A DIALOGVE Philosophical. WHEREIN NATVRES SECRET CLOSET IS OPENED, AND THE
CAUSE OF ALL MOTION IN NATVRE SHOWED OVT OF MATTER AND Form, tending to mount
man's mind from Nature to Supernatural and Celestial promotion: And how all
things exist in the number of three. Together with the witty invention of an
Artificial perpetual motion, presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

All which are discoursed between two speakers, Philadelph, and Theophrast,
brought together by Thomas Tymme, Professor of Divinity.

SYRACH. 43.32. There are hidden greater things then these be, and we have
seen, but a few of his works.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Holy-Lambe, 1612.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas, Thomas Tymme wishes all happiness in this life, and in
the world to come true felicity in Christ Jesus.
AS that famous Zeuxis, another Apelles, intending to limme in her natural
colors the picture of Juno, selected five of the most beautiful Virgins that
were in all Agrigent, that from the comely feature of those, in each part, he
might portray a complete and most amiable picture: so in like manner (right
Honorable) I purposing to set Dame Nature upon the Stage of the world, in each
limme well fashioned, out of Matter and Form, have taken her lineaments from
the Art and wisdom of the more learned sort of Philosophers, that in all her
parts (so well as I could) she might stand fair and well composed to the
common view, of such especially as can discern and judge, a property not
common to all. For every plummet is not for every sound, nor every line for all
leauels; neither is it possible out of every block to make the sculpture of
Mercury, no more then it is possible for every one without a convenient
Bucket, to draw water from the depth of Jacobs Well.

But your Lordship being in all humane Science profoundly learned, and of
mature Judgment (as has appeared by effect) can with Protogenes, discipher
Apelles work, by the draught of one only line, and can by your sublimed
wisdom discern the mystery of Matter and Form.

And to the end your Honor may the better feel my meaning herein, I have
reduced (as it were) innumerable beams to one Sun, and many Rivers to one
Fountain, abridging large discourses into a convenient compendium and method.

But seeing no Pomegranat can be so fair, but that some one imperfect and
rotten kernel may be found therein, I humbly beseech your Honor to deal with
such occurent faults, as Lapidaries are wont to deal with precious stones, who
to hide a crack or flaw, do set the same more deep in gold. So (my right
Honorable Lord) let your Noble name and High reputation of learning and sage
prudence, shadow and adorn my imperfections in this Treatise. Wherein, albeit
you find not an Eagles nest, no more then Theseus did (notwithstanding through
fair promises he had long looked for it) yet happily your Honor, at the least
shall find a Wrenne, and then at the last you may say you have a Bird.

Now fearing least I paesse the due limits of proportion, as did the Myndians,
who made their gates greater then their Town, I cease to stay your Lordship
from your Honorable affairs, craving pardon for this my boldness, and
beseeching God to increase your days and years with desired health, to your
joy and comfort, and to the good of this Church and Commonwealth of great
Britain.

Your Honors most humble, Thomas Tymme.

To the Reader.
THE Almighty Creator of the Heavens and the Earth, (Christian Reader) has
set before our eyes two most principal Books: the one of Nature, the other of
his written Word. By these we know that, God was before all times, infinitely
one, comprehending all things that now be, in himself: and being the beginning
of Time, created those things in number, measure, and weight, adorning his
work most wonderfully with these three Instruments, as with the first Forms.
And formed thus this universal frame after the similitude of Unity, in
circular compass, in pure and mere simplicity.

The wisdom of Natures book, men commonly call Natural Philosophy, which
serves to allure to the contemplation of that great and incomprehensible God,
that we might glorify him in the greatness of his work. For the ruled
Motions of the Orbs: the wonderful workmanship of so many starrie Tents: the
connection, agreement, force, virtue, and beauty of the Elements: the
situation, firmness, and spreading of the Earth amidst the waters: and so
many sundry natures and creatures in the world, are so many interpreters to
teach us, that God is the efficient cause of them, and that he is manifested in
them, and by them, as their final cause to whom also they tend. Yea, the
Natural Motions which belong to all creatures, even to Vegetables, casting
their roots downwards, and their sprouts upwards, do therein set forth the
power and wisdom of the omnipotent Creator. But the Mirror wherein we may
yet better behold God, is Man, a little World, in whom shines, and is
imprinted a Divine Essence, the like whereof is not to be found in any visible
creature besides. How necessary is it then, for men to consider the works of
God in his creatures? And how much more necessary is it to behold their own
person and nature, wherein there are almost as many marvelous works of God,
as there are in the whole frame besides? For what will it profit a man to
measure the Universal: to compass the whole Elementarie Region: to know the
things in them, and their nature: and in the mean time to be ignorant of
himself? For albeit, a general knowledge of all the creatures of this visible
world, will greatly help to lead man to the knowledge of God the Creator, yet
he shall never be able to know him well, if with all he know not himself.

Plato searching by the means of Motion, what was the substance, nature, and
immortality of man's Soul, attained to the understanding of the Divine
Essence. Aristotle also taking the same way, acknowledges that he knew God
under the name of the first Mouer, who is perpetual and immovable. But the
wisdom Supernatural, called Theology, revealed in the written word of God,
being far more excellent then all natural Philosophy, sublimeth our
spirits, through the light of the divine Spirit, to mount (as it were) by
Jacobs ladder, with Phoenix wings, from the things of Nature to Celestial and
Divine things, whereby we have a light and bright understanding.

If man had not sinned, the book of Nature would have sufficed to have kept
him always in the knowledge and obedience of God his Creator. For then he
should himself have carried that Book whole and perfect, imprinted in his
heart and mind, neither should his Soul have needed any other Teacher to know
it self; but it self should have clearly beheld and contemplated it self so
long as she preferred and preserved her first light, wherein God had created
her. But now that she is in the body as it were some excellent picture of
Apelles, fallen into a sink of mire, covered and compassed about with thick
mistes and obscure darkness, it is very needful that we should have another
new light brought to us from Heaven, not natural, as the first, but
supernatural. For this cause God has given us his sacred Book, by means
whereof, as also by his holy spirit, he communicates to us as much heavenly
light as is needful for the knowledge of our selves, and of his high Majesty.

Now (Christian Reader) because all things live, move, and have their being in
God, a fire most pure and simple, and a light inacceslible, (from whom that
subtle fire which penetrateth into every thing, and is the cause of all
motion, proceeds, and has original,) I have compiled this Dialogue,
discoursing natural Philosophy, that thereby thou may not only pry into
Nature, but also thoroughly understand the cause and beginning thereof to be in
God. And for that rare things move much, I have thought it pertinent to this
Treatise, to set before thee a most strange and witty invention of another
Archimedes, which concerns Artificial perpetual motion, immitating Nature
by a lively pattern of the Instrument it self, as it was presented to the
Kings most royal hands, by Cornelius Drebble of Alchmar in Holland, and
entertained according to the worthiness of of such, a gift my pains herein
bestowed and intended for thy profit and pleasure, if it seem but as Iron, yet
let it serve for the Forge and Anuile of good conceit, if the discourse seem
rough, shadow it I pray thee with the curtain of smooth excuse: but if it be
found of thee as Bullion, fit for the Mint, and current for the stamp, then
grace it with the golden approbation of Touch and Test. So shall I rest thine
during life,

Thomas Tymme.

The Contents of the first part of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. Shows the beginning of all natural things, and their first Matter.
Chap. 2. Shows the form of things natural, and the preparations thereunto.
Chap. 3. Concerns Power: which is a preparation of Matter to receive form.
Chap. 4. Concerns Matter, Form, and Temperament. Chap. 5. Concerns the
three principles of Nature: viz. Salt Sulphur, and Mercury. Chap. 6.
Concerns the existence of Man in the number of three.
The Contents of the second part.
Chap. 1. Concerns the natural Heavens, and their motions. Chap. 2.
Concerns the natural cause of the motion of the Sea. Chap. 3. Concerns the
nature and quality of the earth: and the handling of a question whether the
Earth has natural motion or no. Also herein is described an Instrument of
perpetual Motion. Chap. 4. Concerns the cause of all natural causes: and
the motion of man's soul to Celestial promotion.
NATVRES CLOSET OPENED, BY THE DISCOVRSE OF TWO SPEAKERS, PHILADELPH AND
THEOPHRAST. (*)
CHAP. I.
Philadelph. IN very good time I discry my old friend Theophrast (if my sight
fail me not,) with whom I have of long time desired to confer about some
points in natural Philosophy, wherein I much desire to be informed. I will
therefore go meet with him presently, least he turn some other way, and so I
miss of my purpose, Well met my good friend Theophrast. Your absence from this
Country in Paris, has deprived me of your company a long time: but now you
being happily returned, in very kind manner I give you the welcome.


Theophrast. I requite your kindness, rejoicing in your welfare my dear
Philadelph, wishing to thee as much good as to my self.


Philadelph. From your well-wishing mind, let me crave of you the spending
sometime to acquaint me with that admirable Queen of the world, Dame Nature,
whom I suppose you know, considering your great travails. Tell me therefore
in good fellowship, have you been in that Ladies Court, and seen her most
rich Treasury and Closet, replenished (as men write) with inestimable jewels?


Theophrast. I have not desired to please my external senses herein, but to
behold her in contemplation, which has contented me, without too curious a
scrutenie, not daring to diue deeper than I had means to swim.


Philadelph. What is the beginning of natural things? and what thing is Nature?


Theophrast. All things which come forth by their own accord, and by an inward
force and virtue, are said to be by nature; as the four elements of the world,
metals, all kind of plants, all living creatures, and the parts of these. So
that this secret and inward beginning of procreation and offspring, and of all
action, is not only called, but is in very deed the nature of every thing. To
this Nature a certain matter is added: as to the forming of an Image, wood or
metal must be put, upon which also the name of Nature must necessarily be
bestowed. And thus every thing is made of two natures, which cannot be by any
means disioyned, or consist in any place being separated: and both these
natures do so affect and like the other, that being knit together they live,
otherwise they die. That matter, which is brought to form, as the first
foundation, abides always one and the same, until the compound matter it
self does perish and pass into another, for every substance which is
begotten, is begotten, and has being of another subject: as air is begotten
of water: plants and living creatures of seed: neither is there any thi^^, now
made of nothing. But yet the subject whereof any thing is made, was made of
matter and form: the Form perishes and passes away, and another succeeds,
and takes away privation, but the self and same matter abides, which matter
is ready and apt to embrace the subdued and decayed form. It is therefore
necessary, that something be brought and added after such a manner, that there
may be a vicessitude and conversion of things in the remainder, and suruiuour.
Whereby it is to be understood, that matter is not begotten from any
beginning, and is indissoluble and immortal throughout all ages: and that also
as it was without beginning, so also it is without destruction. And when any
thing is begotten, only the form thereof is procreated, and shows it self,
and when it dies and is extinguished, the same form fails: but the common
matter of all things do ever remain one and the same. For if upon the
vanishing of any thing, the matter thereof should die and perish, then the
common Mass of all things had long since come to nothing: neither could
mankind, nor the whole nature of things, nor yet the world it self, stand and
continue.


Philadelph. These things I well understand. Now I pray you show me if every
thing that is begotten, proceeded from another, from whence it took matter, as
from a fountain: which if it be so, why then at the last do we desire the
Elements, which do flow in the procreation of this compacted body.


Theophrast. They flow to this end, that they may add and supply matter to
things begotten and constituted. For the matter which proceeded first from the
elements, passed into a certain subject, from whence springs and arises all
that we behold and see.


Philadelph. I do not well understand your meaning, open it therefore if you
please more plainly.


Theophrast. That subject body, out of which by procreation, something is borne
and comes to light, is either wholly simple or compound: out of a simple body
nothing can be derived, but that which is simple, because the motion thereof is
simple and uniform. For the which cause the Elements are resolved into
themselves only: and in like manner return back again, and every one is
made of another simple. But of a compound body no simple is made, but another
compound, which can never proceed out of a simple.


Philadelph. I take it without further question, that it is as you affirm
herein.


Theophrast. Conclude then, that there is one matter of the elements, and
another for compound bodies.


Philadelph. I say that the consequent necessarily follows, albeit it does
n^^ plainly appear unto me to my content.


Theophrast. I will therefore deliver it more plainly. The matter of the
Eleme^^^ is simple: but the matter of bodies compounded of the Elements is
compounded. In the simple Elements are the beginnings only: in the compound
are not only the first beginnings, but also the Elements. The commutation of
the Elements between themselves is most simple; wherein that which is first,
supplieth simple matter to the latter: but the matter of one Element cannot
suffice to the begetting of mixed and compound bodies, but the whole four must
necessarily be mixed together in the procreation of bodies compound: for assure
your self, that gold, silver, Iron, and all metals, as also the precious
stone called the Union, the Hyacynth, the Smaragde, and all sorts of gemmes and
pearls, took their original not from one Element alone, but from all sour
in mixture; or rather if you will from the earth, as from their mother; but so
as she having a convenient temper by the other, was the more fit for the
procreating faculty. So also plants and living creatures come not immediately
and of the earth, but by the means of seed by longer tract of time, and by
many changes coming between: but yet they have received their matter out of
the Elements, which were kept in the seed and faculty nutritive, so that this
their matter, is not simple of the Elements, and without all form, but being
much compounded, is now called a natural body, and properly a subject, wherein
the incorrupt substances of the four Elements do abide. Moreover, if another
body should come forth of this dying body, those incorrupt substances will
remain safe and sound, albeit in another proportion, and in another order of
mixture, until at the length by extreme desolution, every of them return
into their natures, and be restored to their universality.


Philadelph. I pray you now define unto me what thing is matter.


Theophrast. Matter is a constant and permanent subject, out of which all
things are procreated: and albeit, it is not found by it self, and of the
remote form, yet it is first put into the body, as the foundation wherein
form is, and upon which it is supported, and is as it were the receptacle of
all alterations and changes.


Philadelph. There are certain Philosophers, as Alexander, and others who have
^^ught me, that all things in the universal world, and the very forms (...)
things, do spring and proceed from the mixture of Elements. Affir^ing, that
the whole form is the substance of the natural thing, and ^^at there is
incident to the same a certain harmony and consent of ^^fections and
qualities, which is the form by which it has the name, ^^d is different from
the rest: for every thing is known, and offers it ^^fe to our sense, by
these his qualities.


Theophrast. I will not stand to handle these things, which are but trifles:
but ^^inke it better to spend the time upon more weighty and profitable
questions, what you hold concerning the forms of Elements I care not, if so be
you agree with the best sort of Philosophers, that the forms of compound
bodies are placed in the kind of substances.


Philadelph. I do agree with them, yet lately I have learned of some very
famous for Philosophy, that the forms of Elements are reckoned among
qualities, which question albeit you think it a trifle, yet would I gladly
hear your opinion therein.


Theophrast. I do not think that any thing can be defined concerning these,
which is either certain, constant, or approved by general consent, so long as
man's mind is shut up in the prison of his body, neither can he know by his
senses, what Matter, and Form is: I rather incline to their opinion, which
affirm that as the forms of compound bodies, are pure substances, so also the
forms of the Elements are pure substances. (...) you give credit to this
opinion, and have reason for it, let me hear it.


Philadelph. Alexander says thus: that form which comes from Art, is not by
any manner of means a substance, no more then Art it self: but the form
which is of nature, is without doubt a substance, even as is Nature her self,
for we make heat and dryness in fire (which is a natural and simple body) a
form; and affirm that there is in them and from them, a natural lightness,
for this is the beginning of motion tending upwards. By which words he plainly
affirms, that the form of a natural compound, is a substance, and the
quality of the Element is as the Artifice of a made matter.


Theophrast. But shut not the book as yet, till you have read further.


Philadelph. Contented. It follows in this manner: for the which cause th^^
form cannot subsist, if it be separated and removed apart from the matter, yet
we make no doubt but they both are substances. For as the matter, so also the
natural form is a substance: for the parts of a substance are substances. Now
because either part is a substance, that which consists of both, is both the
substance, and all one nature, not such as we see in an Artifice. For the
subject of these is substance: bu^ the form is thought to be a quality. Are
not these words plain enough?


Theophrast. Yes truly, they are plain enough against you, to confirm my
purpose, therefore out of them I frame this argument against you. The part
(says Alexander) of a substance, are substances: but as well the Element as
the body compound is a substance: therefore as the parts of the compound body,
so also the parts of the Element, are substances, if by this reason Alexander
shows that the form of a natural compound is a substance, he will not deny
but that the form of the same Element is to be referred to a kind of
substance.


Philadelph. I must confess you have taken me in my own snare.


Theophrast. Tell me Philadelph, is there not one common matter of all things?
Which granted (as I know you will not deny it) you must then confess that the
essences of natural things, do much differ among themselves, how then can you
make those substantial essences of things to be differences from matter, which
is common to all things? or how shall every thing take and derive the proper
essence of his kind, from that rude and common beginning of all things?


Philadelph. I see not how.


Theophrast. If there be diverse orders and differences of kinds among things
which consist of nature: if every thing has his proper nature, there must be
some other thing appointed; besides that common matter, by which every
particular thing may have his form and particular nature.


Philadelph. This must needs be.


Theophrast. But that thing whatsoever it be, which gives essence to the
whole, must needs be some excellent thing, and far more excellent than
matter.


Philadelph. What else? for thereof every thing has his name.


Theophrast. And this is the very same which thou art wont to call the form of
a thing.


Philadelph. Not only I, but all for the most part, are wont so to call it.


Theophrast. Form, must needs be the first and chief part of all things.


Philadelph. I make no doubt to affirm the same of second bodies, but not so
of the Elements, of which there is a far different consideration: for the
species of these is a quality.


Theophrast. You do roame as it were in a certain maze. I showed you before,
that after one and the same manner, the form of every simple or compound
substance, is a substance: but let us come to every one particularly, and
unfold their natures. A plant or metal is indebted to his form, that the one
is a plant, and that the other is metal, and so of all others it may be said,
of what kind so ever they be: Is this true, or no?


Philadelph. All men say so.


Theophrast. Then must needs the Element take the reason of being an Element,
from form only.


Philadelph. This also is confessed.


Theophrast. But an Element is a substance by form, and a substance of this
kind. For that it may be a substance of this or that kind, that is, that it
may be fire or earth, it has not such power to take such being from matter,
which is common to all things.


Philadelph. This I granted before.


Theophrast. From whence then has it such being?


Philadelph. From form.


Theophrast. Therefore this form of the Element, by which fire, is fire, and
differs from this, is a substance.


Philadelph. How?


Theophrast. For, if fire be granted to be a substance (as you confess it is)
that same which gives and causes it to be fire, is also a substance.


Philadelph. It must needs follow.


Theophrast. The same is the reason of fire, which you deny not: whereby it
comes to pafie necessarily to be concluded, that both the form of fire, and
also of every other Element is a substance. Therefore when by definition we
will comprehend an Element, or other substance, we do not define it with a
figure, with color, with beauty, or turpitude, but with the same substance
from whence every thing natural has taken his effence, and that is form,
which concludes the definition of any thing. Moreover as a plant differs by
variety and dissimilitude of form from metal, and a living creature from a
plant: so also an Element, which also is a substance, differs from other
substances by a certain natural and in-set substance proper unto it. For as
no accidents can accomplish and perfect the essence of a substance, so no more
can that essential difference of things be made of an accident, because it
cannot change the essence of a natural thing. Seeing then in all other
substances that which disseuereth and discerns one from another, is
substance: how can it be that it should not do the like in Elements, which are
true substances?


Philadelph. Every substance that is comprehended by the essences, is
compounded of substance and form, as out of his parts: The simple matter of
the Element, is a matter of the similar body, compounded of the Elements. The
matter of the dissimilar body is manifold.
even as all such things as Art has made out of the matter of metal, stone,
or wood, have a certain form and ornament from Art. The Element which is a
simple body, has for his subject a simple matter, wholly without form, and
destitute of all fashion. But a compound, mixed, and natural body, cannot have
a simple subject, for we see that a body of one sort or fashion every way like
unto it self, (which the Grecians call similar) which of all the compounds is
most simple by many degrees, has a subject mixed and increased out of the
four Elements, as Gold, Stone, or Iron: for it was granted before that the
matter of a mixed body, is derived from the four Elements, which reserving
their forms, do abide in a mixed body: for if their forms should utterly
perish, then should there be in very deed a destruction, and no mixture at all.
Moreover, beholding and considering a body of many forms, and of a diverse
nature, as this Rose, or that pleasing Laurel Tree, I plainly discern by the
beholding of the eye, (which is the surest demonstration) that the subject has
a body consisting of many unlike parts: as one of the root, one of the bark,
another of the wood, another of the marrow or sap, another of the leaves, and
another of the berries. Furthermore, that there is a greater difference
between a vegetiue and the subject of a liuiing creature, because besides the
diversity of parts, it has conformation and a manifold figure or shape.


Theophrast. My good friend Philadelph, you have spoken truly and profitably of
a matter known to be true by common sense and experience: whereof if any man
demand a reason, beside sense and experience, if he consider the offices and
actions of things living, he shall see the sinews, the bones, and the flesh,
to have such different faculties and use, that he will affirm their natures
and essences to be much different. Moreover, these similar parts as they are
compounded in themselves, have certain proper temperaments, which being kept
sound and pure, it is likely that their natures which are partakers of the same
temperament do remain vncorrupt: for what can dissolve them their temperament
being pure? Thus it is plain, that in the composition of a living creature,
the bones, the sinews, the flesh, the filmes, and other similar parts do
differ, not only in color, thickness, and in other qualities and feature,
but also in the natural temperament, proper essence, and in form: if any man
think, that these are not sufficient to set forth the differences of things,
by what other reason I pray you will he distinguish their essences? ^or what
bodies can he bethink him of, whose essence is more then that of theirs? and
yet no man will deny, but that these have their substance, except he be come
to that madness or contentious disposition, that he dare say, that as well
the parts of our body, as also other bodies which are most different, are
separated only in accidents. But let him esteem as he please the decree of
the most ancient Philosophers long ago exploded, who rejecting forms,
affirmed that all things were made, and are to be discerned only by accidents.
Wherefore to come more near to the sentence which thou have propounded, I
auow, that not only the bodies of living creatures, and of plants, but also of
stones, and of certain metals, have a manifold subject, whose parts do
differ in form and in essence, and not in accidence only.


Philadelph. There are some which affirm, that the form of the four
beginnings of Nature is most simple, and that the bodies compounded of them are
more perfect, for if you mark well, you shall see that there is a better form
in a stone, then in the Element thereof, which is earth, and a better in a
plant, then in a stone: and a much better form in a living creature, then in a
plant: as if nature had given to every of these, a form, according to the
worthiness of the subject. Will you say then that these things which have a
compounded subject, have not also a compounded form? Or if you grant that,
will you not also yield, that the form of every thing is natural, and
begotten out of those forms, which are in the composition of his own subject?
which if you grant to be so, you must needs also confess, that the same is not
to be taken from any other, neither that it has any other faculties than such
as they give to the nature of simples. How think you of these reasons? let me
hear what you can say against them.


Theophrast. I know the Authors from whence these things are drawn by you,
which cannot be determined without much contention: That which I have to say
herein, shall be according to Aristotle's mind and opinion, namely, that the
form of an Element is a simple, in a simple subject. And that the form of a
natural compound body, though the subject be cohering and coaugmented out of
diverse parts, yet the form of the whole is simple: and such as using a
manifold and compounded subject, has manifold and compounded faculties: by
which the perfection thereof is to be discerned.


Philadelph. This is to me somewhat obscure, therefore I pray you express your
meaning more plainly.


Theophrast. There are many orders of forms, digested out of the sorts and
kinds of offices: for seeing form is a certain nature, and the same the
beginning of motion, it must be deemed a most simple and imperfect form, and
of basest degree, which shall be the cause but of one simple motion. The order
of Forms. Form the beginning of motion.
But the form which shall be the worker of many different motions, shall be more
perfect than that, and also of a more high degree. So the form of an Element,
which because by the change of the place, is only carried upward or downward,
is thought most imperfect and abject: the form of a plant which stirs up
motion of nourishment, of increase, and of procreation, is therefore accounted
more perfect and more noble than that of the Element. And the form of a living
creature is more noble than that of a plant, which beside the other gives
sense and a voluntary progress. But of all other, the form of a man is of the
highest, and most perfect degree, which above all things, is endued from God
with the gift of a Divine mind. And it is convenient, that the form which is
the more perfect, and endued with most faculties, should have a more complete
and better furnished body, as a shop or workhouse, that it might the better
apply the great store and variety of Instruments to diverse and sundry sorts of
offices, for neither the perfect form which is able to effect in it self many
forms, shall pass into a matter that is rude, simple, and unprepared: nor yet
if it shall pass, can it either stand therein safe and sound, or fully execute
all his offices in the same. The matter of the Elements is altogether simple
and rude, as is the subject, which is in metal or stone, compounded of the
only temper of the Elements. To plants is given both a subject dissimilar, and
also a body organicall: but for so much as the odds or dissimilitude is more
in living creatures then in plants, the same dissimilitude is a better and more
comely feature: finally, Nature has so excellently formed man, as if she
intended (out of him, as out of an examplar or pattern of a most absolute and
perfect work) to cause him to be admired and esteemed more excellent than all
other natural things. After this manner therefore the form of all things is
simple, but the more highly it is sublimed and advanced, and by how much it
contains in it the effecting faculties, by so much the more it has obtained
a more absolute subject, furnished and more fit to effect any thing: for the
body is made for the forms sake, and not the form for the bodies sake.


Philadelph. Be it as you say: yet they proceed further, and affirm, that if
the forms of simples (out of which, things are compounded) are preserved whole
in the compound, and perish not, it is then convenient that they should be
mingled and compounded among themselves, as are the matters wherein they are
seated, and that out of such mixture the form of the whole should spring: and
that the same is a certain harmony, compounded as it were of well tuned and
fitted forms: for the action of a plant, or of a whole living creature,
proceeds from the functions and faculties of all the parts, conspiring or
agreeing together in one: neither is the action of the whole any other then the
action of all the agreeing parts. Thus (say they) Nature makes it plain, that
nothing is to be believed to be the form of the whole, but that which is a
just consent of the singular forms, and an agreement arising no where else,
but out of them. Therefore Alexander says, simple bodies whose subject is
simple, have gotten a simple form and nature. But in those bodies wherein
there is not a simple subject, but a body already or a compound; in the same,
the form is more perfect, by the gallantnesse, and brave feature thereof. And
not without cause; for that form which is in the matter, and in the subject
brings somewhat to the form of those which are compound. And soon after he
says: the multitude of forms and their mixture (which is diverse) in subject
bodies, may bring an equal cause of change. This opinion is so contrary to
that which you before have affirmed, that I for my part know not what to hold.


Theophrast. Against your Alexander I oppose that worthy Philosopher Aristotle,
who disputing about this position, determined, that neither the soul nor form
was a harmony. For harmony is a proportion of well tuned and consenting voices.
But this proportion is not a substance: but the soul is a substance: moreover,
the soul is before the body, and far more excellent, being the Queen of the
same, moderating and moving it. But the Harmony comes after his instrument,
whether it be Harp, or Violl, neither has it any command in the same, it
neither moves nor moderateth it; and so soon as by any occasion the consent
of the well tuned strings is dissolved and ended, the Harmony is also
dissolved: and upon every change by note, it is either higher or lower: but in
the mixture and temperament of the parts, it is otherwise. For the soul
appears not, nor is any other, then it was upon the alteration of the
temperature thereof. And whereas the body is sometime changed upon offense, yet
for all that the soul abides, albeit we see that the Harmony is distempered
and out of course: and every temperament may at will be changed, but no man can
change his soul, before life changes Who then will say that Fortune is a
harmony, no not of the body thereto belonging, which is therefore called (...)
or Disimilar, because it has not all his parts of one kind and likeness in
each point? Form is a certain composition of forms of the same kind, and
that have similitude among themselves, which seem to be so apt and knit
together in themselves, that they conspire together in one, and do agree
without discord: for it is ridiculous to think that the Soul or Form does
consist of the bond and composition of the different parts, as does the subject
body. But it must needs be, that there is one simple Form of the whole
compound, which differing from the Forms of the simple parts, keeps them
sound, whole, and incorrupted in the total. This is proved by the large
testimony of Aristotle, in his sixth of Metaphisickes, in these words, or to
this effect: That which consists of any thing, is so compounded, that the
whole universal is one, not like a heap, but as a syllable, a syllable is not
the element it self, neither is it the same that (a) and (b) is, no more is
flesh, fire, and earth. The Elements dissolved, these are not flesh, nor
syllable: but the Elements are earth and fire, therefore a syllable is not an
Element or principle, a vocal letter, and mute, but a certain other thing: so
in like manner, flesh is not only fire and earth, or hot and cold, but also
another thing. Many other places Aristotle has, wherein he expounds himself
more plainly. But when he disputes against Empedocles concerning the soul,
he shows why there is some new beginning and cause brought to the forms of
simples, affirming, that simples, especially such as are contrary, cannot be
contained, and conioyne in one, except it be as it were by a very straight
bond, least they being dispersed, should be soon distracted, and so return
thither, from whence every of them proceeded. Moreover, he writing concerning
the soul, against Plato, shows by the same reason, that if those things
which are many and different, do conioyne into one and the same, it must
needs be that they are constrained so to conioyne by the force of another, and
to be contained, least they pass away. Whereby it is plainly understood, that
as the body albeit compounded of many, yet we call it one: so we must say, that
the form thereof is one, and a simple form. Thus you see it follows
necessarily, that the forms of compound bodies must be simple.


Philadelph. Alexander says, that the body works by the soul: even as the
earth by her weight is carried downward: as if the soul were the Instrument of
the acting body.


Theophrast. But Aristotle is of a contrary opinion, affirming that the bodies
of all things, as well of living things as of plants, are the Instruments of
the soul, and were made for the same.


Philadelph. Alexander subiecteth the soul, and the whole form of a thing to
the body, and makes it inferior to the same.


Theophrast. But Aristotle, and all the best Philosophers, appoint the soul to
be more excellent, and far superior.


Philadelph. Alexander teaches, that the body is the cause and beginning of
all action and motion.


Theophrast. But Aristotle collecting reasons against Empedocles, shows, why
form (which he simply calls nature) is the cause and the beginning of the
motion of all things. To which of these will you incline, to Alexander, or to
Aristotle? which of these sway most with you? If you regard not that famous
name, yet respect his reasons, which if you find more strong and evident then
those of Alexander, then embrace them.


Philadelph. I rather subscribe to Aristotle, then to Alexander: but be it as
you say, that the form of every thing is a certain simple substance, and that
it is the chief efficient cause of functions and faculties, and more excellent
then the body, which it uses as an instrument to execute those functions and
offices: yet nevertheless, that same form seems to come from the
temperament of the body, as a certain simple force proceeding from temper, and
an accorded harmony of the subject bodies.


Theophrast. Is not that which Alexander calls the form of a natural thing
a substance? I make no question but that Alexander and your self will and do
confess it. Which granted, you will not deny that the temperature of the
mixed Elements, and the whole state and power of the subject arising
here-hence, to be in the kind of qualities.


Philadelph. It must needs be so.


Theophrast. But a substance cannot arise from one or more qualities.


Philadelph. It cannot in any wise.


Theophrast. How then can it be that the form of a thing should proceed from
the mixture and temperament of qualities, and that qualities alone should
engender a substance, without the concourse and help of a substance?


Philadelph. A mixture and temper of qualities, is not made of quality alone,
but out of that confusion and mixture of such forms as are the Elements.


Theophrast. But Alexander has referred the forms of Elements unto a kind of
qualities, by reason whereof he makes the form of the compound, to arise and
spring from the qualities.


Philadelph. For my part I assent not to Alexander herein, but rather to
Auerrhois, who placed the forms of Elements, in an ambiguous and doubtful
kind. What lets then but that the form of the whole compound, may spring
from the forms of simple subjects?


Theophrast. Because so the form shall not be simple, but as the body is
compound, so also the form shall be compound.


Philadelph. I perceive that as yet you understand not any meaning.


Theophrast. Why so?


Philadelph. Because I am of opinion, that a simple form may arise out of the
temperature of the subject forms: which albeit it be simple, yet it may
comprehend, as it were, in her bosom, the forms of all things.


Theophrast. Then all things whatsoever have flowed together to the procreation
of a natural thing, whether simple or compound bodies, the same before such
time as they were compounded in themselves by natural action, having every of
them both matters, and forms, as also their qualities residing in them.


Philadelph. It is confessed that the Elements being furnished with those
three, do come and join together for the procreation of things. What then?


Theophrast. Their commixtion being true and exquisite, those qualities are
diffused altogether into the whole: but their matters cannot be totally
mingled, but the parts being reduced thither, by a long partition, in such wise
that now at the last they being very small, and bound together with a certain
conjunction between themselves, do cleave and agree together.


Philadelph. I hold this necessary. For if there should be a total confusion
of the matters, the bodies would utterly perish in themselves: which seems to
me so absurd, as it is to be rejected.


Theophrast. But the forms do never forsake their matters whereunto they are
once infused: neither can they interchangeably pass one into another.
Therefore there can be no other mixture of forms, then there is of matters.
Nor yet do the forms (leaving their states) pass away, whereby they being
dissolved from the matter, may mingle themselves one with another apart, but
are settled in subjects, and are mutually affected one to the other. Wherefore
as the whole matters cannot pass fully one into the other totally, so no more
can the forms. Whereupon I infer, that the form cannot be simple, which
comes out of such a temperament: and so also I conclude, that the form of a
natural thing is a simple substance.


CHAP. II.
Philadelph. I Pray you let me hear your opinion more at large, whether the
form of a compound body, which is simple and similar, be defused through the
whole body.


Theophrast. You shall hear my sentence herein, so briefly as I can: one
natural spirit which is altogether like it self, is dispersed and diffused
throughout this living plant which you behold, and by the coming between of
this spirit, one soul is seated and abides in the whole plant. This is to be
seen more plainly in sensible creatures, which have one simple and natural
spirit, issuing from one simple fountain ever like itself, containing not
only the similar, but also the dissimilar parts. Seeing therefore the same is
one, flowing from a simple fountain, it cannot be the chariot and bond, but of
one simple soul. For so (if the Philosophers have said truly, that the soul
is retained in the body, by the bond of his proper and convenient spirit) we
shall rightly gather out of the differences of their Spirits, how manifold the
essences of Souls are, and how disagreeing among themselves. Therefore it is
concluded, that the natural Soul is one, breathing and diffused into all
parts of the body. The like reason is of the vital and feeling faculty, which
also is one and every where, as is the animal Spirit: and the same also must
necessarily be one through all the instruments both of the senses, as also of
motion: and thus I hope you understand my meaning.


Philadelph. I hear your words, but I crave pardon for my slow conceit, in
that as yet I understand not your meaning. For admit that there is one
fountain as well of the natural spirit as of the soul, yet according to the
varying nature of the parts, these shall be found very much different. There is
a certain peculiar spirit and soul proper to the bone, to the flesh, to the
sinew, and so to every particular, for as these parts are in substance much
unlike, so is it convenient that these should be nourished and increased after
an unlike manner. How then can it be that one and the same soul can give and
perform things so diverse?


Theophrast. Why not? seems it strange to you and incredible, if by the help
of such different instruments, it show forth many and different effects? this
is the thing which in this matter I would you should understand, that the
varying and much differing functions of the parts, come not from the difference
of the soul it self, but from the difference of the parts whereunto it is
diffused and spread, therefore after this manner the animal power, albeit it
is one and ever the same, distributed throughout all the nerves, muscles, and
arteries of the body, yet it effects and gives by some sense only; and by
other some, both sense and motion: and both of these sometime obscurely, and
sometime more plainly, according to the variety and different affection of the
parts into which it is infused, and which it moves. In like manner the
natural power which is in the flesh begets flesh: that which is in bone,
begets bone, and so of the rest: for it applies it self unto the
temperament of the parts, which it moderateth and nourishes, and also to the
nature and manifold varying uses thereof.


Philadelph. I would gladly be further instructed by you in this one thing,
whether the forms of the parts be a certain preparation to the simple form
of the whole.


Theophrast. There is no doubt, but that the forms of all the parts in
particular, are as it were certain degrees, by which they are advanced to the
highest form of the whole, neither are they for any other cause engraffed into
the subject, but to make way by this preparation to bring in that supreme
form. Nor yet am I of opinion, that the same supreme form was made to
preserve the forms of the singular parts, but that rather it consists for
itself and the offspring, or generation thereof: but for as much as the same
has a coherence out of all the parts, it comes therefore to pass, that when
it defends it self and the whole progeny with this nourishment, and with a
new fruit or offspring, it multiplieth in such wise, that it does also keep
the very forms of the parts incorrupted (whereof it has need for
preparation) and does also sometime beget new forms: so that the parts do
bring much to the form of the whole; yet no essence but a preparation, and a
certain convenient disposition of receiving and keeping the whole, and to
execute all the functions and offices thereof. For it joins it self
prosperously with these mean agents, and so the wedlock of the form, with
the whole subject, remains indissoluble: the which peradventure being
forcibly expulsed, there must of necessity either presently follow a divorce,
or else the form must be left idle, and without efficacy in the subject. As
therefore the subject of the bone, sinew, or flesh, and of every similar, is
not prepared only out of the temperament of the qualities, but also out of the
mixture of the natural principles, and the form of the sinew or bone flows
unto them, they keeping their forms: so we must think that the body is
subject to the form of the whole living creature, framed and builded out of
the bone, sinew, flesh, and such like parts adhering and mixed in one. For
those parts which are called organical, do arise from an apt and neat
position, number, figure, and magnitude of the similars: out of whose
conueniencie and mutual consent, a perfect body at the last is made. Therefore
all these aptly joining together in one, the subject fitly prepared, draws
unto it the common form of all these, preserves it, and attends the
functions thereof.


Philadelph. It seems then, that there are diners sorts of preparations of
the matter, to make it apt and fit for form.


Theophrast. There are sundry preparations, but especially three. One is a good
and convenient temper, which must be in every simple and similar part,
proceeding from the mixture of the first principles, and a good disposition of
the whole body: another preparation, is a fit and convenient composition, a
consent, and conformation, which we see to be severally in every organicall
part, and in all the members of the body: the third is, a certain spirit
diffused throughout the whole body, which must have in it a vital and
preserving heat.


Philadelph. I see no reason, why you should bring in this last for a
preparation.


Theophrast. If you know that every living creature does contain heat in it
self, nourishing it, whereby life is preserved, and which being extinct, the
soul thereof departs, then have you no cause to doubt, but that the same
spiritual heat is of all other most necessary to maintain life, for that it
comes most near to the nature of the soul, and is unto it a perpetual and
inseparable companion.


Philadelph. What lets then, that this preparation may not proceed from the
composition of the Elements?


Theophrast. Albeit, the first preparation before spoken of, proceeds from
the Elements, yet the conformation and spirit do not take their original from
thence, but from a more divine beginning.


Philadelph. Why so?


Theophrast. Because by no means it can come to pass, that the Elements
howsoever tempered in the best manner, can by themselves without the help of
another, give to the body apt conformation, sense, and motion. For what order
or measure can you prescribe in the effecting of these things.


Philadelph. In my opinion, the manner of tempering them is inexplicable.


Theophrast. But if this seem inexplicable, you will say that the manner of
temperament in the conformation is far more inexplicable. For it is well
enough known, that some things are of a hot temperament, because the hot and
fiery Element does exceed the other Elements in the mixture. Moreover, if by
touching you shall feel that which is cold, so to be, then you will
conjecture that the cold Element is predominant: But by what reason it comes
so to pass, that this or that is the figure of this or that thing, you can
neither express by words, nor yet conceive in mind. For we behold many things
with our eyes, which albeit they be of one temperament, yet have they received
unlike shapes and figures, and contrariwise, that some things are like in
figure, whose temperament is most unlike in themselves. Furthermore, that
in-set spirit or heat which is both the worker and band of life, cannot be
ascribed to the temperament of the parts of the body.


Philadelph. I pray you open this matter unto me somewhat more plainly.


Theophrast. A living creature, being on the sudden newly slain, every of the
similar parts do for a while retain temperature, and cannot in such a moment
be changed and put out of his nature, and yet notwithstanding then, neither
that in-set heat nor spirit is in those parts.


Philadelph. No marvel. For the living creature and his parts do therefore
die, because that hot and in-set spirit, which is the conseruing cause of soul
and life, being suddenly dissolved, either vanishes, or else being
extinguished, perishes. For it is true which Aristotie says, that when death
approaches to man or beast, the body waxes cold.


Theophrast. Hereupon it is concluded, that the in-set spirit or heat, does
nothing at all appertain to the reason of temperament; and because the spirit
which is in the greater Arteries, especially is not reckoned among the parts of
the body, no more then is the blood which is shut up in the veins, it must
therefore necessarily follow, that neither that spirit nor heat, does any
thing at all appertain neither to the substance of the body, nor to the
temperament which arises from the Elements of nature. Wherefore this
temperament shall not be the efficient, neither of the spirit, nor of the
conformation: but this conformation must follow and proceed from a more Divine
nature. And of this opinion is Auerrhois.


Philadelph. I remember in deed that Auerrhois says, that both the natural
heat and spirit that is in us, comes no manner of way from the temperament
of the bodily parts, whose words are these. The parts by nature do both work,
and are also wholly affected, through the heat which is diffused in them,
differing from that which is gotten from temperament, for it is found by
experience in Anatomies, that in the heart is contained a certain little
vaporous body exquisitely hot, the which is transmitted from thence by the
pipes of the Arteries, and is derived into the whole body of the living
creature. These things make plain to me, that the heat and spirit which is
naturally in us, does not only not retain the nature and condition of fire;
but also that they proceed not from the composition and mixture of the
Elements, they having rather a certain original more Divine: which original,
what manner of thing it should be, neither can I call to mind where he
expressed it, nor yet can fully attain unto it, do what I can. For this cause
I pray you supply my want herein, which I know you are well able to do.


Theophrast. You demand of me a very hard and doubtful matter, yea such a
thing as for my willingness herein, may cause me to be hammered on the Anuile
of calamity, and to be accounted too rash: yet tosatisfie your request, I will
reveal unto you my whole knowledge concerning this matter: first, therefore I
will begin to show the opinion of such as are learned, and are lovers of truth,
concerning heat and spirit: then I will show you the root and original of
forms, wherein I will so deal, that what I lay down for this point, shall be
especially builded and founded upon the ground of Hippocrates, Plato, Galen,
and Aristotle. Know therefore first of all, that whatsoever lives (and not
created of corrupt and filthy matter) proceeded from a subject, which is the
proper seed of every thing. Here-hence all the parts of the body are made at
the first by the force of nature, as it were by the hands of the worke-maister:
the lesser and more small parts being at the first confused, are afterward
digested and brought into order. So that the seed being as it were endued with
a certain excellent artificial wisdom, giving unto Plants and other
vegetables, which come out of the earth, (which notwithstanding is mixed with
other Elements) and to living creatures, which come out of their material
blood, their familiar and convenient nourishment, such as by use appertains
unto them, together also with a fit and equal temperament of the Elements,
bringing to pass that every one singularly and particularly is of this or
that temperament (which some call the propriety of temperament) and also the
conformation and composition of the subject, is brought both to the whole body,
and also to the parts thereof, by the faculty and power of the seed. Thus have
I delivered unto you the two first orders of preparation, according to my
former division. But the third preparation which is made by the vital heat
and spirit, as it could not be finished by the contemperament of the Elements
only: so more plainly and evidently then the rest, it takes original and
beginning at the seed. For all men constantly affirm, that the seed is full
with heat and spirit, and that it takes such force from the Parents: for the
Parents intending to procreate and beget something like unto themselves, are
prevented by death; and do fail before the same comes to light (as sometime
it happens to seeds and plants, after they are sown and grafted) provident and
industrious nature seeking the eternity of things, look what power and faculty
was in the Parents, to give life and procreate, the same has she committed to
a small portion of seed, to bring forth the like by heat and spirit. Let this
for the present satisfy thy appetite, another time you shall have more.


CHAP. III.
Philadelph. YOu said before, that power is a certain preparation of Matter,
to receive a certain form: show me now therefore I pray you, whether these
preparations (which you say be in the seed) are the same power or no?


Theophrast. They are without all controversy, and do return into one and
the same, but for as much as there is nothing more common in the saying of the
Philosophers, then this word (power) nor more vehemently disputed of, can
thou Philadelph, show me how many ways it is taken.


Philadelph. If I be not deceived, I can. The name of power diversely taken. 5.
Metaph. cap. 12. et 9. cap. 1. and 2. 2. de Anima. cap. 1.
Aristotle first of all defined Power to be the beginning of motion and of
alteration, and for as much as the same is two-folde, the one of effecting, and
the other of suffering, he thereupon decreed, that there were two sorts of
power: saying, that the power of effecting is the beginning of mutation in
another (whereof he has spoken much in his seventh of Phisickes) and the
power of suffering is the beginning of mutation from another. In cata.
qualitatis. 9. Meta. capit. 2.
By which signification of the word, he calls the matter of every thing,
power: and the form he calls act and perfection. Both of these are in the
kind of substances. And for this cause somewhat is drawn to accidents, which
Aristotle is wont to call natural power or impotencie. For it is an hability
or affection, by whose help every thing either does or suffers. Or if you
please, it is a certain disposition or readiness to do or to suffer
something to be done. And thus he called all Arts, powers of acting, because
they are the beginning of changing in another. The like affections also he
joins to things that have no life, by the help whereof they do either work
more speedily, or else do withstand and stop, least by the force of the
contraries they be changed into that which is worse: the power of suffering is
a certain Diathesis, whereby every thing is readily converted into another
state.


Theophrast. Strike sail, and anchour here a while: for now you are come into
your wished Haven. For the matter which we debate of now, is the power of
suffering, which being in the matter as a certain preparation, makes the same
apt and fit for commutation and change.


Philadelph. This is that power which Alexander Aprodisaeus said, was the
beginning put into matter, whereby it was apt to take all things upon it, which
should come out of it or from it.


Theophrast. They which have defined power to be a certain preparation and
ordering of matter, (albeit they thought it not fit to seek further what
manner of preparation that should be) yet do thrust upon us a prodigious false
invention, and do rather busy themselves about the name, then seek to know
the things themselves.


Philadelph. I pray you resolve me yet further concerning one doubt, the which
also is full of obscurity to many. Whereas the Philosophers say, that Form is
brought out of the power of the matter: do you think that these preparations
when they have received full perfection, do put from themselves Form? I know
that Simplicius has so written concerning this point, in these words. Nothing
perfect comes from that which is imperfect, except power coming as a mean
between, adds that which is wanting to perfection, taking chief perfection
from that which is most perfect. I doubt not but these words of Simplicius are
true, yet I learn nothing by them. Others teach me that power is a certain
quality which extends it self very far both ways, obscure and very little
in the beginning, but soon after it gets strength, and waxes greater by
little and little, and so by small degresse it comes at the last to full
perfection. And then it is that Entelechia, according to Aristotle, which some
call perfection, and others a certain continual agitation. As therefore this
perfection seems to be finished by little and little from an imperfect and
obscure preparation, so the form of every thing (which differs nothing from
perfection) does spring and arise from preparation and power: For say they,
perfection is Form; and preparation power: so that as at the last preparation
is made perfection, so power is changed into form.


Theophrast. Take heed Philadelph, that you be not here ensnared and deceived,
there are many false things which seem true, which covered with the cloak of
truth, seduce many through salshood, into foul and shameful errors, for this
which you have now delivered, is a very subtle point, that perfection is the
form of a thing: which if you hold and allow, you err grossly.


Philadelph. How then? do you think that there is difference between these?


Theophrast. Very great difference, even as great as is the difference of
kinds. Perfection comes from power, and is by little and little consumated,
as is a young man to perfect age, and the part goes before the whole, but the
whole form which succeeds is on the sudden, whereof before there was not
the least mite. Perfection, is a certain patient nature, as is power. Form is
a nature efficient, and the beginning of all motion. Perfection is only an
accident: but Form is a simple and pure substance. How then can it be, that
power, by the degrees of increase, should pass into a sollide and express
form, and so of a quality to be made a substance? as if the genera suprema,
which have no manner of conuenience with themselves, and which are more far
distant, then are the things which are most contrary, should mutually pass
one into another? I deny not but that one quality may be changed into
another, and one substance into another, because they have one common matter:
but that in like sort quality may be changed into substance, no thought of
man's mind can comprehend and contain.


Philadelph. Give me leave to propound against you that which is holden by
some concerning this point: who say, that the power which is in the seed, is
increased by little and little, until it come to full perfection.


Theophrast. But I pray you tell me, by what acting force and provoking power
do they say that increase is given?


Philadelph. Alexander answers you, that first there is infused into the seed
a certain beginning of motion, which by a force taken from the begetting,
acts until it come to some end, and until by a continuing increase it has
perfected it self, and as it were entering the race, cease not until it come
to the mark and end thereof, unless it be forcibly stayed in the course.


Theophrast. You object and say, that there is given to the begetting seed a
certain force and beginning of motion. Do they understand that this beginning
of motion is power?


Philadelph. Yes verily, they do.


Theophrast. And do they say that the same beginning which is power, does act
continually, and that it does proceed from the first entered natures, to the
last consumated, whereunto nothing can be added, which we deny to be the
highest and most perfect.


Philadelph. They do so.


Theophrast. And do they constantly affirm that this power is a quality.


Philadelph. They affirm that Aristotle says so.


Theophrast. But no quality can at the first and by it self, act; but every
action belongs to the form that has gotten substance, which is a certain
efficient beginning.


Philadelph. They deny not this.


Theophrast. Seeing therefore they say, that power is increased by little and
little, until a perfect form be made, to what form shall it first of all be
ascribed?


Philadelph. You must herein answer your self, for I can go no further.


Theophrast. We say that in seed there are only three things, namely,
Matter, Form, and Power. Does then that action of power lead at the first to
the form of seed?


Philadelph. Whereto else should it lead?


Theophrast. But that cannot be.


Philadelph. What is the cause?


Theophrast. Because whatsoever acts, acts to this end, that he may make
the Patient object like himself: neither does the form which is in the seed
intend any other thing, but that it may generate another seed out of it self.


Philadelph. I knew this well enough before, but the consequence of the matter,
has enforced me not to deny it. Now therefore I give place: and yet I
affirm, that the power which is in seed does increase it self by his own
force: neither does it desire any external help. For albeit the same power is
thought to be a quality, yet is it of a more high degree then are others: for
the which cause Aristotle has called the same a Natural power, because as it
is partaker of quality, so also after a sort it is also partaker of Nature.
Wherefore in my opinion, who so says that the same can do any thing of it
self, shall utter no absurdity.


Theophrast. These are wonderful shifts; be of what opinion you will, only
know this: If power do act at the first, and by it self, when it increases
and finisheth it self, it brings no other thing to pass, but such another
power as it is it self: neither can it though it be increased, bring form out
of it self. Out of the seed, as out of the subject, is ingendered a living
creature, or a plant: but there was never any in the rank of the best
Philosophers, which held that powers should make form, or that a living
creature is generated by the force of seed.


Philadelph. And why so?


Theophrast. That which is not yet, but shall be hereafter, is not now simply
in being: but how can that which is not, be said to beget any other thing? How
then think you can it come to pass, that the power which is in seed should
procreate form, if as yet the same form be not in it? Or that the seed which
is not yet that living creature, should effect a living creature? For if any
thing be to be begotten out of these, there must be some other thing put of
necessity, which in act may obtain form, and which may be the first
efficient and chief cause of this procreation. The which when Aristotle
deeply considered, he decreed that there was a twofold nature in the
procreation of living creatures, and of their offspring. One more imperfect
which is made in seed, and is not yet: Another more perfect, which being in
act, is simply such an effectrix, as it is in that from whence the seed did
spring. The place is in the second book, concerning the procreation of living
creatures; where he puts a difference between Nature and Art, in these
words: Art is the beginning and the form of that which is effected: but yet in
another: The motion of Nature is in that which is effected, proceeding from
another nature, which in act obtains the form. Therefore he holds, that a
nature is in the seed, by which it is made, and moved: and the efficient
nature in that which is in act. This sentence Simplicius has expounded more
largely in these words, or to this effect: the nature and cause of every
motion, makes a subject like it self, and not another: for as the nature of
man makes a man: so the nature of seed can make nothing but seed. For how
shall that properly make a man which is in the seed, which as yet is not the
nature of man, before such time as the man be made. If the nature of the seed
desires to be changed, and to have a living creature perfected, then properly
the efficient and next cause, is the paternall and maternall nature: for the
form goes before the act in the father and mother, according to the which
form, that which is in power is brought to act. And by this means the nature
of that which is generated, if it be said to be efficient, it is so efficient
that the same is therewithal made. And that nature has properly the force of
effecting, which is such in act, because nature is the procreatrix of that
which is like it self. Thus Philadelph, you see that the force of the seed
which we say is called power, cannot be turned into the form of a living
creature, how well so ever it fitteth it self, or adorneth it self, but there
must be present a certain thing, as is such in act.


Philadelph. These things which you have now uttered seem in my Judgment most
true. But before you finish this matter, it is convenient that you explain one
thing, which all Philosophers have approved, namely, that the form of every
thing is brought forth out of the power of the subject.


Theophrast. When the power which is in the seed, that is to say, when the
preparation to bring in form is come by daily increase to full perfection, it
has also obtained therewithal the form of substance. For form necessarily
follows that perfection, and never leaves it. For this cause Aristotle
calls Form oftentimes by the name of Entelechia in regard of perfection:
either because it is an inseparable companion of perfect power, or else because
it does fulfill and perfect it wholly. Therefore as we say that perfection, so
also according to usual speech, we say that form is brought out of the power
of the matter.


Philadelph. Then it seems to me that form is extracted out of the
precurrent power, no otherwise then act comes out of the habit.


Theophrast. The comparison which you have made is fit to the purpose, for by
long custom and use, a Musician or Harper, having gotten a habit in dividing
his parts on his Instrument, loses not that habit, though he fleepe, but can
readily when he awaketh show his former skill, according to his own will.
Therefore as the act proceeds from the habit or skill, because the act cannot
show forth it self, except the habit be first perfectly gotten: so in like
manner it fares in the procreation of things: For it is not Power that
imprinteth the form, but an external cause, which notwithstanding being
without the help of power, should not have strength enough of it self.


Philadelph. I perceive you well, it is as if one having Science uses it not:
yet when he has will to make use thereof, he contemplateth, and is in act a
man of Science: even so what subject so ever has perfect power to beget a
thing when the external force of the agent comes, the same has present
action and form. And hereunto agrees Aristotle, who says: he which knows
any thing, if he have his mind actually occupied in contemplation, yet he
keeps his habit, and has not lost his Science in contemplating, but does
rather amend and perfect it, even so, that which has received perfect power,
when the form comes, puts not off the quality of power, but adds
thereto an ornament and a perfection. Thus you see, I well understand you, not
perverting your meaning, I will now briefly repeat what has been spoken
hitherto for my better memory, and also to let you see how well I have
observed for my further knowledge, that which at my request you have delivered
to this effect following. A brief repetition of all that has been spoken.
Of all the things which the parent Nature has brought forth, the first
constitution is made out of the inferior and subject matter and form: of the
which two, for as much as form is far the more excellent, it is more often
called form then matter. And as we do see that the thing begotten, is nothing
permanent or stable; but does sometime fall and vanish away: so that form, by
which the thing did flourish, cannot perpetually abide and cleave to the
matter, but remoueth it self sometime, and that very suddenly, which shall be
the destruction thereof. But before form came into matter, it desired a
certain ornature and preparation of the same, without the which it cannot
enter there. This preparation is called Power, the which power is not so much
as a portion, nor the least mite of the approaching form, but only a
fore-running preparation, or ordering of the matter. Whatsoever has begotten
any thing, is thought to have employed and bestowed this power: sometime by it
self, alone, sometime with the seed, or with a certain Seminary, agreeing
and answering thereto. Therefore seeing power is a manifold and varying
preparation of the body, both out of those four incorrupt beginnings of things
which are the Elements, with the temper made in the smallest proportion, and
wholly annexed together, and a feat and comely conformation of the body, with an
apt conjunction of the parts therewith, as also all commoderation and
conueniencie of the natural and in-set spirit, this whole order of powers
depends on the faculties and force of the seed, and of him that cast the
seed, then when all preparation is fully finished, (which is when power is
consumated) then by a certain natural and inevitable necessity, the form
comes and shows it self outwardly. This form is altogether simple without
any composition of the forms of the subjects, and yet is able to do and
further many things, according to the several faculties which it has. They
which measure all things by the senses, and have an eye only to the nearest
cause, contend and stiffly hold, that the form is stirred up, and brought
forth from out of the power of the matter, which opinion they defend with
strong arguments. For the efficient or genitorie, when he begets another
thing of his name or kind, by himself, or by the means of his seed or
seminary, does neither make, nor yet put in the form thereof, but is the
cause of this concourse only, namely, that form may be in the matter. And
this is that which is said to be the cause of the begotten, and of the genitour
which has begotten. But yet there is a more high and most excellent
workmaister, who gives form outwardly by a certain inspired motion. This is
the sum which has bin hitherto spoken for my instruction.


Theophrast. I commend your memory, and collection, in this repetition.


CHAP. IIII.
Philadelph. BY that which has been hitherto discoursed, it appears that
three things are in the composition of every natural thing, to wit, Matter,
Form, and Temperament: whereof two as principles, namely, Matter and Form,
do make every thing: but Temperament is only in Matter, which Matter is
congealed and compacted out of the mixture of the first Elements of the world.
Now therefore declare whether the powers and forces of all things proceeded
from these three and no more.


Theophrast. Aristotle speaking of efficient causes, propundeth some altogether
without reason, and some endued with reason, and therefore says: Whatsoever
things are the efficients of contrary works, are partakers of reason: and every
thing is deuoyd of reason, which is the beginning of one work only: hereupon
I frame this argument. Of the natural causes and faculties which are without
reason, one cause is the beginning of one effect, neither can more or diverse
effects proceed from one and the same: but we observe and see many effects,
and the same much different and unlike of every simple and natural body;
therefore these cannot be referred to one common beginning, but there must
needs be many causes of these.


Philadelph. Although this one beginning has diverse causes and faculties, yet
I ascribe all those to Temperament; except you show unto me that of these some
do proceed from Matter, and some from Form.


Theophrast. First, then I take this as granted from you, that there are
certain forces and faculties in temperament.


Philadelph. Should I deny that which is confirmed by the testimony and
opinions of all Philosophers?


Theophrast. And yet Temperament, does not comprehend in it alone the efficacy
of all functions, but of those only which after a certain manner do retain
and set forth the nature and condition of the first qualities. For in
temperament and mixture it is very necessary, that one or two qualities do
excel, which because they are superior, they challenge unto them all the
efficiencie of temperament, in such wise, that whatsoever is effected by it,
the same is said to be perfected by them, albeit the rest are not idle. For
that which we perceive to be hot, does heat, albeit more faintly then fire.
And that which is hot and dry, does both heat and dry together. Neither can
any function come out of the Temperament, which is not referred to the nature
and power of the predominant quality. This if it be alone and pure, shall have
the forces of the Element: but if it be tempered with the mixture of the
contrary, it shall still contain the same forces, albeit obscure and
inferior. For the repugnancie of the contrary may hinder the forces of the
predominant quality and excess, but it cannot utterly suppress and quail the
nature and strength thereof. Therefore it is necessary that the power of the
predominant Element do abide and domineere in the temperament, albeit the same
power be weaker and oppressed, which enclining always to the accustomed
nature, can produce no effect out of another different kind. And to persuade
you that the rules go thus, it seems good to me to use a more subtle
reason. The true mixture is of bodies, the temperament is of qualities only.
But contrary qualities do not mutually pass into themselves, or one into
another, says Aristotle: For heat does not pass into cold, nor moistness
into dryness, or contrariwise: but the subject body only does suffer change.
For heat is not subject to cold, nor cold to heat, but that which is
subject to either, is Matter. Therefore if ye think that contraries cannot
pass into themselves, how shall it come to pass, that a new power or quality
should arise out of the contemperament of the chief qualities, which having
gotten a different nature, does nothing savor or taste those chief qualities.
Wherefore it is necessary that the forces which arise out of the principal
qualities, do immitate the nature of the superior and ruling quality.


Philadelph. I see verily the reasons of this conclusion. Tell me therefore I
pray you, what force of effecting do you think has the matter gotten at the
last. For seeing it is rude and without form, and only subject to bear the
forms of things, it effects nothing at all, but suffers and endures all
order of change.


Theophrast. I do not hold and determine, that there are any forces and
functions in the simple and bare matter of things, but in that matter which is
compounded of mixed substances of the Elements, Aristotle in diverse places
shows that of the four first qualities, two, that is to say, Heat and
Cold, are active, and are therefore called efficient: the other two, that is
to say, Moist and Dry, are called passive: so in like manner concerning the
beginnings of nature, Fire and Air are as causes efficient: but water and
earth are as the matter patient. That same Aristotle pronounces those things
which are more potent and excellent in strength, simply efficients; but Water
and Earth, which are less potent, he makes the matter of compound and thick
bodies, and calls the qualities of these dryness and moistness. Living
creatures (says he) do live and converse only in the earth, and in the
water, and not in the Air and Fire, because earth and water are the matters of
bodies, and therefore he adds these words: That which suffers is either dry
or moist, or else compounded of both: and for this cause water is said to be
the body of moistness, and earth the body of dryness, because amongst moist
and dry things they are most passive. Hereof I gather, that moistness and
dryness are patible qualities, and that earth and water, wherein is much
moistness and dryness, are the matter of natural bodies. Therefore for good
considerations we do call the same, the virtue and quality of matter, which
Aristotle is wont to call the secundarie qualities arising from the patible,
and also calls them corporal effects, as are hard and soft, thick and
thin, tough and brittle, light and sharp, and such like, all which are
hidden and contained in matter. Also Aristotle respecting the power and
qualities of the Elements, calls them efficients, but yet after a more
subtle manner: but when he considers their substance, then he affirms all
of them to be patible, and the matter of natural bodies, whereof all creatures
(which are in the universal frame of this world) consist. This therefore is
the matter of mixed bodies, which being compunded of the matter of the elements,
and of the virtue of their qualities, has the same forces, which I called
secundarie, and from whence all that is soft, hard, thick and thin,
proceeds. And this is the cause why our meats do nourish quicker or slower,
and why they have virtue to stop, to open, or to cleanse.


Philadelph. Your speech imports thus much (as I take it) as if you should
say, that such forces do one while proceed from the qualities of the
elements, and sometime from their matter, and yet nevertheless the forces both
of the qualities and matter do apparently come from the elements themselves.


Theophrast. They seem to proceed in deed from both, if as well the one as
the other seem Elementarie, but yet except those forces which proceed from
the qualities be discerned from those which the matter yields, there will no
doubt be great ambiguity in things, and much confusion, which if you think
good to clear and avoid, you shall drive the effects of the elements from the
temperament, and the effects of the consistence from the matter.


Philadelph. I like the distinction of your Homonomye: now therefore proceed
with the third sort of forces, namely, of that which concerns form.


Theophrast. If the form of a natural thing, which is the perfection of the
whole, be far more excellent than either the matter or the temperament, who I
pray you is so mad, and so blind in the contemplation of things, as to think
that matter and temperament, have their forces and effects, and that form
should be idle, and nothing available in the power of acting? That the
accidents should have in it a natural effecting power, and the substance,
which of all other is most chief, should be destitute of all acting power to
do any thing, which to think is too absurd. I for my part, attribute so much
force to the forms of bodies, that I verily think that all those effects
which we behold in the things created, do chiefly and especially proceed from
them. And the rather I am of this opinion, because Aristotle confirms the
same. For he opposing himself against certain Philosophers, which deduced the
powers of natural bodies, from hot and cold, thinking that all things were
made of these, and by these, makeeh it plain by demonstration, that those
qualities are only instruments of a certain more superior and principal
cause, which he has expressed by the name of nature. For whosoever shall
affirm that these secundarie qualities have the prerogative in themselves to
work, and shall attribute the cause and power, as it were, of acting to the
Axe, or such like instrument, and so the form and perfection of the thing
rejected, shall pass by the true cause, imputing that to the actions of the
Instrument, which nevertheless should remain idle, if they were not moved and
stirred up by the force of form, the same I say shall much forget himself.


Philadelph. If there be so great force and power in form, that to the same
chiefly all motion and action must be imputed, then shall we be enduced to
think, that the functions and qualities which even now you referred to
temperament and matter, take not their original by themselves, but first from
form. What cause have you then to determine, that they proceed from
temperament and matter?


Theophrast. They which soar no higher then the wing of common sense do carry
them, will affirm that such functions and qualities spring from matter and
temperament, albeit form has the first place and pre-eminence: we following
these men's low pitch of conceit, affirm that those qualities proceed from
Matter and Temperament, because they are effected by these as by instruments.
But what qualities and faculties I simply pronounce to be of form, those I
affirm to have no need of the help of Instrument.


Philadelph. Go to then: Are not matter and temperament which you propund as
Instruments, certain furtherances and forces of the efficient form?


Theophrast. No verily. But as in any artificial work, the Caruer or Smith is
he which is the first and principal agent, and who has the power and faculty
of acting, (which is his Art and strength of body) but the Artificers
instrument, as Axe, or Hammer, is but an helper, and in the instrument there is
as it were a certain borrowed help or force, not which works, but by which
the work is the better effected, and to this end the well fashioned and sharp
Tool is a great furtherance: even so in like manner almost, in the natural
working of things, whereby they are brought to pass, Form is the first and
chief efficient, having in it the effecting power: But Matter and Temperament,
are as helping instruments of the efficient cause, and either of these, to wit,
Matter and Temperament, have their power and faculty, and an apt constitution,
by which the effect may more easily be brought to pass. Therefore in every
natural body, there are three efficient causes, namely, Form, Matter, and
Temperament, every of which have their peculiar force, whereby it works
strongly or after a weak manner Form of it self is the beginning of working,
neither does it borrow any thing of the Instrument, to have being, or the
nature of beginning, which comes afterward, as by accessarie means. Form
therefore had the power and faculty of acting, before such time as it acted by
the Instrument, even as the Caruer before he work any thing with his Tool,
has ability and Art to effect, the which faculty he takes not from his Tool
or Instrument. Whereby it appears, that the faculty which is naturally in
every form, and which is called the property thereof, is far different from
Matter and Temperament in force and virtue: for a Caruer or Painter by his
Science only, (which is his faculty) without the help of any Instrument can
make an Image in his mind: so in like manner the form of a thing, effects
the thing without the help of Matter and Temperament. And forasmuch as these
three are mixed and conjoined in every natural body, Forms can scarsly show
forth their forces apart, and by themselves in effect, but that therewith
Matter and Temperament will express their supply. But on the contrary part,
Matter and Temperament cannot show forth themselves without form: so that
these in their several kinds must be distinguished, and not confounded.


CHAP. V.
Philadelph. YOur ternarie of Form, Matter, and Temperament, puts me in
mind of three principles, which that great and ancient Philosopher Hermes
Trismegistus has delivered, that is to say, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; which
three he appoints as the only natural beginnings of all things created,
which agrees not with Aristotle's four Elementarie principles. How can these
two opinions so different in number stand together?


Theophrast. Aristotle had reason to appoint a quaternarie of Elements,
according to the number of the four qualities, hot, cold, dry, and moist, as
the first principles of all things, as is to be seen in his second book of
Generation of living creatures. Yet forasmuch as one can beget nothing of
himself but three therefore three do make one body, by a compound made by a
threefold efficacy of the divine word. For God in the beginning, as Moses
testifies, made of nothing a Chaos, deep, or waters (which we please to call
it) animated with his spirit, who being the great workmaister in the creation,
separated first light from darkness, and this Ethereall Heaven which we
behold as a quarta essentia, or fourth eflence, or most pure spirit, or most
spiritual simple created body. Then be divided waters from waters: that is to
lay, the more subtle, aterie, and Mercuriall liquor, from the more thick,
clammy, oyle-like, or Sulfurous liquor. After that, Moses tells us that God
separated from the more gross waters, the Earth, which stands apart by it
self, like Salt. And thus in the bosom of the world, God encluded these three
simple bodies, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, as the first forms of things.


Philadelph. Do the Philosophers, the followers of Hermes, exclude the Element
of Fire, in the composition of bodies elemented?


Theophrast. In Genesis it is evidently to be seen, that there is made mention
of Heaven, Earth, and Water only: but of Fire and Air, no mention at all,
because these two are encluded under the other: as under Heaven, Fire, and
under the superior waters, Air: so that hereby it is plain, that there is no
other fiery element but Heaven; a fourth essence, separated out of the more
subtle matter and form of the three elements: which being so separated and
extracted, is no other thing but a pure Aetheriall and most simple fire, most
perfect, and far different from the three Elements, as imperfect, which Fire
is the Author of all forms, powers, and actions in all the inferior things of
nature, as the first in degree among the second causes, and carries it self
like a Father toward his offspring.


Philadelph. What are the essences of these three, Fire, Air, and Earth?


Theophrast. The first which is fire, is a substance containing in it life and
motion, or the soul of the Elements. The second which is Air, is a substance,
which has in it the nourishing foment of life, and the spirit of the Elements.
The third is an Earthie and watrie substance, both together carrying the body of
the Elements, under the name of Earth.


Philadelph. I pray you declare unto me the complexions and qualities of these
three principles, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, that I may understand how they
agree with those of the Elements.


Theophrast. Mercury is a sharp liquor, fluible, and penetrable, and a most
pure Aethereall and substantial body: a substance Aierie, most subtle,
quickening, and full of spirit, the seed of life, and an essential form
comprehended in Air. Sulphur is a moist, sweet, oile-like, clammy original,
which gives substance to it self, the nourishment of Fire, or of a natural
heat, endued with the force of molifying, and conioyning together,
comprehended in water. Salt is that dry body, saltish, merely earthie,
representing the nature of Salt, endued with wonderful virtues, of dissoluing,
congealing, cleansing, emptying, and with other infinite qualities comprehended
in earth. These three principles were called by the foresaid Hermes, Spirit,
Soul, and Body; Mercury, Spirit: Sulphur, the Soul, and Salt the body. The
body is joined with the spirit by the bond of the Soul, Sulphur, for that it
has affinity with both the extremes, as a mean, coupling them together: For
Mercury (as is said) is liquide, thin, and fluible. Sulphur is a soft oil
passable. Salt is dry, thick, and stable: the which three are so proportionate
together, and tempered one with the other, that there is a great Analogy and
conueniencie in this contrariety of beginnings. For Sulphur with his humiditie
oyle-like, joins as a mean the two extremes, fixed Salt, and flying
Mercury: that is to say, the dryness of Salt, and the moistness of Mercury,
are contempered with the viscous humidity of Sulphur: the thickness of Salt,
and the subtilty of Mercury, (which are contrary) are tempered with the
fluidity of Sulphur. Moreover, Sulphur by his exceeding sweetness, does
contemper the sharpness or sowernesse of Mercury, and the bitterness of
Salt: and by his clamminesse, does conioyne the subtle flying of Mercury,
with the firmness and stability of Salt. Thus of these three, all natural
bodies are compounded.


Philadelph. You said before that Fire is the Author of all forms and actions
in universal nature. I pray you show unto me after what manner it is so to be
reputed.


Theophrast. Fire by his wind and spirit, carries and conuayeth his seeds into
the belly of the earth, whereby the generation and fruit is nourished,
fostered, and grows, and is at the last thrust forth out of the lap and
bosom of the Elements. This Heaven or Fire, albeit it is no complexion in it
self, that is to say, neither hot nor cold, moist nor dry: yet by his
natural disposition it yields to all things, heat and cold, moisture and
dryness. For so much as there are stars which have their most cold and
moist spirits, as the Saturnals and Lunaries: others most hot and dry, as the
Solarie and Martials: others hot and moist as the Iouials, who by their virtues
and complexion wherewith every star is endued, do form, fashion, and
impregnate all these inferior things in such wise, that some indiuiduals are
of that condition and complexion, which they have borrowed and taken from their
framing or fashioning star or planet: other some of another complexion, which
they have obtained, according to the condition of other stars. For God has
given to Heaven most perfect and simple seeds, such as are the Planets and
Stars, which having in them vital faculties, and complexions, do power them
forth into the lap of the inferior Elements, animating and forming them.
Neither does this Heaven at any time cease from his working, nor the Astrall
seeds thereof, because their virtues are so abundant, that they are never
exhausted, nor yet do they suffer alteration or diminution of their faculties,
whereby they may cease from procreating or forming, albeit at sometime they do
make more or less fruitful, than at other times. Hereupon comes that
perpetual circulation, by the benefit whereof, the seeds of the Elements, or
their matter, are coupled with the seeds of the stars, thrusting their
contained seed into the maternall lap, that it may form and bring forth a
kindly offspring. For as Heaven is said to work upon the Earth, so also the
inferior Elements do yield and bestow their actions and motions, albeit after
another manner: because Heaven is altogether active and nothing passive, being
of a Homogeniall and most perfect nature, and is therefore incorruptible and
immutable, until the predestinate end of things created.


Philadelph. Are then those three, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, the Essential
and first principles of the Heaven?


Theophrast. God in creating Heaven, separated out of the Chaos, or confused
Mass, the most pure from the impure: that is to say, he reduced the more pure
and Aethereall Mercury, the more pure and inextinguible stars and lights,
into a Crystaline, and Diamontine substance, or most simple body, which is
called Heaven, the highest and fourth formal Element, that from the same the
forms, as it were seeds, might be powered forth (as is before showed) into the
more gross Elements to the generation of all things. Therefore it cannot be
denied, but that Heaven does consist of those three principles, albeit most
simple: but yet of the most pure, spirituous, and altogether formal. If we
will behold the purity of the Heaven above other elements, and the constancy
thereof, look then upon those bright and shining fires, continually glittering
with light, to whom the Heaven has given the most pure and in extinguible
Sulphureus substance, whereof they consist. For such as the Heaven is in
essence, such fruits has it brought forth therein, as touching substance: out
of whose vital impressions and influences they procreate and bring forth some
likeness of themselves in the more gross Elements: but yet according as the
matter is more gross, more thin, more durable, more constant, or more
transitory. And the influences of such fires are Mercuriall spirits: but the
light and shining brightness is Sulphur: their fixed Heavens or vitriall
Christalline circles is a salt body; which circles are so pure shining and
fixed, that a Diamond which partaketh of the nature of fixed Salt, is not of
more purity, continuance, and perpetuity then they are.


Philadelph. What say you to the Element of Air? does that also consist of
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury? If it do, show me I pray you the manner how?


Theophrast. The beginnings of Air are all one with the other, but yet more
gross, less pure, and less spirituous and simple, then the beginnings
celestial, notwithstanding that they are much more perfect, thin, and
penetrating, than are the waterie and terrestrial Mercuries and Sulphurs, and
are such, that next to Heaven, Air has the pre-eminence of actiuitie and
power: whose powers and effects, are to be seen in diverse and sundry winds
(which are Mercuriall fruits) and the spirits of the Aierie Element, whose
Sulphurs also are discerned to be pure and brght in burning Comets, which are
no perpetual fires and Sulphurs, as are the stars, degenerating from the
nature of them as from purity and simplicity, into a more gross and impure
form. And as concerning Earth in Air, it is so subtle and thin, that it is
very hard to beseene, being diffused throughout the whole Region of the Air.
Which Salt shows not it self to man's eye, but in Dewes, and Frosts, and in
Manna; In Honey which Bees do gather from flowers, wherein there is no other
thing but Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury of the Air, which by a skillful Chemist
are separated from it with great admiration. Yea, the rusticke Coridon finds
this to be true by his experience, in that he can separate the matter of the
Bees work into wax, a matter sulphurous: into Honey, which is a Mercuriall
essence: and into dross representing the terrestrial Salt. The very same
beginnings of Air may also be seen in Meteors, in Lightnings, in
Corruscations, in Thundrings, and in such like, which are engendered in the
Air. For in that fiery flame which breaks forth is Sulphur, in the windy
spirit thereof is Mercury, and in the stone and thunderbolt is Salt fixed.
Thus that superior separated into an Aethereall and ayrie Heaven, has his
three beginnings, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, yet nevertheless very different
in simplicity and purity.


Philadelph. These demonstrations persuade much: but show me I pray you
whether the things of this inferior Globe, consist in essence of the same
number of three, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.


Theophrast. These three beginnings do more plainly show themselves in this
inferior Globe, by reason of their more gross matter, which is to our sight
more sensible. For out of the Element of Water, the iuyces and metalline
substances do daily break forth in sight, the vapors of whose moisture or
more spirituous juice do set forth Mercury: the more dry exhalations Sulphur,
and their coagulated and congealed matter, Salt. Of the which Salts, Nature
does offer unto us diverse sorts, as Allom, Coperas, Vitriol, Salt Gem, Salt
Armoniacke, Salt Peeter, and many others. She gives also unto us many kinds
of Sulphurs, as Brimstone, Bitumen, Pitch, Tar, and such like. Also diverse
sorts of Mercuries. Moreover in the Sea, there are Mercuriall, Airie, and
Sulphurus spirits, whose Meteors, in Castor and Pollux, and tn other kindled
fires, by reason of their sundry Sulphurs and exhalations, do manifest the
same. And as touching the Salt in the Sea, no man will make question, it is so
superabundant. From this Marine Salt, the Earth being like unto a sponge, and
sucking the same continually into it, produces the before mentioned Salts,
beside store of minerals and metals, as the mother and first original.


Philadelph. For as much as these three first beginnings are in the Heaven, in
the Air, and in the Water (as you have showed) I have no reason to doubt, but
that by a far greater likelihood, the same are to be found in the earth, and
to be made no less apparent, seeing the earth of all other Elements is the
most fruitful and plentiful. Therefore discourse unto me I pray you,
concerning the Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, of Plants and Trees.


Theophrast. The Mercurial spirits of the Earth show themselves in the leaves
and fruits: the Sulphurs in the flowers, seeds, and kernels: the Salt in the
wood, bark, and roots; and yet so, that every of those three parts of the Tree
or Plant, severally by themselves, have in them their peculiar Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, without which they cannot consist, how simple so ever they be.
For whatsoever has being within the whole compass of Nature, it does consist
of these three essences. And albeit some Trees and Plants are said to be
Mercuriall, some Sulphurus, and some Saltish, it comes hereof because the
Mercuriall do contain more Mercury, the Sulphurus, more Sulphur: and the
Saltish, more Salt in them then others. For some Trees are to be seen more
full of Rosine, and Sulphurus matter than other some, as the Pyne, and Fur
Trees, which are always green on the coldest mountains, because they abound
with their Sulphurus beginning, the principal vital instrument of their
growing. For there are some other plants, as the Laurel, the Trees of Orenges,
Lymonds, and Cytrones, which continue long green, and yet subject to cold,
because their Sulphur is not so easily dispersed, as is the Sulphur of the
Fur Trees, which are Rosine, and are therefore of a threefold more constant
life, furnished against the injury of times. Furthermore, all spice Trees, and
odoriferous herbs are Sulphurus, and as there are sundry sorts of Trees of
this kind, so are there an infinite sort of Sulphurs, whereof I cannot stand
now to entreat. The plants and herbs which more abound with Salt than others,
are to be discerned by their taste, such are Celadine, Nettle, Aron, Radish,
Mustard-seede, Porret, Leekes, Garlic, Onions, Ramsons, Persiccaria, and such
like, which also by the plenty of their Salt, do prescrue themselves from the
cold of Winter. As for other plants, abounding with Mercury, none are
comparable to Rosa solis.


Philadelph. Are those three beginnings to be found in animals or living
creatures, that have sense also, as they are in vegetable plants, and such like?


Theophrast. I told you before that there is nothing in Nature, but it
consists of these three: even the very fowls of the Air, and fishes that
live in the water, and worms of the Earth. In the Egg, whereof the foul
takes his beginning, these are severally to be seen, the white of the Egg
shows the Aethereall Mercury, wherein is the seed, and the Aethereall
spirit, the Author of generation, having in it the generating power, whereof
the bird is chiefly procreated. The yolke of the Egg, which is the nourishment
of the bird, is the true Sulphur. But the thin skin and the shell is
altogether Salt. And this Salt is the most fixed and constant of all other
Salts of Nature. So as the same being brought to blackness, and then freed
from the combustible Sulphur therein, by artificial calculation, it will
endure all force of fire, a property belonging to the most fixed Salts. This
Salt duly prepared is very fit to dissolve the stone and to avoid it. As these
three are in the Egg, so do they pass into the bird: for Mercury is in the
blood and flesh, Sulphur in the fat, and Salt in the Ligamens, sinews, bones,
and more solid parts, and the same beginnings are more airie and subtle in
birds then in fishes and terrestrials, as for example the oylely substance of
birds which is the Sulphur, is always of more thin parts, than that of
fishes or of beasts. The same may be said of fishes, which albeit they be
procreated and nourished in the cold water, yet do they not want their hot
and burning fatness. Also that there is in them Mercury and Salt, no man well
advised will deny. All Terrestrial living creatures do consist in like sort
of these three beginnings: but in a more noble degree of perfection they
appear in them, than in vegetable things. For the vegetables whereon the
beasts do feed, being more crude, are concocted in them, and are turned into
their substance, whereby they are made more perfect, and of greater efficacy.
In vegetables there are only the vegetatiues, but in beasts, there is not
only the vegetating faculty, but also the sensitive, and are therefore of a
more noble and better nature. The Sulphur appears in them by their grease,
tallowe, and by their unctuous oylely marrow, and fatness, apt to burn, their
Salts are represented by their bones and more solid parts, even as their
Mercuries do appear in their blood, and in the other humors and vaparous
substances, all which singular parts, are not therefore called Mercury,
Sulphur, and Salt, without the conjunction of the three beginnings together,
but in Mercurials, Mercury: in Sulphurus Sulphur: in the Saltish, Salt has
the greatest command. Out of the which three beginnings of minerals,
vegetables, and animals, diverse oils, liquors, and Salts, apt for man's use,
both to nourish, and also to heal and cure, may by Chymicall Art be extracted.


Philadelph. For as much as Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are the essences and
beginnings of all things, I would gladly hear, after what manner man is
compounded of them, who as he is the most excellent creature under the cope of
Heaven, so me seems his composition should be far more excellent than that of
others.


Theophrast. In man, as in a little world, are contained these three
beginnings, after as different and manifold manner as they are in the great
world, but more spirituous and far better. For man is called a compendium of
the greater world. And therefore Gregory Nazianzene in the beginning of his
book concerning the making of man, says: God therefore made man after all
other things, that he might express in him, as in a small table, all that he
had made at large. For as the universal frame of this world is divided into
three parts, into Intellectual, Elementarie, and Caelestiall, the mean
between which, is the Caelestiall (which does conioyne the other two, not
only most different, but also clean contrary: that is to say, that supreme
intellectual wholly formal and spiritual, and the Elementarie which is
material and corporate) so in man the like triple world is to be considered,
as lt is distributed into the parts, notwithstanding most strictly knit
together and united: that is to say, the Head, the Breast and Belly, which is
inferior to the other two, and comprehends those parts which are appointed
for generation and nourishment, correspondent to the lower Elementarie world.
The middle part which is the breast, where the heart is seated, the fountain
of the bodies motion, of life and of heat, resemble that celestial middle
world, which is the beginning of life, of heat, and of all motion, wherein the
son has the pre-eminence as the heart in the breast. But the highest and
supreme part, which is the head, wherein is the brain, contains the
original of understanding, and is the seat of treason, like unto the supreme
intellectual world, which is the Angelical world. For by this part man is
made partaker of the celestial nature, and of understanding, of the sensitive
and vegetating Soul, and of all the celestial functions formal and
incorruptible: whereas otherwise his Elementarie world is altogether gross,
material, and terrestrial.


Philadelph. I have observed one thing in your whole discourse hitherto, that
all the things in Nature, are comprehended in the number of three, according to
that triple proportion, wherein God is said to have made all things in weight,
Wisdom. 7.
number, and measure: which must needs contain a great mystery, which I pray
you unfold unto me.


Theophrast. There is indeed a great mystery in this point to be considered.
For first the number of three represents the most holy and Divine Trinity in
unity. It is therefore a most holy and potent number, and the number of
perfection. All dimension consists in three, in Longitude, Latitude, and
Thickness. All corporal and spiritual bodies consist of three, of Beginning,
Middle, and End. All measure of time is in the number of three, Past, Present,
and to Come. All magnitude is contained in three proportions in Line,
Superficies, and Body. Harmony contains three Symphonies, Diapazon,
Hemiolion, and Diatessaron. There are but three kinds of living creatures,
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Intellectual. There are three quaternions of the
celestial signs, Fixed, Moved, and Common. There are three faculties in man:
Natural, Vital, and Rational. And man existeth wholly in the number of three,
namely, of Body, Soul, and Spirit. The Soul has three principal faculties,
Reason, Memory, and Will. Therefore it is true which you observed, that GOD in
such general manner has numbered the whole work of his hands by the number of
three, that no one thing can be showed in universal Nature, which has not
this cognizance of the Divine Trinity in unity.


CHAP. VI.
Philadelph. WHereas you said even now, that man consists in the number of
Three, to wit, of Body, Soul, and Spirit, it is plain that Soul and Spirit
have been always taken for one thing. I pray you therefore hear how they are
distinguished.


Theophrast. I cannot otherwise distinguish them, then they are already
distinguished in the holy Scriptures: as in this place where the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews writes thus. The word of God (says the Apostle) is
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through, even to the dividing asunder of the Soul, and of the Spirit, of the
joints, and of the marrow. And in another place he says: I pray God that your
whole Spirit, Soul and Body (that is to say, the whole man which consists of
these three) may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Solomon also in his book called Ecclesiastes, makes a distinction between
Soul and Spirit, where he says: And the Soul return unto God that gave it.
But in another place speaking of the Spirit, he says, Man and Beast have all
one spirit or breath. By which testimonies it appears, that Soul and Spirit
are not one, but too distinct essences joined together in one body.


Philadelph. Divines commonly hold, that there is no difference between Soul
and Spirit, affirming that the Greek words Pneuma, and Psuchae, (that is,
Spirit and Soul) do signify one thing.


Theophrast. If Pneuma, which signifies but a breath, be the Soul, then must
the Soul of man and beast be all one thing, which to think were too
irreligious and gross.


Philadelph. If Soul and Spirit be not all one thing in essence, how comes
it to pass that in the scriptures they signify sometime the life of any
thing, as here Anima mea est in manibus meis, my life is in my hands. Sometime
anima signifies the whole man: so 76. Souls descended with Jacob into Egypt.
Sometime for spirit or breath, as when Saul said unto the Amalechite, I pray
thee come upon me and slay me. Etiamsi anima adhuc in me est, because my Soul
is yet within me. And it was said of Eutichus, which being a sleep at S. Paul's
Sermon, fell down as dead, Anima eius est in ipso, his soul is yet in him,
that is, there is yet breath in his body, that he may be revived again. Also
sometime Anima is taken for nothing: so said the Prophet, We have conceived and
been in travail, et peperimus Spiritum, and we have brought forth a Soul.
Finally, the Spirit is taken for the regenerated soul: so says the Apostle,
Pneuma lusts against the flesh. And S. Augustine in diverse places calls the
soul by no better name then Flatus, which signifies no more then a breath or
blast: Deus fecit (says he) omnem flatum, God made every blast; meaning every
soul. And it is written, God breathed into Adam the breath of life. Therefore
these two words being thus confounded in the Scripture, how can you make them
appear to be two distinct essences?


Theophrast. All that you have alleged, is nothing at all against the
distinction of the essences of soul and spirit, albeit the one sometime has
the name of the other. For admit, that the soul sometime signifies life and
spirit, because it is the principal spirit that gives life, and is also
immortal, yet does it not therefore follow that the Aethereall spirit (which
is transitory) joined therewith as a bond to keep it in the body, is of the
same essence. And where to serve your purpose you english the word anima, to
signify spirit or breath, and again, spirit to signify soul, as in these
places: Anima eius est in ipso, there is yet breath in his body: and peperimus
spiritum, we have brought forth a soul, you deal not faithfully in
translating, calling that spirit which is soul, and that soul which
signifies spirit. It cannot be denied, but that so long as the soul is in the
body, there remains also that breathing spirit with it, and no longer then
breath tarrieth will the soul abide in the Heart and Brain: not because they
are all of one essence, but because the spirit is a mean to conioyne the soul
and body together for a time: according to the saying of the Psalmist, Thou
take away their spirit, or breath, and they die. This was the isntrumental
spirit which God used in the conioyning of the reasonable and immortal soul
with Adams body, when he is said by Moses, to breath it into him. And as for
the place in the Galathians, The spirit lusts against the flesh, no man
doubts but that it is spoken of the regenerate soul, which is a more
excellent essence then that by which man breaths. What absurdity I pray you
can follow, if it be granted that the soul and spirit are two distinct
essences? none in my judgment: but being denied, many Atheistical and absurd
conclusions may be made against the immortality of the soul. Seeing therefore
the word of God puts difference in the denominations of either, I see no
reason but that also the difference in essence may well stand. It is not denied
but that the soul of man has diverse denominations. For sometime it is called
anima, because it gives life (as is already showed) to the body, by a natural
union. For the soul is more excellent then the spirit, being always one and
like it self. It is sometime called Animus Apo tou anemou, that is to say, of
the wind or spirit, because the most swift cogitation thereof is like in
speedy motion to the wind, reaching in a moment from Earth to Heaven: and
sometime it is called Men's of Mean, that is to say, of the Moon: because man's
mind is changed by course of time, as is the Moon, through his natural
imperfection.


Philadelph. Show me I pray you the difference, which is between the soul and
spirit of man, concerning substance and quality.


Theophrast. The Soul of man is an immortal heat, most subtle moving by it
self, and the cause of the bodies motion. It is capable of Science, aspiring
to a way like to it self, and to a substance of her own affinity, and
leaving the terrestrials, it seeks to attain that which is highest of all,
partaking of the Heavenly Divinity, often contemplating the super-celestiall
place, and stands alone the moderatour of all things. To conclude, the soul
of man is a simple, incorporate, and immortal substance, according to Galens
opinion. But because Hipocrates confesses that he can find no certain
opinion, upon which he may build concerning the substance of the Soul, Melius
est de occultis dubitare, quam de incertis litigare. It is better to doubt
concerning hidden things, then to contend about things uncertain.


Philadelph. I will not desire to be wise beyond sobriety, but will keep my
self within the limits of modesty: yet if it may stand with modest sobriety,
let me entreat you to say somewhat concerning the substance and quality of
Spirit.


Theophrast. Spirit natural, is an Aethereall substance, differing from the
material body and humors thereof. Hipocrates calls the same a stirring
spirit, not for the thinness and subtilty of the substance, but because the
same has a great force and passage, as has the wind. In regard that this
spirit stirs up such motions, it seems to have affinity with the body, and
in respect it cannot be seen, it may be thought to come near to an
incorporable substance, whereby it may be denied to be a mean between both to
partake of either.


Philadelph. Thus then we must conclude, that man consists in the number of
Three, that is to say, of Body, Soul, and Spirit; that the Spirit is as it
were the chariot of the soul, the heat of this soul is celestial and divine.


Theophrast. It is true, I so hold and determine, till I can be better
informed: and I wish you not to make any doubt of this distinction, albeit as
you have before alleged, that by some, soul and spirit are confounded and
made as one: and forget not this excellent sentence of Isiodore, Men's dum
corpus viuificat, anima est: dum vult, animus est: dum spirat, spiritus est:
dum recolit, memoria est: dum rectum iudicat, ratio est: dum aliquid sentit,
sensus est. That is, the mental spirit when it quickneth the body, then it is
the soul: when it wills, then it is the mind: when it records, it is
memory: when it judges right, then it is reason: when it does breath, then it
is spirit: when it feels by any of the five wits, then it is common sense.


Philadelph. Let me yet a little further trouble you in recalling you to the
place of Solomon, where it is said thus. As the beast dies, so also man dies:
Eccle. 3.9.
for they have all one breath or spirit, and there is no excellency of the man
above the beast, for all is vanity: who knows whether the spirit of man
ascend upward, and the spirit of the beast descend downward to the earth? This
place seems to import, that the soul of man is mortal, as is that of the
beast, whereas you said before, that the soul is a substance immortal, which
I verily believe: yet I pray you open unto me the meaning of Salomons words.


Theophrast. You must know that Solomon in those words speaks not of the
reasonable and understanding Soul which can never die, but lives in
expectation of the felicity to come: which Soul S. Stephen yields and
commends into the hands of God: which being so, is also free from all torment
and pain: I say he speaks not of this Spirit, but of that Aierie spirit,
which serves to join Soul and Body together, during this transitory life.
Solomon was not ignorant of the difference between these two Spirits: and
therefore he speaks of two returns answerable to them both, and to their
originals, namely, of the reasonable Soul to God which gave it: and the
natural Spirit which is common to man and beast alike, passes to air again:
but whether of them pass upward or downward, living and breathing in like
mixture of air, cannot be discerned by the external and common sense.


Philadelph. This is a most wonderful mystery, that an essence, simple,
incorporate, and immortal as is the soul, should be knit to a compound body:
and that Nature, so far unlike, should be brought to such conueniencie and
familiarity, during their continuance together.


Theophrast. It is indeed a wonderful work of God, that these three, body,
soul, and spirit, should be so conjoined in unity, that the soul cannot
separate it self from the body when it list, nor keep back it self when the
time is come to go to the Creator. All passages are shut up, when it is
commanded to abide, and all the parts are set open, when it is appointed to
depart. And being departed out of the body, it lives still, not as it did in
the corporal and transitory body, which retained it by breath in the air,
and by an equal mobility which is proper unto it, being subtle, swift, and
eternal. It sees, hears, and touches, and uses the rest of the senses
after a more effectual manner then before, having an intelligence and
judgment, not imperfect and in part (as before) but knowing all things wholly
and spiritually. Therefore because it is a simple, pure, and uncompounded
essence it cannot die. Hereupon Iustine Martyr says: the spirit never dies,
for death can but touch that part which is animated by the spirit: but the
soul being the original and fountain of life, cannot die. For that which is
animated is one thing, and the soul animating is another thing.


Philadelph. Do you not know that in the Scriptures, the souls of the wicked
are said to die, and that there is often mention made of eternal death? how
can this be, seeing the essence of both those spirits as well of the one as of
the other is alike immortal.


Theophrast. Albeit in the Scriptures the souls of the reprobate are said to
die, it is not to be understood as touching the essence and quality of the
soul, but in regard of the misery thereof, being forsaken of God, and cast
out of his presence, (in whom all happy and blessed life consists) is left to
it self in desperation and torments of Hell, where it lives still in essence
and substance in unspeakable misery and woe, which is a continual living
death, ever dying, and yet never dead, abiding for ever, and ever in that
second death with the Devil and his infernal spirits, are you not weary
Philadelph of this long discourse? We have sufficiently according to the manner
of Philosophers debated of these things, and it is now time to take our dinner:
if therefore you please to keep me company, you shall be very welcome to my
house, where in the afternoon we may have further conference.


Philadelph. I thank you, and do gladly accept of your courteous offer: and
the rather because I desire to be informed further in some things, which depend
upon that which has been already in question.


THE AFTER-NOONES CONFERENCE.
CHAP. I.
Philadelph. ARistotle, beside Matter and Form (whereof has been already
spoken) appoints Heaven as a third principle to be the procreatour of these:
but forasmuch as there are diverse Heavens, I would gladly learn the
distinctions of their motions, according to their several Orbs. I pray you
therefore describe them unto me.


Theophrast. Astronomers, and some Divines, do divide the natural Heanens,
which were made out of the more noble part of that Chaos or first matter, into
the number of eleven, every one being placed in their several degrees, one
above another. Whereof the first is a fixed and immovable Heaven, created the
first day, and was then repleate with holy Angels. This Heaven is a body most
subtle, the first foundation of the world, and the greatest in quantity.

Heaven (as says Peter Lombard) is that which Beda and Strabo call Coelum
Empyreum, that is to say, a fiery Heaven: not because any thing is there burnt
or consumed, but because of the fiery light, with the which the same is
illuminated. And S. Ambrose and Basil are of the same opinion also.

Heaven is the first moveable, which makes the daily motion from the East
toward the West, returning again into the East in 24. hours regularly, that
is, no swifter at one time, then at another, without weariness or pain. And
by that motion, this Heaven earrieth with it all the inferior Heavens. This
motion is made upon the poles of the world; and this Heaven has in it no
stars.



Libra and Aries, of the fifth Sphaere: and the Semidiameter of their circles is
four degrees, 18. minutes, and 43. seconds. This motion is called coming and
going.

Saturn, who moves himself in his circle, making revolution once in 30.
years.

Jupiter, who moves about in 12. years.

Mars, who signifies his circular motion once in 12. years.



Venus, who makes a revolution once in 246. days.

Mercury, who moves round about his circuit once in 330. days.

Moon, who goes about the earth once in 28. days, making in this manner 12.
reuolutions in one year. Thus you may perceive the several motions of the
Heavens in their several degrees.


Philadelph. Show me I pray you whether all these Heavens in general, or one
more especial, is the cause of the procreation of the inferior earthie and
natural bodies?


Theophrast. Nunqua^ nimis dicitur, quod nunqua^satis dicitur. There is never
too much spoken, where the disciple is not weary in hearing. Know therefore
that as the Heaven, which is called Primum mobile, is the first of all motions,
which tends to place, from which all other latter and succeeding motion, as
procreation, alteration, growing, or augmentation, and perishing, or death, do
come even so, that body which is carried about with a continual motion and
circuit, must needs be the cause of all bodies procreated. And it is a very
ancient opinion of the Philosophers, that the Sun moving Astrall influences,
is of greatest virtue and power, which being placed by God in the midst of
Heaven, illumineth all things both above and also beneath it, and with his
beams makes the whole world fruitful, even to the very center of the same.
For as the fountain of life in man's body, is the center of his heart (where
that secret vital spirit is contained, from whence natural heat does spring,
heating, illumining, and quickening the rest of the members): even so, the Sun
by his heat and light, does naturally quicken all the parts of the world both
superior and inferior. For in regard of his heat it is called the Heart of
the world, and in regard of his light, it is called the eye of the world. The
Sun is the most noble body of all things that are in the natural Heavens,
and in the earth, therefore in respect of the worthiness thereof, and virtuous
power wherewith it is endued, next unto God it is called the parent of all
things, because the seminary and formal virtue of all things is secretly
comprehended therein.


Philadelph. Then it seems that the Sun by his continual and yearly
course coming toward us, does promote and set forward the procreation of
things, and going from us, does cause their decay and perishing.


Theophrast. It is very true which you say: for it agrees with Aristotle, who
determines that the celestial and mundane conversion, is the cause of those
things which are begotten, and which perish. It is necessary (says he) that
this whole world which compasses the earth about, be so continued with his
superior conuersions and motions, that the whole virtue thereof may be
governed thereby. For that ought to be accounted the first cause, from whence
all things have the beginning of motion. And further (says he) this cause is
sempiternall, neither has it as touching place, any determined end, but is
always in the end. Also in his book de mundo, he calls Heaven an Element,
far differing from those four known, and common Elements, which he
affirms to be divine and immortal, and free from destruction. But for as
much as there is in the Heavens a double or two-folde revolution, and
conversion, the one which is the most swift mundane motion, which is finished
in the space of 24. hours, and the other whereby the seven inferior Orbs
are turned backward, by a contrary motion to that of the higher Heaven: the
first of these two going always forward after one manner in a constant course
without change, cannot be the cause of life and death, things so contrary. But
the latter carrying about the wandering stars, by the Zodiac, when it
brings them to the North, makes the pleasant Spring and life of things, but
when it carries these into the South, it brings the fall of the leaf, and
the decay of things terrestrial. By this perpetual calculation of the Sun
and Stars, the Heaven is married to the Earth, and the inferior Elements do
join with the superior.


Philadelph. Whatsoever is moved, is moved of another. What then is the cause
of the general motion of the Heavens in their several Orbs? Some have
thought that the celestial bodies are moved of their proper forms. Some
according to Platoes opinion, and consent of the Philosophers, have denied them
to be living creatures, affirming that it is one of the greatest shew-tokens of
life, that those celestial bodies have the principal cause of their motion in
themselves, and that they stand not in need of an external mouer. And for
this cause not only the most ancient Chaldean Astrologers, but also the
Chieftaines of the old Phisiologie, as well Greeks, as Egyptians (as
witnesses Plato in his Cratilo and Epinomides, and elsewhere) have thought
that the Caelestiall Orbs have life and Soul, from whence motion proceeds:
and that the whole world is quickened by an universal Soul therein, which they
imagined to be sempiternall. Yea, this opinion was so settled in the minds of
the Atheniens, that they condemned Anaxagoras of an irreligious conceit,
because he durst affirm the contrary. What say you to this? Do you agree to
this Philosophy.


Theophrast. I allow it not, for it must be granted that God alone is the first
mouer and chief cause of all motion, and therefore men illumined with a more
clear light of the knowledge of God, than the Philosophers had, in stead of
that imagined Soul of the world, understand a certain created spirit, which
moved upon the waters in the first creation: which Spirit received power from
God, to quicken, cherish, and conserve all things in their kind and order,
until the determined end of the same. Therefore we may safely say, that
neither Heaven, nor the Stars, are animated as bodies organicall, and for
that cause cannot be meet habitacles for a Soul: but are rather bodies
regular and uniform, moved by a certain natural necessity, according to the
wisdom of the Almighty. For we know that God passes the whole frame of the
Earth, Sea, and Heavens, who fulfilleth all in all. And to prevent the great
ruin thereof, he has of his great goodness and infinite wisdom, appointed
that general Nature, to defend and preserve this great work, by the virtue
and moderation thereof. And that by the continual and yearly revolution of
the eight Heaven, and by the influences and virtues of the Stars, Planets,
and Celestial powers, all things might be well governed, and abide constant in
their estate, until the predestined time of their dissolution. And yet in
such manner, that God himself still orders all things in these secondarie
offices, according to his own secret will and predestination.


Philadelph. Hereby it appears, that God being the first Mouer and cause of
all motion, is himself immovable: because if he were changeable, then must
he necessarily be moved of another: but of another he is not moved nor can be,
for then could he not be the first mouer: because that thing which should move
him, must needs be before him: and also because he not being immovable,
should be moved of another: and so in the moving and moved, there should be no
end, but a proceeding infinitely, which Philosophy rejects. And if we should
imagine, that he is moved of himself, then must he be divided into the part
moving of and by it self, and into the part moved by it self, and so by
motion he shall be without form. Which to think of the most high and chief
simplicity, were too detestable and execrable.


Theophrast. God no doubt is altogether immutable, who without all question as
he is eternal and immensurable, so also he is most simple and most perfect.
For this cause the eternity which is in God, takes from him all temporal
motion, because he is all in all. And this immensurablenesse takes from him
motion in place, because he is every where: and his exceeding perfection and
simplicity, takes away motion to Form, because he needs nothing being most
fully complete. Therefore in no sort God is subject to change and motion, but
stands stable for ever: of whose stability the Prophet David speaks thus:
Thou changest them, and they shall be changed, but thou art one and the same
for ever. And Boethius very notably speaks hereof thus. O quiperpetua mundum
ratione gubernas: terrarum caelique sator qui tempus ab aeuo ire iubes:
stabilisque manens das cuncta moueri. O thou which by a perpetual order, do
govern the world, the maker of Heaven and Earth, which command the times to
proceed from the beginning, and which remaining stable thy self, do give
motion to all things. God therefore in whom all things live, move, and have
their being, is the same which gives forms to all things, that be in the
created Heavens and in the Earth: he is the beginning, the midst, and the end
of all things. If then the Divine power and virtue pass through, and is
effectual in all things: by which the same exist, and has appointed the
perpetual beginnings, dividing through all natures their several kinds, and
fulfilling them with their proper seeds, by which they receive the spirit of
life, will any man make doubt that there is any thing in Nature, which is not
truly divine and so called? Some say of old, Deorum plena sunt omnia, all
things are full of Gods. It is then rashness, utterly to take away without
reason this excellency of the Divinity, infused by God into all natural
things, which opinion has been received by the constant tradition of all the
ancients, and it is more then madness, to acknowledge that there is some Divine
thing given to many things, and yet not to vouchsafe the same a Divine name.


Philadelph. Let it be as you say, that there is some divine thing in things
Natural, yet what manner of thing that Divine thing is, I well understand not,
neither can I conjecture.


Theophrast. Why can you not conjecture? seeing in a natural body there is
nothing more excellent then a simple form, and nothing before it. And for as
much as the residue which apperraineth to Matter, are inferior to Form, as
vile and transitory, it follows, and you may easily perceive that the simple
form of a thing, is that Divine thing which is sought after. And whatsoever
does represent and express the nature thereof, the same also is partaker in
some measure of the Divinity.


Philadelph. But what force or strength do you suppose that simple Form to be
of things of nature: which I must attribute to the force and virtue of the
mixture of Elements?


Theophrast. If the Elements and their qualities have certain virtues and
faculties proper unto them, then must the virtues and faculties of the
Divinity be far greater, which in a higher degree surmounteth all other in
dignity and perfection. Also all the functions and works of this simple Form,
may of us easily be discerned and known. But how and from whence they
proceed, and what is the substance of the effecting cause or faculty thereof,
is as much hidden and unknown to us, as is the essence of the Divinity. We
see that the Magnes or Loadstone has in it an attractiue faculty to draw Iron
to it: that the stone Astroites, moves of it self, if a little quantity of
vinegar be put to it. That the Estridge has a power by swift concoction to
digest Iron: that a Pidgeon by his heat digesteth stones, which a Lion whose
heat is more vehement cannot do. That a little fish called Echeneis,
otherwise Remora, is able to stay a ship against any violence of Oar or wind
in full sail, that out of the ashes of a Phaenix, another of the same kind
should be procreated. That the Salamander should be rather nourished by fire,
then consumed. That the Camelion living by air, should turn himself into
every color which he sees. That a Cockatrice in his eye should have power to
slay a man. That a Viper or Scorpion should kill a man with poison. That an
Adder should prevent the force of a charm, by stopping his ear. That the fish
Ephemera should die the very same day that it began to live: of the which one
days Fever bears the name. That the feathers of an Eagle mixed with other
feathers should consume them. That the wild and fierce Elephant at the sight
of a Ram should be made tame. That a Vine should not prosper, growing near
to a Laurel Tree. That the Almond Tree being solitary, bears no fruit, but
growing with other plants, is very fruitful. That there should be such
familiarity between the Olive and the Myrtle Trees, that the branches of the
Myrtle should so friendly embrace the boughs of the Olive, and both their
roots to join together in one. That the stone Tyrrhemus being whole swimmeth:
but broken sinketh. That where the Glow worm creeps in the night, no Adder
will creep by day. That Rheubarb should have power to separate Choler: Agarick
Phlegm: and Epithimum, Melancholy. That Hemlocke and Hellebore should be to a
man pestiferous: and yet that the Quail should be nourished with Helebore and
the Starling with Hemlocke. That the several parts of a Hare should have
diverse Forms and faculties to heal diverse diseases. As the lungs, those that
be short winded: the blood to break the stone in the bladder or reins of a
man: the bone which is behind the knee in the after leg, to cleanse away
sand and gravel: the Mawe outwardly applied to retain and stay a conception,
the have to stanch blood. These and many more such like are hidden in the Closet
of Nature, the undoubted causes whereof no man is able to show, nor comprehend
by any certain reason. Yet it is man's duty being set upon the op^n Stage of
this world, to take a view of all the creatures of God to him known, to search
after such hidden causes therein soberly, that he may magnify the most
omnipotent and wise Creator of Nature.


CHAP. II.
Philadelph. YOu having spoken before of the celestial motions, it rests that
you say somewhat concerning Water motion. Therefore show me now I pray you,
the cause of the Seas motion: wherein I have observed a great diversity,
sometime ebbing and sometime flowing: one while calm, and another while
turbulent.


Theophrast. The Sea in general has three degrees of motion, the one calm
and quiet continually: as in that Archipelagus, called Mare pacificum, and Mare
delzur: which is seldom troubled with tempest, that M. Anthony Pigafetta,
sometime Knight of the Rhodes, and one that did accompany Magelanus in his
first voyage and enterie into this Sea, upon the first discovery thereof,
testifies, that he with his company sailed therein 4000. leagues in the space
of three months and 20. days. In all which time being without sight of land,
they had no misfortune of wind, nor of any other tempest.

Another degree of motion is in these parts of the Ocean, called the Spanish
Seas, which do move and swell with surging waves like mountains, in such wise
that the top Mast of one Ship going before another, cannot be seen of the
follower, being as it were in a valley between two water hills. In these Seas,
Ships cannot sail near together, least they fall foul one upon another.
Otherwise in these Seas, the passage is less perilous then in the narrow
Seas, for that the billows and waves of these go whole and break not, the
Sea in that channel being so deep, that a whole dry-fat of line may with a
Lead be sunk therein without finding any bottom.

A third degree of motion is in that part of the Ocean, commonly called the
narrow Seas, which coasteth Northward, upon England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
toward the South, upon France and Flanders, and so along the trade toward the
the East, from the West, these Seas are sometime calm, and sometime by
occasion of tempest very rough and turbulent, for that the passage of the Sea
in that channel is interrupted with rocks and sands, to the great hazard of
them that sail therein.


Philadelph. But for so much as the Sea is ever in motion, either ebbing or
flowing, show me I pray you the cause of such natural and inter changeable
motion, which keeps time and tide twice in 24. hours, from East to West, and
from West back again to the East, in the circumference of the whole Globe of
the Earth.


Theophrast. I find in Writers such variety of opinion concerning this motion,
that I know not certainly what to determine to content you, yet to give you the
best satisfaction I can herein, you shall have my conceit, which nevertheless
I submit to the judgment of the more learned in Natures School. I suppose
that there are two principal causes of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. The
one supernatural: the other natural. The supernatural and divine cause is
God, who in the creation of all things by his spirit which he created (as
witnesses Tertullian) was the inspirer and animater of the whole universal:
which Spirit served the will of the Creator, as an Instrument to give such
motion to the Sea, as we see it has, appointing it bounds which it cannot
pass without the will of the most mighty Commander. Another natural cause
beside that created Spirit, whereof Moses speaks (calling it the Spirit of
God) Job expresses by the similitude of Fire put under a Pot, saying: It is
God which makes the Sea to boil like a Pot. Hereof I gather, that there is a
natural fire, of two sorts. One in-set, contained in the Marine Salt: for the
Sea generally is Salt, even to the North. And Salt (as witnesses Pliny)
yields the fatness of oil: and oil by a certain native heat is of
property agreeing to fire. And Josephus Quersitanus, and Christoferus
Parisiensis affirm, that Salt is both animal and vegetall, having life in it
as the radical Balsam of Nature, and to be the first moving thing in the same,
which makes to grow and to multiply, and therefore serves for the generation
of all things: so as with the Poets and ancient Philosophers, it may be said,
that Venus the mother and first beginner of all generation, is begotten of the
salt spume of the male. For which cause Venus was called by the Greeks
Aligines, as affianced to the salt Sea. The other natural Fire, the cause of
the Sea flowing and ebbing, is foreign or external. And this also is of two
sorts. One subterraneall, which is as fire under a boiling pot. For the earth
has more fire in it, then has water: which fire lies hidden in stones till
it be beaten out with steel. This subterraneall fire does also cause the
motion of the Sea, being of substance liquide, fluible, moveable, and
altogether a passive subject to acting fire. And when it begins to run any
way, the precedent part thereof, by reason of the continuation and cleaving
together, is thrust forward by the follower, according to this sentence, Vndam
vnila sequitur, one water follows another. Thus the Sea passes to and again
from one Gulf to another. For there are two Gulphes caused by two vast
continents, the one comprehending all Asia, Africa, and Europe, and that other
America. Which two continents divide the whole Sea into two parts of the world,
opposite one to the other, East and West. These two Gulphes rest at no time,
but like as Sea monsters do, they breath to and again, until the one have
engorged the other so full, that it is compelled to pay unto his lender back
again that which is borrowed. And thus the Sea having a natural impotencie to
stay it self in rest, suffers a certain reciprocal motion into and out of
it self, without intermission: which motion Aristotle calls Talantosin.

The other external heat, causing the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, is that
which proceeds from the Moon, which Aueroes calls the Lady and Mistress
of the Sea, who by her beams and influences makes the Sea hot, and by the
same heat does beget exhalations in it, wherewith when the Sea swells, it
flows to the shore and Sea banks, fulfilling the Havens with Tide. And the
same exhalations being diminished and abated, the Sea again sets in it
self. Therefore when by the Moons ascension and approaching to the South, her
light and heat is increased, then does she make the waters to swell and flow.
But when she descends and enclineth to the Horizon, her heat being by little
and little diminished, the waters do fall and abate. Thus all these causes
working together, the Sea does move in weight, number, and measure, according
to the ordinance of the Almighty.


Philadelph. Jews Vertomannus, in his book concerning Navigations into East
India, affirms, that the floods there have contrary courses to those of ours,
concerning increasing and decreasing. Because there (says he) they increase in
the wane of the Moon: but here with us in the full.


Theophrast. If the report of Vertomannus be true, then are all the times and
seasons by the motion of the Heavens in the Hemisphaere, contrary unto those of
ours in this Hemisphaere, in such wise, that as the people enhabiting there,
are Antipodes unto us; so also with them it is Summer, when Winter with us: and
night with them when day with us: and then no marvel if it be there with them
a full Sea, when the Moon is in the wane, and low water in the full Moon,
contrary to the floods and ebbes here.


Philadelph. Let it be as you say and suppose. Whereas you said before that the
Sea has sometime a turbulent and raging motion: what is the reason thereof?


Theophrast. There are two causes of such motion. One is certain exhalations
bred in the Sea, causing winds to break forth from thence. And sometime a
multitude of dry exhalations drawn up from the Earth into the air, causing
stormy winds, which break the course of the Sea to the greatamazement of
Mariners, and peril of Ships. Who yet are so suddenly taken in such storms,
but that they have fore-warnings thereof by certain tokens precedent: as by
the roaring of the Sea in a great calm: by the sporting and playing of
Dolphins and Porpoyses above the waters: and by certain visible fires, called
S. Helen, S. Nicholas, and S. Clare, which are wont to hang on the Mastes of
the Ships, dazeling the eyes of such as are there. After which fires, and other
show tokens, there follows undoubtedly in very short time, great and
intolerable tempest.


Philadelph. What fires are they which you so name and sanctify. Are they not
Spirits?


Theophrast. They are no spirits, but natural things, proceeding of natural
causes, and are engendered of certain exhalations. Of these Hieronimus Cardanus
writes after this manner. There are two manner of Fires engendered of
exhalations, whereof one is hurtful, the other without hurt. That which is
hurtful is fire indeed, engendered of evil and venomous vapors, which in
continuance of time, take fire, as apt matters to be kindled. The other kind
is no true fire, but like the matter that is in such old putrified wood, as
gives the shining of fire, without the substance and quality thereof. Of the
true kind of fire is the fire-ball, commonly called S. Helen, which is
sometime seen about the Masts of Ships, being of such fiery nature, that
sometime it melts brazen vessels, and is a token of drowning, for as much as
this chances only in great tempests, for the vapor or exhalation whereof
this fire is engendered, connot be compact in form of fire, but is of a gross
vapor, and by a great power of wind put together, and is therefore a token of
imminent peril. As on the contrary part, the like Fires, called in old time,
Castor and Pollux, and now named the two lights of S. Peter and S. Nicholas,
which for the most part fall on the cables of the Ships, leaping from one to
another, with a certain flattering noise like birds, are a token of security
and of the tempest ouerpassed. For they are but vapors cleaving to the Cables,
which in success of time the fire passing from one to another, appear in the
similitude of a light candle. They are a token of security, because they are
little, not slow or gross, whereby they might all have joined together in one,
and thereby have been the more malicious, and lasted longer: whereas being
many and but little, they are the sooner consumed. Thus far Cardanus.


Philadelph. I have not heard of these Sea-fires before. But I have read of
certain whirle-pooles, into the which what Ship so ever comes, it is
swallowed up, and the fragments of the lost Ship are seldom cast up again.
What is the reason of this whi^le-pooles motion.


Theophrast. I have likewise read that in the Norwegian Sea, are three Islands,
namely, Lofoth, Langanes, and Vastrad. The Sea that runs between these
Islands, is called Muscostrom, which signifies boiling. The Sea when it flows
here, is swallowed into certain Gulphes or Caves, and is blown out again at
the ebb, with no less violence then the streams of rivers, which fall from
the mountains. The reason why they are swallowed up, which chance to fall in
with this or the like Sea, is the eddie water, which whirling round about with
the violent fall of the Sea, which before was pent in with the Islands, makes a
great Indraught, which violently sucketh and swalloweth suddenly. This is the
wonderful power of Nature, passing the fabulous Sympleiades, and the fearful
Malea, with the dangerous places of Silla and Charibdis, and all other miracles
that Nature has wrought in any other Sea hitherto known unto men.

Now friend Philadelph, to the end you may the better understand what has
been spoken before concerning the motion of the celestial Orbs; and also
that you may plainly see as in a glass, how the Region of Fire, and Air,
under the Moon, do compass about the Earth and Sea: as also for the better
perceiving of things to be spoken hereafter: behold this Mathematical Figure
following.

figure showing motion of celestial orbs This outtermost circle of this figure
of all the Sphaeres (which is infinite) does represent the habitacle of God,
who was before all time and place.

Time and Place began when this created World began to be.




CHAP. III.
Philadelph. FOr so much as the Earth and Sea, make but one globous body,
united and combined together, I pray you describe the form thereof unto me.


Theophrast. The globous body of the Earth, in comparison of the Heavens
circumference, is a very small body, less then the Sun, and bigger then the
Moon, extending it self within a small distance of the fiery Region, and in
that regard is a great body.


Philadelph. Does not this Earth, being a spungeous body, suck into it, and
partake of the Salt that is in the Sea? which if it do so, in my opinion, it
should procure barrenness to the Earth.


Theophrast. You have forgotten (it seems) what I said before, where I showed
you that the Salt of the Sea contains in it the radical Balsam of Nature;
and being so, it is the cause of the generation, first of most precious pearls
in the shells of fishes, and of Coral, springing out of the bowels of hard
stones and rocks, spreading forth branches like a Tree.

Salt is so far from making the Earth barren, that it fructifieth the same,
making it fat, and giving it power to be fruitful. Salt increases and gives
a vegetating and growing virtue with seed in every terrene thing. For what
other thing is it which makes the Earth fat, and brings to pass that one
grain multipheth into an hundred, but a certain stercoration, and spreading
of dung and urine of men, and beasts upon the eatrh, which compast is full of
Salt? What other thing opens the earth, and makes it to sprout in the
beginning of the spring time, after that the Sun is exalted into the sign of
Aries, (which sign is the fall of Saturn, and the house of Mars, signs
altogether fiery) but the sublimations and eleuations of the Spirit of Salt?
This is that which gives heat and quickneth: which makes to grow, and which
ioyeth and decketh the fields and the meadows with grass and flowers, and
which produces that most ample and universal vigor and virtue.


Philadelph. It seems then that the natural Salt of the earth has in it a
vital and nourishing heat, whereby not only the Caves and hollow places, but
also Springs of water are made warm; as that famous Spring which atiseth in
one of the five Islands of Molucca, called Bachian: where the water issues out
hot in the beginning, but is very cold when it has stood a while in another
place. This water springs from the mountains, on the which the fragrant
Cloue-trees do grow.


Theophrast. Such are those sulphurous Springs also which arise out of the
Earth in the City of Bathe, which are so much the more hot, by how much the
Winter in cold is more vehement. And this does yet further appear by this
example, that the mountains of Norway and Sweathen are fruitful in metals,
in the which Silver and Copper are concocted and molten in veins, which
scarsly can be done in fiery fornaces.

In Iseland also toward the Sea coast, are four Springs of water, of most
diverse and contrary nature. The first whereof, by reason of his perpetual and
fervent heat, suddenly turns all bodies that are cast therein, into stones,
reserving nevertheless their first forms and shape. The second is of
intolerable coldness. The third is sweeter then honey, and most pleasant to
quench thirst. And the fourth is plain poison, pestilent, and deadly. But this
is to be observed that in these springs, is such abundance of Brimstone, that
1000. pound weight thereof is bought for the tenth part of a Ducket. For the
truth of these things read Ziglerus, in his book of the North Regions.


Philadelph. You tell of strange things, and report matter of marvel.


Theophrast. But to make you marvel more, the same Ziglerus reports that in
Iseland are three mountains of a marvelous height, the tops whereof, albeit
they be covered with snow, yet are the nether parts of them of like nature to
the mount Aetna, in the Island of Cicilie, boiling with continual flames of
Fire, and casting forth Brimstone. One of these mountains is called Helga: the
other Mons Crucis: and the third is named Hecla: whose flames, neither consume
Flax nor Towe (matters most apt to take fire) not yet are quenched with water:
and with like force as the shot of great artillarie is driven forth by violence
of fire, even so by the commixion and repugnancie of fire, cold, and
brimstone, great stones are here cast out into the air. The Inhabitants of the
Island do think that in this mount Hecla, is the place where the evil souls
of their people are tormented. Thus Philadelph you may see, that the Earth is
not without a natural Sulphur and Salt, which Salt by heat causes both
motion and generation, not only of Trees, Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with
fruits of singular virtue and beauty, wherewith the Earth is garnished (serving
not only for necessity, but also for pleasure) but has also in the bowels
thereof many excellent natures, as Salts and Sulphurs, of sundry sorts,
minerals, and metals in such plenty, that it may seem a storehouse of
infinite riches, ordained by God, for man, for whom he prepared this habitacle
before he created him. And albeit this Globouse body of the earth is not
Sphaericall, or perfectly round, yet it tends to Sphaericitie, being
contracted by hills and dales in the parts thereof.


Philadelph. Seeing the Sea which is combined and joined with the Earth, has
motion, it seems to some that the Earth has also perpetual motion. And of
this opinion is Nicholaus Cusanus (as appears in his book De docta
ignorantia) and Copernicus accords with him, as is to be seen in his book
of Reuolutions: who for their purpose allege these reasons. First, that we
should rather attribute motion to the contained, then to the containing; to the
thing placed, then to that which affords place. Secondly, that it is conceit
and imagination which makes us think that the Heavens do move, rather then
any truth of such motion indeed. For that the motion of the Earth cannot be
perceived, but by a certain comparison of the fixed. As for example, if a man
perceive not the ebbing and flowing of the water, being in a Ship at Sea, where
he sees no landmarks, how shall he perceive that the Ship does move? After
the same manner, a man being upon the Earth, and seeing neither Sun, Moon,
nor Star, it seems unto him that he is in a center immovable, and that all
other things do move. Thirdly, that it is very unlike, that the vast and huge
compass of the Heavens should make revolution once in 24. hours space, rather
then the Earth, being but as a prick in comparison thereof. Fourthly, that the
wandering Stars be always more near to the Earth toward the evening (as when
they are opposite to the Sun, the Earth coming between them and the Sun)
and further from the Earth at Sun setting, when they are hidden about the
Sun, at what time we have the Sun between them and the Earth. Whereby
(says Copernicus) it plainly appears, that we have the Sun for our fixed
center, rather then the Earth. Fifthly, that it is a condition far more noble
and divine to be immovable, then to be moving and unstable, which quality of
motion and instability better agrees with the Earth, then with the Heavens.
Other reasons are aleadged, which being of no great importance, for breuity I
omit. These may suffice being the more principal, by which they maintain the
motion of the Earth: which reasons seem to me pregnant and invincible.


Theophrast. Then it seems you will prefer nouelty before Antiquity. For
Ptolome, that great Atlas of the world, and Prince of the Astronomers, with the
more part of ancient Philosophers, have ever been of opinion that the Heavens
do move, and that the Earth is firmly fixed. Therefore I say unto you with S.
Augustine, Qui errantem laudat, errorem confirmat, et qui adulatur ad errorem
allicit: that is, who so praises him that erreth, confirms the error, and
he which flattereth, allureth to error. It is said of Ixion, that he took a
cloud for Juno: So, the more part of men embrace lies for truth, falsehood for
certainty, and ignorance for knowledge. Men have labored to draw out of the
shallow Fordes of their own brain, the deep and unsearchable mysteries of
GOD. Aristotle, a man of singular wit, notwithstanding his great learning and
knowledge in humane Sciences, attained not to the thousand part in the
knowledge of those things which are laid up in the Clofet of Nature. Yet
having an insatiable desire thereto, at the last, because he could not perceive
the reason why the Sea caused seven Tides in one day, at the sttraight of
Nigront, he cast himself into the Sea, uttering these words, Quoniam
Aristoteles mare capere non potest, capeat Aristotelem mare: that is, because
Aristotle cannot comprehend the Sea, let the Sea comprehend Aristotle. A just
judgment upon man, when he seeks to be wise without God and his word.

Solomon says, Man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun:
Man labors to seek it but cannot find it. The Sciences invented by man's
wit, are more varying then the skin of the Camelion; more contrary then the
Elements: more perilous then the Sea: more light then the winds: more
intricate then a laborinth: and more obscure then darkness.


Philadelph. It is true which you say, yet have you not answered the reasons of
Copernicus and Cusanus, whose opinions are also confirmed by Heraclides,
Ecphantes, and by Nicetus Syracusanus, and some others.


Theophrast. My digression from your question is not altogether impertinent and
from the matter. But now I come to answer Cusanus and Copernicus, with reasons
not taken out of humane Philosophy, which (as I have said) is uncertain, the
greatest Philosophers disagreeing among themselves, which caused in their
Schools diverse Sects, as the Scaeptickes, Pyrrhonickes, Academickes,
Peripatetickes, Platonists, Stoickes, Epicures, Pythagorians, and others, who
as in opinion, so also they differed in name. I say I will bring you no
deceitful Philosophy, but that which is divine and infallible, proceeding
from the wisdom and mouth of that great God, who is the Creator of the
Heavens and Earth, who only is true, and every mortal man a liar. Hear
therefore what the Prophet David being divinely inspired speaks, concerning
the motion of the Sun in his Sphaere: He comes forth (says he) as a
Bridegroom out of his Tabernacle, and rejoices as a mighty man to run his
course: his going out is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit is to the
end of the same, and nothing is hid from the heat thereof.

If the Sun and Moon moved not in their Sphaeres, Ieshua should in vain
have required of the Lord the stay of their motions, till he were avenged of
his enemies, saying: Sun stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Aialon. The which came to pass as a miracle, contrary to the course of Nature:
and the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, etc. So that one day was so
long as two natural days at that time. It was also supernatural and a
miracle, that the Sun contrary to his natural motion and course, was
retrograde in his Sphaere, going backward ten degrees, as appeared by the
shadow of Ahazes Dioll. But as touching the Earth, it has no motion at all
naturally as has the Heavens. For, God (says the Prophet) has founded it
upon the Seas, and established it upon the floods, so that it should never
move. The Earth accidentally may have some violent motion, when God is angry
with man for sin, at which time, the Earth shall tremble and quake, and the
foundations of the mountains shall move and shake. Let therefore these Divine
warranties and evidences of sacred Scripture suffice to confound man's vain
invention, and fond imagination concerning the stability of the Heavens, and
motion of the Earth. And to make plain the demonstration unto you, that the
Heavens move, and not the earth, I will set before you a memorable Model and
Pattern, representing the motion of the Heavens about the fixed earth made by
Art in the immitation of Nature, by a Gentleman of Holland, named Cornelius
Drebble, which instrument is perpetually in motion, without the means of
Steel, Springs, and waights.


Philadelph. I much desire to see this strange invention. Therefore I pray thee
good Theophrast, set it here before me, and the use thereof.


Theophrast. It is not in my hands to show, but in the custody of king James,
to whom it was presented. But yet behold the description thereof here after
fixed.


Philadelph. What use has the Globe, marked with the letter A?


Theophrast. It represents the Earth: and it contains in the hollow body
thereof diverse wheels of brass, carried about with moving, two pointers on
each side of the Globe do proportion and show forth the times of days,
months, and years, like a perpetual Almanacke.


Philadelph. But does it also represent and set forth the motions of the
Heavens?


Theophrast. It sets forth these particulars of Celestial motion. First,
the hours of the rising and setting of the Sun, from day to day continually.
Secondly, hereby is to be seen, what sign the Moon is in every 24. hours.
Thirdly, in what degree the Sun is distant from the Moon. Fourthly, how many
degrees the Sun and Moon are distant from us every hour of the day and
night. Fifthly, in what sign of the Zodiac, the Sun is every month.


Philadelph. What does the circumference represent, which compasses the Globe
about, marked with this letter C?


Theophrast. That circumference is a ring of Cristall Glass, which being
hollow, has in it water, representing the Sea, which water rises and falls,
as does the flood, and ebb, twice in 24. hours, according to the course of
the tides in those parts, where this Instrument shall be placed. Whereby is to
be seen how the Tides keep their course by day or by night.


Philadelph. What means the little Globe about the Ring of the glass, signed
with this letter B?


Theophrast. That little Globe, as it carries the form of a Moon cressent,
so it turns about once in a month, setting forth the increase and decrease
of the Moons brightness, from the wane to the full, by turning round every
month in the year.


Philadelph. Can you yield me any reason to persuade me concerning the
possibility of the perpetuity of this motion?


Theophrast. You have heard before that fire is the most active and powerful
Element, and the cause of all motion in nature. This was well known to
Cornelius, by his practice in the vntwining of the Elements, and therefore to
the effecting of this great work, he extracted a fiery spirit, out of the
minerell matter, joining the same with his proper Air, which encluded in the
Axcltree, being hollow, carries the wheels, making a continual rotation or
revolution, except issue or vent be given to the Axeltree, whereby that
imprisoned spirit may get forth. I am bold thus to conjecture, because I did
at sundry times pry into the practice of this Gentleman, with whom I was very
familiar. Moreover, when as the King our Sovereign, could hardly believe that
this motion should be perpetual, except the mystery were revealed unto him:
this cunning Bezaleel, in secret manner disclosed to his Majesty the secret,
whereupon he applauded the rare invention. The fame hereof caused the Emperor
to entreat his most excellent Majesty to license Cornelius Bezaleel to come
to his Court, there to effect the like Instrument for him, sending unto
Cornelius a rich chame of gold.


Philadelph. It becomes not me to make question concerning the certainty of
that, which so mighty Potentates out of the sublimity of their wisdoms have
approved, yet me thinks that time and rust, which corrupts and wears out
all earthly things, may bring an end to this motion in few years.


Theophrast. To the end time may not wear these wheels by their motion, you
must know that they move in such slow measure, that they cannot wear, and the
less, for that they are not forced by any poyse of weight. It is reported in
the preface of Euclydes Elements by John Dee, that he and Hierommus Cardanus
saw an instrument of perpetual motion, which was sold for 20. talents of
gold, and after presented to Charles the fifth Emperor: wherein was one wheel
of such invisible motion, that in 70. years only his own period should be
finished. Such slow motion cannot wear the wheels. And to the end rust may
not cause decay, every Engine belonging to this instrument, is double gilded
with fine gold, which preserves from rust and corruption.


Philadelph. This wonderful demonstration of Artificial motion, immitating
the motion celestial, about the fixed earth, does more prevail with me to
approve your reasons before aleadged, concerning the moving of the Heavens, and
the stability of the Earth, then can Copernicus assertions, which concern the
motion of the Earth. I have heard and read of many strange motions
artificial, as were the inventions of Boethius, in whose commendation
Cassiodorus writes thus: You know profound things and show meruailes, by the
disposition of your Art, metals do low in sundry forms: Diomedes picture
of brass, does sound a Trumpet loud: a brazen Serpent hisseth: birds
artificial, sing sweetly. Very strange also was the moving of the Images of
Mercury: The brazen head which seemed to speak, made by Albertus Magnus: the
Dove of wood, which the Mathematician Architas, did make to fly, as Agellius
reports. Dedalus strange Images, which Plato speaks of: Vulcans
selfe-mouers, whereof Homer has written: the Iron Fly, made at Noremberge,
which being let out of the Artificers hands, did as it were fly about by the
guests that were at the Table, and at the last, as though it were weary,
returned to his Masters hand again. In which City also an artificial Eagle
was so ordered to fly aloft in the air toward the Emperor coming thither,
that it did accompany him a mighty way. These were ingenious inventions, but
none of them are comparable to this perpetual motion here described, which
time by trial in ages to come, will much commend.


Theophrast. These great mysteries were attained by spending more oil then
wine: by taking more pains then following pleasure.


CHAP. IIII.
Philadelph. WHereas before in your discourse, you have showed after what
manner this inferior world is governed by the superior, and also how all
things that are procreated, receive their form from thence: now to ascend
upward again, I pray you declare unto me in such plain sort as you can, in
what sense and meaning Aristotle makes one thing, which is the first of all,
and moving all, to be the cause of all their beings so procreated. For if
Heaven be the giver of Form to every creature, what need is there of such an
obscure and tedious search? And what will it avail to show the causes of
things, from that most hidden original.


Theophrast. Aristotle was of opinion, that there are two worlds: one, which is
this visible, compound, and corporeate world: and the other an incorporeate
world, which we cannot see: wholly replenished with Forms, simples, and free
from all mixture, body, and dimension, the most happy and blessed house of
God, and of all his Saints: the Archtipe and exemplar of this inferior and
transitory world, which he briefly comprehends in these words. It is
manifest, that without the compass, and above the created Heavens there is
neither place, emptiness, nor time. Wherefore those things which be there, are
neither apt to be in place, neither does time cause them to be old, neither is
there mutation of any of them, which are set and placed above the uttermost
conversion, called Primum mobile. But being subject to no transmutations, nor
affections, do enjoy the best and most sufficient life in the universal
eternity. And their best life is contemplation, then the which there can be
nothing more sweet, and delectable. Upon these words of Aristotle, I conclude,
that from this one thing comes all things procreated, as is showed you before.


Philadelph. What manner thing is that eternity, wherein the Saints of God
have life?


Theophrast. It is an everlasting being, or (if you please) you may call it a
Sempiternitie, which in very deed is God. For by that name Aristotle said, he
knew God, as these words of his declare; In Deo vita nimirum aeuamque continuum
atque perpetuum inest, hoc enim ipse est Deus: That is God, wherein is life and
a continual and everlasting being. And least it might seem nouelty, and an
absurd thing to attribute this name unto God, Aristotle says, that this name
was divinely given by the Ancients. For as the end which comprehends the
time of the lfe of every thing, is called age, and a long lasting time: so the
end of the universal created Heavens, and the end which contains the whole
infinite time, is an everlasting being and eternity, for it is immortal and
divine. And how infinite Gods knowledge of all things is, it hereby appears,
that Gods whole life is a working of the mind: for God is his own act, and
that act which is by it self, is his best and perpetual life. If the action
of the mind (which is a contemplation) be the perpetual life of God, who then
will make any question, but that Aristotle attributed the knowledge of all
things unto God? For he verily is the knowledge of all things, his own action,
and his own life, whom Aristotle demonstrateth to be the most chief and
super-excellent God, to be perpetual, perfect, immovable, indivisible, that
cannot be defined by greatness, nor by parts subject to no alteration nor
affection, as to whom nothing is in any sort contrary. And at the last he
concludes this demonstration of these things upon this reason: namely, that in
motions it is necessary, that at the last we come to something which moves
and is not moved, which self and same is perpetual, and both substance and
act also. And he is the very same whom before he called the first of all
things, moving all things. Whatsoever Minds and Forms are above the Heaven,
Citizens of that Olimpicke habitacle, if they have not the same form that God
has, yet have they such a condition, state, and dignity, as is next unto it
in degree.


Philadelph. What degree and dignity is that which these heavenly Citizens
enjoy?


Theophrast. It is the state of perfect blessedness, and the fruition of true
felicity in the life to come.


Philadelph. But the Philosophers were of opinion that the chief good and
felicity, consisted in the good things of this life: as in strength, health,
beauty, pleasure, and such other good things of the body. Also in
contemplation, in fortitude, constancy, patience, temperance, wisdom, and
other virtues, and good things of the Mind: finally, in liberty, riches,
honors, friends, and in such like goods of Fortune. And it seems to me, that
this is a happy man which is blessed with these.


Theophrast. The Heathen Philosophers which had not the knowledge of God by his
word, could not define any thing certain concerning true felicity: in so much
that Saint Augustine says, that there are reckoned up 288. opinions concerning
felicity. Wherefore rejecting the imaginations of men, let us that have a
greater light of knowledge, know and be assured, that true felicity cannot
stand in the vain and transitory things of this life: whereof Solon (one of
the greatest wise men of Greece) said to Craesus, when he boasted of his
substance, riches, pleasures, and power of his Kingdom, these words: No man is
happy before his death. Whereby he did put him in mind, that all these things
were casual, and subject to change, and might easily be taken from him, and he
cast down into greater calamity. Wherein Solon was not deceived. For Craesus,
being overcome by Cyrus, saw all that he had quite overthrown: So in like
manner, who but Marius for a time in Rome? but soon was he dejected, and Sylla
got the fame. Sylla stood not long, but Pompey had the honor: and soon after
Caesar. Lucianus by a notable Epigram represents this, in setting before us a
territory or plot of ground, which one while belonged to Archimenides, another
while to Menippus, and after that by course of Fortune to others. Valerius the
Emperor being captive to Saporus King of Persia, was constrained to serve in
stead of a mounting block, so often as Saporus took his horseback. I have
seen (says Sirach) servants on horseback, Eccle. 10.7.
and Princes walking as servants on the ground. Senacharth, Holofernes,
Sampson, Solomon, and many more, had their days of prosperity and pleasure,
which soon came to an end. A day is but a short time, such is the continuance
of man's pomp. 2 Reg. 5.27.
Gihesi is in health and clean to day, to morrow a foul Leaper. The rich
Glutton is secure to day, but at night leaves life and all. It is not always
day with us, the night of affliction must come upon the Sons of men. Consider
the most flourishing City that have been in the world, Babylon, Niniuie,
Troy, Jerusalem, and others more, and behold, they have undergone alteration
and change: and some of them have been utterly raced, and made a heap of
stones. Nunc seges (says Virgil) vbi Treia fuit. But what should I stand to
speak of the alteration and ruin of Cities, when as whole Monarchies have
been turned vpside down. The first Commanders of the world were the
Assirians; they being vanquished, the Babilonians and Medes were Monarchs:
both these subdued, the Persians were Emperors: after the Persians, came the
Macedonians: and at last the Romans. True therefore it is which Tacitus has
uttered, in these words. Quae nunc vetustissima creduntur noua fuerunt: et quod
hodie exemplis tuemur, inter exempla futurum est: Those things which are
believed to be most ancient, were new: and it will come to pass hereafter,
that the thing which we defend at this day with examples, shall be an example
it self. But that which is more then all that has bin spoken, the whole earth
in the first world, garnished with the plenty of all creatures, was subject to
alteration, and was ouer-whelmed with Noah's flood, whereby it was made so
naked, that the Dove found not where to rest the sole of her foot.


Philadelph. If felicity does not consist in any thing appertaining to this
life, wherein then does it consist?


Theophrast. First, it consists in the true knowledge of God, and of his
eternal Son Christ Jesus: for this is eternal life (says our Savior) that
men know thee the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Upon
which words S. Augustine writes thus: Infoelix qui omnia nouit, et te nescit,
Unhappy is that man which knows all things, and knows not thee. And the
Psalmist pronounces them blessed, which out of the knowledge of God bring
forth holiness of life, saying: Blessed are they which are undefiled in the
way. Upon which words also Augustine says: I know what thou would have,
thou seek for blessedness: if therefore thou will be blessed, be thou
immaculate. Blessedness also consists in the free grace and mercy of God, in
not imputing to us our sins, according to this sentence: Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is that
man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Romans 3.23.
For, all have sinned, and are by nature the children of wrath: but are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.


Philadelph. Then it seems that this is a good evidence of a Christian man's
felicity, if he know God aright, and live in holiness of life, according to
the commandments of God.


Theophrast. A true Christian, has besides these a further assurance of his
blessedness and felicity: for that he has already in this transitory life,
the fruition of true fel^^ity in Christ, by a certain participation. For, as
the Apostle says, By hope we are saved. So that even now already we enjoy
tranquillity of conscience. Romans 8.24.
For we are assured that there is no damnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Moreover, whereas
before our reconciliation through Christ, we were as enemies unto God, and most
hateful unto him: now through faith in Christ and our free justification, we
are at peace with God. Also being regenerate by the holy Ghost, we are endued
with excellent virtues, especially with brotherly charity, then the which
there is nothing more excellent in the world. Genesis 5.24. 2 Pet. 1.10. Romans
8.15. Gal. 4.6.
Thus walking in holiness of life (as did Henoch with God) we by our good
works do make our election sure to our own conscience, the spirit of God
testifying to our conscience and spirit, that we are the Sons of God, whereby
we have boldness to call him Father: he that carries the picture of a man in
his hand, may be said to have in his hand a man, albeit there is no such
Essence: So man may be said to have here already the fruition of eternal
life, because they apprehend it by faith, and live in expectation thereof,
carrying in their minds the Image of eternity. Gal. 2.20.
I live (says the Apostle) by the faith in Christ Jesus.


Philadelph. But the tribulations and afflictions which Gods children do
suffer in this life, is a sore temptation, and many times shakes their faith,
and daunteth their spirit, so that in stead of happiness here, they may
account themselves miserable.


Theophrast. The tribulations and afflictions which Gods children do suffer in
this life, makes them not miserable, because by them as by a way, Acts 14.22.
they enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Saints and children of God do
most gloriously shine in tribulation, whereby also they are assured of Gods
love. For they know that if they be not under chastisement, whereof all Gods
children are partakers, they are bastards and not sons: therefore tribulation
works in them patience: patience, experience: Heb. 12.
experience, hope: and hope makes not ashamed. This makes them to say
confidently with the Apostle, Romans 5.3.
Who shall separate me from the love of God in Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? and so
forth. Romans 8.35.
I am persuaded (says he) that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. For all things proceed happily, to
them that love God. And this is an especial comfort to them, that their
afflictions shall not be perpetual, as shall be those of the wicked, whose rod
shall not come into the lot of the righteous: Psalm. 125.3.
for affliction shall destroy the wicked: Moab shall be threshed as straw. To
a worldly and carnal mind, which looks upon nothing but upon the
prosperity of the wicked, affliction seems unfit for Gods children, and
therefore repining at their misery, have said: Do they that dwell at Babylon
any better that they should have the dominion of Sion? Thou suffer them that
sin, and destroyest thy own people. But we must have an eye to the wisdom
of God herein, who has made the way to celestial felicity very hard and
unpleasant, least men being detained with the pleasures of this life, should be
stayed from their heavenly course, and therefore he sends upon them
tribulation, to make them more speedily to come unto him. For thus he dealt
with his old people, the children of Israel, laying on their backs the great
affliction under Pharaoh, that they might the more earnestly desire the land of
promise: before Abraham had a settled rest, he lived a Pilgrims life: before
David enjoyed the Kingdom, he was a long time persecuted by Saul: before Jacob
was enriched, he was in servitude to Laban 14. years: before Joseph had the
rule in Egypt, he was cast into prison: before the Israelites came into the
land of Promise, they wandered forty years in the Wilderness. Thus you may
see the good end of affliction, which is like unto Aarons rod, being rightly
used, it is Gods rod sent for our good: but if it be cast under foot and
despised, it will be a serpent, and sting us.


Philadelph. In what points does the felicity to come consist?


Theophrast. The true felicity of that Heavenly and most blessed life to come,
consists in these things. First, in the restoring of all the chief things in
Nature to a far greater, and more high perfection then now they have, Rom
8.19.
of the which S. Paul writes thus. The fervent desire of the creature waits,
when the sons of God shall be revealed. Because the creature is subject unto
vanity, not of it own will, but by reason of him that has subdued it under
hope. Because the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. For we know that every creaure
groaneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain together unto this present. Also
in his Epistles to the Ephesians, and Colossians, he says: that all things
whether in Heaven or in Earth, shall be restored in Christ. And the Apostle S.
Peter, 2 Pet. 3.7.
speaking of the same restoring, writes thus: Verse. 10.
The Heavens and Earth which are now, are kept by the same word in store, and
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment. And afterward, he says:
Verse. 13.
The Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth, with the works that are therein, shall be brent, and
being on fire shall be dissolved. But we look for new Heavens, and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness. By which words I gather, that when
Christ our Lord shall come to judgment, in the last period of time, the four
Elements (whereof all creatures consist) having in them matter both
combustible, and incombustible, as the Heaven, shall by the wonderful power of
God, be changed. For the combustible having in it a corrupt and drossie matter,
which makes them subject to corruption, shall in that great and general
refining day be purged through fire, and then God will make new Heavens and a
new Earth, and bring all things to a Christaline clearenesse, and will make the
four Elements perfect, simple, and fixed in themselves, that all things may be
brought to a Quintessence of eternity: So that the world, as touching the
Nature thereof, and substance, shall not perish, but be made new, to a greater
perfection then now it has. In regard whereof, S. John compares it to a
City, which is made of pure gold, with a great and high wall of the precious
stone called Iaspis: the wall whereof had also twelve foundations, made of 12.
precious stones. Also 12. gates, made of 12. rich stones, called Margarites,
and every gate was an entire Margarit: The streets of the City were paued
with gold, enterlaide also with pearls and precious stones. The light of the
City was the clearenesse and shining of Christ himself, sitting in the
midst thereof: from whose seat proceeded a river of water, as clear as
Crystal, to refresh the City, and on both sides of the banks, there grew
the Tree of life, giving out continual fruit. There was no night in that
City, nor any defiled thing entered therein, but they (says he) that are
within, shall live for ever and ever. By this description S. John gives us to
understand, that so great is the felicity prepared for us in the Kingdom of
Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.
that the eye has not seen, neither the ear heard, nor the heart of man
conceived what things God has prepared for those that love him. Apoc. 2.
The Kingdom and City, shall in amplenesse and beauty be far beyond the
reach of man's reason to comprehend. Yet the ample greatness may partly be
conceived by the view of the stars. For if the least of them be of such
greatness, as all the Princes of the world have not within their power, so
much compass and space, and yet an innumerable multitude of stars, have
place in the firmament, where there remains still room and space for many
more: how great then is the amplenesse and capasitie of the Heaven it self?
Verily, we may say with Baruch: O Israel, Baru. 3.24.
how great is the house of God, and how large is the place of his possession?
Another point beside the greatness of the place where we shall dwell for ever,
which will increase our happiness, is, that in the same there shall be no
manner of evil that may bring to Gods children, sorrow, pain, or annoy, so as
it shall be verified which is said in the Psalm: There shall no evil happen
unto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling: In this Kingdom,
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
for the first things are passed. A third point which shall increase our
felicity, will be the exceeding resplendant glory of the glorified bodies, and
creatures in that Kingdom. For if one Angel is much more glorious, then all
that we can now see with our bodily eyes: what a thing will it be, and how
glorious a sight, to behold the whole host of Angels, with their blessedness,
beside the divine Majesty and glory of our God? whose glory shall make us to
shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father. And then having such
glorified bodies after their own likeness, we shall see God as he is, and
behold him face to face. And therefore S. Augustine says: This only sight of
God is our happiness; and therefore it is only promised to the pure in heart.
O what a joy shall it be, when at one view we behold the most high and glorious
Trinity, and all mysteries whatsoever are in God! for what shall not he see,
who sees him that sees all things? Then shall man's mind have perpetual rest
and peace, neither shall it desire any further understanding, when he has all
before his eyes, that may be understood. Then shall man's mind be quiet, when
he enjoys that felicity, wherein all other things, as in a fountain and
Ocean of all happiness, are contained. Then shall faith have her perfect
work: Hope shall enjoy that which she long desired, but Charity shall abide
for ever. Then shall be sung continual praises unto the Lamb, and the song
although it be always sung, yet it shall be ever new.


Philadelph. O happy and sweet death, which delivers the soul from this
sinful body, as from a wretched and miserable prison, to dwell with Christ in
Heaven, Phil. 1.23.
which Heavenly meditation moved S. Paul to desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. For upon this dissolution it cannot be expressed what joy and
pleasure the Souls of the blessed shall have, especially when soul and body
shall be united again in the resurrection. O joy above all joys, surmounting
all joys, and without which there is no joy. When shall I enter into thee
(says S. Augustine,) when shall I enjoy thee, to see my God that dwells in
thee! O everlasting Kingdom! O Kingdom of all eternities! O light without
end! O peace of God that passes all understanding, in which the souls of the
Saints do rest with thee, and everlasting joy is upon their heads, they
possess joy and gladness, and all pain and sorrow is fled from them. O how
glorious a Kingdom is thine, O Lord, wherein all the Saints do reign with
thee, adorned with light, as with apparel, and having crowns of precious
stones upon their heads? O Kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou O Lord,
the hope all Saints art, and the diadem of perpetual glory, rejoicing them on
every side with thy blessed sight. In this Kingdom of thine there is infinite
joy, and mirth without sadness: health without sorrow: life without labor:
light without darkness: felicity without ceasing, and all goodness without
any evil. Where youth flourishes, that never waxes old, life that knows
no end, beauty that never fades, love that never vanishes, health that never
diminishes, joy that never ends. Where sorrow is never felt, complaint never
heard, matter of sadness is never seen, nor evil success is ever feared:
because they possess thee O Lord, which art the perfection of their felicity.

This sweet and Heavenly meditation of S. Augustine, if men would print it in
their minds, would very much further them to the seeking of eternal
felicity. Where is the zeal and love of our Fathers become, who for the
fervent desire they had to enjoy the felicity of the Heavenly Kingdom, lived
continually in straightness of life, fared hardly, prayed continually, ^atched
carefully, and mortified their flesh, humbled in sackcloth and ashes in
tears? Man's life in this world, is like a race, and compared to a warfaring
life, wherein there must be running, and fighting, and violent motion, to get
the crown and triumph. So did S. Paul, who says: I have fought a good fight,
and have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.
I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day:
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his coming. Fighting and
running are violent actions, and motions to prevail in our purpose and
enterprise: So in this spiritual conflict which men are to undergo, against
the impediments which may hinder them in their course to true felicity, (as are
riches, honors, pleasures, and worldly prosperity) there must be a violent
wrestling and striving. Men that have been a long time exercised in worldly
affairs only, and have followed carnal delights with full sail, can hardly
be reclaimed, to run in the spiritual race, without a certain violent
striving against their affections, Math. 11.1.
whereby they do as it were by violence pluck unto them the Kingdom of God:
for custom breeds a certain Nature, and to alter Nature great violence is
required. Therefore they that in the spiritual conflict, intend to conquer the
world, the Devil, and the flesh, must strive to have the Kingdom of God come
unto them, by the mighty power of the Spirit, (by whom they are armed) before
they can attain to it. For God then reigns, and rules in man, when man
pulls unto him by faith and love the Kingdom of God. And thus the Kingdom
of God is said to be within us.

O that men would seriously consider these things, then would they not labor
so earnestly for things of no moment, for the transitory things which are
mere vanity, but would rather strive with might and maine, to attain to that
most happy and blessed life, wherein all eternity and felicity consists.

Thebrotus, having read Plato his book concerning the immortality of the
Soul, was so moved therewith, that immediately he cast down himself headlong
from a lofty turret, thereby thinking to gain immortality. Shall Platoes
Heathen Philosophy so much prevail with an Ethnicke, which had no manner
feeling of this felicity, that in hope of immortality he bereft himself of
life, and shall not the most sweet and comfortable promises of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, much more persuade us, which have the true knowledge of him, and
of his Heavenly Kingdom, to forsake these vanities, delights and pl^^^res of
the world? Remember often that worthy sentence: He (...) aeternitas: This
life is a moment of time, whereof (...) of death or life to come depends. If
it be a moment, the (...) thereof must needs be momentanie, and miserable is
that joy which ^^th an end. But the joys of Heaven are so perfect, that
nothing can (...) them, nor taken away from them, and therefore perpetual.
(...) is the most happy and blessed place to resolve, and set our (...) where
no manner of evil shall happen unto us, nor any plague (...) us. Therefore
settle thy self here, and stand fast against all temptation, so shall thou
more cheerfully shake off all carnal burdens, and reereate thy self in this
painful race and battle.


Philadelph. I thank you for your pains in this consolatorie motion to
caelestiall glory, wherein you have much comforted me with the consideration
of true felicity. In comparison whereof, I do with my heart confess, that
all the joys of this world are but anguish: all mirth, but heaninesse: all
delight, but sorrow: all sweetness, but bitterness: and all the beauty of
the flesh but grass, deformity, and mere vanity. And thus taking my leave
of you, craving pardon for my importune holding you, I commend you and my self
to the protection of that great euer-huing God; who keep us in true faith, and
fear, and so prepare us for death, that we may enjoy the Heavenly Felicity
which is to come.


FINIS.

