A brief Treatise, Concerning the use and abuse of Dancing.

Collected out of the learned works of the most excellent Divine Doctor,
Peter Martyr, by Master Rob. Massonius: And translated into English by I. K.

Ecclesiasti. 9. ver. 4. Use not the company of a woman that is a synger, and
a dauncer: neither hear her, least thou be taken by her craftiness.

Imprinted at London by John Judge, dwelling at the North door of Poules.

To the right worshypfull Master Alexander Nowell, Deane of the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul: Happy health with grace from God.
Having (right worshypfull) a Treatise sent unto me to be Imprinted, as
touching the use and abuse of dancing: Collected out of the works of the most
worthy, and well learned Divine Doctor, Peter Martyr. I fancied to present the
same (especially and above the rest) to your worship and worthy person, only
enforced thereto by the common brute of your rare zeal, singular virtue, and
godly Religion.

The party by whose pen and pain it was translated, and changed from
Roman robe, to English vesture, is both virtuous, learned, and godly: and
being stirred, as it were stinged foreward of very zeal, seeing these
disordred and daly daunsings in the rude Country, marring men's manners,
breeding much beastly behavior: and being desirous to have such rudeness
reformed in those quarters where he is acquainted, requested and wyld me to
procure in print the publishing thereof: Which having accomplished, I most
humbly present the same to your vvorshyppe, emboldned the rather under your
name to have it published and put forth in print, to the view of the world, for
that it has been ouerlooked and lyked of Divines, zealous, Religious, learned,
and godly. Wherefore desiring you good Master Nowell, so it may be taken as a
token of my good will to your vvorshyppe: I forbear any farther to molest you
with my unlettered lines, beseching the ever and over ruling Iehoua through his
Christ Jesus our only joy, to continue his good blessings upon you, and to make
perfect the good he has begun in you, and in us all. Amen.

Your vvorshippes to command. T.K.

To the Christian Reader.
THat I, who am as I am. Undertake this matter (good Christian) when other of
our English Nation, writing both learnedly with judgment, and zealously with
knowledge, against diverse and sundry abuses crept in amongst us, nothing or
very little handle the same, may to many perhaps, who are lightly wayed to the
worse part, offer occasion of this common objection: What means he to meddle
with this thing, seeing he sees others hold their peace? what? thinks he
if it were so necessary and needful a thing to be published in print, that
among so many Books, there should be none, or nothing in them set forth?
This kind of cauell, because I see it first and most of all others in the
mouths of many, it seemed not therefore to me a mysse at the first to meet
herewith: as well to remove the sinister opinion they conceive (I dare say) of
the godly, as also the prejudicial verdite this may breed upon this my
true, though not trim style of writing. Whether there be not diverse that
have written freely and frankly against the abuse of Dancing, not only in
the Latin and French, but likewise in our mother tongue: who will pluck the
beam out of his eyes, may soon epsy. But why our late learned men have not
purposely penned some piece of work, (if it be long ago or little, these men
forget it, or never see it) forasmuch as it may be imputed to the want, neither
of will nor ability, to what it may be, I certainly know not: for who
knows what things are in man, saving God and the spirit in him) yet to use a
probable conjecture, I take the occasion to be in these virtuous persons:
Because God has either given the^ the peaceable state of Solomon, yt they
need not come forth into the field: or if not the peaceable state, yet the
ready yielding of the people under EZra, that there required no assault to be
given: or if not the ready yielding, yet the speedy conquest of captain Joshua,
that the only certain sound of the Trumpe, the scripture has overthrown
the walls of Jericho: and the walls ouerthrown, the bright Lamps of the
gospel so shined out of their earthe^ vessels, that the eyes of the
adversaries were in such sort daseled, that Phineas with his spear thrust this
Madianitishe woman clean through: or if none of all these come to pass, (as
often times for the abundance of our iniquityes in these latter days they do
not) yet because God has sent them a Moses zelouse in his cause, Exo. 32.19
to put down such outrageous pastime, that their shoulders are eased of this
heavy burden. But will some Saloms say, this comparison you make between us,
and the children of Israel, is odious. Far be it from us, that our disporte
should be like, or lykened unto their. Whether there be such dissolute
disportes in all places or no, I am utterly ignorant, and God for bid there
should: Neither include I in this my comparison all manner of daunces, no more
then mine Author does, and so I beseech thee (gentle Reader) interpret both
our meanings. But truly to report what I have heard with mine ears, seen
with mine eyes, and mine hands have as it were handled, I see no cause why
ours and theirs may not iustlye he coupled together.

Theyrs (who knows not) tended to the dishonouring of God: and to tell thee
how many ways God is dishonored by ours: I may deal with thee, as the
spyrite of the Lord dealt with the Prophet Ezechiel. Son of man, behold the
abominations flowing out of this filthy fountain. Math. 12.36.
For every idle word that man shall speak, shall he give accoumpt at the
day of judgment: And whether at this play, there be any other almost, then
idle words uttered, if man will not, I call heaven and earth to witness. But
yet turn thee, and thou shall see greater abhominatio^s then this. That fylthy
communication proceed not out of our mouths, Ephesians. 4.29 and. 5.3.
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that no uncleanness be once
named amongst us, as it becomes Saints: neither fylthines, neither foolish
talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of
thanks, we are by the Apostle charged. And whether at these meetinges, these
things be not commonly used: notwithstanding, we find them forbidden us by
Gods word: if the offenders will not give glory to the Lord God of Israel,
by making confession of their faults, I appeal to their conscience, bearing
them witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing. But yet
turn thee, and thou shalt see greater abominations then these. Christ
condempneth him of adulterye, that looking upon a woman lusts after her:
Mat. 5.28
but quallyfying the condempnation of adulterye, because the Law of man
requires so precyse proof: yet how the looks are a provocation thereunto,
believe the Wise man, and follow his good counsel. Use not the company of a
woman that is a singer, and a dauncer, neither hear her: Eccle. 9.4.
least thou be taken in her craftiness. Gaze not on a Maid, that thou fall
not by that, that is precious in her. The sons of God gazed on the daughters
of men, Gene. 6.
and seeing them fair, took them wives of all that they lyked. Therefore the
Lord said: my spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but
flesh, his days shall be an hundred and twentye years.

Now of those gazinges what became? Unlawful copulations. Of these
copulations what? mighty men, and of great renown, who usurped authority
over others, and degenerated from the simplicity of their forefathers. Of
these men what? they were myserably drowned in the great deluge. Behold of
this small sparkle, what raging fire of concupiscence flameth: and see of this
little drop what a wonderful huge water falls from out the windows of
Heaven, and issues from the bowels of the earth, to quench this furious fire,
and that about the beginning of May, when all things flourish. You O ye sons
of men keep company with dancing Damsels, you gaze upon them in the month of
May: beware, you hear out of Gods own mouth, what evil ends ensue. A wise
man will not enter the brimmes of dangerous depths, least he soddainly slip
over headde and ears: These be the brimmes, come not nighe them my beloved,
(you are not, I fear me, all Joseph's) come not nigh them. For though the
Rainebow be a certain sign, that neither of the Heaven above, nor of the
earth beneath, the water will destroy you: yet will there fire descend from the
throane of the almighty Jehovah and with brimstone ascend out of the fiery
lake, Revel. 21.8
to be a portion for them that proceed to the end of these beginninges.

But yet turn thee and thou shall see greater abominations then these.
Idleness, and Pride, two notable vices spring also herehence, as the masters
of many, for the one, who see it by experience in their business: And for the
other their gaye gear above their degree and ability, their proud behavior
and words toward their betters, their rude manners toward their elders, well
witness and declare. The children of Israelles dancing was done to the golden
Calfe, and therefore Idolatry: ours though to term it Idolatry, would seem
to some, not so strange as untrue, yet in diverse qualities dot hit agree
therewith.

The Apostle calls a covetous person an Idolater, Ephe. 5.5.
not because he causes an Idol to be made and set up, that be might adore
and worship the same: but because he serves Mammon, and who so serves Mammon,
cannot serve God, and who so serves his riches, when they should serve him, is
an Idolater. In like sort, who so leaves the service of God, to serve his
dancing, and who so takes more delyght in the strength of his legs,
agilitie, and nimblenesse of his joints, then in the Gospel of Christ: let the
Apostles sente^ce-iudge what he is, and for my part, I say nothing, but that
such abuse has been amongst us. Notwithstanding, if a Christian once creke
against these works of the flesh, and with as gentle words and mylde means,
as possible he may devise, seek to suppress them: When as the very Heathens
reprehend it with sharp terms, accoumpting the users thereof wa^ton,
dishonest, unchaste, vnsober, mad, and worthy great reproach: And when the
faithful fathers going somewhat rounder to work, call it deuyllish, with other
like phrases, as appears in the Tracte following: with chese colors, when
these men blase these abuses: if now a days, I say, one do but cipher, he
is sure straight ways to be assayed with the Pharisees weapons: either with
over curious reasons of ma^s deuyce, impertinent and wrested places of
Scriptures, frivolous and fruitless questions: or if these prevail not, then
with injurious and unjust sclanders: first for the first sort, to touch only
those, either vnreme^bred, or as it is more lykely not at all uttered in mine
Aucthors days, or at least those, which he not upon want of knowledge, but
upon hope he had wrote enough (as in deed enough for any reasonable man)
wyttinglye (as it seems) omytted. To touch these I say, their chiefest
arguments they would feign fetch from the examples of the godly men and
virtuous women. How say ye (say they) by Iepthes dear Daughter? Judge. 11.34
Iud. 15.12. Luke 15.25
met not she her Father with Tymbrelles and daunces? by the noble Judith?
led not she ye dance her self? by the pittyfull father? had not be melody,
and daunceing in his house, for joy his dead son was revived? these you
cannot deny were virtuous people, and these their doings virtuous. But good it
is, yea, our bounden duty it is, to follow the footings of our Forefathers in
their virtuous actions: and therefore do we well in this thing, to imitate
their examples which are written for our instruction. They are (as the rest of
the Scripture) to this end left in writing: but beware, least as the sword
taken by the handle, helps, and by the point hurts: so this which ryghtlye
received, serves for instruction, wrongfully received, and taken by the wrong
end, serve not to destruction. In the right imitation of our Ancients, three
things are chiefly to be considered: first that we play not the deceaueable
Coyner, who lays gold upon copper or brass, or some such base metal, to
the intent ye one might go current by ye means of the other: so that we gylde
not, and florishe over the deeds of the wicked with the doings of the
righteous, and then take them both as curra^t: take Judas in with the eleven
Apostles, and Satan with the sons of God, accept none as our fathers, saving
those as be the sons of God. And secondarily, in these men we must not
imitate al things, but only the good. And thirdly of the good not all too,
nor in all respects: but we must have herewith, these three noates in
consideration: upon what spirit, in what order, to what end they did the^. For
otherwise, those that made their doings commendable in the sight of the Lord:
if they or any of the^ want in us, will make ours abominable. For the two first
of the general division you have the^, good fathers, and godly Matrones: the
last you lack with the three branches, which turns the other two into
bitter wormwood, as by co^paring the^ together will evidently appear.
Abraham's offering up his dear son and only Isaac, Gene. 22.
was to him an high praise by the mouth of the Angel, saying: I know that
thou fear God. The Ammonites, 1. Kin. 11.7
offering up their sons and daughters to Moloche, is accounted an
abomination: because the one was of the spirit of God, the other of the
deuyls, the one by faith, the other by infidelytye, the one to Gods glory, the
other to ye idolatrous service of Moloche. 2. King. 1.
The Prophet Elias prayer and invocation, was so well lyked of the Lord, that
twyse at his request came fire from Heaven, and consumed the two captains with
their fifties: Luke. 9.54
James and John asking Christ their Master, whether they should command that
fire come down from heaven to deuowre the Samaritans, were so much mislyked,
that they were sharply reprehended. Behold here, how the fact being all one,
the circumstaunces make ye one good, the other stark naught. The Prophet moved
by the spyrite of God, desired this plague to fall upon them: the Apostles
moved by an indiscreet zeal, and ignorant of what spyrite they were, required
the like. Ahaziah the wicked Apostatate, under the pretense of holiness sent to
slay the Prophet: the Samaritanes denied, but lodging to Christ as he passed
bye. The Prophet had to deal with the^, that having the word of God,
forsook it: the Apostles with them that never knew the same. The Prophet at
the pleasure of almighty God, called down fire from above, to show forth his
glory: the Apostles by humane affection, were pricked to revenge the injury.
The Prophet was sent to punish the infidelity of the Israelits (as it may
likewise appear by his kylling the four hundredth and fifty Prophets of
Baall, 1. Kin. 18.
and of the groves four hundredth:) the Apostles were sent to preach the
Gospel, and not to punish the contemners thereof, except extraordinarily:
neither was their Masters kingdom of this world, that his servants should
defend or revenge his quarrel by any such means.

Now as we have labored in laying these together, (and much the more because
like the Captain we would bestow the greatest part of our pains, in
batteryng this your principallest bulwark: for this once won, that ye have
no hold of scripture, (as truth you have not) many of your soldiers will
soon, I doubt not, yield) so set we theirs and yours, the one by the others.
The Daughter of Judge Iepthes, Judith, and the good Father, delyghted in
daunceing, and daunced some them selves: you in this point do the like. But go
further with the^ in this wide wilderness of the world, until you come, (as
Herculus did) to the two ways, the one virtuous, the other voluptuous: and
they enter the way of virtue, you of voluptuousness, as apparauntlye declare
your usual and wanton words, lascivious iestures, and unchaste behavior. If
you can say that good men, and godly women, have used this exercise, you have
said, you suppose something. But alas, this some thing is nothing, by that time
you co^ferre it with those three things, that make or mar all. For though
the external actions be in a manner all one, as were those of Abraham, and the
Ammonits Elias, and the two disciples, James, and John, yet the cause, the
manner, and the end, make as great difference in these, as they did in those.
The cause of the chaste Virgin, and worthy womans dancing, was in token of a
joyful heart yt the Lord had given them or their friends victory over their,
and the Lords enemies: your cause to satisfye your voluptuous pleasure. Their
manner was modest and moderate to refresh their minds and recreate their
bodies: yours immodest, if immodestye it self be immodest, and immoderate, if
dancing all day long, and part of the night be immoderate: if to toil and
sweat thereat as if a man were at mowing: nay, they that sweat so much hereat,
never so much and seldom at all sweat at work.

The cause again of the dancing and melodye made in the Fathers house, was
for joy his Prodigal child was returned, and the sinner repented: and I pray
you, which of you ever daunceth for joy the wastfull youth becomes thryftye,
or wicked forsakes his naughty ways? daily experience teaches us ye
contrary, that many young men somewhat thriftye, after they give them selves to
daunceing fall to prodigallity? and somewhat virtuous, become altogether
vicious: or being before but up to the shoe latchets, now are they sunk up to
the chinne, and without great heed, over head and ears. The end of theyrs
tended to the glory and honor of almightye God, they sang the praises and
mighty works of the almighty, in their sober daunces: and at what time I
beseech you, at these meetinges sing you the praises, and wondrous works of
God? Nay, at what time is not he or she laughed to scorn, that should so
behave them selves? so far are you from their godly pastimes. Wherefore for
shame cease to cite this that makes so much against you, and as pure white
sets forth your foul and steyned black: and if you have any other and
better, bring them forth. Better we have not, neither can we (for where so good
may be found, as in holy Scripture) but other we have, whereby we will no more
contend, that this lascivious leaping of ours is sufferable at all times, but
only at VVhytsontide, and that for three causes: that we may use rejoicing in
remembrance the holy Ghost descended to illuminate the hearts and minds of
men: that the Church might be the better by this means maintained: and that
the youth might eschew idle thoughts, which by sytting still and doing nothing
would soon possess their heads, and thereout would quickly flame evil deeds.

The Kings of Judah that walked in the ways of their father David, pulled down
all Monuments of Idolatry, saving that the high places stood still: God forbid
my beloved Brethren, that you should root out other oportunities of
daunceing, and disallowe all other times and places, and yet suffer this high
place to continue. If it be evil, or euilly used, then play the part of good
King Josias, 1. King. 23
down with all, yea, even with this high place too, wherein and in which time
this abomination is at the highest. If it be good, yet let us not do this
good, that the euylles already rehearsed may follow. Roma. 3.8.
But these general examples and exhortations because they point not (as they
think) dyrectly at them: I will (God wylling) therefore enter into particular
examination, and answer them severally by them selves.

First for rejoicing at the feast of Pentecost, that the comforter came down
in the visible form of fiery cloven tongues: what other joy is better and
meeter, then the comforter him self requires? and what is that joy be shows
by the mouth of his servant Iaemes, saying, Iam. 2.13.
is any among you afflycted? let him pray* is any merry? let him singe. And
what he should singe, he declares by the pen of his ready writer the Apostel
Paul, saying: Ephesians. 5.19.
Speak unto your selves in Himmes and Psalms and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody, to the Lord in your hearts. More over if we will rejoice
for the coming of the holy spirit, what other rejoicing is so good and meet
for a Christian, as that Primative and first rejoicing at his visible
discension? what decenter order, what goodlier and godlier exercise, then the
Apostles and the religious multitude gathered together out of many Nations to
serve the Lord, kept at that feast of Whitsontide? We rejoice (we say) and
we gather our selves together out of many towns: but in what order rejoice we
and to what end flock we so fast together? in no such order, to no such end
(the Lord knows) as those Apostles and Apostles Disciples bid. The Apostls
when the day of Penticost was come, Acts. 2.
were all with one accord in one place, and were filled with the holy Ghost:
the people wondered at the wonderful working of the spirit: the Apostle Peter
painefully preched the word of God, the people heard him and constantly
continued in the Disciples doctrine. The Apostles ministered the supper of the
Lord (so much signifies to us the breaking of bread) the people accompanied
them in that godly fellowship. And to be brief both Apostles and people
perseuered together in prayer, in gladness, and in singlenes of heart. Mark
this manner of gladness and tell me whether ours in respect hereof be not mere
madness. We are together but full far from one accord, as our daily debates
declare: we are filled, not with the holy Ghost, but with strong ale: we come
together from diverse places, to serve the Lord? no, to serve our voluptuous
pleasures. We preach, but what preach we? ye Gospel of Christ, or ye sins and
abhominatione of ye people, Mich. 2.11
as Peter the^ did? nothing less: but we prophecy and preach of pleasure, of
strong drink, of wine, and then are we Prophets for this people, then are we
accounted honest men. We communicate, and what do we cumunicat, the supper of
the Lord? nay that were to sad a matter for so merry a time, and yt would let
much good sport. But we communicate many idle words, many vnseamely jests, I
will say no more for sparing you. So that this unchristian behavior of ours
shows us to celebrate the feast rather of Bacchus then of the holy Ghost.
Secondarily for the maintaynance of the Church, there are other and better
means then this, as you your selves right well know. Oh, but you must
consider, (will they say) that they would not give at all were it not to this
end. Now truly, better well spared then so evil spent: and as for the
reperations of the Church, 2 Kin. 12.4
King Ioas shows a seem liar order, and though this law be abolished, yet
have our own laws provided the like: use that a Gods name, and as for this
unlawful and wicked way, let it serve the sinagogue of Satan, for the Temple of
the Lord was at no time by ye godly, by these ungodly ways vpholden.
Thirdelye for banishing idle thoughts out of your childrens and servants minds,
who works this way, drowneth a fish in ye water, and puts out alamp with
oil, as plainly appears both by that which goes, before and that which
comes, after. These are one sort of the Weapons, the other (as I said) are
slanders, wherewith they entreat them which reprehend these abuses, much after
the manner the Lybertines entreated Stephen. When Stephen repleate with the
holy Ghost disputed against certain Libertines Cirenians, Acts. 6.
Alexandrians, and Cilicians, they not able to resist the wisdom and the
spirit by which be spoke, suborned false witness, who testified they hard him
says that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy that place and change the
ordinances which Moses gave them? and thus moved they the Scribes, the elders*
and the people against him. In like sort these loose Libertines reason with
those arguments and auctthorities before mentioned and when they be not able
to withstand the word of God and spirit that speaks in his true ministers,
then seek they out and set up false witness, who slanderously report that we
goo about to destroy all, to change the ancient ordinances Moses gave them,
to alter al old customs their forefathers leaft them, to put down al honest
and laudable pastime, to end all friendly and neyghbourlye meetinges and merry
makinges, to cut of good occasions of love among men and charity toward the
poor: and thus stir they the Scribes, the Elders and the people against us
well, for them I say no more, but remember the commandment of almighty God,
thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. For you, ye
Magistrates, Ministers and people I exhort in the Lord, that ye be not over
credulose in these matters, least in quitting Barrabas you condemn Christ,
and in letting goo these slanderous witness, ye punish innocent Stephen.
Suffer me a while to plead our own cause in your presence, and you shall
plainly perceive, how these unjust accusations they lay to our charge, may
justly be turned upon them: For first they by their abominations, endeavor to
destroy all, to break the ordinances of Moises and old customs of the
primative Church, and purest times. There are many things committed in this
lewd and licentious exercise: flat against Moises mind, as his deed declared:
against his ordinances, as his laws (who list to confer them with Ezechiels
for showed sight) make manifest. By their voluptuous sport they put down all
honest lawefull and lawdable pastime, namely shuting, and especially at that
season, when for the number and length of the holy days they are at most
leisure, and for the freshness of the air and sweetness of the fields, they
may take most delight. The Prince comands it, the wise commends it, the war
compels it, and yet rude royat shall prevail against them all. By their
vnciuell and unmannerly usage, friendly and neighbourly company and
communication is quite dissolved and broken of. The caters chief care, must it
not be for the youth, howsoever the age? for the servant howsoever the master?
for the son, howsoever the father fares. The best and highest rooms, be
they not kept for the young men and maidens, wheresoever the ancient
substantial, and honest of ye Parrish sit? nay if they be sat, be their
meetinges never so neighbourly, their communication never so friendly, their
matters never so weighty, must they not away, my Lord comes? But this is but
once a year, and in jest many will answer, no more is this opportunity of
this neighbourly meeting, but once a year, and therefore to be preferred this
once: and this jest, turns commonly to such earnest all the year after, that
Gods commandment is broken, Honor thy Father and Mother: Ephe. 6.5.
the Apostles precept neglected, Servants obey your masters. By their brawles
and sometime blows between company and company, the linkes of love are often
severed a sunder. By their overmuch eating and drinking, charity to the poor
waxes cold. For do they not ride from town to town, go from village to
village gulling in strong drink, and glutting in good meat, nature being
before sufficed, that might be better bestowed upon the necessity of the
saynctes? I will say nothing here of the gluttony and drunkenness committed
neither of the practice and sport that I have seen to make a man overcome with
nappie ale: but what if I (to spare you) say nothing, nevertheless the
Apostle says, That drounkardes shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: 1.
Cor. 6.10 Aba. 2.15
And the Prophet cries, VVoe unto him that gives his neighbor drink to make
him drunken. Far better were it (beloved brethren) that this Dancing the
cause of this great and grievous sin (for take away Dancing and down fales
al) should be utterly abolished, then that on soul should perish, or one of
these woes should light upon us. It is a sore and terrible thing to fall into
the hands of the Lord. Tushe will sum say, he yt so delights in drinking and
dancing if he have it not here, will have in it a another place and will do it
though this were not: and therefore it is better to let them have the^ at home,
the^ they should raung about. As though other places be not, or ought not to
be in this good order? or as though you should norish naughtiness, because
others do so? or as though thy fatherly fear, and masterly aucthority were not
sufficient to suppress this sin and wickedness? In excusing this one fault,
thou make three. First thou apeachest other places of like lewdnes: next that
thou may follow their examples: and last of all, yt thy self want wisdom
and discretion to rule thine unruly family. If other Towns were so untoward as
thou make the^, does it follow that thou should associate them? If other
youth be so evil bent, must thine needs accompany them? God forbid. Abraham
that good father, and godly master, when all other Nations round about him,
were wholly given to all manner of abhominatio^, kept his household in such fear
of God, and so well instructed them in his word, that they wyllingly received
Circumcision at his hands: Genesis 17.23
If Abraham had said as you say, I were best to suffer my family to run royat
at home, for otherwise they will in other places round about me: would they,
think you, without resistance have suffered the impression of this covenant,
being so grievous a sore, that the Seheehemites sick therewith, Genesis 34.25
were a great number overcome by two persons, Simeon and Leui? Neither the
multitud of many countries could move Abraham to let lose the reins to his
tender youth: nor the grievous sore again of Circumcision, could cause his
householde to withstand his doing: You have not (God be praised) so many
(though too many) against you: Act. 16.10
neither would I wish you, nor is it my mind to lay this, or the like yoke on
your necks, which neither our fathers, nor we were able, to bear as some
complain, saying, we would have the^ live like Saints, (as who would say that
were evil (which is to straight for them) but we desire to lay on your
shoulders the yoke of Christ and his light burden. And if it fall out that all
towneships round about you, or, if all the town which you inhabit maintain
this misdemeanure, yet would I counsel a Christian to say with Captain Joshua,
Chose you whether you will serve God, Iosu. 24.15
as your vain pleasure, I and mine house vvil serve the Lord. This account if
every man would make as he ought, this disorder would be quickly redressed.
Thus have you heard how they are fallen into the pyttes they dug for others
and now a word or two how Stephen is not only clear of these slanderous
accusations, but also earnestly desires that whereof they accuse him. They
accuse him to say that Jesus of Nazareth (it can be none other so long as he
preaches none but Jesus) would change the ordinances Moses gave them, the
ancient customs their forefathers leaft them, where he teaches that Christ
came not to destroy the laws of Moses but to fulfill them. They from this
general and false position, descend to as false particulars, bringing certain
late and new orders of merye makings and friendly meetings of neighbors, and
of releeuing the needye, thinking them old orders if they can call them so, or
if they be out of their remembrance, or if they have been used an age or two
before them: whereas he endeavors to abolish the strange innouations and
new fangles, and to call them back to the old custumes and ancient orders in
deed.

In the primative Church the faithful made feasts among them selves, Jude
ver. 12
partly to protest their brotherly love, and partly to relieve the poor
people. The ancient Father Chrysostom says. Chriso. upon Genesis ho. 10.
Let one of you take the holy book, and let him call his neighbors about
him, and by the heavenly words let him water and refreshe boeth their minds,
and also his own, that by this means we may be able to escape the Deceiptes
of the Devil. You that stick so fast to old customs and have always in your
mouths let us keep old customs, leave those your new and naught, and keep
these oulde and good coustomes: or at the least change your common song, and
sing another while: Ours be of late since iniquity has got the vpperha^d, and
yours of old in the primitive Church, and time of the ancient Fathers. But
for as much as neither the good counsel of this ancient Father, nor the
shyning mirror of this primitive Church, so much move many as the commandment
of the Prince and her Magistrates, I will therefore thereof speak somewhat,
that I may win some. The Queens Majesty in the twenty article of her
Injunctions, Commands that her faithful and loving subjects celebrate, and
keep their holy days according to Gods holy will and pleasure: that is, in
hearing the word of God read and taught: in private and public prayers: in
acknowledging their offenses to God, and amendment of the same: in reconcilyng
themselves charitably to their neighbors, where displeasure has been: in often
receiving the Communion, in visiting the poor and sick, in using al
soberness and godly conversation. Hitherto the words of the Iniunction:
Wherein albeit dancing be not named, and namely forbidden, yet is it as
straightly denied, as if it were expressed. For in commanding godliness to be
used, wickedness is denied: and whosoever accomplisheth her Majesty's most
godly mind in these points, shall have (I warrant him) little leisure and
less pleasure to dance and dallye: and wheresoever these godly exercises be
put in practice, dauncinge Dagon will down before the arc, the seuerest Saul
that seeks to persecute such as speak against these abuses, will him self
fall to prophecyeing? The sturdiest soldier that comes to take Christ will
stagger, and fall flat to the ground, as many happy places and blessed
persons in these days well witness and declare: where and among whom the
arc (the bible co^teining the testimonies not of Arons rod and the pot of
Manna alone, but many more miracles, together with the two tables) is so set
up, that the idol of dancing breaks his neck. The spirit of God so
mightily works, that diverse, of persecutours, are become defendors of Gods
people: the words of Christ so effectually pronounced, that such as will not
yeilde, they strike down to the earth. This is the Lords doeyng and it is
marvelous in our eyes.

Notwithstanding some much like Thomas Didimus, will not believe that this
article of the Princes touches this disorder, because they here not dancing
expressly named. These men I refer to Master Godwinnes. 47. article, under
the title of Church wardens and sworn men: who are sworn to see the same
abbollished, God give them his grace to discharge their oath: Which that they
might the rather do, this besides diverse other, was one cause I took this
task in hand. Others were to move the Magistrates by the example of Moses,
Exo. 32.19
to stop this outrageous pastimes, to stir my brethren, whom the Lord
has appointed watchmen over his flocks, to admonish them of their wicked
ways, Ezech. 3.18. and 33.6
least their blood be not one day required at their hands: and for part of
discharge of this my charge among the rest, to declare unto the people these
abominations: that the mouths of the malicious may be musled, readinge and
iudginge (by this means) at their leisure, the doctrine I have taught them,
to be no old wives tale, nor corrupt custom, nor vain invention of man, as
theires is, but the word of the Lord, rebukinge their sins, whereof I and
such as I am: upon pain (you heard even now of everlasting death, are
straightlye charged to admonish you, and that the hearts of the honest, who
more for want the watchman warns them not these offenses, 2. Cro. 29.36. and
30.14.15. and 31.1 Ezra. 8.15
then for obstinate and wilful frowardness (for truly to report as I find,
the people are often readier to do their duty to the Lord, then the Priests
and Levites, and willinger to obey his will then the sons of Levy) that these
men's hearts (I say) saying now how they have heretofore of ignorance in the
word of God, and not thinking it to be so evil as they here in mine Authors
tracte see it is, done amysse may be so inwardly touched yt they may say: Men
and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 2.27.
And because no Prophet is esteemed in his own country, I have thought it
good to take a worthy Prophet of another country, that thou might not
disdain to be taught, at his hands, who once taught the learned Divines in
Oxforde: and that thou mighteste not refuse to be told thy fault, whether it
be of malice or ignorance (for if of ignorance, Leuit. 4.
yet a fault, as shewethe the oblations offered therefore) by such a one as
rebuked even Kings for Christ's sake, and Princes by the weighty words of his
wrytinges. Finallye that thou might in little time read in thy mother
tongue: and for a little monye buy not so much a little book according to the
quantitye, as a whole librarye of books according to the quallitye. For by the
wonderful pains of this sedulous Be, have thou here the honnie of most
arts concerning this matter. Art thou a divine, and of the divines a favorer
of the truth? Here have thou examples of the scripture, general councelles and
ancient Fathers: or a favorer of the Pope? here have thou popes and popish
scholemen. Art thou a lawier, and of the lawiers a ciuilian? here is civil
law: or a Cannonist? here are Cannons, distinctions, and decrees: Studiest
thou Philosophy? here Philosophers speak their minds: Delightest thou in
Oratorye? here Orators utter their eloquent sentences: or in Historiography?
here Histories ar declared: dwell thou in the country, and desire to have
their objections answered? here are they answered. Briefly he is of a very
strange decree and condition of life that may not in this small tract of
Master Martyrs, in his own professyon be brought familyarly from this vice
to the better knowledge of Christ, as were the Astronomers by a star, and Peter
the fisherman by a myraculous draughte of fish: which God to the glory of his
name grant. So be it.

A brief Tracte con cerning Dancing collected out of Master Doctor Peter
Martyr, by Master Massonius.
Dancing, as Plato says, is said to be of rejoicing: for that it is a
certain testimony of joy and gladness. And Seruius interpreting that verse of
Virgill. Omnis qua^ chorus et socij co^mitantur oua^tes.

Whom all the company of dauncers and fellows followed reioycinge: says the
same to be a singinge and leapinge of them that are of one age. But from whence
this should take it beginning, there are diverse opinions.

Some suppose, that men beholdinge the motions of the fixed and wanderinge
Stars, invented this, thereby to represent that variety of the motion. Others
think that it rather sprange first of Religion, because among the ancient
Ethnickes, no sacred things were well nie done without dauncinge.

For they lead their daunces from the leafte to the right side of the Altar,
to show the turninge of Heaven from the East to the Weast, then returned they
from the right side to the leafte, to signify the course of the moveable and
immovable stars: which thing peradventure Virgill meant, when be said:
Instaurantque choros mixtique altaria circu^. They begine to dance afresh one
with another round about the aulters. salij were priests of Mars in Rome,
which daunced about the city with targatts called Ancilia.
Also Salij the priests of Mars among the Romans were had in great
estimation. And there be that refer the original hereof to Hiero Siculus the
tyrant: who, as they report, to establish his tyranny, forbad the people
mutual communication. By means whereof it came to pass, that the men of
Sicilia began to exprsse their minds and thoughts by beckes and gestures of
the body: which afterward grew to an use and custom. But whether this be so
or not, daunces in the old time were not enstraunged from religion: albeit
afterward they were applied to public and common rejoicing: Besides these,
there was another kind exercised by young men in Martial affairs.

For as much as they were commanded to leappe and make much gesture and signs
of mirth in their Harnes, to thend they might be readier and apter for battle,
when the cause of ye common welath so required. Pyrricha a certain form of
dancing used of soldiors, and iuented by Pyrehus.
This manner of daunsinge was called Pyrrhicha, and because it was used in
armor, armed, hereof mention is made in the civil laws, (that is to say) in
the digest of punishments, F. de poenis: L. ad damnum.

And sometime young men, when they trespassed, were not forthwith adjudged to
dye, but either to hunte in the theater, or to dance in their armor: and they
were called Pyrrhicharij. Another kind also there was, which was appointed for
pleasure, only and lasciuiousnes, called of the Gretians (...) or (...). (...)
a rude rusticall and rydiculouse kind of dancing in comaedies.


Moreover of them that expressed by the gestures of their bodies the meaning of
their minds: writes Lucianus in his Treaty of dancing, and likewise
Athenaeus: Which came to that pass at length, that Demetrius Cynicus in
derision called this counterfeit dancing a vain thing and nothing worth.
Whereupon a worthy dauncer, who then was had in honor at Rome, desired him
that he would but one only time behold him, and then that he would judge
and report whatsoever pleased him. He came to the Theater, the counterfeite
began by his gestures to express the common fable of Mars and Venus, taken
in adulterye. Wherein in such sort, he showed the Son disclosinge, Vulcan
knittinge nets, Venus all ashamed, and Mars humbly entreating, in so much as
Demetrius astonished cried out. I not only see, O man, the things thou do,
but also here them. For by thy hands thou seem to speak unto me. At the
same time, as it happened, there repaired to Rome, the king of Pontus: Who
when he had seen this dauncer play his gesturs in the Theater, afterward
willed to demand of Nero, the thing he chieflye wished to be bestowed upon
him, he asked ye gesturer: whereat Nero maruelyng, seeing he might have
requested other things of much more value, inquired the cause of his request.
He made answer, because I have many nations under my subjection, whom without
an interpreter, I cannot understand, and eftsoomes it falls out, that
interproters declare not faithfully enough my words unto them, nor again
theyrs unto me: But this fellow by his gestures will declare all things most
faythfullye. Plato in his third book of laws, makes two manners of daunces,
the one warlike, which above we named Pyrrhicha, the other peaceable, wkich he
terms placable.

The unclean and filthy kind I omit to speak of, because it is manefestslye
condemned by the laws. The exercise in harnes and that which was showed by
signs, may serve to some use in the common wealth: but to our purpose they
perteine not. Wherefore of the peceable and placable sort, shall somewhat be
said in this place, how far forth it may be lawefull, when for reioycinge
sake it is used.

This kind of exercise seems to me of it own nature neither vitiouse nor to
be prohibited, for as much as agillitye and nimblenesse of the boddye, is the
gift of God: and if there be added some art, that the boddye be moved with
decencye, just pace, and comlines, I see not why it ought to be reprehended, so
it be done in due season, moderatly and without offense. For as it is lawful
to singe, and use singinge to give thanks to god, and celebrat his praises: So
likewise moderate dancing to testify our joy and gladness. 2. Sa^. 6.14
David doubtless daunced openly before the Arc.

1. Sa^. 18.6
The maidens renowned his victory over Goliath with dancing and singing. Miriam
Moses sister, Exo. 15.20
when Pharo was laid a long and slain, daunced with other women, and sange a
song of triumph and victory. Wherefore since holy men and chaste women have
used daunces, we can not say they are faultye of their own nature: but as
they are now a days done, that men should dance togeyther with women, they
be intolerable: For that they are the nutrimentes and prouocations of
lasciviousness and voluptuous pleasures. Mirriam Moses sister traced not with
young me^, but apparte with women: neither David with women, nor the maidens
who honored his conquest, with young men but by themselves. Now they yt with
all their mind and might love God, it is not enough for them to observe his
commandments, unless they cut of also all occasiones, whereby their
observations may be impaired. But our daunces are most evident occasions of
transgressing the divine law: snares they are and stumblinge blocks, not to
the doers alone but to the beholders also: For they stir and inflame the heart
of men, wicked enoughe otherwise from it very beginning: and what with much a
do and industry, is to be repressed, that the flickeringe inticementes of
these light leapinges raise and stir up. Verily if a man would take counsel
either of him self, or of experyence, or of reason, he shall find the luster
of the mind not a little to be kindled, and set on fire by these sightes: and
he shall perceive me^ with wave of their goodness, and women with eclyppes of
their chastity return home. Furthermore, perilles are rather to be taken
heed of then nourished: For as Salamon says, Who loves peril shall fall
thereinto.

But some man will obiecte, that dauncinges so much indammage manners, and
kindle lust, commethe to pass by rashness and by accedentarye means: and
judgment ought not of every thing to be given, according to those things
which come by chance, but according to these things that are here in
themselves. Some are found so chaste and pure, that they can with a chaste and
pure mind see these sightes. I grant it may sometime so fall out, but take
this with you, all accedentes not to be of the same condition.

Some there are which very seldom happen, some either way, which of their
nature may be as well present at any thing, as absent: and soome which for
the most part are wont to fall out: these last in each thing ought to be most
diligently considered and regarded: neither must we respect what may, but
what was wont to be done. Aristippus daunced in purple, and thereof accused,
excused himself that thereby he waxed never the worse, and that he could even
in that nicenes and delicacye retain a Philosophers mind. But such sayings
are not to be herkened unto: because as Demosthenes says, and is cited of the
Laweiers, we must not concider what any man does now and then, but what is
accostomed to be done for the most part. Imagine a man to be so chaste, that
he may not be moved with these allurementes, yet in the mean while how are
the people provided for, and the multitude seen unto? For the integrety and
uprightness of some one or other, shall we suffer all the rest to remain in
danger? But so, will some man mutter, take a way Sermons and Sacraments, for
many hear sometime the word of God to their own condemnation, and to their own
condemnaetion many eat and drink the holy Mysteries.

Here is it necessary to be known that some things make for men's salvation,
and are commanded by the word of God, which by no means ought to be taken
away. Some things again are indifferent, which if we see them tend to hurt,
are not tolerable. Concerning Sermons and Sacraments, we have the law of God
that we should hear and receive them: touching dancing there is nothing
commanded: Wherefore these are not to be compared together. But by this means
(say diverse) are many honest marriages made. It may be so otherwhile,
notwithstanding for my part, it could never sink into mine head, that I
would wish Matrimonies to be by these means contracted, wherein the nimbenesse
only and beauty of the body are respected. There are other means far honester,
let us use them, and as for these scarce honest and chaste, let us leave them.
Weigh we with our selves, that although sometime honest marriages be gotten by
dauncinge: yet a great deal oftener adultrye and whoredom are wonnte to ensue
of these sights.

We should follow the footings of our godly Fatherrs, who now and then used
dauncinge, yet chaste and moderate, the men by them selves, and the women by
their selves: By these daunces testified they the myrthe of their minds, sangs
they praises to God, gave they thanks unto him for some singular benefit
received at his hands. And as for the confused daunces of men and women
together, we read them not in the holy scripture. But our men will say, who
would dance after this sort? These things while they utter, they bewray
themselves what they seek for in this pastime.

Hither flock the effects of dauncinge recorded in Matthew, how the daughter of
Herodias skipped in the kings feast, the king took pleasur in her, whom
without shame he could not openly gaze upon: for it was a most evident token
of ye forbide^ marriage and whoredom: for Herod had taken unto him the wife of
his brother, and mother of this damsel: of that dance it followed that John
was be headded. Many are misgreeued with us, that we cye out upon daunces,
as upon things: evil of their nature and prohibited. We again make answer,
that things ought not always to be measured, by their nature, but by the
disposition and abuse of our flesh: wine, we cannot, deny, of it self is
good: yet is it not administered to the sick of the Fever: not in that it is
evil, but in that it agrees not with the body so affected. In Exodus when the
people made to themselves a golden calfe, which they might worship, they sat
down, they eat, they drancke, and they rose up to play: In which place to
play seems to be nothing else then to dance. But that I may not seem
singular and alone man in these my sayings and censure, I will annexe certain
testimonies of the forefathers. Augustine in the sixth Chapter of his book
against Petilian, says: Bishops were evermore wont to punish vain and
lascinious daunces: but now a days, there be many Bishops not only present at
the daunces, but dauncers themselves with women: so far are they from
correcting this vice. The same Augustine while he expounds those words of
the.32. Psalm Upon an instrument of ten stringes will I singe unto thee:
those ten stringes he makes the ten commandments, and when he had said
some what upon every one of them, at the last he comes to the Saboth: of
which it is written, remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day: I say not
(says he) that thou should be so drowned in delicacie, as the Jews are
accustomed: for better it is all day to dig, then to dance on the Saboth,
Chrysostom in.56. Homely upon Genneses, entreating of Jacobs Marriage, Marriage
(quoth he) have ye heard, but no dancing, which there he calls Diabolical:
and many more matters has he in the same place, which make for us. And among
all the rest be writes how by dancing, the Bride and Bridegrume are
corrupted, and the whole family defiled. Again in his.48. Hom. Thou see,
says he, Marriages but daunces thou see not. For at that time they were
nothing so wanton as they are in these days. Diverse other things has he in
the.14. of Matthew, where reciting Herodius dancing to the people, among the
rest, he says now a days Christians deliver not half their kingdom nor
another man's head, but their own soul into destruction. And he adds, where
this lascivious dancing is set up, there daunceth the Devil together with
them. In the counsel of Laodicia we find written, that it is not convenient
for Christian men to dance at Marriages. Let the^ dine and suppe discreetly and
moderatelye, giving God thanks for the benefit of Matrimony. In the self same
council it is also written. Let not Clerks approach the Theater, or matiages
to gape after Pageaunts: they may be at Marriages, but after the singers and
Harpers be come in, who serve for daunces, arise they and depart, least by
their presence they may seem to allow and approve that wantonness. In the
Council of Illerden, holden under Simmachus and Hormisda Popes, and king
Theodoricke, the same is decreed: that Christians should not dance at
weddinges. In the Council of Arrisidoren, which was under Pope Deus dedit,
this seems to be restrained to Clerks: for there is, there a Prouiso, that
no Clerks might in the feast either singe or dance, as if to others it were
after a forte lawefull.

Of the same opinion are the scholemen of the Diuins in the 3. Senten.
Distinct. 37. Who refer these restraintes unto the hollye days.

Richard of the middle Village, accounts it a most grievous sin, to
dance on the hollye days as though on other days it might be permitted; But
far waightere is the judgment of the Fathers and sound Councelles, then
these men's; Who hurtfullye set at large those things, which are to be keept
in, seeing they have with them the hazard of souls, and not the hazard only,
but the slydings and falls most grievously to be lamented* And yet these men
seem to borrowe this their Sentence, whereby they deny dauncinge on the hollie
days of the civil laws, in the Code forsoothe, in the title of holly days,
and law holly days.C. tit. deferijs L. dies festos. We let at liberty
vacation on the holly days, but we will that men be restreined from inordinate
delectations. And therefore it shall not be lawful on the hollye days to use
dauncinges, whether they be sensual or prepared for sensuallitye.

Aemilius Probus in the life of Epaminondas, says, that singing and dancing
among the Romans were smalie regarded, when among the Gretians they were had
in great estimation. Salust in his Catilinaria weighteth that Sempronia, a
certain lewd and lascinious woman, was trymlier trained up in singing and
dancing, the^ be seemed a honest Matron. And in the same place, he callteh
these two instruments of excess in carnal pleasure. Cicere in the third
book of his offeces, is of this mind, that an honest and virtuous man, will
not dance in the common concours of people, though he might thereby become ye
gretest heir in ye world. And in his oration, which he made after his return
to the Senate, he termed in remoche Aulus Gabinus his aduersarye O tricksye
dauncer. It was laid in Lutius Murena his dishe as a fault, that he daunced
in Asia: with the same also was king Deiotarus hit in the teeth. Cicero for
Murena aunsweres, that no sober person daunceth, either in solitarines, either
in an honest and moderat banquet, except he be out of his wits. The same
Cicero in his Philip. among other vices vpbraided Antonius with dauncinge. It
appears furthermore, that ye men of the East and West were not of like
disposition: they being of a merye mind and nimble bodies, so much the more
delight in dancing. For to let others pass, David daunced in open sight.

And they which now travel to us out of Syria, testifye ye the Christians
which inhabit those Regions, upon the day of the Lords resurrection, and
likewise upon other famous Festiualles, come to the Church with harpes and
Harmony, singing psalms and dancing together. For those spyrites of those
people are quick and quiver, where the sprrites of our Country men are heavy
and lumpishe, yet for all that, they report that they dance discretlye and
modestly, the men and women one from another. ()

FJNIS.

