THE Book of Thrift, containing a perfect order, and right method to profit
lands, and other things belonging to Husbandry.

Newly Englished, and set out by I. B. Gentleman of Caen, in France.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, Chauncellor of
Lancaster, first Secretary of estate to the Queens most excellent Majesty,
and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, James Bellot
Gentleman of Caen in Normandy, wishes health.
SIr,
being not long agone in a friends house of mine, he showed me an old Book of
Parchment, in a written hand, entreating of sundry matters, and in sundry
languages: The which, when I had opened it, I fell (by chance) upon a little
Treatise of Husbandrye and ploughing, written in old French, so ill set
together, and so straungely painted, that I had much a do before I could reap
any thing of it: but finally, it was gods will (after I had long mused upon it)
to show unto me the meaning of the same: And finding it a work right worthy
to be put in the hands of the public, (because it entreats of public
affairs) I thought good, yea most reasonable, to commit it first into your
learned hands, to the end that under the protection of your authority, it
might walk in greater safety. Therefore, I beseech your Honor most humbly,
to receive it acceptably, and to look on it with so bountiful an eye, that it
may be the bolder to show it self: not only in English through all this
Realm, but also in other languages throughout all inhabited countries: and so,
your Honor shall graft within me a most entire, and most pure affection to
pray unto God (as yet at this time I do pray) to grant you (in health, and
long time) an increase of all Honorable estates, with true and eternal
felicity.

An account for Husbandry.
FIrst he that shall render account, ought to swear that he shall render a true
account, and shall charge him self with that, that he has received of the
Lords goods, and that he has not put in his scrole by his good will, but that
which he has lawfully spent about the Lords profit. And the clearke ought to
swear, that he has truly put in his account, that which he judges his
master to have received of the goods of the Lord, and has employed nothing
but that which he knows to be for the Lords profit. And then if he have at
other times rendered the like account: It ought be looked unto how it is
divided, and if he be found in a rerage of money, or of corn, or of both, or
of any other thing, let him cast up all to the just value of money, to charge
therewith his account, at the beginning of his scrole, and to set it down
after the accounts of other rents received for the Lord, and of all other
things whereof never a penie may be levied, and to charge the account thereof,
and to employ it at the end in a great sum, and after to go to the expenses.

First, for the cost for carts, it is good for the smith to take a note, for to
find out what is needful to have of iron, and of steel for the ploughes, and
shoe the horses and all other their affairs, and to put that which may be
behoouefull to be done, and is accustomed to be given of allowance in the
country: and the same man shall see, if within the manor there is growing any
great wood, or great timber, or timber that a man may gather thereof axeltrees,
naues, and other necessary things to be felled, as well for carts as for
ploughs, so taking them a man may spare money. And for the overplus, which is
not there to be had, and necessary for him to buy, let it be allowed unto
him. And it will be good for him to have both Carters and ploughmen which can
work all the timber of the carwood, the more are these two sorts of servants
to be enterteyned. The said man shall see at the end of the year, all the
small necessary things, all the provisions, all the iron, and all those things
which in the manor do remain little and small, and to write after in the
other year, what thing it behooved him necessarily to buy, and to allow the
same, and the overplus lay up safely. The Provost ought to cause to be gathered
all the pills of the trees to make cords, for that, that he shall need of,
and he must cause, to sow within the yard, hemp to make cords for the carts,
as haltars and other necessary things, and the making of them must be allowed
unto him, if there be none of the household that can make them. Mending of
houses, walls, hedges and ditches if need be, ought to be allowed according
unto reason: yet the provost must not sell, buy, receive, nor deliver any thing
except by tally, or by good testimony And the bailey must make all the
servants of the house, when he comes from labor, to labor about the yard,
to thresh corn, or to make walls, ditches, hedges, or other necessary works
about the house, for the sparing of money, and if there be any servant of the
house that can do the work: he must therefore allow him more then any other:
if he cause him to make that work, and allow another to work in his stead.
The stewards or the bailies, shall see all the buyings, and all the sellings
which the baily or provost shall make, for to ouersee that they be well done,
and to the profit of the Lord. And the steward and baylies which do keep the
court, incontinent after the said buying, ought to render their scroles at the
Lords court, or to the auditors of the court, that they may charge by their
scroles the prouosts, and baylies which do remain accomptable of the profits
of the yard for the whole year. And the provost must make account of the issue
of the Mares of the yard, that is to wit, for each Mare a Colt by the year,
and if there be any that have never a Colt, let it be inquired of, whether it
be through ill regard, or by want of good keeping, or through over much
travel, or by default of a stallion, or that she be barren and brings no
coltes, that he may have her changed for another in time: and it makes no
matter whether he be in like manner charged of the issue or of the value of the
same. And if there be any horse, or other beast dead, let it be inquired
whether it be through the default of the keeper, or of the baylie, or of the
provost, who might have well saved it, or to have employed some help about it,
and did it not if they could, let them bear the loss thereof upon their own
goods. And if they do die by mischance, that it be not by their fault, as of
the Morien, and any other diseases upon beasts, let the provost be answerable
of the carcasses, and of the skins, and of the flesh, and the issues, and put
them in the profit of the Lord, and let him employ that, that he shall know or
be able to prove. And if there be any thing lost in the yard, or without, or
stolen away, the which be it quick or dead, either little or great, whereby
the Lord may have any manner of loss, either by burning, or by any other manner,
the Lord must charge the pro ust therewith, and the provost must charge those
of the yard which are guilty thereof. And it is to be known, that all the
servants of the yard, men and women must be attendant on the provost, because
that the provost must answer for all their actions, and the provost ought to
bring into the Court those for whom he will answer for their deeds. And the
steward must see that the provost enter good pledges for all those of the yard
which are placed by the provost: and if the Lord receive any domages by the
provost, and the provost has not wherewithal he may restore the domages, all
them of the town which have chosen him, shall answer the surplussage for him,
of that, that he shall not be able to pay. And if the Lord does place there a
ponder, a field-keeper, or a granger, or any other what soever he be, and the
Lord do receive any damage by the fault of them the which he shall have there
placed, the Lord ought to take his mends of them, because he placed them, and
not of his provost. It is to be understood, that manours that are governed by
baylies, where there is no provost, but the bailey who answers for the manor
that the said bailey shall render account, as the provost shall and all the
other servants ought to answer to him for all things, without any alteration
or change of words as unto the provost. And those which do hold in villenage
of any manner, ought to choose the provost such as they will be answerable for,
for if the Lord does receive any damage by default of the provost, and he has
not wherewithal to satisfy it, they shall pay for him the surplussage which he
can not pay.

An answer of the seeds that must be sown.
ALL the land must be measured each one by it self, and every holding of the
field named by their names, and every medowe by it self, and every pasture,
every wood, and every heath, turberie, moore and marish also by themselves, and
all by the perch of sixteen foot and a half, because it is easy for one to
measure the land there by the pole of sixteen foot and a half. They do
sow in many places four acres with one quarter, and in many other places, it
is required to have one quarter and a half to sow five acres of wheat, and
of rye, and of beans, and of peason, and two acres with one quarter of barley,
and of otes. But because that some will be sown thicker then the other, the
party ought to measure in each manor every acre by the corn, and see how
much a man may sow of each kind of corn upon one measure, then may you
always be certain of your sowing. And because that a man sows barley upon
a wheat field, and beans, and peason, and lentiles amo^ngst the otes, the
party ought to name each land which is sown in barley amongst the wheat, and
each land of other corn which is sown, amongst the otes. And there where the
fields are divided in two, the winterage or wintercorne, and the tramis
(otherwise common barley) are sown in one and the same field. Therefore he
must answer that of each land, what land is sown of one kind of corn, and
which of another. And if there be any enclosure, he must see what land he
takes in the enclosure and with what corn he sows each land, and the same
seed he must score by it self out of the other grain.

How a man ought to allow, or hire the harvest men in harvest time, and in time
of making of hay.
YOu may well have your lands weeded for a penie an acre, and the acre of meadow
mowed for four pence, and the acre of land in the valley for three pence
halfepenie, and take up and stubbe the acre for three halfpence, and to take
up and stubbe the acre of meadow in the valley, for one penie farthing: and you
ought well to know, that five men may well reap and tie two acres by the day
of each kind of corn, some more, some less. And where every one takes two
pence by the day, yet you ought to give five pence for every acre, and unto
many more. And when the four do take three halfpence a piece, by day, and the
fifth because he is a tier, two pence a day, you ought then to give for each
acre four pence. And because that in many countries they cannot reap by the
acre, yet may a man know by the reapers, and by the days, that which they do,
so that you keep the reapers by the lands: to wit, five men or women the which
you please, five men do make one land, and five and twenty men do make five
lands: and five and twenty men may reap and tie ten acres by the day in
seasonable weather, and in ten days an hundred acres, and in twenty days two
hundred acres by five score to the hundred. Then you shall see how many acres
he has to reap, in all, and you shall see whether they agree with the days,
and then shall you allow them: And if they do reckon more days then it
behooves according unto the order, you ought not to allow it them, for it is
their fault that have not followed them, and caused them to work so well as
they should.

How lands ought to be measured.
ANd because the acres are not all alike, for in some countries they do
measure by the pole of eighteen foot, and in some countries by the pole of
twenty foot, and in some countries by the pole of four and twenty foot:
and you must know, that the acre that is measured by the pole of eighteen
foot, makes an acre and a roode and the sixtenth part of a roode, of the pole
of sixteen foot, and four acres make five acres, and the fourth part of a
roode, and eight acres, do make twelve acres and a half roode, and sixteen
acres make twenty acres and one roode. And the acre which is measured by the
pole of twenty foot, makes an acre and a half, and the fourth part of a
roode, of the pole of sixteen foot, and four acres do make six acres and
one roode, and eight acres make twelve acres and a half, and sixteen acres
both make five and twenty acres: and the acre which is measured by the pole of
two and twenty foot, makes an acre and a half and a roode and a half, and
the sixtenth part of a roode of the pole of sixteen foot, and the four acres
do make seven acres and a half, and the fourth part of a roode, and eight
acres make fifteen acres and half a roode, and sirteene acres do make
thirty acres and one roode. And the acre which is measured by the pole of
four and twenty foot, makes two acres and a roode of the pole of sixteen
foot, and four acres do make nine acres.

The answer of the barn.
OF the profits of the barn, the man ought to see how much of each corn he
has sown, and how much it does answer in profit: that is by right and by
common account, barley does answer at the eight grain, that is to wit for every
corn sowe^, eight corns increase: and the rye, at the seventh corn, and
beans at the sixth bean, and peason at the sixth pease, and of dredges of
barley, and of otes, if they be equally mingled, at the sixth: and if there be
more barley then otes, it ought to answer the more, and if there be less
barley, it must answer ethe less, and also of masline, if it be equally
mingled must answer at the sixth, and if there be more wheat then rye, it
answers the less, and the wheat must answer at the fifth corn, and the
otes at the fourth. But because the lands do not answer so well in one year
as in another, the light lands do not answer as the good do: and besides, it
happens that the winterage takes well, and the Lent fails, and sometimes
the Lent takes, and the winterage fails: and therefore if the land answers
more then it is charged by the corn, the Lord loses it, and if it does
answer less, of necessity it behooves him which rendereth the account, to
pay it of his own, and so no man can receive damage by the account aforesaid.
And there is no peril to put men which may answer by the corn. and whosoever
knows not the increase, let him place a faithful man in whom he trusts
besides the thresher of the barn: and it is good for him which is beside the
thresher of the barn to score the increase of each heap in the barn by it
self, for to see how many quarters each heap of corn ought to render by it
self. And if there be any heap without, let him cause it to be measured by
rode, and by foot in height and length, when he will cause it to be threshed,
and let him score each heap by it self, then shall he be able to know as well
af each heap without, as of ache heap within the barn, both the stock and
the profit: so that the heaps be every one of one height, and of one length:
and if he will sell his corn by the great, he may the better know how much
each heap ought to be worth, according unto the price of the corn, if he
sells the corn by the great. It is good for him to score, and to see the
profit of each heap, and of each stacke: for the oftener he shall try it,
the certener he shall be of the profit, and of the stock, be cause that corn
does not answer every year equally: and let him take heed which is with the
thresher of corn, that if he does thresh any old corn with the new, he
thresh, and score it by it self out from the new, and that the provost may
answer the sale of the corn severally, and see the profit every year,
whether it shall answer to his seed.

Answer of dredges.
ANd if you do make dredges, they must always answer to you for nine
quarters the tenth at the least, and yet it is a very small answer, but a man
may bring it to this reckoning, because that he may not make thereof a greater
store, when he puts in greater store of otes, the dredges thereof will be
worth the less, and of all the increase thereof the less Beer shall be made.

The profit of the dairie, concerning the small store.
ANd you ought to have in each place and dyarie a man or woman to keep the
small store of the croppe, as is aforesaid. And if there be a man, yet he must
do all things even so as if a woman were there, and ought to take the quarter
of the year of sixteen weeks for the white meat, where the other quarters
are taken of twelve weeks, and he must sell all the corn, and shall take of
the money of the dairie that is paid, to pay the woman which sells it: If
you do measure to sell four quarters of wheat, or of rye, and six quarters
of barley, of peason, beans and minglings, you must allow in the sale one
half penie and a half for every oen of them: if they be measured to sale
eight quarters of otes, for the same one penie: and the man ought always to
take in the quarter the fifth for the full measure of every kind of grain: Also
a man ought to thresh the quarter of wheat, or of rye for two pence, and the
quarter of barley, beans and peason, for two pence halfepenie, and the quarter
of otes for one penie, and to allow always for every fourth the fifth for the
full measure: and if the dairie wife take heed to all the said store which
remains in the yard, as to the swine and peacocks, and to their increase, and
to the geese and to their increase, and to the capons, and to the cocks, and
to the hens, and to the chickens, and to the eggs and their increase: and
you ought to know that the sow must pigge two times by the year, and at each
time seven pigges at the least, and every goose must bring forth five goslings
by the year, and each hen must lay one hundred and fifty eggs, and breed
seven chickens, whereof three must be made capons, and if there be to many
hen chickens, she must change them for cock chickens: so many as it is here
found that every hen must increase three capons and four hens by the
year: and for five geese, it behooves to have one gander, and to seven hens
one cock. And each cow must answer one calfe by the year, and each ewe
sheep one lamb by the year: and if there be any cow or ewe sheep which
brings forth no increase, let him inquire by whose default it is, either by
the fault of the bailie, or of the provost, or of the keeper, through fault of
good keeping, or by want of food in summer time, or in winter season, or
through want of a male, or if the provost may have changed it for any other in
an unmeet time. And if it be not found by the default of none of them, let him
make a full change of the issue, or of the valor thereof. And also if none
dies by any manner of way by his default, let him be answerable for the quick
beast, or of the value thereof: and if the mamour lacks a dairie, it is
always good to have a faithful woman for the lightest costs that a man may,
for to keep the small store, croppe, and all which is within the yard, and to
answer all the issues as well of the crops, as of the dairie: to wit, of the
sowes and of their pigges, of the peacocks and of their chickens, of the geese
and of their goslings, of the capons and of the cocks, of the hens and of
their chickens, and of their eggs, and she must be answerable of the half of
the selling of them, as well as of the dayrie.

Answer of the white meat of kine.
EAch cow ought to answer from Michaelmasse day till the first Kalends May, by
eight and twenty weeks, the one and the older, the account of ten pence
throughout all that time, the one more, and the other less. And it behooves
to understand, that every cow does answer by equality, for the one gives
sooner milk then the other, and the one is sooner dry then the other, neither
do the Heyforts answer so much milk at their first bearing, as they do at
the other bearings after: but of those of eight year old, they ought to
answer so much: and the next day after the first Kalends of May, till S.
Michaels day, by four and twenty weeks, the one day so much as the other,
and they do make right skore and eight days, and the profit of the milk of
every Cow, must be worth during that time, three shillings and six pence,
and all the other season, the issue of the cow comes to ten pence, and by
this account every cow ought to answer iiij. shillings.iiij. pence, of the
profit of the milk: and it is to be understood, yt every cow must answer
between the kalends of May, and Michaelmasse, six stones of cheese, and always
of six stones of cheese one stone of butter, and you ought always from the
next day after Michaelmasse till Saint Martins day at the least, and in the
other season, after Christmasse till Summer time, it profits more to the Lord
to sell the milk, then to sell cheese: for it is more profit then to sell a
gallon of milk, then to sell three gallons in Summer, or at any other season:
and if you do make cheese, then a gallon of milk will be no more worth then
it is worth at any other season.

The answer of the whitmeate of sheep.
EAch milked sheep ought to answer profit of her milk, all the Summer long,
so long as she gives milk six pence: for the sheep that gives milk, gives
no milk after August, and no man does keep them for to give milk after
August, because that they are less worth, and are the more perilous to pass
the Winter, and if they be sick, or feeble, their profit is the less. And
the dairie wife ought to answer so much profit of a gallon of sheep milk in
cheese and butter, as of a gallon and a half of cowes milk: and a gallon does
weigh seven pounds: and two gallons, do weigh fourteen pounds, and
foure-pounds makes the stone. And it is to be known, that the Mare goes
forty nine weeks after she has been covered, before she bring forth any
colt. And the Cow from the time that she has been covered goes forty
weeks before she bring forth any calfe. And the sheep goes xxj. weeks
from the time she has been covered, before she bring a lamb. And the sow
goes xv. weeks, from the time that she has bin covered, before she farow any
pigs. And the sow farroweth her pigges five times in two years, and no more.
And the goose breeds one time by the year. And the hen hatcheth if she be
well kept, and be good two times in a year, but that happens not every
year: neither can every one of them give profit, but only according as they
shall be well kept, answer they profit, either more or less.

This husbandry made a Knight, sir Walter of Henley, who after rendered
himself into the order of the Friers-preachers, and did reach unto the people,
how they ought to live wisely and hohestly of their goods, and not to waste too
much before hand, lest they should want after.
THe father sat in his old age, and said to his son, Fair son, live
wisely, according to God, and after the world. Toward God think often of the
passion, and of the death that Jesus Christ suffered for us, and love him above
all things, and fear him, and keep his commandments. As touching the world,
think ye on the wheel of fortune, how men have no riches, and when they are
on the top of the wheel, how by mischance they do fall into poverty, and
more into afflictions: therefore I pray you to order your life according as
your lands are worth, and do extend by the year, and no higher: If you can
improve your lands to gains, either by storing or by other purueyance more
then the ordinary revenue, keep the overplus in store: for if corn fail,
store dies, or burning happens to come, or any other mischance, then the
same that you have in store will be profitable to you. If you do spend by the
year the worth of your lands, and any loss in the year or mischance happen
to come, you have no recourse to your store, and let the storer make no waste,
nor destroy his goods, as some men do, as those marcha^ts which do by for
twenty shillings, and do sell for ten, that man is neither called nor
approved wise, that can deliver himself out of loss and does it not. You
may see some men which have lands and revenues, and can not tell how to live:
wherefore I will tell it you, because they live without order, or any forecast,
or provision before hand, and they spend and wast more then their lands are
worth by the year, and when they have wasted their goods: then have nothing
but sorrow in their mouths, and do live in anguish, neither can they make any
shift for their profit. Such a man may one reprove in English thus: Whosoever
strikes further then his whittle will last, in the stroke his foot he must
stretch. Fair son, be you wise in your deed, and against this world which is
so mischievous and ticklish, that you may want nothing, and that you need not
to depend upon any man for your relief. If there be any men carting in your
yards, let the^ be advised by their elders, and if in your judgment you think
that they be too high minded, be you advised here to measure ye same, so yt you
may not be reprehended thereby, neither here nor before God. Be you acquainted
with honest persons and wise, and you shall have the love of your neighbors: for
it is said in French: whosoever has a good neighbor, ye same has a good
morning. Use your tongue wisely, that you be not justly reprehended: you shall
discretly spend those goods which God has lent you.

You ought to know four things, in layings out and in expenses: the first is,
What ye must give, how and to whom, and how much you must give: for the first,
that you must give before need requires it: for two shillings given then, are
better accounted of then twelve shillings, when need forces you to it: for
the second, whether you ought to give, or to spend, and to do it willingly,
then the same shall be double rewarded unto you, and if you do give
unwillingly, you shall leese all that you do either give or lay out: for the
third, give to him that may be profitable unto you and to others: for the
fourth, how much you must give, neither more nor less, but according as the
work is, either great, or little, that you have to do: look on the poor, not
for the praises of the world, but for to have the love of God, which gives us
all things. You shall enlarge your lands and tenements by your loyal men sworn.
First reckon your yards, gardens, doue-houses, orchardes, what they may be
worth by the year, besides your provision.

Then reckon how many acres of meadow you have, and what they be worth by the
year, and see also how much wood you may sell by the year, without any waste
or destruction, and what the same may be worth by the year: and what your
milles: and your fish ponds are worth by the year, besides the provision: and
then reckon how many acres you have of erable land: and how many be of them in
every field: and of free holds, how much each of them conteyneth, and by what
service: and of copy hold, how much every one of them conteyneth, and by what
services and customs or duties they be held, let them be employed and all other
things wherein they do profit, account what they be worth by the year. And by
the husbandmen, you shall enquire how much will serve to sow an acre of land,
of every kind of corn, and how much provisions you may have upon every manor:
and by the allowance you shall know how much your bailyes must answer in their
scrowles, besides the said alowance. So may you be able to know how much your
lands are worth by the year, and your tenements also, whereby you may dispose
of your living so as it is told you before, and whether your prouosts do set
down in their accounts so much corn sown, upon so many acres: So to the
allowance, and perchance shall you find fewer acres then they will tell you,
and more corn sown then it were need or requisite: for you have at the end
of the allowance with how much a man may sow an acre of land of all sorts of
grain. Besides this, if need were to bestow either more or less cost about
the ploughes: by the allowance you shall be certified how: I will tell it you.
If your lands are divided by three, the one part to the winter, and another
part in Lent, and the third part in resting land, then is the plough nine score
acres. And if your lands be divided by two, the one moitie is sown in winter,
and in Lent: and the other moitie in resting land, then shall the plough be of
eight score acres. Go you to the allowance, and see how many acres in demain
land you have, and thereby you may be certified as well how much the plough of
eight score acres has to do, as the plough of nine score acres has to do. I
will show unto you, that of eight score acres, is forty acres of winteredge,
and forty acres of lent, and four score acres of resting land: Return and
replough the four score acres, and then the plough shall go of twelve score
acres. Concerning the plough of nine score acres, three score acres for
winteredge, and three score acres for lent, and three score for resting land,
and then run over and plough again the three score acres. Then shall the
plough go for twelve score acres by the year, as the plough of eight score:
Some men do say, that a plough cannot do so much by the year, I will show you
that it may do it: You know that an acre ought to be of forty poles in
length, and four poles in breadth, and the kings pole is of sixteen foot
and an half. Then is the acre of sixty six foot of breadth: Now go on
forward thirty three times about, and take room of one foot in breadth. Then
is the acre otherwise. But go thirty six times about for to make the room
narrow, and when the acre is gone forward then you have gone seauentie and two
furlongs, which do make six leagues, that is to wit, twelve furlonges for one
league: the horse shall be very poor, or the ox either, the which in one
morning cannot go softly and with a little pace the way of three leagues, and
to go back at noone. And by another reason I will show you that it may do so
much. You know that there is fifty two weeks in one year: now take away
eight weeks for the holy days and other lettes, then shall remain forty
four weeks of travail, and in all that time the ploughe shall have to do,
but the plowing of the resting land, and the plowing of the sowing in winter,
and in Lent, the dayes-worke of three roodes, and half a rood, and to stir
again one acre. Now see you, whether a ploughe which is well kept and
followed, may not do so much in one day, and if you have lands whereon dungue
may be laid, take pains to dungue it according as the land does require: and
have regard to know whether your land be well in dungue, and whether your
dungue be well kept as it must, then it shall answer to the third part of
your lands by the alowance. Be they your tenants or customers, if they do deny
customs or services by your alowance, you shall know the certainty.

If you be to choose bailifes, or serge, ants, choose them neither by kindred,
nor by favorable word, nor by any other like things, if they be not of good
name, and let them be honest and ancient, and such as know the profit of the
dungue. Take no corne-keepers but of your homagers and lande-holders: and if
you do choose them, let them be of your homagers choosing: for if they
trespass, you shall have your remedy upon them.

At the beginning of breaking, tilling and sowing of your lands, see that the
bailifes and the keepers or prouosts, be always in company with the ploughmen
to see that they work plainly, and do well their work, and at their iourneys
end, to see how much they have done, so that they may be answerable for all
afterward, except they can be able to show certain apparent let: and because
that servants are commonly slack in their works, it is needful to cast over
their frauds. In ye mean time it is needful for the keeper to admonish them
every day. On the other part, the bailife ought to look so well about it, that
they do well: and if they do not well, let them be rebuked, and corrected for
it.

You shall at the plough of oxen draw one of your horses: for the plough of
oxen (if the land be not stony) can not shift their feet. The plough of oxen
is far better then the plough of horses, The cause why? I will tell it you.
The horse does cost more then the ox: besides that, the plough of oxen is so
much worth by the year as the plough of horses, because that the naughtiness
of plough-men suffers not the horses to go more then their pace. Besides the
same for the stayings, the plough of horses shall stay, when the plough of
oxen shall go on. And will you see, how much the horse costeth more then the
ox, the same I will tell you: It is always accustomed, that those beasts
which do serve about the plough, do lie in at the manger, betwixt Saint Lukes
feast, and holy crosse-feast in May, during twenty five weeks: and yet the
horse must be well kept to do his days journey, he must have oats by night,
the sixth part of a bushel of oats esteemed at a halfepenie, he must have at
the laest twelve sheaues of grass in Summer time every week, some horses more
and some less, of one penie the burden. Concerning ye shoowing, if they be
shoowed of al four feet, the sum rises to twelve shillings five pence
halpenie hy the year, besides the fodder and the straw: and if the ox be in
good liking to do his work, then it is needful to allow him at the least,
three sheaues and a half of oats by the week, rated at one penie, and in
Summer season twelve burdens of grass, rated at two shillinges and one penie
besides fodder and straw, and ten sheaues of oats, do answer a bushel of
oats heap measure. And when the horse is old and tired, then is there in him
nothing good but the skin. And when the ox is old, with twelve burdens of
grass, he will be worth being fatted, or being sold, so much as he did cost
you first, or more.

In breaking time, is a good season for the plowma^, if the ground breaks
after the plough: and the fallowing after Midsommer day, it is best for him
when the dust does rise after the plough: and in the earing and sowing time,
when the land is settled, and is not too close: but he that has much to do,
can not have all the good seasons. And when you do break deep any good land,
then must you square furrow, for to have good resting land: but prick it not
to deep but sparingly, only doing so that ye may destroy the thistles and the
weeds: for if the land be fallowed to deep, and if it be wette and waterish
when it is eared and sown, the plough can not then reach any certain ground:
but it shall go flowing as in a good ground: and if the plough might go two
finger deeper then the land was fallowed, then should the plough find the
certain ground, and should be cleansed, and should make fair and good
plowing.

In sowing time, do not plough large surrow but a little one, and well joined
together, that the seed may well fall. And if you do plough large furrows
for to make great dispatch, you shall do hurt as I will tell you. When the
land is sown, the harrow will come that shall rake all the seed on the hill
which is between the surrowes, and the furrow which is large shall be
discovered, and there shall grow no corn: and to show you that it is so, when
the corn is upon the ground, go to the head of the land, and look on the
corn toward the other head, and you shall see that the same which I tell you
is true.

If the ground be to be sown upon the furrow, see that it be tilled with little
furrows, and the ground so high as you may possible, and see that the furrow,
which is betwixt the two furrows, be straight, and the land which lies as it
were a comb in that furrow, under the left foot after the plough, that it may
be all turned, and then the furrow shall be straight enough.

Sow your lands betimes, so that the earth be settled, and the corn well rooted
before the coming of the hard winter.

If perchance it happens that any great rain falls upon the land within the
eight days, that it is sown, and then a hard frost commes two or three days
after, if the land be hollow, the frost shall pearce the earth so deep as
the water is gone in, and therefore the corn which is sprowted shall be
incontinet rotten.

Two perilles that are in sowing in Lent season sowinges so betimes: The earth
that is clayish, and the stony ground, I will tell you wherefore: if it be a
dry season in March, then the clayish earth shall wax too hard, and the
stony ground shall wax dryer, when it is covered, wherefore it needs, that
such lands be sown in a convenient time, so that the corn may be well
nourished by the moystnesse of the winter. The hollow lands need not to be
sown otherwise but in their time: for these two are two sorts of ground which
fall to be hollow and great in show, but in the sowing of them, let the lands
be somewhat wet. And when your lands be sown: cause to scowre well the
marish, and other waterish grounds, and cause the ditches about them to be well
cleansed, that thereby your land may be the sootter dried from the water.

Cause to cleanse, and weed your corn after Midsommer day, for it is not good
to do it before. And if you do cut of the thistles, a forte-night, or a
seuen-night before Midsommer day, of each shall come two or three: cause your
corn to be wisely reaped and put in the barn.

To make the profit of your barn, see that you entertain a faithful honest
man, that may faithfully charge the provost: for it is seen often that the
Barner, and the granetier, do join together to do ill: let your provost, and
your granetiers cause the same corn to be truly carried, but measure of eight
bushels, one pecke for the waste and decay, at the coming in, and at the going
out of the barn: for their is deceit in the heaping, as I will tell you. When
the provost has rendered account of the profit of the barn, then cause the
bushel to be proved wherewithal it was charged: and you shall find that
four heaped quarters, shall make the fifth, a little more or a little less,
and if the bushel be narrower of five quarters: this take, and if it be
narrower of six quarters, then take the seventh: and if it be yet narrower of
the seven quarters, then take the eight: and yet being narrower of eight
quarters, take the ninth, and of each of them a litile, either a little more or
a little less, according to their bigness: Now some of these proffes of
measure will render a true account but with the ninth quarter, what bushel
soever it be, either broad or narrow will do it. And if the bushel be broad
there is a great deceit, if the profit of your barn answers but to the
third of your seed, you get nothing except the corn be very well sold: you
know well that an acre of la^d which is sown with wheat, will have three
tillings, except those lands the which are sown every year, some more, some
other less. Each tilling is worth six pence, and the harrowing is worth one
penie: and it behooves to sow upon every acre two bushels at the least, and
these two bushels are at the least worth at Michaelmasse twelve pence, and the
weeding a halfpenie, and the cutting down five pence, and the carrying in
harvest one penie, and the fodder shall quite the thresshing. And the third
part of the seed ought to yield six bushels of Wheat: And if at
Michaelmasse Wheat be worth four shillinges, then are six bushels worth
three shillinges, and your harvest charges do amount to three shillings one
penie and halfepenie.

Change every year the seed at Michaelmasse: for the seed which is grown
upon other land will prove better, then the seed which is grown upon the
same land. And if you will see it, cause to till two forelandes of one and the
same land, and in one day, and sow the one with the feed that you have
bought, and the other with the seed which is grown upon the same land: and
when you come in harvest time, you shall prove that I tell you true.

Sell not, neither stir not your stubble, because that for the less you
should leese the most.

When you cause dungue to be kept, with good earth, cause your dunguehil to be
dressed and mingled with the dungue, and cause every fortenight to draw out of
your sheepecote wherewith to dungue your clayish ground if you have it, or with
some good earth drawn out of the ditches, and then scatter it upon, and if
there remain any fodder besides the sustainement of your cattle: you shall
cause it to be scattered within in the yard, and within the mire, and in your
sheepecote also, cause it to be scattered, and in like manner in your modde, and
before the drought of March, cause all your dungue to be heaped together, which
is in the stables, in the yard, and without. And when you mind to dungue your
ground, and the same to carry, you must have a man whom you trust well, that is
faithful unto you, to follow your carts the first day, and if he sees that
they do their work without feyning, see at the iourneyes end how much they
have done: and let them answer so much every day, except they may show some
certain let. Your dungue which is mingled with earth, you shall put upon
sandy ground if you have any, the cause wherefore I will tell you. The Summer
time is hot, and the dungue hot, and when the third heat is assembled to
them, by the great heat they do wither away after midsommer day. The barley
does grow in a sandy ground as you may well see where you go in many places.
On the Evening, the land which is mingled with dungue, causes the sand to wax
cold, and rayseth up deawe, and therefore that your lands that are sown may
bring forth the more, dungue them, and till them not too deep, because that
the dungue is marred in turning in too deep. How I will tell you what
advantage you shall have by the straw which is mingled with the earth. If the
dungue be but it self, it may last three years, or there aboutes, according
as the land is either cold or hot. The dungue which is mingled with earth,
does last ye double, but it shall not be so quick: you know well that the
marle, lasts more then straw, why so? Because that the dungue wastes in
turning it deep into the earth, and the marle in turning of it out of the
earth. And why does the dungue mingled with earth last longer then the pure
dungue, I will tell it to you. The dungue and the earth which are tilled
together susteyneth the straw that it wastes not in the turning in, though it
should waste naturally. Therefore I pray you to cause dungue to be kept
according to the ability. And your dungue which is scattered, and somewhat
moistened, is in season good to be turned, for the ground and the dungue shall
then take the better together. And if you put your dungue upon fallowes, it
shall be all at the stirring turned under the ground, and in sowing time shall
come up again, with the mingled ground: and if it be put upon stirring in
sowing time, it shall be turned the more upon the earth, and the less mingled
with the ground and that is not approved: and the nearer the dungue is to the
seed it is better: at the feast of our Lady, first cause to fatten your
dungue, according as you have of sheep, either more or less: for they do in
that season cast much fatning.

Make once in the year your provision, draw btweene Easter and Whitsunday, to
wit, your oxen and kine, and other cattle which are not to be kept: let them be
put to fatten to grass, and you shall gain: and know the certainty that
then the woorst is better worth then the best. How? I will tell it you: If
they be cattle for burden, they must be kept better then the other and more
made of, else the other are the more grieved by their default: and if you must
buie any store, buie it between Easter and Whirsuntide: for then are cattle
lean, and good cheap: And before your horses be too old, or tired, or lean,
or of small valor, you may sell them away in due season, and then may you
relieve your self with good and young. How store should be kept it is good you
should know it, to make your serua^nts wise: for when they shall see that you
know it, they shall endeavor to be the better.

The cattle for the plough must have pasture sufficient to do their work,
and that they be not labored too much under, when they shall come to the
manger: for you should bestow too much cost to restore them, and so your
gains should be diminished: put them in no houses in rainie weather: for
surfeiting may come betwixt the hair and the skin, which turns to the great
damage of your cattle: and if your cattle have their ordinary prouender let
it be given to the^ by day light, at ye sight of the hayward, or of the
provost, and mingle it with a little straw of wheat, or of oats, and not of
barley straw, because barley straw has too many beards, which will offend the
mouths of the horses. And why do you say so? by proof of the straw I will
tell it you: because it happens often that thieves do steal their
prouender, and the horses do eat straw better then the prouender, and do
fatten, and do become better. And let not much fodder be given to the oxen at
once, but little at once and often, and then they eat it well, and waste little
of it: and when there is greater quantity before them, they do eat their
bellies full, then they do lie down, and do gnawe, and with the blowing of
their breath, do begin to hate and to waste it. And let the cattle be kept
clean, and when they be dry currie them, for that does them good: and let the
oxen be curried with a wispe the day, and they shall lick themselves the
better. Let your kine have sufficient pasture, least they give the less milk.
And when the ox calfe is calued, let him have his milk one whole month: at
the months end take from him a dugge, and every week one dugge, the^ shall
he suck eight weeks, and lay food before him that he may learn to ease: and
let the cowe-calfe be at her milk three weeks: at the tree weeks end take
away from her all the other dugs, as from the oxe-calfe, and let them have wate
and food before them, be they within the house or without: for many do die on
the ground of the disease of the lights, for lack of water. Besides that, if
there be any ox which begins to be out of flesh, bestow some cost to sustain
him: for it is truly said, that the penie is well bestowed tha brings in
two pence. If your kine be feeble, pick them out, and those that be not good,
put them away. And if your kine be fed in pasture of salt marish ground, then
ought two kine to answer a stone of cheese, and half a gallon of butter by
the week: and if they be fed in pasture of wood, or in medows, after mowing
time, or in stubble, then must three kine answer by the week, one stone of
cheese, and half a gallon of butter: between Easter and Michaelmasse without
any reply of second hay between Easter and Michaelmasse, and twenty bearing
sheep, which are fed in pasture of salt marish ground, must and may well
answer both of cheese and butter even so as the kine aforesaid. And if your
sheep be fed with fresh pasture and of fallowes, thirty bearing sheep ought
to answer of butter and cheese, even so as the kine before mentioned. Now there
be many great prouosts and surueyors, the which will gainsay this thing, and
the reason wherefore they do it, is because that they do eat, give and waste the
whitemeat: and know ye, that for to see if the whitemeate is not spent, nor
otherwise wasted, except about the thing aforesaid your kine and shape may be
so much the better, and ought to answer the proofs aforesaid: will you see it
in them how three kine must make a stone of cheese: the cow of one of these
three kine shall be but poor, of the which a man cannot make in two days one
cheese, worth one halfepenie, which is according to the rate of those days,
in six days iij. cheeses worth three halfpence, and the seventh day of the
week is not in the account, because that the seventh day shall help for the
tenth, and for the wast, and is allowed for ye cost. Though it were but three
halfepence in the week in xxiiij. weeks which are betwixt Easter and
Michaelmasse, there shall be three shillings for the worst cow. Now set down the
profit of the second cow at so much, and of the third cow even at so much,
then have you ix. shillings, and therefore you may have a stone of cheese
commonly to sell* And one of the three kine shall be but poor, of the which a man
can not reap the third part of a pottell of butter by the week, and if the
gallon of butter is worth six pence, then is the third part of a pottell
worth one penie.

Cause your hogs to be tried once in the year, and if you do find any one
that is not sound remove it. Keep you neither Bore nor Sow except they be of
good kind. Your other Sowes shall you cause to be gelded if they do not
pigge: then shall you have bacon made of them, even as good as of the hog. In
winter must you feed them yt they perish not, and that they may be well able to
pigge: in three months they need to be kept with good food, to wit, in
February, March and April, and three times in the year, must your sowes
farrow pigges, except it be through ill keeping. A nourishment in swine is to
have a long morning, and to lie dry. Cause your hogs to be gelded whiles
they be young, then they shall grow the better.

See that your sheepeheard be not too hasty, for by hastiness cattle may be
to villainously driven, that thereby, they may happen to perish. When sheep do
go a feeding, and the sheepeheard is amongst them to hasty, and driving the
sheep too hastily, then is that a token that he is not gentle to his sheep.

Cause your sheep to be milked every year between Easter and Whitsonday, and
those that are not to be milked, cause them to be shorn betimes, and mark
them from the other, and put them in woods that be closed, or within some
other pasture ground where they may fatten, and sell them about Midsommer: for
then is sheep flesh in season, and let there wool be sold by it self, with
the skins of them that are dead of the morrion. And when you have sold your
sheep, your wool and your skins aforesaid, set up again in their steades so
many sheep. Some men do set up again others by the profit they make of them
that are dead of the morrion, how? I will tell you: if one sheep dies
suddenly, they do put the flesh into the water, so long as from the morning
till noone, and then do hang it up, and when the water is dried up, they cause
it to be salted and dried: and if they do see that any sheep begins to pine
away, be it either that her teeth do fall, or that her teeth falls not, they
cause them to be killed, powdered and dried as the other, and then they do
cause them to be pressed, and do spend them at home among their men, and
iourneymen, and so much as the prise amounts, they do render in season: and
of that, and the skins they do set up again so many other sheep: but I wish
not you to do the like. See that your sheep be within at home, between the
feast of Saint Martin, and Easter: I will not say but if the ground be dry,
and the water be drawn to his course and place, and the weather be fair, that
your muttons may not lie out: and let them that be kept at home have hay,
either more or less, according as the weather is: and cause to dunge the
floor of the sheepecote every fortenight, so as I have told you heretofore,
and let straw be laid upon the same. And know ye, that you shall have more
profit, then if they did lie in the mire: and if your sheep are within in
stormy weather, let them be by themselves, and let them have of the coursest
hay, or hay mingled with wheat straw, or oate straw well threshed: Wherefore,
I will tell you: They are tossed by night in the mire by stormy weather, and
the next day after by reason of their lying they do not feed, and then they do
come to the cribbe hungry, and the stronger do thrust out the feeble, and do
swallow up without gnawing the small hay, and the sheep that has eaten her
belly full gnaweth her fodder, and that fodder which is not gnawen nourishes
not, but remains within the body, and therefore is unnatural, whereby many
do perish: and if the fodder be mingled, they will eat it the better because
of the coursenesse of the fodder: and if you do lack hay, take the coddes and
the straw of peason, which is good fodder for sheep. And when your lambs are
yeaned, let the sheepeheard take away the wool which is about the dugges: for
it happens often that the wool sticks in the lambs mouth, and so the
lamb swalloweth it up: and it remains within their stomach, and thereby
many are perished: and at the feast of S. Simon and Saint Jude, cause to draw
out two of the middle sort, and two of the best, and two of the woorst, and if
you do find that they be not sound, cause the best of them to be sold, and
let honest persons have them upon good surety, till hogges-day, and then cause
other to be set up again in their stead.

Of geese and hens, let hem be at the discretion of the baylie, because that
all the time I was a Bayliffe, both Geese and Hens were let to farm, Geese
for twelve pence, Hens for three pence, and some for four pence, by the
year.

Sell and buie in due season, having always one honest man or two, which may
testify of all things: for there be some other persons then those which are
accomptable, the which do increase the buyings, and do diminish the sellings:
and if any rerage run lying upon the final account, let it be quickly
gathered up: and if they do name certain persons which do owe the rerages:
keep with you their names: for it happens often that Servants and Prouostes,
do serve their own turns, and do cause others to serve their turns which
they ought not: and they do the same, for to hide their own delays. Make a
view of the account, or cause it to be made, by some trusty person, once in
the year, and a final account at the years end. The view of account must be
made, to know the estate of things, as of the profits, receipts, sales, buyings,
and other expenses. And thereupon, if there be any money remaining, take it out
of the hands of the Servants: for it happens often that Servants, and
Prouostes do make merchandise by themselves or by others, with their Lords
money, to their profit, and not to the profit of their lords, the which thing
is not honest: if you must buy or sell in the country where is no good order:
be you then well advised, for you may be defrauded by them which cannot be
contraried. Those that have the custody of such things, must of necessity
have these four things: To love and fear their Lord, and as for the raising
of profit, they ought to do it as though the thing were their own: and as for
their expenses, they should so expend, as supposing the thing not to apperteine
unto an other. There be many servants and Prouostes which have these four
things together: but many there are which have fled from the three first, and
keep the fourth, and have used the same contrary to right, as a thing
apperteining to an other: receiving and taking with both their left and right
hand, when as they think that their delays can be by no means perceived or
known.

Visit often your things, and cause them to be visited: for it is said in a
common saying: Who often visits his own goods, if he gains not, he does
not leese: and those which serve you by the year, shall the more beware to
(...) ill, and shall endeavor themselves the more to do their best.

Here ends Husbandry.

