The second part of the Widow of Watling-streete, and her three Daughters.
To the tune of The Wanton wife.
THe beautiful Widow of Watling street,
being thus falsely accusde by her son:
With her three daughters of favor so sweet,
Whose beauty the love of so many had won,
With her daughters three for succor went she,
Unto the kings counsel of Noble degree,
Now fie upon falsehood and forgerie frail,
For great is the truth and it shall prevail.
Her son by a writ now sommoned is,
At the Starchamber with speed to appear:
To answer there the abuses of his,
The Lords of the counsel the matter will hear:
This news was brought his wits he sought,
Which may his villainy best might be wrought.
Then up and down the City so fair,
He seeks companions to serve his turn:
A sort of vacabonds naked and bare,
the which to work murders for money is won:
These wretches behold for money and gold:
He hired for witness his lies to uphold, etc.
My masters quoth he, my mother by name,
To be a lewd strumpet accused I have:
And having no witness to prove that same,
Your aid and assistance herein I do crave:
Therefore without fear, before the Lords there
yet this thing is certain, you fix shall it swear.
The first two quoth he, shall swear on a book
That sixteen years past they plainly did see,
As they through the garden hedge sadly did look
That she in one hour was abused by three:
And how it feel, as they marked it well:
That just nine Months after she had her first girl
The second couple shall swear in this sort,
That at Bristow fair about xvii. years past,
She with her own apprentise did fall in such sport
That her second daughter was got at the last,
now trust us quoth. they we will swear what you say,
Or any thing else for money this day, etc.
And thus ye third couple their oath now that take
That as a^t he Bath she staid on a day.
For ach in her bones as the scuse she did make,
How she with a Courtier the wanton did play:
And how well you wot in the pleasant plot,
her dearest young daughter for certain was got,
But now you masters your names let me know:
That I may provide you apparel with speed,
Like six grave Citizens so must you go,
The better your speeches the Lords will heed,
So shall I with scorn, ere Saturday morn,
Prove her a Harlot, my sisters base borne, etc.
My name is make shift, the first man did say,
And Francis light-finger the second likewise,
Cutbert creepe-window the third to display;
And Rowland Rob-man, with foul staring eyes:
Jack shameless comes then with Hary steale-hen,
You are quoth. the widow some right honest men.
Before the Lords most prudent and grave,
This wretch does with his witness come:
The mother complains and Justice does crave,
Of all the offenses that he has her done:
My Lords then quoth. she, I pray you hear me,
The Law for my deeds my warrant shall be.
I say she is a Harlot most vilde,
And those be her bastards that stands is place,
And that she has often her body defilde,
By very good witness i will prove to her face:
This thing of thy Mother you oughtst for to smother
It Is shame for a child to speak of his Mother.
But if this matter be proved untrue,
And thou a false liar be found to thy face:
Worse then an Infidel, Pagon, or Jew,
Thou oughtst to be punished and plagd in this case,
And therefore draw near, and now let us hear,
What says the witness that here does appear?
When the first couple did come for to swear
They quiuerd and quakt in most wondrous sort,
The lords very countenance did put them in fear
And now they knew not what to report:
The second likewise stard so with his eyes,
They stamberd and knew not what to devise.
The Lords perceiving the case how it went,
Did ask the last couple what they had to say,
Who fell on their knees incontinent,
Saying they were hired for money that day:
Quoth they it is so, the truth for to show,
Against a good widow no harm we do know.
Thus was the widow delivered from blame,
With her three daughters of beauty most bright
Her son reproached with sorrow and shame,
Having his judgment appointed him right:
To loose at the least the goods he possessed,
To loose both his ears, and banished to rest.
When he heard this judgment pronounced to be
The tears full bitterly fell down from his face,
To mother and sisters he kneeled on his knee,
Confessing yt Lucre had wrought his disgrace,
That for my own gain, I sought to detain,
My sisters three portions this lie I did feign,
Therefore dear Mother forgiveness I crave,
Of you and my sisters offended so sore:
My body from peril if you will but save,
I swear I will grieve and offend you no more,
The Lords then replide, the Law justly tried,
the punishment now thou are like to abide,
Therefore to prison now thou shall go,
Where thou shall the kings pleasure abide,
From thence to be brought with shame and with woe,
To suffer the punishment due to thy pride:
Then out of hand, thou shall understand,
That presently thou shall be banished the land.
Now while in prison this prisoner did rest
Himself he hanged in desperate wise:
Such horror of conscience possessed his breast,
and being cast forth, the Ravens picked out his eyes
All children behold, what here has bin told,
Accuse no man falsely for lucre of gold.
Now fie upon falsehood, and forgerie frail,
For great is the truth, and it will prevail.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for T. P.


