A TREATISE OF THE SABBATH DAY. CONTAINING, A DEFENSE OF THE Orthodoxall
DOCTRINE of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, against Sabbatarian-Novelty.

By Dr. FR. WHITE, L. Bishop of ELY.

Ier. 6.16. Thus says the LORD, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein. Tertul. Constat omnem
doctrinam, quae cum ecclesiis matricibus and originalibus conspirat, veritati
deputandam: id sine dubio tenentem, quod ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a
Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit. The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BADGER. 1635.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM, By the Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, his Grace, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan; one of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
Most Reverend Father.
OUR blessed Lord and Master, in one of His Evangelicall Parables, compares the
Militant Church, unto a field, in which the Hus-band-man sowed good seed, but
while men slept, Dormientibus multis in doctrinae simplicitate Tert. c. Praxeam
cap. 1.
, the enemy came and sowed tares, Avenarum sterilis foeni adulterium Tert. c.
Haer. cae. 31.
. Also, He resembles the same unto a Net, which being cast into the Sea,
gathers fishes, some good, and some bad. The Apostle likewise resembles the
same; to a great House, wherein are Vessels of Honor, and Vessels of
dishonor. And the godly Fathers compare it, to Noah's Ark, in which were
contained Beasts, clean and unclean, of each quality some; wherein also was
an impious Ham, as well as a pious and dutiful Sem.

Now the condition of the Church Militant being such: it cannot be otherwise,
but that in all ages there shall be found among those which profess Christ,
not only such as are virtuous and sound in faith: but also men of corrupt
minds, and reprobate concerning the faith: venomous Serpents, noisome tares,
pestilent weeds, and unclean beasts.

Our Savior's own prediction was: There shall arise false Prophets: and His
admonition, beware of false Prophets: and His description, which come to you in
Sheep clothing, but inwardly, they are ravening Wolves: Men, carrying a
semblance, and having an outside of verity and holiness: but inwardly,
corrupt, deceitful, and ravenous: working under hand, to infect and impoyson
the flock of CHRIST Tert. c. Haeres. c. 4. Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium,
nisi nominis Christiani extrinsecus superficies? Qui Lupi rapaces, nisi sensus
and spiritus subdoli, ad infestandu^ gregem Christi intrinsecus delitescentes?
. Saint Paul, a Master Builder of God's house, foretells: Oportet haereses esse,
there must be heresies among you: ut fides habendo tentationem, habeat and
probationem Ibidem capite 1. Cypr. d. unit. Eccl. Fieri haec Dominus permittit
and patitur, ut manente proprio libertatis arbitrio, dum corda and mentes
nostras veritatis discrimen examinat, probatorum fides manifesta luce clarescat.
, that they which are approved, may be made manifest. And in his exhortation
to the Bishops of Ephesus: After my departure grievous Wolves shall enter in
among you, not sparing the flock: Also of your own selves shall men arise
speaking perverse things, and shall draw disciples after them.

Now these prophetical predictions have been fulfilled in all Ages, and in
all states of the Militant Church. For in the Apostles own days, sundry
Heretics, and Schismatickes rose up, Phigellus, Hermogenes, Philetus,
Himinaeus, Alexander, the Nicholaitans, etc. But then after the blessed company
of the holy Apostles, by several ways of death, had finished their course
Egesip. ap. Eusebius. li. 3. c. 26. (...), etc.
, the false and deceitful conspiracy of impious error, made entrance, Fraud
and astutia illorum qui doctrinam a veritate alienam disseminare laborarunt: by
the fraud and malicious craft of those men, who labored to sow a seed of
doctrine, disagreeing with truth.

And although by the power of Divine providence, the evil of Heresy and
Schism, was converted in the end, to the benefit and good of the true Church:
(for God, who is only good, would not permit evil to happen, but because He
being also omnipotent, is able to turn it to good Aug. Enchir. c. 100. Qui
bonus, non sineret mala fieri, nisi omnipotens etia^ de malo facere posset been.
; and Divine verity when it is discussed by the subtle opposition, and cavil
of heretical fraud, is with more diligence searched into, better understood,
and more zealously defended Aug. de Civ. Dei, li. 16 cap. 2. Multa ad fidem
Catholicam pertinentia, dum haereticorum callida inquietudine agitantur, ut
adversus eos defendi possint, and considerantur diligentius and intelliguntur
clarius, and instantius praedica^tur, and ab Adversario mota quaestio, disce^di
existit occasio.
:) Yet for the time present, the same proved a grievous scandal, and in the
afflictive times of persecution, it increased the misery of God's people.

The Gentile Infidels insulted over Christians, because of divisions, which by
the fraud of Heretics, were raised among them Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. cap.
8. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. Chrysostom. in Act. Ap. hom. 33. and in cap. 1. Ep.
ad Galat. Venit Gentilis and dicit, vellem fieri Christianus, sed nescio cui
adhaeream: multae enim sunt inter vos pugnae, seditiones, and tumultus. Nescio
quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam, singuli enim dicu^t, ego veru^ dico. Hanc ob
causa^ deridiculo facti sumus and Gentibus and Iudaeis dum Ecclesia in mill
parts scinditur.
: they scorned and derided their religion, imputing the base opinions, and
actions of Heretics, to the sound part of the Church in general Baron. Anal.
tom. 2. An. 143. n 4. Qui Christianis infensi erant Gentiles, etc. quaecunque
erant Gnosticorum portenta, vel aliorum haereticorum turpitudines, omnia
Christianis ascribebant, nimirum infames illos conventus, infanticidia,
humanarum carnium esum, promiscuos concubitus, etc. Just. Mar. Apol. 2. (...),
etc. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. ca. 7. Tertul. Apol. ca. 7. Athenag. Apolog.
trium flagitiorum infamis rumor de nobis spargitur: impietas quae Deos tollat,
epulae Thyesteae, concubitus incesti. Minutius Foelix^ in Octavio page 3. and 8.
: And alleged this as a prime reason, wherefore they could not believe them,
because they were divided into lo many factions, and for that their religion
was a confused fardell, and rifferaffe, of various and prodigious opinions.

Now that which happened anciently, is fulfilled likewise in our days, both
concerning the entrance and existence of Schisms and Heresies, And likewise
the scandal arising from thence.

Therefore, if Schism and Heresies have risen up in our days, it can be no
wonder; For the Prophesies of CHRIST and His Apostles concern our times, as
well, (if not more,) than those which are past: and all the causes of Schism
and Heresy are now extant, which were in former ages. For the enemy that
sows tares, is neither less vigilant, nor less envious, than in old time:
And on man's part, blind zeal, vainglory, curiosity, self-love, desire of
change and novelty, overweening of men's own wit and learning, envying of
others which excel in learning or authority, offense for want of preferment,
dislike of that which is present, etc. These venomous roots and seeds of
Schism and Heresy, are not wanting in these perilous times: And the corrupt
soil of man's heart, is no less fertile, to nourish and bring them forth, than
in the days of old.

But from this which is delivered, I shall entreat your Grace, and all other
impartial and intelligent Readers to consider the uncharitable construction of
Romish Adversaries, who from the Rising up of some schismatic spirits
amongst us, conclude: That the maine body of our Church is schismatic. For
was the whole Church of Corinth reprobate and schismatic Bosius de. sign.
Ecclesiae. lib. 3. c. 5. Fitz. Simon. Britannomachia. p. 8. Rescius
ministromachia. Staphil. d. Concord. Discipul. Lutheri. Gualter. Tabula.
Chronograph. seculo. 17. page 823. Sciopp. Ep. d. Antichr. p. 21. and. p. 139.
and p. 202. Cochelet. Caemiter. Calv. p. 625.
, because some branches or members thereof, were such? Or was it heretical,
because within it, some denied the Article of the Resurrection? For if this had
been so, Saint Paul could not have saluted that Church, with such an
honorable inscription: Unto the Church of GOD which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in CHRIST JESUS, etc, A field cease not to be a good
corn field, because some noisome weeds, and tares spring up among the wheat:
And a good tree has some degenerous branches, which deserve to be pruned and
lopped off.

Our National Church of England is A Vineyard of the LORD of Hosts: A sound
body compacted, united, and knit together, in an uniforme profession of one and
the same orthodoxall verity, which was once given to the Saints, in the holy
Apostles days: And which in all substantials, was maintained by the holy
Primitive Fathers: Tertul. d. Praescr. c. 38. Antiquum nihil aliter fuit quam
sumus.
Our public form of Divine Service and worship is in every part thereof
religious and holy, (maugre the cavils of envious spirits, who have depraved
it:) The Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers of our Church are Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, such officers as have administered sacred things, in the
Christian Church, yea, in all Christian Churches, for fifteen hundred years,
ever since the holy Apostles days: and the divine benediction, providence, and
protection of our great God and Savior, has preserved, comforted and honored
this Church and State, more then a man could have wished or expected, ever
since our reformation: and that which S. Augustine delivered long since of
Constantine the Emperor, has been fulfilled in our Kings and Princes;
Constantinum Imperatorem non supplicantem daemonibus, sed ipsum verum Deum
colentem, tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta optare nullus auderet Aug.
de civ. Dei l. 5. c. 25.
. The Lord of Heaven replenished Constantine the Emperor, who duly served him
and not Devils, with such abundance of temporal benefits, as a man durst not
have presumed to wish or expect.

Now this which is hitherto delivered, is abundantly sufficient to justify our
Mother Church of England, against the unjust reproach and censure of any
Adversaries, who shall traduce the same of being schismatic; for our
Saviors own prediction is; Necesse est ut scandala veniant, it must needs
be that offenses do come: but when among us any offenses happen, Sander. d.
visib. Monarch. Tale est militantis Ecclesiae verriculum, quod quia tam malos
quam bonos pisces comprehendit, interdum scinditur, and dirumpitur.
they are reproved, confuted, and condemned, according to the direction of holy
Scripture, and the form and custom of Primitive times.

It is not within compass of humane power, either wholly to prevent, or in an
instant to restrain, the malice of Satan, and his schismatic instruments,
from vexing, renting, and disquieting the Church; and therefore if our
adversaries were guided with the spirit of charity (as they that will be judges
of other men's actions ought to be) they would forbear to censure or condemn
us. For Charity envieth not, it thinks no evil, it rejoices in truth, 1
Cor. 13.5, 6.

Having delivered thus much in just defense of our Mother Church, against the
uncharitable calumniation of Romish adversaries, I hold it meet in the next
place to offer unto your Graces consideration, a view of the deportment of
factious and schismatic spirits, who have been the authors and fomenters of
the scandal, from whence our adversaries before mentioned, have taken occasion
to traduce our Church and religion.

There started up in Queen Elizabeth's reign, a new Athanas. Quod non a
Patribus profectum est, sed nuper inventum, quid de eo aliud existimari debeat,
quam illud ipsum, cujus Paulus mentionem fecit, In novissimis, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Presbyterian-sect, which tendered a form of Discipline to the Queen, and to
the State. And concerning this platform of their Ecclesiastical Discipline,
they affirmed these things following:

First, that the only Officers Travers. d. Discip. Eccl. page 142. (horum)
Ecclesiasticorum magistratuum justae authoritati obtemperandum.
(Magistrates they term them) who are to exercise this discipline, are
Pastors, Doctors, and (Vestrie) Elders P. 123. Est Ecclesiasticus Senatus
coetus Presbyterorum, etc. Presbyteroru^ nomen nusquam Diaconis in Scriptura
tribuitur, sed Pastoribus, Doctoribus, and qui proprio nomine Presbyteri
appellantur.
. Secondly, this form of disciplinarian Regiment, is the Scepter of Christ's
Kingdom: The Standard of Christ: The Soul of the mystical body of Christ
Sions Plea, page 5. If the Hierarchy be not removed, and the Scepter of
Christ's government, namely, Discipline advanced, etc. p. 110. It is the
Scepter of Christ swaying his own house according to his hearts desire; the
soul, etc. The chief commander in the Camp Royal, etc.
: and a proper Character of the true Church. Thirdly, as the old Canonists say
of the Papacy, GOD had not been discreet, if he had not made a Pope Extra d.
Major. and obed. glossa. Non videretur Dominus fuisse discretus nisi unicum
talem post se vicarium reliquisset.
; so likewise, say the Presbyterians, CHRIST had not proved Himself a Prophet
like unto Moses in all things Trav. d. Discip. Eccl. p. 7. Quomodo Mosi fimilem
fuisse dicemus, si tam necessariam doctrinam de Ecclesiae gubernatione, aut
omnino praetermiserit, aut non aeque perspicue and perfect explicarit? Illam
aut a Christo traditam fateri necesse est, aut eum non solum Prophetico, sed
etiam Regio munere spoliare.
, nor yet an absolute King, had he not ordained this disciplinarian Senate in
his Church. Fourthly, these divine Magistrates and Senators, must exercise
sovereign authority, over all people; and especially, over Kings, Princes, and
Monarchs Id. page 142. 143. Huic disciplinae omnes orbis Principes, and
Monarchas fasces suos submittere and parere necesse est.
: Fifthly, all other forms of discipline and Church government, are unlawful,
and Antichristian, because they are not commanded and appointed by God's Word.
Sixthly, the King and temporal State, have no authority, or command in matters
Ecclesiastical Id. page 191. The Church has her laws from the Scriptures,
neither may any King make laws in the house of Gods for if they might, the
Scripture should be imperfect.
: Sions Plea. page 285 If any object the Magistrates interposed authority, it
is quickly answered, quod ejus potestas, etc. that his power is not to weaken
any ordinance of God, but for guarding and making good all Gods ordinances with
the sword, etc.
(no more than they have to administer the Sacraments) but their only service
is, to be the executioners of such decrees, as these Presbyterian Senators
shall affirm to be the Laws of Christ. Seventhly, the present form of
Ecclesiastical government, by Bishops and their Officers is Antichristian
Sions Plea. page 38. They derive their authority from the Pope p. 46. Their
being is Antichristian, p. 292. The sons of the monstrous Giant, the Man of
sin.
. Lastly, the Liturgy and common Service of the Church of England, and the
Rites and Ceremonies appointed therein, are popish and superstitious, for they
were composed or brought in, by Bishops, who are a limb of Antichrist: and
confirmed by the humane authority of the Prince and temporal State: whereas no
common service is lawful in the Church, but such only as is formed by their
Ecclesiastical Senate, and after their own Presbyterian Laws.

Fruits and consequents of the former dictates, are these which follow:

First, concerning the King himself: His royal Majesty according to these
Presbyterian-rules, shall have no power to command his Clergy to keep a
National Synod: he shall have no power at all,
over these Ecclesiastical Senators, to judge of any of their abuses, Id. page
331. An able Pastor (H. B.) in a general Fast in London, pleading for
reformation under Joshua's removal of the excommunicate thing, told us in
plain terms, that the main thing was, That damnable Hierarchy (of Bishops)
who made no matter of sinking Church and State, so they might swim in honors
and pleasures.
or to reform and correct them: And if His sacred Majesty shall deny obedience
and subjection to their classical Mandates, these Senators have Sovereign
Power under Christ, to deliver him to Satan, and to lay the fearful censure
of Excommunication Trav. discip. Eccl. Excommunicatio est censura Ecclesiae qua
aliquis gravioris sceleris reus, sine certi temporis praescriptione a sacris
exclusus fidelium communione privatur, etc. Huic summos Magistratus and Reges
parere, etc. Philippus and Theodosius Imperatores. Tho. Chartw. being asked
whether the King himself was subject to excommunication, answers: That
excommunication should not be exercised upon Kings, I utterly mislike.
upon him.

Secondly, concerning Bishops: whereas, in all religious Ages, and among all
people professing Christ, the Bishops of the Church were highly honored and
respected because of their Office and Order: and their Doctrine, Precepts,
Counsels, admonitions, reproves, and censures, were of great authority: These
Senators, and their Camerades, with their barking, barrating, and libelling,
have brought, not only their persons, but their venerable calling, into much
contempt and hatred, as though it were some profane and noisome evil.

Thirdly, they have with bitter clamors Amb. Epist. 42. Venenum in dentibus
habent. Optat. Milevit. c. Parmen. l. 2. In cord livoris acueru^t novaculas
linguae.
, defaced the public service of our Church (being a form of divine worship,
of so good quality, as that since the holy Apostles days, the Christian world
never enjoyed any more reverend and religious) and by this means, the solemn
worship of God and Christ, are neglected in many congregations: and instead
thereof, an indigested form and conception of extemporall prayer is brought in.

Now I humbly desire your Grace, and all benevolent and indifferent Readers, to
consider the ungracious dealing of these men.

First of all, the general ground of their proceedings by which they justify
themselves, and their own precepts, and condemn others, is this which
follows: No officer must govern or Minister in the Church: neither any form
of divine worship, or Ceremonies be used, but only such as are commanded in
the Word. It will be overlong to relate in what manner they prove this;
whether by the second Commandment Sions Plea. p. 87. In the 2d. Commandment
is forbidden all will worship, all rites and ceremonies of man's devising in
God's worship: and further, every calling of Ministers and Elders that is not
appointed and approved of God. p. 278. give the second Commandment the due
extent: this Iron if it be well plied, will bow down the back of the
Prelacie, and break the iron sinew of all superstitious worship.
: or by Ier. 7.31. or by Exodus 25.40. Look that thou make them after their
pattern which was showed thee in the Mount: or by Omnis Planta, every plant
which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up, Matthew. 15.13.
But in conclusion they resolve us not, what they understand by the commandment
of the Word: Whether a literal and formal Commandment: or a Commandment
inferred by any necessary inference: or an example and president, which has
the force of a Law. Now we are certain that their own Presbyterian platform,
is warranted by no Commandment in any of these three senses. For we read of
no literal or formal Commandment for their Vestery Elders: Neither can they
prove the ordination of this new generation, by any necessary inference of holy
Scripture: and as for example of Scripture, we find none having the force of a
law. The plain truth is, we find no example at all: For the Elders mentioned,
1 Timothy 5.17. were Priests in holy Orders, as appears plainly, by the eighteen
and ninteen verses of that Chapter: But if some example had been extant,
Unless they can demonstratively prove, that such example has the force of a
perpetual law, This will conclude no more for the perpetual continuance of
Vestry Elders: Then the holy Apostles observing the legal Sabbath; Or their
abstinence from blood and strangled: Or their unction of the sick with oil,
will conclude for extreme unction: or for the keeping holy the seventh-day
Sabbath: or for perpetual abstinence from blood or strangled.

These imperative men mightily forget their own principle: For they create new
Senators, Vestry-Elders, without any commandment of the Word: They command
whatsoever their own working-heads affect, without commandment of the Word, to
wit, Omni-parity of Churchmen: Fathers to present their children in their own
persons, at Baptism: Christians to dream religious dreams on Sunday nights:
Parents to give significant names to their children, to wit: The Lord is near:
More trial: Reformation: More fruit: More joy: Sufficient: Deliverance: Dust,
etc. But their negative precepts are sance number: no Private Baptism: no
Kneeling at the Communion: Bowing at the Name of JESUS: Communicating with a
reading Minister: Keeping Christmasse-day, and other Holy Days: reading
Homilies: Reading Apocrypha: Ringing more Bells than one upon a Sunday, or
fetching a pint of wine out of ones own house: Standing up at the Creed:
Looking toward the Chancell in Common Prayer: Often rehersing the
Lord's-Prayer: Reading the Letany, and Epistles and Gospels, etc.

But these sanctified Senators will say: That the second Commandment ( which
they have made, (...) Cotholicon, to prohibit what their will disliketh,)
condemns all things before rehearsed. But it is not sufficient to say: They
must demonstratively prove out of the Word, their assertions.

Now the second Commandment prohibited none of the former actions, Verbatim,
or in express terms: Nor yet by necessary illation; For the sense of the
Commandment is: Thou shall worship no Idol, etc. Lev. 26.1. But the Son of
GOD, and His blessed Name are no Idols: The Son of God, in the blessed
Eucharist, giving us His body and blood, is no Idol. Therefore religious
adoration of Christ, in the holy Eucharist, and at the rehearsing the Name of
Jesus, is no superstitious act, prohibited in the second Commandment. But the
Author of Sions Plea, will have Court Bishops, Cathedral Churches, Parish
Clerks, and Churchwardens, etc. condemned by the second Commandment. And why
not say we, Vestry Elders? For these grave Senators are no where commanded in
GOD'S Word, either formally or virtually: And therefore, In malam crucem
abeant: Let them be packing to the Crutched-Friers.

Concerning Bishops, and their authority, these men affirm, that the same is
not ordained in the Word, But condemned by Christ, etc. But our answer is, that
the holy Apostles themselves ordained Bishops in all eminent Christian
Churches, to wit, Timothy at Ephesus: Titus in Creta: Evodius at Antioch:
Polycarp at Smyrna, etc. Now the Apostles act was according to the Word, for
they were men inspired by the Holy Ghost. And the Apostles ordination is proved
by witnesses, against whose testimony none can except Wesenbach. in Pandect.
li. 22. tit. 5. de qualitate Testium. 2 Cor. 13.1.
, that consider impartially the infallible properties of true and lawful
witnesses. For they are many in number, A cloud of witnesses: All the
orthodoxall Fathers since the Apostles age: Some of them lived in the Apostles
times, and were their auditors Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Eusebius. Chronic. Anno
Christi. 104.
: and some of them succeeded those which were ordained Bishops by the Apostles:
They were faithful witnesses, even unto death Athanas. d. Incarnat. Verb. page
59. and Ep. ad Dracont. p. 738. Quot ab Idolis converterunt? quot a furiosa and
daemoniaca co^suetudine suis admonitionibus compescuerunt? quot aduxerunt
Christo servos?
: They consent and accord in their testimony: And they are such, to whose
testimony the Christian world gives credit, for the waightiest matters in
religion: to wit, concerning the number and integrity of the Books of
Canonical Scripture: The holy Apostles Creed: and next unto the holy
Scriptures concerning The eternal Deity of our blessed Savior, etc.

1 The subscriptions of two of Saint Paul's Epistles testify 2 Timothy 4. The
subscrip. The second Epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians. Titus 3. It was written to Titus ordained the first
Bishop of the Church of the Cretians.
, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus: and Titus of Creta. And the ancient
History of the Church testifies the same Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. Timotheus
sane primus Ephesianae paroeciae, Sicut and Titus Cretensium Ecclesiarum
Episcopatum sortitus scribitur.
. Ignatius the Martyr, (who lived at the least thirty years in Saint John the
Evangelists days Theodoret. Dial. 1. (...). Ignatius. Eusebius. in Chron. An.
Dom. 104. Ignat. ad Antioch. Mementote Evodii beatissimi Pastoris vestri, qui
primus vobis ab Apostolis ordinatus est Antistes. Tertul. c. Haer. ca. 32.
Smyrneo. rum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Ioanne conlocatum Episcopum. Iren.
lib. 3. c. 3. Polycarpus non solum ab Apostolis edoctus and conversatus cum
multis ex iis, qui Dominum nostrum viderunt, Sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in
ea quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia, constitutus Episcopus: and quem nos vidimus in
prima nostra aetate, etc. Ib. Ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens. Ib.
Habemus eos qui ab Apostolis ordinati sunt Episcopi. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. ca.
30. Hieron. Catalog. in Polycarpo. Cyp. Epist. 65.
:) Tertullian, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, etc. testify the like concerning Evodius,
Polycarpus, Linus, Papias, Clemens, etc. And that Bishops ordained by the
Apostles, were not titular and nominall only, but such as had power of
jurisdiction, and power of ordination, is witnessed by Ignatius, Tertullian,
Cyprian Ignat. ad Trall. Quid aliud est Episcopus quam is qui omni principatu
and potestate superior est? Id. ad Magnes: Decet vos (Presbyteros and Diaconos)
obedire Episcopo, and in nullo illi refragari (...). Id. ad Smyrnens. page 68.
ad Ephesians. page 217: 219. Cypr. Epist. 27. Inde per temporum and successionum
vices, Episcoporu^ ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit: ut Ecclesia super
Episcopos co^stituatur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos
gubernetur.
, and by the whole Catholic Church: And Saint Hierom himself Hier. ad
Nepotian. Esto subjectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suscipe.
Tertul. de Bapt. cap. 17.
, whose testimony some men have labored to draw another away, confirms the
same.

2 This form of Ecclesiastical government is agreeable with the presidents of
holy Scripture, both in the time of the old Testament: and with the Apostles
form of government, who in their own persons exercised authority over all
other Pastors, and at their decease appointed Bishops, to be principal Rulers,
in all eminent Christian Churches Cyprian. Ep. 42. n. 4. Hier. Com. in Titum c.
1. Idem c. Vigilantium. Aug. in Psalm. 44. Pro patribus tuis nati sunt filii,
etc. Patres missi sunt Apostoli, pro Apostolis nati sunt filii, id est,
constituti sunt Episcopi.
.

Now whereas tne adversaries of the Prelacy contend, that Episcopal
gubernation is prohibited by CHRIST, Matthew. 20. Mark 10. Luke 22. They have no
mind to consider, that the holy Apostles themselves, to whom our Savior's
words were personally directed, did all their own days exercise jurisdiction
over all other Ecclesiastical persons: And therefore their great Lord and
Master prohibited not superiority and government over Priests and Deacons, but
such form of government as was merely secular, and not conformable or
subordinate to the rules of the Evangelicall Law.

In the last place, after these Senators have in such manner (as your Grace
has heard) battered Episcopal Government, with their paper-shot, Then they
fall pell mell upon the Service book Sions Plea. p. 29. What gross, absurd,
blasphemous untruthes, these books are stuffed withal, especially the Service
Book, page 178. Our religious worship of God is overlayd with the rubbish of
idolatry, and superstition, p. 314. Egyptian Garlic.
.

One of this Novell generation, in a Tractate, entitled, A survay of the Book
of Common Prayer, makes quaeres, nd has no less than two hundred double
quarrels, against our Church service, and the Ceremonies thereof. T. C. in his
days, and his disciples named in my margin Abridgement. p. 89. Admon. 1. p.
9. Admonit. 2. ad p. 41. Fall of Babell, p. 29. Altar Damas. p. 612. Sions
Plea, p. 29. 316, 317.
, are confederate in the same gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Their prime objections are. The form of the Common Service, is not commanded
in the Word Elton on the Colos. page 308. John D. upon the second Commandment,
page 17. Sions Plea, page 107. Whatsoever is besides the Word, is against the
Word, whatsoever worship is not of God's own prescription, is condemned under
the name of Idolatry.
, And some materials thereof, are taken out of the Romists Breviarie, Portuis
and Masse-booke Id. p. 29. The Service Book which they cannot deny to be raked
out of three popish Chanells, the Breviary, Rituall and Mass Book.
.

Touching the first, they declare not, whether their meaning is, That every
lawful form of Divine Service, must be taken verbatim out of the Scripture:
Or whether it be not sufficient, to have the same conformable to the rules of
holy Scripture. If they say the first, propriasua vineta caedunt Nullus sanae
mentis, quae domi recondita habet, traducit ac reprehendit, sed suis quisque
favet.
, they cut the throat of their own praying, singing, preaching, and saying,
for the same are not word for word in holy Scripture: but if they require only
the latter, we are able to maintain against all Presbyterian backbiters, that
our English Common Service, and our Ceremonies, are conformable to the rules of
holy Scripture.

And their second objection, borrowed from the heretics the Donatists, makes an
impetuous sound and impression in popular auditories, but it is vain and of no
force with the judicious. Cypr. Ep. 73. Quale est, ut qui^ hoc Novatianus
facere audet, nos putemus non esse faciendum? Aug. d. Bap. c. Don. l. 3. cap.
11. Neque enim quicquid Hae retici perverse fuerint imitati, faciendum a
Catholicis non est, quia illi similiter faciunt.
For if the materials received out of the Roman Missall, and Portuis, are in
their proper quality true and holy, then the Lord himself is the prime Author
of them: and our Church has warrant, from the example of God and Christ of
using them.

We may not dislike the Magnificat, or Te Deum laudamus, or the Lords Prayer,
or the Apostles Creed: the Epistles and Gospels: Baptizing of Infants: bread
and Wine in holy Eucharist: Imposition of hands in ordination: Reverent and
decent habit, gesture, and formality in divine worship; nor any other action,
in quality good, or adiapharous, convenient and subservient to Gods outward
worship: We ought not (I say) abhor or reject such things, because the Roman
Church has used them: for the Christian Church it self received the books of
the Old Tastament from the Synagogues of the Jews Aug. in Ps. 41 and in Ps.
56. Nobis serviunt Iudaei tanquam capsarii nostri: studentibus nobis codices
portant. Codicem portat Iudaeus, unde credat Christianus: Librarii nostri fact^
sunt.
: and S. Augustine Aug. d. Bapt. c. Don. li. 6. c. 44. Ipsi Gentiles si quid
divinum and rectum, in doctrinis suis habuerunt, non improbarunt sancti nostri.
says, If the Gentiles had any thing good in doctrine (or manners) holy
Christians did not reject or distaste the same. Our Lord and Savior made water
which had been superstitiously abused by the Pharisees in their Lotions,
Matthew. 15.2. Mark. 7.3. the material element of Baptism: and Bread and Wine
profaned by Gentiles in their idol service Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. (...), etc.
, the material Elements of the Holy Eucharist. In Joshua, the silver and gold
of Jericho, was by God's commandment put into his own treasury, Chap. 6.24.
The Censers of rebellious Corah, etc. were by Gods mandate, made Plates, for
the covering of the holy Altar, Number. 16.38. De luco alienorum Deorum (says
Augustine Aug. Epist. 154. ad Publicolam.
) wood growing in Idol Groves, by Gods appointment was made fuel for
sacrifice: and when things profaned and abused, are converted to holy use: hoc
de illis fit quod de hominibus, cum de sacrilegis and impiis, in veram
religionem mutantur: the same is done to them, which is done to men, when they
from being profane and sacrilegious, are converted, and made religious.

The Bishops therefore of the Church of England did no ways offend, by
receiving from the Roman Church into our divine service, such materials,
circumstances or ceremonies, as were religious and good.

But now, whereas these Zelots complain of us, for partaking with the Roman
Church, in things lawful and good: they themselves comply with the same in
Articles and Actions, which are of no good quality.

For example.

First, as the Romists make their Church, the only Spouse of Christ, and their
Doctrine only Orthodoxall verity: So likewise the Presbyterians esteem
themselves, and their pure Sect, the only Kingdom of Christ: they style none
Brethren, but their own sectarians: all their doctrinals are the pure Word of
CHRIST: they style their extemporall preaching, per excellentiam, The Word: and
as learned Papists make their Churches preaching, the sole instrument of
working grace and saving faith Bosius d. sig. Ec. l. 2. Greg. d. val. Analys.
fid. Cath. li. 8. Stapleton. Relect Controv. 5. quaest 3. ar. 4. Id. Princip.
doct. l. 8. ca. 18.
: So likewise do these men concerning their own ecclesiastical sermonizing:
and whatsoever quality or effect, sacred Scripture ascribes to Apostolical
preaching, or to the word of divine inspiration, Romans 1.16. and Chap. 10.17.
Heb. 4.12. these presumptuous Senators ascribe the same, to their own private
doctrine and form of preaching.

2 These Presbyterian Dictators, without any manifest and demonstrative proof,
make their owns form of discipline the scepter of Christ's kingdom, the
standard of Christ, the soul of the mystical body of Christ, and
consequently, a proper Character of the true Church. Now what do Romists more
concerning their ecclesiastical policy?

3 The Romists teach, that the material sword of Kings and Soldiers is to be
exercised ad nutum and patientiam Sacerdotis Cap. unam sanctam. d. major. and
obed. glossa.
: according to the beck and mercy of the High Priest: so likewise the
Presbyterian Senators, challenge power to command Princes, to execute their
decrees, and to say to the King and Temporal State, in our Saviors name, Luke
19.27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, (by
the Scepter of my Kingdom, Presbyterian discipline) bring hither and slay them
before me Sions Plea. p. 196 201. As the Minister must do his part with the
spiritual sword: so the Magistrate must do his part, in removing this evil
with the sword of Justice.
.

4 Some Zelots of this fraternity, are so far transported, with furious
indignation against the opposites of their Newborn Republike, as that
(neglecting what they have objected against the Prelates) themselves comply
with the most impudent and merciless Romists, in their cursed speaking and
writing, and likewise in their cruelty.

Their two general maxims are: 1. That all things in Religion and manners,
ought to be regulated by the Commandment of holy Scripture. 2. It is
altogether unlawful for the English Church, to comply with the Roman in the
use of Ceremonies, forms of Service, or any other indifferent things: and by
force of these two rules they condemn Episcopal authority; the common
Service; and all Rites, Ceremonies, and Gestures in Religious worship, which
have been used by Pontificians.

But now presently I shall make it appear, that these men themselves in their
moral practice transgress both these rules.

1 Holy Scripture commands: Be you merciful, as your heavenly Father is
merciful. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, that you may be the children of your Father in heaven. Be ye
followers of God as dear children, and walk in love, as Christ loved us.
Railing and cursed speaking is a character of infidels. Their throat is an open
sepulcher, the poison of Aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness: Their feet are swift to shed blood. These filthy
dreamers despise dominion, speak evil of dignities. These speak evil of
those things they know not. Michael the Archangell contending with the Devil,
etc. durst not bring against him railing accusation.

Now the Presbyterians, who make the Commandments of holy Scripture the only
rule of all actions, fulfill the former precepts in manner following: to wit,
the clean contrary way.

I will not presume to trouble Your Grace, or my Readers, with raking into the
old kennels of Thomas Cartwright, Vdall, Penry, Martin Senior, Martin Junior,
More work for Cooper, etc. But I shall humbly entreat your patience, to give
me leave to relate unto you some few passages out of a modern Presbyterian
tractate, entitled, Sions Plea against the Prelacy.

This remarkable author, follows the Rule of the word in manner following:

First he belcheth out all the venomous, and opprobrious language, which the
bottomless pit could afford him against English Prelates, and against all that
favor their order. Then he persuades Ministers and Magistrates, to set
themselves against their superstitious worship (the Service book) and to
pursue these Prelates, with an Holy hatred Sions Plea. The second mean of
removal of this great evil, is: for Ministers and Magistrates, to set
themselves against this superstitious worship, and Antichristian government:
teaching and exhorting others to do the same: They must labor, and cause
others labor, for an holy hatred of the Prelates and their burdens.
: that is, to dash the brains of that Babylonish Prelacy against the stones:
and according to Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which would not that J
should reign over them (by my Vestry-Senators) bring hither, and slay them
before me Sions Plea. p. 196
. And again, Strike that Hazael in the fifth rib; yea, if Father and Mother
stand in the way, away with them Idem p. 240.
. Strike this Basilik vein, for nothing but this will cure the plurisie of our
State.

2 This Stibiarian presses audaciously upon the Royal Throne: and after some
Scarrification Id. page 41, 79. 208. 213. 215, 224, 248, 270 The good
harmless King being captivated etc. We must not loose you and the Kingdom, by
prefering your fancy or groundles affection, before sound (Presbyterian)
reason. You should complain to the heart that the head is much distempered.
The Lion must be cured (by the Presbyterian Senate) of the Kings Evil. We
read of Vzziah his proud attempt, etc. the valiant men of the Lord withstood
him, showing from the Law, etc.
, tendereth a bitter pill of sacrilege and cruelty: but when the same was
rejected because it was violent, then he presents his Antimonian potion, to
the States of the Kingdom: now these likewise understanding that he was an
Empiricke, give him repulse. Upon which occasion, he changes his profession,
and turns false-prophet: 1. He presageth happiness to as many as should
comply with him in his fury. 2. He denounces many woes to open adversaries. 3.
He declaimeth against lukewarm Laodiceans, who being well affected toward
the holy cause (of sacrilege) are not active, and such as the Prophet Jeremy
requires; men in the streets.

3 This Presbyterian man of War, congratulates a certain notorious murder,
committed by a Zelote of his own devotion; he makes this damned act an
heroical virtue: and blasphemeth God Almighty, making him the author of this
diabolical Asassination D. Buck. page 160. 162, 166, 176. Prosp ad ob. Vinc.
10. Detestando and abominanda est opinio, quae Deum cujusqua^ malae actionis
credit authorem: Adulteria matronarum, and corruptelas virginum no^ instituere
novit sa^cta divinitas, sed damnare: Nec disponere, sed punire. Gandent.
Brixian. in Exodus tr. 3. Ingentis sacrilegii est, vel cogitare, quod Dens, qui
non solum bonus and justus, sed ipsa bonitas and justitia est, vei jubeat vel
cugat aliquid fieri, quod factum damnet.
.

He exhorts the Nobles of the Land to proceed in this bloody execution,
saying: GOD has chalked out this way unto you: GOD having offered Himself to
guide you by the hand, in giving this first blow, will you not follow home? The
sprinkling of the blood of the Wolf, if we can follow the LORD in it, may
prove a means to save, etc. The counsel of Hushai to Absalom sorteth well
with this business, that all Israel should be gathered from Dan to Beersheba,
as the sand of the Sea in number: who may with the ropes of their prayers,
joined to the power of your hands, draw the City of their Babel into the River
of destruction, until there be not one small stone found.

Lastly, These Novell Senators, deliver some positions concerning the holy
Scripture in such a large, and confused manner: as that by this means they
become the occasion of pestiferous schisms and heresies.

For whereas the Article, concerning the perfection and perspicuity of sacred
Scripture, ought to be delivered with distinction and limitation: these novell
teachers, by their confused and presumptuous tendrye, make their own opinative
sense, and application of Scripture, the common rule and model, of
theological questions, and moral actions.

But there is a vast difference, between the holy Scripture in it self, and
the singular phansies and expositions obtruded upon it Hilar. d. Trin. Dictorum
intelligentiam, non ex ipsis dictis expectant, sed imponu^t: and hoc cogunt
dictis contineri, quod ipsimet apud se praejudicatis opinionibus persuaserunt
esse intelligendum.
, by private spirits. For the first is the Word of Truth, and Evangelium
Domini, the LORD'S holy Gospel: but the other at the best, is Evangelium
hominis, an humane Gospel, but many times, and which is worse, est evangelium
diaboli Hieron. in 1. cap. ep. ad Gal. Interpretatione perversa ex Evangelio
Domini fit Eva^gelium hominis, vel quod pejus est, Diaboli.
.

The life and soul of holy Scripture; is the true sense and exposition
thereof: non in verbis Scripturarum est Evangelium, sed in sensu: non in
superficie, sed medulla: non in folijs, sed in radice rationis (says Saint
Hierome Hieron. c. Luciferian. and in ep. ad Gal.
.) The verity of the Gospel is in the sense, and not in the bare letter: in
the inward marrow, and not in the outside: in the root of reason, and not in
the outward blade or leafes, Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum
and corruptus stilus (says Tertul. Tertul. d. praescr. ca. 17.38.40. Clem. To.
ep. 5. apud Gratian. d. 37. c. Relatum. Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 39. August. d.
Genes. ad lit, lib. 1. cap. 18. and in Ps. 48. c. 1. Hieron. c. Lucif. in fine
Dialogi. Nec sibi blandiantur, si de Scripturarum capitulis videntur sibi
affirmare quod dicitur: cum and Diabolus aliqua de Scripturis sit loquutus: and
Scripturae non in legendo consistunt, sed in intelligendo.
) an adulterous sense crosses the verity of Scripture, no less, than the
corrupting of the Text.

The common rule of Faith and Obedience, must be constant, immutable, and
uniforme: but private opinions, expositions, and applications of Scripture, are
various, mutable, and contradictory: therefore the same can no more be a just
rule, and model of lawful actions, then contrary winds, gusts, and streams,
of safe and regular navigation.

The Article therefore of our Church concerning the perfection of holy
Scripture must be expounded in manner following, to wit: Sacred Scripture
truly expounded, and rightly applied, is a complete and sufficient rule, to
direct our judgment and belief, concerning all verity merely supernatural.

Also it delivers maxims, rules, canons, and it contains many presidents
and examples, for the better ordering and perfecting of civil, moral, and
Ecclesiastical duties and actions. The same likewise is so far forth
sufficient, in propounding the Articles of faith, and the precepts of good
manners, necessary to be believed and obeyed by Christians in general: that
if they shall duly observe the order and means appointed, they may rightly
attain the sense and understanding of them.

Now the means to attain the sense of holy Scripture (upon which I shall
touch for the present) are:

1 A true, right, and perspicuous translation of the Scriptures, out of their
original tongues. And this is a work of great skill: and requires much
diligence, good conscience, and many helps, of learning, art, and reading.

2 Holy Scripture has forms, phrases, and expressions of matters
supernatural, peculiar and proper to it self. Christ is called (...), The
Word, John 1.1. GOD is said to be Three, and One, 1 John 5.7. The Word was made
flesh, John 1.14. Divine predestination: By nature children of wrath:
Justification: New Birth: the Church the Body of Christ, of his flesh, and of
his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.

3 Some prime Articles of faith, are not delivered in a literal or
catechisticall form of speech, but they are collected and concluded by
argumentation, out of sentences of Scripture, and by comparing of sundry Texts,
one with another. And sometimes there is a seeming difference between one Text
of Scripture and another, Ioh. 10.30. and Ioh. 14.28. Romans 3.28. and Iam. 2.24.

Now the Presbyterians shall not find the holy Scriptures in these and many
other such like things, so perspicuous Hieron. Tom. 3. Ep. ad August. In
Scripturarum expositione quaedam vel obscurissima sunt. Aug. in Ps. 140. Sunt
in Scripturis sanctis profunda mysteria, quae ad hoc absconduntur, ne
vilescant, etc. Id. de Trin. li. 15. c. 17 Id. de mendac. ad Consent. 14. Greg.
ep. ad Leand. ca. 4. and sup. Ezech. Hom. 17. Isidor. Pelus. li. 2. ep. 5.
Fulgent. ser. d. confess. Aug. ad Volusian. ep. 3. Whitaker d. Ecclesia, page
220. Sunt quaedam Scripturae loca, de quibus nihil certi statui potest. Id.
Duplic. li. 1. c. 13. page 201. In Scriptura non omnia aperta, and palam
exposita sunt, sed abstrusa and recondita multa sunt. Parcus, in Genes. 4. pa.
699.
, as that every private person, by help of the Spirit, and by their mother
wit, may easily understand them, and rightly judge of controverted articles by
them. And these new men, undervaluing all humane learning, and rejecting, and
crying down the testimony, and tradition of the Ancient Catholic Church; have
set open a wide door to Heretics, and Schismatikes, and among the rest, to
new Photinians, Socinians, semi-Pelagians. Anomians, Anabaptists, etc. And if
any hereafter will proceed further, and question the Canonical authority of
Saint John's Revelation, or the Acts of the Apostles, etc. I do not as yet
conceive, what these Masters (having disannulled all Tradition and authority of
the ancient Catholic Church) will be able to plead against them.

The Church of England has proceeded, a right and orthodoxall way: For we have
justly rejected all counterfeit and adulterous Traditions, namely, all such as
are not truly ancient and Catholic: Nor yet subservient to the doctrine of
holy Scripture: But on the contrary, we maintain the uniforme testimony and
tradition of the Primitive Church, complying with holy Scripture, and being
subservient to true faith and godliness.

It falls out many times, that some verities, which are evident enough, to
peaceable minds, out of holy Scripture, are notwithstanding opposed by
Adversaries, as namely, Childrens Baptism: Communion in both kinds:
Church Service in a known language, etc. In such cases, when we have the
testimony, example and Tradition of the Primitive Church, confirming our
inferences from those Scriptures, which we allenge: This adds reputation to
our doctrine and practice, and very much confounds our Adversaries. Athanas.
ad Adelph. (...).


Now the Presbyterian faction proceeding a contrary way, are easily brought to
a nonplus, even when they have a good cause: But concerning their maine cause,
to wit, the external government of the Church: When (upon their grand
principle, that no ordinance must take place in the Church, but such as is
verbally, or by necessary consequence commanded in holy Scripture,) They reject
that form of government which is approved by the perpetual testimony of the
true Catholic Church: They utterly damn their own consistorian Regiment, for
the same can neither be proved by any literal Texts of holy Scripture: Nor yet
by necessary inference out of Scripture: Because all Texts and sentences, which
they make foundations of this new Fabric, do not so much as probably
conclude that which they require.

By these men's positions, and irregular proceedings, many of our people are
infected with dislike and hatred of the godly form of our Church Service,
administration of Sacraments, ordination of Ministers, and with our
Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies: and are persuaded, they are Superstitious,
and that it is unlawful, to observe them. And this conceit has quenched the
devotion of many good people, toward God's public worship: It has caused a
fraction and division in the Church and State: And brought forth a novell
spawne and fry of Donatists, Novatians, Separatists, Anabaptists, etc. Also
many are become contentious and factious in civil affairs: And the ancient
love and respect, which our English Nation was wont to bear to Sovereign
Authority, is much cooled and decreased. But one mischief besides, is
remarkable: Namely, that many people, piously affected in their general
intentions, Men and Women fearing God, loving His Word, sober, charitable, and
virtuous in their moral conversation, Are made a prey to schismatic Leaders
Minut. Foelix in Octav. Incaute creduli circumveniuntur ab iis, quos bonos
putaverunt.
: And whereas, had they exercised religion, and other virtues, in Unity and
obedience of the Church, whereof they are members, (as all religious persons in
ancient time were wont to do Hieron. c. Lucifer. ca. 7. Illo tempore nihil tam
co^veniens servo Dei videbatur, quam unitatem sequi.
) this would have been honor and comfort to themselves: And their virtues and
good life, would both have honored the Religion professed in our Nation, And
likewise have been exemplary to others: But it now falls out, That the
poison of Schism has corrupted all the former: They bring scandal and
dishonor to our religion: Their outward virtuous deeds are thought to proceed
from hypocrisy and blind zeal: and they are rather scorned and contemned,
than honored and imitated: And they themselves, in stead of receiving honor
and comfort, are fallen into disgrace, hatred, danger, and loss, and some of
them into great misery. The remedy of the former evils must be these things
which follow:

1 A true and plain discovery of the falsity and deceitfulness of
Presbyterian principles: And the Reader shall find some passages in this
ensuing Treatise, very useful and material for that purpose.

2 Divines must become studious, of pious and venerable antiquity: And in their
judgment, and their doctrine, they must not vary from the same, unless
evident and convincing reasons shall enforce them.

3 And there is one thing more, of great moment, to persuade people to live in
conformity and unity of the Church: To wit, the holy and religious conversation
of conformable men. When people shall observe conformable Ministers, diligent
and industrious in serving God, and promoting the salvation of Christian
souls, committed to their charge: When they behold in them, peaceable, sober,
and virtuous conversation: And that they are no less diligent in sowing the
seed of grace, than Heretics and Schismatikes are, in sowing tares: This will
prevail very much, to persuade them to honor the present Church, and the
discipline thereof.

Now on the contrary, no one thing has been a greater scandal, and occasion
of withdrawing many from conformity: Then the profane negligence of some
conformable Ministers: Then their losenesse of life: Their avarice and
ambition, in heaping together Benefices and promotions: And then a gross
neglect in discharging their duty, either in their own persons, or by
entertaining and rewarding able and sufficient Curates.

Your Grace in your Metropoliticall Visitation, has begun a good work, in
taking this into your religious consideration, and you have endeavored a
reformation. GOD Almighty vouchsafe to give a blessing, and good success to
your pious intention, and that by your Graces authority, this scandal before
mentioned, may be removed out of our Church.

There might also (my Reverend good Lord) be a very profitable use, of some
private form of pastoral collation with their flock, for their direction and
information in particular spiritual duties: such as was private coufession in
the ancient Church. Now the Presbyterian Censors, upon their Paralogisme taken
from abuse, have with such loud and impetuous declamations, filled the ears
and prepossessed the minds of many people, that they are exceedingly averse,
from this sovereigne, and ancient medicine of consolation, prevention, and
curing the maladies of the soul Augustan. Confess. Nos confessione^ retinemus
praecipue propter absolutionem, quae est verbum Dei, quod de singulis,
authoritate Divina, pronu^tiat potestas clavium: Quare impiu^ esset ex Ecclesia
privatam absolutionem tollore, Neque quid sit remissio peccatorum, aut potestas
clavium intelligunt, si qui privatam absolutionem aspernantur. Gerrard. loc.
com. d. Paenit. privata coram Ecclesiae ministro co^fessio, quam auricularem
vocant, quamvit non habeat expressum ac speciale mandatu^, ac proinde non sit
absolutae necessitatis, tame^ cum plurimas praestet utilitates, and disciplina
ecclesiasticae pars sit non postrema, publico Ecclesiae consensu recepta, ideo
nequaqua^ temere, vel negligenda, vel abroganda; sed pie, ac in vero Dei
timore, praesertim ab illis qui ad sacram synaxin accedunt, usurpanda. Iuel.
Def. Apol p. 2, Divis. ca. 7. page 192. Chemn. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 2. page
221. P. Mart. loc. com. class. 3. cap. 8. Sect. 28. Zanch d. oper. Bed. page
757. King James Meditat. upon the Lords prayer
.

Having now proceeded thus far, in declaring the scandal, which by the
factious deportment of Presbyterian spirits has been raised in our Church: and
likewise having vindicated our mother Church from imputation of Novelty: I
shall at the last apply my self to the subject of the Treatise following, and
deliver the occasion, by which I was induced to handle this Question of the
Sabbath.

A certain Minister of Northfolke, (where I my self of late years was
Bishop,) published a Tractate of the Sabbath: and proceeding after the rule of
Presbyterian principles, among which, this was principal: That all religious
observations and actions, and among the rest, the ordaining and keeping of
Holy Days, must have a special warrant and commandment in holy Scripture,
otherwise the same is superstitious: Concluded from thence, by necessary
inference, that the seventh day of every week, to wit, Saturday, having an
express command in the Decalogue, by a Precept simply and perpetually Moral
(as the Sabbatarians teach) and the Sunday or Lord's Day being not commanded,
either in the Law, or in the Gospel: The Saturday must be the Christians
weekly Sabbath, and the Sunday ought to be a working day.

This man was exceeding confident in his way, and defied his Puritan
adversaries, and loaded them with much disgrace and contempt. Besides, he
dedicates his Book to the Kings Majesty himself: He implores his Princely
aid, to set up his old new Sabbath: He admonishes the Reverend Bishops of the
Kingdom, and the Temporal State likewise, to restore the fourth Commandment
of the Decalogue to his ancient possession: and professes that he would rather
suffer Martyrdom, than betray such a worthy cause, so firmly supported by the
common Principles of all our new men, who have in preaching or writing treated
of the Sabbath.

But while he was in this heat marching furiously, and crying in all places
where he came, Victoria, victoria: He fell into an ambuscado, and being
intercepted, he was convented and called to an account, before Your Grace, and
the Honorable Court of High Commission.

At his appearance, Your Grace did not confute him with fire and faggot, with
halter, axe, or scourging (as a certain Hot-spurre, a lybelling disciple of
Thomas Cartwright's, traduceth the Judges of that honorable Court Martin
Mar-pres. Protest. 13. Besides whorish impude^cy, halter, axe, bands,
scourging, and railing, our Bishops have nothing to defend themselves withal.
) But according to the usual proceeding of your Grace, and of that Court, with
delinquents, which are overtaken with error, in simplicity, there was yielded
unto him, a deliberate, patient, and full hearing, together with a satisfactory
answer, to all his maine objections.

The man perceiving that the Principles which the Sabbatarian Dogmatists had
lent him, were deceitful, and that all which were present at the hearing (of
which number there were some Honorable Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
and many other persons of quality) had approved the confutation of his error:
He began to suspect that the holy brethren, who had lent him his principles,
and yet persecuted his conclusion, might perhaps be deceived in the first, as
he had been in the latter. And therefore laying aside his former confidence, he
submitted himself to a private conference, which by God's blessing so far
prevailed with him, That he became a Convert, and freely submitted himself to
the orthodoxall doctrine of the Church of England, both concerning the
Sabbath Day, and likewise concerning the Lord's Day.

Now because this Treatise of the Sabbath was dedicated to his Royal Majesty:
and the principles upon which he grounded all his arguments, (being commonly
preached, printed, and believed, throughout the Kingdom,) might have poisoned
and infected many people, either with this Sabbatarian error, or with some
other of like quality: it was the King, our gracious Master, his will and
pleasure, that a Treatise should be set forth, to prevent future mischief, and
to settle his good Subjects, (who have long time been distracted about
Sabbatarian questions) in the old and good way of the ancient, and orthodoxall
Catholic Church.

Now that which his sacred Majesty commanded, I have by Your Graces direction,
obediently performed: and I shall now desire Your Grace, and all other Readers,
to take notice of these particulars following:

First, I have with much diligence, weighed and examined those men's arguments,
which ground the religious observation of the Sunday, upon the letter of the
fourth Cemmandement; and I have proved by demonstrative arguments, that they
are of no force. And therefore I have grounded it upon the uniforme practice and
custom of the Ancient Catholic Church, which received the same from the holy
Apostles Aug. d. Temp. 251. Dominicum diem Apostoli, and Apostolici viri, ideo
religiosa solemnitate habendu^ sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor noster a
mortuis resurrexit, etc. ( Nota hic sanxerunt, hoc est, sancte and firmiter
statuerunt. Fr. Sonhi. demonstr. p. 4. ca. 4.)
.

Also touching the manner of keeping it holy, I have walked in the old and good
way of pious antiquity, and I have made clear remonstrance, that the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws and Constitutions, of our Church and State,
accord, and come fully home, to the ancient decrees, Canons, and Precepts of
the holiest Governors of former times.

The keeping holy the Lord's Day, and of other Festivals, ordained by the
Church and State, is a work of piety, a nursery of Religion and Virtue, a
means of sowing the seeds of grace, and of planting faith, and saving
knowledge and godliness in peoples minds: and our blessed Lord and Savior,
being duly and religiously served and worshipped upon the Holy day, imparteth
heavenly and temporal benedictions, to the King, the Kingdom, the Church, the
public, the private, and to thr whole State.

Profanation of the Lord'-day, and of other solemn Festival days, which are
devoted to divine and religious offices, is impious, and hateful in the sight
of God and of all good men, and therefore to be avoided by such as fear God,
and to be corrected and punished in those which shall offend.

And there is one kind of sacrilege, usually committed in our Kingdom, which
had his beginning from the Presbyterians, and has infected innumerable
multitudes amongst us: to wit, a profane and shameful neglect and contempt of
the solemn form of divine Service, appointed to be duly used and frequented,
by the public constitution of our Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws. Many of
our Priests and Ministers, being infected with the Presbyterian drug, of
despising our Church Service, do either mangle it, and transform it, according
to their own fancy: or wholly neglect it, preferring their own devised forms
before it: and our Lecture-men, and some others whom precise people, style
powerful Teachers, do seldom honor it, so much as with their own presence:
and whereas (if they were the men they desire to be esteemed) they should not
only honor it with their presence, but also with their action (not holding it
a base office, to offer up to GOD in the name of the Church the sacrifice of
public prayer, thanksgiving, and worship) they in their Sermons and Lectures,
and when they treat of Prayer, etc. at no time commend the use of it, nor
declare the fruits and benefit of it, nor make it a necessary act of religion.
And now lately, since I have been reading many English Pamphlets and tractates
of the Sabbath, I can hardly find any Treatise wherein the use of the Common
Service by the Minister, and the due frequenting thereof by the people, is once
named among the duties or offices of sanctifying the Lord's Day. Certainly, men
do not consider that it is a sacrilegious act, to rob God of such worship and
service as the Church and State have devoted to him: and why may not men rob
God of his Church, and Churchmen of their Tithes, as well as of his Service? but
besides this, it is a common injury to the whole kingdom, to the Kings Majesty
Himself, his Gracious Queen, and lovely Children, to the Lord's, Nobles,
Bishops, Magistrates, the sick, the whole, and to all estates of people, to be
deprived of the public suffrages of the Church, which amongst all religious
and holy men, were ever esteemed as a common or universal Sacrifice, far more
pleasing to GOD, (being offered up by the general vote of all the Land, in an
uniforme consent, as it were with one heart, and with one voice) then the
singular and affected devotions of private spirits.

And now, most Reverend Father, having thus far presumed of your patience, in
reading these former passages: I shall in the last place humbly entreat your
Grace, to receive this Treatise of Mine, concerning the Sabbath Day, and
concerning the Lord's Day, into your favorable Protection. Many things
persuade me to dedicate the same to your Grace: namely, Your dignity and
authority in our Church: Your religious care and affection, to reform those
evils of which I justly complain: Your deep judgment in matters
Theological: Your reverent esteem of venerable antiquity, and Your distaste
of novelty: and lastly, Your long continued good affection to my self: all
these have moved me, and some of them have obliged me to commend these my
labors to Your Graces Patronage. I am assured, Your Grace will lovingly accept
this Treatise, because it tends to the public edification of the Church: and
if it shall be truly understood, and impartially examined by such as read it;
it may be a means to settle the Sabbatarian Controversy, which ever since Th.
Cartwright's unluckie days, has disquieted both Church and State.

Your Graces in due observance, and love unfeigned, FR. ELIENS.

Theophilus Brabourne IN A TREATISE INTITVLED: A DEFENSE OF that most Ancient
and Sacred Ordinance of God 's, the Sabbath Day: maintains these Positions
following.
1THE first: The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue; Remember the Sabbath Day
to keep it holy, etc. Exodus 20. is a Divine Precept, simply and entirely
moral, containing nothing legally ceremonial, in whole or in part: and
therefore the weekly observation thereof, ought to be perpetual, and to
continue in full force, and virtue to the worlds end.

2 His second Position is, The Saturday, or seventh day of every week, ought
to be an everlasting Holy Day, in the Christian Church, and the religious
observation of this day obliges Christians, under the Gospel, as it did the
Jews before the coming of CHRIST.

3 His third Position is, That the Sunday, or Lord's Day, is an ordinary
Working day: and it is superstition and will worship to make the same, the
Sabbath of the fourth Commandment.

These Positions are to be examined in this Treatise following, wherein shall
be declared: That the two former, are repugnant to the authorized Doctrine of
the Church of England, and to the unanimous sentence of the godly Fathers of
the true Catholic Church of CHRIST, in all Ages: But the second Position is
not only repugnant in manner aforesaid, but the same has been as well in
ancient, as in latter Times, condemned as Superstitious, Jewish, and Heretical.

The third Position concerning the Sunday, or Lord's Day, shall be examined in
a proper Section, in which I will declare, what is agreeable to verity, and
what again, is erroneous in the same.

T. B. His Doctrine, concerning the perpetual morality of the
Saturday-Sabbath, is repugnant, to the public sentence of the Church of
England: and to the sentence of Divines, who lived at the beginning of the
Reformation.
1 The Rubric of our Liturgy, at the foot of the Calendar, rehearses all,
and every Festival Holy Day, to be observed in our Church throughout the
Year: and it names all Sundaies of the year, the Feast of Circumcision,
Epiphany, Purification, etc. and none other are ordinarily, to be kept holy by
any Law of our Church.

Also the Curate is commanded, that he declare openly in the Church upon every
Sunday, the Holy Days (if any be) of every week: but the Saturday is none of
these.

The Homily of our Church, says: Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit, on the Lord's
day: Since which time, God's people have in all Ages without gain saying used
to come together on the Sunday, to celebrate and honor the Lord's blessed
Name, and carefully to keep that Day in holy rest and quietness, both Man,
Woman, Child, and Servant. Ibid. We must be careful to keep, etc. not the
seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the Lord's Day, the day of the Lord's
Resurrection, the Day after the seventh day, which is the first day of the
Week.

Canon 13. Anno 1603. All manner of persons within the Church of England, shall
from henceforth, celebrate and keep the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday,
and other Holy Days, etc. (amongst which, the Saturday of every Week is none.)

Statut. Edward. Regis, Anno 5. and 6. Neither is it to be thought, that there
is any certain time, or definite number of days prescribed in holy Scripture,
etc. but that the appointment both of the time, and also of the number of the
days, is left by authority of God's Word to the liberty of Christ's Church.

Be it therefore inacted, that all the days hereafter mentioned, shall be kept
Holy Days, and no other; that is, all Sundaies in the Year, the days of the
Circumcision of the Lord, of the Epiphany, Purification, etc.

Bishop Cranmer's Catech. Anno 1548. The Jews were commanded in the Old
Testament, to keep the Sabbath Day, and they observed it, every seventh day,
called the Sabbath or Saturday: but we Christian Men, in the New Testament are
not bound to such Commandments of Moses's Law: and therefore we now keep no
more the Sabbath, or Saturday, as the Jews did, but we observe the Sunday,
and some other days, etc.

John Frith declar. of Bapt. page 96. Our forefathers which were in the
beginning of the Church, did abrogate the Sabbath, to the intent that men might
have an ensample of Christian liberty: and that they might know, that neither
the keeping of the Sabbath, nor of any other day, is necessary. Howbeit,
because it was necessary, that a Day should be reserved in which the people
might come together, to hear the Word of God, they ordained in stead of the
Sabbath, which was Saturday, the next day following, which is Sunday. And
although, they might have kept the Saturday with the Jews, as a thing
indifferent, yet did they much better to over-set the day, to be a perpetual
memory, that we are free, and not bound to any day, but that we may do all
lawful works to the pleasure of God, and the profit of our neighbors, etc.

Will. Tindal. Answ. to D. More. ca. 25. We be lords over the Sabbath, and may
change it into Monday, or any other day, as we see need. Or may make every
tenth day Holy Day, only if we see cause why: we may make two every Week,
if it were expedient, and one not enough to teach the people. Neither was there
any cause to change it from the Saturday, then to put difference between us
and the Jews, and lest we should become servants to the day, after their
superstition.

D. Barnes, Articl. p. 206. Therefore be certain days assigned, that we
should come together, not that, that day in which we come together, is holier
than another, but all days are alike equal: And CHRIST is not only crucified
in the Parascheve, and risen on the Sunday, but the day, of Resurrection is
always: and always may we eat of our Lord's flesh.

Now from these testimonies, it appears that T. B. His Position concerning
the perpetual morality of the Saturday Sabbath, and our new men's assertion
concerning the Sunday Sabbath, are repugnant to the ancient and public
sentence of the Church of England.

Thesis. 2.a. T. B. His Tenent is repugnant to the unanimous Sentence of the
Ancient Bishops and Fathers of the Primitive Church.
Justin. Martyr. Tryph. Non est opus celebratione Sabbati, post filium Dei.
Gentes etiamsi Sabbatum non observent, omnino sanctam Dei haereditatem adibunt.
After the Son of God's appearing, we have no need to observe the
Sabbath Day. The Gentiles may attain God's holy inheritance without
observation of the Sabbath Day.

Tertul. c. Iud. ca. 4. Sequitur itaque ut quatenus Circumcisio and veteris
Legis abolitio, expuncta est: ita Sabbati quoque observatio temporaria fuisse
demonstratur. Ib. ca. 6. Novi Testamenti haeres and legisl^tor circumcisionem
veterem cum suo Sabbato compescuit. Id. d. Idol cap. 14. nobis quidem Sabb^ta
extranea sunt, a Deo aliquando dilecta.
The observation of the Sabbath was temporary, and it was blotted out, like as
Circumcision, and other Rites of the Old Law.

Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 19. and cap. 30. and cap. 31.

Origin in Genesis Hom. 10. Et in Exodus Hom. 7. and in numb. 28. Hom. 33. page 163.

Council. Laodicen. cap. 29.

Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. li. 4. ca. 24.

Athanas. d. semente and d. Sab. and Circumcis.

Basil. in Esaiam. vis. 2. p. 837.

Greg. Naz. Orat. 19. in funere Patris.

Greg. Nyssen. Orat. 1. d. Resurrect p. 826. and d. Pasch. Orat. 4. p. 867.

Epiphan. Haeres. 30. and Haeres. 66.

Cyril. Hierosol. Ca. 4.

Phylastrius. d. Haeres. tit. 88. p. 616.

Chrysostom. Enarrat. in ca. 1. Esa. and in Mat. Hom. 4. and Imperfect. in Mat.
Hom. 11.

Ambros. in ca 3. Luc. page 59. and li. 5. in Luc. page 98. and Epist. 72. and
Epist. 39. Abiit ille dies veteris Testamenti and venit dies novus.


Hieron. Quaest. Hebr. in Genes. page 853. and in ca. 44. Ezech. and in prooem.
Epist. ad Galat.

Remig. in Epist. ad Romans ca. 7.

Machar. Hom. 35.

Hilar. Prolog. in Psalm. pa. 339. and in Matthew. Can. 12.

Leo d. jejunio septimi men's. Sermon. 17.

Theodoret. in 20. ca. Ezech. pa. 569. and in ca. 4. Epist. ad Galat. p. 152.

August. c. Faust. Manich. li. 6. c. 4. d. Genes. ad lit. li. 4. ca. 13. d.
spir. and lit. cap. 15. c. Duas Epist. Pelag. li. 3. ca. 4. Epist. 86. and
Epist. 119. ca. 12. d. util. Credendi. cap. 3. Nullus quidem Apostoli Sermo ore
vel per Epistolam, vel praesentis, in quo non laborat docere, antiquae legis
onera deposita, and omnia illa quae in typi^ and imaginibus praecesse^unt, id
est, otium Sabbati, circumcisionis injuriam, calendarum and trium per annum
solennitatum recursus, gratia Evangelij subrepente cessasse. Cessationem
Sabbatorum jam quidem supervacaneam ducimus, ad observandum, ex quo spes
revelata est quietis aeternae. Iam vero tempore gratiae revelatae, observatio
illa Sabbati, quae unius diei vacatione figurabatur, sublata est ab
observatione fidelium: mutato tempore, jam superstitiosum esse significavit.
Inter omnia illa december praecepta, Solum ibi quod de Sabbato positum est,
figurate observandum praecipitur. Isidor. Postquam Christus in sepultura sua
ejus figuram adimplevit, observatio ejus quievit.


Hesich. in Lev. ca. 26.

Gregor. Mag. Regist. li. 11. ep. 3.

Isidor. Hisp. Orig. li. 6. ca. 18.

Anast. Sinaita. contempl. in Hexam. li. 7.

Damascen. Orth. fid. li. 4. ca. 24.

Raban. Maur. instit. Cler. li. 2. ca. 42. Andronic. constable. c. jud. c. 58.
Council. Paris. ca. 50. Council. Aquisgran. p. 569. Council. Matiscon. 2. ca. 1.

Thesis 3a. T. B. His Position concerning the seventh day Sabbath, was both in
Ancient and succeeding Ages, condemned as Haereticall.
August. Philastr. d. Haeres. Epiphan. Haeres. 30. Eusebius. Hist. Ecc. l. 3. c.
24. Nicep. Hist. Ec. l. 3. cap. 13. Greg. Naz. or. 19. Greg. M. li. 11. Ep. 3.
quia judaizare populum compellit, ut exteriorem legis ritum revocet, coli vult
Sabbatum. Prateol. Elench. Haeret. l. 7. and l. 10. Histor. Anabapt. i. 6. p.
153. Luther c. Carolast. d. S
1 It was thus condemned, in the Nazarenes, and in the Cerinthians: in the
Hebionites: and in the Hypsistarij.

2 The ancient Synod of Laodicaea, made a decree against it, ca. 29. Also
Gregory the Great, affirmed it was judaicall.

3 In Saint Bernard's days it was condemned in the Petrobusiani.

4 The same likewise, being revived, in Luther's time, by Carolastadius,
Sternebergius, and by some Sectaries among the Anabaptists, has both then, and
ever since, been censured, as Jewish and Heretical.

Thesis 4a The Doctrine of the Church of England, both concerning the
Sabbath Day, and the LORD'S Day, is grounded upon the holy Scripture: and upon
the consentient Testimony of the ancient Catholic Church: and therefore the
same is to be received, and the contrary ought to be rejected.
1 The same is confirmed by such Arguments of holy Scripture, as cannot be
solved or answered, but by devising and affixing new senses, and novell
expositions, or by inventing distinctions, which were not in use before the
present question was a foot.

2 The consentient and unamimous sentence of the ancient Catholic Church of
Christ, ought to be preferred, before the sentence of private men, unless the
holy Scripture shall apparently contradict the sense of the Church.

The reasons hereof are many.

1 The true Church of Christ, and especially the holy Primitive Church, by
Office and divine Calling, is the ground and pillar of truth Calv. instit. li.
4. c. 1. n. 10. Nec parvi momenti est, quod vocatur columna and firmamentu^
veritatis et domus Dei. Quibus verbis significat Paulus, ne intercidat veritas
Dei in mundo, ecclesiam esse fidam ejus custodem, quia ejus ministerio et opera
voluit Deus puram verbi sui praedicatione^ conservari, etc. Electa segregataque
dicitur a Christo in sponsam, quae esset sine ruga et macula, corpus et
plenitudo ejus.
. 1 Timothy 3.15. and the holy Apostles in a plentiful measure, powered into the
same, as into a rich Storehouse, all necessary and saving truth, to the end
that every one that desires, might receive from thence, the drink or water of
life. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4. In eam quafi in depositorium dives, Apostoli
plenissime contulerunt, quae sunt veritatis, ut omnis quicunque velit, sumat ex
ea potum vitae.


It is evident (says Tertullian) that all such Doctrine as accords with
those Apostolical, Primitive and Mother Churches is to be reputed sound and
true: because those Churches received this Doctrine, from the Apostles, and the
Apostles from CHRIST, and CHRIST from God. Tertul. de praescript. c. 21.
Constat omnem doctrinam quae cum illis ecclesiis Apostolicis, matricibus and
originalibus fidei conspirat, veritati deputandam, id sine dubio tenenrem, quod
ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit.


Clem. Alex. The most perfect knowledge and the best election of opinions, must
be received from verity alone, and from the ancient Church. Clem. Al. strom. l.
7. c. 9. (...).


Orig. That verity only is to he credited, which differs in nothing from
Ecclesiastical authority. Orig. (...) l. 1. prooem.


S. Augustine: Aug. in Ps. 37, etc
In ventre Ecclesiae veritas manet, etc. In the Womb of the true Church verity
remains, and whosoever separates himself from this Womb, he must of
necessity err from truth. And in another place: Hypognost. lib. 3. Id. d.
util. Cre. c. 17. Council. Ephesians. tom. 4 cap. 25. Qui nulla Apostolicae and
Evangelicae traditionis habita ratione, novitiam menris suae adinventionem in
pretio habent, hii ab omnibus audiant: Ne transgrediaris terminos antiquos,
quos posuerunt patres tui, etc. Athanas. c. Arian. Orat. 2. Quod non a patribus
profectum est, sed nuper inventum, quid de eo aliud existimari deceat, quam
illud ipsum cujus Paulus mentionem fecit: in novissimis temporibus deficient
quidam a fide, adhaerentes spiritibus erroris, etc.
Tunc a nobis limes sanae fidei tenetur, quando termini quos posuerunt sancti
Patres, non transferuntur, imo observantur and defensantur. The border of right
faith is preserved inviolate, when those bounds which the holy Fathers have
fixed, are not removed, but observed and defended.

2 The Church Primitive was planted and watered by the Doctrine of the holy
Apostles. The same received an ample measure of Divine Grace: many miraculous
and supernatural gifts were conferred upon it: 1 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. 8.7. You
abound in everything, in faith, and word, and knowledge. The Bishops, Priests,
and Fathers of those times, were eminent, and excelled men of later Time in
sanctity, charity, and virtue: their zeal and love of heavenly verity, was
admirable, and they honored and preferred the profession and maintenance
thereof, before all humane and transitory good: they exposed their lives, their
honor, their liberty, and whatsoever else the present world affords, to all
kinds of danger: and they endured the most miserable, and terrible pressures
and torments, that bloody Tyrants and Persecutors, yea, and which Satan
himself could inflict upon them, for the testimony of the truth of CHRIST.
Justin. Mart. Dial c. Tryph. Quod nos in Jesus credentes, nemo terrere aut
domare valcat apparet quotidie: cu^. n. obtruncemur, crucifigamur, objiciamur
bestiis, ignibus aliisque tormentis tradamur, tamen a confessione non
discedimus, sed quanto magis in nos saevitur, tanto plures pietatem fidemque
per nomen Jesus profitemur. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Cum nihil mali fecerint, pejora
latronibus subire tormenta coacti sunt. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 39. Flagellis
cesiuenis ferreis laniati, in sartaginem, immissi, etc. Prosper. d. vocat.
Gent. lib. 2. ca. 15. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 22. c. 6. Ligabantur, includebantur,
caedebantur, torquebantur, urebantur, laniabantur, trucidabantur, etc. Non erat
eis pro salute pugnare; nisi, salutem pro Salvatore contemnere. Theod. Ser. 9.
(...). Minut Foelix. octav. Page 10. Pueri et mulierculae nostrae, cruces et
tormenta, feras, et omnes suppliciorum terriculas, inspirata patientia doloris
illudunt.
And therefore their unanimous sentence, concerning matters divine, has
always been esteemed in the Church of CHRIST, of greatest authority, next
unto the sacred Scriptures.

For the reasons aforesaid, The Cnurch of England, in her public, and
authorized Doctrine and Religion, proceeds in manner following. 1 It builds
her Faith and Religion upon the Sacred and Canonical Scritures, of the holy
Prophets and Apostles, as upon her maine and prime foundation. Aug. de. civ.
Dei. lib. 11 c. 3. Scripturam condidit, quae canonica appellatur,
eminentissimae authoritatis. Chrysostom. de Lazaro. Hom. 4. Etiamsi mortuus
reviviscat, etiamsi Angelus de Coelo descendat, maxim omninum credendum est
Scripturis. Ambr. de fid. ad Gratian. li. 1. c. 4. Nolo argumento credas,
sancte imperator, et nostrae disputationi: Scripturas interrogemus,
interrogemus Apostolos, interrogemus Prophetas, interrogemus Christum. Clem.
Alex. strom li. 7. c. 9. Non absolute hominibus enunciantibus, fidem
adhibuerimus, quibus licet etiam annunciare contrarium, sed voce Domini
probamus quod quaeritur, etc. quae est sola demonstratio, etc. principium
indemonstrabile, etc. Dominica Scriptura, etc, ipsa judice utimur.


Ambros. Epist. 47. Hoc munimentum haec sepes fidei nostrae. Athanas. Epist. ad
Adelph. c. Arian. p. 333. Nostra fides recta est, and ex doctrina Apostolica
and traditione patru^ confirmata. Meisner. Phil. sobr. part. 3. p. 788.
Injuriam nobis facit Becanus scribendo in tract. d. judice, nos docere solam
Scriptura^ esse normam and judicem controversiarum fidei. Imo vero and Spiritum
Sanctum ceu judicem supremum praesupponimus: and Ecclesiam ceu judicem
inferiorem lubenter admittimus: ideoque soli scripturae officium judicandi,
absque omni distinctione non assignamus. Selneccer. in 1 Cor. 14. P. 731. BB.
Mort. Appeal. li. 3. c. 15. sect. 1. p. 399.
2 Next unto the holy Scripture, it relieth upon the consentient testimony, and
authority of the Bishops and Pastors of the true and ancient Catholic Church:
and it prefers the sentence thereof, before all other curious or profane
novelties.

The holy Scripture is the Fountain, and lively Spring, containing in all
sufficiency, and abundance, the pure Water of Life, and whatsoever is
necessary to make GODS people wise unto salvation.

The consentient and unanimous testimony of the true Church of Christ, in the
Primitive Ages thereof, is Canalis, a Conduit-pipe, to derive and convey to
succeeding Generations, the celestial water, contained in holy Scripture.

The first of these, namely the Scripture, is of sovereign authority, and for
it self, worthy of all acceptance. The latter, namely, the voice and
testimony of the Primitive Church, is a ministerial and subordinate rule, and
guide, to preserve and direct us, in the right understanding of the Scriptures.

The Profession of the Church of England, concerning the former proceeding.
Praefat. To Bishop Jewel his works. This is and has been the open
profession of the Church of England, to defend and maintain no other Faith,
Church, and Religion, but that which is truly Catholic; and for such
warranted, not only by the written Word of GOD, but also by the testimony and
consent of the ancient and godly Fathers.

King JAMES of ever happy memory: The King himself, together with the Church
of England professes: that he will acknowledge such Doctrine only; for true
and necessary to salvation, which springs out of the sacred Scripture, as
from a Fountain, is derived to these present times, by the consent of the
ancient Church, as by a Couduit-pipe. Causab. ad Card. Perion. p. 20. Rex cum
Ecclesia Anglicana pronunciat, eam demum se doctrinam, pro vera and necessaria
agnoscere, quae e font Sacrae Scripturae manans per co^sensu^ Eccelesiae
veteris, sicut per canalem, ad nostra tempora fuerit derivata


The Archbishop of Canterbury, at a solemn Visitation, held in the year,
1571. sets forth this Canon following: All Preachers within this Province,
shall take special care, that they teach, or deliver no other doctrine in
their Sermons to be religiously embraced, and believed by their hearers the
people: but such, as being consentaneous to the holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, Whitak duplic. pa. 187. Plus merito tribuendum est, si
authoritate^ quaeris, Ecclesiae Primitivae, quam subsequentium saeculoru^
Ecclesiis, quandoquide^ quo erant ipsis Apostolis propiores, eo longius ab
erroribus aberant. Sneps. Annot. in Aug. conf. c. 7. and 8. page, 689. Patrum
scripta and interpretationes non modo non abjicimus sed admiramur, etiam
existimamus ipsos utilem operam praestitisse ecclesiae, and illustrasse etiam
scripta prophetica and Apostolica suis lucubrationibus.
was formerly taught and collected from thence, by the Ancient Fathers, and
godly Bishops. Imprimis. Videbunt Concionatores, ne quid unqua^ pro concione,
doceant, quod a populo religiose teneri et credi volunt nisi quod consentaneum
sit scripturis veteris et novi Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa scriptura
docuerint antiqui Patres, and veteres Episcopi collegerint.


And in this her practice and profession, the Church of England consents with
the practice and rule of the Ancient Church.

Cyril. of Alexandria, in the Ephesine Council. Cyril. Nos divinas literas and
sanctorum patrum sequimur fidem: sic enim supernae vocationis palmam lucrabimur
in Christo.
We the Fathers of this Council, following the faith of Divine Scriptures, and
of the holy Fathers of the Church, shall obtain the Crown of celestial
blessedness in Christ.

Vincentius Lyrinensis. Vinc. Lyrin. in Commonitor. Qui in sana fide, sanus and
integer permanere voluerit, duplici modo munire fidem suam debet: primum
scilicet divinae legis authoritate, tum deinde Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritate.
He that desires to continue firm and sound, in right and saving faith, must
fence and fortify his faith, first of all, with the authority of Divine Law:
and next to that, with the authority of the Catholic Church.

The same is affirmed by the Fathers of the sixth Council of Constantinople,
cap. 19. By S. Basil Basil. Fidem nos neque recentiorem ab aliis conscriptam
acceptamus, neque ipsi, mentis nostrae foetus, aliis obtrudere audemus, ne
humana putentur pietatis verba: sed quae a sanctis patribus edocti sumus, ea
nos interrogantibus annunciamus.
. Ep. 60. p. 835. And the Ecclesiastical story reports of Greg. Naz. and of
S. Basil, That in their studying the books of holy Scriptures, they collected
the sense of them, not from their own judgment or presumption, but from the
testimony and authority of the Ancient, who had received the rule of the true
intelligence of Scriptures, from the holy Apostles by succession. Ruffin. eccl.
hist. lib. 2. cap 9. Basilius and Gregorius, etc. omnibus Grecorum saecularium
libris remotis, solis Divinae Scripturae voluminibus operam dabant, earumque
intelligentiam, non ex propria praesumptione, sed ex majorum scriptis, et
authoritate loquebantur: quos et ipsos ex Apostolica successione, intelligendi
regulam suscepisse constabat.


The observation of the former rule Aug. de bapt. lib. ^. cap. 26. Quod nos
admonet ut ad fontem recurramus, id est, Apostolicam traditionem, et inde
canalem in nostra tempora dirigamus, optimum est, et sine dubitatione
faciendum. Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 7. cap. 9. Inter eos viros qui tanti erant
in ecclesiastica cognitione, quid restabat dicendum a Marcione aut Prodico et
similibus qui non sunt ingressi recta via? neque enim eos qui praecesserunt
superare potuerunt sapientia, ut aliquid adinvenirent iis, quae ab illis vere
dicta sunt: sed been cum iis actu^ esset, si scire potuissent ea quae prius
sunt tradita: is ergo nobis solus qui est cognitione praeditus, cum in ipsis
Scripturis consenuerit, Apostolicam et Ecclesiasticam servans dogmatum
rectitudinem, rectissime vivit, convenienter Evangelio, etc.
is both profitable and necessary, for preservation of sound faith and holy
religion, and for repressing of Schism and Heresy: it freeth the Church from
scandal and imputation of novelty: and it adds reputation and esteem to the
Doctrine and Religion, professed and received upon the said two grounds: and
lastly, it comfort Christian people in their holy profession, and augmenteth
their love and obedience to that Faith and Religion, which is both consonant to
holy Scripture, and which likewise has approbation from the ancient Church.

Thesis 5. Topical or probable Arguments, either from consequenee of Sripture,
or from humane reason, ought not to be admitted or credited, against the
consentient Testimony, and Authority of the ancient Catholic Church
1 Arguments and objections of this quality, may be false as well as true: and
the Philosopher well observes, that many times, Falsa sunt probabiliora veris,
Things false are more probable, and have a greater appearance of verity, than
things really true Orig. in Cant. Saepe videntur pulchriora mendaciorum
sophismata, quam documenta veritatis.
For the Medium or ground of such objections, is not necessary, but contingent
Clem. Al. strom. li. 7. c. 9. Alia est ut opinor natura probabiliu^
argumentorum, et alia verorum. Aug. de Bapt. li. 4. c. 6. Rations arripuit,
quas verisimiles potius, quam veras esse invenimus. Ambros. li. 10. ep. 82.
Fuco quodam probabilium disputationum ea colorare voluerunt.
: And contingent propositions, are of a dubious quality: and they cause opinion
only, and not divine faith.

2 The admitting, and crediting of Topicall arguments, has in all ages, opened
a gap to most pestilential Heresies Clem. Al. strom. libro 7. capite 9. Qui
vero in opinione, ii sectantur haereses. Magis declinamus ad ea quae sunt
opinabilia (...), etiamsi sint contraria, quam ad veritatem.
: Namely, to the Heresies against the blessed Trinity: and against the eternal
Deity of Christ. The Pelagian Heresy, concerning Grace and Free Will, and
concerning original sin, was grounded upon probable reasons: and so likewise
the heresies of Socinus, and many erroneous doctrines of Pontificians, are in
our days wholly supported, by verisim lous, and probable reasons. And as
Clemens Alexandrinus has well observed: Men are more apt to believe things
probable, than verity.

A Conclusion from the Premises.
T. B. His maine Position, concerning the Sabbath, being contrary to the
authorized Doctrine of the Church of England; and to the consentient and
unanimous sentence of the ancient Catholic Church; Is to be condemned, as
false and erroneous, if it shall evidently appear, by the Answers following,
that the same is totally grounded upon Objections and Arguments, which are only
of a probable and dubious quality.

T. B. His Arguments and Objections, examined and answered.
In the solution of the Sabbatizers objections, my method shall be, to examine
in the first place, the maine grounds and principles upon which he builds,
and from whence he deduceth his conclusions. And this being performed, his
particular arguments being in number 24. and beginning at the 401. page of his
book, will easily be answered.

T. B. His principal ground, whereupon he maintains his Position, for the
necessary and perpetual observation of the Sabbath Day.
All and every one of the ten Commandments are purely, entirely, and properly
moral: and there is nothing delivered, or commanded in any one of them, which
is Judicial, or legally Ceremonial.

His maine Reasons.

1 All and every one of the ten Commandments were pronounced, delivered, and
promulgate, at one and the same time, and in one and the same manner, namely,
by the immediate voice of God, with thundering and lightning, and in the common
audience of all the Israelites, Exodus 20.18. Deuteronomy. 5.22.

2 They were all and every one, written or engraven in tables of stone, by the
finger of GOD Himself, Exodus 31.18. Deuteronomy. 9.10. Exodus 32.16. and 34.1. Deuteronomy.
10.4.

3 According to GODS own appointment, all and every one of these ten
Commandments, were placed in the Arc of the Testimony, within the most Holy
place of the Tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 2. 2 Chronicles. 5.10. Heb. 9.4.

4 One and the same proeme, containing a general motive to provoke people to
obedience of all and every one of these Precepts, was prefixed before the
Decalogue, Exodus 20.2.

5 Many Divines of our own Nation, in Sermons, and written Tractates of the
Sabbath, and in their Expositions of the fourth Commandment, maintain the
foresaid Position, affirming with much confidence, that all and every one of
the ten Commandments are entirely, properly, and perpetually moral.

T. B. His assumption.

The fourth Commandment, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, Is one of
the ten Commandments, and it is a Precept of principal note, placed in the
first Table: and the observation thereof is required in the Law, and in the
Prophets with great vehemency: and the transgression punished with much
severity, Exodus 35.2. Whosoever does any work therein shall die, Number. 15.32.
They found a man that gathered sticks Upon the Sabbath Day, etc. And all the
Congregation brought him without the host, and stoned him with stones, and he
died, as the LORD had commanded.

Now from the premises, this conclusion is inferred by necessary consequence:
Therefore the fourth Commandment, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy,
Being one of the ten, is purely and properly moral, and it obliges Christians
to the obedience thereof, Th. Broad. 3 quaest. d. Sab. To the Reader. Some in
their book often printed (it was printed last 1618) have these and the like
passages: The fourth Commandment is no more ceremonial than the rest: the
observation of the seventh day, is a moral, and perpetual duty: we may not
pick up a few sticks on the Sabbath: there is as much difference between the
Sabbath and other days, as between Sacramental and common bread. Ioh. Sprint
d. Sab. page 11. The observation of the seventh day is of the Law of Nature,
whatsoever is found in the fourth Commandment appertains to the Law of
Nature, etc. Id. page 13. The observation of the seventh day was established
before Christ was promised: and therefore it is not Ceremonial, but of the Law
of Nature, and perpetual. Idem page 28. G.W. d. Sab. page 16. The Decalogue
being the same with the Law of Nature is one and the same for ever: it
follows necessarily that the Sabbath being a part of that Decalogue, is to
remain for ever. Idem. page 26.
as well as the other nine.

D. B. Of the Sabbath, page 40. The fourth Commandment can be no more partly
moral and partly Ceremonial, than the same living creature, can be partly a
man, and partly a beast, Page 50. The observation of the seventh day, and also
the precise resting from worldly affairs is moral, neither is there any thing
in the Commandment that might intimate it to be Ceremonial.

R. B. against Br. page 90. The fourth Commandment in every part thereof, and
as it is contained in the Decalogue, is Moral, and of the Law of Nature, Page
88. The fourth Commandment is part of the Law of Nature, and thus part of the
Image of GOD, and is no more capable of a Ceremony to be in it, than GOD is.

R. C. Of the Sabbath, page 54. This fourth Commandment participateth with the
three other before, and the six next following, in all the honors and
prerogatives, wherein they go before all the Leviticall constitutions, for
more glorious promulgation and establishment. They were pronounced by the voice
of God Himself, immediately unto the people: So was this. They were written in
Tables of stone, with GOD'S finger: So was this. They were put into the Arc:
So was this. They were written by the Holy Ghost, in the Book of Exodus
jointly together without any mixture of any other with them: So was this also,
and set in an high place, before all those of the second Table. But nothing of
this is affirmed of the Law of Ceremonies.

I. D. Upon the Commandments, page 129. These reasons do most evidently
confirm to the hearts of all God's children: That the keeping the Sabbath Day,
is a Moral Law, and binds us, and all men, to the end of the world, as much
as it did the Jews, before Christ.

D. D. Against Heathering. Page 54. The morality of the Sabbath may be proved
from the manner of writing the fourth Commandment. For it was not written in
Paper or Parchment, or upon leaves of Trees, but in Tables of stone, as the
rest of the ten Commandments were, to signify the perpetuity thereof.

Idem, The morality of the Sabbath may be proved by GOD'S own placing of it,
for the Law of the fourth Commandment, is not placed among the Ceremonial or
Judicial Laws, as though it had been Ceremonial, or had concerned only the
tradition of the Jews, or them especially: But it is placed among the moral
Laws, yea, it is made one of the ten Laws: so that if it were abrogated,
there would remain but nine Commandments: and so the Law of GOD were
imperfect, which were blasphemy to affirm.

H. B. Dial. Manuscript. These ten words, or Commandments, GOD Himself by
His lively voice spoke to the people in the Mount, face to face; Not so the
Ceremonial. These ten Commandments were written in two Tables by GOD'S own
finger, and that twice: Not so the Ceremonial. The ten Commandments were kept
in the Ark, in the Sanctum Sanctorum, within the Veil: Not so the Ceremonial.

T. B. His inference from the Premises.

The Fourth Commandment, according to the Principles of the Authors aforesaid,
is truly, entirely, and properly moral: for it is a precept of the Law of
Nature: a part of the Image of GOD: and no more capable of a Ceremony to be in
it, than GOD is: and it is as gross an absurdity to say, It is partly moral,
and partly Ceremonial, as to say, The same living creature is partly a man,
and partly a Beast.

But the fourth Commandment speaks of a Day, which by Divine imposition, was
called the Sabbath Day: the same day of the week, on which GOD Himself
rested: and which was observed by the Jews and Israelites under the old Law:
The Day in which no Manna fell: Exodus 16.

Now from hence it is manifest, and can with no appearance of good reason be
denied: That the Saturday of every week, ought to be the Christians
Sabbath Day, as well as it was the Jews: And on the contrary, that the Sunday
is, according to the rule of the fourth Commandment, one of the six
working-dayes, and no more the Sabbath Day, commanded in the Decalogue, than
Thursday or Friday.

T. B. Was so confident in his Position, of the Saturday Sabbath, because he
supposed the principles upon which he grounded his arguments to have been
undeniable, that he breaks forth into passion, and delivers two desperate
speeches, One concerning his Adversaries, whom he styles Puritanes, that they
yielding and maintaining his Principles, and yet denying his Conclusion,
deserve to be answered with clubbes, rather than with reason: The other
concerning himself, that his conscience was so possessed, with the certainty
of this Doctrine, as that he would rather lose his life, and all that he
enjoyed in this world, than depart from the teaching and maintaining such an
apparent verity.

Answ. The Reader may perceive, by the former disputation, that the whole
weight and strength of the Sabbatarian cause, leans upon this one pillar, to
wit: The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, is properly, entirely, and
perpetually Moral, and in every respect, both for quality and obligation,
equal to the other nine Commandments.

But this Position, (which for many years has reigned, in Pamphlets, Pulpits,
and Conventicles, and is entertained as an Oracle, by all such as either openly
profess, or do lean toward the Disciplinarian Faction:) is destitute of
truth: And to make this appear, I will in the first place deliver a
description, and division of the Moral Law, and of Moral Precepts: And in the
next place set down the formal and essential Characters of Laws and
Precepts, simply, and eternally Moral: Lastly, I will demonstrate out of the
former, That the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, wanting the formal
Characters of Precepts purely Moral, is in sundry respects of a different
quality from the other nine.

A Declaration concerning the quality of Divine Precepts, called Moral.
DIvine Law, called Moral, is a just rule or measure, imposed by GOD,
directing and obliging to the obedience, of things holy, honest, and just; and
to the avoiding of the contrary.

The same is twofold: Simply Moral, Or Moral only by some external
constitution, or imposition of GOD.

Alex. Hat. 4. q. 3. m. 5. ar. 1. Est morale simpliciter, quod omni tempore,
and ab omnibus servandum est: Et est morale secundu^ quid, sive ex condition
loci, populi, te^poris, etc. Hug. Vict. Alleg. in Exodus l. 3. c. 5. Praecepta
legis scriptae, alia sunt mobilia, quae ex dispensatione a Deo sunt ordinata.
Alia immobilia, quae a natura veniunt, and vel ita sunt mala, ut nullo tempore
sine culpa possint fieri: vel ita bona, ut nullo tempore possint sine culpa
dimitti.
Divine Law simply Moral, commands or prohibiteth actions, good or evil, in
respect of their inward nature and quality.

Divine Laws and Precepts, Moral only by external constitution, command or
prohibit actions, which before the position of the outward Law, are
adiaphorous, in respect of their inward nature and quality, or else good or
evil only, by reason of some circumstance. For example, To eat the blood of
Beasts, or to abstain from eating: To worship GOD at the Temple, or in a
private house, or in open fields: To lay aside alms for the poor, upon the
first day of the week, or upon the second, or third day.

Again, Laws positively Moral, are either Personal only Greg. in 1. Reg.
13. v. 11. Quaeda^ praecepta Dei sunt communia omnium: Quaedam specialia
aliquoru^, etc.
. Genesis 12.1. and 22.2. 1 Samuel 13.11, 19. 1 Kings 13.16. Matthew. 10.9. Luke
18.22. Or common and general, either for all mankind, as the Law of Polygamie
Aug. c. Faust. M. lib. 22. cap. 47. Alia sunt peccata contra naturam: alia
contra mores, alia contra praecepta. Quae cum ita sint, quid tandem criminis
est, quod de pluribus simul habitis uxoribus objicitur sancto viro Jacob? Si
naturam consulas, non lasciviendi, sed gignendi causa, illis mulieribus
utebatur. Si morem, illo tempore, atque in illis terris fiebat. Si praeceptum,
nulla lege prohibebatur. Nunc vero cur crimen est si quis hoc faciat, nisi quia
and moribus and legibus non licet? Idem, de bono conjugal. cap. 17. Plures
foeminas uni viro legimus conjunctas, cum gentis illius societas sinebat, and
temporis ratio suadebat: neque enim contra naturam nuptiarum est.
, and wedlock within some degrees mentioned, Levit. 20.20, 21. Or else for one
Nation, Republike, or Community of people: Exodus 22.1, 3, 7, etc.

Proper Characters of Laws and Precepts, simply and entirely moral.

Character 1. In all such Laws and Precepts, the actions commanded or
prohibited, are in their inward nature and quality, good, or evil, before any
external constitution passes upon them, and secluding and abstracting, the
positive Law, or external imposition of the Lawgiver. Arist. Ethic. li. 5. ca.
7. Est aliquid justum, etiam ante conditam legem. Castropalaio. mor. tr. 3.
disp. 6. punct. 3. Scholast. in. 1.2. Intrinsecam habe^t bonitatem and
honestatem, per conformatione^ ad rectam rationem, seclusa omni lege
extrinseca. Iren. li. 4. cap. 30. Iusti Patres, virtutem decalogi conscriptam
habentes in ^ordibus, and animis suis, diligentes scilicet Deum, qui fecit eos,
and abstinentes erga proximum ab injustitia: propter quod non fuit necesse
admonere eos correptoriis literis, quia habebant in s^^^ctipsis justitiam
legis. Aug. de li. arb. li. 1. cap. 3. Non sane ideo malu^ est, quia vetatur
lege, sed ideo vetatur lege quia malum est.


For example:

To Honor Father and Mother, was an action honest, virtuous, and just, and the
contrary was vicious and unjust, before the Law of the Ten Commandments was
given at Mount Sinai, Genesis 9.21. unto 28. Sem, Ham, and Iaphet, toward their
Father Noah. Hospitality, Chastity, Fidelity, were inwardly virtuous and good
in Abraham, Joseph, etc. Genesis 18.8. Heb. 13.2. Genesis 39.6.8, 9. To adore and
worship the true and living God, and to teach others to do the like, and to
rebuke vice, were pious and righteous actions from the beginning, Genesis 4.4.26.
and 8.20, 21. and 12.7. and 18.19. and Genesis 5.24. with the Epistle of Jude
v. 14.

On the contrary: Envy, Pride, Idleness, Adultery, Murder, evil
Concupiscence, Theft, Deceit, Oppression, false-Witnesse, Superstition, and
Idolatry, Sacrilege; were internally vicious, before the outward Law, Genesis
4.8. and 12.2. and 18.15. and 31.7.30.34. and 19.5. and 20.3. and. 30.30. and
34.2. and 35.22. and 37.20, 28. and 38.16. and 39.79.15.17. Exodus 1.11. and
5.2. Josh. 7.1. and 24.2.

Charact. 2. Good or evil actions, commanded or prohibited, by Laws and
Precepts simply moral, may be resolved into some dictates and principles of
the Law of Nature, imprinted in man's heart at the Creation.

The Precepts of the first Table require, fidelity, reverence, honor, and
service in due manner, to be rendered to God Almighty: Aquin. 1.2. Q. 100. art.
6. Inter ipsa quae ordinantur ad Deum, primu^ occurrit, quod homo fideliter
subdatur, nullam participatione^ cum ejus inimicis habens: Secundum, ut
reverentiam ei exhibeat. Tertium autem, ut famulatum impendat. Aureol. 3. Did.
37. Art. 1. Latria est habitus quo aliquis voluntate inclinatur ad exhibendum
cultu^ Deo, in quantum est author omnium bonorum, ut sic profiteatur homo, Deum
se habere superiorem. and creatorem and largitorem omnium bonor um. Potest
autem considerari, ut omnium productor, ut omnium provisor, ut omnium
speculator, Rich. Med. 3. d. 37. q. 4. Ad hoc ut been ordinetur homo ad Deum,
oportet quod in Deo observet haec tria: fidelitatem, ita ut quantum in se est,
non transferat honorem principatus ad alium, and hoc est quod continetur in
primo praecepto. Oportet etiam ut tantam reverentiam ei exhibeat, ut nihil
injuriosum in eum committat, and hoc praecipitur secundo praecepto. Oportet
etiam quod fibi exhibeat famulatum, tanquam memor beneficiorum receptorum ab
eo: and hoc praecipitur tertio praecepto.
and they prohibit idolatry, superstition, blasphemy, and profaneness. Now all
and every one of these duties, are grounded, and may be resolved into the
Dictates and Principles of natural morality. For because the true and living
GOD, is the supreme Lord and Governor, both of the World, and especially of
Man: and because Man receives his being, his power, his preservation, comfort,
and happiness from him: and besides, Man is in such manner subject to GOD, as
that this great Lord and King has absolute power over him, and over all his
actions, and he may save or destroy, reward or punish him, according to his
own will and pleasure: upon these grounds and reasons, it is most just, safe,
and beneficial, according to the rule of natural understanding, that Man,
being GOD'S Subject, Servant, and Creature, do render unto his Supreme Lord
and Governor, fidelity, service, fear, reverence, obedience and love. And the
holy Scripture very frequently, upon the former, and upon other such like
natural principles, exhorts man to his duty toward GOD: and reproves him
for his ingratitude and disobedience, Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father,
and a Servant his Master: If I then be a Father, where is mine honor? if I be
a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts? Esaias 1.3 and 5.3. Ier.
8.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Mal. 3.8. Mat. 18.32.

The duties of the second Table may be resolved in like manner, into dictates
and principles of morality. Children receive from their Parents their natural
life and being; their education, livelihood, etc. Now natural reason and
affection enclines men's hearts to love gratitude, and due respect, toward
grand Benefactors. Theoph. Antioch. ad Autolyc l. 2 Id laudabile and sanctum
censetur, non solum apud Deum, sed apud homines, sub jici parentibus. Arist.
Ethic. lib. 8. Cicero in Orat. post red. Diis and parentibus nemo potest
reddere aequale. Parents charissimos habere debemus, quod ab hiis nobis vita,
patrimonium, libertas, civitas data est, etc.


Natural reason persuades man to love his neighbor because of similitude of
kind: because mutual love is necessary for man's welfare and preservation: and
every one desires another should love him: now it is a maxim of nature, that
one do to others, according as he would himself be done to.

The negative precepts of the second Table, are all and every one grounded upon
natural principles: and S. Augustine disswadeth people from evil
concupiscence by this maxim of the Law of Nature: Do not thou covet thy
neighbor's wife, or his goods, etc. because thou thy self art offended, if
another man shall covet thine. August. in Psalm. 32 Ne concupiscas rem aliqua^
proximi tui, quia si quis concupiscat tuam, displicet tibi. Id. d. lib. arb.
li. 1. cap. 3. Hoc scio malum esse, quod hoc ipse in uxore mea pati nollem.
Quisquis autem alteri facit quod sibi fieri non vult, male utique facit. Hier.
in Gal. c 5. p. 150. Quae vobis fieri non vultis, alteri ne feceritis, etc.
nolo adulterari uxorem meam: nolo substantiam diripi: nolo me falso testimonio
opprimi, and ut cuncta brevi sermon co^prehendam, indigne fero aliquid mihi
fieri, quod est injustum.


Charact. 3. Divine Laws and Precepts simply and formally moral, are
universal, in respect of persons, and in regard of their perpetual obligation
Gulielm. Paris. d. leg. ca. 1. Nunquam possibile fuit, aliquem exemptum esse a
debito, and obligatione alicujus istorum. Nulli enim unquam licere potuit, non
diligere vel timere Deum, and ita de unoquoque aliorum. Haec igitur lex est
quae non recipit abrogationem neque derogationem, neque exemptionem, nec
dispensationem ullo modo. Ibid. Lex est simpliciter, semper, and ad omnes a
cujus observatione non est exceptio. Ex quo manifestum est, quia praecepta and
prohibitiones quaecunque siunt, vel factae sunt, praeter hanc, non sunt lex
simpliciter, sed cui and quando.
. For they oblige to obedience or punishment, all and every humane Creature
having the use of reason: and they oblige in all Ages of the world, and under
all religions, or mutations of Temporal, or Ecclesiastical government: that
is, before the Law, under the Old Law, under the Gospel. The Jews, the
Gentiles, the Grecians, the Barbarians, the Bond, the Free, Princes, Judges,
Nobles, Plebeians, Rich-men, Beggars, etc. are equally subject to them: Lastly,
they oblige without external promulgation, by a mere impression of Nature,
seated by GOD, in the conscience: and no authority of Men or Angels can
privilege or exempt any from their obligation.

The Characters of Laws and Precepts Positive.

That Law is called positive, which is not inbred, imprinted, or infused, into
the heart of Man, by nature or grace: but it is imposed, by an external
mandate of a Lawgiver, having authority to command Suar. d leg. Illa lex
vocatur positiva, quae non est innata cu^ natura vel gratia: sed ultra illas,
ab aliquo principio habente potestatem posita est. Ideo enim positiva dicta
est, quasi addita naturali legi: non ex eo necessario manans.
. And it has the name positive, from external imposition or constitution: and
because it is added to the Law of Nature, and does not necessarily spring from
it.

The Characters of Positive Laws, are these which follow:

Charact. 1. The matter and things commanded or prohibited, by such Laws and
Precepts, are either in their kind and quality, or in respect of their
Circumstances, adiaphorous; that is, neither virtuous nor vicious, but they
become good or evil merely by the Law and command of the Lawgiver. Hier. in
Esa. ca. 55. Indifferentia, id est, nec bona, nec mala, quae pro ute^tium
qualitate variantur. Maerat. in 1.2. Thom. tr. d. leg. Disp. 3. tr. 4. Lex
positiva praeceptis suis affirmativis, imperat ea quae vel ex objecto
indifferentia sunt: vel si bona, non tame^ antequa^ imperarentur necessario
facienda, sed omitti tunc possent scienter and I bear sine peccato. Soto ^t.
and jur. li. 2 q. 3 art. 11 Ex soli divina institutione vim habent: ideo sunt
bona, quia jussa; and mala, quia prohibita.


For example: The Fruit of the tree of knowledge, was in itself, or in respect
of the natural quality, good for meat, and pleasant to the eyes. The Lord
himself created it. And every creature of God, being rightly used is good in
it self, and good to man, Genesis 1.31. and 2.9. 1 Timothy 4 4 Man's tasting thereof
was a sin, because of the negative Precept of GOD Aug. de civ. Dei, li. 14.
c. 12. d. Genesis ad lit. li. 8. cap. 6. and. in Ps. 70. Theoph. Ant och. ad
Autol. l. 2. Non ut quidam opinantur, aliqu^^ nox^ vel lethiferi ea arbor
tulit, sed inobedientia mortis causa fuit.
. Genesis 3.17. It was not the natural quality of the fruit, which made Adam and
Eve sinners; but only GOD'S prohibition. Adamum non cibus, sed prohibitus
cibus perdidit. The same may be said of Lot's Wife looking back to Sodom,
Genesis 19.26. and of the Prophet, sent to Hieroboam, who was killed of a Lion,
for eating bread in Samaria. 1 King. 13.22.

Charact. 2. The material object, or actions commanded or prohibited, by
precepts merely positive, if one separate or abstract the external law,
cannot be resolved into any of the natural principles of morality.

For example: The Law of Nature teaches, that every man shall love, fear, and
obey, the Lord his Creator, and Governor: But that Abram must obey GOD, by
departing out of Vr in Chaldea, or by offering up his only son Isaac, Genesis
12.1. and 22.1, 2. depended merely upon the Lord's will, and positive command.

Also, the Law of Nature, prohibiteth one neighbor, to rob or defraud another,
and if any offend in this kind, he must make restitution: but that one
Israelite robbing or defrauding another, should restore fourefold for one
Sheep, or five Oxen, for one that was stolen, was merely positive, Exodus
22.1. 3, etc.

Charact. 3. Laws and Precepts merely positive, oblige only the Persons, the
State, or Nation, and Republike, upon which they are imposed by the Lawgiver:
Maerat. in Tho. 1 2. tr. d. leg. D. 17. Se. 2. Positiva lex eos tantu^ obligare
potest, quibus imponitur. Lex enim in imperio formaliter co^sistit, quia
imponere est imperare. Positiva autem lex, in imperio tota co^sistit. Soto. d.
just. and jure, li. c. q. 1. artic. 4. Vasq in Thom. 1.2. dis. 155. c. 2. Lex
imponitur allis per modum regulae, and mensurae. Regula autem and mensura
imponitur per hoc quod applicatur hiis, quae regula^tur and me^surantur: unde
ad hoc quod lex virtutem obligandi obtineat, quod est proprium legis, oportet
quod applicetur hominibus, qui secundum eam regulari debent* Talis aute^
applicatio fit per hoc, quod in notitiam eorum deducitur, ex ipsa
promulgatione. Vnde promulgatio ipsa necessaria est ad hoc, quod lex virtutem
suam habeat.
or to whom they are published by a legal promulgation: and they continue in
force, during such time only as the Lawgiver has fixed and appointed. Also in
many cases they may be dispensed withal, as appears in David's example, 1 Samuel 21.6. Mat. 12.4. and in the Man cured of his infirmity, carrying his Bed
upon the Sabbath day, contrary to the Divine Law, Ier. 17.22. John 5.10.

An application of the Premises, to the Law of the fourth Commandment.
The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, in respect of the literal and
particular object thereof, wants all the essential characters of divine
precepts simply moral.

1 The day of the Week, which is commanded to be kept holy, by resting from
servile labor, is the same day, on which GOD himself rested, Genesis 2.2. and
which the Jews and Israelites observed from Moses, until the vocation of the
Gentiles.

But secluding and abstracting the divine positive Law, there was no real
holiness in this Day, more than in all the rest. Every day of the Week, had
one and the same efficient cause, namely, Divine Creation: and all times and
things created by GOD, were very good, Genesis 1.31. The Prophet David speaking
of all days and nights, says: The day is thine, and the night is thine, thou
have prepared the light and the Sun, Psalm. 74.16. Every creature of God is
good, 1 Timothy 4.4. and as Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.8. So
likewise all days and times, and all other creatures are subject to his
providence and dominion. GOD'S positive precept only, either immediate, as in
the Old Law, or mediate by his Church, as in the time of the Gospel, makes one
day more holy than another: not by infusing any real sanctity into the same,
but by applying it to a sacred and religious use.

The Sabbath therefore of the fourth Commandment wants the first Character
of a precept simply and entirely moral.

2 If the Divine positive Law shall be abstracted, the religious and necessary
observation of the seventh day of every Week, rather than of the first or
second, etc. cannot be concluded, or inferred from any principle or dictate of
the Law of Nature.

For the Law of Nature teaches, that the true and living God, ought to be
worshipped: and that a sufficient and convenient time, is to be set apart for
the same.

But the fourth Commandment appoints the seventh day of the Week, to be an
Holy Day, in memory of the Creation, and because GOD Himself rested on that
Day: and it prescribes the manner, to wit, by cessation and abstinence from
weekly labor: and none of all these particulars, to wit, neither the fixed
Day, nor the end, nor the form of observation, are conclusions of the Law of
Nature, but they depended merely upon God's positive Law, and institution.

3 The Law of the Sabbath, wants the last character of Divine Precepts
formally and simply moral. Ius Civil. ca. d. leg. and Constitut. Tunc valere
leges jubentur, cum in commune factae, sunt manifestae. Soto. d. just and jur.
li. 1. quaest. 1. art. 4. Thom. 1.2. qu 90. art. 4. Virtus legis in eo
consistit, quod instar regulae and mensurae cives dirigat. Regula autem and
mensura, non exerit virtutem suam, nisi applicetur rebus me^surandis. Legis
autem regula tunc demum civibus applicatur, quando per publicationem venit in
eorum notitiam.
For it was not published and revealed by promulgation to all mankind, but
only to the Jews and Israelites and Proselytes: the observation thereof,
according to the rule of the Law, obliged not perpetually, for in case of
urgent necessity it might be omitted, and the Jews themselves might labor,
and war, and fight in battle, and carry burdens, and perform laborious
works, Josh. 6.15. 1 Kings 20.29. John. 5.10. But Precepts simply moral, in
respect of their negative part oblige perpetually, and they may in no case be
transgressed: for it is an infallible maxim touching Precepts purely moral:
Praecepta negativa ligant semper and adsemper Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 40. In hiis
quae peccata omnino sunt, nulla unquam excusatio, inveniri potest. Nam neque
homicida, si per iracundiam se fecisse dicet, neque adulter si per cupiditatem
se commin^^e asseverabit, unquam satisfaciet, etc. Hic autem (Christus) in lege
Sabbati, cum famis necessitatem ad satisfactionem attulerit, ab omni illos
(discipulos) crimine vindicavit. Aquinas, 2.2. q. 33. ar. 2. Praecepta negativa
legis prohibent actus peccatorum, etc. Actus autem peccatorum sunt secundum se
mali, nec aliquo tempore vel loco been fieri poslunt, etc. Ideo obligant semper
and ad semper.
. Negative precepts have a perpetual Obligation, and they may be transgressed
at no time, and upon no occasion. Read the History of Joseph, Genesis 39.9. Romans
3.8.

Out of the former description, of Divine Precepts, simply moral; and Divine
Precepts merely positive; This conclusion follows: That the Law of the
fourth Commandment concerning the religious observation of the seventh Day was
not simply Moral: because it wanted all the inseparable Characters of such
Precepts, and on the contrary, it was only positive, and temporary.

An Objection against the former Argument.
Although it be granted, that the Law of the fourth Commandment concerning the
particular day specified therein, was positive: yet the observation thereof may
be perpetual, for the reasons following. 1. The Law of the Sabbath was imposed
upon Adam and upon all his posterity, Genesis 2.2. 2. The whole Law of the Ten
Commandments obliges the Gentiles as well as the Jews. For Christ himself,
and after him, the Holy Apostles ratified and confirmed every jot and title
thereof.

Therefore the same may be perpetual, although it be admitted, that at the
first institution it was positive. For the Will of God the Lawgiver, may make
Commandments to be of perpetual obligation, whatsoever their inward quality
is.

Answ. 1. The former reply, destroys the Tenent both of Saturday and Sunday
Sabbatarians, who affirm, that the Precept of the Sabbath, is of the Law of
Nature.

2 If it be a Precept merely positive, it can oblige those people only, upon
whom it was imposed, and during such time only as the Lawgiver has appointed.

3 All arguments used, either by Saturday, or Sunday Sabbatarians, to argue
that the positive Law of the Sabbath ought to be observed under the Gospel,
are of no force, as will appear by the particular examination and solution of
them.

An Objection out of Genesis 2. Ver. 2, 3.

T. B. At the Creation, GOD sanctified the seventh day, and made it an
Holy Day. And whereas other days were holy, only by destination, This was
such, both by Destination, and also by Consecration: For it pleased GOD to
sanctify this Day, at the very Creation of the World, Making Himself our
Samplar and President in it, and beginning it in his own Person. And this
Sabbath of the Creation was not only exemplary, but also obligatory. For if the
ground whereon Moses stood, became holy ground, because of Gods presence there,
What shall hinder it, but that in like sort, the day wherein God Himself
rested, should forthwith become an Holy Day?

D. D. Against Heather. G. W. d. Sab. page 24. Moses before the Law, shows i^
to be kept by God himself, Genes. 2.2. Id. page 28. If this rest were a sign
and figure of our rest from sin, it must be so unto Adam also: for the Law
was given unto him.
page 54. The Morality of the Sabbath is proved, from the time it was first
instituted and celebrated, and that in Man's innocence, before any Mosaicall
Ceremony was in use, Genesis 2.3.

D. B. Of the Sabbath, page 61. It is in express words said in Genesis, that
God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.

E. E. Upon the Commandments, page 90.

I. D. Upon the Commandments, page 125. Adam had by the Law of Nature, to
keep a solemn time to the Lord, and by Divine institution, to keep the
Seventh Day. And the Gentiles always were, and to the end of the world shall
stand bound to keep the Sabbath, by virtue of the first institution, given to
Adam, and to all mankind.

Ioh. Sprint. d. Sabb. page 12. The sanctification of the Seventh day,
confoemeth us to the Image of Adam's holiness in his integrity.
R. B. against Brierw. page 198. If the Sabbath be instituted in Paradise, and
this be exemplary to Men, how can it be less than obligatory, though it be not
delivered in a form of words, expressly obligatory?

R. C. Of the Christian Sabbath, page 83. Maintains, that Abraham, Jacob, and
the rest of the Patriarchs, who lived before the Law, kept the Sabbath, etc.

Answer to the former Argument out of Genesis 2.2.
Three things are delivered in the Text of Genesis, Chap. 2. verse. 2, 3.

1 GOD Almighty, on the seventh day of the Week of Creation, had finished the
work, which He had made.

2 On the same seventh day, He rested from all his work, which he had made.

3 He blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it, He rested
from all His work, which He had made or created.

But this Scripture expresses not the manner how the LORD sanctified this day,
whether by imparting any special virtue to it, above other days: Or by
dedicating the same to any religious service, to be performed by Adam, in the
state of innocence: Or whether by an inward decree only, he destined that day,
to religious offices, in future time.

Eminent Doctors, both Ancient and modern, are of contrary opinions,
concerning this question.

Venerable Beda Beda, and post eum alij. Sanctificavit Deus Sabbatu^, non actu
and reipsa, sed decreto and destinatione sua, q. d. Quia quievit Deus die
septimo hinc illum diem ordinavit sibi sacrum, ut indiceretur festus colendus a
Iudaeis. Abulens. in Genes. 2. Pererius, Bonfrerius, Lorinus, Paul. Burgens.
Addit. ad Genesis 2. Vatablus Annot. in Genesis 2. (...) benedixit, and sanctificavit
diem septimum, hoc est, sanctum, solennem, and venerabilem haberi voluit.
Coepit autem sanctus and solennis haberi, data lege, non antea. Musculus, loc.
com. in 4. Praecept. Galatin. d. Arc. cath. ver. lib. 11. ca. 10. Author. lib.
Victor. c. Iud. p. 2. cap. 15. Greg. Val. Azorius Fagundes.
, and before him, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaeus, etc. and many other
Doctors, both Pontificians, and of the reformed Church maintain, that God
sanctified the Seventh day, Genesis 2. by His decree and destination only, and
not by any present imposition.

And the arguments upon which this opinion is grounded, are very weighty.

1 There is no other means for us to understand, what the will and act of God
was, Genesis 2. but only divine revelation: and the holy Scripture, neither makes
mention, of any Commandment of God, given to Adam, concerning his resting upon
the Sabbath Day; neither yet makes any historical narration, of Adam's, or of
any other the Patriarchs observation of the Sabbath Day. Now in cases of this
quality, Athanasius his rule is: Quia tacitum est de ea re, in Scripturis
sanctis, certum est, non prius evenisse: Because the Holy Scripture is
altogether silent in this matter, we may be assured there was no such thing
done Hieron. in Mat. cap. 23. Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem
facilitate reijcitur, qua probatur. Iren. li. 3. c. 12. Ostensiones quae sunt
in Scripturis non possunt ostendi, nisi ex ipsis Scripturis. Orig. in Ex. Hom.
13. Hoc divinare magis est quam explicare, ubi quod dicitur, non de
Scripturarum authoritate munitur. Ambros. ep. 64. Quod nusquam legerim non
astruo, nec verum arbitror.
.

2 It is repugnant to the common sentence of the Doctors of the Church, that
God Almighty, imposed upon Adam in the state of innocence, any other positive
precepts, but one only of abstinence from the fruit of the tree of Knowledge:
And from this circumstance, they aggravate Adam's offense; Namely, that he
being charged with one only negative precept of obedience, which was so easy
to be observed, became notwithstanding a transgressour Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom.
14. and Hom. 16. Bern. de Circumcis. Ser. 2. Aug. de Civ. Dei. li 14. cap. 12.
Mandatum hoc de uno cibi genere non edendo, ubi aliorum copia, tam leve
praeceptu^ ad observandum, tam breve ad in memoria retinendum, etc.
.

3 The Law of the fourth Commandment, was not agreeable to the state of
innocence. For in that happy state there was no toilesome labor, for man or
beast: The earth required not the work of laborious hands, for freely by GOD'S
blessing and command it brought forth fruit, so that man needed not be weary
in working Teoph. Antioch. ad Autolych. lib. 2 Nec terra postulabat laboriosas
hominu^ manus, nam sua sponte ex praecepto Dei proferebat fructus, ne homo
operando lassaretur.
. Sweat of face entered into the world after the fall, Genesis 3.19. And before the
fall, man's labor was matter of delight and pleasure: Besides, being a
freeman, he might intermit labor at any time, when himself pleased. Neither
yet was there any necessity of having one set day in every week, for
performing religious offices: For as Tertullian Tertul. de Patient. cap. 5.
observes, Vivebat homo in Paradiso, fruens Deo, de proximo amicus: Man lived
in Paradise, in a fruition of GOD, and as a familiar friend. Quamdiu in
Conditoris sui obedentia perstitit, in suavissimo contemplationis Divinae lecto
requievit: Nullam in animo poterat sentire esuriem, and omnem quae ex carne
nascitur ignorabat passionem Gregor. M. in 7. Psalm. Poenitential. prooem. in
Psalm. 3.
. So long as he persisted in the obedience of his Maker, he enjoyed continual
rest, in the sweet bed of divine contemplation. He could feel no spiritual
hunger, and he was ignorant of all fleshly and carnal passion. Lastly, all
God's creatures were as living books, to preach to man, the Majesty, and
bounty of the Creator. The Law therefore of the fourth Commandment requiring
cessation from toilesome labor, for man himself, for beast, for Ox and Ass
Anastas. Sinait. Anag. cont. in Hex am. lib. 7. Neque camelos, and asinos, and
mulos, jussit Sabbatum agere.
, for manservant, and maid servant, and for the stranger within the gates;
could not be in force, or of any use in the state of innocence: Because in
Paradise there were no servants, or bondmen August. de Civ. Dei, lib. 19. ca.
17. Conditio servitutis jure inteiligitur imposita peccatorit nullus natura in
qua prius Deus hominem condidit, servus est hominis aut peccati.
, no persons or other creatures needing a weekly Sabbath, or day of rest from
toilesome labor: neither was there any necessity of having a set day, for
spiritual contemplation.

Fourthly, The most Ancient Primitive Fathers affirm, that none of the
Patriarchs, living before Moses, observed the Sabbath Day.

Justin. Martyr c. Tryph. Neq, Circumcisionem, neque S bbatum observabant
Enochi temporibus. Ante Abraham non fuit usus Circumcisionis, neque ante Mosen
celebrationis Sabbati. Ad ipsum usque Mosen, nullus omnino justoru^ servavit
Sabbatum, and ne praeceptum quide^ serv^^d accepit
. In the days of Enoch, people observed not Circumcision, or the Sabbath.

Before Abraham there was no use of Circumcision, nor before Moses, of keeping
holy the Sabbath.

Before Moses, none of the Righteous observed the Sabbath: neither received
they any Commandment to observe it.

Tertullian Tertul. c. Iudaeos. cap. 2. and 4. and 6. Neque Sabbatizante^m Deus
Adam instituit, etc. consequenter sobole^ ejus Abel, etc. Noah no^
Sabbatizantem de diluvio liberavit. Enoch justissimu^ and no^ circu^cisu^, nec
Sabbatizante^, de hoc mu^do transtulit: Melchisedech summi Dei Sacerdos non
Sabbatizans ad Sacerdotiu^ Dei allectus est.
, Enoch, Noah, Melchisedech, Abel, etc. observed not the old Sabbath.

Melchisedech God's High Priest, was elected to the office of Priesthood,
being uncircumcised, and without Sabbatizing, or keeping holy the Sabbath: And
from hence it appears that the observation of the Sabbath Day was temporary.

Iren. Iren. lib. 4. ca. 50. Ipse Abraham sine circumcisione, and sine
observatione Sabbati, credidit Deo, and reputatum est ei ad justitiam.
. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, before
he was circumcised, and without observation of the Sabb.

This Father in the same place treating of Circumcision, and the Sabbath, says
as follows: Sed and reliqua omnis multitudo eorum, qui ante Abraham fuerunt
justi, and eorum Patriarcharum qui ante Mosen fuerunt, sine hijs quae praedicta
sunt, and sine lege Mosis justificabantur. Likewise the whole multitude of just
men, which were before Abraham, and all the multitude of Patriarchs before
Moses, were justified without these things, of which we spoke before
(Circumcision, and the Sabbath) and without Mose 's Law.

Eusebius Eusebius. Demonstrat. Evang. lib. 1. ca. 6. Melchisedech servus dei
altissimi etc. qui neque corpore erat circumcisus, neque quid Sabbatum esset
ullo modo edoctus etc. beatus Job, etc. Id. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 4. Neque
certe ulla corporis circu^cisio fuit illis (Patriarchis) neque Sabbatoru^
observatio, quia neque nobis, etc.
. Melchisedech the servant of the most High God, etc. was neither circumcised
in his body, neither was he taught at all what the Sabbath was: And in like
manner blessed Job.

There was no Circumcision of the body, nor observation of the Sabbath, among
them (Patriarks) like as there is none among us.

Damascen Damasc. de Fid. Orth. lib. 4. cap. 24. Quando non erat lex, neque
Scriptura divinitus inspirata, neque Sabbatum Deo sacrabatur. At quando
Scriptura divinitus inspirata per Mosen data est, sacratum est Deo Sabbatum, ut
circa Scriptura meditationem in eo exercitarentur, etc.
. Before Mose's Law, and Scripture given by Divine inspiration, the Sabbath was
not consecrated unto God. But when the Scripture, divinely inspired, was given
by Moses, the Sabbath was made sacred to God, and that people might be
exercised in Meditation of Scripture.

Now from the Premises, our Reader may well observe, that it is a question
Problematicall and dubious, whether the observation of the Sabbath was imposed
upon Adam, and his posterity in Paradise? For there are no commanding or
imperative words, nor any sentence declaring, or signifying a Precept, in the
Text of Genesis the second: And many learned Authors, ancient and modern, both
Pontificians, and men of note and quality in the reformed Churches, are of
diverse opinions touching this question.

Alexander de Hales Al. Hal. part. 3. quaest. 32. membr. 3. art. 1.
, a famous and Ancient Schoole-man, says: Etsi ante legem esset inspirata
observantia Sabbati secundum rationem honesti, hoc est digne fieri; non tamen
secundum rationem praecepti, hoc est debite ficri: sed hoc modo proponitur in
lege. Although it was inspired before Mose's Law, that the observance of the
Sabbath was agreeable to honesty, and was worthy to be done: yet it was not
delivered by way of Precept, or as a thing to be done of duty: but it was thus
propounded in the Law.

Franciscus de Petigian. Fra. Petig. Commentar. Scholast. in 2. cap. Genesis p.
265.
, a Scotist, says, that the more common opinion of Divines is, that the
observation of the Sabbath was not commanded before Mose's time.

Many Divines also of our profession affirm the same: Musculus in his Common
places Musculus in 4. mandat.
: Gomarus in two several Treatises Gomar. investig. Orig. Sabb. Id. Desens.
sentent. Sabb.
, written of that argument. The Professors of Leiden Synopsis purior. Theol.
Disp 21. ^. 14.
, make it doubtful, whether the Patriarchs before the Law observed the Sabbath
or not: and that it may be, the institution of it began, Exodus 16.5. and not
before.

Being therefore a matter doubtful and uncertain, whether the Sabbath of the
fourth Commandment had his beginning in the second of Genesis: It is repugnant
both to the rule of good reason, and of sound Divinity, to ground the necessary
and perpetual observation of this day, upon such a dubious and controverted
principle.

Lastly, if it could be clearly and effectually proved, that the Law of the
Seventh day Sabbath was given to Adam in Paradise, before his fall, or out of
Paradise, after his fall: And likewise, if it were certain, that the Holy
Patriarchs, Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, etc. observed the same: This affords
not sufficient demonstration, that the Law of the fourth Commandment
concerning the Seventh day Sabbath, is simply and perpetually Moral, or a
precept, or a necessary conclusion of the Law of Nature. For supposing Divine
institution in Paradise, or out of Paradise, and likewise a continued
observation by the Patriarchs: This can reach no higher, than to make it a
Divine positive Law, necessary to be obeyed, during the time GOD Himself
appointed.

In Paradise there was a positive Law, concerning the Tree of Knowledge;
Therefore, the imposition of positive Laws, was not repugnant to the state of
man in Paradise.

After the fall of man, the Holy Patriarchs received positive precepts,
concerning abstinence from the blood of beasts: concerning the difference of
clean and unclean beasts: Concerning sacrifices, etc. For the Patriarchs
observed not these ordinances by chance-medly, neither did they forge or invent
them by their own imagination, or by their own natural and humane wisdom:
But they being Holy Prophets, (Epist. Iud. ver. 14. Genesis 9.25, 26. Genesis 20.7.
and 27.27. and 49. per totum) they received the Law of Sacrifices, and other
positive Laws by Revelation, by Oracle, and by Divine Inspiration.

If therefore it could be proved, that the Patriarchs living before the Law
observed the Sabbath: they observed the same, only as a Divine positive Law,
to wit, in such wise as they kept the law of abstinence from blood, and the law
of burnt sacrifices Zanch. in 4. Praecept. cap. 19. Quod aiunt patres ante
legem sanctificasse diem septimum, quanquam hoc non facile and aperte
demonstrari potest ex sacris literis: ego tamen non contradixerim. Sed quod
inferunt, esse igitur natural; ita ut etiam ad nos pertineat, tam facile
sequitur, ac si dicas: Patres ante legem offerebant animalia: item
Circumcidebantur, ergo utrunque est natural, and a nobis praestari debet.
. Read before page 34. where I have made clear demonstration, that the Law of
the old Sabbath was a positive law.

T. B. If the ground whereon Moses stood, became holy ground, because of GOD'S
presence there: what shall hinder it, but that in like sort the Day wherein GOD
Himself rested, should forthwith become an Holy Day?

Answ. The ground whereon Moses stood Exodus 3.5. was at that present time an
holy place, because of the Divine apparition of the Angel, who represented the
person of GOD Himself: Aug. in Exodus q. 3. Clamarit ad eum Dominus de Rubo:
Dominus in Angelo, an Dominus Angelus, ille qui dictus est, magni concilii
Angelus, and intelligitur Christus.
And because the Holy Angel declared, that the same should be so esteemed. But
this holiness, was only temporary, and continued no longer, that until the
vision and Oracle of that present time was ended: and then afterward Abulens.
in Ex. q. 3. Terra in se sancta non est, sed sancta dicitur, quia Deus ibi
apparuit, and legem ibi postea dedit.
at the giving of the Law, it was sanctified again, Exodus 19.23.

In like manner, the seventh Day of every Week was holy in the time of the
Law, and for the whole time it pleased God to have it so: but it is impossible
to prove, by the former comparison, that the seventh Day must be a perpetual
Holy Day, unless it be first proved that the Law of the Old Sabbath is
eternal. For if it be only a precept positive, then it can oblige no other
people than those to whom it was revealed, nor for any longer time, than the
Lawgiver has appointed.

T. B. His grand Objection out of Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. etc.
The Precept of the Sabbath, John Sprint. d. Sab. page 13. Whatsoever Law was
written with the finger of God, and that in stone: and that two several times
immediately delivered by God as no other laws judicial or Ceremonial were:
and even put into the Ark of GOD with the other nine Commandments (these
circumstances implying their permane^cy even under the Gospel, and the denial
of any power but God's to blot the^ out) is as perpetual as other laws so
written and reserved. But so was the fourth Commandment written and reserved.
was delivered in Mount Sinai, with the other nine Commandments. It was
uttered and pronounced by GOD'S own and immediate voice, with the same
Majesty, terror, and all circumstances of the other nine: to wit, with
thundering, lightning, sound of the Trumpet, fire, and smoke, earthquake,
Exodus 19.16.18. and in the Common audience of all the people.

The same was written and engraven in stone, in the first Table, with the
finger of GOD.

By the Commandment of GOD, it was afterward placed within the Arc of the
Covenant, as well as the other nine.

The general Preface or Proeme of the ten Commandments, was prefixed, and
had the same reference to this precept, which it had to all the rest.

Therefore if the other nine Commandments for these reasons, are simply and
eternally moral, the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath, must likewise
be so.

Answ. If this Argument have any weight, it concludes for the Saturday
Sabbath; and not for the Sunday, or Lord's Day. It makes some noise in a
popular auditory, but being examined, it has no more strength than a broken
Reed. For the antecedent or leading part, namely, that God himself immediately
uttered the ten Commandments, is dubious, and controverted, and the
inference likewise is not necessary.

1 The antecedent is dubious for this reason: many texts of holy Scripture, and
many profound Doctors affirm; That the Lord himself did not utter and
pronounce the ten Commandments with his own voice, but by the ministerial
voice of his Angel.

Acts 7.38. This is he that was in the congregation in the Wilderness with
the Angel, which spoke to him in Mount Sinai, and with our Fathers.

Acts 7.53. Which have received the Law, by the Ordinance of Angels, and have
not kept it.

Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added because of
transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the Promise was made, and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

Heb. 2.2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, etc.

John 5.37. The Father himself which sent me, has borne witness of me: you
have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

Now whereas in many places of the Law it is said; that God himself uttered
the words of the Decalogue with his own voice, Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 5.22. This
proves not, that God Almighty pronounced them immediately; for we find in
holy Scripture, that when holy Angels, or Prophets, were the immediate persons
which uttered and delivered the vocal and external sound of words, the Lord
himself is reported to have spoken unto men. Aquinas 1. 2. q. 98. art. 3.
Apostolus. Heb. 2. Probat eminentiam novae legis ad veterem, quia in novo
Testamento locutus est Deus nobis in filio suo, in vetere autem Testamento, est
sermo factus per Angelos. Rabbi Moses. (...) p. 1. ca. 27. Nihil novi est in
libris Prophetarum, ut narrentur verba illa, quae Angelus nomine Dei loquitur,
ac si Deus ipse proferret.
Genesis 18.2.13. Exodus 3.2.6, 7.

Saint Augustine August. c. Adamant. manic. c. 9. d. Trin l. 2. c. 13. and li.
3. ca. 11. In Exodus quaest. 3. and q. 144. In Joan. tr. 3.
is resolute, that Almighty GOD Himself, in the Time of the Old Testament, did
not speak to the Jews and Israelites, with his own immediate voice, but
only by his Angels, and by his Prophets.

And when the Heretic objected, Cur ergo scriptum est, dixit Deus, and non
dixit Angelus? his answer was, Quia cum verba judicis praeco pronunciat, non
scribitur in gestis, ille praeco dixit, sed ille judex qui imperavit ut
diceret. Wherefore then was it written, GOD spoke, and not rather an Angel
spoke? because, when in the place of judicature, the Crier pronounces the
decree, and sentence of the Judge, it is not recorded in the Acts or Court
Rolls, the Crier delivered this sentence and decree, but the Judge who
commanded the Crier to proclaim it.

And again in the same passage: Sicut verbum Dei est in Propheta, and recte
dicitur, dixit Dominus, quia verbum Dei quod est Christus, in Propheta loquitur
veritatem; sic and in Angelo ipse loquitur, quando veritatem Angelus annunciat:
Et recte dicitur, Deus dixit, and Deus apparuit, cum illud dicatur ex persona
inhabitantis Dei, illud ex persona servientis creaturae. Even as by reason the
word of God is in the Prophet, it is truly said, the LORD speaks, because the
Word of GOD CHRIST, speaks verity in the Prophet: and likewise when an
Angel annunciates truth, it is rightly said, the Lord speaks, or the Lord
appears: because the one of these is spoken in respect of the Divine Person,
who inhabited in the Angel: and the other is spoken, in respect of the person
of the Creature, who for the present was God's Minister and Ambassador. To the
same purpose speak St. Hierome, Hieron. in Gal. 3. Quod ait Apostolus, lex per
Angelos data est, hoc vult intelligi, quod in omni vetere Testamento, ubi
Angelus primum visus refertur, and postea quasi Deus loquens inducitur,
mediator loquebatur, qui dicit, ego sum Deus Abraham, etc.
Dionysius Areopagita Dionys. Areop. Hierarch. c. 4. Angelicu^ nomen meruerunt,
quia primum a Deo illumina^tur and per ipsos nobis nostrae revelationes
transmittuntur. Sic igitur lex, ut Divinus sermo testatur, per Angelos nobis
data est. S. Maximus Scholia in hunc locum. Primam legem per Angelos datam esse
sanctus Stephanus testatur.
, Gregory the Great Angelus qui Mosi apparuisse describitur, modo Angelus, modo
Dominus memoratur. Angelus videlicet propter hoc quod exterius loquendo
serviebat: Dominus autem dicitur, quia interius praesidens, loquendi efficaciam
ministrabat. Cum ergo loquens ab interiori regitur, et per obsequium Angelus,
and per inspiratione^ Dominus nominatur. Id. mor. li. 28. c. 2. Duobus modis
divina locutio distinguitur; aut per semetipsum Dominus loquitur, aut per
Angelicam creaturam ejus ad nos verba formantur. Sed cu^ per semetipsum
loquitur, sola nobis vis internae inspirationis aperitur, et de verbo ejus,
sine verbis and syllabis cor docetur.
, in Moralium praefat. cap. 1.

But if it shall be granted that God Himself Immediatione virtutis, and
immediatione suppositi, not only by his suggestion, but also immediately in his
own person, uttered and proclaimed all the words of the Decalogue, and
consequently all the words of the fourth Commandment: This will not confirm
that Precept to have been simply moral. For what sufficient reason can be
rendered, why God Himself may not deliver a positive Precept by his immediate
voice, as well as a Precept simply moral? God Almighty spoke to Abraham nine
several times in the book of Genesis. He spoke likewise frequently to Moses:
and to Job, and to his three friends, Job 38.1. and 42.7. and to Elias, 1 Kings
19.9.12. and to David, 1 Samuel 23.12. and 30.8.10.

At the delivery of the Leviticall and Judicial Laws, the Lord himself spoke
to Moses Tert. d. jejunio. ca. 6. Vidit oculis (Moses) Dei gloriam, et audivit
auribus Dei vocem. Amb. l. 1. Ep. 3. Moses ille quo nemo praesentius Deum
vidit, neque surrexit amplius in Israel Propheta qui Deu^ facie ad faciem sicut
Moses videret: ille qui 40. diebus cum Deo jugiter, and noctibus fuit, cum
legem acciperet in Monte, etc.
, (...) face to face, as a man uses to speak to his friend, Exodus 33.11. and
(...) mouth to mouth. Number. 12.8. Deuteronomy. 5.31. Stand thou here with me, and I
will tell thee all the Commandments, and the Ordinances, and the Laws, which
thou shall teach them, Exodus 20.21, 22.

But this immediate and personal speaking of God Almighty to Abraham, Job,
Moses, etc. made not all his precepts, and dictates, delivered in this manner,
simply and eternally moral: for some of them were personal, Genesis 17.1. and
many of them were ceremonial and judicial.

2 If the Lord's immediate or vocal pronouncing the Law of the fourth
Commandment, proves it not to be simply and perpetually moral: then the
writing and ingraving thereof, with the finger of GOD in a Table of stone: and
the placing of it in the Arc of the Covenant, are not sufficient to prove it
to be such.

For these were only circumstantiall accidents, which made no alteration of
the internal, and natural form or quality of the material object of this
Commandment: and Aarons Rod, and the Pot of Manna, were placed in the Arc of
Testimony Aug. in Exodus q. 105. In Arca jussa sunt poni, Lex, and Manna, and
Virga Aaron. Origin in Josh. hom. 1. Arcam Testam. Domini, in qua Lex, and
divinae literae servantur.
, as well as the Law of the fourth Commandment, Heb. 9.4. The Book of
Deuteronomy also, not being totally moral; was placed in the side of the Arc
of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.26.

H. B. (Dialog. manuscript.) writing the ten Commandments in stone, was a note
of their perpetuity, Job 19.24: O that my words were now written, O that they
were written even in a Book, and graven with an Iron Pen in Lead, or in stone
for ever!

Answ. Writing the ten Commandments in stone, was a figure and represent of
hardness of heart in the Israelites Aug. d. Cat. rud. c. 20. Accepit ille
populus legem digito Dei scriptam in tabulis lapideis, ad significandam
duritiam cordis illorum, quod legem non erant impleturi.
, 2 Cor. 3.14. Ezech. 11.19. and 36.26. and not of the perpetual obligation of
the fourth Commandment. For Joshua wrote upon stones a rehearsal of the Law
of Moses, in the presence of the children of Israel, Josh. 8.32. But a great
part of Moses his Law, was positive, and legally ceremonial.

3 The proeme of the Decalogue confirms not the natural and perpetual
morality of the fourth Commandment. For besides, that this Proeme had special
relation to the Children of Israel G. W. Of the Sab. page 32. In the first
Command. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: this
had only reference to the Jews: but we may rather say, which brought us out
of the bondage of sin, or out of the bondage of Popery.
, whom God delivered out of Egyptian bondage, and was used as a special
motive, to that stiff-necked Nation, to persuade them to obedience: We read
in Deuteronomy. the same motive used by Moses, to persuade the Israelites to observe
the whole Law, both moral, and ceremonial, and judicial, Deuteronomy. 6.20. When
thy son shall ask thee in time to come, What mean these Testimonies, and
Ordinances, and Laws, which the Lord our God has commanded you? 21. Then thou
shall say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt, but the Lord
brought us out of Egypt, with a mighty hand. 22. And the Lord showed signs
and wonders, great and evil, upon Egypt, and upon Pharaoh, etc. 24. Therefore
the Lord has commanded us to do all these Ordinances, etc.

T. B. At a private Conference argued in manner following.
It is found in Scripture that GOD himself wrote some Laws, and Moses wrote
other. But Moses wrote such Laws as were temporary, and therefore abolished
under the Gospel. And GOD Himself wrote not in Tables of stone any temporary
Law, but every one of the Laws written by Him were eternal.

Now the Law of the Sabbath, was one of GOD'S Laws, written in the very heart
of the Decalogue, with his finger.

Therefore this Law of the Sabbath was simply and eternally moral.

Answ. GOD'S writing of some Laws, and Mose's writing of other Laws, made not
a formal difference betwixt all the Laws which were written according to this
diverse manner. For many Laws written by Moses in the Decalogue, were properly
and perpetually moral, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. If any of thy brethren with thee be
poor, etc. Thou shall open thy hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient
for his need. Leviticus 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart,
but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin,
Deuteronomy. 10.19. Love ye the stranger, etc. Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not put a
stumbling block before the blind.

2 Concerning God's own writing of Laws, there can no sufficient reason be
rendered: wherefore a temporary Precept may not as well be written with his
finger, as delivered by his internal inspiration.

3 God's writing, was his forming and creating, by his power, the external
characters, letters, etc. of the ten Commandments. But it appears by the
example of Ionas's Gourd. C. 4. 6. and by many other instances, that all things
immediately formed, and created by God, are not eternal.

4 If God's immediate speaking and writing argues precepts thus spoken and
written, to be perpetually moral: Then his not writing of Precepts, argues
them to be temporary. For proper signs and affections conclude both
affirmatively, and also negatively. For example: Micaiah the son of Imlah,
was a true Prophet, because he was inspired by God. But Zidkiah the son of
Chenaanah, was not a true Prophet, because he was not inspired by God, 1 Kings
22. Aaron and his Sons were Priests of the LORD, because they were called and
anointed according to the Law and commandment of GOD: but Korah, Dathan, etc.
were not the LORD'S Priests, for they received no such calling and unction.

In like manner, if the LORD'S immediate speaking, uttering, and writing, does
conclude by a necessary inference, that all Precepts uttered and written in
this manner, are simply and perpetually moral: Then on the contrary, all
Precepts wanting this, are merely temporary. But the falsity hereof is
evident, by many instances: namely, Be not drunken with wine, wherein is
excess: Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Be not forgetful to lodge
strangers. Forgive one another your trespasses. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good, to the use of edifying,
Mat. 10.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves, Ib. 12.36. Of every
idle word that men speak, they shall give an account, at the Day of Judgment.

Now although these, and many other such like Commandments, were not
immediately pronounced, by God Almighty, nor written with his finger in Tables
of stone; They are notwithstanding simply and eternally moral. And from hence
it is evident, that the Lord's immediate writing, etc. is not an inseparable
property, of Precepts purely and perpetually moral: But notwithstanding this,
they may be positive and temporary.

T. B. His Objection out of Matthew. Chap. 5. Verse 17. etc.
Matthew 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I
am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them.

18 For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or title
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of GOD: But
whosoever shall observe and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of GOD.

By the Law here, CHRIST understands the Moral Law: for the same is it He
expounds, in the verses of the Chapter following. And sure I am, the
Sabbath Day is not less, than one of the jots and titles of the Law, page 118.

I cannot devise what should be more plain and pregnant, for the maintenance
of this ordinance of God's Moral Sabbath, than this Text, page 451.

CHRIST in this Text ratifieth the whole Decalogue, and every jot and title
thereof, and He teaches that the same shall continue for ever, or until the
World be destroyed.

The fourth Commandment therefore, and every branch thereof, being one of the
Precepts of the Decalogue, is totally and eternally Moral.

John Sprint. d. Sab. page 13. The fourth Commandment of sanctifying one day
in seven, is not ceremonial, but moral and perpetual, which Christ destroyed
not, Matthew. 3.17. G. W. d. Sab. p. 18. Whereas some say, so much of the moral
LaW shall stand as Christ has re-established in the Gospel, therein they
grant that the Sabbath shall remain. For Christ has established the whole
Law; yea, and has warranted every jot and title of it, to be as durable as the
Heavens. And therefore unless we can turn Heaven and earth upside down, let
us beware to take one jot or title from the Law of God.
R. C. Of the Sabbath, page 63. In this Scripture, three things are
considerable: First what is meant by these Commandments; And Interpreters
deliver, they are the ten Commandments: Secondly, by the least Commandment,
is meant any one of the ten, which should be slighted or disesteemed. Thirdly,
this speech was not confined to our Savior's natural life only, but it is to
be extended to all succeeding ages, and future times.

Answer to the grand Objection out of Matthew. 5.17, etc.
The subject of our Savior's Doctrine, Mat. 5.17, 18. is not the Decalogue
only, but the whole Law of GOD contained in the Pentateuch, and also the whole
doctrine and the predictions of the holy Prophets, who lived before Christ.

1 The words of the Text are, I am not come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets. But the Law and the Prophets are of larger extent, and contain more
than the Decalogue, Matthew. 11.13. All the Prophets and the Law prophesied
until John, Luke 24.44. All things must be fulfilled which were written in
the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets
endured until John 17. Now it is more easy that heaven and earth should pass
away, than one title of the Law should fail.

Secondly, The whole Law and Doctrine which our Savior came to fulfill, and
not to destroy, is the subject of His speech, Mat. 5.17.

But our Savior came to fulfill the whole Law of the Pentateuch, and all
things prophesied, and foretold by the Prophets. And although He disannulled
the old positive law, in respect of observation, in the time of the Gospel:
Yet He established and confirmed the lawful use thereof in the Christian
Church: and the obedience of all such spiritual and Evangelicall duties, as
were signified and pre-figured by the Rites, and Ceremonies of that Law August.
c. Faust. Manic. li. 18. c. 6. Sive Circumcisio, sive Sabbatum, etc. figurae
nostrae and Prophetiae erant, quas Christus non solvere, sed adimplere venit,
cum ea quae hiis praeuunciabantur implevit. Idem Sermon. Dom. in Mont. lib. 1.
cap. 8. Quod ait, jota unu^ aut apex unus, non transibit a lege, nihil aliud
potest intelligi, nisi vehemens expressio perfectionis, quae per literas
singulas demonstrata est: inter quas literas jota minor est caeteris, quia uno
ducto fit apex autem est etiam ^sius, aliqu^ in summa particula. Quibus verbis
ostendit, in lege ad effectum minima quaeque perduci. d. util. Crea^ cap. 3.
Evacuatur in Christo, non vetus Testamentum, sed velamen ejus. Ambr. Epist. 76.
Plena mensura in Evangelio est: semi plena in lege, cujus plenitudo est novum
Testamentum. Siquidem ipse Dominus ait: non veni legem solvere sed implere
. 1 Cor. 5.8. Romans 2.29.

Thirdly, All the Commandments specified by CHRIST, Matthew. 5. were not
delivered by GOD Himself in Mount Sina, Exodus 20. For verse 39. it is thus
written: I say unto you, resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also: And if any man will sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: And whosoever
will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that asks,
and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away. Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which ^t you, and persecute you.

Fourthly, The verb (...), Matthew. 5.17. I am not come to destroy the Law, etc.
signifies in holy Scripture, to annihilate, to demolish or pull down, and to
make frustrate.

Mat. 24.2. There shall not one stone be left upon another, which shall not be
demolished, (...).

Esdr. 5.12. The King of Babylon destr^^ed, demolished this house, (...).

Acts 5.38. If this counsel or this work be of men, (...), it will be
frustrate, and come to nothing: But if it be of God, you cannot (...), destroy
it or bring it to nothing. Now this being the signification of the word (...),
to destroy, it is inconsequent to argue, That because our Savior came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, or any jot or title thereof, by annihilation,
or making them frustrate, or of no use in the Christian Church: Therefore He
maintained the Moral obedience, and observation of every part and precept
thereof Suar. d. leg. li. 9. cap. 11. Non solvere, non est abrogare, non sed
non transgredi. Tollere legem post impletu^ tempus, pro quo fuit lata, non est
transgressio, nec injuria legis, cum sit voluntas legislatoris, imo illud ipsum
est implere legem
. For after He had fulfilled the whole Law, and Prophets by his own personal
obedience: And performed likewise all things, which were foretold and written
of him, in the Law and the Prophets August. c. Faust Manich. li. 19. c. 8. Quod
in Prophetis sive aperte, sive per figuras vel locutionum vel actionum promitte
batur, ab illo impletum est, qui non venit solvere legem, sed implere.
: He freed and delivered the Christian Church, from the external observation
and obedience of all such legal precepts, as were not simply, and formally
Moral: Nevertheless, He maintained the honor of the old Law Theoph. in Mat.
5.17. Quoniam ipse novas leges introducturus erat, ne putaretur quod Deo
adversarius esset, dixit, quod non destruat legem, sed implevit, (...); quia
perfecit omnia quae praedixerunt Prophetae: and omnia mandata legis implevit,
quia peccatum non fecit, (...). Quaecunque enim illa adumbravit, hic perfect
depinxit: sicut pictor non corrumpit lineamenta prima, sed magis illustrat and
implet.
: and of the Doctrine contained therein: also, He inspired his Apostles to
teach his Church the true sense and understanding, and to declare the right
end, and use of that Law: and he maintained the reading and expounding of the
Law and the Prophets: And by his Divine providence, he preserved the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, and every jot and title thereof from being lost or
destroyed, by tyranny of Persecutors, fraud of Heretics, or by negligence of
profane persons.

Lastly, Our Sabbatizers must first of all make remonstrance, That the fourth
Commandment of the Decalogue is simply and formally Moral: Before they
presume to affirm, that the same is a part, jot or title of that eternal Law
which CHRIST commands to be observed in the Christian Church, to the worlds
end, Matthew. 5.19.

T. B. His Argument from the example, or practice of Christ and the Apostles.
T. B. Our Savior Himself during His abode in this world, constantly observed
the Sabbath day, to wit, the seventh day of every week, the Old Sabbath day.
So likewise the Holy Apostles both before, and after the Resurrection of
CHRIST, observed the very same day: Acts 13.14, 44. and chap. 16.13. and chap.
18.4. And they did this constantly, Acts 17.2. Paul, as his custom was, (...),
went in unto them three Sabbath-dayes, and disputed with them by the
Scriptures. Ioh. Sprint d. Sab. page 21. As the Apostles Constitutions, which
are called Commandments of the Lord, Act. 15 28. must needs tie the
Conscience: So their very practice and example in matter Religious, moral,
ministerial, directly tending to God's Public worship, and solemn Service,
does (...) the Conscience.


D. B. Of the Sabbath. page 23, 24. Our Savior CHRIST and all His Apostles
established the Sabbath by their practice. For they upon the Sabbath ordinarily
enter into the Synagogue of the Jews; and Preach unto the people, doing such
things on those days as appertain to the sanctifying them according to the
Commandment. And this they did, not once or twice, but continually and
ordinarily, showing the ordinary continuance of the Sabbath, and the
sanctifying it.

Answ. The Reader may observe by this latter passage of D. B. out of what
armory T. B. borrowed his weapons to fight against the Church, for the setting
up of the seventh day Sabbath. For if the practice of Christ Himself whiles he
was under the Law, and of the Apostles before our Savior's Passion, and for
some space of time after his Resurrection, shall be a perpetual moral rule,
obliging all succeeding Ages to the observation of the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment. Then it cannot be denied, but that the Christian Church stands
bound, to keep holy the same Sabbath which Christ observed.

But passing by this gross Paradox, my answer is:

1 That our Savior in his own Person, during the time of his Humiliation,
duly observed the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, and all other legal
rites and observances, because he was under the Law, Gal. 4.4. He was
circumcised, Luke 2.21. He went up to the Passover, and to other legal
Festivalls, Mat. 26.17. John 2.23. and Chap. 5.1. and Chap. 7.37. He sent the
Lepers to the Priest to offer for their cleansing, as Moses had commanded, Luke
5.14. and therefore D. B. might from our Savior's example, as well have
concluded for the observation of all legal festivalls, and the whole Law of
Moses, as for the seventh day Sabbath of the fourth Commandment.

Besides it is observed by the Fathers, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 40. Sabbatu^
saepe solutum fuerat, imo vero and in circumcisione and in aliis compluribus
semper solvitur, and in Hiericho hoc esse factum licet conspicere. Matthew. 12.7.
If ye had known, what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless. Here Christ likeneth the observation
of the Sabbath to the offering of Sacrifices: he blames the Pharisees, because
when GOD would have mercy before sacrifice, they preferred keeping the Sabb.
being of like quality with sacrifice, before mercy.
and it appears by many speeches and actions of Christ, that he esteemed not
the Law of the Sabbath, to be an eternal Law: or of the same quality with the
other Precepts of the Decalogue: For it is simply and universally unlawful, to
transgress, or to commit any thing repugnant to the three first precepts, or
to the six latter, Namely, to worship any other Gods, or to use GOD'S Name
irreverently, or to set up Idols, or to commit adultery, or to bear
false-witnesse, etc.

But on the contrary, our Savior's Doctrine, and his practice teaches, that
it was in many cases and upon sundry occasions lawful to perform servile and
secular works, and to do things repugnant to the letter of the Law of the 4th
Command. John 5.9, 10. Mat. 12.1, 2, 3. 5. Mark. 2.23. John 7.27. And from
hence the Fathers infer this observation: That Christ by his words concerning
the Sabbath, and by many of his actions upon that day, did signify and
foretell the cessation and expiration of the Sabbaticall Law, in the time of
grace. Epiphan. Haeres. 30. Apostoli ex ejus convictu disciplinaque, abrogatae
esse Sabbati legem haud ignorabant Tertul. c. Marc. l. 4. c. 12 Per Iesum
(Nave, qui typu^ Christi) tunc quoque concussum est Sabbatum.


Concerning the Apostles observing the Sabbath.

The holy Apostles after the Resurrection and Ascension of CHRIST, preached the
Gospel in Synagogues upon the Sabbath days: not to signify the perpetual
morality of the seventh day Sabbath; but to the end that they complying with
Jews and Proselytes, in this observance might obtain familiar access, and
gain opportunity to instruct them in the Christian Faith, and by little and
little, to teach them the cessation of the Old Law. Neither did they deal thus
in the matter of the Sabbath only, but for a time they condescended unto them,
in the use of some other legal observances. Clem. Alexand. strom. l. 7. c. 5.
Ecce Timotheu^ praeclarus circumcidit Apostolus, cu^ vociferaretur and
scriberet, circu^cisionem manu factam nihil prodesse, sed ne repent and
acervatim a lege avellens, ad eam quae est ex fide circumcisionem cordis,
reluctantes eos qui audiebant Iudaeos abrumperet, se Iudaeis acco^modans factus
est Iudaeus, ut omnes jucrifaceret. Chrysostom. ser. de virg. Expectavit dum fides
prius haereret in animis, veritus ne si citius quam rei tempus aut maturitas
venisset, ad zizaniae fibras evellendas accessisset, salutaris disciplinae
semina, una cum radicibus extirparet. Tert. d. praescript. ca. 24. Adeo pro
temporibus, and causis and personis, quaedam reprehendebant, in quae and ipsi
aeque pro temporibus, and personis, and causis committebant. Quemadmodum si and
Petrus reprehenderet Paulum, quod prohibens Circumcisionem, circumcidit ipse
Timotheum. Christ. sermon. 63. Cur in Pentecost. Act. Apost. page 946. Atque ut
intelligas eos idcirco tempora observare, non ut se observationis necessitati
subijciant, sed quod imbecillioribus sese accommodate conentur, audi quid dicat
Paulus: Dies observatis and Menses, etc. Iam vero si videamus eum qui Dies and
Menses, etc. observare vetat, haec observare, quid quaeso dicemus? Number eum sibi
repugnare, etc. Absit: sed eum, quod vellet eorum tollere imbecillitatem, a
quibus tempora observabantur, illis sese per observationem istam attemperare.
Ila quoque faciunt Medici, porrectos aegris cibos prius degustant, quamvis ipsi
minime cibis indigeant, sed illorum studeant in firmitati mederi. Ita quoque
Paulus egit, cum observatione temporum nihil egeret, tempora observavit, ut eos
qui observabant, illa observandi imbecillitate liberaret, Hieron. in Gal. 5.
For Saint Paul himself, who was most adverse to legal ceremonies, says in
manner following: Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might win the
Jews: to them that are under the Law, as though I were under the Law, that I
may win them that are under the Law, 1 Cor. 9.20.

Saint Augustine renders another reason, for which the Apostles observed some
legal rites, and ceremonies for a time. Namely, to signify the difference
betwixt legal rites, and Heathenish superstition, God Himself being the
Author of the one, and Satan of the other: And he adds: that because God
Himself was the Author of all the legal Ordinances, the Holy Apostles were
willing to yield unto them an honorable Funeral, after the time that their
obligation was fully expired in Christ. Aug. Epist. 19. Cur mihi non licet
dicere Apostolum Paulum, and alios rectae fidei Christianos, tunc illa vetera
sacramenta paululum observando commendare debuisse, ne putarentur illae
Propheticae significationis observationes a piissimis patribus custoditae,
tanquam sacrilegia diabolica a posteris detestandae? Iam enim cum venisset
dies, quae prius illis observationibus praenunciata, post mortem and
resurrectiorum Domini revelata est, vitam amiserunt: veruntamen sicut defuncta
corpora, necessariorum officiis, deducenda quodamodo erant ad sepulturam: non
autem deserenda continuo, vel inimicorum obtrectationibus, tanquam Caninis
morsibus projicienda.


T. B. His Objection from the practice of the Primitive Church, for sundry Ages
after Christ.
The more pure Primitive Churches, so long as they retained their best or
spotless purity, observed the Sabbath Day, page 79. and 488.

It was in use in the Primitive Churches after Christ, for three or four
hundred years: Namely, so long as the Church retained her best purity: and
until corruption and Popery came in.

This day was observed at the Council of Laodicea: and this Council was the
first, that did cast an aspersion of Iudaisme upon the keeping of that Day, p.
483. This Council made a schism and rent, from the most ancient and purest
Churches which lived before them: and the religious observance of the Old
Sabbath, has now lain buried 1200. years, ever since that wicked and
schismatic Decree, of the Council of Laodicea, page 611.

Answ. It is fomerly declared, in the first part of my answer, that T. B. his
position concerning the Seventh day Sabbath, is repugnant to the unanimous
sentence of all the Primitive Fathers. And it is impossible to demonstrate,
that any Ancient Churches or Fathers, favored the same.

Some Primitive Churches, which had Jews and Proselytes in their Christian
assemblies, made the Saturday of every Week an Holyday, upon the same reasons
the holy Apostles had formerly done: Aubaspina. Observat. in optat. and Council.
Carthag. l. 1 ca. 13. Ipsorum Apostolorum temporibus, Sabbatum uti festa,
colebatur. Existimo aute^ eam veram and germanam fuisse causam, quod cum primum
inter fratres and Iudaeos, disseminari Evangelium cepisset, nol^ent aut certe
non auderent, ceremonias omnes Iudaicas rescindere. Eam igitur quae ad Sabbatum
pertinebat, quaeque magnos motus, si sublata fuisset, excitatura fuisset, ne
eos a Christianis sacris averterent, retinuerunt.
But these Churches did in like manner observe the Lord's day, for a weekly
festival: and as I shall afterward prove, they preferred the Lord's Day, and
esteemed it more honorable then the Sabbath: neither did they observe, either
of these days, after the Law or rule of the fourth Commandment. For they
ceased not from all worldly labor and negotiation, by the space of the whole
day: but when religious offices appointed by the Church were finished,
Christian people had liberty, to work and to labor in their callings.

Ignatius Ignat. Ne Sabbatisemus more Iudaico, velut otio gaudentes; qui enim
non laborat, non edat: and in sudore valtus tu^ vesceris pane tuo, habent
Divina Oracula.
ad Magnes. Let not us Christians observe the Sabbath after the Jewish manner,
by rejoicing in idleness: because the divine Oracles say: He that will not
labor, let him not eat: and thou shall eat thy bread in the sweat of thy
face.

S. Ambrose Ambr. Nunc diem ipsum and oneribus ferendis, and negotiis obeundis,
sine paena animadvertimus deputari.
Epist. 72. Now under the Gospel, we observe, that this day, (to wit the
Sabbath day) is deputed and made free, to carry burdens, and to exercise
worldly business.

S. Athanasius. Athan. Nobis and universis simul permittitur, in Sabbato
laborare, quum nos omnes simus Regale Sacerdotiu^ Greg. m. Regist. li. 11.
Epist. 3.
tr. d. semente. It is permitted unto us, and to all people else, to work and
labor on the Sabbath day, by reason that all we are in these days a royal
Priesthood.

2. The Sabbath was not made a weekly festival, universally, or in all
primitive Churches, but only in some of them: for at Rome, Alexandria, and
throughout Africa, it was a working-day. Innocent. 1. Ep. 1. c 4. Aug. Epist.
86. Hier. Epist. 28 ad Lucin. Cassian. collat. 3. c. 10. Latinorum Ecclesia
nunquam Sabbatum coluit.


Justin Martyr, was an inhabitant and Professor in the Church of Rome: Eusebius.
Hist. eccl. li. 4. c. 11. Hieron. in Catal. in iustino. Photius in Biblio
and at Rome the Lord's Day was observed for religious Assemblies: and likewise
at Alexandria: and in Africa: and in these Churches the Sabbath Day was a
fasting-day: and therefore it could be no Holy Day, because of the precept of
the Primitive Church Ignat. Epist. ad Philip. Canon Apost. 65. Tertul. d.
Coron. mil. c. 3. Epiphan. Expos. fid. Cath. Number. 22. Ambros. Epi. 83.
, which prohibited that any festival day, should be an ordinary fasting day.
Concerning the Council of Laodicea.

1 T. B. Affirms that this Council was held in the year of our LORD, 364,
but both he and the Authors which he follows, are deceived in this matter of
Chronology: For this Council was held before the first Nicene, and in the
days of Pope Silvester the first: as the Authors cited in the margin have
proved. Baron. Annal. Eccl. tom. 4. in Append. Binius in notis ad Synod. Laod.
Longus Corialan. sum. Council. and in Chronolog. Falsum est synodum hanc
celebratam esse circa annum D. 364. sub Papae Liberii finalibus annis: nam fuit
celebrata medio tempore inter Neo-Caesarien sem and Nicenam Synodum, quando
Silvester, etc.


2 This Synod, as it is very ancient, so likewise it has always been
reputed Orthodoxall, and sundry good Decrees and Canons are found therein: and
by name one Canon touching the Canonical Books of the Old Testament Council.
Laod. ca. 59.
: and another which condemns the invocation and religious adoration of
Angels. Ib. ca. 35. Theod. in 2. ca. Colos. p. 193.


3 The Fathers of this Synod, were not schismatic, or novellists in the
matter of the Sabbath: for they maintain no other Doctrine concerning this
question, then Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Origin, etc. have in substance
delivered concerning the same. And Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. Dialog. c. Tryph.
p. 266.
who lived 150. years before this Synod, reports, that a question was made
in his time, Whether a Christian which observed the Sabbath, might be admitted
to the holy mysteries or not? Therefore the Fathers of the Council of
Laodicea, were not the first Authors, who condemned the religious observance of
the Old Sabbath.

T. B. His Objection out of S. Ignatius Page 259. and. 488.
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians, exhorts them to keep the
Sabbath Day: and he calling the Sunday or Lord's- Day, the Queen and
Princess of Days: signifies thereby, that he leaves an higher room for the
Sabbath Day, and that he accounted it, the King and Prince of days.

Answ. S. Ignatius the Martyr in his Epistle ad Magnes. writes as follows:
(...), etc. after the Sabbath Day, or instead of the Sabbath Day, let every
friend of Christ (...), keep holy day (...) the LORD CHRIST His Day, in memory
of CHRIST'S Resurrection: For the same is Queen, and Lady Princess of Days:
that Day which the holy Prophet expected and longed for, when he said in the
Title of the Psalm, In finem pro octava: The Day wherein spiritual life
received beginning, and Death was vanquished by Christ.

This Encomium which the Holy Martyr Ignatius has stamped as an honorable
Character upon the LORD'S Day, declares what esteem the Primitive Church
entertained of this Day. For Ignatius lived at least thirty years in the days
of St. John the Evangelist, and was his Auditor Eusebius. Chron. An. Dom. 71.
Antiochiae secundus Episcopus ordinatur Ignatius. Ioannes relegatur in Pathmon.
An. Dom. 97. Ioannes moritur, An. 103. Auditores ejus fuerunt, Papias
Hieropolitanus Episcopus, and Polycarpus Smyrnae, and Ignatius Antiochiae.
, (as shall hereafter further be declared) and he was a faithful observer of
apostolical constitutions Idem Eccl. Hist. li. 3. cap. 32. Hortatur Ignatius
ut Apostolorum traditioni mordicus adhaerescerent.
.

And whereas T. B. imagines, that Ignatius stiling the Lord's Day (...), the
Queen, intended thereby to exalt the Sabbath Day, and to make the same the
chief and King of days: This conceit proceeds from partial ignorance: For
the Rabbis who doted upon the Sabbath Day, styled the same (...) the Queen of
days: and the Poet intending to show the excessive esteem which money was in,
says Regina Pecunia; and the Philosopher, Iustitia Regina omnium virtutum; and
the Orator, Regina eloquentia; Queen money, Queen justice, Queen eloquence,
etc. Therefore the Title of Queen is given by Ignatius to the Lord's- Day, not
by way of derogation and diminution, but to signify the eminent and
transcendent honor of the day.

T. B. His authorities out of S. Athanasius examined.
T. B. Athanasius who lived in the year 300. does not only and barely avouch,
that Christians in his time, kept the Sabbath Day: but he does moreover
justify their keeping of it. For whereas some might object unto him, That the
keeping of the Sabbath is Iudaisme; this godly Bishop foreseeing this
objection, says; We assemble together on the Sabbath Day, not as we were
infected with Iudaisme: but therefore we assemble on this Day, that we may
worship Jesus, the Lord of the Sabbath.

The judgment therefore of this godly Bishop was, that a Christian Church
might sanctify the Sabbath Day, without any taint or tincture of Iudaisme.

Saint Athanasius is orthodoxall every way, both concerning the Sabbath, and
the Lord's Day. For in a special Treatise, (...), He maintains, that the
Sabbath Day, and circumcision are both of them legal observances: And that
neither of them is in force under the Law of grace Athanas. d. Sabbat. and
Circ. Atque hinc est quod Sabbati diem non ut in prima aetate observamus: sed
speramus futura Sabbata Sabbatorum, in quibus finem non habebit nova creatura.
Sicut prioribus te^poribus Sabbati diem servari voluit in monumentum finis
priorum: Ita Dominicum diem veneramur, ut monumentum exordii secundae
reparatsonis. Non septima dies Sabbatum est, sed remissio peccatorum, cum quis
requievit a peccatis
.

During the time and continuance of the first Age, the law of the Sabbath and
of Circumcision was in force at Jerusalem: (...), etc. But when the new
Generation came in, after the Resurrection of CHRIST, the Old Sabbath ceased to
be in force, Hereupon, since the new Creation (...), we Christians observe not
the Day (of the Sabbath) as in former times: but we expect an eternal
Sabbath, wherein the new Creature shall never end. Wherefore, the LORD
commands not the new Creature to keep the Sabbath Day: for the Lord's Day in
which the new creation began, has put an end to the Sabbath.

The same Father in an Homily, (...), d. Sement. delivers the same doctrine
touching the Sabbath: his words are: When we Christians assemble, or come to
Church upon the Sabbath Day, we do not thus, because we are any ways sick,
or infected with Iudaisme, ((...)) but to honor the LORD JESUS who is Lord of
the Sabbath. In the old time of the Jews, the Sabbath was highly esteemed: But
now under the Gospel, (...): the Lord has changed or translated it into the
Lord's Day. For the old Sabbath appertained to the pedagogie and rudiments of
the Law: and therefore when the great Master came and fulfilled all that was
prefigured by it, it then ceased, even as a Candle is put forth at the rising
and appearing of the Sun (...),
.

Now it appears by these testimonies of Athanasius, that in his age, the
observation of the Sabbath Day, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, was
condemned of Iudaisme: and that the Lord's day, upon which our blessed Savior
arose from the dead, to enlighten all people sitting in darkness, was
observed weekly for religious and ecclesiastical offices in the Church.

T. B. His Objection out of the Ecclesiastical History.
Socrates Eccl. hist. lib. 6. cap. 8. Assemblies were wont to be held in
Churches upon the Sabbath Day, and upon the Lord's Day.

Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 21. At Caesarea, Cappadocia, and Cyprus, the Bishops and
Priests did ever interpret and expound the Scriptures upon the Sabbath day, and
upon the Lord's Day.

T. B. Page 488. Although they kept two days in a week, yet one only was
kept for the Sabbath: The other was kept lightly and partially, as a light
Holy Day, or a lecture day.

Answ. 1. No Author speaks more fully, concerning the cessation of Judicial
Sabbaths and Feasts, then Socrates Socrat. Hist. Ecl. 5. ca. 21.
. No Law (says he) made by Christ, gave leave to Christians to observe any
Judicial rites. But on the contrary, the Apostle plainly prohibiteth the
same, whiles he not only abrogated Circumcision, but exhorted also, that there
should be no dissension about Holy Days. It was not the intention of the holy
Apostles, to make Laws for keeping Holy Days; but their study was, to be
authors unto people, of leading a virtuous and holy life.

2 Even as Christians held Assemblies, upon the Sabbath Day, and upon the
Lord's- Day, in some Cities and Countries: so likewise in many parts of the
world, and in the most eminent Churches, they kept holy the Friday, and the
Sunday. Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18. Epiphan. to. 2. l. 3. Exposit. Cath.
fid. number. 22. Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8 Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. 1. c. 8.
Constantinus legem tulit, ut tum die Dominico, quem Hebraei appellant primum
diem Hebdomadae, vel Sabbati, Graeci autem Solis nomine nuncupant tum die
veneris, omnes a judiciis dandis* and aliis negotiis obeundis vacarent,
precibusque and obsecrationibus Deum colerent, diem autem Dominicum veneratus
est, utpote in quo Christus resurrexit a mottuis: diem vero Veneris, utpote in
quo erat cruci suffixus. Clem Romans Apost. Constable. l. 7. c. 24. Sabbatum and
dominicum festos dies agit^te: quod ille quidem dies recordatio sit
fabricationis mundi: hic vero resurrectionis.
. Constant. the Great made a Law, that Christians under his dominions, should
weekly keep holy, both the Sunday, or Lord's Day, and the Friday: the Sunday,
because of CHRIST His resurrection, and the Friday, because of His Passion.

3 The Sabbath Day was preferred by no orthodoxall Christian Church, or more
honored than the Lord's Day: but the greatest number of Christians, preferred
the Lord's Day before the Sabbath, in those Regions, where both days were
observed: and they which honored the Sabbath most, say only, that these two
days, were Germani fratres, like two natural brethren Greg. Nyssen. Orat. d.
castig. Quibus oculis Diem Dominicum intueris, qui Sabbatum dedecorasti? An hos
dies nescis germanos esse (...)? and si in alterum in jurius sis, in alterum
impinges.
: For the one was founded upon the old Creation of the world, and the other
upon the new.

T. B. His Argument for the Seventh-day Sabbath, from the work of Man's
Creation, and Redemption.
We must have such a Sabbath, as the reason of it does belong to all men, and
to every man, none excepted.

And such is the Sabbath Day of the fourth Commandment, to wit, the Saturday
Sabbath, which is kept in memory of the Creation. For all and every man, has a
benefit by the Creation, and therefore all, and every man, have reason to
observe the Sabbath, which God himself ordained to be kept holy, in
recognition of that common and general benefit.

But it is not so with the Sunday Sabbath: because Redemption, which is the
motive why Christians observe the Lord's Day, is nothing at all to such people,
as are not elected to salvation.

Well then, see how these things hang together: the thing they must prove, is,
that we Christians, that is, all we Christians, even every one within the pale
of the Church, that is baptized, all these ought to keep the Lord's Day for a
Sabbath, in memory of the Redemption: when as the one half of these is not
redeemed: and the reason to bind all, and every man, thus to keep remembrance
of this Redemption, is because the work of Redemption is greater unto some only
of these men. How absurd is this, that every man should be bound to keep a
joyful memory of that thing which does belong but to some of them only, as not
to one half of them.

This is, as if they would undertake to persuade, not only Englishmen, but
Dutchmen, and Frenchmen, to keep a yearly joyful remembrance with us, from
the invasion of the Spaniard, in 88. which concerns not them, etc. Page 252,
etc.

Answ. The sum of the former objection is, that the ground and reason of
keeping holy the Sabbath Day, must be a general and universal benefit, common
to all that profess Christ. And therefore, because the benefit of Creation is
universal, and common to all and every one, and Redemption is peculiar to the
elect only: Christians ought to observe the Seventh Day in memory of Creation:
and not the Lords Day, in memory of redemption.

My answer to this objection is: 1. That the ground and reason of keeping holy
a festival day, may be such a benefit, as by the antecedent will of Christ
Ruitz. d. vol. Dei, Disp. 19. Sect. 2. Voluntas antecedens, est voluntas
primaria, and beneplacitum Dei, ex ipso Deo, and ejus nativa propensione
existens, nullamque sumens occasione^ ex nobis.
is intended to all men living, though all men by reason of their own
demerits, do not actually receive the fruit of it. But the benefit of
redemption, by the antecedent will of CHRIST, is intended to all men living
which profess Christ: and none are excluded from it, but only they, which by
their own demerit have made themselves unworthy. Tertul. c. Mart. l. 2. ca.
11. Bonitas Dei prior secundum naturam, severitas posterior secundu^ causam.
Illa ingenita, haec accidens: illa propria, haec acco^modata: illa edita, haec
adhibita. Fulg. ad Monim. li. 1. ca. 27. Iniqui ad mortem animae primam non
sunt praedestinati.


It is the express Doctrine of the Church of England, that Christ has
redeemed all mankind; and that upon the Cross he made a full, perfect, and
sufficient Sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction, for the sins of the whole
world. And this Doctrine is confirmed by many sentences and arguments of holy
Scripture, and by the testimony of the orthodoxall Fathers.

1 Sentences of Holy Scripture are these which follow: Heb. 2.9. He tasted of
death for every man, 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave Himself a ransom for all men, 1
John 2.2. He is the propitiation not for our sins only, but for the sins
of the whole world, 2 Cor. 5.15. He died for all. 2 Pet. 2.1. There were false
Prophets also among the People, which shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the LORD that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation.

2 There are delivered in holy Scripture many weighty arguments for this
Doctrine. 1. Our blessed Savior, who is Yea, and Amen, Apoc. 1.5. John 18.37.
commanded his Gospel which is a word of truth, Ephesians. 1.13. to be universally
preached, not only to all Nations Prosp. d. vot. Gent. l. 2. c. 2. Ad omnes
prorsus homines missum est Evangelium crucis Christi. Ib. ca. 16. Quae
redemptio se vniverso intulit mundo and omnibus hommibus indifferenter innotuit.
, Matthew. 28.18. but to every humane creature, Marc. 16.15. and the sum of the
Gospel is: Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15a. 2.
He likewise exhorts all people to repentance Ib. ca. 13. Principem gentis
impiae, sancti fratris meritis invidentem, caedemque ejus parricidali cord
meditantem, dignatur Dominus paterno mitigare co^silio, dicens ad Cain, Vt quid
tristis factus es? etc. Cum ergo ad Cain talia loqueretur Deus, nunquid
ambiguum est, voluisse eum, quantu^ ad illum mede^di modum sufficiebat, egisse,
ut Cain ab illo impietatis furore resipisceret? Sed malitia pertinax, inde
facta est inexcusabilior, unde fieri debuit correctior.
, and commands them to believe his Gospel, and to honor, worship, and obey
him, upon this ground, namely, that he is their Savior and Redeemer. 3. The
holy Apostles Creed requires all people within the Pale of the Christian
Church, to believe in God the Father.

But if CHRIST by a previous, and antecedent decree, has excluded the greatest
number of Christian people having, from all possibility of reaping benefit by
His Passion, and if he has paid no price at all for them: then His Gospel
may be preached to infernal spirits, with as great sincerity as to the
greatest part of mankind: The Devil and his Angels may with as good reason be
exhorted to believe in Christ, and to call GOD Father, as Christian people,
which have no special assurance and testification from God, that Christ Jesus
paid the price of their redemption.

3 The orthodoxall Fathers maintain, universality of redemption, by payment of
a price: and S. Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 68. p. 2. Judas proditor punitus est,
et Christus crucifixus est: sed nos redemit saguine suo, and punivit illum de
pretio suo. Projecit enim pretiu^ argenti, quo ab illo Dominus venditus est,
nec agnovit pretium, quo ipse a Domino redemptus erat.
with many other Fathers affirm; even of Judas Iscariot, that he was not
excluded from the price of redemption made by Christ's blood, but he might have
obtained pardon of his sin, if he had repaired to the Mercy-seat of Christ.
Amb. Ep. 3. Leo d pass. ser. 1. Cyril. in loan. l. 11. c. 21.


Our blessed Savior, like unto a Royal, and magnificent Prince, having many
of his subjects, in thraldom and captivity, under a foreign enemy, paid a
full, perfect, and sufficient ransom, for all and every one of them, and then
sending forth his Ambassadors, inviteth them to return out of captivity: Now
many of these captives despise liberty, and make choice rather to serve the
enemy, than to return to the freedom of their Lord: also some of them being
redeemed, and released out of bonds, return again into bondage. Prosp. ad
Cap. Gal. sent. 9. Qui dicit quod pro totius mundi Redemptione Salvator non est
crucifixus, non ad sacramenti virtutem, sed ad infidelium respicit partem: cum
sanguis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, pretium totius mundi sit. A quo pretio
extranci sunt qui aut delectati captivitate redimi noluerunt, aut post
redemptionem, ad eandem servitutem sunt reversi.


It cannot be denied, but that all and every one of these were redeemed, by a
full and free payment of a ransom: and that by reason of their own contempt,
or neglect, they receive not the fruit and benefit of redemption.

Now these things being declared, concerning the work of man's redemption, my
answer to T. B. his objection, is as follows.

As the benefit of redemption, in regard of application, and the ultimate fruit
or effect thereof, is not common to all mankind, by reason of their own
infidelity and disobedience: so likewise man's forming, creation, and coming
into the world, is a forerunner of his eternal perdition, by reason of his
own wickedness, and it had been good for many people never to have been
borne: but from hence it is consequent, that there is no more reason for many
people to observe a Sabbath, in memory and recognition of Creation, than of
redemption; because, neither Creation, nor Redemption, are finally beneficial
to ungodly and disobedient people.

All the Israelites in Moses days, were redeemed out of Egypt: in memory and
recognition whereof, they were commanded, to observe the weekly Sabbath,
Deutre. 5.15. But notwithstanding their redemption, many of them through their
own infidelity and disobedience, perished in the Wilderness: in like manner
all Christians are redeemed by Christ, in manner aforesaid: and all observe the
Lord's Day in recognition of this gracious benefit, which according to our
Saviors Doctrine proceeded from the general and impartial love of God, to
all mankind, John 3.16.

But when the holy Scripture descends to the declaration of the proper and
effectual cause of man's failing, of receiving the fruit and benefit of
complete and actual redemption and salvation, it referres the same to his
own malice, infidelity, disobedience, and irrepentance, Matthew. 23.37. Hier. in
Lam. Ierem. c. 3. Nullo modo existimandu^ est, quod Creator clementissimus
causa sit perditionis hominum iniquorum, qui ad eum per poenitentiam nolunt
co^verti.


The goodness and bounty of the Almighty, was not deficient (says Prosper
Aquitanicus Prosp. d. voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 13. Bonitas Dei, ne illi quidem parti
defuit, quae in charitate non stetit: and ab initio sui veneno Diabolici
livoris intumuit.
) to that part of mankind, which abode not in charity, but was corrupted and
infected with the venomous gall or poison of diabolical envy.

T. B. His twenty four special Arguments, in maintenance of his position
concerning the seventh-day Sabbath. Argument 1. page 401.
T. B. Every man fearing God must maintain and defend, either the seventh-Day
Sabbath to be still in force, or the Lord's Day. Otherwise there shall be no
Sabbath Day in the Church: and we must live profanely and impiously in the
breach of one of Gods ten Commandments.

But no man that fears GOD must maintain the Lord's Day Sabbath: 1. Because a
man cannot defend this day in faith: And whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
Romans 14.3. Now a man cannot speak for the Lord's Day in faith, because he has
no Word of God for the ground of his faith: and so it is not faith, but
fancy, superstition, and presumption.

Page 195. When the old Sabbath was set up, it was done by an express
Commandment: and can there a new Sabbath come into its rome without a
Commandment?

Page 402. Christ has left no Commandment for us to sanctify the Lords Day.
It is no where said to us in the New Testament, Remember the Lord's Day to
sanctify it. Neither can it be proved by any collection or consequence, from
any Text of Scripture, etc,

Page 283. When men will do that in Gods service, and in obedience to God, the
which he has no where commanded them: what is this but a needless religion
and superstition?

Page 619. It is but superstition and will worship.

Page 629. All humane inventions, thrust into Divine service or Worship of God,
are plain idolatry.

Page 618. The Lord's Day is a Popish tradition, because there being no ground
for it in Scripture, yet for all that, the Patrons of it do urge and press
the observation of it as a necessary thing, as tying men's consciences upon
pain of damnation.

R. B. ag. Br. page 117. It is a matter of infinite comfort to us, who desire
to do the duties of the day with faith, and in Gods blessing and acceptance,
that God sanctified our Sabbath Day by the words of the Commandment written
with his own finger.

H. B. Dial. manuscr. It is true, that only Gods Commandment binds the
conscience* and unless we find the keeping the first day of the week for
Sabbath, to be commanded, etc. the divine authority of it will not appear, etc.

Answer to the precedent Argument.

The first proposition of the precedent argument, is not necessary: for
although men fearing God, should neither observe the Seventh day, nor the first
day of the Week, for their Sabbath: yet they may be free from profane and
impious transgression of the fourth Commandment: by keeping holy some other
day, or some other convenient and sufficient time. For the fourth Commandment,
in respect of any one definite and special day of every week, was not simply
and perpetually moral, but positive and temporary only, as is formerly proved,
page 34. 35, etc.

The common and natural equity of that Commandment is moral: to wit, That
Gods people are obliged, to observe a convenient and sufficient time, for
public and solemn divine worship, and for religious and Ecclesiastical
duties Aureol. in 3. d. 37. art. unic. De jure naturae est, quod aliquo
tempore, vel aliqua hora vacandum est ab opere servili, ut vacemus Deo: and hoc
patet, quia tam sum obligatus Deo, quam mihi: sed jus naturae and ratio dictat
quod pro aliquo tempore debeo vacare mihi, and procurare salutem meam, and
necessarium mihi: ergo and Deo debeo vacare, recognoscendo ejus beneficia.
: And abstinence from secular labor and negotiation, and keeping holy one day
of every week, both for man's temporal and natural refreshing, and for the
spiritual good of his soul, is very agreeable both to natural, and religious
equity, and it is grounded upon the ancient custom and practice of Gods people
in time of the Law Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. 10. Iam hinc ab initio doctrinam hanc
insinuat nobis Deus, erudiens in circulo hebdomadae, diem unu^ integru^ (...).
: and we Christians having obtained a larger measure of divine grace, and our
obligation to serve GOD, and CHRIST, upon his heavenly promises, being greater
than in the time of the Jews: If in those former times of greater darkness,
the Lord's people observed a weekly Sabbath Day: Then surely we should be
ungrateful, and negligent of our own salvation, if we yield not to God a
weekly day, or a sufficient time for His service, as well as the Jews did
Novel. 4. Le^z. cap. 54. Si qui umbram quandam and figuram observabant
ta^topere Sabbati, diem venerabantur, etc. quomodo qui gratiae lucem ipsamque
veritatem colu^t, hos, eum diem qui a domino dicatus est, nosque ab exitii
dedecore liberavit, non venerari par est?
.

Lastly, our weekly observation of the Lord's day, in the time of the Gospel,
is not superstitious, but an holy and godly practice. For it is warranted by
the example of the holy Apostles, and those Primitive Churches, which were
planted by the Apostles: and which received their Ecclesiastical precepts and
constitutions, by Tradition Isich. in Levit. lib. 2. cap. 9. Nam and nos
illorum sequentes Traditionem, Dominicam diem, divinis conventibus
sequestramus. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. Ordinatione, and successione, ea quae
est ab Apostolis in Ecclesia traditio venit ad nos. Cap. 4. Nonne oportebat
ordinem sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis, quibus committebant ecclesias?
from the Apostles.

Answ. to the Assumption of the Argument.
T.B. A man cannot maintain the religious observation of the Lords Day in
faith, because he has no ground of Gods Word for his faith, and so it is not
faith but fancy: and if the observation of the day, is not in faith, it is
sin Romans 14.23.

Answ. 1. By Faith, Romans 14.23. the Apostle understands the dictate and
practical judgment of the Conscience, concerning the quality of the action,
which one is to do, or to leave undone Chrysostom. Ambrosius, Theodoret.
Theophilact. Oecumenius. Omne quod non est profectum ex fide, id est, ex
dictamine conscientiae, quo credit seu judicat quis tale quid sibi hic and nunc
licere, peccarum est Neque enim agit hic Apostolus de fide Christiana naturali,
generali and speculativa: sed de fide morali, particulari and practica, quae
nihil aliud est, quam dictamen conscientiae, seu judicium rationis, quo judico,
mihique persuadeo, me recte agere, nec Deum offendere.
. Therefore this sentence or saying of the Apostle concludes nothing for the
Objectors purpose.

Secondly, But if by Faith, should be understood, Christian belief and
persuasion, grounded upon the written Word of God: my answer is, that the
keeping holy of the LORD's Day, is grounded upon a Commandment of God.

For divine precepts are of two sorts: 1. Some of them are express, immediate,
and particular, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your parents (natural) in the Lord.
1 These. 4.3. Abstain from fornication. Ephesians. 4.18. Be not drunk with wine
wherein is excess.

Some are general precepts, which command by a mediate and subordinate Law, 1
Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord 's sake.
Verse 18. Servants be subject to your masters, with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have the
rule over you, etc.

Now Parents, Masters, Princes and Rulers, command children, and servants, and
people under their subjection, to perform worldly and temporal businesses, as
to labor in this thing or that thing, to travel, to go to war, to sail,
to sow corn in such a field, etc. The Centurion in the Gospel, Mat. 8.9. I am
a man under authority, having Soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go,
and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to my servant, Do
this, and he does it. Genesis 24.2. Abraham said to his eldest servant, etc. Put
thine hand under my thigh, and I will make thee swear by the LORD etc. Thou
shall go unto my Country, and to my kindred, etc. Isaac called Jacob, and said
unto him, Arise, go to Padan Aram, etc. Genesis 28.1, 2. King David commanded
Ziba, Thou and thy sons, and thy servants shall till the land, and bring in the
fruits, etc. 2 Samuel 9.9, 10.

In all these examples, and in thousands more, children, servants, subjects,
soldiers, etc. performed secular and temporal service and business, in
obedience to the precepts of such persons as were their governors, and their
obedience unto the commandments of men was done in faith, and was pleasing to
GOD, and warranted by the general rule of Divine Law.

In like manner, the Holy Ghost delivers a general law to Christian people:
Hear the Church Cyprian. Ep. 69. Nec haec jacto, sed dolens profero, cu^ te
judicem Dei, and Christi constituas, qui dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoc, ad
omnes praepositos, qui vicaria ordinatione Apostolis succedunt, Qui audit vos,
me audit etc. inde enim schismata and haereses obortae sunt and oriu^tur, dum
Episcopus qui unus est, and Ecclesiae prae est, superba praesumptione
contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honoratus, indignus hominibus judicatur.
Idem Epist. 55. In Deuteronomio loquitur Dominus Deus dicens: Et homo quicunque
fecerit in superbia, ut non exaudiat sacerdotem aut judicem, quicunque fuerit
in diebus illis, morietu^, etc.
. Be obedient to them that have the rule over you: And their spiritual
Fathers and Rulers command them, to repair to such a Church, being a
convenient place for God 's public service: to observe such a day of the
week, to wit, the Lord's Day, which is a convenient day, and time for Divine
service, and Ecclesiastical duties, and a time convenient for cessation from
secular business: In these, and in all other the like cases, the Rulers of the
Church command that which is reasonable, and subservient to the honor of God,
and subservient likewise to the Divine precept, concerning Christian
edification Putean. in Primam secundae quaest. 95. art. 1. Dub. 1. Fieri
potest, ut quis consequatur finem legis Divinae, media aliqua lege positiva.
Media enim lege de non sumenda Eucharistia, nisi a jejunis, faciliori modo
consequimur fructum Sacramenti, ad cujus receptionem tenemur per divinum
praeceptum.
: And people obeying their precepts, have warrant so to do, from the general
rule of God's Word: and their obedience (if other things be answerable) is an
act guided and commanded by Christian faith.

T.B. page 283. When men will do that in GOD's service, and in obedience to
GOD, the which he has no where commanded them: What is this but a needless
religion, and superstition? Page 619. It is superstition and will worship.

Answ. This Objection is borrowed from the Disciplinarian Masters Thom.
Chartwr. lib. 1. page 26. Saint Paul says: Whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, we must do it to the glory of God. But no man can glorify
GOD in any thing but in obedience; And there is no obedience but in respect of
the commandment and Word of GOD. Therefore it follows that the Word of God
directs a man in all his actions.
: But it is like the rest of their Divinity. For in the very time of Moses Law,
when God's special Commandments were most of all required, Some festival
days were ordained, and duly observed among the Jews, by authority of the
Church and state, and the same was not superstitious, for our Savior himself
resorted unto them, John 10.22. 1 Match. 4.56. Hest. 9.17.27.

The holy Patriarchs performed some religious actions by command from God,
declared unto them by revelation: and some also by the rule of Christian
prudence without special command, Genesis 14.20. Hebr. 7.2. Genesis 28.18.22. The
Rechabites likewise, Ierem. 35.6.14. In the New Testament, diverse did the
like, and are highly commended, Ioh. 12.3. Mark 14.6. (...), Let her alone,
why trouble you her, she has wrought a good work on me: This is the speech of
Christ Himself.

Secondly, The Religious observation of the LORD's day by the Christian Church
can be reduced to no kind or branch of Superstition Suar. de Relig. li. 2. cap.
1. Ad legitimum cultum religiosum duo requiruntur: unum est, ut cultus sit
legitimus ex part rei cultae. Aliud est, ut in modo colendi sit prudens and
moderatus. Vnde dupliciter potest cultus esse superstitiosus: Vel ex part rei
cultae, si non sit cultus very Dei sed falsi. Vel ex part modi observandi in
cultu very Dei, etc. Lactant. de Relig. lib. 4. ca. 28. Superstitio est in
cultu falsorum Deorum, qui superstitio appellatus est, eo quod homines relicto
antiquo, and vero Deo, superstitem suorum Deorum memorium, colere coeperunt.
: For it is neither an undue and excessive worship, in respect of the object,
because it is observed in in honor of the true and living GOD, and of CHRIST
our Savior: Neither is it such in respect of any undue form of worship: for
it is not legal, as burnt sacrifices were: Neither is it impious, as when men
offered their sons and daughters in sacrifice: Lastly, it is not repugnant,
but every way conformable, to such sacred Rules, and Canons, as the Holy Ghost
has delivered, concerning the ordering the external circumstances, and
external materials of Divine worship, which are not expressly set down in the
written Word.

Thirdly, It is a wonder to me, that T. B. should call the Lord's Day an Idol,
and the observation thereof an Idolatrous action: For it is not an Idol ratione
termini, in respect of Termination, for the religious observation thereof is
referred and subservient to the honor of GOD and CHRIST: Neither is it such
ratione modi, in respect of the manner of observation, for it is kept holy, by
the exercise of Evangelicall duties, which are taught the Church, by the Holy
Ghost in the new Testament. Lastly, Saint John the holy Evangelist, and Prophet
of the new Testament, styles it (...), the Lord's Day: and the holy Apostles
themselves, at some times: and the Primitive Churches (planted by the Apostles)
constantly observed it: And where (I pray you) did ever any man read, that an
Idol was styled by the Spirit of God, the Lord's Idol, Or that the holy
Apostles, or their godly successors had any communion with Idols? 1 Cor.
10.14. 1 John 5.21.

Fourthly, It is a contumelious and ignorant speech, to term it a popish
Tradition: For popish Traditions had not their beginning from the Apostles,
neither were they honored by Apostolical men.

Reformed Churches reject not all Traditions Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trid. par.
1. Apostoli multa tradideru^t viva voce, and Apostolici ab Apostolis ex
traditione vivae vocis multa acceperunt, quae suis Discipulis rursus
tradiderunt: Sed, Irenaeus inquit, omnia illa (...): Et non nihil eorum
rejicimus, Sed omnia quae Scripturis consentanea sunt, suscipimus and
veneramur. Calvin. c. Pigh. de lib. Arb. Non difficulter posset, inter me and
Pighium convenire, si modo Ecclesiae traditionem, ex certo and perpetuo
sanctorum Orthodoxorum consensu, non ex testimoniis, hinc inde male excerptis
demonstraret. Beza ad Repet. Saint. cap. 7. Vbi tandem invenies, ullam
Ecclesiasticam, Traditionem Dei verbo accommodatam, and Ecclesiae utilem, a
nobis reprehensam? Gesner. sup. 2 Timoth. 3.16. cap. 7. Si pontificii suas
traditiones eadem via, per testificationem antiquissimae and Apostolicae
Ecclesiae, ad nostra usque tempora deduxerint, admittimus eas. Zanch. de op.
Red. lib. 1. loco de Tradit. Hosiand. c. Analys. Gregor. de Valentia page 126.
Meisner. Consult. c. Lessium. page 590. Whitaker. de Script. perfect. quaest.
6. cap. 4.
, But such as are spurious, superstitious, and not consonant to the prime rule
of faith, to wit, the holy Scripture: Genuine Traditions agreeable to the rule
of Faith, subservient to piety, consonant with holy Scripture: derived from the
Apostolical times, by a successive current, and which have the uniforme
testimony of pious antiquity, are received and honored by us. Now such are
these which follow: The historical tradition, concerning the number,
integrity, dignity, and perfection of the Books of Canonical Scriptures. The
Catholic exposition of many sentences of holy Scripture. The holy Apostles
Creed. The Baptism of Infants. The perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin
Mary. The righteous observation of the Lord's Day, and of some other
Festivalls, as Easter, Pentecost, etc. Baptising, and administration of the
holy Eucharist, in public assemblies and congregations: The service of the
Church in a known language: The delivering the holy Communion to the people in
both kinds: The superiority and authority of Bishops, over Priests and
Deacons, in jurisdiction, and power of ordination, etc.

5 T.R. His branding the institution and observation of the Lord's Day, with
the black character of Will Worship, proceeds also from rash and
presumptuous ignorance.

For will worship, (...), Colos. 2.23, is a religion and service proceeding
merely from the fiction, invention, and fancy of man's brain, having no
foundation in the will of GOD, or in any just Law of man.

The same has evermore, either all, or some of these properties following: 1.
It is vain and superfluous, having no profitable use. 2. It is erroneous, as
when the Pharisees supposed, that meat being eaten with unwashed hands, defiled
the soul. 3. It contains something repugnant to Gods divine Law, or Will, as
that children might defraud their parents of necessary relief, by offering a
gift in the Temple, and saying, it is Corban Dicitis, legem de honorandis
parentibus abunde implet, and gratius obsequium Deo offert, quicunque dixerit
patri, etsi egentissimo, vel matri, etsi fame pereunti, Corban, id est, donum
seu munus (...) me offerendu^ Deo, non mihi solum, sed tibi proderit, o pater,
si non quoad corpus, saltem quoad animam.
. Mat. 15.2.5. Mark 7.11. etc.

Now I wonder, what vain, superfluous, erroneous, or impious observation, T.
B. or his adheres, can find in the institution of the Church, concerning the
keeping holy the Lord's Day?

An Observation concerning the quality of Ecclesiastical Precepts and
Constitutions.
These. 1. Although the Ecclesiastical precepts, and constitutions of the
Rulers in the Church, are not Divine by miraculous and immediate inspiration,
in such manner as the Precepts of GODS written Law: yet when they are composed
according to the Rules and Canons of holy Scripture, and are apt and convenient
means, to the better fulfilling of the Commandments of GOD, delivered in holy
Scripture; they are by conformity and subordination to the Divine Law, and by
divine approbation, sacred and venerable Zanch. d. oper. Red. d. trad. These. 4.
Si consentaneae sunt hae leges verbo Dei, qui illas rejicit, verbum Dei
rejicit. Si non pugnant, co^temnit ecclesiam Dei, qui illas contemnit,
contemptus autem Ecclesiae quam sit ingratus, apparet ex Mat. 18.17. Calvin.
com. in 1. Cor. 14.40. Vnde colligere promptu^ est, has posteriores (leges
Ecclesiasticas) non esse habendas pro humanis traditionibus, quandoquide^
fundatae sunt in generali lege: omnia decenter and ordine fiant. Ioh. Mar.
Verrat. Ecclesiasticae constitutiones, non sunt tantu^ humanae leges, sed etiam
divinae: tum quia authoritate divina, a patribus co^stitutae: tum quia
fundame^tum habe^t in scripturis: tum quia ad divinum honorem, Ecclesiaeque
decus, divinae que legis faciliorem impletionem sunt ordinatae.
.

For 1. Their immediate authors and composers, are sacred persons, called and
authorized by the Holy Ghost, to rule and order the Church of Christ, Acts
20.28. Luke 12.42.

2 The matter of these Precepts, being ordered and framed according to the
Apostolical rules, Romans 14.19. 1 Cor. 14.26.40. and according to precedent
examples, and presidents, of holy Scripture, and the equity and analogy of
former divine Laws: 1 Cor. 9.9.13. and maxims and conclusions of natural
reason rectified by Grace, 1 Cor. 9.7.10. and chapter 11.14, 15. and the end of
such precepts being godly edification, order, decency, and reverent
administration of sacred and religious things: The Precepts and constitutions
of the Church (I say) being thus qualified, are sacred and venerable, and their
observation is an act of religion, and of obedience, to the general
Commandment of God. For the Holy Ghost commands: Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13.17. Hear the Church, Matthew.
18.17. And if children, servants, and subjects, are bound by divine Law P.
Arrag. d. just. and jur. q. 62. art. 3. Dupliciter dici potest, quod aliquis ad
culpam obliget. Vno modo ut agens principale: and hac ratione nemo potest ad
culpa^ obligare nisi solus Deus. Alio modo sicut causa secunda, quae innititur
vi and efficacia primae causae: and hoc modo homines suis legibus possunt
obligare ad culpam, quatenus subsunt potestati divinae. Molin. d. just. tr. 2
disp. 27. Licet quae a Regia and aliis legitimis inferioribus potestatibus rite
praecipiuntur, sunt de jure positivo: quod tamen illis, postquam ita
constitutae sunt, pareatur, est de jure divino, mediis rerum naturis, a Deo
ipso ita constitutum: cum legitimae potestates omnes a Deo sint, Deique vices
in suo ordine teneant: dumque illis obedimus earumque praecepta ^rvamus, Deo
pariter in illis paremus, Deique praeceptum and, voluntatem exequimur.
, natural and positive, to obey their Parents, worldly Masters, and temporal
Princes, in things humane, and secular, when the same are reasonable, honest,
and just: and by performance thereof, they serve and obey the Lord CHRIST.
Colos. 3.14. Ephesians. 6.1. 1 Pet. 2.15. In like manner, when Christian people
submit themselves to conformable observance of the lawful and religious
constitutions of their spiritual Rulers, this conformity and submission of
theirs, is pleasing to God.

3 The holy Apostles common Rule to all Christian people is, Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report,
these things do. But peaceable and conformable observation, of the lawful
constitutions of the Church, touching decent and reverent exercising religious
offices, is honest, and just, and appertaining to peace, and love.

Therefore the Apostles common rule, given to all Christian people, Phil. 4.8.
obliges every one to a peaceable and conformable observation of the Lawful
precepts and constitutions of the Church, as well as it does to the obedience
and observation of the Commands of temporal Lords, Masters, Officers,
Governors, Parents, etc.

4 In the Primitive Age, when Christian people excelled in virtue, and piety,
they generally observed the constitutions, and precepts of the Church, which
were ordained for decency, order, and good government Basil. d. spir. sanc. c.
27. Nec hiis quisquam contradicit, quisquis sane vel tenuiter expertus est,
quae sunt jura Ecclesiastica.
: and if any frowardly, and contemptuously disobeyed the same, they were
censured as Malefactors. It was a Law of the Church in Ignatius and Tertullians
days, that people should not make the Lord's Day a Fasting-day: and the wilful
transgressing this Ecclesiastical constitution was esteemed a nefarious
offense. Tert. d. cor. mil. c. 3. Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus. Ignatius
ad Philip: Si quis Dominico die jejunarit, Domini interfector est. Can. Ap. 64.
Conc. Constant. in Trullo. cap. 55. Conc. Gang. Amb. Ep. 83. Epiph. to. 2.
expos. fid. Cath. li. 3 n. 22.


Betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, and upon every Lord's Day, the Law and Canon of
the Church was: That people at public prayer, and in time of Divine Offices,
should stand upright on their legs, and not sit or kneel. Tert. d. Cor. mil.
cap. 3. Basil. d. sp. sanct. c. 27. Hieron. ad Lucif. Epiphan. expos. fid. l.
3. to. 2. n. 22. Hilar. praef. in Psalm.


It was likewise a general constitution, to adore CHRIST with bodies and faces
turned toward the East Just. Mart. q. ad orthod. Tert. Apol. ca. 16. Clem. Al.
strom. 7. Basil. d. sp. sanc. ca. 27. Hier. in Amos c. 6. Dionys. Hierarch. ca.
2.
.

To receive the holy Eucharist in the forenoone, and when people were fasting:
and to receive the same from the Bishops, Priests, or Deacons hands, and not
for the people being participants, to take it from off the Altar or Communion
Table with their own hands Tert. d. cor. mil. c. 3. Just. Mart. Apolog. 2.
, Mixing some water with the Wine of the holy Communion. Just. Mart. Ibid.
Iren. l. 4. c. 47. Cyp. Epist. 63.


In the administration of Baptism, trina mersio, thrice dipping or sprinkling
in water. Tert. d. cor. mil. c. 3. Dionys. Basil. Amb. Hiero.


Observation of certain yearly Festivalls and Holy Days, among which were
Easter and Whitsuntide: and likewise annual, and weekly times of fasting.
Epiph. to. 2. i. 3. Ex fid. Cath. n. 22.


In all these, and the like Ecclesiastical observances, Christian people were
very obsequious, to the precepts and constitutions of the Rulers of the Church.

But in our times it is otherwise: for our Disciplinarian Guides, with their
arguments, Ab authoritate Scripturae negative: The holy Scripture has
commanded none of these Rites, and Observations in particular: Therefore they
are Popish traditions, will worship, and superstition: have made our people
wild; and many are so perverse, that they esteem it an high degree of purity
and sanctity, to perform all religious duties overthwart to the way of the
Church. And whereas in times past, it was a general maxim among Christians,
Non habet Dei Charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligit unitatem August. c. Don. d.
Bapt. l. 3. c. 16.
: The love of God abides not in them, which do not love and observe the unity
of the Church. Now, they are reputed most pure and holy, who with greatest
boldness bequarrell and cavil against the authority, government, and lawful
Precepts and Constitutions of the Church. But Irenaeus Iren. l. 4. 62.
Iudicabit eos qui schismata operantur, qui sunt inanes, non habentes Dei
dilectionem, etc. propter modicas causas gloriosum corpus Christi co^scindunt,
and quatum in ipsis est, interficiunt, etc. liquantes culicem, and deglutientes
Camelum, etc.
said long since, of such: That the LORD will judge those which cause schism,
and who wanting the true love of God, upon very slender exceptions and
occasions, (to wit, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel) tear and
divide, and as much as in them lies, kill and destroy the body of CHRIST.

T.B. Argument 2.
Either the seventh-day Sabbath must be abolished, or else it must continue
still in force.

But the seventh-day Sabbath is not abolished: for there is not in all the New
Testament any Commandment, or any prohibition, as a countermand to the fourth
Commandment, where it is expressly written, Thou shall not sanctify the
seventh-day Sabbath: Neither is there any Text of Scripture out of which it can
be necessarily proved. Therefore the seventh-day Sabbath is still in force.

Answ. 1. By the term abolishing, the Objector understands abrogation of the
Law, by a total mutation and desition Lege. 120. ff. d. verb. signif.
Derogatur legi, cum pars detrahitur abrogatur lex, cum prorsus tollitur.
: or an express and formal revocation of the Law, by Gods countermand.

But abrogation is not the only means to make a Law cease: for a Law may
cease to be in force, without an express revocation of the Lawgiver, and that
many ways Scholast. in 1. 2. Cessat aliquando tota lex, and non abrogatur.
Maerat. d. leg. disp. 7. tr. 13. Nec dubium esse debet, quin possit tota lex
aliter desinere quam per abrogationem.
: of which these following belong to our purpose: 1. If a Law be enacted, to
continue for a certain time Ibid. Simul ac certum and definitu^ tempus
effluxerit pro quo data fuit: lex sponte quodammodo sua ac ex seipsa definit.
Quando tempus expirat pro quo lex erat constituta, ipsa se tollit, nec solvitur
sed impletur.
, when that time is elapsed, the Law cease without any further abrogation,
Exodus 12.22. 2. If a Law be imposed upon a certain State and community of
people, whiles such a form of gubernation lasts: if that form of government
be changed, the positive Law cease, unless it be revived under the new
form.

The major proposition therefore of the Argument is denied: for the Law of the
seventh-day Sabbath, was only a temporary Law: and it was to continue in force
of obligation, until the coming of the Messiah, and during the Legal
Covenant, and no longer: and therefore being not revived under the Gospel, it
continues not in force Salas d. leg. Revocata est implicit and virtute per
substitutionem legum Evangelicarum. August. In umbra data est significante quae
sublata est luce veniente. Athanas. Sicut exorto sole, candela cessat.
, although it were not abrograted or abolished, by any negative sentence, of
God the Lawgiver.

The judicial Laws of the Old Testament, to wit, That a Thief stealing a
Sheep, shall restore four fold, etc. Exodus 22.1. That a man shall not gleane
his Vineyard, Lev. 19.10. nor go back again, to fetch a sheafe of corn, which
he had forgotten, at the cutting down of his harvest, Deuteronomy. 24.19. and one
shall not deliver unto his Master, the servant which is escaped from his
Master, Deuteronomy. 23.15. These and such other like judicial Laws, are not
repealed, by an express and particular sentence of abrogation:
Notwithstanding, being positive precepts of the old Testament, they are ceased
under the Evangelicall Law.

2 The assumption of the argument also is denied. For it can be proved, that
the observation of the seventh-day Sabbath according to the Law of the fourth
Commandment, was a branch of the Legal Covenant, Exodus 31.13. Ezech.
20.12.20. And it is the express Doctrine of the New Testament, that the Legal
Covenant is ceased, Heb. 8.6, etc. and Chapter 10.16. Therefore it is an error
which the Objector has delivered: in saying, it cannot be necessarily proved
or concluded out of any Text of Scripture, that the fourth Precept of the
Decalogue touching the seventh day Sabbath is abolished.

T. B. Argument 3.
They which dislike the seventh day Sabbath, and are utter enemies to the
keeping of it: Do maintain notwithstanding, that it is still in force: For
their doctrine is, The Sabbath of the fourth Commandment is Moral and
perpetual. It is part of the Law of Nature, and so a part of the Image of GOD:
Therefore the seventh day Sabbath is still in force. This Argument is of
weight, because a testimony which a man gives against himself, is ever
accounted strong.

Answ. Some of the Authors D. B. Of the Sabbath, page 40. R. B. Against Br.
page 90.
cited by the Objector, to prove the seventh day Sabbath to be in force, are as
far wide, in one extremity, as he is in another.

There be other Divines of good note Fra. Iunius, Proelect. in Genesis cap. 2.
Quia (...) haec lex naturalis est, sancitur praecepto quarto Decalogi, tanquam
ab hominibus ex aequo observand^. Quod natural est diem quemque septimum Deo
sacrum esse illud permanet.
, who maintain, that one day of seven in every week, ought to be an Holy Day,
not by the letter, but by the equity of the fourth Commandment, and because of
God's Ordinance at the Creation, who according to their judgment consecrated a
seventh day of every week, to His religious service, from the beginning of the
world.

But whereas some Heretics, and perfidious Jews P. Galatin. d. Arcan. Cath.
verit. li. 11. cap. 9. Impia Iudaeoru^ perfidia, Sabbatum non solum a Iudaeis
ipsis, sed a Christianis quoque literaliter serva^dum esse probare volunt, quia
inter december praecepta moralia numeratur.
, and certain Sabbath-men of our Nation, maintain that the fourth
Commandment is purely moral, and not Legal or Ceremonial in any part, and
that, according to the speciality thereof R. B. If you yield not the
speciallity to be Moral, you turn out one Commandment of ten, page 133.
: This position is proved by invincible arguments, to be erroneous, and
likewise it is repugnant to the unanimous sentence of Orthodoxall Divines, in
all ages, since the holy Apostles.

T. B. Argument 4.
No day of the week can be Sabbath day, by the Law of the fourth Commandment,
but only the seventh day. For no other day, is expressly mentioned or commanded
to be kept holy. And all other days of the week, are by GOD Himself
appointed to be working-dayes, Exodus 20.9. Deuteronomy. 5.13.

Answ. The Church of England, walking in the good and old way of the
orthodoxall primitive Fathers, groundeth the religious observation of the
Lord's day, and of other Christian Holy Days, upon the natural equity, and
not upon the letter Origin. in Mat. Tract. 26. Sunt Scribae infaelices, qui
literam legis sequentes, in infidelitatem and vanas superstitiones incurrunt.
of the fourth Commandment. And although the Sunday or Lord's day, in the time
of the Law, was an ordinary working-day: Yet under the Gospel, the same is an
Holy Day, by the perpetual ordinance of the Catholic Church. And this
ordinance and observation of the Lord's day, began in the Holy Apostles age
Isich. in Levitic. ca. 9. Nos illorum (Apostolorum) sequentes traditionem:
Dominicum diem, divinis conventibus sequestramus.
, and has universal been continued ever since, to the great honor of CHRIST
our Savior, and to the mavelous benefit of Christian souls, who upon this
Holy Day, are edified weekly in virtue, godliness, and true Religion: And
therefore we justly account all those, August. de Temp. Sermon. 251. Dominicum
diem Apostoli and Apostolici viri religiosa solennitate habendum sanxerunt,
page 819. Basil. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 27.
who malign the honor of this blessed day, profane and sacrilegious.

T. B. Argument 5.
To sanctify the seventh day, is a part of the Moral Law: and every part of
that Law is in force, because the whole is in force: according to the Logic
rule: Posito vel remoto toto, necesse est poni, vel removeri parts. And as in
Circumcision, and the Feast of Passover, the eight and fourteen days were
appointed, as well as other actions: So likewise the particular day designed,
is as well to be observed in the Sabbath, as resting from labor and
Sanctification. Id. page 415. The doing work on the Sabbath, was punishable by
death, Exodus 31.15. and 35.2. But punishment implies sin: and sin
presupposes a law: (to wit a Moral Law.)

Answ. To keep holy the seventh day, by resting from servile labor, was a
duty commanded in the Law of the fourth Commandment. And whiles that Law was
in force, the time and day of rest, was commanded, as well as cessation from
labor.

But it is formerly proved by demonstrative arguments, that the Law of the
fourth Commandment, according to the speciality thereof, was positive and
temporary Synopsis, Purior. Theolog. Disp. 21. n. 10. Sabbati praeceptio, non
est a naturae necessitate, ut reliqua praecepta, quae menti insita, and per se
cognita sunt sed (...) ex voluntaria Dei institutione.
. And no part of it is in force under the Gospel, but only the natural and
moral equity.

Secondly, The penalty of death, was common to many legal and ceremonial
transgressions: Genesis 17.14. Levit. 16.2. Numb. 4.20. 2 Samuel 6.7. And this no
more proves the fourth Commandment to be simply and perpetually Moral, then
the Law of Circumcision: or the Law, that the Kohathites should not see the
holy things of the Sanctuary uncovered.

T. B. Argument 6.
The seventh day of the week, is the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. But
the Sunday, neither by natural, or by Scripture computation, is the seventh
day of the week, but the first day, or the eight day, Genesis 2.2. Matthew. 12.1.
Ioh. 5.10. The Sunday therefore, is not the day appointed to be kept holy by
the fourth Commandment, but the Saturday.

Answ. It is certain that Saturday was the particular day, enjoined by the Law
of the fourth Commandment. But the Church of CHRIST groundeth not the
religious observation of the Lord's day, upon the letter of the fourth
Commandment, but upon other weighty reasons, to be delivered hereafter.

T. B. Argument 7.
The seventh day Sabbath, was ordained of GOD, to be a special means, and a
singular help to keep in His Church the memory of that most wondrous and
miraculous work, to wit, the Creation of the world by Almighty GOD: And we in
our time, have as great use and need of means and helps to keep in memory
this great work of GOD, as ever had the Jews. Therefore the seventh day
Sabbath ought still to be in use in the Church of GOD.

Answ. The seventh day Sabbath, was at no time, either the only, or the
principal means: neither is it a means absolutely necessary to preserve the
memory of the Creation of the world Alex. Hal. 4. q. 3. m. 5. art. 5. Ad illud
quod dicitur, quod datu^ est Sabbatum in memoriam quietis Dei: dicendum quod
nec propter hoc oportet servari: quia memoria illius sufficienter habetur ex
lectione Scripturae.
. For in old time, and in future ages, and at this present, There are many
helps and means, subservient to that end, far more sufficient: Namely,
Divine Revelation, without which, the observation of the Sabbath, would have
been but a dead ceremony. And since Moses, the holy Scriptures, of Genesis,
Exodus, etc. and the Prophetical Books: and since the Ascension of CHRIST,
the Scriptures of the New Testament have been read and preached: and in all
these, the doctrine of the Creation is declared. And although the literal
observation of the fourth Commandment is ceased under the Gospel: yet this
Commandment, containing among other things a narration of the Creation of the
World, is commonly read, and sometimes expounded in our Christian Assemblies
upon the Lord's Day and upon other Festival days.

And therefore the observation of the Saturday Sabbath, is needless in our
days to preserve the memory of the Worlds Creation.

Circumcision, and some other legal purifications, were means appointed by
GOD under the Law, to teach people their natural and original uncleanness
August. in Joan. Tract. 30. significat circumcisio expoliationem a cord
cupiditatu^ carnalium. Non ergo sine causa data est, and in eo membro jussa
fieri, quoniam per illud membrum procreatur creatura mortalium. Et per unum
hominem mors, etc. Ideo quisque cum praeputio nascitur, quia omnis homo cum
vitio propaginis nascitur, etc. and non mundat nisi per cultellum petrinum
Dominum Christum. Athanas. d. Sabb. and Circumcis. page 763. Circumcisio signum
erat exuviarum, quae per Baptismum deponuntur, etc. (...).
: But in the Christian Church the observation of these means are not
necessary, for we have far better helps, etc.

T. B. Argument 8.
Whatsoever GOD has commanded in the Moral Law or ten Commandments, is still
in force, and to be observed and obeyed, unto the end of the world. For it is a
part of the Divine Law, which is unrepealed: and the holy Scripture in general
terms, ratifieth the continuance and obligation of the whole Moral Law, Iam.
2.10. Gal. 3.10. Romans 3.31.

But in the Moral Law or ten Commandments, GOD has expressly commanded the
observation of the seventh-day Sabbath.

Therefore, the observation of the seventh day Sabbath is still in force.

T. B. Page 441. I appeal unto the conscience of my Reader, etc. if he find
not the Spirit of GOD, secretly moving him to think, that all things commanded
among the Moralls, should be Moral: And that all Preacepts which GOD wrote and
spoke, should be more lasting and durable, than those Precepts which Moses
wrote and spoke.

Answ. 1. The Holy Scripture of the New Testament ratifieth in general, every
branch, and every precept of the ten Commandments, which is simply and
naturally Moral. But I have formerly made evident proof, that the fourth
Commandment concerning the keeping holy the Sabbath day, is not simply Moral
Aug. de Spir. and lit. cap. 14. In illis december praeceptis excepta Sabbati
observatione, dicatur mihi quid non sit observandum a Christianis?
. And GOD's external promulgation, or speaking thereof did not alter the same,
in respect of the inward form or quality: But He thereby made this positive
Precept of greater esteem among the Jews and Israelites: And because the
observation of it, was a most heavy burden, this circumstance, of His speaking
and writing it, was necessary to stir up that stiff-necked people Alex. Hal.
3. q. 55. m. 5. ar. 2. Quia ille populus durae cervicis, difficillimus erat, ut
abstraheretur a terrenis and converteretur ad coelestia and divina: Inde est,
quod determinata dies vacationis, scilicet septima, repetebatur eis frequenter
in jussione: and transgressio ^uniebatur, cum magna districtione and severitate.
, to be more diligent in the obeying of it.

Secondly, If God's immediate writing, makes things durable and everlasting:
How happened it, that the characters of the fourth Commandment, which God
Himself wrote, are so long since perished? for if any shall reply, that all
the artificial characters of the whole Decalogue, which were written with the
finger of GOD, are perished, as well as the Characters of the fourth
Commandment: And therefore the loss and destruction of the Characters, is no
argument to confirm the cessation of the Law of the Sabbath: It is answered,
That none of the Precepts in the Decalogue, were simply and perpetually moral,
for this reason only, or principally, because the Lord Himself immediately
wrote or ingraved them, in Tables of stone: but by reason of the kind, and
quality of their object, and because the Divine will ordained them to be such.

T. B. At the conclusion of his eighth Argument appealeth to the conscience of
his Reader: whether he find the Spirit of GOD, secretly (inwardly) moving him
to think (believe) that all things commanded among the moralls, should be
moral.

The answer is: The holy Spirit of God ordinarily moves and persuades the
conscience; not by sudden raptures or immediate impressions, (...): but by
mediate causes, to wit, by arguments and sound reasons of holy Scripture, Luke
24.32. And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while
he talked with us, by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? Acts
2.37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, etc.

But the Objector's motives, in his former argument, are not arguments or sound
reasons of Scripture, but mere phancies and presumptions.

For first, All things commanded among moralls, are not always simply and
eternally moral: and positive Precepts, and moral Commandments, are often in
one and the same Chapter, yea, and in the same verse of holy Scripture,
conjoined and rehearsed together, Lev. 19.4, 5. Ezech. 18.6. Act. 15.29. and
the whole and entire Law of Deuteronomy, containing both Legalls and Moralls,
was placed within the same Sanctuary, with the Decalogue, Deuteronomy. 31.26. Take
this Book of the Law, and put it in the side of the Arc.

Secondly, many moral and perpetual Commandments were uttered and penned by
Moses, to wit, Deuteronomy. 1.17. You shall not respect persons in Judgment. Exodus
22.22. You shall not afflict any Widow or Fatherless Child, Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou
shall not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy. Exodus 22.25. If
thou lend money unto any that is poor, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer,
neither shall thou lay upon him usury. Chap. 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil.

By these and many other testimonies it is evident, that some moral
Commandments were uttered and penned by Moses, which were not expressly and
immediately written with the finger of GOD.

Thirdly, in the New Testament, the Precepts penned or preached by the holy
Apostles, were as divine and as perpetual in respect of obligation, as those
which were preached by our blessed Savior Himself. Cypri. d. Ablutped Nec
minus ratum est quod dictante spiritu sancto Apostoli tradiderunt, quam quod
Dominus per se tradidit. Aug. d. Consens. Evang. li. 1. c. 35. Quicquid enim
ille de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum illis tanquam
suis manibus imperavit. Hoc quisquis intellexerit, non aliter accipiet quod
narrantibus Discipulis Christi in Evangelio legerit, quam si ipsam manum
Domini, quam in proptio corpore gestabat, scribentem conspexerit, etc.
And Christ Himself wrote no part of the Evangelicall Law, declaring thereby,
that the immediate writing of GOD, is not necessary to the constitution of
Divine Law, or to make the same moral: but that his inspiration is of as great
efficacy, and authority, as his writing.

T. B. Argument 9.
If the fourth Command. concerning the seventh-day Sab. is not now in force,
Ioh. Sprint. d. Sab. p. 14. If the Church should take away one of the ten
Commandments there would be left but nine, and so one of the words of God, and
Law of the perpetual Covenant and direction of good works would be abolished.
then it stands for a Cipher: and it commands nonsense: to wit, you must
rest from labor upon Sunday, because the 4th Commandment says: Remember to
keep holy the Saturday-Sabbath, in memory of the Creation.

D. B. d. Sab. page 37. If that Position of theirs be true, then there should
be but nine moralls (in the Decalogue) which were to disturb the whole Law.

R. C. d. Sab. page 56. When Moses calls them ten words, shall we think he
meant more or less, than the just number of the (ten) moral precepts?
especially when in Exodus he says: God spoke all these words: and in
Deuteronomy: he added no more. If any other had been put to, they had
exceeded that number: if this fourth be none of them, they would be but nine.

Answ. 1. The fourth Commandment stood not for a Cipher in the Old Law, but it
obliged the Israelites to the literal obedience of it.

2 It stands for no Cipher, in the Law of grace: for the common and natural
equity of this Commandment, obliges mankind to the end of the world Aquin.
in. 3. sent. d. 37. art. 5. Praeceptum de Sabbato observando, secundum illud
ejus, quod naturalis ratio dictat, praeceptum morale est: ut scilicet aliquo
tempore homo contemplationi vacet: sed taxatio temporis in quo vacandum sit,
non est de dictamine naturalis legis, and ideo non est morale praeceptum.
Petigian. in 3. sent. d. 37. q. unic. Licet praeceptum Sabbati fuerit
ceremoniale, tamen in decalogo ponitur, quia non erat pure ceremoniale: and
quia erat determinatio naturalis praecepti, de vacando rebus divinis.
.

3 When the Christian Church, by authority received from the Holy Ghost, has
ordained and determined set and definite days, and times, and hours, for Gods
public and solemn worship, and for Ecclesiastical offices: to wit, Easter
day, the Ascension day, Christmasse-day, Whitsuntide: the Sundaies of every
Week throughout the whole year, and other holy Church-daies: the religious
observation of these days, and holy times, and the hours of the days, is
reduced to the fourth Commandment, as a special to a general: to wit, Gods
people must observe holy times, because the equity of the fourth Commandment,
which is the Law of Nature obliges thereunto: But Easter Day, and
Christmasse-day, and Sunday, etc. are Holy Days, lawfully appointed by the
Governors of the Church; and subordinate to the equity of the fourth
Commandment. Therefore Christian people are to observe these Holy Days and
Times, in obedience to the equity of the fourth Commandment.

4 This Commandment stands not for a Cipher, neither is it read and
expounded in vain among Christians: because the letter of that Commandment,
figureth, represents, and consequently it teaches and commands the
obedience of many Evangelicall duties: namely, resting from the servile works
of sin Anast. Sinait. in Hexam. l. 7. Sabbatum, etc. est vera peccati
depositio, quam ego fidelis agere jubaeor, and festum celebrare, in requie and
adimpletione vitae meae: in quo Sabbato, me jubet Deus, non tollere onus
peccati, and sarcinam hujus saeculi. Epiph. l. 1 Haer. 5. Habebant illi
(Iudaei) Sabbatu^ quod nos ad magnum illud Sabbatum, hoc est, Christi Domini
quietem, praeparando detinet: ut a peccato cessantes, velut Sabbatum quoddam in
Christo celebremus. Greg. Nys. d. Resur. orat. 1. Per Sabbatum instituimur, ut
a peccatis quiescentes abstineamus, etc. Marchar. Hom. 35. Anima quae meretur
liberari ab obscaenis and sordidis cogitationibus, verum Sabbatum celebrat, and
veram quietem requiescit otium agens, and liberata a cunctis operibus
tenebrosis.
: also resting and relying upon Christ, for remission of our sins, and
everlasting happiness Epiph. Haer. 30. Hic (Christus) est magnum,
sempiternumque Sabbatum, cujus parvum illud (Iudaicum) exemplar fuit, etc.
Damian. l. 2. Ep. 5 Quid per Sabbatum debemus intelligere nisi Christum? In
illo siquidem Sabbato requiescimus, cum in illo solo spem ponimus, cum hunc
toto cordis amore diligimus, ac rerum temporalium concupiscentiam postponentes,
a servilium operum labor abstinemus.
: lastly, leading an holy and religious life, that we may at last enjoy the
rest of heaven, Heb. 4.11, etc.

T.B. Argument 10. out of Mat. 5.17.
Christ ratified the very least thing commanded in the Law: even unto the least
letter, to continue for ever, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19.

Therefore together with the rest of the Commandments, he ratified that of the
seventh-day Sabbath.

Page 451. I cannot devise what should be more pregnant or plane, for
maintenance of this moral ordinance of GODS the seventh-day Sabbath.

Answ. Our blessed Savior, in this part of his Gospel, penned by S. Matthew,
ratified not only the natural moral Law, which Christians are to observe:
but the whole Divine Law, positive, and ceremonial, and the whole doctrine of
the Prophets: to wit, respectively, according to their several kinds and
qualities.

1 He ratified the whole Law, which was purely, simply, and perpetually
moral, in respect of necessary obedience and observation.

2 He ratified Ceremonial and Positive Laws, Alex. Hal. 4. quaest. 5. art.
2. Ad id quod objicitur, quod jota unum, etc. dicendu^, quod non dicit, haec
non transibunt simpliciter, sed quod non transibunt donec omnia fiant. Fieri
autem vel impleri dicitur dupliciter. Vel ad literam, and sic implentur
moralia: vel spiritualiter and sic implentur ceremonialia. Aug. c. Faust.
Manich. l. 18. c. 6.
in respect of their spiritual use and signification, and by fulfilling all
things typed and prefigured by them.

3 He ratified the whole Doctrine of the holy Prophets, by fulfilling in his
own person, and in the members of his mystical body all things foretold and
prophesied by them: and he maintained also the reading, expounding, and
spiritual, and moral application of prophetical doctrine, to continue in the
Christian Church, to the worlds end.

Read a fuller and larger answer to this objection, (out of the 5th of St.
Matthew.) page 61, 62, etc. and the Reader will perceive, that T. B. had little
reason to put so much confidence in this objection.

T. B. Argument 11.
CHRIST commanded His Disciples to use all possible means, that they might not
profane the Sabbath Day, by working, traveling, moiling, or toiling in it,
for above fifty years after the end of Ceremonies: for He said, Matthew. 24.20.
Pray ye, that your flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath Day.

Now how can it enter into any man's head to think that Christ should command
them, that they should not fly on the Sabbath Day, in any other sense than
this, because he would not have them profane it? and because he would have his
Fathers Will revealed in the fourth Commandment carefully to be observed: and
because he would not have his Disciples pollute their consciences with
profanation of Gods Sabbath.

Edw. Elton upon the fourth Commandment, page 90. CHRIST foretelling the
destruction of Jerusalem, which should be forty years after His Ascension,
when all Jewish Ceremonies were abrogated, bids His Disciples Pray, that their
flight might not be in Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day.

Now, If this Commandment had been Ceremonial, they might have fled with as
little care and grief on that day, as on any other day.

Answ. Our Saviors speech to the Disciples, Matthew. 24.20. Pray that your
flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath: was not delivered to
signify, that the Law of the old Sabbath was in force at the destruction of
Jerusalem: But for other reasons.

1. It is an undoubted verity, that the old legal covenant was cancelled and
repealed, at the Passion of CHRIST: and the new Covenant was sealed and
ratified with our Saviors blood Aug. lib. quaest. 83. Mortuo pro nobis
Christo, novum Testamentum firmatum: cujus similitudo vetus Testamentum erat,
in quo mors Testato^is per victimam figurabatur.
Hebr. Chap. 8. and Chap. 9. And this being so, they which believed in Christ,
and had knowledge of their Christian liberty: were freed from necessary
obedience of legal ordinances.

But yet notwithstanding, this Evangelicall doctrine, concerning the cessation
of the old Law, did not presently take general footing, neither was it
universally received, at the first plantation of Christian Religion: for many
believing Jews and Proselytes adhered stiffly to many legal observances, and
especially to the Law of the Sabbath: And the unbeleeving Jews were most
rigid, and zealous observers, and exactors of the observation thereof,
according to the traditions of their elders.

Secondly, Although it was no transgression of the Law of the fourth
Commandment, in case of urgent and extreme necessity, to travel, or to
labor, or to flee from danger: Yet the common and general opinion of the
Jewish Nation was otherwise, and they esteemed it an intolerable profanation
to do any such thing upon the Sabbath Day: Ioh. 5.16. Therefore did the Jews
persecute JESUS, and sought to slay Him, because He had done those things on
the Sabbath Day. If therefore the Disciples, or Christian believers, should be
compelled to flee on the Sabbath Day, they would be in peril Abulens. q. 121.
in Matthew. 24. Sabbatum obstabat ad fugiendum, non quasi conversi ad Christum
putarent esse peccatu^: Quia etiamsi putarent manner obligationem legis, sicut
in lege Mosis: Non erat peccatum fugere in tali necessitate: Tamen licet
constaret de hac necessitate credentibus, Non constabat Iudaeis inter quos
vivebant credentes, nesciebant enim talia pericula instare. Et ideo putarent
illos violatores Sabbati, quasi sine causa itinerantes: Et sic lapidarent eos.
, to be greivously molested and persecuted by their own superstitious Nation.

It is therefore false, which the Objector concludes from our Saviors words,
Matthew. 24. namely, that CHRIST willed His Disciples to pray, that their flight
might not be in the Sabbath, because their flight on that day, would be a
transgression of the Law of the fourth Commandment, for that Law was ceased at
the destruction of Jerusalem: and Christians might as lawfully travel, or
labor, or flee on that day, as upon any other.

Lastly, whereas E. E. in his Catechism, page 90. applies our Saviors words,
to the Sunday, or Lord's Day, as though CHRIST should have said: Pray that your
flight be not on the Sunday: Surely this gloss destroys the Text: for it was
lawful in our Saviors days, Luke 24.13. and in many ages after, to labor,
travel, flee, etc. upon the Sunday: and no Law of GOD, or man, prohibited the
same: And the Lord's Day, was a distinct day of the week, from the Sabbath Day
of the fourth Commandment, of which Christ speaks, Matthew. 24. Neither was it
at any time called the Sabbath Day, either by our Savior, or by any of His
Apostles, or their immediate Successors.

But there is nothing more familiar, with these new Sabbath-masters, than to
wrest holy Scripture, to their own purpose.

T. B. Argument 12:
The Apostles, after the death and Resurrection of CHRIST: and when all legal
ceremonies were dead, duly observed and kept holy the Sabbath Day. So likewise
did the Primitive Church, after the Apostles, for three or four hundred years.

Answ. The holy Apostles, and their Successors observed not the Sabbath Day in
obedience, or after the rule of the fourth Commandment: But for other reasons
formerly declared, page 68.

1. They observed it not in obedience to the fourth Commandment, because both
the Apostles and their Successors, had taught the Church, that the law of the
old Sabbath was ceased. Read before, page 6. etc.

Secondly, They observed not the same universally in all Churches, but in such
only, wherein were Jews and Proselytes. Neither did they establish the
perpetual observation of it in any Church, which was planted by them: Neither
observed they it, according to the rule of the Law. Read page 71.

T. B. Argument 13.
We Christians are to imitate GOD, in keeping the seventh day Sabbath. For the
Scriptures in general, do freequently set before us GOD's example for
imitation, and exhort us, to be followers of Him, Ephesians. 5.1. Matthew. 5.48. Luke
6.39. 1 Pet. 1.15.16. And GOD Himself in the fourth Commandment fetches a
reason, to have us keep the seventh day Sabbath, from His own example.

But to imitate GOD, is to do as He did: and He rested the seventh day, and
not the first day, or the eight day. They therefore which keep holy the first
day, thwart and cross GOD, and do not imitate and follow Him.

Answ. 1. Every Divine action is not a common rule of imitation, for then we
should strive to imitate GOD, in His actions extraordinary Aug. in Psalm. 90. In
quo imitaturi sumus vias Christi? Nunquid in ea magnificentia, in qua Deus
erat, etc. ut talia miracula faciamus, qualia ipse fecit, etc.
, in His operations of absolute power, and when He works ad extra, according
to the liberty of his own will, and good pleasure. But the Almighty has
declared unto us, in His holy Word, in what things we must imitate Him: namely,
in doing of good, and shunning of evil, in fidelity, and truth, in holiness,
righteousness, charity, compassion, etc.

Secondly, GOD Almighty in the fourth Commandment, sets down a reason
wherefore He Himself imposed the Law of the seventh days rest upon the
Jews, namely, because on that day He ceased from the work of prime creation,
and His will was, that they throughout their generations should keep it holy,
by resting from worldly labor, in memory of the Creation Philo de opif. mundi.
Sicut Reges diem natalem filiorum suorum coli jubent: Ita Deus natalem operis
sui mundi, peculiari festo assidue recoli voluit, ad exclude^dum errorem
philosophorum, omniumque infidelium, qui dicturi erant, mundum non habuisse
principium.
.

But He imposed not this Law (of resting upon every seventh day, in memory of
the Creation) upon Christian people, by any Evangelicall Precept: neither did
He command the Gentiles at any time, before or after the Law, to imitate His
example, of resting the seventh day of every week.

And therefore abstinence from worldly labor upon the old Sabbath, in imitation
of GOD Almighty, would not be a work of holiness and true obedience in us
Christians: But an act of Judicial superstition.

T.B. Argument 14.
We may not with Libertines, Antinomians, and Anabaptists, abolish the whole
Law of the ten Commandments: But the seventh day Sabbath is one of the ten
Commandments.

Page 500. There is as good reason for us, to join with Antinomians, and
Anabaptists, in casting away the (whole) Moral Law, As to join with them in
casting away the Sabbath Day, commanded in the Moral Law.

Answ. 1. The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, according to the literal
and particular subject thereof, is a legal and positive precept of the old
Law; and not any part of the natural moral Law: neither is the observation
thereof, commanded or ratified in the Gospel. Read this proved, page 34. and
page 61.

2 They comply not at all, with Libertines, Antinomians, etc. modern or
ancient, who maintain that the Law of the old Sabbath, according to the
speciality thereof, is expired, in the time of Grace, and obliges not
Christians under the new Covenant: But they which maintain the Saturday
Sabbath to be in force, comply with some Anabaptists Histor. Anabapt. lib. 6.
page 153. Rotmanist. artic. 5. Diem Saturni diuina authoritate institutum, non
autem diem solis, humano arbitrio dedicatum, celebrandum esse.
.

And as for the ancient Libertines, and Antinomians, namely, the Simonians,
Gnostics, Carpocratians, Eunomians, etc. These rejected the whole Divine
moral Law: And were enemies to all good works commanded by that Law.

Eunomius maintained Aug. Haeres. 54. Fertur adeo fuisse bonis moribus
inimicus, ut asseveraret, quod nihil cuiquam obesset, quorumlibet perpetratio
and perseverantia peccatorum: Si hujus quae ab illo docebatur fidei particeps
esset.
, That if one were partaker of that faith, which he professed, no foul sins
whatsoever committed by him, and continued in, could hurt him.

Carpocrates Idem haeres. 7. Carpocrates docebat omnem turpem operationem,
omnemque adinventionem peccati: Legem Dei quae bona opera docet, contemnebant
(sequaces ejus) quia sola fide and gratia Dei salvi simus. Ex Tertulliano,
Epiphanio, Theodoret. etc.
taught his followers, That all filthy conversation, and uncleanness of
manners was lawful: And that the moral Law which taught good works, was to
be contemned, because men are saved by Faith, and the Grace of GOD alone.

The Gnostics and Valentinians held: That a spiritual person (so they styled
people of their sect) could no more be defiled with vicious or carnal deeds,
than pure gold, can lose his worth and beauty, when it is cast into a dunghill
Hen. lib. 1. cap. 1. Quemadmodum aurum in coeno depositum, non amittit decorem
suum, sed suam naturam custodit: Sic and semetipsos dicunt, licet in
quibuscunque materialibus sint, nihil noceri, neque amittere spiritalem
substantiam. Quapropter and intimorate omnia quae vetantur, hi qui sunt ipsorum
perfecti operantur.
.

Now it appears by the premises, that there is a large and vast difference
between orthodoxall Christians, who deny the natural morallity of the seventh
day Sabbath, upon true Evangelicall grounds: And base and sensual Heretics,
who reject the moral Law of the ten Commandments, because they delight in
sin and wickedness.

T.B. Argument 15.
No man by interpretation of Scripture may abolish the Law of the Saturday or
seventh day Sabbath, which is the fourth Commandment.

But my Adversaries, the Puritan Teachers T. B. Pref. to his Reader. I have
often occasion to use the word Puritan, etc. I use it not in reproach of
sanctity, etc. but only as a note of distinction, to point at some men, with
whom I have to deal, etc. I take them for Gods enemies and mine, I may not
unfitly resemble those Ministers unto that cloud, which had a light and a dark
part, etc. p. 23. Of this number are those ten Ministers, my professed enemies
in this point, who in special I do oppose.
, abolish the Law of the Saturday Sab. by their new and strange interpretation
of Scripture. For these men say, that the fourth Commandment is still in
force, in respect of the duties of the old Sabbath, namely, resting from
servile work, and performing of religious offices: But then they deny the same
to be in force, in respect of the particular day expressed in the Commandment.

And thus by interpretation of Scripture, they abolish the true Sabbath
commanded by GOD's Law: But if they would proceed sincerely; As they maintain
the day is abolished, So likewise they should teach, the duties are ceased:
Because in all other divine Laws, whenever any part was taken away, the
whole was abolished.

Answ. This man throughout his whole Treatise, is very bitter against certain
of His old friends, whom, he styles Puritans. These good men (as it seems to
me) have highly offended him, because after that they had lent him his grounds
and principles, they refused to suffer him to enjoy his conclusion. My leisure
does not serve me, to part the fray betwixt these contenders: But walking on,
in the orthodoxall way, of the ancient Catholic Church, my answ. to this
Object. is, That the old Sabbath Day, namely, the 7th day from the Creation
Epiphan. Haeres. 30. Sabbatum illud lege praescriptum, ad ipsius (Christi)
adventum peseveravit, quo demum abrogato, magnum nobis Sabbatu^ obtulit qui est
ipse Dominus, requies, Sabbatique observatio nostra.
: And the legal offices of that day, are both of them ceased under the Law of
Grace.

We Christians observe a weekly holy day, namely, Sunday, which with the holy
Apostle, Rev. 1.10. We style the Lord's Day and not the Sabbath Day.

The duties we perform on that day, are resting from ordinary labor, and
serving God and Christ, by Evangelicall offices.

Our resting from labor, in respect of the general, is grounded upon the Law
of Nature, or the equity of the fourth Commandment. The particular form and
circumstances of resting, are prescribed unto us by the Precepts of the Church.
Our spiritual actions according to that which is maine and substantial in
them, are taught by the Evangelicall Law. Their modification and limitation, in
respect of rituall and external form: and in regard of place, duration,
gesture, habit, and other external circumstances: are prescribed by the Law
of the Church.

And (to accede to the argument in hand) in the religious observance of the
Lord's Day, we decline two contrary extremes: 1. Iudaizing according to the
rigid form of the old Law. 2. Profaneness, in pretermitting or opposing such
holy duties, as the Law of Christ in general, and the Law of the Church in
particular, imposes upon us.

And concerning the fourth Commandment, we maintain, that it obliges us in
respect of the common and natural equity thereof: but the obligation of that
Law is ceased, in respect of special time, and all other legal circumstances.

Now whereas the Objector says, In all Divine Laws, whenever any part is
taken away, the whole is abolished: If by part, he understand such a part as
is substantial and constituent, his position is granted: but if he understand
a circumstantiall or accidental part, the position is false: for the Law of
prayer and divine worship is still in force, as it was in David's, and in
Daniels days, in respect of substantial actions: but many circumstances of
time, place, and gesture, as Daniels praying with windows opened toward
Jerusalem, Daniel 6.10. And David's lifting up his eyes toward the hills, Psalm.
121.1. His going up to the House of God, etc. Psalm. 122.1, 2. are abolished in
the time of the Gospel.

T. B. His argument therefore is inconsequent: for the duties of the fourth
Commandment might have continued, and yet the circumstance of the day and
time, have been altered.

T. B. Argument 16.
When GOD Almighty put an end to the annual Sabbaths of Moses Laws, he
abolished both the Duties of those Feasts: and also the days and times:

But the duties of the seventh Day Sabbath are not abolished. And therefore the
day it self continues in force, and is not abolished.

Ans. All legal and ceremonial duties, or religious actions of the
seventh-day Sabbath, are ceased, as well as the Legal Offices and services of
other annual Sabbaths.

But all religious actions observed in the Old Testament, which are spiritual,
or simply and properly moral, are in force in the New Testament: and many
positive duties, to wit, the administering and receiving the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the holy Eucharist, the preaching of Christ crucified, and
repentance and remission of sins in his Name, are commanded in the Evangelicall
Law: Gods people also, are commanded in the Gospel to pray to God the Father,
and to give him thanks in the Name of Christ, John 16.24. Col. 3.17. and to
bow the knee of body and soul, at the Name of JESUS: and to love one another,
as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.

All the foresaid duties are Evangelicall, and not legal: and they are not
commanded by the fourth Precept of the Decalogue, but by the Law of Christ in
the Gospel.

The spiritual and Evangelicall Offices therefore which Christian people
render to God upon the Lord's Day, and upon other holy days, were not
commanded by the fourth Precept of the Decalogue, neither continue they in use
in the Church, by virtue of that Commandment.

T.B. Argument 17.
The sanctification of the seventh Day Sabbath is a part of GOD's worship,
comprised in the first Table of the Moral Law: And it was written by the
finger of GOD in Tables of stone.

Therefore the sanctification of this day is Moral, and now in force.

Ans. The sanctifying of the Sabbath, in the old Law, was an act of divine
Religion: and so was the observation of the Passover: but that which in those
times was holy and religious, is now profane and superstitious, as appears by
Circumcision, burnt Sacrifices, etc.

Neither did the writing the fourth Commandment, argue it to be simply and
perpetually moral: for although this be affirmed by many, yet it can never be
proved: and let any Sabbatizer yield a sound reason if he be able: wherefore
Gods inward writing by inspiration, and mental revelation, should not cause
Precepts so revealed and written, to be perpetual, as well as his external
pronouncing, writing, or forming. But the Lords writing by inspiration and
internal impression, did not argue that all precepts so written were simply
and perpetually moral. Therefore Gods external writing made them not such.
Read before Page 54.

T. B. Argument 18.
The observation of the Old Sabbath Day, was celebrated by Christians after the
death of Christ, and the abolition of all Legal Ceremonies: and was recorded
by way of approbation, and commendation by the Holy Ghost, to all posterity,
Luke 23.56.

R. B. c. Briarw. Page 104. H. B. Dialog. Manuscrip. The holy Women, the
Disciples of our Savior, rested the Sabbath Day: and would not enbalme his
Body, though they had prepared spices, and ointments the day before: and their
work by the Evangelist, etc. has this commendation: that it was according to
the Commandment, Luke ^3.56. And they returned and prepared spices and
ointments, and rested the Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment.

Answ. The Legal Sabbath, was at this time in force, for ought these holy
Matrons knew, to the contrary. For that Law was not then repealed, by any
public act, or plain sentence of the Lawgiver, and therefore the observation
of it, did still oblige the consciences of all such, as were under the Law
Medina. 1. 2. q. 103. art. 3. Licet sola revocatio praecepti, tollat ejus vim
obligandi: nihilominus subditus cui datum est illud praeceptu^, obligatur ad
illud observandum, donec sibi innotescat revocatio, non quidem ratione
praecepti, sed propter dictamen conscientiae.
, until they were resolved of the repeal thereof.

For it is an infallible maxim: That all just Laws, Divine, or humane, are
still to be observed, until their expiration, or abrogation be made known,
to the Subjects, by some sufficient declaration, express, or vertuall: That
is, by some edict, or public constitution of Prince or state: or by desuetude,
or contrary custom: or by cessation of the ground and reason of the Law: or by
elapse and ending of the time, for which it was given when the Law is
temporary: or change of place: and lastly, when a Law becomes unprofitable or
pernicious to the public. L. d. quibus. ff. d. legibus can. in istis.
Justinian. Novell. 3. Causae cessatio. Rebuff. ad. l. derogatur. 102. d. verb.
sig. Abrogationis variae sunt causae: 1. Consuetudo contraria. Constitutio
contraria. 3. Causae cessatio. 4. Loci varietas. 5. Tempus. 6. Majus damnum
inde sequens.


T. B. Argument 19.
Unless the fourth Commandment be still in force, for the time and day
specified therein, it commands nothing, but such duties only, as were
formerly enjoined in the second Commandment.

For the second Commandment forbids all false worship, and commands the
true Worship of GOD: as Prayer, Preaching, Psalms, Sacraments.

Now this being granted, there will be a tautology, and needless repetition
in the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, because it commands no new or
distinct duty, from those which were commanded before.

Answ. 1. It is manifest that the second Commandment of the Decalogue
prohibiteth, the making and setting up of Images to be adored, Levit. 26.1. Ye
shall make you no Idols nor graven Image, neither rear you up a standing
Image, (...) neither shall you set up any Image of stone in your land, to bow
down unto it, (...).

But by what evidence can any new dogmatist, make it appear, that this precept
requires Evangelicall worship, in spirit and truth, to wit, by faith, hope,
and charity? and as for Evangelicall prayer, in the name of Christ: and
preaching Christ crucified, and raised from the dead: and the use of
Evangelicall Sacraments, Baptism and the holy Eucharist, what Alchymist can
extract these out of the second Commandment? And I see no reason, but if that
these Evangelicall duties, are commanded in the Decalogue, why a man may not
be justified by the Law, as well as by the Gospel.

2 The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, Remember the Sabbath day to keep
it holy: according to the literal sense thereof, enjoyneth not such spiritual
and Evangelical duties as are mentioned in the objection, to wit, prayer (to
God the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ, John 14.13. and 16.24.) preaching
of the Gospel, and hearing of the same preached, or the administration, and
receiving the holy Sacraments of the New Testament.

Also it is a controversy among Divines, whether this precept commanded the
Jews, and Israelites in general, to wit the whole Nation upon the weekly
Sabbath, to resort to any public congregation, and to be present at any common
Divine Service, or at any solemn reading, and exposition of the Law.

The Law of Deuteronomy, was to be read in public, in the year of Release, to
all the people, Deuteronomy. 31.10. And Moses commanded them, saying: At the end of
every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
Tabernacles. 11. When all Israel is to come to appear before the Lord thy God
in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this Law Abulens. in Mat.
5. q. 91. Accipitur lex specialiter pro Deuteronomio.
, before all Israel, in their hearing. 12. Gather the people together, Men, and
Women, and Children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may
hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to
do all the words of this Law. But that there should be any public or solemn
reading, and expounding of the Law, every weekly Sabbath Day, is not expressly
required, and commanded in the Pentateuch.

Neither does it appear by any relation of sacred History, that before the
Babylonish captivity, there was any weekly reading and expounding P. Cuneus.
d. Repub. Heb. li. 2. ca. 17. Sub priore templo lex recitata duntaxat a
Levitis, populo est, aut etiam domi a singulis legebatur: interpretatio
magistroru^, commentatioque nulla erat. At sub postetiore, oraculis
cessantibus, receptum paulatim more publico est, ut verba Biblici textus,
sensaque explicarentur.
the Law, upon the Sabbath, either at Silo whiles the Arc remained there, or
in the Temple of Jerusalem, when that was made the place of public worship:
and it is a thing to be admired, that if the reading and expounding the Law,
had been in continual use, among the Jews every Sabbath Day: there should
be found in the days of King Josiah, one copy only, or Book of the Law, in
the most solemn place of GOD's worship, to wit, the Temple of Jerusalem: and
that Hilkiah the Priest, should find this book, hidden in a corner, and
present it to the King, as a great rarity, 2 Kings 22.8, 9. 2 Chro. 34.14.
Iunius in his Scholia upon two Kings 22. says, This book was Authenticum
Mosis autographum: but the Original Copy was always remaining in the side of
the Arc, Deuteronomy. 31.26. And Hilkiah came not with in the Sanctum Sanctorum:
Neither came he near the Arc; nor might be open the side of it, or take any
thing out of it: and when he found the Book, he was searching here and there
in the outward places of the Temple. Abulens. in. 4. Reg: 22. q. 40. 1. Dicitur
quod Hilchias reperit librum: sed reperite quis dicitur vel invenire, cum
alicui occurrit res, a casu vel intention, quia quaerebat eam: sed sciens
locum non dicitur invenire eam, sed accipere. Sciebat autem Hilchias in latere
Arcae esse, Deuteronomy. 31. 2. Non audebat librum illum accipere ex Arca, quia contra
mandatum, etc. Non licebat introire in Sanctum Sanctorum nisi semel in anno,
and cu^ ceremoniis variis, etc. 3. Non licuit summo Sacerdoti ingredienti, etc.
aperire Arcam, and aliquid ex ea tollere, etc. Nam minatus est Deus morte
moriturum, etc. Lev. 16.
Every man in common reason may conceive, that if the Law had been commonly
read, and expounded every Sabbath Day, either in the Temple, or in other
public assemblies of the Kingdom of Judea, there could not have been such a
rarity of Bibles, or books of the Law.

2 It appears not in Mose's Law, that any other public religious offices,
were enjoined the Priests or Levites upon the weekly Sabbath (more than such
as were daily to be performed:) but those which are mentioned, Number. 28.9. Lev.
24.8. to wit, an oblation of two Lambs, etc. and two tenth deals of flower,
mingled with oil, and the Drink Offering thereof: and besides this oblation,
the placing of twelve new loaves of Shewbread, with Frankincense, etc. Now the
people were not commanded to be present at this service Lorin. in Lev. 23.
Oblatio and sanctificatio panum propositionis; Lev. 21.8. Duorum Agnorum
sacrificium, cum duabus decimis similae, and libis in Sabbato ad Sacerdotes
tantum pertinebant, nec tenebantur omnes ad ea convenire.
, neither any other Priests and Levites, but such as waited and attended in
their courses.

3 Many Doctors of note maintain Caietan. 22. q. 122. ar. 4. Soto. d. Not. and
Gra. lib. 1. ca. 22. Fillut. mor. quaest. tom. 2. tr. 27. cap. 1. n. 8. Lorin.
in Lev. 23.3. Suar. d Relig. lib. 2. ca. 1. Number. 5. Ex vi illius praecepti ut
erat veteris legis, non fuit determinatum speciale opus cultus Divini in die
Sabbati. Bonfrer. in Exodus 20.8. Tota sanctificatio. Sabbati Iudaeis praecepta,
non aliud fuit quam cessatio ab operibus servilibus: and haec cessatio apud
Iudaeos habebat rationem divini cultus, erat enim signum quoddam externu^
negativum, quod formaliter praecipiebatur and assumebatur ut Divinus cultus.
Caeterae actiones religionis positivae, etsi a Deo tanquam finis illius
cessationis intenderentur, non erant tamen illae formaliter iis praeceptae, ex
vi illius mandati.
: That the Letter of the fourth Commandment imposed upon the Jews and
Israelites, no other external form, of sanctifying the weekly Sabbath, but
resting and cessation from secular labor and negotiation, in memory and
recognition of the work of prime Creation: and although some other religious
actions, were intended by God, as the end of the precept: yet no other were
formally commanded.

In future times, and namely after the return from the Babylonian captivity,
the Jews had Synagogues Sigon. d. Rep. Heb. lib. 2. ca. 8. Origo Synagogarum
non fuit vetusta. Neque enim in historia Regum aut Iudicum ulla earum memoria
celebratur. Ego eas in Babylonico exilio primum constructas putarim: ut qui
Templo carerent, in quo aut orarent aut docerent, locum aliquem similem Templo
haberent, in quem ejusmodi officii gratia convenirent. Atque hoc idem fecisse
reliquos dispersionis Iudaeos, in Asia, Egypto, and Europa, censuerim.
, both throughout Judea, and also in other Regions of the world, where they
lived, and upon the Sabbath-dayes they frequented the same, Acts 15.21. Moses
of old time, has in every City, them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath Day. But this was not commanded in the Decalogue, or
by any express sentence, or mandate of Mose's Law.

If it shall be now objected, that it is said, Acts 15.21. that the reading
and expounding of Moses, was used in Synagogues every Sabbath Day, of old Time:
it is answered, that this form of speech, (...), is used of such things, as
had their beginning many Ages after the Law was given in Mount Sina: and many
times it is spoken of things not very ancient, Mat. 5.21, 27, 33. Acts 15.7
Lorin. in Act. Idem valet hic a temporibus antiquis, quod ja^mdudum, and
jampridem. Pelarg. in Matthew. 5. (...) nomine non semper intelliguntur antiqui a
multis retro seculis: sed ii crebro notantur qui praecesserunt nos, kadmonim,
sive Reshonim, priores, etc.
.

And again, whereas it is said, that the solemn performance of Evangelicall
duties, is commanded by the general word sanctify, or keep holy the
Sabbath Day: our answer is, that (...) to sanctify, is not taken in a general
notion, in the Law of the fourth Commandment, but in a particular notion, to
wit, Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day, according as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee, Deuteronomy. 5.12. But that the Lord God commanded Jews and
Israelites to hear Evangelicall Sermons, and to administer and receive
Evangelicall Sacraments, upon every weekly Sabbath Day, is delivered in no
passage or sentence of Mose's Law, but this was commanded by the Evangelicall
Law only.

They which in their popular Tractates and Collations, use to cry down
Ecclesiastical authority, and contend, that either we must have a divine Law,
for keeping holy the Lord's day, or else our religious service, will be
superstitious, and not of faith: maintain with great confidence, that the
fourth Commandment has a particular and special relation to the Sunday of
every week: and that the same commands all Evangelicall duties, public and
private, which are to be performed by Christian people, upon that day: But
this opinion is novell, and unheard of, until these latter times: and besides,
the Old Law being defunct Origin. In Josh. Hom. 1. Defuncta est lex, and
legalia praecepta jam cessant. Iren. l. 4. c. 31. Haec quae in servitutem and
signum data sunt illis, circumcinxit novo libertatis Testamento. Quae autem
naturalia, communia and liberalia omnium, auxit and dilatavit.
, and legal commandments being ceased, the same cannot be a rule to
Christians, either of the fixed time, or for the form and manner of
Evangelicall worship. Now the fourth Commandment according to the literal
sense thereof, is a branch of the old Law, and one of the precepts thereof;
Quibus nunc Christianos uti fas non est: which Christians may no more lawfully
use under the Gospel, than circumcision, and burnt sacrifices August. d. util.
Cred. c. 3. Lex Paedagogus noster erat in Christo, ille igitur Paedagogum dedit
hominibus quem timerent, qui magistrum postea quem diligerent. In quibus legis
praeceptis and mandatis, quibus nunc Christianos uti fas non est, Sabbatum est
and circumcisio, and sacrificia, etc.
.

Under the Gospel we maintain the general equity of the fourth
Commandment, and the spiritual and mystical use thereof, Sed quisquis illum
diem nunc observat, sicut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit: sapere autem secundum
carnem, mors est Aug. d. spir. and lit. c. 14.
. Whosoever in the time of the Gospel observes this day, according to the
letter, is wise according to the flesh: and to be wise according to the flesh,
is death.

T.B. Argument 20.
We must have and retain such a Sabbath day as is commanded by the fourth
Commandment.

But if we abolish Saturday the Old Sabbath Day, once commanded in the fourth
Commandment, then we leave no Day as commanded, or which GOD has sanctified
and hallowed.

Answ. Christians are not bound to observe a Sabbath Day, commanded by the
fourth Commandment, or by any other special divine Law August. Epistol. 119.
Observare diem Sabbati non ad litera jubemur, secu^dum otium ab opere corporali.
. The Gospel of CHRIST, has given liberty to the Church, to appoint days and
times for Divine worship in public assemblies, and for ministerial duties
Aquin. Quodli. 4. art. 13. Haec est differentia inter legem utramque, quia lex
vetus determinabat multa, tam in praeceptis ceremonialibus, pertinentibus ad
cultum Dei, quam etiam in praeceptis judicialibus pertinentibus ad justitiam
inter homines conservandam: Sed lex nova, quae est lex libertatis, hujusmodi
determinationes non habet, sed est contenta praeceptis moralibus naturalis
legis, and articulis fidei, and sacramentis gratiae. Caetera vero quae
pertinent ad determinationem judiciorum, vel determinationem divini cultus,
libere permisit Christus, qui est novae legis lator, Praelatis Ecclesiae, and
principibus Christiani populi.
. And accordingly the Church had made choice of the Lord's Day, and of other
Holy Days, against which no just exception can be taken.

T. B. Argument 21.
We must not be partial in the Law, Mal. 2. nor mangle GOD's Law: but have
respect to all GOD's Commandments, as David had.

But if we reject the old Sabbath, we are guilty of mangling GOD's Law.

Answ. They mangle the Law, who reject or disannull any part or member thereof,
which is in force, and which ought to be observed. But the Law of the old
Sabbath, is not a Divine Law of that quality.

T. B. Argument 22.
It is maintained by many Divines, that one day of every week ought to be
sanctified, by virtue of the fourth Commandment.

Now Saturday is GOD's ancient, and sanctified Day: and this Day is expressly
commanded in the Decalogue.

Therefore Saturday, GOD's ancient, sanctified, and hallowed Seventh Day, must
be our weekly Sabbath.

T. B. Page 520. What Pulpit is there, in the Kingdom of England, which does
not on all occasions seal unto this truth, by proclaiming and publishing it
unto the people?

Answ. It is consonant to the equity of the fourth Commandment, that one day
in seven shall be an Holy Day, wherein Christian people ought to rest, and give
themselves to religious exercises: And the Church of Christ accordingly, both
in ancient and modern times, has made choice of the Lord's day, being the day
of our Saviors Resurrection, to be a weekly day of rest, from servile labor:
and a solemn time for divine worship: neither does the Church hold it
reasonable to alter this day Covarruvias, to. 2 var. Resolut. l. 4. c. 19. n.
7. Non temere opinabimur hanc diei Dominicae festivitatem, ab Apostolis Divina
institutione edoctis, constitutam fuisse. Eam etenim legimus traditione
Ecclesiastica, semper in Ecclesia Catholica, sanctificatam fuisse, ut tandem
licet ab humano instituto Apostolorum processerit, and originem duxerit (quod
quibusdam placuit) nimis indecorum esset, eam ab ecclesia mutari, aut tolli.
.

But all this makes nothing for the old Saturday Sabbath: For the Church of
Christ, in all ages, maintains the cessation and expiration thereof.

T. B. Argument 23.
To rest from work on Saturday, the Seventh day, is expressly commanded in the
Moral Law: and we find it by experience a notable furtherance of GOD's
public and private worship and service, etc. and of the works of mercy, both
to Man and Beast.

Now all works, commanded in the Decalogue, and which serve to promote GOD's
service, and to benefit men by showing mercy, are moral and perpetual, page
528.

Answ. Resting from work and labor upon the Lord's-days and other Holy Days:
is as beneficial to man, and as subservient to all good offices, both of
Religion and of Charity, as is resting, and serving of God, upon the Saturday,
or upon any other day. And the motives for keeping the Lord's Day, are greater
than the Adversary can bring any, for observing the Saturday.

T.B. Argument 24.
The Observation of the seventh day Sabbath is expressly commanded in the
Decalogue: and it is such a duty, as being made known to a mere natural
man, he cannot in reason oppose it, but allow and subscribe unto it: partly
because God Himself is the Author of it: and because of the ends and uses of
it, namely resting from toilesome labor, and refreshing of body and mind,
which art things very reasonable and good.

Page 534. I see not but it might be proved, that the seventh day Sabbath is a
Law of Nature. For as the Gentiles, some of them, found out the true GOD: so
likewise some of them found out the seventh day Sabbath.

Answ. 1. It is acknowledged by all men, that the seventh Day Sabbath was
expressly commanded the Jews in the Old Law: but that precept was temporary
and positive, and therefore it obliges not Christians, unless it be made
manifest, that it was renewed or confirmed by some Evangelicall precepts.

Secondly, If the ends and uses of the legal Sabbath shall be made known to
a natural man, they cannot persuade him to the observation of the seventh day
of the week, rather then of the first. For to rest from toilesome labor, and
to refresh the body and mind, upon Sunday, or upon Saturday, is equally
beneficial, and consonant to the rule of natural reason. And GOD's
institution of the Sabbath day, under the Law, is of no greater force to
persuade men, that it is necessary to observe the seventh day, then His
ordination is to move them, to observe other positive and temporary Laws,
which were imposed upon the Jews in the old Testament.

Thirdly, Whereas T. B. and before him, some Sunday Sabbatizers affirm that
the law of the Sabbath of the 4th Commandment is of the law of Nature R. B.
against Br. of the Sabb. ca. 16. It stands firm, that the fourth
Commandment in every part thereof, as it slandeth in the Decalogue, is Moral,
and of the law of Nature, page 83.
, because some Heathen people found it out: By the same reason they may
conclude, that the oblation of burnt sacrifices, is of the law of Nature. For
many of the Gentiles used such sacrifices. But very few among the Gentiles
observed the seventh day Sabbath: The Chaldeans had it in derision, Lam. 1.7.
And Saint Augustine Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 6. (...). 11. Hic inter alias
civilis Theologiae superstitiones, reprehendit Sacramenta Iudaeoru^, and maxim
Sabbata: inutiliter id facere affirmans, quod per illos singulos interpositos
dies, septimam ferd aetatis partem perdant vacando, and multa in tempore non
agendo laedantur.
says of Seneca, That among all the Ceremonies of the Jews, he most of all
reprehended their observation of the Sabbath: Because by observing it, they
spent the seventh part of their life in idleness, and doing nothing.

The Grecians and the Romans Plutarch. in vita Thesei. M^crob. Saturn. lib. 1.
cap. 16.
, observed for resting-dayes: the one the eighth day; and the other the ninth.
Theodoret Theod. in 20. ca. Ezech.
says, That no other Nation, but only the Jews, observed the Sabbath day:
And Dio Cassius Dio. Cass. hist. Romans lib. 37.
places the weekly Sabbath among the special observances of that Nation. The
Latin Poets also nicknamed the Jews, and called them, Septimos viros,
Seventh-day men Abulens. in Exo. 31. qu. 10. Vocabant Iudaeos septimos viros a
septimo die quem observabant. A Sabbati observatione, eos denominabant, quasi a
connotato proprio. Ovid. Terra Palestina septima culta viro. Joseph. c. Appion.
l. 2. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 5. Negant urbem ullam Graecorum, vel Barbarorum
ex Iudaico ritu, a diei septimi cessatione ab opere suo, in suos mores
suscepisse.
, because of their observing the seventh-day Sabbath.

But if any Heathen people did observe the Jewish Sabbath, this will not prove,
that the Law of the Sabbath is of the Law of Nature. For some Heathens were
circumcised, and offered burnt-sacrifices and oblations, etc. But they did not
this by the light of natural reason, but by imitation of God's people.

Lastly, if the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath, is of the Law of Nature: Then
it is either a principle, or a necessary conclusion of natural reason Aquin.
1. 2. q. 94. art. 4. and ib. Cajetan. Conradus, Medina, etc. Scotus in 3. did.
37. and in eum. Petigian. ib. art. 1. Scotus. Tertium praeceptum quod est de
Sabbato, est affirmativum, quantum ad aliquem cultum, exhibendum Deo debito
tempore: At quantum ad determinationem hujus, vel illius temporis, non est de
lege naturae, stricte loquendo. Similiter nec quantum ad partem negativam,
quaeincluditur. Quia scilicet probibetur actus servilis pro tempore
determinato, prohibens a cultu tunc exhibendo Deo. Ille autem actus non
prohibetur nisi quia impediens vel retrahens ab isto cultu qui praecipitur.
; or so agreeable to the former, that upon the notice of it, every reasonable
man will presently assent unto it, especially if he be judicious: but it is
neither any principle, or necessary conclusion of natural reason, nor
consonant to either of these, in such a clear manner, as that a judicious
natural man shall be forced upon understanding the terms, to yield assent
unto it. And therefore the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath, is not of the Law of
Nature.

An Argument of T. B. propounded at the time of his censure.
God delivered ten Commandments in Mount Sinai. They in all ages maintained
this number. The rubricke of the service Book, names ten Commandments,
saying: Then shall the Priest rehearse distinctly all the Commandments. The
people after the fourth Commandment, say, Lord have mercy on us and incline
our hearts to keep this Law. But this law commands the observation of the
seventh-day Sabbath.

Byfeeld. p. 133. If you yield not the speciality (of the fourth Commandment)
moral, you turn out one Commandment of the ten, from being moral, for all
your generality. For to say, that this is the morality of the Commandment, and
no more, that some time should be sequestered to Divine worship, makes this
Commandment no more moral, than the building of the Temple or Tabernacle is
moral. Id. page 144.

Answ. 1. Ten Commandments were delivered in Mount Sinai, and of these
ten, the fourth Commandment is one. The Isralites also were commanded to
keep holy the seventh-day Sabbath. But it has been formerly proved, that
this fourth Commandment was not simply and perpetually moral. Nevertheless,
the same is read and expounded in the Christian Church, as other positive
Precepts of the old Law: not to signify the perpetual obligation thereof, in
respect of the particular day commanded therein: but to signify the manifold
graces of God, typed, and represented by this Law: and to persuade Christian
people to observe the equity thereof, and to provoke them to the obedience of
such spiritual and Evangelicall duties, as were prefigured by this
Commandment.

T. B. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law, etc.
Answ. 1. We beseech GOD Almighty to incline our hearts to keep and observe
this Law, according to the equity thereof: which is, that upon the Lord's Day,
and upon all Festival days, and times, in which we assemble to serve and
worship God, and Christ, and to hear his holy Word, and receive his
Sacraments, etc. We may receive the assistance of Divine Grace, and be enabled
from above, both devoutly, reverently, and holily, to honor the Lord our God,
and to edify our selves in faith and true obedience.

2 We beseech GOD to give us grace, to observe the spiritual Sabbath,
prefigured by the legal Sabbath, by abstaining from the servile lusts and
works of sin Greg. Nyssen. d. Res. orat. 1. (...). Prosp. Sent. 114. ex
August. Male celebrat Sabbatum qui ab operibus bonis vacat. Otium autem ab
iniquitate debet esse perpetuum, quia bona conscientia non inquietum sed
tranquillum f^cit. Hugo Vict. Allegor. in Exodus l. 3. c. 7. Sabbatum Dei illud,
quo exterius ab opere cessasse dicitur. Sacramentum est illius interioris
Sabbati, ubi men's sancta per bonam conscientiam a servitute peccati quiescens,
in gaudio Spiritus sancti jocundatur.
: throughout the whole course of our life, and especially upon those sacred
days and times, which by the Christian Church, are devoted to the honor and
service of God and Christ.

Our prayer then to God, prescribed in the Liturgy, is not to beseech him to
incline our hearts to keep this Law, according to the special form and
circumstance of time, commanded in the old Law: but in such a manner as is
agreeable to the state of the Gospel, and the time of grace, that is,
according to the rule of Christian liberty, and according to the equity and
mystery of the fourth Commandment. Now Christian liberty has freed God's
people, under the Gospel, from the observation of days, and months, and
times, and years August. c. Adimant. Manic. 16. Sabbati quietem non observamus
in tempore: sed signum temporale intelligimus, and ad aeternam quietem, quae
illo signo significatur, aciem mentis intendimus. Origin. in Genesis Hom. 10.
Iudaeorum est dies certos and raros, observare solennes: and ideo ad eos dicit
Dominus, quia Neomenias vestras and Sabbata non sustineo. Odit ergo eos Deus,
qui unum diem, putant festum diem esse Domini. Hieron: in Galat. Omnes dies
aequales, etc.
, upon legal and ceremonial principles, Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16.

(...): That is, Arguments of Confutation, proving that T. B. his Sabbatarian
Doctrine is erroneous.
Argument 1. Every Commandment of the Old Testament legally ceremonial, is
disannulled and expired in respect of outward observation, under the Gospel.

The Commandment of the Seventh-day Sabbath, is legally ceremonial.

Therefore the Commandment of the Seventh-day Sabbath, is disannulled and
expired in respect of outward observation, under the Gospel. And consequently,
Christian people are not obliged, by the Law of the fourth Commandment, to the
weekly observation thereof.

The Major Proposition is confirmed by all these Arguments following.

1 The cessation and expiration of the whole ceremonial Law, in respect of
outward observation is foretold, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.

2 Our Savior in the Gospel preached and foretold the same.

3 The holy Apostles and their colleagues in the Acts, and in the Epistles to
the Galatians, Colossians, Hebrews, etc. deliver this Doctrine.

4 The true Catholic Church of Christ, ever since the Holy Apostles days,
maintains this doctrine, to be a Divine verity, and the contrary to be
heresy.

The Minor Proposition is thus proved.

Many proprieties and formal characters of legal ceremonies, are belonging to
the Seventh-day Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, which argue the same to be
legally ceremonial. And this being proved, it is an undoubted verity, that the
Seventh-Day Sabbath of the fourth Commandment is legally ceremonial, and the
observation thereof obliges not Christians.

The first Character of legal ceremonies, is, that they were external
actions, signs, or types, representing and prefiguring things to be fulfilled,
or to come to pass under the Gospel, Heb. 10.1. 1 Cor. 10.6. Col. 2.17.

Now resting from servile labor, upon the old Sabbath Day, was a figure and
represent of spiritual ceasing and abstaining from the servile works of sin,
by Christian people under the Law of grace Tert. c. jud. c. 4. Origin. in Number.
Hom. 23. Aug. in Joan. tr. 3.
, and the same prefigured the spiritual rest, which the righteous should have
in Christ Epiph. Haer. 66. n. 85. Isidor. Hisp. Orig. lib. 6. ca. 18. Damian.
l. 2. ep. 26.
: and the eternal rest of heaven, where people shall dwell in a sure dwelling,
and safe resting place, never to be disquieted with labor, fear, misery, or
care Aug. c. Adaman. c. 16. Cyril. Alex. in Joan. l. 4. c. 51. Hieron. in Esa.
56. and 58. Amb. in 13. ca. Luc. Greg. Nyss. d. Resur. Orat. 1. Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom. 40. Iunil. Affric. d. part. div. legis. l. 2. c. 6. Anastas. Sinait.
Anagog. contempl. in Hexam. l. 7. Hugo Vict. Allegor. in Exodus l. 3. c. 7. G.
W. Of the Sabb. p. 31. The seventh-day kept among the Jews, was ceremonial;
and did shadow out unto us our eternal rest, as appears, Heb 4.4, 10. Id.
page 33.
, Heb. 4. from ver. 3. to the end of the 11. verse.

T. B. His Objection.

S. Paul, Col. 2.17. By Sabbaths, which he says were figures of good things
to come, understands not the weekly Sabbaths, but the annual: for the word
Sabbaths is indefinite, and not general: and all the other things mentioned in
the Text, were not written in the decalogue, and therefore of different kind,
from the seventh-Day Sabbath. The rest were signs and shadows of good things
to come: but the seventh-Day Sabbath was a sign of a thing past, to wit the
Creation of the world.

N. B. upon Col. 2.16. p. 75. Object. Is the Sabbath Day that was moral
abrogated? Sol. No; the Apostle speaks here of the ceremonial Law, not of
the moral: and of ceremonial Sabbaths, not of the moral Sabbath: the word is
in the plural number.

E. E. p. 91. The Apostle means not the Sabbath of the LORD, but the first
and last day of the great Feasts, the Passover, Pentecost, etc.

I. D. p. 132. R. B. p. 130. D. D. p. 60. R. C. p. 118.

Answ. All ancient and modern expositors of holy Scripture, who are men of
note and authority, in the Church, expound Saint Paul's Text, Col. 2.17. of
weekly Sabbaths, as well as of annual: and when Faustus the Manichee,
contended against the Catholic Church, about the legal Sabbath: S. Augustine
objected this Text of S. Paul against him, saying, Tu Apostolo responde si
potes, qui vacationem istius Diei, umbram futuri esse testatur. Answer thou the
Apostle, if thou be able, who witnesses that resting upon the Sabbath Day,
was a figure of that which was to come.

2 The reasons which the Sabbatarians use, to show that Saint Paul's Text is not
to be understood of the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, are of no worth.

The word Sabbath (say they) is plural and indefinite in that Text. Therefore
it comprehends not the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. But this cavil is
ridiculous. For first of all, in the very Decalogue it self, where the Law of
the weekly Sabbath is rehearsed, the Greek translation reads, (...).
Remember the Day of the Sabbaths, Exodus 20.8. And in Deuteronomie 5.12. (...).
Observe the day of the Sabbaths to hallow it. In like manner, the word Sabbaths
is used in the plural number, in many other passages, both of the Old and New
Testament, in which it is certain, that it comprehends the Sabbath of the
fourth Commandment, Levit. 19.3. Lam. 1.7. Esaias 1.13, and 56.4, 6. Ezech.
20.12. Mat. 12.5, 11. Mark. 1.21. and 2.23. and 3.2, 4. Luke 4.31. and 6.9. and
13.10. Acts 13.14. and 16.13. and 17.2. Lastly, in the Text of Leviticus, which
the Sabbatarians allege, for their novell exposition of S. Paul, Col. 2.16.
the plural word Sabbaths, comprehends the seventh-day Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment, Lev. 23.3. with verse 38.

Another of their Cavils is: The Sabbaths of which Saint Paul speaks, were
shadows of things to come: but the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, was a
sign of a thing past, namely, of the Creation of the world.

This is a miserable subterfuge: for the annual Sabbaths, namely the
Passover, and the Pentecost, etc. were observed in memory of things past, to
wit, deliverance out of Egyptian bondage, and the giving of the Law in Mount
Sinai: and they were also shadows and figures of things to come: namely, the
redemption of mankind by CHRIST: The sending down the Holy Ghost in fiery and
cloven tongues, at the Feast of Pentecost, by means whereof the Holy Apostles
were enabled to teach the Evangelicall Law of Christ.

Another propriety and formal Character of legal and ceremonial observances,
is: They were proper to the Jews and Israelites, and did belong to the
partition wall, of which Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.14.

This Character belongs to the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment; for the
Law of this Sabbath was given to the Jews and Israelites only, and not to any
other Nation of the world unless they became Proselytes: And the observation
of this weekly day, in recognition of the benefit of creation, was a
principal distinctive sign, differencing the Jews from all other people: as
I have formerly showed in my solution of T. B. his 24th. Objection, page 156.

Theodoret upon Ezech. 20.12. says as follows Theodoret. Illud, Non
moechaberis, non furtum facies, and alia cum his co^juncta alios quoque homines
naturae lex edocuit: At Sabbati observandi non natura magistra, sed latio
legis. In aliis igitur, cum aliis communione juncti, in observatione Sabbati
propriam quandam videbantur obtinere Rempublicam: Nulla enim alia gens hoc
otium observabat: Neque Circumcisio, ita ipsos ab aliis distinguebat, ut
Sabbatum. Quippe circumcisionem Idumaei quoque habebant, qui ab Esau genus
ducebant: Et Ismaelitae similiter: Aegyptii item a Iudaeis hanc edocti
observare studebant: quod per Prophetam Hieremiam Deus declaravit, cum dixit:
Et visitabo super omnes Circumcisos praeputium ipsorum, super Aegyptum, and
super Edom, etc. Sabbati vero observationem, sola Iudaeorum natio custodiebat:
Idcirco dixit Deus, quia Sabbata mea dedi eis ut sint in signum, inter me, and
inter ipsos, etc.
: The Law of Nature taught all people, that Murder, Adultery, Perjury, Theft,
etc. were unlawful: But the observation of the Sabbath day did not come from
Natures teaching, but from the Positive Law of GOD. In many other observances
the Jews were conjoined, and had fellowship with other people of the world:
But in keeping the Sabbath day, they had a Republike proper to themselves. For
no other Nation besides themselves observed this day of rest. Neither did
Circumcision so much distinguish them from other people, as the Sabbath:
Because the Ismaelites, Edomites, Egyptians, Ambr. Epist. 77. page 1122.
Aegyptii impium judicant sacerdotem qui nequaquam habeat circumcisionis
insigne. Reperimus in historia veteru^ non solum Aegyptios, sed etiam Aethiopum
and Abrabum and Phoenicu^ aliquos circumcisione usos. Hieronim. in Gala. t. c.
5.
etc. being instructed by the Israelites, were circumcised; But the Jewish
Nation alone observed the Sabbath. And for this cause the LORD says by
Ezekiel: I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they
might know, that I am the Lord, to sanctify them, Ezekiel. 20.12.

A third Character of legal observances: They were imposed upon the Jews and
Israelites, as an heavy burden, to signify unto them the heavy and
insupportable burden of the old Law, Acts 10.14. Gal. 4.24.

The Law of the Sabbath, was an heavy burden Philo. vita Mosis, lib. 2. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 17. Origin. (...), lib. 4. pa. 470. Aben-Ezra. ap.
Abulens. Exodus 35. quaest. 1. Hieron. proaem. Epist. ad Galat. and in Esa. 58.
and in Amos 5. Anastas. Sinait. Anagog. contempl. in Hexam. lib. 7.
. For the Jews were prohibited on that Day, To kindle any fire, throughout all
their habitations, Exodus 35.3. And whosoever did any work upon that day, must
dye, Exodus 35.2. The Israelites on that day might not travel, or take any
journey: nor carry any burdens, Ier. 17.21. Neh. 13.15. nor bury or enbalme
their dead, Luke 23.56. And a silly man which gathered sticks upon that day,
was apprehended and put in ward, and at length stoned to death by the Lord's
own appointment, Number. 15.36.

The fourth Character of legal observances, they were commanded to be observed
by the Jews, in memory and recognition of some special benefit conferred upon
them.

The legal Sabbath was commanded to be observed, by the Jews and Israelites,
to put them in mind of their mighty deliverance out of Egyptian servitude: and
to incite them to thankfulness and obedience to God, for their rest and
liberty in the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember that thou wast a servant in
the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, by a
mighty hand and stretched out arm: Therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee
to observe the Sabbath day.

Conclusion. It cannot therefore be denied, but that the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment having so many Characters, and formal properties of legal
Ceremonies is positive and legal: and the same being such, the observation
thereof is superstitious, and obliges not Christians under the Gospel.

The second Argument against T. B. his Position.
No Precepts of the old Law, merely positive, are in force, or of necessary
observation under the Gospel, unless the same be ratified and confirmed by
the Gospel.

The fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, in respect of the particular day of
the week, therein specified, is a precept of the old Law, merely positive:
And it was not ratified or confirmed by the Gospel.

Therefore, this Commandment of the Decalogue, in respect of the particular
day therein specified, is not in force under the Gospel.

The minor proposition of this argument is formerly proved, page 34. etc.

And the major proposition likewise, page 33. and 37.

It is likewise proved from the Apostles doctrine, concerning the expiration of
the Old Law: and it was decreed in the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem, Act.
15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no more burden upon
you, than these necessary things, that is, that ye abstain from things
offered to Idols, and from blood, and from that which is strangled, and from
fornication.

Lastly, the same is evident by examples: for no instance can be brought of any
positive precepts of the Old Law, which are in force under the Gospel, but
only such as were ratified by CHRIST or his Apostles: Or which were appointed
by the Christian Church, after the Apostles, and used as things adiaphorous.

The third Argument against T. B. his Position.
All, and every precept, of necessary observation under the Gospel, is either
a precept of the law of Nature, Or a precept Evangelicall, Or a precept of the
Church, composed according to such rules and Canons, as the Holy Ghost has
delivered concerning the making of Ecclesiastical Laws.

The Law of the fourth Commandment concerning the seventh day Sabbath, is
neither a precept of the law of Nature; nor a precept Evangelicall, enacted or
confirmed by Christ, or by his Apostles. Nor yet an Ecclesiastical precept,
imposed by the lawful Pastors and Rulers of the Christian Church.

Therefore, the law of the fourth Commandment concerning the seventh-day
Sabbath, is not of necessary observation under the Gospel.

First, It is no precept of the Law of Nature Jacob. Granado. In Tho Aquin. 1.
2. Contr. 7. d. leg. tr. 2. disp. 4. Dicendum est legem naturalem consistere in
illo dictamine rationis sive intellectus, quod dictat aliquid ita esse bonum,
ut sit dissentaneum naturae intellectuali, illud no^ amplecti: Et aliud ^ta
esse malum, ut sit dissentaneum eidem, illud non respuere.
, for then it must either be a Principle of that Law, naturally imprinted in
the Conscience of all mankind: or a necessary conclusion of some such
Principle: or so agreeable to one of these, that a natural man understanding
the terms by which it is expressed, shall be forthwith convinced, that it is
to be embraced Scot. in 3. d. 37. Stricte loquendo nihil aliud est de lege
naturae nisi principium, vel co^clusio demonstrata. Sic tamen extendendo,
quandoque dicitur illud esse de lege naturae, quod est verum practicum consonu^
principiis, and conclusionibus legis naturae in tantum, quod statim notum est
omnibus, illud convenire tali legi.
. But it is none of all these, for it is inconsequent to conclude in this
manner. The true and living God ought to be solemnly and publicly worshipped
in due and convenient time: Therefore He must be worshipped upon the Seventh
day.

Secondly, It is no Evangelicall precept: for it is not imposed in the New
Testament, either expressly or implicitly.

Thirdly, It is not a Precept of the Christian Church, for in place thereof the
Bishops and Fathers of the Church, have appointed the Lord's Day, and other
Festival or Holy Days, for the public and solemn worship of GOD, and
CHRIST, and for the exercise of ministerial and Ecclesiastical offices.

The fourth Argument against T. B. his Position.
All Divine Laws, the observation whereof is necessary to eternal salvation,
in the time of the Gospel, are written and imprinted by the Spirit of God, in
the hearts of faithful people August. de Spir. and lit. c. 20. and 21. Eusebius.
Demonstr. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 8. Abros. Epist. 7. p. 941.
.

The Law of the seventh day Sabbath, is no Divine Law, written and imprinted by
the Spirit of God in the hearts of faithful people.

Therefore, the Law of the seventh day Sabbath, is no divine law, the
observation whereof is necessary to eternal salvation, in the time of the
Gospel.

The major proposition is confirmed by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 31.33. and by
S. Paul, Heb. 8.10. and Heb. 10.16. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.

The Minor Proposition is proved by these reasons.

First, The holy Bishops, Martyrs, and Pastors of the Primitive Church, were
faithful people, and eminent for sanctity of life, and all kind of virtue.

Secondly, The Spirit of grace was powered into their hearts in great abundance:
And that which the Prophet Joel foretold, (...) in them, Acts 2.17.

Thirdly, These eminent Saints of God, being many of them Guides, and
spiritual Governors in the Church of CHRIST, and sundry of them holy Martyrs,
neither observed the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, as a religious duty
necessary to eternal salvation: Neither did they impose the necessary
observation thereof, according to the Law of the fourth Commandment, upon the
Christian Church, wherein they were Rulers: But on the contrary, they
instructed the flock of Christ, that the law of the old Sabbath was
disannulled under the Gospel: And both by their doctrine and example, they
maintained the religious observation of the Lord's Day, and of such Festivals
and Holy Days, as the precept of the Church in their times appointed. Some of
them, because of the Jews and Proselytes, made the Saturday an Holy Day for
divine service: But as soon as they had fully instructed Christian people,
concerning the quality of the day, they abolished the observation of it.

The fifth Argument against T. B. his Position of the Old Sabbath.
Moral Laws and Commandments obliging all Nations of the world to obedience,
must be of such quality, in respect of the Duty commanded, or the matter
prohibited: As that there is a Moral possibility, for all Nations, upon whom
they are imposed, to observe them.

But there is not a Moral possibility, in the Law of the Old Sabbath, for all
Nations to observe it.

Therefore the Law of the Old Sabbath, delivered in the fourth Commandment of
the Decalogue, is not a Law and Commandment universally obliging all Nations
to obedience.

1 The first Proposition is true, both in all Laws simply and perpetually
Moral: And in all just positive Laws.

All Laws of the first kind, are connaturall to all mankind: and they are
of such quality, that all and every Nation of the World, one as well as
another, may observe them, if they will use their best endeavor. As may
appear by setting down an Induction of all such Laws, whether they be
principles, or immediate, or remoter conclusions of the Law of nature.

Laws of the second kind, namely such as are positive, must be just, and they
must be reasonable: and if they be such, then there is a moral possibility in
them to be observed: and they are so attempered and proportioned to the
quality and the state of Subjects in general, as that they agree with their
nature and kind, with the Region and Country where they live, and they have
all other conditions and circumstances, arguing their observation to be
possible.

Now if they be simply impossible to be kept: or if their observation be so
difficult, as that one man of an hundred, is not able to obey them: all such
Commandments and Laws are unjust and ungodly. For King Pharaoh is condemned
by God and Man, because he made such a Law, Exodus 5.6, 7.

2 The second proposition, namely, there is not a moral possibility, for all
Nations to observe the Law of the Old Sabbath, is confirmed in this manner.

The Sabbaticall Law of the fourth Commandment is thus set down, Exodus 20.8.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. 9. Six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work: 10. But the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God:
in it thou shall not do any work, etc. 11. For in Six days the LORD made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

Exodus 16.23. This is that which the Lord has said: To morrow is the rest of
the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake, to day, etc.
that which remains over, lay up for you, to be kept until the morning. 24.
And they laid it up until the morning, etc. 25. And Moses said, eat that to
day, for to day is the Sabbath unto the Lord: to day ye shall not find it in
the field. 26. Six days ye shall gather it, but on the seventh day, which is
the Sabbath, in it there shall be none. 27. There went out some of the people
on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none. 29. The Lord has given
you the Sabbath; therefore he gives you on the sixth day, the bread of two
days, etc.

Observat. 1. The fourth Commandment made one day of seven a weekly Sabbath.

2 This day had a morning, or Sunrising, and an evening, or Sunsetting
throughout the whole year.

3 It was that day of the week on which the LORD Himself rested, and in which
no Manna descended, as it did the other six days.

The Sabbath then of the fourth Commandment is a day of every week,
distinguished from the rest of the days, by the rising and setting, and by the
motion of the Sun, in the Hemisphere, on that Region and Climate, in which
there is a day, and by the departure of the Sun when it is night.

Application of the former Declaration to the question.

In some habitable Regions, and under some Climates, the year is not
distinguished by weeks, containing each of them seven days: neither are there
several natural days, of twenty four hours, consisting of morning and
evening, by means of the rising and setting of the Sun: as these instances
and examples following do declare.

Continuance of the Sun above the Horizon.

Latitudes of places.
1 Grad. 70. o^. In the Southern part of Groineland, Finmarke, Lapland: and in
the North of Russia and Tartaria, one day lasts from the 10. of May unto July
14. 65. of our days.

2 Grad. 75. o^. In the North of Groineland, the Isle of Chery, Nova Zembla,
Lancasters, and Horse-sounds: the day continues from April the 21. until
August the 2d. of our days 102.

3 Grad. 80. o^. In the North of Baffins-Bay, and Greeneland, the day
continues from April the 6th. until August 17. of our days 133.

4 Grad. 85. o^. In Regions and places undiscovered, the day continues from
March 23. until August 31. of our days 161.

5 Grad. 90. o^. Under this degree, the day continues from March the 10th.
until September the 13th. of our days 187.

Now from the Premises, this Argument arises.

The Law of the fourth Commandment enjoineth the observation of such a
Sabbath Day, as is distinguished from the other days of the week, by morning
and evening, by the rising and setting of the Sun, and by the presence and
absence thereof, within the space of every 24. hours.

But in many Regions of the World, and under sundry Climates, there are no
ordinary weeks, containing seven particular days, distinguished each from
other by morning and evening, and by the rising and setting, and by the
presence and departure of the Sun.

Therefore the Sabbath Day of the fourth Commandment cannot be observed in
many Regions of the universal world, by such Nations as live under a Climate
where there are no such weeks and days, as the Law of the fourth Commandment
enjoyneth to be observed. For the subject of that Commandment is a natural
day of 24. hours: and where that subject is wanting, how is it possible for
any Law that wants his proper Subject, to be in force?

Now if any shall conceive, that although in the Regions, and Climates
aforesaid, there be no such particular day, as is expressed in the fourth
Commandment; Yet there is a sufficient and equivalent space of time, which may
be measured by hours: My answer is, That the Law of the Decalogue requires
the keeping holy of such a seventh day, as is distinguished from the day
before, and the day after, by a new return, arising, presence, and going down
of the Sun: but time and hours in general, do not yield or constitute such
a day.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE, concerning the SUNDAY, or LORD'S DAY.
T. B. His Positions concerning the Sunday, or Lord's Day.
These. 1. The religious observation of this day, is not commanded Christians by
the fourth Precept of the Decalogue, Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to
keep it holy.

These. 2 The weekly keeping holy the Sunday, or Lord's Day, is not Commanded
in the New Testament by any written Law of CHRIST Himself, or of His holy
Apostles.

These. 3. It cannot be proved by any evidence of Scripture, that the holy
Apostles themselves in all Churches planted by them, did constantly and
perpetually keep holy this day: but it is impossible to demonstrate, that
either themselves or their immediate successors, or colleagues, observed it, or
commanded it to be observed in any Church, according to the rule of the fourth
Commandment.

These. 4. It is superstition, and voluntary Religion, (...): (according to the
definition of superstition, delivered by the Puritans) to impose the necessary
and perpetual observation of the Sunday, upon the Christian Church.

Answ. To the first Position.

These. 1. The keeping holy the Sunday of every week, is not commanded by the
fourth Precept of the Decalogue, expressly, formally, or literally.

Reasons. The day expressly, formally, and in particular enjoined in the fourth
Commandment, is (...) Sabbatum, that Sabbath which is properly styled the
weekly Sabbath Day, in the Law, and in the Prophets, and in the New Testament.

2 The day cammanded in that Law is, (...). Illa dies, ipsa septima dies, that
day of the week, that very day, in actu signato, and in actu exercito, which
GOD passed his Law upon, and upon which, both he himself rested, after six
days action in creating the great opifice of the World, Genes. 2.1, 2. Exodus
20.11. And that very day of the week, on which the Israelites rested from
servile works, after six days previous labor, Exodus 20.9. That seventh day
which God blessed and sanctified it (...) Genesis 2.3. Aug. Epist. 119. Nusquam
legimus in Genesi, sanctificationem per omnes priores dies, sed de solo Sabbato
dictum est, Et sanctificavit Deus diem septimum.
Exodus 20.11. (...). Sanctificavit illam.

It was that day of the week, in which no Manna fell in the desert Orig. in
Exodus Hom. 7. In nostra dominica semper pluit Manna de Coelo: in Sabbato non
pluit.
, nor could be found, when some of the people went out to gather, Exodus 16.27.
It was the day of the week, on which the Israelites might neither bake nor
sees, Exodus 16.23. Nor kindle any fire, throughout their habitations, Exodus
35. Nor carry any burdens, nor bring them in by the gates of Jerusalem, Ierem.
17.21. the only day on which to gather any sticks, or do any servile work
was capital, Exodus 31.13. and Chap. 35.2. Numb. 15.32, 36.

Lastly, it was the very day of the week concerning which, the Pharisees so
often bequarrelled our Savior in the Gospel: and the Disciples plucked the
ears of Corn to eat, Matthew. 12.1. and Christ taught the people in the
Synagogue on that day, Mark 6.2. Luke 4.16. The Apostles likewise, Acts
13.14.42.44. and Chap. 17.2.

G. W. of the Sab. p. 31. The day or time of the rest is not perpetual: for if
you mark, God says not, Remember the seventh day to rest upon it: but
remember the day of rest. The Apostles might change the day, because they found
no limited day, set down in the Commandment.
H. B. The fourth Commandment says not: Remember the seventh day to
sanctify it: but remember the Sabbath, whatsoever it be, to sanctify it.

R. B. Light of faith, pa. 147. The Commandment says not, The Lord blessed
the seventh day: but the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, be it the seventh or the
first day of every week.

Answ. It seems by this doctrine, that it had been lawful, by the fourth
Commandment, for the Jews and Israelites, to have made any day of the week,
their ordinary Sabbath: and these dogmatists are not afraid to make the Holy
Ghost a liar, who teaches in most clear and express terms, that God
Almighty blessed and hallowed the very seventh day, on which Himself rested,
and none of the other six days, to wit, in that peculiar manner, which is
mentioned, Exodus 20.11.

These. 2. T. B. His second Position, (namely: The Lord's Day, is not made a
weekly Sabbath, by any written Law of Christ, or of his Apostles) must be
granted, until his Puritan adversaries represent unto us some written Law of
Christ, and His Apostles, affirming the contrary. But they can find no such
Law in the four Evangelists, nor in the Acts of the Apostles, nor in the
Epistles of the holy Apostles, or in the Book of Revelation: nor in any other
authentike record, nisi in scrinio pectoris sui.

R. B. Light of faith, page 149. The change of the day is easily proved to be
divine: it is called in the Scripture, The Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. as the holy
Supper of the Eucharist is called the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20.

(It was) first instituted by the Lord, and in its use referred to the Lord;
for who could change the day of the Sabbath, but he that is Lord of the
Sabbath, that is, Christ? Mark 2.28.

The practice of our Savior, and the Apostles who appeared on this day, and
held their assemblies on this day, convinces it sufficiently to be commanded
by our Lord and Savior, John 20.19, 26. Acts. 2.1 and Chap. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.
and reasons strong and many may be given.

The Commandment that a seventh part of our time be consecrated to God, is
moral: therefore the institution of the Lord's day, could not be deferred one
whole week: for the Jews Sabbath, in respect of the determination thereof to
the seventh day, was abrogated de jure, in Christ's death: if it were deferred
to the Apostles ordination (though then also it were divine, for they had the
spirit of Christ) yet the Church must have been left destitute of a Sabbath
for a time, and only nine precepts, to have stood in force, for that space.

Answ. R. B. His maine Proposition in this passage is: The change of the
seventh day to the first day, is divine. But if this man will prove his
conclusion, he must not discourse and dictate, but demonstrate, that the change
of the old Sabbath into the Lord's Day, according to all the qualities, and
circumstances thereof, to wit, strictness, and duration of resting from
worldly labor, and necessary, and perpetual obligation hereunto, is of divine
institution.

R. B. Argument 1. The name, Lord's Day, proves divine institution, etc.

Answ. The name, Lord's Day, proves that this day had relation to Christ, by
reason it was the first day of his Resurrection: and if it were dedicated to
the service of Christ, by the Apostolical Church, this will not prove that it
should be the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, but a Christian Holy Day. And
the lawful ordination of the Church, may give the name Lord's Day, to an
Holy Day: as well as Episcopal laying on of hands, may make one which was a
Layman, be called a Priest or Minister of our Lord Jesus Christ.

R. B. Argument 2. None could change the day but Christ who is LORD of the
Sabbath.

Answ. None could do this by power of excellency, or original authority: but
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, being appointed rulers by Christ, might
do this by delegate and derivative power, and by virtue of their commission.
For the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Synagogues of the Jews in ancient times
were principally the Lords: yet the Rulers of the Church had power to change
them into other Christian Oratories; and time and place, are much of a quality.

R. B. Argument 3. Our Saviors apparition on this day, convinces it to be
commanded, etc.

Answ. If it convinces it to be commanded, then it proves demonstratively that
it is commanded: but how can this man make his illation good, viz. Our Savior
appeared the first day of the week to his Disciples: Ergo, he ordained the
first day of the week, to be the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment?

For our Savior appeared to His Disciples, and to others, by the space of
forty days, Acts 1.3. He appeared on the working-day at the Sea of Tyberias,
when His Disciples were a fishing, John 21.1, 2. And his most solemn
apparition among all the rest, was that which happened on Ascension Thursday,
Luke 24.50. Acts 1.9. 1 Corinthians. 15.6.

It is therefore a voluntary assertion, and impossible to be made good, that
our Saviors apparition upon the Sunday, or first day of the week, contained a
Commandment or a divine Precept, to make that day the Sabbath of the Decalogue.

R. B. Arg. 4. The holy Apostles held Assemblies on this day: Ergo, They
ordained it to be a perpetual Sabbath, in place of the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment.

Answ. We believe that the holy Apostles ordained the Sunday, to be a weekly
Holy Day, because the Primitive Fathers, who lived some of them in the Apostles
days, and others of them immediately after, and who succeeded them in
Apostolical Churches, did universally maintain the religious observation of
this day. But it cannot be proved out of the Scripture, either that the
Apostles constantly observed this day in all Churches: Or that they commanded
every Christian Church to observe it: Or that they commanded any one Church to
observe it, according to the old rule of the fourth Commandment.

Lastly, the Apostles, and likewise many successors of the Apostles, for many
ages, at least three hundred years, kept holy the Saturday of every week in
some Churches, as well as the Sunday: But they kept neither of these days by
continual resting from secular labor, according as the law of the fourth
Commandment obliged the Jews. Read before, page 71. etc.

R. B. The Commandment that a seventh part of our time be consecrate to GOD,
is moral. Now the legal Sabbath, in respect of the determinate day, was De
jure abrogated in Christ's death. If therefore Christ had not ordained the
Sunday Sabbath, there should have been no Sabbath day in being: And
consequently, one Commandment of ten, had been lost.

Answ. These new Masters commonly beg the question in the grounds of their
Arguments, and take that as granted, which can never be proved. For there is
no commandment of GOD, simply and perpetually Moral, obliging all mankind,
to consecrate an even seventh part of his time to the service of GOD. The
general divine Moral Law, requires man to yield to GOD, a competent and
convenient time, etc. but the quantity and measure of time, whether a fifth, a
sixth, or seventh or tenth part, this comes not within the command of any
Divine Law, which is simply, entirely, and perpetually moral.

But if a seventh part of time were commanded, Let us hear a convincing
reason, taken out of the natural Moral Law, why one seventh day should be
necessary, rather than a seventh week, or a seventh month? And if a seventh
day, why rather the Sunday, than the Friday? If a reason be given for the
Sunday, from congruity, because of our Savior's Resurrection: This reason is
not grounded on the old Law Moral, but upon the Gospel: And the reason is not
forcing; for as Sunday was the day of Resurrection, so Friday was the day of
Passion: And if we should proceed according to natural reason, the day of
Christ's Passion being every way as blessed a day, in respect of man's
redemption, as the day of Resurrection, it merited on even terms, the honor
of being made an ordinary Holy Day Sosomen. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. ca. 8. Cassiod.
hist. Tripart. lib. 1. ca. 9.
.

Now whereas this pure man is afraid, that the Sabbath must quite have been
lost, if Christ at an instant had not created a new one: First, it has been
formerly declared, that the equity of the fourth Commandment is perpetual,
and therefore this Commandment could not be lost in respect of any thing in
it, which is purely and entirely Moral. Secondly, If the obligation of the old
Sabbath was abrogated at the instant of Christ's death; And there might be no
vacancy of a Sabbath, without decaying the just number of the ten
Commandments: Then surely, part of Good Friday, and Saturday, must begin the
new Sabbath, and not the Sunday.

But leaving this blunderer in a labyrinth, out of which he and his adheres,
will not easily free themselves: I will now return to my first adversary, and
examine his two last positions.

T. B. It cannot be proved by evidence of Scripture, that the Apostles observed
two Sundays, successively one after another: but there is not one sentence in
any part of the New Testament, that they observed the Sunday, according to the
rule of the fourth Commandment.

Answ. 1. It is very probable, and Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 43.
Sedul. in 1 Cor. cap. 16.
affirms it: That in the Churches of Corinth, and of Galatia, the Lord's Day
was made a weekly Holy Day by the Apostles, (for they principally governed
those Churches at this time) 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

But it is not necessary to demonstrate out of Scripture, that the Apostles
ordained the Sunday a weekly Holy Day: The practice of the Primitive Church
immediately, and then successively after the Apostles decease, argues this. For
it could not possibly have come to pass, that all and every Apostolical
Church, thorow-out the universal world, should so early, and in the beginning
of their plantation, have consented together, to make the Sunday a weekly
service-day: unless they had been thus directed by their first founders, the
holy Apostles themselves. Secondly, Saint Augustine his golden rule is: Quod
universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non
nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur Aug. de Bapt. c.
Donatist. l. 4. c. 23.
. That which the universal Church has in all ages held and maintained, if it
appear not that the same was first of all decreed by Synods, as Councels: is
verily believed to have been delivered by the authority of the holy Apostles.

But the universal Church, before the decrees of any general or national
Councels, made the Sunday or Lord's Day, a weekly Festival day.

Therefore, the observation thereof, entered into the Christian Church by
Apostolical authority and constitution.

T. B. These. 4. It is superstition and will worship, to impose the necessary
and perpetual observation of the Sunday, or Lord's Day, upon the Christian
World.

Answ. This position is formerly confuted, page 95. 96, 97. whither I refer
my Reader.

And for a conclusion of this passage of T. B. which is grounded upon a
Disciplinarian dictate: to wit, All moral and religious actions not commanded,
are unlawful, etc. These conclusions are consectary.

First, that a great number of things and actions indifferent, are excluded
from being external materials in Religion, or in the exercise of other moral
virtues, because they are not commanded.

Secondly, If nothing may lawfully be done but what is commanded in Scripture,
then the believers, who sold all their possessions, etc. Acts 4.34. And the
holy women, Mark 14.6. John 12.3. were offenders.

Thirdly, It amuseth me to consider the iniquity and hypocrisy of Puritan
Leaders: For they maintain that the Precepts of the Church concerning
Ceremonies, gesture, habit, ornament, etc, in the exercise of religion, are
unlawful for want of a Divine written precept: And they themselves make many
actions deadly sins, which are no where condemned in holy Scripture, neither
are repugnant to any other just law: As to kneel at the holy Communion, to bow
the body, or uncover the head in honor of CHRIST, at the name of JESUS: For a
rich young widow, to marry without the consent of her Puritan Pastor, etc.

OBSERVATIONS out of the holy Scriptures, and out of the Ancient Fathers,
concerning the Lord's Day.
Observation the first, Touching the appellations or Titles, by which this Day
was called.
This Day, was the first day in the week of prime Creation, Genes. 1.5. In the
beginning GOD created Heaven and Earth, etc. GOD said, Let there be Light, etc.
And GOD called the light Day, and the darkness Night: So the evening and the
morning were the first day Leo Epist. 81. cap. 2. In hac mundus sumpsit
exordium. Isidor. Hisp. Orig. lib. 6. cap. 18. Ipse est primus dies seculi, in
ipso formata sunt elementa mundi, in ipso creati sunt Angeli.
.

In the Holy Gospel, this day August. Epist. 86. Vna Sabbati tunc appellabatur,
qui nunc est dies Dominicus. Id. in Joan. tract. 120. Vna Sabbati est quem jam
diem Dominicam propter Domini Resurrectionem, mos Christianus appellat. Basil:
de Spir. Sanct. c. 27. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 43. Per unam Sabbati, hoc
est die dominico. Gaudent. Brixian. in Exodus tract. 1. Die Dominica, in qua
mundus sumpsit exordium, resurrexit, etc. Greg. Nyssen. orat. 2. de Resurrect.
Christi. Beda in Psalm. 23. and in Luc. 24.1 Primas. in 1 Cor. 16. Hieron. ad
Head. q. 4.
is styled, (...) (...), the first day of the week following, Matthew. 20.1.
Mark 16.2. Ioh. 20.1. Likewise Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.

But the Grecians and Romans called this day Sunday: (...). Diem solis: by
reason of the special influence and predominance of the Planet of the Sun on
that day: and the idolatrous Pagans Eusebius. d. Praep. Evang. li. 1. ca. 9.
Priscos Aegyptios ferunt, cum oculos hujus in mundi co^templationem
defixissent, cumque rerum omnium naturam vehementiori admiratione
obstupescerent, solemn ac lunam, sempiternos esse Deos omniumque principes
censuisse. Glos. Mag. in Gen ca. 1. Apud priscas Gentilitatis nationes, nil
prorsus inter creata cuncta, quod mortalium mentes in sui venerationem
alliceret pertraheretque magis quam ipse Sol, ob nimium splendorem
eminentiamque sui comperiebatur. Diodor. Sicul. Antiq. l. c. 2.
and Jews worshipped this creature, supposing some Divine Power to be in it, 2
Kings 23.5. Job 31.6. Ier. 43.13. Ezech. 8.16. Deuteronomy. 4.19.

The holy Fathers at the first, and some Christian Emperors afterward styled
this day Sunday.

Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2. (...), etc. We Christians, celebrate our solemn
religious assemblies, upon the Sunday, being the first day of the week, in
which God made separation betwixt light and darkness.

Tertul. Apolog. cap. 16. Diem solis laetitiae indulgemus: We Christians make
the Sunday, a day of spiritual rejoicing.

Cod. Just. lib. 3. Tit. 12. Venerabilis dies solis: The venerable or much
honored Sunday.

Hereupon, partly by reason, Christians, devoted the Sunday of every week to
their religious offices: and because likewise their custom was to worship
Christ, bowing, and looking toward the East, The Pagans supposed they had made
the Sun their God Tertul. ad Nation. page 59. Alii plane humanius, solemn Deum
Christianorum existimant: quod innotuerit, ad orientis partem, nos facere
precationem: vel die solis laetitiam curare.
.

But the Gentiles were deceived concerning Christians Cael. Rhodigin. lect.
Antiq. lib. 13. c. 22. Nos jure optimo, diem quem Mathematici solis vocant,
Domino ascripsimus, dicavimusque, and illius cultui totum mancipavimus: quoniam
nulla magis re imaginari praepote^tis and universa superemine^tis Christi,
majestatem co^gruentius possumus, quam per splendidissimu^ solis lumen, Psalm.
19. In sole posuit Tabernaculum suum and exiit de tribu Iudae, cujus signum est
Leo, solare animal.
; for the reason whereof they styled their weekly service-day, Sunday, was to
honor Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Enlightening every
one that comes into the World, Ioh. 1.9. and who by his triumphant
Resurrection, caused the heavenly light of verity and grace, to appear in a
full luster to them which sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death
August. c. Faust Manic. li. 18. ca. 5. Maxim. Taurin. in Pentecost. Hom. 3.
Bonaven. in 3. did. 37. Observatio diei Dominicae introducta est in memoriam
beneficii redemptionis, and amotionem erroris. Quia secundum Gentiles dies
Dominicus primus est, cum principio illius diei incipiat dominari principalis
planeta sol; propter quod vocabant eundem diem solis, and exhibebant ei
venerationem. Vt ergo error ille excluderetur, and reverentia cultus solis Deo
exhiberetur, prefixa fuit Dominica dies, qua populus Christianus vacaret cultui
divino, and pretermitteret negotia terrena, quae distrahunt animum, ne Deo
intendat.
.

Ambros. Sermon. 61. Dies solis vocatur, quia Sol justitiae Christus ortus est,
ut homines seculi illuminet. This day is called Sunday, because Christ the
Sun of Righteousness arose from death to life upon this day, to enlighten
the children of this world.

Gaudent. Brixian. d. Pasch. obs. Oportebat solemn justitiae Christum, etc. It
behoved Christ the Sun of Righteousness, with the fair and pleasing light
of His Resurrection, to dispell the gross darkness of the Jews, and the
frozen cold of the Gentiles: and to reduce all things that were clouded with
the black veil of confusion, by the Prince of darkness, into the state of
prime tranquillity.

Of the name (...), the Lord's Day.

The common and usual religious appellation, which the Primitive Church gave
to this day, was (...), Dominicus dies, the Lord's Day, which signifies a day,
both devoted to the honor and service of the Lord Christ: and likewise a day
which was much honored by the glorious Resurrection of CHRIST from the dead
Procop. in Genesis 1. Non ab re dicitur, quem fecit Dominus: siquidem ab ipso
Domino, cognomen desumpturus erat, ut diceretur dies Dominicus, tanquam soli
Domino consecratus and dedicatus sit ille unus dies.

Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118. Primo die, qui quide^ etiam propterea quod Dominus in eo
ad vitam a morte redierit, Dominicus appellatur.


.

T. B. page 52. says as follows: The name, Lord's Day, it is but new, and
put upon Sunday, but since Christ: and that many years too since Christ.

But this is affirmed without any ground of truth at all: for the antiquity of
this name appears by the revelation of Saint John, Chap. 1.20. I was in the
Spirit on the Lord's Day Ansbert. in Apoc. Ioannes non in Sabbato, quo septimus
dies septimanae exprimitur, quo and requievit Deus ab operibus suis: sed in
dominica die quae prima est septimanae proxima post Sabbatum, in ^^iritu suisse
se dicit. Quia nimiru^, ^am vetus ill^ quae ^ortem o^e^^ (...), transierat: and
nova quae vivificat in Christi resurrectione claruerat, (...) vacatio Sabbati,
in spiritalem animarum requiem conversa vigebat, (...) Sacramenta cernebat.
. And that the day, thus styled by Saint John was the Sunday, appears by the
Fathers, of which some lived in this Apostles days, and some immediately
after: and all these with a general and common vote, make the Lord's Day in
the Revelation to be the Sunday.

Ignatius ad Magnes. Omnis Christi amator Dominicum celebret diem: let every
friend and servant of Christ, celebrate, or keep holy the Lord's Day, being a
day consecrate to the honor of CHRIST'S Resurrection, Id. ad Philip. (...),
etc. If any one shall keep a Fast upon the Lord's Day: or upon the
Sabbath Day, etc.

We read it thus styled, in the Canons of the Apostles, ca. 66. In Clemens
Romanus, constitut. lib. 7. cap. 31. and 37. It is constantly thus named in all
the Fathers Clem. Romans Constable. li. 8. ca. 33. Servi opus faciant quinque diebus:
Sabbato autem and Dominico die vacent, in Ecclesia propter doctrinam
religionis. Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 5. Diem quoque Dominicum Plato divinat.
Dionys. Ap. Eusebius. sanctam hodie Dominicam diem peregimus, in qua vestram
legimus Epistolam.
, in the Councels, in Imperial Laws and Edicts, in Histories, and in all
manner of Tractates.

Clem. Alex. strom. li. 5. ca. 6. Dionysius of Corinth. in Eusebius Eccles.
hist. li. 4. ca. 22. Melito of Sardis Hieron. in Cata. Melito scripsit librum
de die Dominico.
. Tertullian Tertul. d. Idol. cap. 14. O melior fides nationum in suam sectam
quae nullam solennitatem Christianorum sibi vindicat: non diem Dominicum, non
Pentecosten. etc. Id. de Cor. mil. c. 3.
. Cyprian Cyprian. Epist. 33.
. Orig. Origin. in Exodus Hom. 7. etc. Cells. l. 8.
: and after these successively every one of the Fathers.

Of the name Sabbath, whether the ancient Fathers did usally style the
Lord's Day, the Sabbath Day.

H. B. Gospel and Law reconciled, p. 56. first we observe, that they (ancient
Fathers) ever did use to call the Lord's Day by the name of the Sabb. Aug. c.
Adamant. c. 15. Observamus Sabbatum, hoc est, dominicum, in signum nempe
aeterni Sabbati. We observe the Sabbath, that is, the Lord's Day, for a sign
of the eternal Sabbath. The same Augustine in his 95. Sermon De Tempore, etc.
And else where upon those words, Mat. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not in
the winter, or on the Sabbath Day, etc.

Answ. 1. I have diligently searched into antiquity, and observed in the
Fathers their forms of speech, when they treat of the Lord's Day: and I find
it far different from the usual language of the Fathers, to style the
Lord's Day, the Sabbath: and that they by the name Sabbath, either understand
the old legal Sabbath, taken away by Christ: or the spiritual and mystical
Sabbath, which was typed and represented by the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment.

And when the ancient Fathers distinguish and give proper names, to the
particular days of the week, they always style the Saturday (...) Sabbatum,
the Sabbath: and the Sunday, or first day of the week Dominicum, the
Lord's Day.

Ignatius ad Magnes. Next after the Sabbath Day, let every friend of Christ
observe the Lord's Day, etc. Ambros. Ambr. Sed crastino die Sabbato, and
Dominico, de orationis ordine dicemus. Tripar. hist. l. 1. ca. 9. Hill. Proleg.
in Psalm.
d. Sacram. lib. 4. c. 6. Upon the next day being the Sabbath: and after that,
on the Lord's Day, I will treat of the order, to be used in prayer. Socrat
Socrat. Ariani extra urbem conventus fecerunt. Itaque cum festa cujusque
septimanae occurrebant, videlicet Sabbatum, and Dominicus dies, etc.
. Hist. lib. 6. c. 8. Upon the two holy days of the week, the Sabbath, and
the Lord's Day, the Arians held their assemblies, without the City. Clem. Romans
Sabbatum, and Dominicum festos dies agitate, quod ille quidem dies recordatio
sit fabricationis mundi, hic vero Resurrectionis.
Clem. Romans Ap. constable. lib. 7. c. 24. You must keep holy the Sabbath, in
memory of the Creation: and the Lord's Day, in honor of Christ his
Resurrection, Aug. Si Iudaeus Sabbatum colendo negat Dominicum, quomodo
Christianus observat Sabbatum? aut simus Christiani, and Dominicu^ colamus, aut
simus Iudaei, and Sabbatum observemus. Nemo enim potest duobus Dominis servire.
Gaudent. Brixian. tract. 1. in Exodus Athanas. ep. ad. Marcel. Si psallere vis
in Sab. habes ps. 91. etc. Vis gratias agere Dominico die? habes 23. Si canere
vis secunda Sabbati, psalle 94.
Aug. Epist. 86. Either let us be Christians, and keep holy the Lord's Day:
or else turn Jews, and keep the Sabbath: for no man can serve two Masters.

2 The ancient Fathers, very often, by the word Sabbath, understand the
mystical Sabbath, which was represented by the legal Sabbath: to wit, Resting
from the servile works of sin, and resting in Christ by confidence in his
grace: and the eternal rest of heaven, which the righteous shall enjoy after
this life: Tertul. Tertul. cont. Iud. cap. 4. Mementote diem Sabbati and
sanctificate eum: omne opus servile non facietis in eo, praeterquam quod ad
anima^ pertinet. Vnde nos intelligimus, magis Sabbatizare nos ab omni opere
servili semper debere, and non septimo quoque die, sed per omne tempus. Ac per
hoc quaerendum nobis, quod Sabbatum nos velit Deus custodire. Nam Sabbatu^
te^porale and Sabbatu^ aeternu^ Scripturae designant. Ante Sabbatu^ temporale
erat and Sabbatum aeternu^ praeostensu^ and praedictum: quomodo and ante
circumcisionem fuit, and circumcisio spiritalis praeostensa.
c. Iud. c. 4. We must keep our Sabbath, not only upon the seventh day, but
throughout the whole course of our life. There is a carnal circumcision, and a
spiritual: and there is likewise a temporal Sabbath, and an eternal. Origin
Orig. Qui cessat ab operibus seculi and spiritalibus vacat, iste est, qui hiem
festum agit Sabbatorum. Neque onera portat in via, onus enim est omne peccatum.
Neque igne^ accendit, etc. Et in loco suo, nec recedit ex eo. Quis ergo est
locus spiritalis animae? Iustitia est locus ejus, and veritas, sapientia,
sanctificatio: and omnia quae Christus est, locus animae est. Irenaeus. Sabbata
perseverantiam totius diei erga Deum deservitionis edocebant. Chrysostom. in Mat.
tract. 29.
. in Number. hom. 23. In the old Sabbath they might carry no burdens, nor kindle
fire, etc. Now there is an heavy burden of sin, and the fire of evil
concupiscence, which must be avoided, not upon Festivals only, but one every
day of our life. And as the Jews might not upon their Sabbath Day, remove out
of their place of rest: So we Christians must not depart out of the spiritual
resting place of our souls, namely, verity, righteousness, holiness, etc.
Irenaeus li. 4. c. 30. The old Sabbath instructed people to serve God
(spiritually) throughout the whole day, or age of their life. Chrysostom. in Mat.
11. What need has he of the Sabbath, who all the days of his life observes
a solemn Feast, abstaining from malignity and sin, and living virtuously?
August Aug. de civ. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30. Dominicus dies, qui Christi
resurrectione sacratus est, aeternam requiem spiritus et corporis praefigurat.
Idem Epist. 119. cap. 12. Caetera ibi praecepta proprie sicut praecepta sunt,
sine ulla figurata significatione, observamus. Observare autem diem Sabbati non
ad literam jubemur: secundum otium ab opere corporali, sicut observant Iudaei
. in Joan. tract. 3. A Christian abstaining from the servile lusts and works
of sin, observes a spiritual Sabbath, etc. The same is delivered, by other
of the Fathers, Athanas. d. Sabb. and Circumcis. Basil. in Esaiam, vision. 2.
Greg. Nyssen. d. Resurrect. sermon. 1. Ambros. in Evang. Luc. ca. 13. Hieron. in
Esa. c. 58. and in Ezech. 20. Cyril. Alex. d. Adorat. l. 17. and in Esa. lib.
5. and in Joan. l 4 ca. 51. Epiphan. lib. 1. Haeres. 5. and Haeres. 66. Number.
85. Machar. Hom. 35. Procopius in Esa. c. 58. Isidor. Hispal. d. officiis, lib.
1. cap. 24. Greg. Mag. mor. l. 5. c. 22 and in Regist. l. 11. Epist. 3.
Anastas. Sinaita in Hexam. lib. 7.

3 The Ancient Fathers exhort Christian people, to keep the foresaid
spiritual Sabbath, by resting from sin, throughout their whole life Tert. c.
Iud. ca. 4. Non septimo quoque die, sed per omnem vitam.

Origin. in Number. hom. 23. Si de sinas ab omnibus secularibus operibus, etc Et
spiritalibus vaces, ad Ecclesiam convenias, etc. Haec est Christiani Sabbati
observatio.


: and speaking of the Lord's Day, and of other festival days, they persuade
with special care to make those days a spiritual Sabbath, that is, on these
days to abstain from sin Orig. c. Celsum. l. 8. p. 522. Quod si quis nobis
ex adverso regerat, nostras Dominicas, Parascevasque, aut Pascha, aut
Pentecosten recurrentes solenniter: respondendum est and ad hoc, quod qui
perfectus est, ratione, operibus, cogitationibus perpetuo haerens Deo, and
verbo naturali nostro Domino, semper agit dies Domini, and nunquam non habet
diem Dominicum.
: And in this respect Origin styles the Holy Days of the Church, observed in
his times, Spiritual Sabbaths, giving this appellation to the Feasts of Easter
and Whitsuntyde, in the same sense, as he does to the Lord's Day. From whence
it appears, that according to the doctrine and style of the Primitive times,
the Lord's Day was no otherwise accounted the special Sabbath of the 4th
Commandment than the other solemn festivals of the Christian Church.

H. B. Formerly cited, tells us, That the Fathers did ever use to call the
Lord's day, by the name of the Sabbath: and he produces Saint Augustine for a
witness.

Answ. His first testimony out of this Father, is: c. Adamant. Manich. cap. 15.
where he sets down certain words of his own, not found in Saint
Augustine: to wit, Observamus Sabbatum, hoc est, Dominicum; We observe the
Sabbath, to wit, the Lord's Day: but Saint Augustine has no such word, neither
delivers he any thing sounding to that purpose.

For, His words are, Nos quoque and Dominicum diem, and Pascha solenniter
celebramus, and quaslibet alias Christianas dierum festivitates: sed quia
intelligimus quo pertineant, non tempora observamus, sed quae illis
significantur temporibus. We also solemnly observe the Lord's Day, and Easter,
and all other Christian Holy Days: but because we understand whereunto the
same belong (that is, their spiritual end) we observe not the times
themselves, but the things signified unto us, at those times. And speaking of
the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, he adds: Sabbati quietem non
observamus in tempore: sed signum temporale intelligimus, and ad aeternam
quietem quae illo signo significatur, aciem mentis intendimus. We observe not
the Sabbath days rest, according to time: but understanding whereunto that
temporal rest served, we direct the consideration of our mind, to the
eternal rest, which was signified by the Sabbath-dayes rest.

2 H. B. Also has dealt in like manner with Saint Augustine August. de cons.
Evang. li. 2. c. 77. Crapula and ebrietas, carnali laetitia, luxuriaque cor
submergit and obruit. Quod malum Sabbati nomine, propterea significatum est,
quia haec erat sicut and nunc est, Iudaeorum pessima consuetudo, illo die
deliciis affluere, du^ spiritale Sabbatum ignorant.
, in his second allegation: for this Father commenting upon our Saviors words,
Mat. 24.20. says as follows: Surfeiting and drunkenness, drown and
oppress the mind with carnal mirth and luxury: and this wickedness is
signified by the Sabbath (concerning which, Christ said to his Disciples, Pray
that your flight may not be upon the Sabbath) because this was, and now also
is, the wicked custom of the Jews, to overflow in voluptuousness, by reason
they are ignorant of the spiritual Sabbath. Now the spiritual Sabbath,
whereof the unbeleeving Jews were ignorant, was not the Lord's day: but the
denying of ungodlines and worldly lusts all a man's life.

3 In the third testimony which H. B. cites out of this Father, there is
nothing spoken concerning the Lord's Day: but Saint Augustine Aug. de Temp.
ser. 95. In isto tertio praecepto insinuatur quaedam vacationis indictio,
requies cordis, tranquillitas mentis, quam facit bona conscientia, etc.
Spiritale Sabbatum non observant nisi illi, qui scilicet ita tempeante se
accommodant terrenis operibus, ut tamen lectioni, and orationi, etsi non
semper, certe vel frequenter insistant, etc. Qui tales sunt, quotidie
spiritualiter Sabbatum colunt. Qui vero inquieti sunt and jugiter terrenis
actibus implicantur, idem requiem habere non possunt, etc. Scynifes nati sunt
in terra Aegypti de limo, muscae minutissimae, etc. Quales sunt istae muscae,
tales sunt homines inquieti, qui Sabbatum spiritaliter observare, id est, bonis
operibus studere, and lectioni vel orationi insistere nolunt.
delivers only the form of observing the spiritual Sabbath of Christian
mortification, and Sanctification, which is performed by resting from sin,
and doing the works of holiness, throughout the whole course of a man's life:
and comparing the third Egyptian plague, and the precept of the old Sabbath,
he says, That unquiet men, who refuse to keep the Sabbath, that is to say,
which will not apply their minds to the study of good works, and to reading
and prayer, are like unto those small flies, which troubled the Egyptians.

Now before I conclude this Observation, concerning the names and appellations,
which are given to this Christian Holy Day, in the Scripture, and by the
ancient Fathers: I desire the reader to observe the perverse disposition of our
novell Sabbatarians. For they will not permit that the Communion Table shall be
named an Altar, no, not by an allusion or similitude, because it is not so
called in holy Scripture: And because the Romists have been superstitious in
their doctrine and practice concerning the Mass: And because of the peril of
Idolatry.

But again, on the other side, they style the Lord's Day, the Sabbath Day:
although this name is not given it in holy Scripture: Or by any of the godly
Fathers of the Church: And although the Sabbath, and the Lord's Day, are so
different, as that one is Legal, and the other Evangelicall: And
notwithstanding the peril of Jewish superstition, and the heresy of
Iudaisants.

Observation the second, concerning the Lord'-day.
In the Primitive Church, this day was highly esteemed and had in honor.

First, It was graced with a name of dignity, to wit, (...) the Lord's Day Aug.
de verb. Ap. ser. 15. Finitur septimus, Dominus sepultus: reditur ad primum
Dominus resuscitatus: Domini resuscitatio promisit nobis aeternum diem, and
consecravit nobis Dominicu^ diem: Qui vocatur, Dominicus, ipse videtur proprie
ad Dominum pertinere, quia in eo Dominus resurrexit.
, which is, the Lord CHRIST His Day. For this name (...), is derived of (...),
which is appropriate to our Savior CHRIST, both in regard of the dignity and
excellency of His Person: And because of the greatness and largeness of his
dominion: And in respect of his bounty toward the members of his Mystical
Body, Act. 4.36. John 20.13, 28. Apoc. 17.14. and Chap. 19.16.

Now things and persons, which are named the Lord's, are sacred and venerable,
in an high degree. The grace of our Lord, etc. Romans 16.24. The Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3.17. The beloved of the Lord, Romans 16.8. The glory of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.18. The word of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.3. The Cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27.
Convivum Dominicum, The Lords Banquet, Tertul. lib. 2. ad Vxor. The Church or
house of the Lord, (...). Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18. The body of our Lord,
(...). Athanas. ad Epictet. The Scripture of the Lord, (...). The Word of the
Lord, (...). The Lord's people, (...). In Clemens Alexandrinus.

Secondly, But besides the Title and appellation, the Fathers of the ancient
Church, speak most honorably of this Holy Day.

Saint Ignatius the Martyr, who lived in the holy Apostles age, and was S.
John's Disciple, makes it, (...). The Queen, the Princess, the Lady
paramount among the other weekly days.

Eusebius in the life of Constantine the Great, lib. 4. cap. 18. styles it,
(...). In truth, and in very deed, the principal, and the first. Saint
Chrysostom Chrysostom. de Resur. Hom. 5. Dies Dominicus, dies Regalis, in quo
imperator ascendit ab inferis.
calls it A royal Day. Greg. Nazian. Orat. 43. says it is, (...), higher
than the highest, and with admiration wonderful above other days. Saint
Basil. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 2. Vnum illu^ appellavit diem qui seculi ipsius
imago, qui dierum primitiae, qui luci coaetaneus est: ipsum inquam sanctum
Dominicum diem, quem Resurrectio Domini praecipuo honor affecit.

Athanas. Ep. ad Affrican. Ne ipsam quidem Dominica^ Diem sanctissim^ Festi,
ulla in reverentia habuere, etc.


(...), the first fruits of days. Chrysologus, sermon. 77. It is primate among
days. Saint Hierome in Mark. 16. The Lord's Day is better than other common
days, and than all Festivalls, new Moons, and Sabbaths of Moses's Law Hieron.
Is solus and unus revera est proprius and Dominicus dies: and melior est aliis
innumerabilibus diebus, sive qui communiter intelliguntur, sive qui a Mose in
solennibus, and noviluniis, and Sabbatis lege sanciti sunt.
.

Saint Augustine applies the words of the Psalm unto it, namely, This is the
Day which the Lord has made, let us be glad, and rejoice in it, Psalm. 118.24.

Thirdly, Saint Augustine de Temp. Sermon. 251. Leo Epist. 81. Isidor. Hisp. de
off. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 24. Venerable Beda, de ordinat. feriar. Pasch. etc.
having noted many prerogatives belonging to this day Aug. Apparet in Scripturis
hunc diem esse solennem: ipse enim est primus seculi dies: in ipso formata sunt
elementa mundi: in ipso creati sunt Angeli: in ipso quoque a mortuis resurrexit
Christus: in ipso de coelis Spiritus Sanctus super Apostolos descendit: Manna
in eremo in eodem die de coelo datum est. Orig. in Exodus Hom. 7. Ex divinis
Scripturis apparet, quod in die Dominica pluit Manna de coelo, and in Sabbato
non pluit: intelligant ergo Iudaei, jam tunc praelatum esse Dominicum nostrum
Iudaico Sabbato. Leo m. Dominica dies tantis divinarum dispensationu^ mysteriis
est consecrata, ut quicquid a Domino est insigniter institutum, in hujus diei
dignitate sit gestum. In hac die mundus sumpsit exordium: in hac per
Resurrectionem, and mors interitum and vita accepit principium. Patres, in
Synod. 6. cap. 8. In eo die Manna in eremo pluit: in eo stella magis refulsit:
In eo die quinque panibus and duobus piscibus, quinque millia hominum Dominus
pavit: In eo Baptismum in Iordane suscepit: eo ipse pius Redemptor generis
humani, sponte pro salute nostra a mortuis resurrexit.
: among which these ensuing are principal: The Creation of the whole mattter
of the world: The forming of light: The Creation of Angels: The falling of
Manna: The Rusurrection of CHRIST from the dead: the descending of the Holy
Ghost, in cloven and fiery tongues, upon the holy Apostles and primitive Church.

Conclusion. It appears by that which is delivered in this observation, that
the Ancient Church, had the Lord's Day in very high esteem and veneration, and
the principal motive both of the honor given to the Day, and likewise of the
religious observation thereof, was the Resurrection of CHRIST from the dead.

The Lord's Day (says Maximus Taurinensis) is venerable, and a solemn day
among us Christians, because, like the Sunrising, and dispelling infernal
darkness, CHRIST the Sun of righteousness shined forth unto the world by
the light of his Resurrection.

Saint Augustine De Verb. Apostol. Sermon. 15. Leo Epist. 93. cap. 4. Dominicum
diem quem nobis Salvatoris nostri Resurrectio consecravit, exigunt in moerore
je junii.
, The seventh day is ended, the Lord was buried: a return is made to the first
day, the Lord is raised: The Lord's Resurrection promised us an eternal day,
and it did consecrate unto us the Lord's Day.

Observation the third, concerning the Lord's Day.
The Lord's Day began to be observed for a weekly Holy Day in the Christian
Church, in the Apostolical age, and whiles some of the holy Apostles were
living.

1 The Apostles themselves, at some times, observed this Day, for it is
written, Act. 20.7. The first day of the week, the Disciples being come
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, etc. 1 Cor. 16.1. Concerning
the gathering for the Saints, even as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia, so do ye also: 2. Every first day of the week, let every one of you
put aside by himself, and lay up as GOD has prospered him, that then there be
no gatherings when I come. Now although this Text of Saint Paul, makes no
express mention of Church Assemblies on this day: Yet beeause it was the
custom of Christians: And likewise it is a thing convenient to give alms upon
the Church-dayes Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 43. (...), etc. per unam Sabbati, hoc
est, die Dominico, unusquisque apud se seponat, etc. vide quomodo adhortatur a
tempore. Dies enim erat idoneus ad eos adducendos ad eleemosynam. Recordemini
enim inquit, quaenam eo die consecuti estis. Bona enim ineffabilia, and radix,
and initiu^ vitae nostrae, eo facta sunt. Non hac autem solum ratione aptum est
tempus ad benignitatem prompto and alacri animo exercendum: Sed and quod habet
quiete^ and remissione^, immunitatemque and vacationem a laboribus. Cum his
venerandis and immortalibus co^municare mysteriis, magnam affert and immittit
alacritatem.
: It cannot well be gaine-said, but that if in Corinth, and Galatia, the first
day of every week was appointed to be the day for alms and charitable
contributions: The same was also the Christians weekly Holy Day for their
religious assemblies: Read Saint Chrysostom in the margin, etc.

But howsoever it was in the first times of the Apostles; immediately after
them, it is apparent that Christian people made the Lords's-day of every week
an ordinary Holy Day, for the exercising of religious duties, to wit, common
and public prayer, reading and preaching GOD'S Word, and for celebration of
Divine mysteries.

Ignatius ad Magnes. (...) (...), and (...), signify to keep a solemn, or
religious Feast: Exodus 5.1. and 12.14. and 23.14. Levit. 23.39, 41. Numb.
^9.12. Deu. 16.15.
(...). After the Sabbath, let every friend of Christ make the Lord's- day a
solemn Festival.

Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. Upon the Sunday (...), a common assembly, both of
Citizens, and of rural people is held, etc.

Tertul. Apolog. cap. 39. (Upon that day) we Christians meet together, in the
common assembly, etc. For although Tertullian names not Sunday, or the
Lord's Day, in this Chapter of his Apology: yet in the 16. Chapter going
before, and De Idolatr. cap. 14. he shows that the Sunday, or Lord's Day, was
a weekly time for public religious offices: and that the honoring of this
Day, by making it an ordinary Festival, was one reason, for which the Pagans
imagined Christians to have been worshippers of the Sun.

Clements Romans Constable. Ap. li. 2. cap. 63. We Christians assemble our selves
with much diligence, upon the Lord's day, to praise God, etc.

Saint Basil. d. spir. sanct. 27. numbers the observation of the Lord's Day,
amongst Apostolic traditions. Likewise Isichius in Levit. li. 2 ca. 9. and S.
Augustine Aug. Quod universa tenet ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed
semper retentum est: non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime
creditur.
his general rule, De Baptism. c. Donatist. li. 4. ca. 24. proves it to be so.

A Declaration of the Religious offices and actions, which were performed in
the common assemblies, upon the Lord's Day.

1 Common Prayer, supplication, and thanksgiving, were made and offered to GOD
and CHRIST according to the holy Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 2.12 Tertullian Apol.
Coimus in caetum and co^gregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta, precationibus
ambiamus, etc. Oramus etiam pro imperatoribus, ministris and potestatibus
eorum, etc. Justin. Mart. Apol. Clem. Constable. lib. 2. c. 63.
.

2 The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, were read distinctly in the
native language of the Hearers: or in such a language as the auditory
understood Commentaria Apostolorum quo ad tempus fert, leguntur. Deinde lectore
quiescente, praesidens orationem, qua populum instruit, and ad imitationem, tam
pulchrarum rerum cohortatur, habet.

Sub haec consurgimus communiter omnes, and precationes profundimus.


.

3 After the solemn reading of the holy Scripture, (...), the Bishop or chief
Pastor of the Church, preached a Sermon to the auditory, wherein he exhorted
them, to the belief of such things as they had heard read: and to the
obedience of the holy duties, and the imitation of the godly examples, which
had been read unto them out of the Scriptures.

4 The holy and mysterious Eucharist Et precibus peractis, panis offertur, and
vinum and aqua: and praepositus itidem quantum pro virili sua potest, preces
and gratiarum actiones fundit: and populus fauste acclamat, dicens, Amen.

Et distributio communicatioque sit eorum, in quibus gratiae sunt actae, cuique
presenti: absentibus autem per Diaconos mittitur.


, was celebrate, and the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving being offered up
unto GOD for his rich grace, represented and exhibited in this Sacrament: The
mystical signs of Bread and Wine, after their blessing, were distributed by
the hands of the Deacons, to all and every one present: and also they were sent
and carried unto them, which by reason of sickness, or other just occasion,
were absent from the public assembly.

5 Grievous sinners and offenders, namely, Fornicators, Adulterers, Sorcerers,
etc. and Heretics, and such as in time of persecution had denied the Faith:
Schismatic persons, who disturbed the peace and unity of the Church, were
put to open penance: and the censures of the Church, whereof Excommunication
was principal, being a prejudgement of God, and a forerunner of eternal
perdition, were solemnly published and pronounced Tert. Apol. Ibi etiam
censura Divina: nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei
conspectu su^mumque futuri Iudicii praejudicium est, siquis ita deliquerit, ut
a communica ione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii
relegetur, Orig. c. Cells. lib. 3. Cypr. ad Pomp. Ep. 62. Greg. Nyss. orat. d.
Castig. Optat. Milevitan. l. 2.
.

6 Saint Paul's rule concerning Alms Tert. Apol. Justin. Martyr. Apolog. 2. Pro
arbitrio quisque suo, quod visum est contribuunt, and quod ita colligitur apud
praepositum deponitur: atque ille inde opitulatur pupillis and viduis, and hiis
qui propter morbum, aut aliquam aliam causam egent: quique in vinculis sunt,
and peregre advenientibus hospitibus, etc.
and charitable relief, of the poor and afflicted servants of Christ: and
especially of such, as were in bonds, or in servitude, or other oppression, for
the testimony of the Lord Jesus, was duly observed in the Christian Church,
upon the Lord's Day.

7 Christians observed a Love-feast, or feast of charity, called (...), Tert.
Apol. c. 39. Caena nostra de nomine rationem sui ostendit, vocatur enim (...),
dilectio penes Graecos est, etc. Nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae, admittit.
Non prius discumbitur qua^ oration ad Deum praegustetur, etc.
: partly to help and comfort the poor: partly for the mutual consolation of
their whole body: also hereby to cherish and increase, amity, charity, one with
another: and that in those afflictive times of persecution, they might
understand each others danger, necessity, loss, etc. and receive advice and
counsel, etc. S. Paul touches upon these Feasts, 1 Cor. 11. and likewise S.
Jude in his Canonical Epistle, v. 12. Tertullian describes this Christian
Feast, Apol. c. 39. n. 6. Origin, c. Cells. l. 1 Council. Grangr. c. 11. Chrysostom.
in Ep. ad Corinth. Hom. 27. Chrysostom. Peracta synaxi omnes commune inibant
convivium, (...), pauperibus and qui nihil habebant vocatis, and omnibus
communiter vescentibus.


8 Lastly, Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, was usually performed
upon the Lord's Day. Leo. Pie and laudabiliter Apostolicis morem gesseris
institutis, si hanc ordinandi Sacerdotum formam, per Ecclesias quibus Dominus
praeeste te voluit, etiam ipse servaveris: ut hiis qui consecrandi sunt,
nunquam benedictiones nisi in die Dominicae Resurrectionis tribuantur, cui a
vespera Sabbati initium constat ascribi, and quae tantis divinarum
dispensationum mysteriis est consecrata, ut quicquid est a Domino insigniter
constitutum, in hujus diei dignitate sit gestum.
Leo Mag. ad Dioscorum Episc. Alex. Epist. 81. cap. 1.

Observation the fourth, Concerning worldly labor and negotiation upon the
Lord's Day.
The Law of the fourth Commandment enjoined the Jews and Israelites, a total
resting and cessation from labor and secular negotiation upon the Sabbath, by
the space of a natural day, that is, from the vespers of the sixth day, until
Sunsetting of the seventh day, Levit. 23.32. From even to even, shall ye
celebrate your Sabbath. And during this space of time, all servile labor was
prohibited, and all common or civil work, except only such, as was necessary
for the preservation of man and beast, and for Gods own service Tert. ca.
Mart. li. 4. ca. 12. Cum de Sabbato dicit, omne opus tuum non facies in eo:
dicendo tuum, de humano opere definiit, quod quisque ex artificio, vel negotio
suo exequitur, non de divino. Opus autem salutis and incolumitatis non est
hominis, sed Dei proprium.
.

But the Evangelicall Law imposes no such Commandment of total abstinence,
from secular labor, or from civil actions, during the space of a natural
day: either upon the old Sabbath, or upon the Sunday, or upon any other day of
the week August. c. duas Epist. Pelag. li. 3. ca. 4. Christus nobis abstulit
illud gravissimum multarum observationum jugum, ne carnaliter circumcidamur, ne
pecorum victimas immolemus, ne Sabbato septeno dierum volumine redeunte, ab
operibus etiam necessariis quiescamus, and caetera hujusmodi: sed ea
spiritaliter intellecta teneamus, remotisque umbris significantibus, in rerum
ipsarum quae significantur luce vigilemus. Ambros. li. 4. Epist. 16.
:

The Christian Church upon reasons formerly declared, makes the first day of
the week a solemn festival day; and servile labor, and secular negotiation
is by the precept of the Church, prohibited upon this day: not because of the
letter of the fourth Commandment, or because such labor is vicious or
sinful, and of the same quality with blasphemy, adultery, and theft: but so
far forth only, as the same is an impediment, to such religious and
Evangelicall duties, as are commanded to be performed, upon the Lord's Day, by
the precept of the Church: and so far forth also, as labor or secular actions
do hinder Christian people, or withdraw them, from the service of Christ, and
from spiritual actions, necessary to their religious edification.

Now this is confirmed in manner following.

1 In the new Testament we read of no prohibition, or negative precept
concerning abstinence, and cessation from secular actions upon the Lord's Day,
more than upon other days: Et quod non prohibetur ultro permissum est: That
which is not prohibited is freely permitted, says Tertullian d. Coron. mil.
cap. 2.

2 The Catholic Church for more than six hundred years after Christ,
permitted labor, and gave license to many Christian people, to work upon the
Lord's Day, at such hours, as they were not commanded to be present at the
public service, by the precept of the Church.

During the first 300. years after Christ, the Church lived in persecution,
and Christians were not free to abstain from labor, upon the Lord's Day, or
upon other days, for great multitudes of them were bondmen to Pagan Masters:
many were compelled to labor in Mines, and in Galleys, and to toil and
drudge, at all times, when their cruel Lord's commanded them. And we cannot
find in the whole Ecclesiastical story, that Christian people did make it a
matter of religion to forbear worldly labor upon any day of the week, when
they were commanded the contrary by their Lord's: neither were any tormented or
made martyrs, merely for this reason, That they refused to work, or labor,
or travel upon the Lord's day: But if this had been a sin of the same quality
with blasphemy, adultery, and theft, they would rather have endured any misery
which cruel tyrants could have laid upon them, than wilfully to have
transgressed a prime divine moral Law Aug. de civ. Dei li. 22. c. 6. A Christo
Deo non solum colendo verum etiam confitendo, ta^tam per orbem terrae martyrum
multitudine^ metus revocare non potuit: non levis offensionis animorum, sed
immensarum variarumque poenaru^, and ipsus mortis quae plus caeteris formidatur.
.

After the three hundred years, when Constantine the Great, by his Imperial
power, maintained Christian religion, and among many other religious
constitutions, ordained the weekly observation of the Lord's Day: Rural
people had liberty to labor in their fields and Vineyards Cod. lib. 3. Tit.
12. c. d. fer. Constantinus. A. Elpidio. Hermenop. Ep. jur. Tit. 4. Tripar.
hist. l. 1. c. 9. Beza in Cant. ho. 30. Vt autem Christiani eo die a suis
quotidianis laboribus abstinerent praeter id temporis quod in caetu ponebatur,
id neque illis Apostolicis temporibus mandatum, neque prius fuit observatum,
quam id a Christianis imperatoribus, ne quis a rerum sacraru^ meditatione
abstraheretur, and quide^ non ita precise observatum fuit.
, and none of all the holy Fathers of the Church, living in those days, or
many years after, reprooved the same, or held it a profane thing.

In S. Hieromes days, and in the very place where he was residing, the
devoutest Christians did ordinarily work upon the Lord's Day, when the service
of the Church was ended. For this Father in his Epitaph, or Funeral Oration of
Paula reports, as follows Hieron. to. 3. Ep. 27. ad Eustoch. Die tantum
dominico ad Ecclesiam procedebant, et unumquodque agmen propriam matrem
sequebatur: atque inde pariter revertentes, instabant operi distributo, and vel
sibi vel caeteris indumenta faciebant, pa. 181.
:

The (Lady) Paula her self with all the Virgins and Widows, who lived at
Bethlehem, in a Cloister with her, upon the Lord's Day, repaired duly to the
Church, or House of God, which was nigh to her Cell: And after her return from
thence to her own lodgings, She her self, and all her company fell to work,
and every one performed their task, which was, the making of clothes and
garments, for themselves and for others, as they were appointed.

In Gregory the Great his time, it was reputed Antichristian doctrine, to make
it a sin, or thing unlawful to work upon the old Sabbath Day, or upon the
Sunday, or Lord's Day Greg. Mag. l. 11. Ep. 3. Peruenit ad me, etc. Ita ut die
Sabbati aliquid operari prohibeant: quos quid aliud quam Antichristi
praedicatores dixerim, qui veniens, diem Dominicum and Sabbatum ab omn opere
faciet custodiri.
.

In after times, both in the East and West, in France, in Great Britain, both
in the days of Saxon and Danish Kings: rural works and labor, and other
civil and secular negotiations, were prohibited and restrained, upon the
Sunday or Lord's Day, and upon other Festival days. And this restraint was
made, both by Regal and Imperial Laws, and likewise by Episcopal Synods.
Read the quotations in the Margin Novell. Leon. ca. 54. Statuimus quod
Spiritui sancto, ab ipsoque institutis placuit, ut omnes in die sacro, quoque
nostra integritas restaurata est, a labor vacent, neque Agricolae, neque
quicquam in eo alii, illicitum opus aggrediantur. Si enim qui umbram quandam
atque figuram observabant, tantopere Sabbati diem venerabantur, ut ab omni
prorsus opere abstinerent, quomodo qui gratiae lucem, ipsamque veritatem
colunt, hos eum diem, qui a Domino honor ditatus est, nosque ab exitii
dedecore liberavit, non venerari par est?

Impp. Ludovic. and Lothar. Council. Paris. 1. cap. 50. Iudaeis carnalibus moris
est, Sabbatum carnaliter observare: Christianorum porro religiosae devotionis
(quae ut creditur ex Apostolorum Traditione, imo Ecclesiae authoritate
descendit) mos inolevit, ut ob memoriam Dominicae resurrectionis, diem
dominicum venerabiliter atque honorabiliter colant, quoniam eo die Deus lucem
mundi condidit, eo die Christus a mortuis resurrexit, eo die Paracletum
Spiritum sanctum Apostolis misit de Coelis, eo die Manna pluit de Coelo. Haec
and hiis similia liquido ostendunt, hunc diem caeteris diebus celebriorem, and
venerabiliorem esse debere. Proinde nobis visum est, ut primum Sacerdotes,
cunctique fideles summopere procurent, ut tanti diei debita observatio,
religiosaque devotio, devotius exhibeatur. Quapropter specialiter and humiliter
a Sacerdotibus Imperialis Majestas flagitanda est, ut ejus a Deo ordinata
potestas, ob honorem et reverentiam tanti diei, cunctis metum incutiat, ne in
hac sancta and venerabili die, mercatus and placita, and Ruralia quaeque opera,
necnon and quaslibet Corrigationes ullius conditionis homines, facere
praesumant: quoniam dum haec agunt, and decus Christianitatis obsuscant, and
nomen Christi blasphemantibus, locum amplius blasphemandi attribuunt: decet
igitur ut eo die Christianus, Divinis laudibus, and non Ruralibus operibus
vacet.

Carol. Mag. Turon. Council. 3. cap. 40. Interdicatur ne mercata and placita
usquam fiant in die Dominico. Quapropter oportet omnes Christianos a servili
opere, in laud Dei and gratiarum action, usque ad vesperam perseverare.
Ansegisus. lib. 1. cap. 139. d. Francor. leg. Carolus magnus in
constitutionibus suis prohibet, ut mercatus die Dominico nullo loco habeatur.

Council. Matiscon. 2. Can. 1. Custodire debemus diem Dominicam quae nos denuo
peperit, and a peccatis liberavit. Nullus vestrum litium fomitibus vacet,
nullus causarum actiones exerceat, nemo sibi talem necessitatem exhibeat, quae
jugum jumentorum cervicibus imponat. Estote omnes hymnis and laudibus Dei,
animo corporibusque intenti: Si quis vestrum proximam habeat Ecclesiam,
properet ad eandem, and ibi Dominico die, semetipsum precibus lachrymisque
afficito. Sint ocul^ manusque vestrae, toto illo die ad Deum expansae. Ipse
enim est dies requietionis perpetuus: ipse nobis per septimae diei umbram
insinuatus noscitur, in lege, and Prophetis. Iustum igitur est, ut hanc diem
unanimiter celebremus, per quam facti sumus quod fuimus.

Cabilonens. Council. ca. 18. Instituimus ut in ipso Dominico die ruralia opera,
id est, arare, messes metere, exactus facere, vel quicquid ad ruris culturam
pertinet, nullus penitus praesumat.

Turonens. Synod. Sub Carol. m. ca. 40. Interdicatur ne mercata, and placita
usquam fiant in die Dominica, qua oportet omnes Christianos a servili opere, in
laud Dei, and gratiarum action usque ad vesperam perseverare.

Arelatens. Council. Sub Carol. magno. Ne in Dominicis diebus publica mercata,
neque causationes, neque disceptationes exerceantur: and penitus a rurali and
servili opere cessetur, hiis solummodo peractis, quae ad Dei cultum and
servitium perunere noscuntur.

Antisioderens. Council. cap. 16. Non licet die Dominico boves jungere, vel aliz
opera exercere.

Moguntiac. Council. Sub Carolo. m. cap. 37. Omnes dies Dominicos cum omni
veneratione decrevimus observari, and a servili opere abstinere: and ut
mercatus in eis minime sit, nec placitum ubi aliquis ad mortem vel poenam
judicetur.

Rhemens. Synod. Sub. Carolo. m. cap. 35. Vt diebus Dominicis secundum Domini
praeceptum, nulla opera servilia quilibet perficiat: nec ad placita conveniat,
nec etiam donationes in publico facere praesumat, neque mercata exerceat.

Council. Dingfeld. apud Aventin. Annal. li. 3. Die festo solis, otio divino
intentus prophanis negotiis abstineto. Qui hoc die vehiculariam aut hujusmodi
operam fecerit, jumenta ejus publica sunto. Si contumax perrexerit, in
servitutem redigatur.


.

De observatione diei Dominicae ex antiquis legibus and Synodis, Anglo-Saxonum,
etc.

Ex Ina. Regis Occid. Saxon. ll. c. 3. Circa An. 688. Si servus operetur die
Solis per praeceptum Domini sui, liber sit, and solvat Dominus mulctae nomine
30. s. Sin injussu Domini operetur, corium perdat (.i. flagelletur) vel
flagellationem pretio redimat. Si liber ea die operetur, non mandante Domino,
amittat libertatem, and in Sacerdotem poena duplex esto.

In ll. Aluredi magni, Regis Angl. An. Dom. 876. Cum Guthurno Danorum Rege
primo editis, et in foedere Edovardi Regis filii Aluredi magni cum eodem
Guthurno postea confirmatis, scz. circa An. Dom. 912. Cap. 7. sic habetur sub
tit. De operibus in die festo. Dein in textu.

Qui in die Solis mercaturam egerit, mercem ipsam foris facito, and praeterea
si is Danus fuerit, 12. (nummi) oras, Anglus vero 30. sol. Liber, si in quavis
festa die operatus sit, vel liberate sua exuatur, vel legis violatae mulctam
(quam Lahslite vocant.) Servus corium perdat, vel hoc pretio redimat. Si
Dominus servum suum ad aliquid operis in die festo cogerit, legem violatam apud
Danos subeat, apud Anglos mulctam constitutam.

Cap. 9. Nemo sceleris reus (siqua vitari possit) in festivitate diei Solis
afficiatur morte, ni in fugam se conjecerit vel repugnaverit: comprehensus
autem teneatur, donec festivitas diei pertransierit.

In ll. Regis Aethelstani. Cap. 24. Nulla mercatura sit in die Solis: si quis
hanc fecerit mercem foris facito, and etiam 30. solidis eluito.

In ll. Eadgari Regis, Cap. 5. Circa An. Dom. 966. Vnumquemque diem Solis
quisque festum celebrato, ab hora nona diei Saturni (id est, tertia
pomeridiana) usque ad diluculum diei Lunae, sub ipsa mulcta in Iudiciali libro
designata. Quamlibet etiam diem Missalem prout indicta fuerit a Sacerdote, and
indicta insuper jejunia omni cum religione unusquisque observato.

In Canuti ll. Ecclesiast. Cap. 14. Circa An. Dom. 1026. Festa and je junia
quisquis observato, diei Solis celebritatem a nona (.i. hora tertia post
meridiem) diei Saturni, usque in diluculum diei Lunae, and alias omnes Missales
dies prout fuerint imperati.

Et Cap. 15. Mercaturam etiam in die Solis and secularem quamlibet concionem
(nisi magna provocante necessitate) strictius inhibemus; and a Venatione
mundanisque omnibus operibus unusquisque sedulus aequiescat.

Et in ll. ejus secularibus, Cap. 42. Nemo sceleris reus (siqua vitari possit)
in festivitate diei Solis afficiatur morte, etc. totidem omnino verbis ut hic
superius in Foedere Aluredi and Guthruni, Cap. 9.

Ed. Conf. cir. an. 1054. (in suis quae extant legibus) nihil aliud de diei
Dominicae observatione statuit, quam (ut caeteri dies omnes Ecclesiae) pace sua
regia fungeretur: hoc est, ut immunis esset a fori jurgiis and secularibus
aliis vexationibus, unde in Cap. 3. ait, Ab adventu Domini usque ad octabis
Epiphaniae, pax Dei and sanctae Ecclesiae per omne regnum. Similiter a
septuagesima usque ad octabis Paschae. Item ab ascensione Domini usque ad
octabis Pentecostes. Item omnibus diebus quatuor temporum. Item omnibus
Sabbatis ab hora nona, and tota die sequenti usque diem Lunae. Item vigiliis
Sanctae Mariae, Sancti Michaelis, etc. Item omnibus Christianis ad Ecclesiam
causa orationis euntibus, pax in eundo and redeundo sit eis, etc. Haec eadem in
ll. Gulielmi Conquest.

In Concilio Cloveshoviae sub Cuthbarto Archiepis. Doroberniae, An. Dom. 747.

Cap. 14. De honor and observatione Dominici diei. Quarto decimo statuitur
loco: ut Dominicus dies legitima veneratione a cunctis celebretur, sitque
divino tantum cultui dedicatus, omnesque Abbates and Presbyteri isto
sacratissimo die in suis Monasteriis atque Ecclesiis maneant, missarumque
solemnia agant, omissisque exterioribus negotiis ac secularium conventibus
atque itineribus, nisi inexcusabilis quaelibet causa urgeat religiosae
conversationis, ac been vivendi normulam de sacrae Scripturae eloquiis
subjectis famulis praedicando insinuent. Sed and hoc quoque decernitur quod eo
die sive per alias festivitates majores, populus per Sacerdotes Dei ad
audiendum Verbum Dei conveniat, Missarumque Sacramentis ac doctrinae sermonibus
frequentius adsit.

Inter Canones Egberthi Archiepiscopi Eboracensis, Circa An. Dom. 784.

Cap. 3. Item ut omnibus festis and diebus Dominicis unusquisque Sacerdos
Evangelium Christi praedicet populo.

Infra sub titulo de Sabbato.

Deus Creator omnium creavit hominem in sexta feria, and in Sabbato requievit
ab operibus suis, and sanctificavit Sabbatum propter futuram significationem
passionis Christi and quietis in sepulchro. Non ideo requievit quia lassus
esset, qui omnia sine labor fecit, cujus omnipotentia non potest lassari, et
sic requievit ab operibus suis ut non alias creaturas quam antea fecerat postea
fecisset. Non fecit alias creaturas postea, sed ipsas quascunque fecit omni
anno, usque in finem seculi facit. Homines creat in animabus and corporibus,
and animalia and bestias sine animabus. Omnis anima hominis a Deo datur, et
ipse renovat creaturas suas, sicut Christus in Evangelio ait; Pater meus usque
modo operatur, et ego operor. Christus pro nobis passus est in sexta aetate
mundi in sexta feria, et reformavit perditum hominem passione sua, et operatis
miraculis suis requievit in sepulchro per Sabbatum, et sanctificavit Dominicum
diem resurrectione sua. Nam Dominica dies prima dies seculi est, et dies
resurrectionis Christi, et dies Pentecostes, et ideo sancta est, et nos ipsi
debemus esse spiritaliter Sabbatum Sabbatizantes, id est, vacantes ab operibus
servitutis, id est, peccatis, quia qui facit peccatum servus est peccati. Sed
quia non possumus esse sine peccatis, caveamus in quantum possumus, et
emendemus quicquid peccaverimus, demus bona exempla subditis nobis, et
corrigamus nosmetipsos and subditos, et exhortemur ad meliora jugiter. Amen.

Circa. An. Dom. 1009. In Concilio Aemanensi Pambritannico Regis Ethelredi
edicto ab Archiepiscopis Aelfeago Dorobern. and Vulstano Eboracensi, etc.
celebrato. Cap. 15

Festivitatem diei Solis and ad eandem quicquid pertinet, ferventius quisque
observato. A mercaturis and conventibus populi (puta secularibus and
forensibus) a Venatione etiam and mundanis operibus in sancta illa die sedulus
abstineto. Haec propemodum verbatim: sed in exemplo istius Concilii perantiquo
ita exhibetur: Dominicae solennia diei cum summo honor magnopere celebranda
sunt, nec quicquam in eadem operis agatur servilis; Negotia quoque secularia,
quaestionesque publicae in eadem deponantur die. With the former Laws and
Edicts of Princes: and the Canons of Councels, our national Laws and
Statutes, and the Precepts and Canons of our Church Canon. 13. An. 1603. sub
regno R. Jacob. All manner of persons within the Church of England, shall from
he^ceforth celebrate and keep the Lords Day, commonly called Sunday, and all
other Holy Days, etc. in hearing the Word of God read, in public and private
Prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to God, etc
, accord very exactly, concerning abstinence from secular affairs, and the
religious observation of the Lord's Day, and of other Holy Days.

And we consent likewise with the Catholic Church, concerning the freedom of
Christian people, from the rigorous servitude of the Judicial Law: and the
Statutes of our Nation, and our Canons, and our Homilies permit necessary
work, (the forbearance whereof, would bring notorious detriment) upon some
part of Sundays and Holy Days.

Our Homily says Homil. of the place and time of prayer, page 124.
: This Commandment does not bind Christian people so straightly as it did the
Jews, touching the forbearing of work and labor in time of great necessity.

Q. Eliz. Injunct. 20. All Parsons, Vicars and Curates, shall teach and declare
unto the people, that they may with a safe and quiet conscience, after their
Common Prayer in time of Harvest, labor upon the Holy and Festival days, and
save that thing which GOD has sent. And if for any scrupulosity or grudge of
conscience, they should abstain from working upon those days, that then they
should grievously offend and displease GOD.

King Edward 6. Injunct. All Parsons, Vicars and Curates, shall teach and
declare unto their Parishioners, that they may with a safe and quiet conscience
in time of Harvest, labor upon the Holy and Festival days, and save that
thing which GOD has sent. And if for any scrupulosity, or grudge of
conscience, men should superstitiously abstain from working upon those days,
that then they should grievously offend and displease God.

The Statute of King Edward 6. An. 5. and 6. cap. 3. Provided always, and it
is enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful to every
Husbandman, etc.

And in ancient times the like was permitted Council. ap. Palatium Vernis. Sub
Reg. Franc. Pipin^ cap. 14. De die Dominico, quia persuasum est populis, de die
Dominico agi cum caballis sicut bobus and vehiculis per itinera non debere,
neque ullam rem ad victum praeparari, vel ad nitorem domus vel hominis
pertinentem ullatenus exerceri, quae res ad Iudaicam magis quam ad Christianam
observationem pertinere probatur, id statuimus, ut die Dominico quod ante fieri
licuit, liceat. De opere tamen rurali, a ratione, aut vineae sectione,
excussione vel sepe facienda, censuimus abstinendum, quo facilius ad Ecclesiam
venientes, orationis gratia vacent.
.

Observation the fifth, concerning the LORD's Day.
Abstinence, or resting from secular labor and negotiation, and likewise from
Pastime and Recreation upon the Holy Day, are considerable, Either according to
their Relation to the religious offices of the day: Or, as they concern the
temporal welfare, comfort, delight, profit, and necessity of man.

So far forth, as secular labor, and pastime, or recreation are impediments
to sacred and religious duties, public or private, to be performed upon the
Holy Days, they are to be avoided, and abstinence from them must be used
according to the equity of divine Law, and the Precept of the Church:
Otherwise they are sacrilegious Cyril. in Joan. li. 8. cap. 5. Eo gravius est
peccatu^, quo sanctiori tempore committitur. Idne est, o Christian, celebrare
diem festu^, indulgere ventri, and inconcessis voluptatibus habe^as laxare?

Athanas. ad Affrican. page 730. Ne ipsam quidem Dominicam diem sanctissimi
Festi ulla in reverentia habuere, quo minus eo ipso tempore, quo Dominus omnes
ex mortis vinculis compedibusque asseruerit, homines ejus Ecclesiae in vincula
conijcerent.


, Because they are means to rob GOD of His honor, and to hinder the
spiritual edification of Christian people.

The eating of certain kinds of meats, was sinful under the law, because of
a legal prohibition: But under the Gospel, the eating of all kinds of
wholesome meats is lawful, Unless the same be done intemperately, or contrary
to the Precept of the Church or State, commanding abstinence and fasting: In
like manner, working and laboring upon the old Sabbath Day, was a sin under
the Law, because of GOD's positive Precept: But under the Gospel, it is no sin
to work or labor upon any day of the week, but then only, when the doing
thereof is an impediment to spiritual and religious offices, which by the
general Commandment of the Holy Ghost, and by the subordinate Precept of the
Church, are to be performed upon the Holy Day.

And for this cause the Church of GOD prohibiteth them: And this Precept of the
Church has a twofold obligation: The one arising from the quality of the
object, or things prohibited; For because abstinence from labor, and from
recreation upon the Holy Day, is subservient to the exercise of Religious
duties: And on the contrary, secular labor and pastime are impediments
thereunto: Therefore, although in their proper quality they are not evil, yet
the use of them is to be forborne, at such times and hours of the day, and in
such manner, as the Precept of the Church commands.

The second obligation of the Precept of the Church, arises from the authority
of the Commanders: For the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, are by office,
Stewards, and subordinate Rulers, in the House of God; having authority from
CHRIST, not only to feed His flock with wholesome doctrine, but to govern the
same with holy Precepts and Canons in matters of decency, order, and
edification. And it is the duty of Christian people to obey them, Heb. 13.17.

Also Kings and Princes are the Lord's Vicegerents. Psalm. 82.6. to govern and
eommand His people, Not only in matters concerning humane society, But also in
things concerning or appertaining to Divine Religion Aug. c. Crescon. lib. 3.
cap. 51. In hoc Reges Deo serviunt, sicut eis divinitus imperatur, in quantu^
sunt Reges, Si in suo Regno bona jubeant, and mala prohibeant, Non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam societatem, Verum etiam quae ad Divinam religionem. Idem
Epist. 48.
.

And it has always been the honor of Religious Monarchs, to confirm and
ratify the godly Precepts and Canons of the holy Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, by their regal and imperial authority Council. Paris. 1. ca. 1.
Specialiter and humiliter a Sacerdotibus, Imperialis Majestas flagitanda est,
ut ejus a Deo ordinata potestas, ob honorem, and reverentiam tanti diei cunctis
metum incutiat, ne in hac sancta and venerabili die, Mercatus and Placita, and
Ruralia quaeque opera, nec non and quaslibet corrigationes, ullius conditionis
homines, facere praesumant, etc.
: As appears by Constantine the Great, and by Theodosius, Marcianus,
Charlemaine, Lewis, Lotharius, etc.

Now the holy Apostle commands obedience to Royal authority in things
honest, religious, and just, and that, for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. For when
they command Duties of this quality, Per illos jubet Christus Aug. Epist. 166.
Inter homines poenas luit, and apud Deum sortem non habebit, qui hoc facere
noluit, quod ei per cor Regis, ipsa veritas jussit. ibid. Imperatores cum bonum
jubent, per illos jubet, nisi Christus.
: The supreme Lawgiver Himself, which is the Lord Christ, is the Prime
Commander, Prove. 8.15.

Concerning Recreation upon the Holy Days.
By Recreation we understand Sports, Pastimes, Music, playing at some kinds
of games, and bodily exercises, etc. used to refresh the body and mind of man,
after labor and serious actions Ex Seneca, Lucano, Statio, etc. Recreatio idem
est quod restauratio, and reproductio. Et transfertur ad significandam
intermissionem laboru^, infirmitatis, lassitudinis: and refocillationem cum
corporis, tum animi, ut quae velut de novo videntur produci, and restaurari,
dum a laboribus, morbis, molestiis velut feriantur, and quiescunt, viresque
deperditas resumunt.
.

Recreations are of two sorts or kinds: 1. Honest and lawful: 2. Vicious and
unlawful.

Honest and lawful recreation is such, as neither is vicious, in respect of
the matrer and quality of the object: neither is accompanied with any evil
circumstances. Vicious objects are such, as be morally evil in quality: as
excessive drinking, profane, obscene, or scurrilous speaking, prodigal, or
fraudulent playing or gaming, etc.

Evil circumstances are undue and unseasonable time: undecency in respect of
place, persons, habit, or gesture: relation to some vicious end: excessive and
immoderate action, disobedience to Laws and superior authority, etc.

These. 1. All kinds of recreation, which are of evil quality in respect of
their object: or which are attended with evil and vicious circumstances, are
unlawful, and to be refrained upon all days, and at all seasons. But if they
be used upon the Lord's Day, or on other Festival days, they are
sacrilegious, because they Cyrill. In Joan. ^.8. ca. 5. Idne est, o Christian.
celebrar^ diem festum, indulgere ventri, and inconcessis voluptatibus habenas
relaxare? etc. Eo gravius est peccatum, quo sanctiori tempore committitur.
Council. Ioletan. 3. can. 22. Irreligiosa consuetudo est, qua^ vulgus per
sanctoru^ solennitates and festivitates agere consuevit: populi qui debent
divinis officiis intendere, saltationibus, and turpibus invigilant canticis,
etc. Ephrem. Syrus. s. d. fest. dieb.
rob God of his honor, to whose worship and service the Holy Day is devoted:
and they defile the souls of men, for the cleansing and edifying whereof the
Holy Day is deputed.

These. 2. Recreations honest and moderate, such as are neither vicious in
quality or circumstances, may Lawfully be permitted, and exercised upon some
part of the Christian Holy Day Synops. Pur. Theolog. Disp. 21. n. 58. Neque
tamen omnis corporis recreatio, hic omnino prohibetur, ut quae etiam inter
fines Sabbati est: scilicet, quae cultum Dei non impedit, and sacris peractis,
honest, decenter, moderate, and sine scandalo fit.
.

Argument 1. Recreations of this quality, are prohibited by no just Law: either
Divine, Ecclesiastical, or Politic: and therefore they are not sins, because
sin is the transgression of some just Law, according to the definition thereof,
in holy Scripture, 1 John 3.4. Mat. 15.3. Romans 2.23. and Chap. 7.7. Iam. 2.11.
and according to the Fathers Amb. d. Paradis. c. 8. Aug. c. Faust. Manich. li.
22. c. 27.
, and all the Doctors of the Church Lomb. sent. li. 2. did. 38. and in eund.
Scholast. Aquin. 1. 2. quaest. 71. art. 6.
.

Unless therefore the opposers of such recreations be able to demonstrate,
that they are prohibited, or repugnant to some just Law, the same are not
vicious or sinful, and they may lawfully be permitted by superiors, and
exercised by subjects, and inferiors, upon the Holy Day.

Argument 2. Secular and corporal labor, may lawfully be used, upon some part
of God's Holy Day: namely, so far forth as the same is not an impediment to
the religious Offices of the day.

Therefore honest and moderate recreation, may likewise be permitted and used.

1 The antecedent is proved in manner following.

1 No just Law, Divine, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, does totally prohibit the
same.

2 Many cases of urgent necessity require this: for the welfare of man
himself, and of many creatures is preserved thereby.

3 In the time of the Old Law, the same was lawful in many cases, Mat. 12.11,
etc.

4 The Apostolical Primitive Church permitted this Read before observat. 4.
, and all the School Doctors, and the Canonists: and worthy Divines of our
own part teach the same Beza in Cant. sol. hom. 30. p. 603. Vt autem
Christiani eo die (Dominico) a suis quotidianis laboribus abstinerent, praeter
id temporis quod in caetu ponebatur, id neque illis Apostolicis temporibus
mandatum: neque prius fuit observatum, quam id a Christianis imperatoribus, ne
quis a rerum sacrarum meditatione abstraheretur, neque ita praecise, observatum
fuit. Zanch. in. 4. Praecept. Causa cur externa civilia opera vitentur in die
festo, non est quod per se mala sint, contaminentve sanctificationem diei
Festi: sed quia impedimenta sunt ne quis possit vacare praestandis iis, quae
Deus requirit in cultu suo externo, in festis and sacris diebus. D^naeus Ethic.
li. 2. cap. 9. Nobis Christianis non tanta, tamve severa and rigida cessatio
(nempe ne laboremus in die Dominica) imposita est. Nam ex lege Constantini,
licet serere and metere in die Dominica, si commodum sit. Homil. Of the time
and place of prayer. Page 124. This Commandment does not bind Christian
people so strictly as it did the Jews: touching the forbearing of wo^ke and
labor, in time of great necessity.
.

2 The sequel and consequence of the Argument is builded upon this reason.

Secular and toilesome labor, upon the legal Sabbath, was literally and
expressly prohibited, both in the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, and also
in sundry other passages of Moses his Law, and in the Prophets: and that with
great severity: Exodus 31.14. and Chap. 35.2. Ierem. 17.27. And therefore the
doing thereof was a direct and express transgression of the Sabbaticall Law.

But honest and moderate recreation was not prohibited, either in the Law, or
in the Prophets, in literal and express terms: and if it were forbidden, the
same was done collaterally only, or by consequence.

Now that which is directly and by name prohibited by any Law, is more
unlawful than those things which are concluded by inference only, to be
repugnant to the Law. If then secular labor is not simply unlawful on the
Holy Day, although it were expressly named in the Law G.W. d. Sab. page 98. The
reason why the works of our ordinary vocation are forbidden us upon the
Sabbath, is not that they are unlawful in themselves: but because they destroy
the rest, and take up the mind, that it cannot be employed in Gods business.
: then civil recreation, not prohibited in terms, neither yet by any
necessary consequence from the Law, cannot be simply unlawful.

The Tenent of the Novell Sabbath Teachers, concerning labor and recreation
upon the Sunday.
I. D. We must know that the Lord's Day must contain 24. hours, all which
must be dedicated to Him, that so His blessing may be more plentifully powered
down upon us. We are to know that the Sabbath contains 24. hours, as well as
any other day, and therefore the night must be spent in an holy rest also: not
but that man is allowed to take sufficient sleep: but his sleep is to be
seasoned with the sweetness of former exercises, and his dreams Tho. Char^^^
Com. in Eccl. ca. 5. Quodsi in die Dominico men's nostra, in piis exercitiis
tota defixa esset, eadem inter dormiendu^ recurrerent Neque enim co^temnendu^
quod Philosophus in Ethicis docet, justum ab injusto, non somno sed insomnio
discerni.
to have some taste of religion, more than at other times.

Now GOD bids us keep the whole seventh-day: for he would have us give as
long a day to him, as he has given to us.

D. B. d. Sab. p. 262. Upon the Lord's Day, we ought to rest, from all honest
recreations, and lawful delights, Page 274. From talking of recreations.

E. E. p. 107. Recreation belongs not to rest, but to labor, and it is used
that men may by it be made more fit to labor, and therefore it must be granted
on days of labor, (and not on the Sabbath Day.)

I. D. p. 140. If men will allow their servants recreation, let them allow part
of their own time, and be liberal in that which is their own, and not in that
which GOD has not given them warrant to bestow on their servant.

G. W. of the Sabbath, Chap. 4. GOD requires in the Commandment that we rest
the Whole day, and keep the whole day holy: for if he had meant but a part, he
could have said so much: but in that he requires a day in the Commandment,
he puts it out of question.

Every one of thy days has twenty four hours: and therefore he must have so
many to his day: or else thou have more than six days given thee: or if not
given, then thou take it as Hophni did the flesh, Ib. page 58. It is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God: and take heed how thou wrong him, and curtol his
day, as Hanun did David's servants garments, 2 Samuel 10.4
and then thou robbest GOD of part of his day, and so thou committest theft.

Page 60. Neither yet is this sufficient to keep the Sabbath Day from morning
to night, etc. But we must keep the night also, for it is a part of the day
natural: for so Moses, Genesis 1. accounts the evening and the morning but one
day.

The rigid Tenent of some Sunday-Sabbatizers.
Tho. Rogers Prefat. before the Articles.

I have read, and many there be alive which will justify it, how it was
preached in a Market Town in Oxfordshire, that to do any servile work or
business on the Lord's Day, is as great a sin, as to kill a Man, or to
commit adultery.

It was preached in Summerset-shire, that to throw a bowl on the Sabbath Day,
is as great a sin, as to kill a man.

It was preached in Norfolk, that to make a Feast, or wedding-dinner on the
Lord's Day, is as great a sin, as for a father to take a knife and cut his
childs throat.

G.W. d. Sab. p. 81. take heed unto thy soul, and as of all sins, so
especially of this sin of Sabbath-breaking: because of all other it most
separateth the soul from God.
It was preached in Suffolk (I can name the man, and I was present when he was
convented before his Ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more Bells
than one upon the Lord's Day, to call the people to Church, is as great a sin
as to commit murder.

Arguments used (or rather abused) by these new Lawmakers in confirmation of
their Tenent.
Argument 1. The Law of the fourth Commandment prohibited recreation upon the
whole Sabbath Day to the Jews: but the same Law binds us Christians.

1 That Law prohibited servile-worke: and work, and recreation are equal
impediments to the sanctifying of the Sabbath.

2 The same Law is in force amongst Christians, because it is a moral Law, one
of the ten Commandments: and the observation of it was enjoined with as much
severity, as the observation of any other precept.

Answ. 1. I find no formal nor express prohibition, either in the Text of
the fourth Commandment, or in any other sentence of Moses's Law, simply
restraining the Jews and Israelites from the use of honest recreation upon
their weekly Sabbath Day.

Secondly, One principal end, and necessary use of the old Sabbath was: to
refresh and recreate people after toil and hard labor, Exo. 23.12. Six days
thou shall do thy work: and on the seventh day thou shall rest: that thine
Ox and thine Ass may rest, and the son of thine hand maid, and the stranger
may be refreshed, (...) recreetur, (...).

But if all civil recreation had absolutely been denied the Jews, upon every
part of their weekly Sabbath, which continued four and twenty hours, Levit.
33.32. This had been rather an heavy burden, than a recreating and refreshing
of people. For it is more grievous for people to sit still in one place so many
hours, and to have the body and mind exercised with no variety of action: But
only in reading Deuteronomy Rabbini in (...). Hebraeis in die Sabbati,
aliisque diebus festis, alium librum volvere non licet, qua^ librum legis.
, or other parts of Mose's Law, which ordinary persons understood not, Then to
travel and labor in their ordinary businesses. Now we read in Exodus 16.29.
this branch of the old Sabbath Law: Abide ye every man in his place: let no man
go out of his place on the seventh day. And Origin says Orig. (...) lib. 4.
Vnusquisque quo habitu, quo loco, qua positione, in die Sabbati inventus
fuerit: ad vesperam usque debet permanere. Id. in Number. Hom. 23. In Sabbato
unusquisque sedet in loco suo, and non procedit ex eo. Synes. ep. ad Euopt. Cum
exorta tempestate peracta esset dies parascheues, and vespere, decidente sole,
Iudaei qui nautae erant, Sabbatum inchoarent: qui clavum tenebat, mox ut solemn
reliquisse terra^ conjectavit, relicto clavo prosternit se, seque cuique
calcandum exhibuit. Rati autem navigantes, id ex desperatione eum fecisse,
omnes consternebantur: cum autem causam accepissent, quidam gladio evaginato
necem eidem intendebant. Ille vero immobilis, librum legebat legis, etc. sicque
tota nocte cum sequenti die, sedit Iudaeus otiosus.
of the Jews: That in whatsoever habit, or place, or posture of body they are
in, upon their Sabbath Day, in the same they must continue until the evening.

Thirdly, The Rabbis out of their Talmud affirm Buxtorf. Synag. Iud. cap. 11.
Iunioribus permissum est, ut tempore Sabbati, spatiando, currendo, saltando
sese oblectent: Si ix honorem Sabbati faciant.
: That under the old Law it was permitted young people to recreate and disport
themselves upon some part of the Sabbath, with running, or leaping, or dancing:
provided, that this were done in honor of the Sabbath.

Conclus. It is not then a certain truth, that honest and sober Recreation was
universally prohibited by the law of the fourth Commandment. And therefore one
cannot necessarily conclude from thence, the unlawfulness of all civil
recreation, upon the Christian Holy Day.

A second part of the Answer.

If it were granted, that the old Sabbath Law prohibited all civil recreation,
etc. This concludes not against recreation upon some part of the Christian
Holy Day, for these reasons:

1 The old Sabbath law was positive and temporary, obliging Jews and
Proselytes, Ambros. li. 4. ep. 16. Cum Sabbati ignava otia, and corporalis
superflua destrueret circumcisionis (Christus.)
until the time of the Gospel, and then ceasing. Read this demonstratively
proved before, page 34, etc.

2 The LORD'S Day succeeds not the Legal Sabbath, by Divine institution, in
respect of the old form of observation: to wit, in length and continuance of
hours: Nor yet in the rigor and strictness of external Rites. For there is
no proof hereof in any passage or sentence of holy Scripture: Nor in the
Tradition of the Ancient Catholic Church: neither is there any ground of
reason for it.

The continuance of the old Sabbath, the just space of four and twenty hours:
And the strict form of rest from worldly labor and negotiation, were types
and figures of things to be fulfilled under the Gospel: And they were
expressly commanded in the old Law: but the limitation of the time, and hours
of the day, for divine worship, and Church duties: and likewise the Rule, for
outward rest, and cessation from secular labor, and from play and pastime
under the Evangelicall State, are all of them ordered and appointed by the
Rulers of the Christian Church, according to such general Canons, as the Holy
Ghost has set down in the Scripture. Read before page 100. And therefore in
the new Covenant, we are not subject to the rudiments of the old Law: And even
as, although the Sacrament of Baptism succeeds, and is used in the place of
Circumcision, Yet we forbear not the administration thereof, until the just
number of eight days: So likewise we are free from the legal observance of
such a just quantity and number of hours, as was commanded the Jews by the
old Law, for the continuance of their weekly Sabbath days rest. Read before
page 216.

Another branch of Sunday Sabbatarians doctrine: That to labor or to use any
civil recreation on the LORD'S- day, is a sin of as evil quality, As
Murder, Adultery, Incest, False witness, Theft etc. Upon these two false and
absurd grounds. First, because the same is a sin against a Commandment of
the first Table of the Decalogue. Secondly, Because it was punishable with the
same penalty of death, as murder and adultery were punished. Exodus 35.2.
Numbers 15.36. with Deuteronomy. 22.22.

Answ. 1. The Antecedents of both the reasons are denied upon these grounds
following.

First, To labor, or to use civil recreation, upon some part of the Lord's
day, and in such manner as the Law of the Church, and of the State permits,
is no sin; and therefore it is not a transgression of any Precept of the
first Table of the Decalogue,

Secondly, It is impossible for these superstitious Lawgivers to make
demonstration, either out of Holy Scripture, or sound reason, or testimony and
authority of approved witnesses: That it was a capital crime, in the time of
the old Law, for Jews and Proselytes, to use sober and honest pastime and
recreation upon some part of their Sabbath Day: or within the space of any of
the four and twenty hours, during which, their legal Sabbath continued.

Against the sequel of the former Argument, I shall oppose these Positions
following.
These. 1. All sins against the Commandments of the first Table of the
Decalogue, are not more vicious in quality, nor of greater guiltiness before
GOD, than some sins against the Precept of the second Table.

These. 2. Some sins, and some transgressions of Precepts of the second Table,
are more grievous and heinous, in quality, guiltiness, and effect, than some
sins and transgressions of the Commandments of the first Table.

These. 3. Sins against the second Table, being less in respect of their
material object, do many times, by reason of malice in committing, and by
aggravating circumstances, become more deadly, than some kinds, or actions of
superstition, idolatry, infidelity, distrust in God, neglect of Divine Service,
etc. Aquin. 1. 2. quaest. 73. ar. 5. Quod peccata spiritalia sunt majoris
culpae quam peccata carnalia, non est sic intelligendum, quasi quodlibet
peccatu^ spiritale sit majoris culpae, quolibet peccato carnali: Sed quia
considerata hac sola differentia spiritalitatis and carnalitatis, graviora
sunt, caeteris paribus. Modina. 1. 2. q. 73. ar. 4. Comparationes peccatorum
fieri debent, si caetera sunt paria. Vasq. 1. 2. q. 73. ar. 3. Peccatum
inferioris speciei, and ex objecto minus grave, dici potest aliquando majus
alio superioris speciei, propter circumstantias: Vel propter rationem
voluntarii: vel quia majus nocumentum infert. Conrad. ib. in Thom. Non
intelligitur quod quodlibet spiritale sit majoris culpae (id est, imputetur ad
majorem poenam, and habeat majorem reatum, and aversionem, and inordinationem)
quolibet peccato carnali: quia hoc non est verum. Invenitur enim aliquod
spiritale quod est solum veniale: and invenitur carnale quod est mortale grave:
and quandoque potest carnale esse ex deliberatione, and certa malitia, and
spiritale ex surreptione: Sed intelligitur caeteris paribus, ut quod sit
paritas in objecto, and paritas voluntatis.


These. 4. In comparing of sins, we must always proceed in manner
following, that is: Compare foul sins of either Table, with foul sins: like
sins to like, both according to the material object: and according to malice
and wilfulness, and other circumstances in the offenders Tertul. ad uxor. lib.
2 cap. 3. Omne delictum voluntarium, in Domino, grande est.
.

These things being premised, it will appear by many examples, and sentences
of holy Scripture, that my former Positions, concerning the equality, and
inequality, parity, or imparity, of the sins of either Table, are undoubtedly
true.

Genes. 18.11, etc. Sarah sinned against the first Commandment of the first
Table of the Decalogue, not believing Ambros. ep. 36. Sara quia risit
incredulitatis coarguta est.
GOD'S promise revealed by the Angel, That she being then waxed old, and her
Lord also, should of a surety bear a child.

2 Samuel 12.4. A certain rich man, sinned against the second Table: For this
rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds: But the poor man had nothing,
save one little Ewe-lambe, which he had bought and nourished up, etc. And
there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own
flock, and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man, that was come
unto him: But took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was
come unto him.

Now, if we make comparison betwixt these two former sins, whereof the one was
a transgression of a Precept of the first Table, and the other of the second,
the rich man's sin was damnable and mortal, 2 Samuel 12.5. The sin of Sarah
being only of infirmity, was corrected with a check only of the Angel, and
without further punishment.

Deuteronomy. 32.51. Numb. 20.24. and Chap. 27.14. Moses and Aaron trespassed against
the Lord (by distrust in His Word and power) at the waters of Meribah-kadesh,
in the wilderness of Zin in the strife of the congregation: they did not
sanctify Him at the water, before the people.

1 Kings 21. King Ahab consented to the murder of Naboth the Iezreelite, and
when Naboth was dead, he took possession of his Vineyard, verse 16.

This sin of Ahab being against the second Table, was damnable in an high
degree, and it brought destruction upon himself, and it was the cause of utter
ruin to all his posterity, 1 King. 21.21, 22.

But the trespass of Moses and Aaron against the first Table, was an occasion
to impeach their entrance into the Land of Canaan, but it neither hurt their
posterity, neither deprived themselves of GOD'S eternal love and grace.

The man of God, being seduced by an old Prophet, disobeyed an express
Commandment of God, which was against the first Table of the Decalogue, 1
King. 13.21.

Absolon sinned against the second Table, in rebelling against his Father
David: and by lying with his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.22.

I suppose our new Sabbath-masters will acknowledge that the latter sinned
being against the second Table, was many times more foul and heinous, Than the
sin of the man of God.

Lastly, the most virtuous and holy people living, are sometimes over-taken
with sins against the first Table: namely, with some sins of omission: and
with sins of infirmity, ignorance, surreption, etc. with some impatience,
unthankfulness, pride of heart, distrusting, and doubting in God's providence:
As we may observe in the examples of Job, and David, and Ezechiah, etc. But
notwithstanding such sins, these just persons continue in God's favor, and in
the state of grace: and these sins of ignorance, infirmity, surreption, and
sudden passion, are not imputed unto them: neither do they make them guilty of
God's eternal wrath, (according to the law of the Evangelicall covenant:) but
they still remain actually righteous Aug. in Psalm. 11. Peccatum non imputatur,
and tanqua^ non fuerit operatus, accipitur. Id. c. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 3.
cap. 3. Quamvis Diabolus sit author and princeps omnium peccatorum: Non tamen
filios Diaboli faciunt quaecunque peccata. Peccant enim and Filii Dei, quoniam
si dixerint se non habere peccatum, seipsos seducunt, and veritas in cis non
est.
, in the sight of God and men.

But on the contrary, if a just person become a wilful trangressour of any
maine Precept of the second Table: and continue therein, without actual
repentance: The Spirit of God says, Ezekiel. 18.24. All the righteousness that
he has done, shall not be remembered, In his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.

Now from the premises these conclusions are inferred:

1 That some sins against Precepts of the first Table are compatible with
Grace: and some sins of the second Table are repugnant to the State of Grace
Aug. d. civ. Dei. lib. 21. c p. 26. Si quis Christianus diligit meretricem,
eiquc adhaerens unum corpus efficitur, jam in fundamento non habet Christum.
Cyprian. d. Patient. Adulterium, fraus, homicidium, mortale crimen est.
.

2 Sins against the first Table, are not universally greater or fouler, then
all sins of the second Table: neither are many offenses against the Law of the
first Table, equal in malice and guiltiness, to some transgressions of the
Law of the second Table.

Therefore it is a false and prodigious paradox for any one to maintain: that
to dress a wedding dinner on a Sunday, or, to throw a bowl, or to ring more
bells than one, is a more enormous crime, than for a Disciplinarian brother to
lie with his maid, or neighbors wife: or for a Father to take a knife, and
wilfully to cut his childs throat: these, and such like positions, grounded
upon this principle, that all sins against the first Table of the Decalogue,
are greater than any sins of the second Table: or at leastwise all sins of
the first Table, are as foul and damnable as any sin of the second Table; are
not only false and absurd, but pernicious and pestilentiall: for from hence it
will be consequent, that swearing a rash oath, is a crime more heinous and
detestable: then for a son to rebel against his father: or for a servant to
poison his Master. etc.

A second orthodoxall Position, against the sequel of the former Sabbatarian
Argument.
These. The penalty of temporal death inflicted by God or man: or annexed to a
divine Precept, does neither argue the same to be simply and perpetually
moral: neither does it argue that the transgression of such a Precept, against
the Law of the first Table, is morally as evil, as to transgress some
Commandment of the second Table.

1 The contempt of voluntary omission of Circumcision, was capital, in the Old
Law, Genes. 17.14. The uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin
is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he has broken
my Covenant. Now, this form of speech, to be cut off from his people,
signifies temporal death, Exodus 12.15. and Chap. 31.14. Numb. 9.13.

2 The touching of the Mount, at the time of giving the Law, was punishable
with death: Exodus 19.12. Whosoever touches the Mountain shall die.

Levit. 16.2. Speak to Aaron, that he come not at all times into the holy
place, within the veil before the Mercy-seat, which is upon the Arc, lest he
die.

Number. 4.15. The sons of Korah shall come to bear it (the Sanctuary) but they
shall not touch any holy thing least they dye. Ib. v. 17.20. The Koathites
shall not go into see when the holy things are covered, lest they dye. Lev.
10.1, 2. Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, etc. offered strange fire before
the LORD, which he commanded them not: and there went out a fire from the LORD
and devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord. 2 Samuel 6.6. Vzza put forth
his hand to the Ark of GOD, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it. 7.
And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzza, and GOD smote him there for
his error, and there he died by the Ark of God. Exodus 12.15. Whosoever eats
leavened bread, from the first day, until the seventh day, that soul shall be
cut off from Israel. Number. 9.13. The man that is clean, and is not in a
journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even that soul shall be cut
off from his people, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his
appointed season. Deuteronomy. 17.12. The man that will not hearken to the Priest,
that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto the Judge,
even that man shall die, and thou shall put away evil from Israel. And he
smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord: even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men, 1 Samuel 6.19.

Now these former instances, and examples declare, that the penalty and death
inflicted upon offenders under the Law, for trangressions against God himself,
does neither argue, that all offenses punished in this manner, were sins
against the natural moral Law: nor yet that all offenses against the first
Table, are as heinous, or more enormous, than many sins against the second
Table. And therefore although the doing servile work upon the old Sabbath, was
capital under the Law, Exodus 31.14. and Chap. 35.2. Yet notwithstanding the
fourth Commandment in respect of the special object thereof, was positive and
temporary.

Lastly, all the rigid ordinances which our Sunday Sabbatarians, impose upon
Christian people, are mere Judicial traditions: for they are grounded upon no
Divine Law, moral or Evangelicall: nor upon any just and reasonable ordinance,
Ecclesiastical or Civil. And therefore these authors are most presumptuous in
laying such burdens upon men's consciences: to wit, that it is a sin against
God's Moral Law, of the same quality with adultery, etc. In the harvest time
D. B. d. Sabb. To rest upon the Sabbath, is so necessary, that the necessity
of Harvest will not excuse our working before God, Exodus 34.21. Though the
corn be in danger, yet better were it for us, that it should rot on the
ground, then for us by carrying it in, with the breach of the Sabbath, to
treasure up unto our selves wrath, Romans 2.5. p. 148. E.E. On the Commandments,
page 103.
, after evening service, to shocke or rake any corn. A Tailor, or Shoo-maker
upon pain of damnation may not bring home a suite of apparel, or a pair of
Boots or Shoes, upon Sunday morning. A man being in health may not send out of
his own house, to fetch a pint or quart of wine: E. E. pa. 106. If they be in
health, or strength of body, they are not to go or send for such things, etc.
A sick person may not play at any kind of game upon any part of the day:
servants having labored hard all the week, if they leap, or shoot, or
run, or wrestle, or use any pastime after evening prayer D.B. p. 262, etc.
E.E. p. 106. 107. May not sick persons use lawful recreatio^, as
Chess-playing on the Sabbath No, if they be extremely sick, they are rather to
give themselves to prayer^ if they be not so dangerously sick they need it
not, etc.

G.W. d. Sab. p. 122. nor unto our fields to walk in.


: nay, if people do only speak, or discourse of any secular affairs: or of
any pastimes or sports; and if a Porter bring a letter upon a Sunday morning
before Service, which came late to his hand on Saturday night: all such people
transgress the Christian moral Sabbath of the fourth Commandment; and commit
a sin of like quality, with Adultery, Fornication, Theft, Slander,
Oppression, Disobedience to parents, rebellion to Princes, sedition in the
state D. B. p. 148. By breach of the Sab. (by carrying corn) ye treasure up
wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the decla^ion of the just judgment of
God, etc. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, Id. page 28^. The Lord has
declared what kind of rest he requires of us, the height, and the breadth, and
the depth, and the length, and the full measure of it. And the Lord requires
all and every one of us, from the beginning to the end of our lives, without
intermission, under the pain of everlasting damnation: as is alleged by the
Apostle, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them.
, etc.

An Argument against Recreation out of Esaias 58.13.
R.B. Light of Faith, Page 155. I.B. societ. of Saints. page 161. Not doing thy
pleasure on my Holy Day. Esaias 58.13. Man's pleasure signifying sometimes any
manner of sinful delight, agreeable to our corrupt nature, as 2 Timothy 4.1.
Lovers of pleasure; sometimes honest delights, serving for the solace and
comfort of man's life, Genesis 49. Giving pleasure for a King.

G.W. d. Sab. p. 123. The Prophet has given us a true pattern of a Sabbath,
which every Christian is bound to observe.


The Lord says, that the Sabbath is then consecrated as holy, when we neither
do our own ways, nor find our own pleasure, nor speak our own words.

Under those words, The finding our own pleasure, is condemned all
recreations, though they be honest, and lawful at other times: unless you
call those only recreations, of which the Apostle S. James speaks, Chap. 5.
verse. 13. If any be merry let him sing Psalms.

Answ. The Prophet Esaias his words are: If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure, Heb. (...) Sept. (...) Vt non facias
voluntates tuas Chal. (...). Necessitates tuas. Latini omnes, voluntatem* vel
voluntates tuas*
on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable: and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words, etc.

These words of Esaias have a literal sense, and a spiritual sense.

According to the literal sense, the Jews were prohibited on their
Sabbath Day, doing their own works (...) Vias ^uas.
. Seeking their own will, and speaking their own words. The Hebrew word (...)
which is translated Pleasure, signifies will and desire, purpose, and delight:
and the Chaldy Paraphrast, translates it, necessities: and the Greek and
Latin Translators, thine own will, or thine own wills.

Now the Jews own works, pleasures, wills, and words, were such as were
repugnant to the positive Law of the Sabbath, then in force.

This sentence therefore of Esaias, obliged the Jews Mr. Greeneham of the Sab.
p. 312. These words of Esaias 58. are spoken to the present state of the Jews,
as then they were, and not properly to the Gentiles, but as they may see their
estate in the Jews: in which respect it may be profitably applied to the
Gentiles: but evident it is, that here properly it was spoken to the Jews. For
in this place the Prophet sharply reprehended them, because they kept not their
fastings and Holy Days aright.
, according to the legal meaning of the words.

2 The spiritual sense of the Prophets word, is, that every servant of God,
both Jew and Gentile, must observe a spiritual Sabbath throughout the whole
course of this life: and he must rest and abstain, from all desires, lusts,
pleasures, words, and works, which are his own by pravity and corruption of
nature, evil custom, etc.

But this mandate obliges not Christians to observe the external form of
Legal and Judicial keeping the Sabbath.

My answer then, to the objection against honest recreation out of Esaias is;
That the spiritual duty commanded in the mystical sense of the Prophet,
concerns Christians, and not the legal sense. That is, Christians are obliged
by this Scripture, to observe a spiritual Sabbath Machar. Hom. 35 Anima quae
mer^tur liberari ab obscaenis and sordidis cogitationibus, verum Sabbatum
celebrat, and veram quietem requiescit, ocium agens, and liberata a cunctis
operibus tenebrosis.
, not upon one only day of the week, to wit Sunday: but every year, and day,
and hour of their life Tert. c. Iud. c. 4. Vnde intelligimus magis Sabbatizare
nos ab omni opere servili semper debere, and non septimo quoque die, sed per
omne tempus.
: and during this Sabbath, that is, during their whole life, they must highly
esteem and honor, and take great delight in their spiritual Sabbath, that
is, in Christ, and in an holy and godly life: and they must not violate or
profane their spiritual Sabbath Cyril. Alex. Submissi, and tractabiles mores
tenerum Deo praestant in Sabbato otium, vel spiritualem Sabbatismum. Non
levabunt ad opus pedem: a turpissimis and detestandis negotiis otium celebrent:
vult etiam iram ac furorem vincere, and fores, and repagulum linguae apponere.
In Esaias 58. lib. 5. Procop. in Esaias 58. Est Sabbatum secundum Deum celebrare, a
propriis operibus voluntatibusque abstinere, etc. Sabbata delicata, quae
molesti reluctantisque animi nihil habent adversus Deum ut Pharaoh, etc. Vult
linguam nos and iracundiam cohibere. Hieron. Esaias 58. Lege praeceptum est ne in
Sabbatis opus servile faciamus, ne accendamus ignem, ut in uno sedeamus loco:
Quod si juxta literam accipiatur, penitus impleri non potest, etc. Ex uno
igitur mandato, quod juxta literam impossible est, and caetera cogimur
spiritualiter intelligere, etc. Qui facit peccatum servus est peccati: ne onus
portemus in Sabbato, quale portabat qui dicit, iniquitates elevatae sunt super
caput meum, quasi onus g^ave aggregatae sunt super me. Ne nos voluptas and
libido corporis succendunt: qu^ q^iescit in Sabbato, and lavat inter innocents
manus suas, nec movet pedes ut suasfaciat v^ ^^^eates, etc. Hieron. in Gal. 5.
p. 151.
, by doing their own works, speaking their own words, and thinking their
own thoughts, to wit, such words, works, and thoughts, as are their own by
corruption of nature, and which are not seasoned with grace.

But unless the Sabbatarians be able to prove, that modest and honest
recreation, is a work of uncleanness, and a fruit of the flesh like unto
fornication, drunkenness, pride, envy, etc. they in vain urge this text of
Esaias to prove, that all recreation is vicious upon the Christian Holy Day. For
it is inconsequent to say, thoughts, words, and actions proceeding from the
corruption of Man's nature are vicious: Therefore a man may not during the
spiritual Sabbath, which is his whole life, use any recreation.

Another objection against Recreation upon the Sunday.
Although recreation upon the Lord's Day is not simply evil: yet it is not
expedient, for the reasons following.

1 The use thereof will be an impediment to the private religious offices of
the day.

2 The greater number of people are not able to use moderation in their sports
and pastimes. And instead of honest and sober recreation, many people will use
sports and pastimes, which are immodest, and scandalous.

3 The permission and use of recreation upon that day abateth the reverend and
honorable esteem which the Christian Church ought to have of that day.

Answ. 1 It is the duty of all Christian people, to perform private religious
offices, upon the Lord's Day, to wit, Private prayer and thanksgiving
acknowledgement of their offenses to God: Canon of the Chur. of England, Anno:
1603. supra. p. 224*
to reconcile themselves charitably to those they have offended, or with whom
they be at variance: to visit the sick, comfort the afflicted, and to
contribute to the necessity of the poor: also Parents, and Masters of Families
are to instruct their children and their servants, in the fear and nurture of
the Lord etc. But these private duties may be performed, and yet honest and
moderate recreation be used and permitted upon some part of the day.

2 Because the Lord's Day, and other Holy Days are devoted to the service of
GOD, and appointed for the exercise of spiritual duties: Christian people are
to prefer the religious offices of those days, before their worldly pleasure
and profit Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 5. Non oportebat omnino a coetu Ecclesiae
recedentes, contrariis huic studio negotiis implicari: sed domu^ continuo
revertentes sacros replicari libros and conjugem pariter liberosque ad eorum
quae dicta sunt collationem vocare, hiisque altius animo penitusque infixistum
demum ad c^ quae huic vitae sunt necessaria, curanda procedere.
: and the more observant they are hereof, the more they please God, if other
actions of their life be suitable to their devotions.

3 Devout Christians, who are so piously affected, as that upon the Lord's day
and on other Holy days, they do resolve to sequester and retire themselves
from secular business, and ordinary pleasures and delights, to the end they
may more freely attend the service of Christ, and apply their minds to
spiritual and heavenly meditations, are to be commended and encouraged: for
the doing hereof, is a work of grace and godliness, pleasing and acceptable
to God, Col. 3.2. John 6.27.

But no Divine or Evangelicall Law imposes a moral necessity upon all people
in general to abstain wholly from necessary labor, and from honest and
moderate recreation upon the Sunday, or the Holy Day, by the space of twenty
four hours, or which condemns either of these for mortal sins.

Neither does the Church, or Prince, and temporal Magistrate, impose upon
Christian people in general, an absolute forbearance of all necessary labor,
and honest recreation, upon all hours of Sundaies or Holy Days, by their
Ecclesiastical or temporal Laws: because all humane laws must be such, as
be morally possible Isiod. Orig. l. 5. cap. 21. Erit autem lex, honesta, justa,
possibilis, etc. Did. 4. c. 2. and 15. q. 1. Non est, and 23. q. 4.
Nebuchodonozor. ff. Quando appelland. fit. li. 1. Sect. Dies autem istos.
Salas. d. leg. disp. 1. Sect. 9.
to be obeyed and observed, not only by retired and contemplative persons, but
by subjects in general: by vulgar people, such as are Husbandmen, Artificers,
Laborers, Soldiers, poor servants, etc.

But amongst a multitude of people, few are to be found, who morally are able
to apply themselves the space of so many hours of the day to spiritual and
religious exercises, and to divine meditations only, and such as our Novell
Sabbatarians require: and then, after all this is finished on the daytime,
when darke-night comes, to command their fancy to dream of nothing, but of
Chapters, Lectures, Collations, Questions, and Answers, propounded the day
before.

All Divine Evangelicall ordinances, necessary to the salvation of every
Christian, are possible with ordinary diligence, and likewise with comfort to
be observed: For the Law of CHRIST is sweet and easy, Mat. 11.30. and His
Commandments are not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.3. The LORD (says Saint Augustine
Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 61. Neque impossible aliquid potuit Deus imperare, quia
justus est: Neque damnaturus est hominem pro eo quod non potuit vitare, quia
pius est. Chrysostom. de Poenit. Hom. 8. Nequaquam Dominum incuses: no^ mandat
impossibilia. Council. Araus. cap. 25. Secundum fidem Catholicam credimus, quod
accepta gratia, omnes baptizati Christo auxiliante and cooperante, quae ad
salutem pertinent possint and debeant, si fideliter laborare voluerint,
adimplere. August. de Nature. and Great. cap. 43. and 69. Hieron. Exposit. Symb.
ad Damasum. Basil. in Psalm. 118. August. in Psalm. 56. Neque imperaret hoc
Deus ut faceremus, si impossible esse judicaret, ut hoc ab homine fieret. Id.
de Temp. s. 191. Execramur blasphemiam eorum qui dicunt impossible aliquid
homini a Deo esse praeceptum.
) will not command things impossible, because He is just: neither will He
condemn any for doing that which he could not avoid. Therefore our Sunday
Sabbatizers precepts concerning spiritual duties, to be actually, and without
intermission continued the whole space of a natural day, can be no branch of
the Law of CHRIST, nor yet consentaneous thereunto.

Fourthly, Whereas it is objected, that few people in their pastimes and
recreations use just sobriety and moderation G. W. d. Sabb. page 101. By this
allowance will some say, evil men will take liberty unto themselves under
these pretenses, to profane the Sab. by their sports.

Answ. It may well be so, etc. Yet must not this let us, to give that allowa^ce
to God's children, which he has left them in his Word.


: My answer is, that very few do this in feasting, or in ordinary talking, or
in buying and selling, or in the use of other indifferent things: Yea, there
are very few that avoid offenses in their Sunday collations of Scriptures, in
their domestical repetitions, and censures of Sermons, etc. and faction,
pride, hypocrisy, vainglory, etc. may enter into seeming Devotions of
zealous Sabbatisers, as well as some lightness and vanity into poor servants
recreations. Therefore, as drinking of wine is not condemned, because
intemperate men are disordered by it: So likewise Recreation, and other
indifferent actions, may not generally be condemned, because according to the
nature of all humane things, they are subject to abuses August. lib. 50. Homil.
30. Magno errore, magnaque dementia, in res ipsas, quibus male homines utuntur,
crimen male utentium transfertur.
.

Fifthly, Whereas it is said, that people on the Lord's day, and other
Holy Days, use sports and pastimes, which are profane and vicious: this
condemns not sober and honest recreation.

The Laws of our Church and Commonwealth condemn and chastise, all things
profane and vicious, upon the LORD'S day: Stat. Anno 4. Regis Caroli, cap. 1.
There shall be no meetings, assemblies, or concourse of people out of their
own Parishes on the Lord's Day, for any sports whatsoever: nor any unlawful
exercises, or pastimes used by any within their own Parishes, etc.

Also our most Gracious and Religious Sovereign, is the Lord's Vicegerent, to
restrain the abuse and scandalous profanation of the Lord's Day: And he is a
noble Successor of those glorious Princes, which in ancient times, by their
Royal and Imperial Edicts and Constitutions, prohibited on this Day, All
obscene, lascivious, and voluptuous pastimes: Also enterludes and Stage Plays:
and combating in the Cirque: fighting with wild beasts: Sea-skirmishes:
Horse-races: Huntings in woods, or fields, Imp. Leo and Anthem. Nec hujus diei
religiosi ocium, relaxantes, obscoenis quenquam patimur voluptatibus detineri.
Nihil eo die sibi vendicet scoena Theatralis, aut Circense spectaculum, aut
ferarum lachrymosa spectacula, and si in nostrum ortum and natalem inciderit
differatur. Canutus, ll. Eccles. cap. 15. Mercaturam etiam in die solis, and
secularem quamlibet concionem, nisi magna provocante necessitate, strictius
inhibemus. Et a venatione, mundanisque omnibus operibus, unusquisque sedulo
acquiescat. August. de Temp. Sermon. 251. Neque in venatione se occupet,
circumvagando campos, etc. Pipinus Rex. in Council. Foro juliens. cap. 13.
Abstinere in ea primo mandamus ab omni peccato, and ab omni opere carnali, and
ab omni opere terreno, and ad nihil aliud vacare nisi ad orationem, concurrere
ad Ecclesias cum summa mentis devotione: Et cum charitate and cum dilectione
benedicere Dominum, qui hac die pluit Manna in deserto, and tot millia hominum
quinque panibus parit.
etc.

Ios. B. Society of Saints. page 162. An Argument against Recreation.

G. W. d. Sab. page 138. God does require the whole day to be spent in holy
duties. And therefore as thou may in no part of the day break the rest by
labor: so much less may thou break the Holiness.
Those things which are lets and hindrances of holiness, cannot lawfully be
done on that day, which is God's Holy Day.

But all sports and recreations, are lets and impediments of holiness.

Therefore no sports or recreations, may lawfully be done upon the LORD'S Day.

Answ. Because the Author of this Argument is highly conceited of the force of
it; Before I proceed to a formal solution, I shall set down certain notes of
observation, touching the terms which are used in the propositions.

Notab. 1. The term or word Holiness, used in both propositions, signifies,
the exercise of spiritual and religious duties, public and private: to wit,
resorting to Church, hearing Divine Service and Sermons, receiving the Holy
Sacraments: Private and domestical prayer, thanksgiving, reading Scripture,
conference, and meditation of things divine and religious, etc.

Notab. 2. The performing of religious duties, is either Actual, or else
Virtuall and Habitual.

Actual, when people are present at Church serving God, hearing His Word, etc.
Or when privately or in their own families, they pray, instruct one another,
sing Psalms, confer of Scripture, etc.

Virtuall and Habitual, when in their cessation from the actions of these
duties, They have a ready mind and will, to return to the performance of
them, when the Divine Law and Precept of the Church requires August. d. Bono
Conjagal. cap. 21. Habitus est, quo aliquid agitur cum opus est: cum autem non
agitur potestagi, sed non est opus. to. 6. page 293 Durand. 2. d. 41. q. 1. n.
7.
.

Notab. 3. Lets and hindrances of holiness before mentioned, are threefold.
1. Some are Opposite, and of contrary quality to the exercise of true
holiness: As Hypocrisy, Profaneness, Superstition, gross and affected
Ignorance, and Negligence. 2. Some are things lawful in themselves, or in
their proper kind, as to eat and drink, and to plow and sow, to travel, to
trade, and to buy and sell, etc. But if they be acted at such time, as the
precept of God, and the Church prohibiteth, they are profanations of God's
Holy Day. 3. Some things are only occasions of omitting the actual exercise
of religious works, at such time of the day, as the Law of GOD, and the Church
permits a cessation from such works or actions.

Notab. 4. Affirmative precepts, oblige not at all times, to the exercise of
the act commanded by them Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 71. ar. 5. Praecepta affirmativa
ligant semper, sed non ad semper. Id. 2. 2. q. 33. art. 2. Gregor. Val. ib.
disp. no. art. 2. Praecepta affirmativa non obligant pro omni te^pore, (sicut
praecepta negativa, utpote vetantia actus malos, qui nunqua^ licent,) sed solum
pro loco and tempore concurrentibus quibusdam circumstantiis. Gammach. 1. 2.
tr. de leg. disp. 92. Sect. 2.
: Although the general term always, or the like equivalent term, be added
to them: But they bind the conscience only, Habitually, or in ready
disposition of mind and will, to be prepared to perform the action commanded,
when time and matter, and circumstances require.

The Euchitae, or Messaliani, held it unlawful to do any thing but only to
pray Aug. de Haeres. cap. 57. Tantum orant, ut eis qui hoc de illis audiunt
incredibile videatur. Nam cum Dominus dixerit, oportet semper orare and non
deficere: Et Apostolus, sine intermissione orate, (quod sanissime accipitur, ut
nulla die intermittantur certa tempora ora^di) isti ita nimis hoc faciunt, ut
hinc judice^tur inter haereticos numerandi.
, because the Lord said, Oportet semper orare, and non deficere; Men ought
always to pray, and not to cease or be weary, Luke 18.1. And because the holy
Apostle said, Sine intermissione orate, Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

1 Timothy 5.5. She is a widow indeed, and trusts in God, and continues in
supplications and prayers night and day.

Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks to God, (...), always.

2 Thessalonians. 1.3. We are bound to give God thanks always.

Psalm. 34.1. I will bless the Lord always, His praise shall be continually in
my mouth.

Philip. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always.

Josh. 1.8. The Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night.

Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in Hic Law does he
meditate day and night. Luke 2.37. She served God with fastings and prayers,
day and night Paroemialis, Formula est, qua denotatur perpetuum, quoad licet,
humano more, sine fastidio, satietate, negligentia, etc. Tempestive secundum
legis divinae praescriptum, and intentionem, etc. Eusebius. Hilar. Hieron. Ambros.
Basil. August. in Psalm. 1. verse. 2.
.

Now these and the like forms of speech, and the precepts contained in them,
are not to be expounded literally, for then they would be false and
impossible: but the intention of the Holy Ghost, is, that the actions
commanded, are to be performed, readily, and with a willing mind: at all
hours and seasons, when matter and circumstances require them to be done.

Notab. 5. Some negative precepts are delivered in absolute terms, which are
to be understood by way of comparison.

Matthew. 6.19. Lay not up for your selves treasure upon earth.

John 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes.

Philip. 4.6. Be careful for nothing.

Matthew. 6.25. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, etc. Luke
14.12, 13.

But now it is manifest, that the intention of our Savior, and of His Apostle,
was not to prohibit and condemn all honest care for things temporal, and all
worldly labor, and necessary provision of food and raiment: For the Spirit of
God elsewhere in holy Scripture, commands honest labor, provision and care:
And the practice and example of holy persons, the dear children and servants
of God, proves the same lawful.

Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his hand the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs.

1 Thessalonians. 4.11. We beseech you brethren, that you study to be quiet, and to do
your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you.

2 Corinthians. 12.14. Parents ought to lay up for their children.

1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and specially for them of his
household, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

The examples likewise of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob: and of Saint Paul himself
give testimony, that honest labor, providence, and provision of things
temporal, is both lawful and virtuous, Genesis 30.30. Prove. 31.13, 14, 15, 16,
etc. 1 Cor. 4.12. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. Act. 18.3. And Saint Augustine August. de Civ.
Dei lib. 19. cap. 14. Homini justo inest suorum cura, etc. duo praecepta, hoc
est, dilectione^ Dei, and dilectione^ proximi docet magister Deus, etc. And
care and providence for ones household, etc. is an act of the second mandate of
charity.
treating of the care and providence of Parents and Masters, for their children
and servants, accounts the same a work of Christian charity.

These Observations being premised, the answer to the objection, against honest
recreation, upon the Holy Day is very easy.
1 Although the words of the 4th Comt. are general, Exodus 20.10. (...). Thou
shall not do any work: or as it is read in our Liturgy, Thou shall do no
manner of work, thou nor thy son, etc. Yet this prohibition had exceptions,
and limitations in the old Law it self. Read before page 126.

But now under the Gospel, Christian people are prohibited only worldly
actions respectively, that is, so far forth as they are impediments of
performing Evangelicall duties, upon the Lord's Holy Days. And men are not now
obliged, by the space of a whole natural day, or a whole artificial day, to
an actual exercise of religious offices, (for there is no divine
Ecclesiastical, or temporal Law, commanding this) but they must be prepared
in the habitual disposition of their minds, to exercise these duties, so far
forth, and in such manner, and for such space of time, as the equity of the
fourth Commandment, and the Laws of superiors shall require: and likewise
they are obliged in conscience, actually to exercise them at such time of the
day, as either equity of divine Law, or of Lawful superiors does enjoyne.

Tho. Chartw. Replye. 2. part. page 193. In making Church ceremonies
(concerning time of ceasing from labor on Holy Days) respect must be had,
what the common sort may do: even as it is in a musical concent, where the
sweeter or finer voice is not always taken, but that which will best accord
with the Quire.
Now the natural equity of divine Law, and the positive precepts of superiors,
command no longer space of time for actual performance of religious offices
upon the Lord's Holy Days, then such, as both is necessary, for Gods solemn
worship, and for the spiritual edification of Christian people: and likewise
such as may be performed of all well affected persons, without surcharging, or
exceeding the natural strength, and ability of body or mind. For people must
serve the Lord with a free and joyful heart: Psalm. 100.2. 2 Chronicles. 30.23. But
the imposing such a quantity and continuance of spiritual actions, as
exceeds the ordinary ability of humane faculties, choaketh rejoicing and
comfort in the services which men perform, and makes the same a tedious burden.

And this seems to me to have bin a prime motive, to our religious
Governors, of allowing the people of the land, some recreations (not
prohibited by our Laws) upon the Holy Days. For if they should (upon Puritan
principles) restrain them wholly from all repast: the Holy Day would be more
unwelcome to them than the plough-day: and besides it might engender in peoples
minds, a distaste of their present religion, and manner of serving God.

A formal answer to the Argument.
1 To the major Proposition.

Those things which are lets and hindrances of holiness, (that is of
performing religious duties:) by way of opposition and contrary quality, (to
wit, hypocrisy, profaneness, etc.) and likewise those things which are such,
by opposition to any Divine or Ecclesiastical Precept may not lawfully be
done: but those things which hinder the actual exercise of holy duties, at
such hours as such actual exercise, is not necessary, necessitate praecepti,
may be done upon that day, which is GOD'S Holy Day.

2 The minor Proposition is denied. For honest sports and recreations which are
used at such time of the day, as the Law of the Church gives license, are not
lets and hindrances of religious holiness, necessary to be performed at the
same time.

Lastly, this argument is grounded upon a false supposition: namely, that
Christians under the Evangelicall Law, are subject to the letter of the fourth
Commandment, in respect of a precise and definite quantity of hours: and that
it is sin to cease from the actual exercise of holy religious duties, during
the whole space of the hours of the day, prescribed by the old Law.

But although this carry a show of godliness, yet in very deed it is nothing
else, but a superstitious Judicial fancy.

Observation the sixth, Touching the motives inducing the Christian Church to
the religious observance of the Lord's Day.
I observe nothing in all Antiquity declaring their judgment to have been,
That the keeping holy the Lord's Day is commanded by the fourth Precept of the
Decalogue: or that the religious observance thereof, is grounded upon any other
express or formal precept of holy Scripture John Sprint. d. Sab. page 27. The
Christian Sabbath or Lord's Day has absolute Commandment in the word
.

Some of the ancient, and namely S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 10. Iam
hinc ab initio (...) insinuat nobis Deus doctrina^ istam, erudiens in circulo
Hebdomadae, diem unum inregrum, (...), segregandu^ and reponendum in
spiritualem operationem.
, reflecting upon the equity of the 4th Commandment, exhort Christians to cast
their eye upon the Law of the old Sabbath, and to consider the equity thereof,
and that it is reasonable for them, to proportion their actions in such manner,
as that having employed six days of the week upon their worldly occasions,
they would not think much to bestow one day in spiritual and religious duties.

Now the Primitive Church, made choice of and preferred the Lord's Day before
the other weekly days, upon these grounds and motives following:

1 The old Sabbath of the fourth Commt. was ceased, and abolished by the death
and Resurrection of Christ Aug. d. Genesis ad lit. li. 4. ca. 13. Iam vero tempore
gratiae revelatae, observatio illa Sabbati, ablata est ab observatione fidelium.
: and God Almighty had appointed a new form of divine worship, according to
the Evangelicall Law. Now the form of worship being changed Socrat. hist. Eccl
li. 5. ca. 21. Nulla lex a Christo condita Christianis potestatem fecit, ritus
Iudaicos observandi: imo vero contra Apostolus illud plane vetuit, dum non modo
circumcisione^ abrogabat, verum etiam hortabatur, uti de festis nulla fieret
dissensio.
: it was expedient that the outward circumstances of place, and solemn times
should likewise be different from what they were before: and concerning the
times of public and solemn worship, it seemed good to Christians to make
choice of such days especially, wherein our Savior had wrought some gracious
work for man's salvation.

Upon the first day of the week our Savior arose from death to life: and His
Resurrection was a cause of unspeakable joy Humb. c. Graec. Calu^. Constat
Apostolos biduo in moerore fuisse, and propter metum Iudaeorum se occuluisse:
qui die Dominica exhilarati, non solum ipsum festivissimum esse voluerunt,
verumetiam per omnes hebdomadas frequentandum esse duxerunt. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118
, and comfort to all that presently, or in future times believed on him.

Also upon this day, the heavenly Spirit of light, and grace, and peace, and
verity, descended upon the holy Apostles, and upon the little flock, being
altogether in one place, upon the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.1, 2.3, 4.

And for this reason espeially, namely, because this day was honored with
Christ's Resurrection: and it was a day on which the light of heavenly grace,
began first to shine to the world: and lastly, it was a day of gladness and
exultation, because of Christ his victory over death, and his visible
apparition to his Disciples, Andr. Caesar. in Apoc. 1. ca. 2. Divino spiritu
afflatus, auramque nactus spiritualem, (...), die Do^inico qui propter
resurrectione^, prae caeteris celebris habetur. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 2. Read
before page 209.
etc. The Primitive Church could have made choice of no other day of the week,
more proper and convenient, for the solemn and religious service and worship
of Christ.

It was in the free election of the Church, to appoint what day, or days, or
times, she thought good, or found convenient for religious duties: For the
Evangelicall Law has not expressly determined, any certain day or time Socrat.
ibid. Neque Servator, neque Apostoli istud observandu^, lege aliqua
praeceperunt. Apostolis propositum fuit, non ut leges de festis diebus
celebrandis sancirent: sed ut recte vivendi rationis, and pietatis nobis
authors essent. Orig. in Genesis Hom. 10. Chrysostom. Hom. in eos qui novilun.
observant. Hier. in Gal. 4.
: and those actions or circumstances which are not determined by divine
Precept, are permitted to the liberty and authority of the Church, to be
determined and appointed. And accordingly the Church proceeded, concerning the
Lord's Day: and because the religious observance of this day began in the
Apostles age, and one of the prime Apostles styled the same the Lord's Day, and
because it was appointed upon so good reasons; the observation thereof, has
continued in all Ages since the Apostles. Neither have Christians at any time
judged it reasonable or convenient, to alter such an ancient and well-grounded
custom, which is commonly reputed to be an Apostolical Tradition Covar. var.
Resol. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 19 Non temere opinabimur, hanc diei Dominicae
observationem, ab Apostolis divina institutione edoctis constitutam fuisse. Eam
etenim legimus traditione Ecclesiastica, semper in Ecclesia Catholica
sanctificatam fuisse, ut tandem licet ab humano instituto Apostolorum
processerit, and originem duxerit, nimis indecorum esset eam ab Ecclesia mutari.
.

The Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the Lord's Day, and other
Holy Days.
Augustan. Confess. Sect. 16. We teach, that Traditions are not to be
condemned, which have a religious end, namely, that all things be performed in
the Church, decently, and in good order, and which command nothing, repugnant
to the Divine Law; namely, Traditions concerning Holy Days, the Lord's Day, the
Feast of the Nativity, Easter, etc. And these Divines approve, that saying in
the Tripartit History li. 9. It was not the Apostles mind to set down Laws
concerning Holy Days, but to preach godliness and virtuous life.

Helvet. Confess. cap. 24. We give not place to Jewish observations and
superstitions: neither judge we that one day is holier than another, neither
think we, that God takes delight in resting from labor: and we observe the
Lord's Day, and not the Sabbath, according to a free choice, and not by Divine
Precept.

Calvin. Institut. li. 2. cap. 8. n. 34. The ancient Fathers substituted the
Lord's Day, in place of the Sabbath, not without special reason. For it was
the day of Christ's resurrection, and which finished all legal shadows: and
Christians were admonished by this alteration of the day, not to adhere to a
shadowie ceremony. Nevertheless I do not much insist upon the number of
seven, that I would bring the Church in bondage to that number: neither will I
condemn Christian Churches, which appoint other solemn days for religious
assemblies, so as this be done without superstition.

Beza In Cant. Salom. Hom. 30. Concerning the fourth Commandment, I suppose it
is agreed upon among Christians, that the same is abrogate so far as it was
ceremonial: but not in such manner, as that the Lord's Day ought to be
observed, according to the manner of the Jewish Sabbath, etc. That Christians
upon that day should abstain from their daily labors, besides such time of
the day as was appointed for public assemblies: This was neither commanded in
the Apostles days, nor yet observed until Christian Emperors enjoined the
same, to the end people might not be abstracted from holy meditations: neither
in those days was the same precisely or strictly observed.

Bullinger in Apoc. 1.10: Christian Churches entertained the Lord's Day, not
upon any Commandment from God, but according to their free choice. Idem Decad.
p. 2. Sermon. 4.

Pet. Mart. in Genesis 2. That people rest from labor one day of the week, to
serve God, is not a mere device of man's brain, neither did it only
appertain to Mose's Law, but it had beginning from hence. Genesis 2. Now, if
you demand why this seventh day is not still retained in the Church, our answer
is that we are to have all days such, as we may rect in them from our own
works. But that one day be chosen for God's external worship, rather than
another, the Church had liberty from CHRIST, to establish that which it judged
most convenient.

Hospinian. D. Orig. Fest. ca. 2. It is natural that there should be set and
appointed days of resting from labor, Brentius Com. in Lev. 23. Observatur
dies Dominica in Christianismo: haec autem observatio non est authoritate
Evangeliu^ mandata, sed tantu^ publico Ecclesiae consensu recepta.
and assembling together for God's service, etc. But the determination of these
days, obliges not the conscience in the new Testament, as it did in the Old:
but only by reason of scandal and contempt. Neither are we so tied to
certain days or times, but that in case of necessity, or if it shall be more
commodious, we may alter these days and appoint other: neither are the days
determined for religious duties, holier than other common days, in respect of
any mystery, figure, or signification, but only in regard of discipline and
order, etc. Idem cap. 8. The Lord's Day from the Apostles age, has been a
solemn day, notwithstanding, we find not the same commanded by any
Apostolical Law: but it is collected from hence, that the observation thereof
was free, because Epiphanius and S. Augustine testify, that on the fourth and
the sixth days of the week, Church assemblies were held, as well as upon the
Lord's Day. Melanct. loc. com. expos. 3. praecepti. Zanch. in 4. Praecept. cap.
19. pa. 610. We read in no place (of the New Testament, that the Apostles
commanded the observation of this day: but what they and other believers were
wont to do: and therefore they left free (to the liberty of the Church,) the
observance of this day. Brentius in Exodus 20. Herbrand. Annot. in Confess.
Witeberg. cap. 59. p. 453. Chemnitius exam. Council. Trid. part. 4. d. festis.
Centur. Magdeburg. tom. 2. p. 119. Hemming. Enchirid. p. 328. Pareus in Romans
14. p. 1512. Marbach. in Genesis 2. p. 23. and in Exodus 20. p. 165. Vrsin. Chap.
p. 775. Battus in Epist. ad Gal. Disp. 16. These. 4. d. Fest. Christianor.
Zepper. d. leg. lib. 1. ca. 1. Muscul. loci Comm. in 4. praecept. page 174.
Herbrand. compend. Theolog. d. leg. page 347. Poliand. Rivertus. Walaeus.
Thysius in Synopsi Purior. Theol. Disp. 21. Brent. in Exodus 20. and in Lev.
cap. 23. Rivet. in Exodus 20. in 4. mandat. page 192 Co^cesso quod dies illa, ab
ipso Apostolorum tempore fuit vocata Dominica, tum quia Dominus in ea
resurrexit, tum quia in eadem celebrati fuerunt conventus Ecclesiastici: non
sequitur tamen id a Christo vel ab Apostolis fuisse institutum and sancitum,
and ad jus Divinum debere referri, sed potius ad consuetudinem quandam, quae
tum incoeperit and paulatim postea invaluerat, jusque aliquod constituerit sed
Ecclesiasticum, quod proinde in liberate and potestate Ecclesiae fuerit
relictum, pro ratione circumstantiarum, ut eundem diem vel servaret, vel
mutaret, si ratio aut necessitas aliqua suaderet: servata semper anima legis,
de tempore apto and opportuno, ad publicum Dei cultum. Isenman. Annot. in
confess. Augustan. ca. 9. De diebus Festis in Ecclesia docemus, eos qui
antiquitus ad aedificationem and utilem ordinationem, non ad impietatem and
invocationem mortuorum instituti sunt, obedienter esse observandos: non quidem
Iudaica servitute, sed Christiana liberate. Sicut Paulus de ea liberate
docet. Quare si quis nostrorum Auditorum iis abutitur ad licentiam, aut temere
contemnit, non probatur a nobis, sed reprehenditur.


An examination of Arguments used by Master D. and Master Cl. for the religious
observation of the LORD'S Day, by virtue of the Law of the fourth Commandment.
Ioh. D. R. Cl. Expos. of the ten Commandments, page 117. Edition 18.

The purpose of GOD in this Commandment, is: To teach us, to set apart the
seventh day wholly, from all worldly affairs, to the exercises of Religion and
Mercy.

Answ. We must understand the purpose of GOD, in the fourth Commandment, by
His own Word and Revelation Ambros. Epist lib. 5. ep. 3. Orig. in Exodus Hom.
13. hoc divinari magis est, quam probare vel explanare, ubi quod dicitur, non
de authoritate Scripturarum munitur. Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 2. Nec ullum
fundamentum aut firmitatem possunt habere, quae nullis Divinarum vocum
fulciuntur Oraculis. Aug. de Bapt. c. Don. li. 2. cap. 6. Non afferamus
stateras dolosas, ubi appendamus quod volumus pro arbitrio nostro, etc. Id. de
unit. Eccles. cap. 3. Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis, sed ^^^diamus, haec
dicit Dominus, etc.
: and not from humane presumption. And we are taught by Divine Revelation, That
GOD Almighty delivered the Law of the Sabbath, to the Children of Israel only,
and not to other Nations, unless they became Proselytes: And therefore it was
not the purpose of GOD, by that Commandment, to teach us Gentiles, us
Christians, but to teach the Jews under the old Law, to set apart the seventh
day; and before the Passion and Resurrection of our Savior, this Law obliged
the Jews and Proselytes only, and not other Nations: After our Savior's
Passion and Resurrection, the obligation of that Law, for the weekly
observation of the seventh day, ceased, both in respect of Jews and Gentiles:
for if it be still in force, why does not M. D. instruct his Auditors to
observe Saturday Sabbath?

Ioh. Sprint Of the Christian Sabb. To the Reader. The first day of the week
called Sunday, is in a peculiar respect the Lord's day, and sanctified to the
performing the solemn worship of God: Upon the grounds of God's moral and
perpetual Law of the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue: And by the special
will of Christ establishing it through his Apostles practice, and doctrine to
the same purpose, instead of the Jews Sabbath.
Ioh. D. Because there be many that are not persuaded of the continuance of the
Sabbath, and account the keeping of the seventh day in the number of those
Ceremonies, which be abrogated by CHRIST, as belonging to the Jews: Therefore
it is requisite, that we proved and confirm, by sound reasons out of GOD'S
Word, that this Commandment is moral, and perpetual, and as carefully to be
kept under the Gospel, as under the Law, and to continue in force so long as
any of the other Commandments, even so long as there is a world, and a
militant Church in it.

Answ. 1. The Many, which are not persuaded of the continuance of the seventh
day Sabbath, are all, or the most orthodoxall Christians, since the Apostles
days: all the Primitive Fathers, all the holy Martyrs and Confessors, and all
understanding men of modern times. Read before, page 6. 163.

And although the seventh day Sabbath had not been a legal Ceremony, Yet if
it were only a positive Moral precept A. Hal. 3. q. 32. m. 5. art. 1. Morale
disciplinae.
, the obligation thereof ceased under the Gospel, as appears by instance in
the Judicial Laws. But we are able to demonstrate by as strong arguments,
that the old Sabbath was Ceremonial, in respect of the particular day, and the
circumstances thereof: As these new Masters can prove, the Feasts of Passover
and Pentecost were such.

Secondly, If the fourth Commandment, concerning the keeping of the seventh
day, be moral and perpetual: Then it is not such, in respect of the first day
and eight day: For this Precept requires not the observing of two weekly
days, But of that one only day, which it specifieth in that commandment.

Ioh. D. The reasons which GOD uses in the Text of Exodus 20. etc. for the
confirmation of the morality and perpetuity of the Sabbath are diverse.

First, God has permitted men to have six days for their ordinary travel,
and therefore it is equal to yield Him the seventh.

Secondly, The Sabbath is the Lord's, and therefore a Christian may no more
take it from Him, than a Jew.

Thirdly, GOD rested upon the seventh day: and His example is to be followed by
Christians, as well as by Jews.

Fourthly, It is by divine institution a blessed Day to them that keep it: and
we do no less stand in need of GOD'S blessing in these days, than the
Jews.

The reasons therefore of keeping Holy the seventh day, being such as are
common, and concern Christians, as well as Jews: It must be granted the Law
of the fourth Commandment concerning the seventh day Sabbath, is perpetual,
and still in force.

Answ. If the reasons which GOD uses, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. conclude for any
Sabbath, it is for the Saturday Sabbath: but they are altogether inconsequent
for the Sunday Sabbath.

1 God's allowing six days of the week for a man's own work, concludes not
a necessity of keeping holy the first day of the week, rather than the sixth,
or the seventh.

2 Every day of the week, and of the year is the Lord's, and the Sunday is no
more the Lord's, by the Law of the fourth Commandment, than the Friday: for
the Lord's Day of that fourth Commandment is the Saturday.

3 GOD rested upon the seventh day, and therefore if His example obliges
Christians to immitation, then they must rest upon the Saturday.

4 The keeping holy the seventh day of the fourth Commandment, was a means to
bring God's blessing upon the Israelites, and so likewise was the observation
of the whole Judicial and Ceremonial Law, Deuteronomy. 7.12. But can we hence
conclude, the perpetual obligation of those Laws?

The Church of CHRIST believes, that the religious observation of the Lord's
Day, and of other Holy days appointed by the Church, is a means to obtain
God's blessing for Christian people: But this blessing depends not upon keeping
holy the Sabbath, of the fourth Commandment, for Saturday is that Sabbath, and
not the Sunday, or Lord's day.

Ioh. D. Argues for the morality of the Sabbath, as follows.
The Law of the Sabbath is Moral and perpetual, because it was given in man's
innocence, when Adam was perfect, and needed no Ceremony to lead him to CHRIST:
nor to signify any spiritual resting from sin.

And if it were needful for man, when he was without sin, and had no clogge
of corruption, nor evil example to hinder him, or to seduce him, then much
more now.

Answ. 1. The Sabbath on which God rested, and which he blessed and
sanctified, Genesis 2. was not the Sunday, or Lord's Day, but the Saturday.

Secondly, whereas these Sabbatizers affirm, that the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment was ordained in the state of innocence, when man was perfect, and
needed no Ceremony, etc. They have not a mind to consider, that in the state
of innocence, there was no servitude or bondage Greg. Mor. l. 2^. c. 10 Omnes
homines natura aequales genuit, etc. diversitas accessit ex vitio. Homo
animalibus, and irrationabilibus, non autem caeteris hominibus, natura
praelatus est. Gammach. in Thom. 1.2. quaest. 95. cap. 1. In statu innocentiae,
nullum futuru^ erat Imperium Despoticu^ and herile, quale est Dominorum in
servos.
, no manservant, or maidservant, neither any servile labor: and consequently
no Sabbath Day, ordained for a day of rest, from servile labor.

The Sabbath therefore of Genesis, and of the fourth Commandment, were of a
different quality: and the perpetual obligation of the Law of the fourth
Commandment in respect of a seventh-day Sabbath, cannot be maintained by the
second of Genesis.

Thirdly, admitting the Sabbath of Genesis, to have been observed as a moral
precept: it will be impossible to prove, it was naturally Moral, but only
such, by virtue of GOD'S positive Law. Read before page 34.

I. D. The manner of delivery, confirms the perpetuity of the Sabbath.

1 God by his own voice commanded it. 2 He wrote it in Tables of stone. 3 He
placed it in the Arc.
Now, if all the ten Commandments were written altogether by GOD, and no
exception made, whereby the Sabbath should be inferior to the rest, a man may
as well rend any of the other away as this.

Answ. If these divine actions conclude the perpetual morality of the Sabbath:
then the seventh day Sabbath is perpetually moral, and not the Sunday or
Lord's Day: for the Saturday was the day pronounced, written, and placed in the
Arc, in such manner as the Objector speaks: and Mr. D. his authority,
magisterially pronouncing, that these Divine actions, make precepts simply and
perpetually moral: Persuaded Theoph. Brab. to resolve to dye a Martyr, in
defense of the perpetual obligation of the old Law, of the Saturday Sabbath
T.B. I am tied in conscience, rather to depart with my life, than with this
truth. So captivated is my conscience and enthralled to the Law of my God.
. Read before page 24, etc.

Secondly, it is utterly false, that God's immediate speaking, makes a precept
simply moral; for then the precept of circumcision should have been such,
because GOD himself immediately delivered it, Genesis 17.1. When Abraham was
nintie years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abraham, and He said unto
him, (...). And if GOD'S own writing, that is, His immediate forming the
characters of the fourth Commandment be an argument of the eternity of the
thing written: How comes it to pass, that all those characters, written by
God's own finger, are perished and lost, so many ages since? Read before page
116.

I. D. We have the same Commandment and authority for the Lord's Day, which
the Jews had for their day.
1 It is called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. because Christ Jesus instituted it,
as a special memory of his Resurrection.

2. The Apostles by the authority of the Spirit, which always assisted them,
in their ministerial offices, did alter the day, and themselves kept it, and
ordained it to be kept, in all Churches, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.

Answ. 1. If we have the same Commandment, and authority for the Lord's Day,
which the Jews had for the old Sabbath: then God Almighty has pronounced,
written, and ingraved the Law, for the Lord's Day, as he did in times past for
the Sabbath Day: and it may be that Ad Calendas Graecas M.D. and M.Cl. or their
heirs and assigns, will show us this Law.

2 If Christ instituted the Lord's Day, in memory of his Resurrection, then the
Lord's Day is not the Sabbath which was instituted in Paradise: nor yet the
Sabbath concerning which it is said in the fourth Commandment, Remember the
Sabbath day, to keep it holy, etc.

3 If the Apostles altered the Sabbath into the Sunday, then the observation of
the Sunday is grounded upon Apostolical Authority: and not upon the Law given
in Mount Sinai.

I. D. Page 124.
G W. Of the Sab. p. 1. chapter 3. As no man may say the Sacrament is abolished,
because the sign is changed: no more may any man say, the Sabbath is
abolished, because the time is changed, page 36.
If it will not hold, we have not the same Sacraments, as concerning the
outward seals which the Jews had, for they had circumcision and the Paschal
Lamb: therefore we have no seventh-day sanctified, because that day is changed.

Answ. This instance makes against the objectors Tenent. For they maintain
that the Law of the fourth Commandment is in force, and obliges Christians,
to the observation of the Lord's Day. But in their instance the Law of
circumcision and of the Passe-over is expired and abolished, as well as the
sacramental, and ceremonious actions, commanded by that Law: Therefore if the
old Sabbath which was the subject of the Law of the fourth Commandment, is
expired, then the Law it self, obliges not Christians, to the observation of
the Lord's Day. For the prime subject, or material object of a Law, is a
substantial part thereof: and therefore if that be taken away, or destroyed,
the Law it self cease.

An examination of a passage of D. Bownd, in his Treatise of the Sabbath. page
247.
We Christians should take our selves as straightly bound to rest upon the
Lord's Day, as the Jews were upon their Sabbath. For seeing it is one of the
moral Commandments, it binds us as well as them: for they are all of equal
authority, and do bind all men alike.

Therefore, when as in the other nine Commandments we do truly judge our
selves to be as much restrained from any thing in them forbidden, and as
precisely bound to do any thing in them commanded, as ever the Jews were: and
in all those we put no difference betwixt our selves and them: as in keeping
our selves from Images, from blasphemy, murder, theft, adultery, etc. Why
should we then imagine that in this one the LORD has privileged us, above
them? or think, that when he gave his Laws indifferently to all mankind, his
meaning should be, to give a dispensation to the Gentiles R. B. Light of faith.
It was given to Adam and his posterity, not to Abraham: and therefore binds
Jews and Gentiles page 144.
, above the Jews in this one?

D. B. His Position is: Christians under the law of grace, are as strictly
bound to rest upon the Lord's Day, as the Jews were upon their Sabbath.

His Argument, All moral Commandments are of equal authority, and were
indifferently given to all mankind, to Gentiles as well as Jews: and they bind
all men alike.

The fourth Commandment is simply and perpetually moral, and not ceremonial,
in whole or in part, p. 40.

Therefore the fourth Commandment is of equal authority, and binds Jews
and Gentiles in one and the same manner.

Now the fourth Commandment enjoined the Jews, a careful, precise, and exact
rest, upon the Sabbath Day, P. 124. And the Sunday, or Lord's Day, is the
Christian Sabbath, commanded by the fourth precept of the Decalogue: therefore
Christians under the Gospel, are to observe as precise and strict a rest upon
the Dominicall-day, as the Jews did upon the Legall-Sabbath. And like as the
other nine Commandments prohibiting Images, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, and
Theft, oblige all mankind equally, and without any difference or dispensation:
so this fourth Commandment prohibiting secular works and actions,
recreations, etc. obliges without all difference, and admits no manner of
dispensation:

Answ. The Doctors position, to wit, Christians are as strictly bound to rest
upon the Sunday, as the Jews were upon the Legal Sabbath: is not orthodoxall.

My reasons:

1 The Jews were literally and expressly commanded, to observe a strict rest
upon their Sabbath: but Christians have received no such commandment:

The legal rest of the Jews, was typical, and ceremonial: read before Page
163. And it appertained to the servitude of the old legal covenant: read
before Page 168. It was commanded the Jews, to be a note distinctive, betwixt
them and other Nations: and if you take away the ceremonial end, many branches
of that abstinence and rest, had no profitable use, Exodus 16.23, 29. and Chap.
35.3.

3 The ancient Catholic Church constantly taught, that strictness of rest
upon the Sabbath Day, is taken away by Christ, under the Gospel Aug. c. duas
Ep. Pelag. li. 3. cap. 4. Christus nobis abstulit illud gravissimum multaru^
observationu^ jugum, etc. Ne Sabbato, s^pteno dierum volumine redeunte, ab
operibus etiam necessariis quiescamus, etc. Sed ea spiritualiter intellecta
teneamus: remotisque umbris significantibus, in rerum ipsarum quae
significantur luce vigilemus. Greg. M. li. 11. Ep. 3. Pervenit ad me quosdam
perversi spiritus homines, prava inter vos aliqua, and sanctae fidei adversa
seminasse, ita ut die Sabbati aliquid operari prohibeant. Quos quid aliud quam
Antichristi praedicatores dixerim, qui veniens diem Dominicum and Sabbatum, ab
omni faciet opere custodiri. Amb. Ep. 72. Sabbati diem feriatum esse debere
observabatur ex lege, ita ut si quis onus aliquod lignorum portasset, mortis
reus fieret: nunc autem diem ipsum, and oneribus subeundis, and negotiis
obcundis, sine poena advertimus deputari.
. And I have proved at large, in a precedent passage, that in the Primitive
Church, Christian people of devout quality, used to work upon the Lord's Day,
after that the public services and offices of the Church were ended. Read
Page 219.

The Doctor's Arguments in confirmation of his former Position, are defective.
1 It is a palpable error to affirm, That the fourth Commandment is simply
and entirely moral.

For if it is such, then all the parts, and circumstances thereof, to wit, the
particular day of the week, specified and commanded, and the particular reason
and motive upon which the Lord Himself grounded his Precept, for the
observance of that special day, are simply and totally moral; and
consequently, Christians are obliged by the fourth Commandment, to keep holy
the seventh day of every week, from the Creation.

2 The Sunday is a distinct day from the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. It
is an Evangelicall day, grounded upon the Resurrection Basil. in Hexam. Hom. 2.
Dominicu^ diem, quem Resurrectio Domini honor praeciptio affecit, (...). Aug.
Ep. 86. Praeponitur Dies Dominicus, fide resurrectionis. Leo Epist. 93. ca. 4.
Dominicum Diem, quem resurrectio nostri Salvatoris nobis consecravit, etc.

Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Die solis omnes public convenimus, quod is primus, est
dies, in quo Deus tenebras, and materia^, cum mutasset, mundum effecit. Et quod
eodem die Jesus Christus conservator noster a mortuit excitatus est.


, and not upon the Creation: and by the ordinance of the holy Catholic Church,
(not by the Law of the fourth Commandment) is succeeds the legal Sabbath.

Bap^isme succeeds Circumcision: Ordination of Evangelical Pastors,
succeeds Leviticall Consecration. But neither Baptism nor Ordination, are in
force under the Gospel, because of the Old Law of Circumcision, and Leviticall
Consecration.

There is a moral equity, in the Leviticall Law of Consecration, namely, that
no man shall take upon him Ecclesiastical function, without lawful calling,
Hebr. 5.4.

Likewise there is a moral equity, in the old Law of the fourth Commandment,
that the servants of God and Christ, shall depute a weekly day, or some other
sufficient time, to the solemn religious service of their great Lord and
Master. But more then this cannot be derived from the fourth Commandment. For
the Letter of that Commandment, is express for Saturday: and by way of
inference, no more can be concluded for Sunday, then for part of Friday
Constantine commanded that the sixth day should be kept in memory of Christ's
death on the Cross. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 8.
, and Saturday.

For as GOD Almighty rested from the work of prime Creation, on Saturday; so
our Savior rested from all his satisfactory works of Man's Redemption, upon
the latter part of Good Friday, and the Saturday following Isidor. Hisp. Orig.
lib. 6. ca. 18. Sabbatum ab Hebrae is ex interpretatione nominis sui, requies
nominatur, quod Deus in ipso, perfecto mundo, requievisset. Siquidem and in eo
die, requievit in sepulchro Dominus, ut quietis illius mysterium confirmaret.
.

The Doctor's bold assertion, that the Sabbath Law, indifferently obliged Jews
and Gentiles: and that the Gentiles have no more liberty to labor, or to use
civil recreation, upon the Sabbath, then they have, to worship Images, or to
blaspheme, steal, murder, commit fornication, etc. is destitute of all truth.
For,

1. The Gentiles Justin. Mart. c. Yryph. page 243. Gentes quae in illum
credunt, etc. Etiamsi Sabbata non observent, etc. omnino sanctam Dei
haereditatem adibunt.
were not called, either Exodus 16.23. or Exodus 20.8. when the Sabbaticall Law
was delivered: and if they had presumed, to come near Mount Sinai, at the
promulgation of the Law, they must have been stoned, Exodus 19.12. And it is
expressly delivered in Scripture, that the Gentiles had not the Law revealed to
them, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there so great, that has statutes and
judgments so righteous, as I set before you this day? Psalm. 147.19. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he
has not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his
laws, Romans 9.4.

But no Law binds without promulgation and manifestation to the Subjects.
Read before page 33.34.36.

2 Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc. are sins against the Law of Nature, Romans 1.19,
etc. Chap. 2.14. and they are prohibited, quia sunt mala, because they are
simply evil in their inward quality: But the Doctor himself acknowledged D.
B. Of the Sabbath, lib. 1. page 11. Indeed this Law was given in the
beginning, not so much by the light of Nature, as the rest of the nine
Commandments were, but by express word, etc. For though this be in the law
of Nature, that some days should be separated to God's worship, etc. Yet, that
it should be every seventh day, that the Lord Himself set down, etc.
, that observing the Sabbath was no part of the Law of Nature: And every wise
man understands, that to labor on the Sabbath, was evil only, quia
prohibitum, because it was prohibited by a positive precept.

Thirdly, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. are formally and eternally
evil: and the negative law prohibiting them, admits no Dispensation Aquin. 1.
2. q. 97. art. 4. Cajetan. ibid. Conrad. ibid. Medina. ibid. Suarez. Vasques.
Salas. Maerat. de leg. disp. 7. sect. 7. Gammach. Malder.
. But to work and labor upon the Sabbath Day, was permitted by GOD Himself
in sundry cases: Read before page 36.

R. B. His Argument for the Sunday Sabbath, from the Day of Resurrection.
The fourth Commandment stands in force to us, and the LORDS Resurrection,
resting from the work of our Redemption, and Rejoicing in it, blessing it with
that work, with diverse apparitions that very day, and sanctifying it, with
spending it among His Disciples, in His presence bodily now glorified, in
heavenly expositions and operations upon their hearts, and in return of it at
Whitsontide, with the Mission of the Holy Ghost: This, I say, applies and
determines it to this day, we now observe. And as the Jews are sent to seek
the precise day in the LORD'S resting from the works of Creation: So we are
sent to the rest, from the work of Redemption.

The institution of this day, is clearly in the very work of the
Resurrection: As the institution of the seventh day was in the work of
finishing the Creation.

The maine reason of the Jews Sabbath, is, because it was the Sabbath of the
Lord: In like manner, ours is the Sabbath of the Lord Christ, when He had
finished the work of our Redemption. For which cause He takes this Name: The
Son of man is even Lord of the Sabbath. As if in more words He should say:
When God the Father had once ended the making of the World, and published
Himself to be the Lord of that rest, and dedicated it to Himself, giving it
the name of the Sabbath of the Lord: In like manner, when I shall have finished
the work of man's Redemption, I will rest, and have the day of my rest,
dedicated to my self: for which cause, I say, that the Son of man is even
Lord of the Sabbath also, and it shall be called the Lord's Day.

G. W. of the Sabbath, Chap. 3. John Sprint d. Sab. page 17. If the rest of God
the Father were the cause of sanctifying a day, It follows that where a
greater and more excellent rest is, there must of necessity follow a greater
sanctification. But the rest of the Son of God is a greater and more excellent,
by how much the work of Redemption is more excellent than the work of
Creation, etc.
As God the Father did sanctify the seventh day from the Creation, by his
resting upon it from the Creation: So did God the Son sanctify this seventh
from the Redemption, Because that this work of the Redemption being a greater
work than that of the Creation: and his rest from affliction being a greater
rest than from labor: it better deserved to bear the name and credit of the
day, than that from the Creation.

H. B. That day which is the Day of the LORD'S rest, from the most glorious
work that ever the LORD wrought and finished, Is that day which the Lord has
commanded to be solemnly sanctified, and holily rested upon, by His people.

But the first day of the week, is the day of the Lord's rest, from the most
glorious work that ever the LORD wrought and finished.

Therefore the first day of the week is that day which the Lord has commanded
to be solemnly sanctified, and holily rested upon by His people.

The Assumption cannot be denied, that the first day of the week was the day
of the Lord's rest, from the most glorious work that the Lord ever wrought and
finished, to wit, the work of Redemption, from which he rested in the
Resurrection.

Again, it cannot but be confessed, that that Day is to be sanctified for the
Sabbath day, which is the Day of the Lord's rest, since the Commandment says:
Remember the day of the Sabbath, or rest, to sanctify it: He says not,
Remember the seventh Day to sanctify it, But, Remember the Sabbath day to
sanctify it. That seventh day which must be sanctified, depends upon the
Sabbath Day, or day of the Lord's rest, on what day soever it falls: Now the
day of Christ's Resurrection, which brought in the most glorious rest, was the
first day of the week.

Answ. 1. It is acknowledged Aug. Nulla falfa doctrina est, quae non aliqua
vera intermiscet.
, that the work of humane Redemption, was a most gracious and glorious work:
And that in three respects. 1. The fountain and original cause thereof, was
the riches of the mercy of GOD, and the abundance of his love to mankind,
Ephesians. 2.4. John 3.16. 1 John 4.9, 10. Secondly, it was effected by
extraordinary means Bernard. de Dilig. Deo. Non solum de me, sed de omni
quoque quod factum est, scriptu^ est, Dixit, and facta sunt: At vero qui me
tantum and semel dicendo, fecit, In reficiendo profecto and dixit multa, et
gessit mira, and pertulit dura, nec tantum dura, sed indigna.
, to wit, not merely by the Word, and imperative power of GOD, as Genesis 1.3.
but by the Mission, Incarnation, Humiliation, and Passion of the only, and
dearly beloved Son of GOD, John 3.16. Gal. 4.4. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, etc. Thirdly,
The fruit, benefit, and effect thereof, was glory and honor to God Almighty,
Luke 2.14. And glory, honor, and eternal life and happiness to every one
which believes, and works good, both to the Jew, and to the Gentile.

Secondly, The Doctrine of our Church is: That the dearly beloved Son of GOD,
JESUS CHRIST, made perfect our Redemption by his death Collect. at the
ordination of Priests.
. To wit, the whole work of Man's Redemption, which was to be performed by the
payment of a price, and satisfaction for sin. But this great work of humane
Redemption, was not effected by the Resurrection of CHRIST, but by his
obedience and sacrifice on the Cross Gammach. in 1. 2. quaest. 104. cap. 4.
Meritum Christi in ejus passione and morte omnino terminatum fuit: nec potuit
Christus vel in sepulchro, vel in resurrectione aliquid mereri, quia non erat
amplius viator. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 103. art. 3. ad. 2. Mysterium Redemptionis
humani generis completum fuit in passione Christi: unde tunc Dominus dixit,
Consummatum est, Joan. 19. Maerat. de leg. Disp. 18. Sect. 3. Christus humanum
genus non redemit nisi condigna pro peccatis ejus satisfactione exhibita: pro
iis autem non satisfecit nisi per modum condigni meriti. At Resurrectione sua
nihil nobis meruit. Omne enim ejus pro nobis meritum, in morte terminatum fuit.
Similiter Suar. Vasq. Ragusa. Hurtado. de Mendoza.
: and it was fully wrought and finished, upon the Passion-Friday, when after
our Savior had said, Consummatum est, It is finished, He gave up the ghost,
John 19.30. Heb. 10.14.

Thirdly, but besides the price and ransom, solved by Christ our Savior, for
the redemption of all men, 1 Timothy 2.6. 1. Cor. 6.20. and 7.23. It was necessary
to man's actual deliverance out of captivity, that the fruit, effect and
benefit of Christ's redemption, should be applied, and conferred Prosp. ad
object. Vincent. c. 1. Poculum immortalitatis quod confectum est de infirmitate
nostra, and virtute divina, habet quide^ in se ut omnibus prosit: sed si non
bibitur, non medetur.
. For without this latter, redemption by payment of a price only, could have
profited nothing. Ioh. 1.12. and 8.24. 1 John 1.7.

Now this work of application, and actual collation of the fruit of CHRIST'S
Passion and Sacrifice on the Cross, upon man, began to be in fieri, on the
Resurrection day; But it was not then finished and perfected. For to the
consummation thereof, all these-actions following were necessary:

1. Our Saviors Ascension into heaven, Ephesians. 4.8. etc.

2 His intercession for us at the right hand of God the Father, Romans 8.34.
Hebrews 7.25. 1 John 2.1.

3 The Mission of the Holy Ghost, upon the Apostles and Primitive Church, Acts
2.4. etc.

4 Apostolical preaching of the Gospel, to the Jews and Gentiles, Luke 24.47.

5 The donation of heavenly grace, prevenient, subsequent, excitant, adjuvant,
or co-operant, 1 Cor. 15.10. Phil. 2.3.

From the premises it is evident:

1 That our blessed Savior rested, and ceased not, from the whole and entire
work of man's Redemption, upon his Resurrection day. For his actions of
collation, and application of the benefit, and ultimate effect of that gracious
work, had beginning upon that day; But they were multiplied, and continued
afterward, and some of them must continue to the worlds end.

2 The Day of Christ's Resurrection, cannot properly be called a Sabbath, or
day of rest: because our Savior was in action on that day, about the necessary
works of perfecting man's Redemption, by way of collation and application. For,
On that day, He declared unto His little flock, the Article of His
Resurrection: He began to instruct His Disciples, and to prepare them to the
great work of Man's salvation, which He intended to perform by their
Apostolical function. Lastly, He inspired them with the Holy Ghost, the Spirit
of Grace and Truth; And conferred upon them the power of Absolving penitent
sinners from their sins, John 20.22, 23.

3 The day of Christ's rest and cessation from ^ll his meritorious,
satisfactory, and propitia^ory actions and passions, necessary to man's
Redemption, was the latter part of Good Friday, (as is before declared.) And
the primitive Church, devoted the first day of the week, to the honor and
service of Christ, not because of Christ's cessation from redemptive actions:
But because it was, primus dies laetitiae Innocent. 1. Ep. ad Decent. n. 4.
Apostoli die Dominico exhilarati, no^ solum ipsum festivissimum esse voluerunt,
verum etiam per omnes hebdomadas frequentandum esse duxerunt. Clem. Romans
Constit. lib. 5. cap. 9 and cap. 19. In Dominicis diebus qui sunt dies
laetitiaru^, etc. Ambr. Epist. 61. In ea Salvator velut sol oriens, etc. luce
Resurrectionis emicuit. August. In Joan. tr. 7. Hilar. prolog. in Psalm. Tertul.
Apol. cap. 16. Deim solis laetitiae indulgemus, etc.
, the first day of joy and gladness, for the Resurrection of our Lord: and the
Sun of righteousness, which had been, as it were, under a cloud, during the
time of His Passion, did then begin to appear in a joyful luster: and the
Disciples a little flock, amazed some days before with sorrow and fear,
began then with joy to draw water out of the well of salvation, Esaias 12.3. and
35.10:

R. B. page 117, 118. The institution of the Lord's Day, is clearly in the
work of Christ's Resurrection: as the institution of the seventh day, was in
the work of finishing the Creation.

The Resurrection applies and determines the Sabbath of the fourt
Commandment to the Lord's Day, etc.

Answ. 1. The Lord's ceasing or resting from his work of prime Creation, was a
motive upon which he took occasion, to institute the seventh day for a
Sabbath: but his Law and precept was the efficient cause of making it a
Sabbath Day. And if the divine precept had been wanting, God's cessation on
that day, had made it no Holy Day. For the Commandment of a superior, only
institutes a Law Maerat. in. 1. 2. d. leg. Disp. 2. Sect. 1. and 2. Quae
perfect lex est, imperium est. Est autem imperium actus superioris,
praecipientis vel prohibentis aliquid subdito. Ib. Lex imperium est, and legem
far est imperare.
: and where there is no imperative act of the superior or Lawgiver, there can
be no Law, to oblige the subject to obedience.

2 If God's resting from the work of creation, was a commandment: yet
Christ's resurrection being not resting, but action and progress in the
redemptive opperations of the application of his redemption, was no
Commandment containing an institution of a new Sabbath. For the ground of the
old Sabbath was rest: and on the contrary, the day of resurrection, was spent
in action.

3 All Commandments are either formal o^ vertuall Aquinas. 1. 2. q. 17. art.
1. Imperans ordinat eu^ cui imperat ad aliquid agendum intimando vel
denunciando. Aliaco. 1 sent. q. 14. Genes. Sepulved. d. sato. li. 3.
, that is, either they are positive and express denuntiations of the
Lawgivers will: or else they contain something implicitly, by which the
subject may collect and infer the superiors will.

But the act of Christ's resurrection contains no formal or express
commandment, for there are no imperative words or sentences in it, to declare
any such thing Silvestran. in 3. sent. Did. 37. lect. 107. Praeceptu est
jussio vel imperiu^ faciendi vel non faciendi aliquid. Dicitur jussio propter
ordinantem: imperium propter legitime ordinantem
. Neither does it contain any implicit, vertuall, or interpretative command:
for it is inconsequent to say, Our Savior arose from death upon one Sunday of
the year, to wit, upon Easter Sunday: therefore his rising from death upon
Easter Day, was an institution, commanding every Sunday of the year, to be the
Sabbath Day, enjoined to be kept holy, by the fourth precept of the Decalogue.

4 If the former argument have any weight, it might conclude something for
Easter Day, because Christ arose from death, as on that day Chrysostom. Sermon. 5. d.
Resur. Recte dicitur dies lucis, in quo fugerunt tenebrae caecitatis.
Exclamarunt qui erant in tenebris, quia viderunt lumen magnum, and qui erant in
regione umbrae mortis, lux. orta est eis. He speaks of Easter Day. Greg. Naz.
orat. d. funere patris. Morbo laborabat and quidem tum, cum sanctum and nobile
Pascha, diem in quam illum dierum Regem, etc. Ambros. Ep. 83. de celebritate
Paschali. Resurrectionis celebritas, die Dominica celebratur. Athanas. Ep. ad
Dracont. Quis enim iis Pascha Evangelizabit si tu absis? quis illis
Evangelizabit Resurrectionis diem?
.

But the Author of the former argument is so far from yielding an imperative
power to Christ's resurrection, to institute Easter Day a Holy Day of the
fourth Commandment: that he says, page 134. To say the Feasts of Christ's
Nativity, Easter, and Whitsuntyde, are of equal authority with the Lord's Day;
what ear can hear with patience The ancient Fathers preferred Easter before
the Sunday. Vid. Novar. Schediasm. l. 8. ca. 23. n. 122, etc.
? Now the reason why this man looks thus a squint on Easter, is, because the
same is made the most solemn Festival of the year, by Ecclesiastical Law,
without the approbation of the zealous fraternity.

The same Author page 122. The Son of man being Lord of the Sabbath: rested
from his work of redemption upon the day of his Resurrection.

Answ. The Son of Man being Lord of the Sabbath, rested from the work of
satisfactory and meritorious redemption, upon Good Friday, before Sun was
set: and he continued in his bed of rest, namely, his Sepulcher, the whole
Sabbath following, until Sunday morning: and he no more rested upon his
Resurrection-day, than he did upon every day after until his Ascension, and
since his Ascension, until the worlds end.

Ib. Ioh. Sprint. d. Sab. p. 16. As when God the Father was Lord of the
Sabbath, there was a Sabbath necessarily kept, unto that Lord of the Sabbath,
and so the Comt. Exodus 20. Esa. 58.13. did tie the conscience: so also when the
Son of God is Lord of the Sabbath, there must of necessity be a Sabbath day
sanctified, and those moral Commandments do no less belong to Christ, and
tie the conscience of the Christian in the new Testament, then they belonged to
God the Father, and tied the conscience of the Jew in the old Testament.
He signified hereby his will, to have that day of his rest, dedicated to his
weekly service, and to be called the Lord's Day. And thus the will of the
Father shall be fulfilled, that as they honored the Father in keeping the
Sabbath betwixt the Creation and Redemption: so they should honor the Son in
keeping the Sabbath, betwixt the Redemption and Consummation of the world.

Answ. No men living dictate more freely than these Novell Masters, and no men
confirm their dictates more idely: for they neither bring Scripture, nor sense
and reason, nor any authority to make good their bold assertions.

1 This man says; Christ signified such a thing, etc. But by what sign
signifies he this Major. 3. d. 37. q. 1. Lex obligatonia est signu^ creaturae
rationali notificatum, eam ligans ad aliquid faciendum, vel non faciendum:
estque triplex; vocale, mentale, and scriptum.
? for he expressed his mind and will, by no formal speech: he expressed the
same by none of his deeds: neither has he expressed it, in his written Word.

2 The Synagogue or Jewish Church honored the Father in keeping the Sabbath
from the days of Moses, and during the old Law, until the time of the
Gospel: and this is all that can be proved out of the Scripture.

The Church also has honored the Son, in keeping holy the Sunday ever since
the Apostles: not by virtue of the Law of the fourth Commandment: For that
Commandment enjoyneth Saturday: but for the same reasons it observes Easter,
Whitsuntide, and the Feast of Christ's Nativity: that is, according to the rule
of Christian liberty: and because it is an act of piety and gratitude, to
honor Christ upon those set and solemn festival days, which by lawful
authority are appointed.

The conclusion of this Treatise.
It is effectually proved, in the precedent disputation, that T. B. his
Doctrine concerning the Old Sabbath, is erroneous, and the Dictates and
Principles, which he received from the Sunday Sabbatizers, are not divine
verities, but bold and blind fancies and presumptions.

It pleased God Almighty, Who resists the proud, but gives grace to the
lowly, to open the eyes of this Errant to discern truth, when it was revealed,
and to submit himself unto it, so that upon conference he became an unfeigned
convert, and in a public and honorable audience, he made this voluntary and
humble submission and confession following.

Whereas I Theophilus Brabourne, have been convented in this honorable Court
of High Commission, for causes Ecclesiastical, for penning and publishing a
certain book, entitled, A defense of that ancient Ordinance of GOD, the
Sabbath Day: Wherein I have rashly and unadvisedly maintained, that the
Saturday of every week, ought necessarily to be our Christian Sabbath Day, now
in the time of the Gospel, according to the rule of the fourth Commandment: I
do now (upon further trial, and better advisement, being in conscience
convinced of mine error) sincerely confess and acknowledge, that my said
Position touching the Saturday Sabbath, was a rash and presumptuous error: and
by these presents, I do here in all obedience and humility, make my humble
submission, unto my holy Mother, the Church of England, promising, that I will
ever hereafter carry my self as an obedient Son, in all peaceable and
dutiful behavior, to my Mother, the Church, and to the godly Fathers, and
Governors thereof.

And as touching the Sunday or Lord's Day, I do confess and acknowledge, that
the same is an Holy Day of the Church: yea, and a most ancient Holy Day, and
very honorable. For S. Ignatius who lived in the days of S. John the Apostle,
calls it the Queen and Princess of days. And other of the Primitive
Fathers, do give the same day very honorable Titles, and did exhort their
auditors, to observe it religiously: and further I do confess and
acknowledge, that this day is religiously to be observed, and that upon the
same grounds, and in the same manner as is directed by the Canons of our
Church, and statutes of the Land.

The means by which this man was thus converted, was an ostension of the
extreme falsity of all and every one of those principles which some
Novell-Catechisers, Lecturers, and inconsiderat Teachers, have by preaching and
printing, published unto the World, as divine Oracles: a breviate whereof T.B.
delivered to a member of the honorable Court of High Commission.

Right Reverend, many printed books allowed in public, and many Sermons of
late years, and now adays also preached, by men which have the command of
many peoples ears and consciences, upon an opinion of their great sincerity:
deliver with as much confidence, as they do the Articles of the Apostles
Creed, such maxims and positions concerning the Sabbath Day, as do by a
necessary consequence conclude my assertion concerning the old Sabbath.

1 They affirm, that the Law of the Sabbath delivered in the fourth
Commandment of the Decalogue, is a precept of the Law of Nature.

2 The Law of the Sabbath is simply, totally, and perpetually moral: and of
the very same quality with the other nine Commandments. It can no more be
partly moral, and partly ceremonial, than the same living creature can be
partly a man, and partly a Beast. Who can deny (says one of them) the keeping
of the Sabbath to be moral, but he must withal proclaim open enmity to God's
worship, and to man's salvation? The time of keeping the fourth Commandment, is
limited by God, to the seventh day; and how can this day be separated from the
Sabbath, it being an inseparable circumstance of the substance of the fourth
Commandment?

And these powerful Teachers (for so they are commonly styled by their
Disciples) confirm their foresaid Doctrine, in manner following.

1 The fourth Commandment of keeping holy the seventh day Sabbath, was
delivered in Mount Sinai, by God's own immediate voice: and it was charged by
way of command: therefore it is moral, unchangeable, and indispensable.

2 The same was written together with the other nine Commandments with the
finger of God, in a Table of stone, to signify the perpetuity of it: also, it
was placed in the Arc of the Testimony, within the Sanctum Sanctorum: and the
common Preface of the Decalogue confirms the morality of this Precept, as well
as of the rest.

3 The observation of the Sabbath day, is straightly commanded in the Scripture,
and the transgression thereof, was punished with the same penalty, wherewith
blasphemy and adultery were punished, namely, with stoning to death.

4 The perpetual observation of all the ten Commandments, whereof the Law of
the Sabbath is one, is confirmed by CHRIST, Matthew. 5.16, etc. And certain holy
persons are commended in the Gospel, for keeping the Sabbath according to the
fourth Commandment, Luke 23.56.

Lastly, When Saint Paul's words, Coloss. 2.16. are alleged to show, that the
seventh day Sabbath was a legal shadow, they forge a new Commentary of this
Text, repugnant to all Divines living before them, saying; that the Apostle
speaks of annual Sabbaths, and not of the weekly Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment.

Now these doctrines and positions, being openly and commonly preached, and
printed by men of esteem with the multitude: and also being inculcated in
private conferences with great confidence: and the Governors of the Church,
forbearing to reprove or censure them: How could Theoph. Brabourne conceive
otherwise, but that these former principles, and arguments, from whence he
sucked his error, had been infallible verities.

This relation and confession of T.B: after this Conversion, declares, how
perilous a thing it is, for private men, to dogmatize their own novel and
singular opinions: and likewise it serves to admonish such heady leaders, not
to presume upon their own judgment, above that which is meet: Saint Hierome
has delivered a golden Rule to this purpose, saying: Bonum est obedire
majoribus Hieron. Epist. ad Demetriad. Bonu^ est obedire majoribus, parere
perfectis, and post regulam. Scripturarum vitae suae tramitem ab aliis discere,
nec praeceptore uti pessimo, praesumptione sua.
etc. It is a good thing, and very safe (for themselves and others) that men of
inferior quality, be guided and instructed by those, who in judgment and
wisdom go before them: and not to make presumption, which is a perverse
guide, their Counselor.

Gregory Nazianzene advises men of less judgment to imitate Zacheus Orat.
39. (...).
in the Gospel, who being a man of low stature, climbes up into a Sicamore
tree, to behold and know Christ.

Wise and learned men (says S. Augustine Aug. de util. Creden. cap. 12. Homo
sapiens est medium quiddam inter Deum, and hominem stultum.
) stand between God and such as are foolish and want understanding: and it is a
great furtherance of science, to join ones self with men of understanding:
for these latter have eyes of knowledge, and the other must lend an ear, of
belief and obedience Idem in Psalm. 36. Non parva pars est scientiae, scienti
conjungi; ille habet oculos cognitionis, tu habeto credulitatis.
.

It cannot go well with the Church, unless due subordination, (whereof God
Himself is Author) be maintained and observed: and that men of meaner
judgment and capacity, submit themselves to such as are able to govern and
direct them. The foot must not usurp the dignity and function of the head
Greg. Naz. Orat. 7. Cur caput vis fieri, cum sis pes? cur imperatoris munere
fungi, cum sis in ordine mili^um?
: nor the tongue the office of the understanding. For if this be permitted,
dangerous confusion ensues: Many desperate and pernicious errors will abound:
And the unseamed coat of Christ Cyprian. de unit. Ecclesiae. Number. 6. Greg. Naz.
orat. 1. de pace.
(which was a figure of the Churches unity) will be rent and torn with
division and contention.

In Ancient time when Christian people were truly virtuous and religious, they
observed and maintained order and unity, with conscience and care, as well as
verity Vincent. Lyrinens. Commonit. c. 9. Mos iste semper in Ecclesia viguit,
ut quo quisque foret Religiosior, eo promptius novellis adinventionibus
contrairet.
, Colos. 2.5. and if persons of most eminent quality, either for learning or
sanctity, became singular in their dogmatizing, and went by-ways, out of the
common road of the holy Church, it brought a stain upon them, as we may
perceive by the examples of Tertullian, Origin, Apollinaris Vincent. Lyrinens.
in Commonitor. cap. 16.23, 24.
, etc.

But it fares ill with the Church, when singularity of opinion, novell
dogmatizing, and semblance of piety, shall so far advance the reputation of
presumptuous Teachers, Vt fiant magistri, qui vix poterant esse discipuli
Ambros. lib. 6. Epist. 32.
, That they are made masters and leaders, who are scarce worthy to be disciples.

In later times this mischief has prevailed, and infected Christian people:
The remedy whereof must be a general submission of private persons, to the
judgment and authority of those Leaders, who guide them in the old way of
sacred Scripture, and of the holy Bishops and Fathers of the true ancient
Catholic Church: Vincent. Lyrinens. Commonitor. c. 2. Propter tantos varii
erroris anfractus, multu^ necesse est ut propheticae and Apostololicae
interpretationis linea, secundum Catholici and Ecclesiastici sensus norma^
dirigatur.
and not hastily to build their faith upon Teachers, who in stead of sound and
ancient verity, endeavor to obtrude (...) Basil. Epist. 6. Fidem nos neque
recentiorem ab aliis accepimus, neque ipsi propriae mentis faetus aliis
obtrudere audemus, sed quae a Patribus edocti sumus, ea nos interrogantibus
annunciamus.
, the novell imaginations of their own brain.

Where this rule is observed, there God's people are edified with sound and
wholesome doctrine: Pure religion, and undefiled worship and service of God and
Christ, are maintained and exercised: And the holy Apostle's rule, which is, to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, is duly observed Ephesians. 4.3.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABstinence from labor upon the Sabbath Day, Page 36. 216. 288 Abstinence from
labor upon the Lord's Day, Page 216, 217, 218, etc. 224. 226 Adam's keeping the
Sabbath, Page 41, 42 Antecedent will of God, Page 82 Apparitions of CHRIST on
Sunday, Page 188 Arguments probable, Page 15 Athanasius of the Sabbath, 77. and
of the Lord's day, Page 78 Authority of Fathers, Page 9 Authority of the
Primitive Church, 9. 14. A subordinate Rule, 12. The Church of Englands respect
thereof, Page 13
B
Book of the Law lost, Page 145 Brabourne's Positions, 1, 2. The occasion of
his Error, 307. His submission, Page 306
C
CAin invited to Repentance, Page 84 Catholic doctrine of the Sabbath, Page 6
Characters of the Decalogue perished, Page 117 CHRIST'S fulfilling the Law,
Page 63 CHRIST'S keeping the Sabbath, Page 66 CHRIST'S Redemptive actions. Page
297 Churches Precepts, Page 94. 149 Circumcision a sign of natural
corruption, Page 114 Commandments general and special, Page 93 Commandments
Moral, Page 26. 28 Commandments positive, 32. 176. 257. Not impossible to be
kept, Page 176. 257 Constantine's law for Sunday, Page 79
D
A Day of four and twenty hours, Page 177. 186. 216. 233 A Day having
Sunrising, and setting, Page 177. Whether a seventh Day is Moral, Page 90.
107. 152. 182. 190. 268. 275 Days in themselves alike holy. 5. 34. 160.
Observing Days Jewish, Page 160 Decalogue contains something positive, Page 34
Decalogue's Prooeme, Page 55 Decalogue delivered by Angels, Page 50 Decalogue
whether pronounced by God, Page 51. 57, 281. Writing the Decalogue, Page 54.
57. 139. 281 Disobedience to Bishops, Page 97 Dispensation in Precepts Moral,
31. And in Precepts positive, Page 34 Divine Precepts Moral and positive, Page
26 Divine Worship or Latria, Page 29 Duties on the Lord's day, Page 135. 137.
213. 255. 259. 261.
E
EAster Day, Page 300 Equity of the fourth Commandment, Page 35. 90. 120. 191
Esaias, 58. verse. 13. page 251 Excommunication, Page 215
F
WHatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, page 92 Feast of Charity, page 215
Flight on the Sabbath, page 125. 126 Fourth Commandment, page 25. 85. 90
Fourth Commandment no Cipher, page 121 Fourth Commandment not of the Law of
Nature, 36. It enjoyneth not Evangelicall duties, 143. It commanded not Jews
to come to Church, page 143 Friday an Holy Day, page 79 Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, page 32.
G
GEntiles observed not the Sabbath, Page 155. 167. 291 Goodness of God to all,
Page 86 Gospel universally preached. Page 83 Ground on which Moses stood, Page
48
H
Heretics doctrine of the Sabbath, Page 8 Holy- days, Page 79. 204, 205 Holy
dreams, Page 233 Honor Parents, Page 30
I
Ignatius of the Sabbath, Page 71. 74 Imitation of God, Page 130 Impediments of
holiness on the Lord's Day Page 261. 267 Imperial and Regal Laws concerning
the Lord's Day, Page 79. 220 Judas not excluded from common Redemption, Page 87
L
Labor on the Sabbath, Page 36, 71. 216 Labor on the Lord's Day. Page 216.
219 Labor and Recreation on the Lord's Day, Page 127. 216. 218. 224. 226. 229.
262. 265. 288 Laodicen Council, Page 73 Law of Nature, Page 156. 172 Law
delivered by Angels, Page 51 Law whether spoken by God, Page ^3. 57 Law written
by God's finger, Page 54. 57. 139 Laws Moral, their Characters, Page 28 Laws
positive, their Characters, Page 32 Laws abrogation and cessation, Page 104.
141 Legal Ceremonies, and their Characters, Page 167 Lord's Day in Ignatius.
Page 75 Lords- day in Athanasius, Page 78. Lords- day no Idol, 96. Not
superstitious to observe it, Page 98 Lords- day in the Apostles age, Page 109
Lords- day not observed by the fourth Commandment, Page 135, 137, 143. Lords-
day not commanded, Page 185 Lords- day's Names, 187, 196, 199. 208. Not called
the Sabbath, Page 201 Lords- days Prerogatives, Page 210 Lords- days duties,
Page 213. 255, 261
M
IT rained not Manna on the Sabbath, Page 183 Martyrs constancy and fortitude,
Page 11, 218 Moral Laws Characters, Page 26, 28
O
OBedience to Bishops, Page 94 Obedience to Ecclesiastical Precepts, Page 99
Ordinations on the Lord's- day, Page 217
P
PAradise no Sabbath, Page 42 Paradise had no Bondmen, Page 43, 281 Patriarks
kept not the Sabbath, Page 43 Penalty of death, Page 111 Polygamy, Page 27
Positive Laws, 32. 170. 176. 257. possible to be kept, Page 176. 256 Prayer of
our Church, at the fourth Commandment, Page 159 Praying toward the East, Page
197 Precepts moral and positive, Page 26, 27 Transgression of some Positive
Precepts capital, Page 247 Precepts of the modern Church. Page 94. 99. 194
Precepts of the ancient Church Page 102 Precepts of the first Table, Page 243
Precepts affirmative or negative, the manner of their obligation, Page 36, 263,
Primitive Church's authority, Page 9. 10 Primitive Church keeping the Sabbath,
Page 71 Princes power in causes Ecclesiastical, Page 228 Private Spirits, Page
311 Proeme of the Decalogue, Page 55 Promulgatio^ of Laws, Page 33, 36
R
REcreation, 222. 229. 257 258. 266. Permission thereof, Page 266 Recreation on
the old Sabbath, Page 237 Redemption by Christ, common to all mankind, Page 83
Redemption twofold, Page 297, 298 Reformed Churches of the Lord's Day, Page 271
Religious actions without commandment, Page 95 Reprobation followed sin, Page
83 Resurrection of Christ an occasion of keeping the Lord's Day, Page 208. 210.
269. 289. 300 Resurrection of Christ contained no Commandment, Page 301 Rigid
keeping the Lord's Day, Page 249
S
SAbbath not simply moral, Page 17, 34, 281 Sabbath not necessary to be kept,
Page 6 Sabbath not of the Law of nature, Page 20. 111. 155. 156. 172. Sabbath
of Gen 2. Page 39, 40. 155 Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, Page 182 Sabbath
Law not confirmed in Matthew, 5.17. page 61. 123. Sabbath kept holy in some
ancient Churches, Page 71. 80. 141. 174 Sabbath legal and ceased, Page 106, 148
Sabbath in memory of Creation, Page 113, 130 Sabbath had not universal
Promulgation, Page 36. 291 Sabbath 24. hours, Page 177, 186 Sabbath kept by
the Apostles, Page 68, 128 Sabbath spiritual, Page 121, 159, 163. 203. 206.
253 Schismatics taxed, Page 103 Scripture prime rule, 11. And in some cases
sole rule, 41. 275. Besides Scriptures other rules, Page 95 Seventh day, Page
90. 107. 152. 182. 190. 268. 275 Sins damnable, Page 246 All Sins expel not
grace, Page 245 Sins spiritual, Page 243 Sins against the first Table, Page
242 Spirit of God moves by means Page 117 Submission to superiors, Page 310
The Name Sunday, Page 197 Abstinence from labor upon Sunday, 217. And from
vicious pleasure, Page 259 Sunday not commanded, Page 239 Sunday not called
Sabbath, Page 201 Imperial Laws for Sunday, Page 220 Apostles keeping Sunday,
Page 211 Primitive Church keeping Sunday, Page 212 Strict observation of
Sunday, Page 235. 249. 255. 287 Superstition, Page 95, 96 Jewish Superstition
in keeping the Sabbath, Page 238 Synagogues, Page 144
T
TRaditions Apostolical, P. 91. 110. 193 Traditions of the Church, Page 97
W
Will Worship, Page 98 Worldly care and providence, Page 263 Writing the
Decalogue by God, Page 57. 116. 119, 139. 283
Places of Scripture.
Genesis 2.2. Page 39, 40. Esaias 58.13, Page 251. Matthew. 5.17. Page 59, 61, 122
Matthew. 15.5. Page 99. Matthew. 24.20. Page 124. Luke 23.56. Page 141. Romans 14.23.
Page 92. 1 Cor. 16.1. Page 211. Colos. 2.17. Page 165. Colos. 2.23. Page 98.
FINIS.

