THE LIVES OF SAINTS Written in Spanish, by the learned and Reverend Father
ALFONSO VILLEGAS, Divine, and Preacher. Translated out of Italian into English,
and conferred with the Spanish.

BY W. and E. K. B.

Romans 8. v. 17. Sitamen compatimur, vt and conglorificemur.

Yet if we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him.

Printed at DOWAY, By the Widow of LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of the holy
Lamb.

M.DC.XIV.

To the Reader.
WE present the now at length, dear Chri^tian Reader, with the four last
months of ^heyre glorious lives, whose names, as renowned Saints of God, are
in the Roman Calender. This debt, I must confess, has bin due this long time:
but could not be discharged, until this present; wherein the grace of God has
freed our passage through a maine sea of difficulties. For such is the nature
of all Catholic writings in our distressed country. what through penury,
pressure, and long imprisonment of their authors at home; ignorance neglect
and carelesnes of such as are put in trust abroad; we must wind our selves
out of a laberynth of crosses, before we can bring to light our labors. And
even then must they run so many hard fortunes, and have such bad well come
and entertainment, that only this were able to check all endeuoures, not
strengthened by the hand of God. And yett could I never find any reason, why
this work of ours should not be welcome to people of all sorts and
conditions. For if the lives of those ancient worthies, whose highest aim was
a feigned, shadowed, transitory glory, or else the love and renown of their
native country, be so grateful to most men, principally such as follow
their steps: they, who, taking up their cross and following CHRIST, did
beat the narrow path, that leads to salvation; they whose aim was
everlasting glory, whose love Jerusalem their mother city in heaven; they
whose valor and violence did win the Kingdom purchased for them with the
blood of CHRIST; why should not their lives be acceptable to all, whose name
does wittness their profession, to be nothing else but a following of CHRIST?
Or why should we gleane, with a hungry delight and greedy appetite, some few
barren ears of moral virtues, scattered in the lives of Heathnish authors;
and care not for the chief croppe and principal harvest of all natural and
supernatural virtues, which are to be found in that hundreth-yielding field of
the Church of CHRIST? Especially seeing, that, what is most emine^t in such
as only walked by light of reason, may no ways compare with the very
beginnings of those saints, that were guided by the light of faith. These God
therefore has placed in the churches firmament, to serve us as light to guide
our steps: these he did leave us as patterns and myrrhoures, wherein we
might behold our offenses, to shun them; their virtues, to embrace them. In
them all callings and professions shall find how to rule and square their
actions, to the honor of God, and profi^t of their souls. They will teach
us how to wage war with our enemies, World, Flesh and Devil: how to
prevent their wiles and trappes, when they go about to win us with color of
sanctity: how to arm, order, and ward our selves, when they assail us with
open force and hostility. There we shall see how to behave our selves in the
boisterous storms of adversity, how in the deceytfull calm of prosperity.
Finally their lives will be our card compass, teaching us how to direct our
course, that without suffering shipwracked of our souls we may arrive at the
haven of health and salvation. Wherefore, dear Christian Reader, doubt not to
welcome and entertain that ghuest, whose presence with pleasure will afford
thee such profitt. And when thou do find some few such things as are more
to be admired then imitated, past not thy judgment upon the^ with passion:
measure not the virtues of God his Saints by thy own feeblenes: go not
about to weaken or discredit the promises of CHRIST, nor confine the
omnipote^t hand of God within the narrow bounds of human reason. for the
holy Ghost has all ready fore told us, that God is admirable in his saints:
and CHRIST did promise, that his disciples should work greater wonders, then
their masters.

SEPTEMBER.
The life of S. Giles Abbot.
WE READ in the beginning of Genesis that when our Lord God would form man,
Genesis I.
he said these words: Let us make man unto our image and similitude, who shall
rule over the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the air, and beasts of the
earth. The holy Doctors say: that if the first man had perseuered in the state
of innocence, and had conserved original justice, in the which God created him,
all the creatures had acknowledged him for their Lord, and had been obedient
unto him; but for that he was disobedient unto God, all creatures were
disobedient, and became foes unto him.

The same thing happened unto man which, befalls unto a hunter, who going out
to hunt, all the dogs leap about him, and fawn and lick him, but if he
should put on a visard, it is likly enough they would not acknowledge him, but
would look angerly, grin, and swarle at him. Even so befell it unto our first
father Adam; after that he put the visard of disobedience on his face; Before
that all creatures esteemed and served him, and acknowledged him for the
superior, but afterward, they all rebelled, making war against him, as
against their common enemy.

Nevertheless, God being merciful (to the end, that some sign of that happy
estate might be seen) permitted, that there should be some so holy and
faithful, that unto them many creatures should serve, and be obedient. As we
have an example of S. Giles. Who was cherished by a hind a while, and
maintained by her milk, the time he remained in a cave, of a soltary and craggy
mountain. The life of this holy Abbot and Confessor, was written by Gilbertus.
B. of Carnotum, and other Authors in this manner.

SAINT Giles was borne in Athens of the Royal blood. His father was called
Theodorus, and his mother Pelagia; From his childhood he was instructed in the
studies of humanity, and divinity also, and in the same age he gave himself
unto the service of God, exercising himself in good works. He was of singular
charity, and gave much almose. He went one day unto the church, and saw a
poor sick man in the street, who asked an alms of him, and he taking the
garment he wore, gave it to the poor man, who took it, and put it on, and
forthwith, he became perfectly whole. Not long after this, his father died, and
he distributed al his patrimony (which was very great) amongst the needy.

God showed many miracles by the means of this holy Saint: one was, when he
healed a man that was bitten by a venomous serpent, so that he was at the point
of death. Another was, he being one sunday at a Church, there came in a man
posessed with the devil, and made such a noise that the divine office could
not be heard. The holy man prayed for him, and not only obtained that the
devil in him did hold peace, but also did depart out of him and left him free.
Through all Greece the fame of S. Giles was spread, whereupon he fearing to be
honored, and reputed for a holy man, took sea, intending to go into some
country, where he should not be known. The bark was not far from the shore,
but a huge tempest arose, so that every one made account to perish in the sea.
S. Giles prayed, and the storm ceased, by which all the mariners and
passengers well perceived, that the storm ceased by his prayers, and they
yielded unto him many thanks for the same.

After a few days the barck arrived at a haven in France, where S. Giles took
land, and went to the city of Arlez, where a holy man called Cesarius was
Bishop. The holy Saint stayed in his company two years, to the great content
of them both, for that all their conference and conversation was of heavenly
matters. In that place S. Giles by his prayers healed a man, which had been
sick of a fever three years; And because that deed, and the comendations of
Cesarius, caused him to be had in great reverence, and that every one called
him the holy man, he resolved to depart, and to fly from the reputation and
honor of the world (though the conversation and company of Cesarius pleased him
much.) So he passed over the river of Rhosne which is well known in that
realm, and he found on the bank thereof, a holly hermit called Veredemius,
living a solitary life; with whom he stayed and continued certain days: And
whereas the country naturally was barren, it became fertile and fruitful, by
the prayers of S. Giles.

It happened, that on a time a sick man was carried unto the cell of Veredemius
to be healed by him, but it falling out that he was not at home at that time,
S. Giles prayed for him, and healed him. There was never man that avoided to be
contemned and despised, as S. Giles labored to shun, and to repel the
estimation and honor of the world; and therefore he departed from that place,
and went unto an other which was more solitary, and fuller of wood, toward the
mouth of the River. In that place he found a cane among certain thorns, and
other wild plants, nere unto which sprang a clear and pure fountain. In it
he also saw a hind, which made signs, to be content that he should lodge with
her: so the holy man resolved, to make his abode in that place. His food was
the roots of herbs, and running water, and sometimes the hind permitted him
to milk her, and in that sort, he spent part of his life, passing the time in
prayer and meditation.

It befell afterward, that the king who then reigned in France, (being a
Christian) went one day on hunting, and his hounds found the hind of S. Giles,
and pursued her hard to kill her. She with a swift course ran back unto the
cave, where the holy man remained, and lay at his feet, as it were, to demand
succor and help at his hands in that danger. when the hind came into the cave,
S. Giles was at his prayers on his knees; and though he saw his hostess that
gave him lodging, in manifest danger, he did not therefore arise from his
exercise, but he besought God to defend and deliver her. The prayer of the holy
Confessor was heard, for by the power of God, the dogs could not enter into
the cave, but stood a good way of and barked.

At this noise the king and the other hunters came in, but they being not able
to enter the cave, one that carried a crosbowe, put a quarrel therein, which he
shot of toward the cave; determinating to make trial what was within: and the
quarrel, or arrowe, (be what it was), lighted upon the holy Saint, and wounded
him, who patiently tolerated the wound which was made. The hunters passed
through the thorns and branches, determining to see what was in the cave, and
at the last they came to the place where S. Giles was. It seemed unto every one
of them a strange spectacle, to see him at the mouth of the cave, on his knees,
with a grave and venerable aspect, and nothing troubled; looking with his face
and eyes, and likewise his hands lifted toward heaven; The wound had made him
all bloody, and the hind lay close by his side.

These things put the King and all his people in great dread; wherefore he went
unto him, and reputing him a holy man, made obeysaunce and craved pardon of
him, because his bowe-bearer had wounded him, and gave order, that provision
should be made for his cure, though the holy Saint made thereunto denial,
wishing that the wound and the sore might continue all his life, that it might
be an occasion whereby he might have more merit. The king offered unto him
great sommes of money, to the end he should pray unto God for him, but the holy
Saint would not accept any guiftes, but persuaded him, to lay out that which he
desired to bestow on him, in building of a monastery, in which religious men
might dwell, that should pray unto God for him and for his kingdom. The king
was well pleased therewith, and caused a monastery to be builded: of the which,
the holy man was compelled by the importunity of the king, to take on him the
government with the title of Abbot.

S. Giles lived in this monastery certain years, and all that time he spent in
prayers and fastinges; endeavoring that every one should fly from sin, and
attend to the service of God. This may evidently appear by the same king, who
was obstinate in a certain sin he had committed, and thereof had small
remorse and grief, and less will to confess it, yet so much the prayer of S.
Giles prevailed, that the king confessed it with great sorrow of mind, and
repentance for his trespass, and all other offenses committed in his life. It
is said: that the holy Saint went unto Rome, and at his return brought many
indulgences and pardons, granted unto him by the Popes, for his monasteries,
as well for them that dwelt therein, and wore his habit, as also for them that
visited it.

S. Giles having governed his monastery (no less religiously then holylie,)
certain years, the time of his death approached, which was agreeable unto his
good and virtuous life, leaving behind him a holy envy unto all them, that were
present at that time, for it was apparent and evident, that he went to possess
the kingdom of heaven, where was for him prepared a most honorable place. His
glorious death was on the first day of September, and thereon the Church
celebrateth his feast.

In the history of the life of this holy Saint it is written, that S. Giles
lived sometime with Cesarius Bishop of Arlez as I have said before, who (after
Trithemius) lived in the year of our Lord. 660. and adding the time, this holy
Saint lived after his death, he died in the year of our Lord. 700. or there
aboutes. The Spanish original says: 720. upon a Sunday.

The twelve brethren Martyrs.
ON THE same day that the Church celebrateth the feast of S. Giles it also
makes a commemoration of the twelve brethren martirs. The martyrdom of these
twelve holy men, was written in heroical verse by Alfan monk of Monte Cassin^
who lived in the year of our Lord. 1108. That which we can extract out of this
Author, and out of other martyrologes concerning the life of these holy Saints,
is: That they were martirized in Beneuento, in the time of Valerian Emperor of
Rome in the year of our Lord. 258.

The names of the holy martires were these: Donatus, Faelix, Acontius,
Honoratus, Fortunatus, Sabinianus, Soptimius, Ianuarius, Faelix, Secundus,
Vitalis, Satyrus, and REPOSITVS. They were in blood noble, and all of them had
been well instructed in humanity and divinity. They all preached the Gospel
of JESUS CHRIST and many were converted unto the faith of CHRIST by their
doctrine:

They were all laid in most dark prisons; Then were they taken forth, and
brought into the high street, where they thrust their hands hard into certain
pieces of wood, and afterward made fire underneath them. Then in the presence of
the same Valerian they bound them unto certain cords, and ropes, which ran
in polleis, and so hoised them alofe into the air, then they let them fall on
a soodaine, and gave them the most cruel strappado.

This sufficed not, but they also scourged them, and then tore and rent their
flesh with hooks of Iron, to the execessiue pain and torment of the holy
martires; the officers herin displaying their cruel minds. Then they put them
to the fire again, and set the kindled torches to their bare sides: but the
holy Saints endured and abode all very constantly: which the tyrant seeing, and
awearied in putting them unto so many torments, did lastly cause all of them to
be beheaded; and by this martyrdom their mortal lives ended, and their souls
went to the joys of heaven. *

The Nativity of our B. Lady.
THE sacred scripture in the book of Exodus recounteth; that Moses, Cap 2.
being borne, his father and mother knew not how to deliver him from death;
for that king Pharao had made a decree; that all the male children that were
borne of the Hebrews should be put to death. The resolution of his parents was
this. They made a baskett of Rushes and dawbed it over with claye, wherein they
put Moses, and laying him thus in the River Nylus, they let him go to take his
adventure. By this invention he escaped death: for the daughter of Pharao seeing
him, caused him to be taken out, and to he brought up as if he had been her
own son. After this he came to be the captain of the Hebrews.

Moses was a figure of JESUS CHRIST, who for that he was to be cast into the
water of this world which is full of storms, there was made a little basket
wherein he was put, which signifies the blessed virgin his mother, who is a
basket anointed over on the outside. The holy virgin is like unto the rushes,
for she had no bark of Actual sin nor no knott of Original sin. She
remained near unto the torrent of waters for that she enjoyed those goods,
that spring from that liuelye fountain of God in great aboundancy: for that
she is near conjoined unto his majesty. This little basket has the claie
without, which was the grace wherewith God preserved and defended her, that her
soul could receive no damage, neither after she was borne into the world, nor
in the womb of her mother Anna. God was put in this basket, being made man, in
her sacred and holy womb, and for that respect that she was to be his mother,
God bestowed graces, and favors upon her abundantly. And that we may see for
what reason the church celebrateth the feast of the nativity of this glorious
virgin, before that we recount the history thereof, it shall be well done for us
to consider the dignity for the which she was borne, the worthy and eminent
estate she ought to have, and her great familiarity with God.

I SAY then, that though this virgin had diverse names and titles all
maiesticall and stately, yet are none to be equalized to the name of the Mother
of God. for this cause, alweis when the evangelists name her in the discourse
of the gospel, they call her the mother of God. Math. 1.
The Evangelist S. Matthew fetching the pettigree of her most noble lineage from
Abraham, when he comes to name her, and her spouse Joseph, forthwith he adds
of whom Jesus that is called Christ was borne. When he writes of the coming
of the three kings or sages to adore Jesus Christ, Math. 2.
he says: they found him with Mary his mother. S. Luke also writing how the
B. Virgin went to visitte S. Elizabeth her cousin, Luc. 1.
says; the good old woman resaluted her with these words; How have I deserved
this, that the mother of my Lord comes to visit me? The same S. Luke says:
that when Jesus was. 12. Luc. 2.
years old, and stayed behind her at Jerusalem, and was found after three
days, his mother said unto him: Son, why have thou done this unto me? Ion. 3.
S. John speaking of the wedding in Cana of Galilee, where Jesus Christ and the
glorious virgin were present, he repeateth twice the name of the mother of
Jesus. The same Evangelist writing also of the mystery of the passion, says:
Joan. 19.
that Jesus Christ being on the Cross, there was his mother present, in such
sort that in this, and the other places of the ghospel, the Evangelist always
give unto her, this most noble name of the mother of God. The same Christ our
Lord, as often as he names himself, is called the son of man, which words
mean (after the opinion of many holy doctors) the son of the virgin.

The holy church has always had such care of that name, that in the Ephesine
council, which was one, and the third of the same general counceles (which
was celebrated in the time of Pope Celestinus and of thempeior Theodosius)
where Cyril the great was present and. 200. Bishops were assembled: the
principal thing that was determined therein, and for which thy were assembled
was; that it should be helden for a Catholic verity, and an article of faith;
that the glorious virgin Mary was, Cyrill. in tract. pecul. Dam. l. 4. c. 15.
de side orthod. Aug. in c. 2. Joan. D. Tho 3. p. q. 31. ar. 4.
and is, the very true mother of God; as truly, and verytably, as other mothers
are to their true and natural children. The same was confirmed in the time of
Pope Leo the first and Martian themperor in the Council of Chalcedon.

Some holy doctors, as S. Cyrill, S. John Damascen, S. Augustine, and S.
Thomas, declare the manner thereof. The substance of that which they say is this:
that the blessed virgin, having conceived JESUS CHRIST our Lord, she was his
mother, for that her most chaste, pure, and more then illustrious blood, served
for matter. of which the holy Ghost by his divine virtue, formed the body of
JESUS CHRIST, for which cause, she became a true and veritable mother, as any
other mothers be. Having laid this foundation of truth, I say; that to be the
mother of God, argues the great noblenes and worthynes of this holy damsel.

This is proved by a principle, the philosophers hold, to wit: that there is
not only a proportion between the cause and the effect, but also, if the cause
be not empeached or hindered, it produces a like effect to it self, even to
the Indiuiduum, and the accidents: as a lion, that has spots, produces not
only another lion, but also with the same spots. This being granted: I say;
that if the natural gifts of the wit, complexion, and proportion of members,
and natural condition of CHRIST were transcendent, and excellent in the hiest
degree, as it is apparent by the sacred scripture, and also said by the holy
doctors: we are by great reason to find all the same in the B. virgin, as in
his true and veritable mother, to wit, that she was of an excellent wit, an
amyable complexion, of an admyrable beauty, and absolute proportion of limbs,
and most goodly natural condition. So that saying that JESUS CHRIST was the
fairest of all men, Psalm. 44. v. 3.
the same may be affirmed of the B virgin. wherefore, we may well say thus: O
lady unto whom shall we liken thee? what goodlines shall be like unto thine, who
is so beutifull as thou art? The son compared unto thee is foul and ugly, the
moon is dark and obscure, and the stars are as clouds? The Angels are far
inferior, and the Seraphins come not nere unto thee. unto whom shall we liken
thee, but even unto JESUS CHRIST thy son? will you have (says S. Gregory.) a
lively pattern of the glorious virgin? fix your eyes and behold JESUS CHRIST.
Behold the son, in him you shall see a picture of the mother: note you that
there is little difference between the mother and the son. Such a son, and
of such and so great perfections, was fit for such a mother, and such a mother,
endued with so many graces, was fit for such a son. ye ought also to
consider a heavenly workmanship between the B. Virgin, and her son. for she
gave him one thing, which was the humain nature. and he gave unto her another,
to wit the fulness of grace. The mother gave unto him that which she had, to wit
the humanity, and CHRIST being God, and fountein of grace, gave it unto his
mother.

Of this grows two admirable things: The one is, that as the glorious virgin,
for his nature is his mother, so is she his daughter in respect of grace, so
that the mother is daughter, and the son is father, and that which other
mothers say in sport to their sons, calling them: my king, my prince, my
father, and my treasor, the glorious virgin might say it in truth and verity.
This also arises between the mother and the son, That as the son for his
human nature is made like unto his mother, so the mother in respect of grace
is like unto the son. She was humble (in proportion, not in equality) as he,
charitable as he, obedyent as he, and in her proportion full of grace, as he,
so the Angel called her, A^haile, full of grace.

The consideration of this mother and son Luc. 1.
goes further: The virgin in his conception, bestowed the blood of her veins,
of which to form his body, and in the nine months, that she carried him in her
womb, over and beside the giving unto him, her most chaste bowels, for his
rich palace, and the couerings and pannycles of her heart to be the tapissery
of his chamber, she also gave him, the very same meat, she took her self: so
that like a blissed dove, with her bill, she put the nutriment in the mouth of
her son: After he was borne, the arms of his mother, was his cradell, and
holding him unto her breast, she warmed him better, then Abysac warmed David.
JESUS being grown up; his mother gave him, her hands her care and diligence,
to the end all things she had might serve him. After he was dead, and taken
from the cross, she took him also in her arms, and embraced him with tender
affection. All this gave the mother unto the son.

The son gave unto the mother, grace in her conception, in preseuring her
from sin; he gave unto her the use of reason before the ordinary time, and at
three years old, he conducted her as his own unto the Temple. Then he
advanced her higher, until he made her his mother and most fit for such a
son, in such manner, that she is no reproach unto CHRIST before his eternal
father, the Angels and all men. Yea he glories and ioyeth to have such a
mother as Mary is. JESUS CHRIST and his mother were in this as other things,
most faithful lovers; for the presents and gifts the one had from the other
liked them so well, that they never left them. JESUS had his humanity of his
mother, and he so firmly embraced it, that as the deuines say, that which he
once united to himself, he never last. He lost his life in his passion, and in
the three days he lay in the sepulcher, the humane nature was not there: for
his parts, to wit the body and the soul were separated asunder; but the parts
were never separated from the divine Suppositum. It is also very clear, that
the jewels with which this infant was borne, and were bestowed on her in her
conception, were never lost. for she never committed any mortal sin.

Let us then conclude this first tretise to wit of the nobility which accrewed
and arose unto the virgin, in being the mother of God, with the words of S.
Augustine, to wit: That to be the mother of God, is so great a dignity that by
it she surpasses not only all mankind, but also all the Angels: As Much, as it
is more to be the mother, rather then the servant, so much is the dignity
greater to be the mother of the prince, then to be his servant. This reason
also conuinceth it, for that so much the more is a thing advanced in
perfection, the more or nerer it is united to God, who is the hiest perfection.
This is the daughter, that is borne this day, the infant, whose feast the
Catholic Church celebrateth: a little infant, but a great Lady. An infant whose
graces cannot be expressed, but by him, that created her. THis is a day of
great desert, a day whose memory rejoices both heaven and earth. This is the
day, in which she is borne, of whom would be borne JESUS, that is called
CHRIST. By the things before rehearsed, you may know, how reasonable it is to
celebrate the Nativity of this Virgin, for that her deserts and graces be so
great, as is above mentioned.

The Church in ancient time did not solemnize this feast, which is proved by
the words of S. Augustine, Aug: de sanct: ser: 11 t^m. 10.
who says in one sermon: that the Nativity of JESUS CHRIST, and S. John
Baptist be only celebrated. By this you may understand; that this feast was not
kept through the universal Church, at that time, though it be thought, that
from the time of the Apostles, it was celebrated in some particular Churches.
In the time of Pope Innocent. 4. it was ordained; that this solemnity should
be celebrated universally, by all the faithful, in the Catholic Church: about
the year of our Lord. 1250.

The occasion to celebrate this feast was; in one year and 8. months space,
no Pope was chosen, after the death of Pope Celestine. 4. which was the cause
of infinite scandals through all Christendom, but especially in Italy, for
that the Emperor Frederick who rebelled against the Church, every day usurped,
and got some of the lands belonging unto the Church. The Cardinals who were in
the Conclaue desired to make the election, but they could not agree. At last,
they treated among them selfs (it being propounded by some devout person unto
our Lady,) to make a vow, that if any of them were made Pope in a short space,
for a remedy of those great damages and losses of the Church, he should ordeine
the celebration of the Nativity of our Lady, and should make it a feast with
octaues, through al Christendom. The vow being made, forthwith ensued the
election of Cardinal Sinibaldus, who was called Innocent 4. who ordained the
Nativity of our Lady to be kept on the. 8. day of September, through all
Christendom.

This election rejoiced the wholle world that had longed for a pope, and for
that the cause of this was ascribed unto the new feast of the most B. virgin,
he ordained that in the office, they should sing this Antheme which begins:
Natiuitas tua, dei genitrix virgo gaudium annunciauit vniuerso mundo etc: That
is to say: Thy birth o virgin Mary, mother of God, brought joy to the wholl
world.

Some Authors seem to say: Vine. in spec l. 7. c. 119.
that a relligious man living in contemplation, hard every year on the. 8. day
of September the Angels to make melody and triumph; and demanding of one of
them, what was the cause of such joy in heaven, he was answered; that on that
day, was celebrated the Nativity of the mother of God, and that then upon the
credit of that relligious man, this feast began to be celebrated. It may be
true, that this relligious man, had that before remembered vision, but the
occasion to promulgate the solemnity of this feast, is that, which I rehearsed
first.

And to the end, some thing may be spoken concerning the history, collecting it
out of that, which S. Jerome, S. John Damascen, Gregory of Nissen, and Simeon
Metaphrastes write thereof, I say; that the father of the Virgin Marie was
called Ioachim, and her mother Anna: Thy were both of the tribe of Judah, and of
the house and family of David, and this is to be holden as an Article of faith,
for there be many prophecies in the holy writ, which say, that the MESSIAH
should be borne of the tribe of Judah, and of the house and family of David, And
he being to be borne of glorious virgin, it follows; that the father and
mother of her, were to be of that tribe, Hier. de ort. B. Vir. Luc. 3.
and of that family. S. Jerome names some patriarchs, which must of
necessity, be the same, which S. Luke names in his Gospel. He says then,
that Iannes begot Melchi, and Melchi begot Leui, See John lucid. l. 2. de temp.
hebr.
and Leui begot Mathan, and Mathan begot Heli, who is also called Ioachim, who
(as he says) was natural father unto the Virgin Marie, and legal father unto
Joseph.

Ioachim took Anna unto wife, and both of them dwelt in Nazareth a city of
Galilee. They were very rich, and bestowed part of their goods upon the poor,
and other pious uses. S. Jerome says also; that they continued together. 20.
years, and never had children, for which Issachar the priest, not only would
not receue the offering of Ioachim in the temple of Jerusalem, upon a feast,
which was kept there, and was called Encenia, but bad him to depart out of the
temple, for that assuredly he had some secret sin for the which God punished
him, and did not grant him the fruit of benediction. So that Ioachim all
afflicted and ashamed, departed from the temple. Gregory Nizen and Simeon
Metaphrastes say: that S. Anna upon the like solemnity came from Nazareth unto
Jerusalem, 1. Reg. 1.
and like the other Anna the mother of Samuel lamented, wept, and sighed, in
the Temple, desiring God to grant her children, and even as Anna the mother of
Samuel did, she vowed to offer in the temple, unto the service of God the
son or daughter, that God would be pleased to give her.

They say also, that afer she had made the vow, she lay with her husband
Ioachim, and conceived, and was delivered of the Queen of Angels, the Virgin
Mary our advocate. And though usually, when daughters are borne, the father and
mother do not rejoice so much, as if it were a son; for that the daughters
are troblesome to bring up, and to maintain, and more chargeable to set forth
in marriage, yet when the B. virgin was borne, the father and mother felt, and
tasted infinite joy, as of a thing, they had long desired. They also rejoiced,
for that they had some kind of knowledge, that this their daughter should not
be any charge to them for a dowry in marriage, but also by her means God would
show many favors, and blessings upon all the world.

S. Bernard made this speech unto the B. virgin in these words: Happy art thou
O Virgin Marie, more then any other creature, since of thee, in thee and by
thee, God has recreated the wholle world, which he has created. In that we
have said before, we have in part seen the great worth of the Queen newly
borne, the order of her birth, and her coming into the world: Now it remains
(as the usage is) to gratulate and rejoice with her father and mother, saying
unto them:

O Holy and happy Patriark Ioachim and Anna, happy may the birth of your
daughter be, we pray God, ye may see her brought up, and well married:
without doubt it shall be so: for God will give unto her for spouse Joseph, one
of the holiest men, that shall be in the world. He shall be her guard, and help;
he shall not take of her the pledge dew unto spouses, but rather by these
espousalls, she shall remain most pure and chaste, as she was before, and ever
shall be. She shall have another spouse in heaven, which shall be God himself,
to wit The Holy Ghost, the third person of the holy Trinity. He shall be her
spouse, and by him she shall conceive, without loss or damage unto her
virginity, and having conceived, shall bring forth into the world, our Savior
and Redeemer.

After we have thus reioiced with Ioachim and Anna, for that thy have such a
daughter borne unto them, we may also rejoice with their other kinsfolk, for
that they have gotten now such a kinswoman. Let us rejoice also with the
sinners, for that now this day is borne their advocate. Let us rejoice with
the Angels, since that on this day is borne their Queen: let us rejoice with
God, since on this day is borne his mother, daughter, and spouse. And at the
last, let us rejoice with the virgin her self, since God has elected her to
such gretnes and dignity: And the occasion of this being, for that we be
sinners; for if sin had not bin God had not bin made man, and if he had not
bin made man, she had not bin his mother, Therefore without doubt, she being
advanced to this gretnes by our occasion, will remember us, and obtain for
us, of the same God who is her son, pardon and mercy for our sins and
transgressions, and also his heavenly grace, that we may be partakers of his
glory.

The life of S. Adrian Martyr.
THE worthy king David speaking with God in one Psalm said: Ps. 118
I have inclined my heart to do just and good works for retribution sake: that
is having regard unto the reward which arises in doing them. It is not evil
to exercise and do good and holy works in having regard unto that which is
gained thereby in doing them: The reason hereof is: that the guerdon or reward
which is expected, is God himself. In such sort that he who for that respect
does good works, does them for the love of God:

In the number of those, may the glorious martyr S. Adrian be accounted, who by
hearing of the great guerdon, the martirs expected, did voluntarily offer
himself unto martyrdom. His life was written by Ado. B. of Triers: and it was
in this manner.

THE Emperor Maximian commanded; that the Christians that were in the city
of Nicomedia a city of Bithinia should be diligently sought out. Many were
apprehended, and after that the Emperor had admonished, and willed them to
adore the Idol, and saw them constant and firm in the profession of the
faith of JESUS CHRIST, he bad them all to be chained unto wodden posts, and to
be beaten with the raw sinews of beasts: and when he heard them in their
torments to praise the name of JESUS CHRIST, he caused their tounges to be cut
out, and their mouths to be beaten with great stones. The number of these
martirs was 23.

Adrian was present there, as an officer, to attend and see, that the
commandment of the Emperor should be executed. He was an Idolater, and a man
of good account with Maximian: And when he saw how patiently the holy martirs
tolerated those terrible torments, wondering thereat he said unto them: I
conjure you by the God which you adore, and for whom you suffer these torments,
to tell me truly, what guerdon or reward you expect, for I suppose it to be
very great. The holy martirs, though they had no tongues, by the permission of
God answered him thus: The reward we expect is such and so great, that eyes
never saw it, nor ears have hard it, nor the heart of man cannot conceive it,
for it is an unspeakable good, which God has prepared for his friends: Adrian
hearing this, desired not to hear any more, but being inspired by God, and
showing himself desirous to be partaker of so great good, entered into the
midst of the martirs, and said to the Register, (before whom the matter was
handled): write also my name with these soulders of CHRIST: for I will be a
Christian also, as they be.

The Emperor was certified hereof: and when the name of Adrian was read unto
him, among the other Christians which were prisoners: he caused him to be
called, and said unto him. O Adrian, what, art thou become foolish, that thou
seek to lose thy life wretchedly? Adrian answered: I have been, but now I
am not a fool, for that I am a Christian, and no more an Idolater, as I have
been before time. The'mperour being desirous to make him alter his purpose,
discoursed, and conferred long with him, but seeing his words did not prevail,
in rage and fury he caused him to be chained and fettered and put in prison.

Adrian was about 28. years old, and had to wife a woman called Natalia, who
was a Christian. When she heard what had befallen unto her husband, she went
with great joy unto the prison, and fell at his feet, and kissing his fetters
wherewith he was gyued, said unto him: Blessed art thou, o Adrian my husband,
and my Lord, now thou have found the riches which thy father left not unto
thee: Pass securely unto JESUS CHRIST, in whom thou have reposed thy treasure,
which thou shall find herafter in the time of necessity, when no man shall be
able to deliver from punishment the wretch which shall be condemned. The father
shall not be able to deliver the son, nor the mother the daughter, nor the
transitory riches of the world, nor the ambition to have many servants, and a
great patrimony, the friend shall not be of ability to help the friend, only
the deeds which a man has done, shall do a man good and pleasure. Thou (my
Lord) have JESUS CHRIST in thy company, in whom thou have deposed and laid up
thy treasures: walk in the way thou have begone, be not weary thereof, to the end
thou may enjoy the promises. Take heed, let not the remembrance of earthly
and momentary things move thee, to turn backward from thy way begone, nether
let thy kinsfolks, nor the wailings of thy father and mother, nor the flattery
of thy friends, nor the menaces of thy enemies move thee. Let not the torments
of the tirant put thee in fear, but fix thy eyes upon the constancy and
patience of these holy martirs, which be with thee. Imitate them in life, and
thou shall be rewarded with them in death.

The blessed woman having said these words, went unto the holy martirs, one by
one, and kissed their gyues and fetters, saying: I beseech you, o servants of
JESUS CHRIST, to animate and encourage my husband, gain you his soul, Be unto
him a father, that by your means, he may be regenerated unto everlasting life.
Adrian said unto his wife: Go home from hence, my dear and chaste sister, for
when the time shall come, that we shall be examined and judged, I will bring thee
notice thereof, that thou may be present, and see the end of this work.

Certain days after, S. Adrian understood that they resolved to hear and
determine the causes of him, and of the other prisoners which were with him:
whereupon he gave a large some of money unto the keepers of the prison, (some of
his acquaintance interceding and being his suerties) that he might go home unto
his house, promising to return back with speed. Adrian was so well beloved of
all men, that they seemed not to desire his return unto the prison; they let
him depart, and to escape if he would, though they knew and saw themselfes in
apparent danger of life. And it is to be thought his suerties were in the same
danger.

Forthwith some ran before him to give notice unto his wife, that he came
home. She hearing this news, did not believe it at the first, but said: Who
has power to put of the gyues with the which I left him fettered: herewithall
came thither a young man their servant who told them; Adrian came home free and
discharged. She imagining that he had yielded, and now fled to escape
Martyrdom, was much troubled in mind, and began to weep: and when she saw
him to approach the gate of the house, she threw her sowing work (which she
had in her hands) on the ground, and running, locked the gate fast and said: I
will not have any thing to do with this vile and base dastarly coward, that
has returned back, and forsaken the good way he had begone, and much les will I
see him with mine eyes: I will not hear him speak word unto me, neither will I
listen to that tongue, which has dealt deceitfully in the sight of his Creator.

When he came some what nearer, she held the gate shut very close all the
while: and said unto him: O man of all men most miscreant, and irreligious;
what has enforced thee to begin that course, which thou will not accomplish?
who is he that has gotten thee out of the society of the blessed men, with
whom I left thee? who has deceived thee, and made thee to depart out of the
company of peace and perpetually joy? Tellme, tellmee wherefore have thou
turned thy back, and fled before the conflict begin? Wherefore do thou cast
down thy armor on the ground like a dastard, before thou saw thy enemy
come to assail thee? wherefore do thou enroll thy name among the wounded
men, before there be a sword drawn, or arrowe shot? what shall I do, wretch
that I am? who was he that joined me to a faithles person? I have not deserved
to be the wife of a martyr; nay, now I shall be called the wife of a Renegate. A
small time endured my joy and gladness; and long shall last my shame and
reproach.

S. Adrian stayed with out the gate, very glad to hear his wife say these
things? wherefore he said unto her: Natalia my sister, open me the door, for I
do not fly to escape death, as thou think, but come to call thee, that thou
may be present at our martyrdom, as I have heretofore promised thee.
Natalia did not believe him, but rather called him deceiuer. He auerred
earnestly unto her, that his words were truth, and that if she would not open
the gate quickly, he would return unto the prison, that he might keep his
word, and not be deprived of the crown of martyrdom. Natalia gave him then
credit, and opened the gate, and fell humbly at his feet, and he embraced her,
and then both of them returned back unto the Iaile.

By the way S. Adrian said unto his wife Natalia. Tell me my dearest, what
order have thou taken with thy goods and patrimony, lest after my death all be
confiscated and taken from the? Natalia made answer: my lord and husband, take
no thought for the temporal and transitory goods, lest they do captiuate thy
heart and desire. Call to thy remembrance, and reuolue in thy mind, the goods
that be permanent and everlasting, unto which thou drawest nere to be partaker,
together with the other holy men, in whose company thou do desire to die for
the love of JESUS CHRIST.

They both being come unto the prison, all wondered that Adrian would return,
for they were assured, that he came back to his death. Then did Maximian
command: that all the Christian prisoners should be brought forth before him.
Some came with there flesh wounded and putrefied; for in those places where
their Irons and gyues had been, worms were engendered, as was apparent to be
seen. Natalia came close unto her husband, and said unto him; Be careful, my
lord, that thy soul be firm and stable in God: beware thy heart does nor
waver, when they present the tortures before thy corporal sight: The present
troubles shall endure for a small time, but the guerdon, and the beatitude
shall endure for ever.

The Emperor looked first upon Adrian, and said unto him: will thou continue
still in thy folly? The blessed man answered: I am prepared to give my life for
this which thou call folly. Maximian took such indignation at this answer,
that he caused him in his own sight, to be stripped out of his clothes, and to
be cruelly scourged. The officere were tired, and changed they were, first one,
and then another, but the tirant was not tired, but bid them scourge the holy
martyr in cruel sort; and no less the martyr strove to tollerat the torment,
with a resolute mind and great patience.

Oh that one had then seen Natalia, how often the color changed in her
face: sometimes she feared, that her husband should yield, and shrink at the
cruelty of the torments, and then she was pale as a clothe, but when she saw
him endure all constantly and courageously, her lively and cherefull colloure
returned into her face. Sometimes Adrian looked toward her, and though nothing
she said, yet only by her countenance he understood, how she bad him be
valliant, and resolute, and to have consideration that the more the torments
increased, so much greater should his reward be. The holy martyr was beaten
with such cruelty, that they having torn and rent his flesh, and laid his
ribs open to the view, might also see unto his bowels.

The tirant now weary to see any more used on that fashion, at that time,
commanded him into the same prison, where he was before, in which place he
remained certain days in the company of the other Christians, who had endured
the same torment, and suffered the same molestation, as he had done. After this
Maximian caused them to be ageine presented unto him, in the place of judgment.
The martirs were taken out of the dark prison, where thy were brought unto that
state, that it affrighted men, and moved them to compassion, to behold them,
yet they remained constant, (as before) in the faith of JESUS CHRIST. The
tirant commanded the bones of all their legs to be broken to shiuers, and
one of the hands of St Adrian to be cut of. The holy martirs in this torment
passed from this unto a better life, even as they made their prayers unto our
Lord.

Then Maximian gave commandment, that their bodies should be burned, and
whilst the officers, having already gotten all their bodies together, prepared
to perform it, and had laid wood on the top of them, and put fire unto them,
behold on a sodeine, the sky was covered with dark and black clouds, and
dreadful thunders were hard, and thunderboltes killed some of the Pagans, who
were busied in burning the bodies of the holy martyrs: and the other fled away
to save their life's: whereat the Christians took heart, and gathered together the
relics of the holy Martirs, taking them out of the fire which was already
quenched: and putting them into a bark, sailed with them unto Bizantium, and
there they buried them very honorably.

After a few days, the courageous matrone Natalia desirous to remain in the
same place, where the holy relics were, passed from Nicomedia, unto
Bizantium, where she made a blessed end in our Lord, and was buried at the
side of S. Adrian her husband: whose body was in process of time carried unto
Rome, and buried in a Church builded to his name.

The death of S. Adrian was on the. 8. day of September: and the death of
Natalia his wife was on the first day of December, in the year of our Lord.
306. upon a monday as the spanish says, Dioclesian reigning jointly with
Maximian, on the earth; and JESUS CHRIST, with the father and holy Ghost, in
perfect Trinity reigning in heaven, to whom be all praise and glory for ever.
Amen. *

The life of S. Gorgonius Martyr.
JESUS CHRIST speaking of his coming into the world Math. 10.
says as S. Matthew writes in his gospel: Do not you think, that I am come
to make peace in the earth: for I am come to set war therein: Although that
the Angels sang when I was borne: Glory be unto God in the heavens, and in
earth, peace unto men of good will: Although I am become man to treat and
conclude peace between mine eternal father and men, and though my salutations
when I rose from death, were nothing but peace, because I desire that every
man should have it; nevertheless, let not any man be deceived, for I am come to
make controversy and variance between the wicked and the good: I am come to
make a division between the father and the son, the mother and the daughter,
the stepmother and the daughter in law: and I am come to make the household
servants, and familier friends enemies unto the master of the house.

This is evident and apparent to be so, for when the father and the son, the
mother and the daughter, the stepmother and the daughter in law, the master of
the house, and his household people, and familiar friends, be wicked and
vicious, if God touch the heart of any of them, and they be converted unto him,
and the other continue in their wickedness, forthwith discord and dissension
arises among them, and they make war one against another, but this do the
wicked against the good, by persecuting them, even to the taking away of their
life's, because they forsake and abandon their conversation.

Of this we have an example in S. Gorgonius the martyr, who was chamberlain
unto the Emperor Diocleasian, who as long as Gorgonius was a Gentill and
worshipped the Idols, lived quietly with him, and he showed much kindness unto
him, but when he understood that Gorgonius was a Christian, forthwith he fell
out with him, and used him with great tyranny, and lastly with great cruelty
put him to death. l. 8. c. 9.
How it came to pass Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea reherseth after this manner.

SAINT Gorgonius was borne in the city of Nicomedia, and was chamberlein unto
the emperor Deoclesian. This man having received the faith of CHRIST JESUS by
the means of Dorotheus his fellow and companion in the same office, These two
conferred what they might do, to get others of the Emperors chamber, to be
made Christians. It fell out that one day one Petrus that had received also the
christian faith, who was a man noble in blood, and of high esteem in
themperours Court, having an honorable office in the same, saw in the city of
Nicomedia, in the high street, and edict or proclamation set up which was made
against the Christians, threatening death and torments to them that should be
discovered.

This man upon a great zeal of our faith took down the edict, and in the
sight of all the people, rent it in pieces. when this happened, Dioclesian and
Maximian (whom the former had chosen to be his colleague and companion in the
Empire, and had given unto him the title of Caesar were both together in
Nicomedia, and unto them it was told, what Petrus had done, whereat both
enraged and mad with fury, commanded he should be brought before their
presence. When he was brought, (and the other two also being there present,) he
reproched and reviled Peter out of measure, and gave strict commaundment, he
should not be favored in his torments; which although they were excessive, yet
did he never show in his countenance any sign, but of joy, and never spoke
word, but it declared a vallerous and invincible mind.

Gorgonius was present at this spectacle, for he and Dorotheus had been
instructors of Peter in the faith of CHRIST. These two seeing the co^stancy of
the B. martyr, there grew in them also a desire to die for the love of JESUS
CHRIST (this his example working much in them) and by accord between them, they
spoke unto the Emperor in this manner: what meanest thou, o Emperor, that thou
tormentest Peter only for that thing, in which if it be in him any fault, we
also are culpable? if thou put him to the endurance of these torments,
because he professes the faith of JESUS CHRIST, the same faith we confess
also: The same intention he has, we have also, therefore reason wills, that
thou put us unto the same torments, which thou have made him to suffer.

when Dioclesian heard them say this: he grew into great choler: The love he
bore toward them before, was not so great, and the desire to do them good, as
was now the indignation he conceived against them, and the determination he
had to handle them evil, and in his fury and rage he said unto them: Since you
seek the way like fools (as this man is) to be tormented, you shall have your
minds satisfied. Then he commanded they should be scourged without pity,
which was performed forthwith, so that their flesh was rent and torn in diverse
places. Then the tirant commanded the officers to lay salt, and power vinegar
into their wounds, and lay them on the gridiron, and under it a fire to be
made, but not a great one, to put them to the more torment.

Peter was now dead by this martyrdom, and because Gorgonius and Dorotheus
seemed yet to live, and the tirant was wearied to see their torment upon the
gridiron, he made them to be taken from it, and with a rope tied about their
necks to be hanged, by which means the two holy martirs rendered up their
souls unto their Creator. Their bodies being taken away, were buried by some
Christians.

But Dioclesian understanding, that the Christians came secretly to make their
prayers at the place, where the holy martirs were buried, caused their bodies
to be taken out of their graves, and to be thrown into the sea. At such time,
as Dioclesian commanded it, he said: Let them be cast into a place, where they
may be no more seen least they be accounted for gods by the Christians, who are
so ignorant, that they do think it better to adore them that have been our
servants, then those whom we adore for our gods.

God Almighty did not permit those blessed Relikes to ly hidden, but rather his
pleasure was, to cause the sea to do them honor, and to bring them unto the
shore. When the Christians saw them, they took them up with reverence, and
buried them in a place unknown unto the pagans. Afterward in process of time,
the body of S. Gorgonius was carried unto Rome, and was buried in the way called
Lauicana, between the two bay trees. The Spanish book says Via Latina. After
this, Pope Gregory. 4. caused it to be translated into the church of S. Peter.

The church celebrateth their feast on the day of their Martyrdom, which was
on the 9. day of September, in the year of out Lord 280. in the time of the
before named Emperor Dioclesian.

The life of S. Nicholas of Tolentine.
THE Apostle S. James in his canonical epistle, Iac. 5.
admonishes us to pray unto God, one for an other, because the continual
prayer of a just man is of great force. But if it be so, as it is indeed, and
that the prayers of the just men, that be here upon the earth, do help much,
notwithstanding that they be subject, yea rather falling ( as JESUS CHRIST
says) seven times a day, Prou. 24.
though they be slight faults: how much more, may we believe, the prayers of
them, who do already enjoy the vision of God and the divine Essence, and be
confirmed in grace, and be certain, and assured never to loose it, nor never to
sin, do help, and do us good. The holy saints gave up their life's for Gods
sake, some in effect, as the martires, and others by the way of goodwill, as
the Confessors; and to be brief, they all offered it up readily in the service
of God, endeavoring all they might, not to offend him by any means. Such like
as these without doubt, be hard of God, when they ask any favor of him.

But omitting the examples and testimonies of the holy scriptures, which make
this thing an Article of faith, we have most evident examples in many holy
saints, unto whom God granted many favors and graces (which they requested of
him) not only in their life time, in this world, but also after their passing
into heaven, to possess the everlasting glory. One of these was S. Nicholas
the Bishop and Confessor, by whose prayers, God granted unto a man and his
wife, a son, who was also called Nicholas, and was a holy man, by whose
merits God granted many favors and graces unto them, that devoutly recommend
themselfs unto him. His life was written by S. Antoninus Archibishop of
Florence, and by a relligious man of his order, in this manner.

SAINT Nicholas was borne in the Marcha d' Ancona in a village called S.
Angelo, in the territory of Fermo. His father was called Compagnone and his
mother Amata. These two were borne of noble blood, rich they were, and good
Christians, but they lived in some discontent, for that having been married
together a good space, they had yet no children: They had a particular devotion
unto S. Nicholas the Bishop and Confessor, and him they besought continually
that he would of God obtain that favor for them, that they might have a fruit
of benediction. With this intent they went to visit his church in the city of
Bari in Puglia. In that place, the holy saint appeared unto them, and did
assure them, that they should have a son, whom thy should name Nicholas after
him, and also that he should be a blessed servant of God.

Every thing fell out just, as the Saint said: for the being returned home,
Amata conceived, and at her due time brought forth a son, whom they called
Nicholas: and as he took his name of S. Nicholas Bishop and Confessor, by
whose intercession he was obtained, even so he was like unto him in many
things. From a child, he was inclined to serve God, he frequented the Church,
he hard mass and prayed with great devotion, moreover, he fasted, gave alms
and followed his study, so that as he increased in age, even so he did in
virtue, learning, and science. and to be short, he determined to be a man of
the Church.

He was already made a chanon of the church of S. Savior, in the place where
he dwelt, and it happened, that a worthy and renowned father of the order of S.
Augustine, came thither to preach. One day among others, Nicholas was at the
sermon, in the which the preacher expounded these words of S. John 2.
John: Do not you love the world, nor the things, that be therein, The preacher
spoke such good matter upon that text, that Nicholas resolved to abandon the
world, and to take the habit of S. Augustine in that same co^uent, where the
said preacher dwelt with whom he had been acquainted before that time. When he
intended to execute in deed the resolution he had made before time, he asked
leave of his father and mother, who though they were aggriued to want the sight
of their son, yet did they give him license.

Nicholas went unto the convent of Tolentinum, to crave the habit of S.
Augustine, which was given him readily, for they had before then notice of his
good life. Having received the habit, he proceeded from virtue to virtue,
laboring to atteine unto perfection. So that being a relligious man, he was a
mirror for other relligious men, and being a priest, he was a looking glass
for other priests, and when he was a preacher, a spectacle for other preachers,
to behold their duty and function. In this holy saint, among other virtues,
his abstinence shined most clearly: for in. 30. years space, that he continewed
in the convent of Tolentinum, he did never eat flesh, eggs, fish, milk, nor any
thing made with milk.

He fell one time into a grievous infirmity, which brought him unto deaths door,
whereupon the physicians told him; that if he would recover his health, he must
eat flesh, whereunto he answered: that in so doing, he should, by desiring to
avoid one danger, fall into another, and that in flieng the infirmity of the
body, he should incur the malady of his soul, by giving liberty unto his
sensuallity and appetite. The prior of the convent seeing the physicians to
affirm, that it was necessary for the blessed man Nicholas to eat flesh,
commanded him in the virtue of holy obedience, to eat some. He, without any
reply, bad the meat which he should eat, to be brought unto him.

There was brought unto him, (as it is said) a boiled chicken, or some other
foul, whatsoever it was, and the blessed man having it before him, besought
our lord to do him that favor, that he might not eat of that foul, and yet
not to run into the sin of disobedience: whereupon the foul returned unto
life, and flewe away out of the platter, leaving all them that were present
astonished, and the holy saint iocund and glad.

On the next night, the B. Virgin Mary accompanied with S. Augustine visited
him, and the glorious virgin bad him to send for a loaf of bread into the
market place, and to put it in water, and to eat thereof, in the name of JESUS
CHRIST: and he should be cured of that infirmity. Hereof comes the usage, that
the bread, which is called the bread of S. Nicholas of Tolentino, is blessed
on that day in the conuents of S. Augustine, that his feast is solemnised, and
this bread helps, and cures many infirmities, as is to this day seen by
experience, especially the fever tercian, which was his infirmity as is
thought.

S. Nicholas being healed, and cured of the aforesaid infirmity, returned unto
his accustomed penance, and austerity of life; he used to fast three days in
the week, which he had observed from the age of seven years. He whipped
himself in the night many times, and his discipline or whippe was certain
chains of Iron: his bed was made with a little hay, and his habit was of
course cloth, full of pieces; he used to pray very much, for he continued in
his oraisons from the hour of the Complin, until it was far in the night,
and from the hour of mattins until mass was celebrated, and from the hour
of None until the euensong.

The blessed man spending his time in these, and other like good exercises, was
much vexed and mollested by the devil, who endeavored to draw him from these
his holy imploymentes, by scoffs and deceits, and sometimes (by the permission
of God) by tormenting and beating him, in such sort, that the friars hearing
the noise came forthwith to defend him, and they found him laid at length upon
the ground, like a dead man, and so they carried him back unto his couch of hay,
and, yet he for all this omitted not his prayers. He visited sick men with great
charity, and endeavored to help and cherish them, as much as he was able. He had
great compassion upon some sinners which had made their confession unto him,
and for them he prayed, fasted, and said mass with great devotion.

The like he did for the souls in purgatory, unto the which he had great
devotion, which was increased much more in him by a revelation he had, of the
great pains they suffered in that place. when there came any friar as a
stranger unto his convent, he showed him all the kindness, he could possibly,
neither did he forget the state of prisoners, but rather in his sermons, and
private communications, which he had with rich men, and men in authority, he
persuaded them to the works of mercy, as a thing very acceptable unto our lord.
This blessed Saint comforted the afflicted, gave consolation unto men in
tribulation, set atonement between men, that were at variance: He was a refuge
for them, that were in affliction, a helper unto the needy, and the raunsomer
of them that were slaves and in bondage.

God showed many miracles by the means of this glorious saint, as well in his
life time, as also after his death, which be fell him in the before said convent
of Tolentine. and when he was now at the last gasp, he called the friars, and
desired them all to forgive him, if he had offended them in any thing: and
after he had received the most holy sacraments, he caused a crucifix to be set
before him, and in speaking unto CHRIST, his B. Mother, and his holy father S.
Augustine, he yielded up his soul unto God, on the. 10. day of September, in
the year of our Lord. 1307. Afterward Pope Eugenius the. 4. having made due
diligence, and having receued full information of his life, and miracles, put
his name in the catalogue of the holy Confessors. in the year of our
salvation. 1446.

The life of SS. Protus and Iacinctus Martirs.
THE Apostle S. Paul says: Romans 1.
that by the means of visible things we come unto the knowledge of the
invisible things of God. His meaning is, that by the knowledge of the creatures,
we come unto the knowledge of the creator. Even so it happened unto the glorious
martirs SS. Protus and Iacinctus by the means of a holy damsel called
Eugenia. They studied philosophy, and other human sciences, and by that
study, they came to the knowledge, that the Gods which the Gentiles adore, were
false, and that there was but one God only. After this, by conuersing with
some Christians, they understood that JESUS CHRIST is the true God, and they
were converted unto his faith. In collecting their life out of that, which S.
Isidore and Simeon Metaphrastes write in the life of S. Eugenia, I say: That.

SAINT Protus and S. Iacinctus were eunuchs, and attended upon a noble Lady
called Eugenia, daughter unto Philip a Roman senator who being elected Regent
of Alexandria by the senate, went thither with Claudia his wife, Eugenia his
daughter, and all his family. There went thither also with Eugenia, Protus and
Iacinctus the two Eunuchs. And because in that city there was a study of
diverse sciences, Eugenia and the two Eunuchs be stowed their time in study, and
they all three profited much therein. Philosophy was their chiefest study, and
by speculation in the same, thy came to know that it was a foolish and vain
thing to adore many Gods, for reason did make demonstration, that such wicked,
and lewd men as were Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, and all the other, which the
heathens adored for Gods, were not only unworthy of the name of God, but also
of men, since their deeds and actions were bestiall and abominable.

After this, beginning to frequent the company of christians, they had
understanding of the mysteries of our faith, and so desired to be baptized: To
perform this the better, Eugenia determined to put her self in man's apparel,
and in that sort to depart from her fathers house, taking with her Prothus and
Iacinthus the Eunuchs, to seek out a holy Abbot called Helenus, to be by him
Baptized, and received into his society. This Abbot governed a monastery of
relligious men, and had a revelation that Eugenius so called was a woeman, yet
because he knew it, to be the will of God, that things should proceed in that
manner, he kept it from her. He Baptized them and gave unto them all three his
religious habitt, and they lived therein a godly and virtuous life: Afterward
Helenus the Abbot deceasing, the monks, who thought Eugenius had been a man,
chose her for their Abbot. Who was unwilling to take the charge on her, but the
entreaty of the monks who were much pleased with her holy life prevailed.

There was in Alexandria a matrone called Melantia, who had bin cured and
healed of a great infirmity, by the prayers of Eugenius who adjudged her to be
a man. Eugenius went often unto her house at her importunate inuitations. The
matrone was indeed ennamoured of her, and they two being alone, without any
regard of her estate or credit laid open her love imagining her to be a man.
Eugenius sharply reproved her, and so departed and left her alone. Melantia
seeing her self contemned and refused, like the mistress of Joseph shricked out,
and said: Genesis 39.
that the Abbot Eugenius would have forced her: And not content with that, did
also accuse her falsely unto the Governor, who was the father of Eugenia. The
Regent having heard the accusation of Melania commanded the Abbot Eugenius to
be brought in before him. When the blessed Saint understood the cause wherefore
she was called, she took thhe Eunuchs Protus and Iacinctus in the habit of
religious men with her, being come before Philip her father, he used rough
words and asked them if CHRIST their God counseled them to force honorable
Ladies?

The virgin with a modest and cherefull face said: There is time to be silent,
and a time to speak. Eccle. 3.
If Melantia says that I would use force, it is not true, and thou o Philip
peradventure do but jest with me, in asking if the God that I adore, does
will me to do such things. Now thou shall see the verity of this woman's
acusation. Having says this, she rent her habit before her breast, and opened
it, that every one might see by her breasts that she was a woman. Then she
proceeded, and told him that she was Eugenia his daughter and moreover she
spoke so well unto her father, that he was converted unto the faith of CHRIST,
and so was Claudia his wife, and all the rest of his family.

Philip gave up his office and place, and not long after was chosen Bishop: and
afterward in the persecution raised by the Emperors Valerian and Gallyen he
was martired. Claudia, Eugenia, Prothus and Iacinctus, returned unto Rome,
where by the labor of the holy damsel Eugenia and of the two holy Eunuchs
Protus and Iacinctus, many were converted unto the faith of CHRIST. Gallien
being certified hereof, caused Eugenia to be apprehended, and after the
indurance of many torments to be beheadded. Then he caused the two Eunuchs
Prothus and Iacinctus to be taken and having used sundry enducements to move
them to sacrifice unto the Idols, which they refused to do, (showing
themselves very courageous and constant in the faith of CHRIST) the tirant
caused them to be cruelly scourged, and after many other torments given unto
them, he caused them in like manner to be beheaded.

Their martyrdom and death was on the 11. day of September and on that day the
Church celebrateth their feast. It was in the year of our Lord. 263. in the
reign of the aforesaid Gallyen.

The exaltation of the holy Cross.
ALMIGHTY God glories by the mouth of the prophet Ezechiel to have done a
famous work, Ezech. 17.
and indeed worthy of himself, as he shows by the manner of rehersing the
save, saying: I the Lord have humiliated and abased the lofty and stately wood,
and have enhaunced the lowly and humble wood. S. Jerome says, that this humble
wood, is JESUS CHRIST, and he says very well, for he being so humbled, that at
the last he died on the Cross, God for that cause, did exalt him ( as S. Paul
says) to such height, that the Angels in heaven, Phil. 2.
the men on earth, and under the earth, in purgatory, do bow their knees at
his name, and do him reverence.

And JESUS CHRIST was not exalted only to that height, for that he was
humiliated, but the wood also which was the instrument of his humiliation, was
exalted, and honored by God, since (as S. Augustine says) the Cross which was
always before reprochefull, because thieues, and other malefactors were put to
death on the same; now Emperors and kings, bear it on their heads, for that
JESUS CHRIST died upon the same.

The Emperor Heraclius honored and respected it especially, wresting it out of
the hands of Cosdroes king of Persia ( who had taken it from Jerusalem and
carried it into his kingdom) and putting it in the former place. Now let us
see, how it passed, framing a history thereof, out of a sermon, that Andreas B.
of Candia made of the Exaltation of the holy Cross, rehearsed by Lippomanus,
and the lections of the Roman Breuiary, and diverse martirologes and
historiographers, yet first we will propound an important doctrine, which is
this.

OUR Lord God desiring to be served, and not to be offended by men, seeing their
condition, and several estates, and that some be noble, and to be dealt with
all mildly, and that others be rude, and are to be handled roughly, he gave
premonitions unto them, to the end they should not lament nor complain of him,
as if they had not ben warned. He talking with the Hebrews (as we read in
Leuiticus) said to them: Leuit. 26.
If you observe my commandments, among other good and profit you shall reap
thereby, one shall be this: that if you have enemies that molest and make war on
you, five of you shall put a. 100. of them to flight, and a. 100. of you shall
put to flight. 10000. of them. But if on the other side you shall be disobedienr
to me, a few, of your enemies shall make many of you to fly, and that in dread
and fear though none pursue you.

This which God said then unto the people, was apparent and seen (as we read in
the book of Joshua) where it is said: Ios. 7.
that the Hebrews having beseiged Jericho certain days, finally they took it,
without drawing their sword, because the walls fell down, and they which were
within, made no resistance, all was put to the fire and sword, not sparing any
thing, for so God had commanded, because his indignation was kindled against
that nation, as also to terrify his other enemies. It came to pass in the
pilling thereof, that there came to the hands of a soldier called Achan a
scarlet robe, some money, and a wand or rod of gold: which things he kept
against the commandment of God. And to be more secure he hid them all in the
ground.

This being done, part of the army dislodged, and went to fight against Hay,
the citisens whereof issued out and encountered with them; and prevailed killing
many Israelites, and few returned with this doleful news.

Joshua general of the host, seeing the same, fell on the ground, and weeping
said unto God: How happens it, o Lord: be these thy promises? Does it seem
to thee a just thing, to have thy people so evil entreated by thine enemies?
As Soon as we be entered into this country, to conquer it why do thou give
such forces to our adversaries? This shall be an occasion that others shall take
courage, and it shall be a hard thing to subject them. God answered Joshua: that
this happened through the fault of the people them selves having broken his
precept, in reserving some things in the destruction of the city. Therefore
seek out the culpable, and offender, and let him be chastised, and my just
indignation shall cease. As Soon as Joshua had by enquiry found him out, he
caused him to be punished, and the people did after that prevail against their
enemies.

By this you may see, that when Catholics are overcome, and vanquished, it
happens; because God is offended with them for their sins. we ought there
fore have this regard ever when war is made against infidells: if we intend
and desire to have victory, that we be in good estate and accord with God, by
confessing our sins, doing penance, and receiving the B. Sacrament of the
Altar, and without doubt, then a few Christians will be able to resist many
Infidels.

As it befell to Pope Leo. 4. in the year of our Lord. 854. who being
certified, that there was disembarqued or landed at Ostia a great number of
Infidels, and that no captein durst affront them, The glorious Pope assembled
people, and said; he himself would be general of the Army. And that he might
set on, and encounter with his enemies more securely, he enjoined all the
soldiers to confess their sins, and to receive the B. sacrament: he also
commanded each one, in the one hand to carry their weapons for the war, and
in the other hand, the Rosary, to say their prayers in the way. Arriving after
this manner, in the sight of the enemy, notwithstanding the huge number of the
Infidels, and the small host of the Christians, he discomfited them, and drove
them out of Italy, to the great honor of the valiant Bishop, and good and
benefitt of all Christendom.

All this may be fitly applied unto that, which befell in the time of
the emperor Heraclius. for that the sins of the Cristians were many and
heinous ( Phocas ruling the Gretian empire, who was a vicious man, and so he
died, for Heraclius deprived him of thempire, and of his life also) God
permitted a tirant called Cosdroes king of Persia, as a grievous scourge to rise
against them. He being not content to have taken by force of arms the holly
city of Jerusalem, and to have sacked it, carried away the holy cross, (on the
which JESUS CHRIST died, which had bin there, from the time of Helena the
mother of Constantine, who found it) into Persia, and put it in the temple of
one of his Idols: and again he invaded the lands of the Christians with a new
army, were he used horrible cruelties.

With fury he passed into Egypt, and won the city of Alexandria, in which
place he stayed certain days, for that he under stood Heraclianus father to
the emperor Heraclius came against him with a huge host, but by the secret
judgment of God Heraclianus died of sickness, and his army was utterly defeated.
The proud Cosdroes proceeded, and in few days made him self lord of all the
dominons the emperor had in Africa: he sacchegged Thunis, and having used
horrible massacres of Christians, he returned into his kingdom of Persia.

The Emperor Heraclius all this wile remained in Constantinople, spendnig the
time in iollity and pleasures, having taken to wife a beautiful lady called
Martina, who was his cousin, but when he saw things go a way, to his great
reproach and discredit, and fearing greater loss might ensue in the empire,
first, he tried to obtain a peace by lowly and humble embassages, and upon
conditions no less reproachful then disauantageous for his estate; but the
arrogant infidel, proud of his victories, would give no ear to his peticions,
but sent a messenger to say, that he would make no accord with him, except he
would deny the faith of JESUS CHRIST, and become an Idolater as he him self was.

This proud answer, and blasphemy, did so exasperate the Christian Emperor,
that he became another man, and was altered from a negligent and careless
person, to a courageous and enkindled with a godly zeal: And being desirous to
take on him the defense of Gods honor, he behaved himself as a valiant prince,
and a Catholic and good Christian. First, he assembled his forces very
diligently, that he might come to try it with that proud pagan by dint of word,
and also amassed great store of men, engines, and other provisions for the
war; and commanded, that in all the empire processions and prayers should be
made, to beseech God to take the defense of his church, and to punish the proud
blasphemy of the presumptuous tirant against his heavenly majesty.

Heraclius departed from Constantinople, toward this pious and holy interprise,
carrying alwais in his right hand the Image of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, and of his
glorious mother, as his Captein (and the report was, the the same Image was
brought from heaven) and passing from thence the sea with a goodly company, he
entered into Asia, to affront the proud enemy, who when he understood that
the emperor with a mighty army came to seek him, was advised to have regard of
his person; so he retired to a strong and secure place, and left his army
guided by valorous generals, to defend the countries he had conquered, and his
own also. There happened in this war (which lasted little less then six
years) many great and notable feats of arms.

The sum of all was, that they fought in three set battles: The first was
in the passage of the mount Taurus and the river Saron. and in this Heraclius
discomfited and put to flight Saluarus one of the chiefest capteines of
Cosdroes. The second pitched field was, in the next year, with Satinus who was
another valiant captain, and the encounter was very terrible, for the Persians
fought stoutly to recover the honor they had lost in the former battle so
that Heraclius was in great danger. The Christians were resolved to leave the
field, and to fly; when it pleased God to hear the prayer of his champion
Heraclius: for unlooked for, there fell from heaven a great shower of rain
with a storm, which driven with a strong wind, carried the rain into the face
of the pagans, and deprived them of their sight, in such sort, that they not
being able to fight began to fly, which the Imperials seeing, took heart,
beholding God apparently to fight on their side: and thus they obtained the
second victory, which was more great then the first.

Lastly, in the year following, Heraclius returned into the field, to encounter
with Razatanes the most valiant captain Cosdroes had: and therein the emperor
behaved himself so valiantly, that he utterly defeated and daunted the pride
of the arrogant and cruel king Cosdroes, who was enforced by these ouerthrows
to retire himself unto the most strong and secure places of his kingdom of
Persia.

This his fearful retreat caused his utter ruin. For thinking he had left
sufficient forces on the frontiers of his realm, to keep his enemies from
entrance, he made Medarses his younger son his heir and successor in his
kingdom, and put him in possession thereof, and assigned him to stay on the
frontiers for the more sure guard and defense thereof, and to keep the
Imperialls from entering therein.

Cosdroes had another son elder then Medarses, called Siricheus, o Sirus (as
some call him) who expected to succeed his father in the kingdom (as his
right and prowess also deserved) who took such indignation at his fathers
doing, that he divised to deprive him of his crown: and that he might with
more facility bring his purposes to pass, he determined to make a secret
accord with Heraclius, which was concluded upon these articles: That he should
deliver unto the emperor Heraclius his father and brethren, either alive or
dead: and also the Cross of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: and set free out of prison
Zacharias the patriarch of Jerusalem: That he should restore all that which
Cosdroes had taken from thence: And that he should have the realm of Persia
for himself, and that he should keep perpetual peace with the Christians. All
these covenants were performed. For by the aid of them of his faction, and the
aid Heraclius sent, he was made king, and put his father and brethen to death,
he restored the holy Cross, set the patriarch free, and performed all the
covenants comprised in the peace.

The Emperor Heraclius, desirous to render thanks unto God for the benefits
received, and also to restore the Holy Cross unto the place, where it ought to
stand, went on procession. In the which Heraclius was clothed in most gorgeous
apparel, and with shoes embrodered with perles and precious stones: and in
this manner he carried the holy Cross, as in imitation of JESUS CHRIST:

It happened that when he should enter the gate of the city to go unto Mount
Caluary, (I say enter, Brocard: de terra sancta p. 1. c. 7.. 43.
for that before the destruction of Jerusalem, Mount Caluary was out of the
city, and when it was reedified newely, Mount Caluary was comprised with in the
city gate, where by he was to enter) he stayed with the Cross on his shoulder,
and could not stir by any means. He and all the rest of the people which
were present were amassed at the miracle, not knowing what the cause might be.

The patriark Zacharias came near unto the emperor, and said: I am in dou^e
that thou thy self give cause, why thou can not stir, and I will tell
thee what it is: Thou now do carry the Cross upon thy shoulders, as in
imitation of JESUS CHRIST who bore the same this way: But if thou mark it well
thou do imitate him but little, for thou do not carey it, as he did, nor
as it should be carried. Thou art apparelled in most costly garments, and he
was clothed most meanly: Thou have on thy head an imperial crown, and he
wore one of pricking thorns: he went with his feet bare, and full of dust, and
thy feet are adorned with purple embrodered with Jewels and precious stones.

The words of the patriark seemed to the emperor to be reasonable, and true,
whereupon he caused a mean and course garment to be brought unto him. He took
the crown of from his head, and put of his hose and shoes, and thus being
barefoot, and meanly apparelled, he followed the procession, until he set the
holy Cross in the former place, from whence Cosdroes had taken it foureten
years before. For this respect the Catholic church ordained that every year,
the feast of the exaltation of the holy Cross should be celebrated on the same
day it was placed again by Heraclius in the very same place it was set when
JESUS CHRIST should die thereon.

This mystery befell on the day, that the Church celebrateth it, that is: on
the 14. day of September; S. Aug. ser 17. de imoli Isac D. Amb. lib. 5. epist.
Epiph. in sine pana.
in the year of our Lord. 624. in the reign of the abouenamed Heraclius. S.
Augustine S. Ambrose and S. Epiphanius say: that in the place where the Cross
of CHRIST was set, Adam was buried, and the dead nans scull which ordinarily
is painted at the foot of the Cross denotes and signifies the same.

The life of S. Nicomedes Priest and Martyr.
RIGHT happy are they ( says JESUS CHRIST,) Math. 5.
which suffer for the love of justice. This is not to be understood of them,
that are punished by course of law for their trespasses. All they who are
whipped, sent to the galleys, and condemned to die, are not happy; but many of
them may more justly be called unfortunate, in that they know not how to reap
profit by this chasticement, which their offenses deserves; but bear it
impatiently, and dye desperately: but right happy are those, that having done
any just, holy, or meritorious act, affiction comes upon them, as it befell
unto S. Nicomedes the priest, who lost his life, for that he had buried a holy
damsel martired by the pagans, as may be seen in this story written by
Marcelus the disciple of S. Peter the Apostle in this manner.

SAINT Petronilla the daughter of S. Peter being in Rome, was seen by the
governor of the city, who was enamored of her. And though that he was a man in
chief authority, yet went he unto the house of the holy saint, with a great
troop of gentlemen, and gave her to understand, that he loved her, and desired
to marry her, and make her his wife. Petronilla seeing Flaccus, (for that was
his name) to be a man of great power, douted he would use violence, and
therefore shaped him this answer: me think it is not a thing convenient, to
come and speak unto a damsel (living alone, as I do) with such a crewe,
especially in such a matter as of love; as though thou would obtain me more
by constraint, then by love. I should be thought a fool and unwise if I would
forsak such an honorable person as thy self, that sueth to mary me, and take
any other to my husband: wherefore my Lord, I beseech thee to send unto me some
matrone or damsells, to stay and remain three days with me, after which time
I will come unto thy house, and the wedding shall be made as thou desire.

This her request contented the governor fully, and so he departed, with
intent to perform her desire. Petronilla had a maid servant called Felicula,
who was a Christian and very virtuous, and unto her Petronilla uttered her mind
in great familiarity, and besought her to assist her in her prayers unto God,
that with in three days God would be pleased to take her out of this life.
Felicula at the request of her mistress, was content to do it. So they two
fasted and prayed all those three days, and did other works acceptable unto
God.

On the third day there came unto them a priest and servant of God, dwelling in
Rome, called Nicomedes; who said mass, and gave them the B. Sacrament. S.
Petronilla having communicated, began a long and fervent speech unto JESUS
CHRIST, saying: that she had offered her virginity unto him, with a perpetual
vow; and therefore desired him not to permit it to be violated against her will.
S. Felicula also as a true friend, aided her, importunating our Lord, to
deliver his handmaid out of that danger; though she desired not her death. It
was Gods pleasure to give Petronilla remedy by that means; for having ended her
oraisons, she went unto bed, and yielded up her soul unto God. The matrones and
damsells Flaccus had sent, to accompany the spouse unto his house on the
wedding day, came in god time to solemnise the funerals of the holy saint.

When Flaccus was certefied, and saw Petronilla to be dead, he cast his eyes
upon Felicula (who was very sorrowful, for the death of her friend) being very
beutifull, which drew the affection of Flaccus in such sort, that he was
enamored of her also* and after many words he used to that purpose he finished
his speech thus: Felicula, elect one of these two things, please thy self either
to be my wife, or else sacrifice unto the Gods. The good damsel made him this
bold answer: I will not be thy wife, for I have JESUS CHRIST to my spouse, and
I will not sacrifice unto thy Gods, for that I am a Christian. when Flaccus
hard the resolute answer of Felicula, he delivered her into the hands of the
liuetenant to give judgment upon her. He kept her fast in a dark room for
seven days, and beside other vexations he kept her from any sustenance.

Some women that belonged unto the prison, said unto her: Alas poor girl, why
art thou so fond, as to die willingly this evil death? Take this great Lord
unto thy husband, who is beutifull, rich, and in the flower of his youth, and
highly favored of the emperor, who has made him governor of this city: other
women would have been right glad thereof, and thou make no account of him,
which may turn to thy damage and loss of life. The blessed damsel replied:
I am the spouse of JESUS CHRIST, and I will not mary any other but him.

After that seven days expired, Felicula was led unto the Vestall virgins,
where she remanied certain days, but she would never eat of the meat that
they did eat, because it was offered and sacrificed unto the goddess Vesta;
for if she had eaten thereof, she had given a sign to consent unto their
Idolatry, and other Christians would have been much scandalized thereat. When
the deputy understood the constancy of Felicula, he caused her to be taken out
of that place, and to be tortured with the torture called Eculeus, and when she
was tortired there with, she said with a loud voice: Now do I see my beloved
JESUS CHRIST, upon whom I have fixed my love.

The excutioners said unto her; Say, that thou art not a Christian, and thou
shall be delivered from this torture: She answered: I do not deny, neither will
I deny my beloved JESUS CHRIST, who for my sake was crowned with thorns; and
had gall given him, for drink; and also died on the Cross. The executioners
took her of from that torment, and threw her in a gutter or sink, in the which
the blessed damsel yielded up her soul unto Almighty God.

Nicomedes the priest, that had said mass, and given the B. sacrament unto S.
Petronilla on the day of her death, and had lain clo^e and hidden in a cave,
for fear of the persecution, was advertised thereof; and one night he departed
out of the cave, and took the body of S. Felicula from thence, and buried it a
mile out of Rome, in the way toward Ardea.

Flaccus being told, what Nicomedes had done, caused him to be apprehended for
the same, and being instigated by the fiend, willed him to sacrifice unto the
gods. The good priest said he would not sacrifice to any, but to Almighty God,
that reigned in the heavens; for that they whom they reputed gods, were no
other, but stocks and stones, which remained in their temples, like prisoners.

The governor commanded he should be whipped, which was done with such
vehemence, that the good priest passed out of this unto a better life in this
torment, and his body was cast into the river Tiber, by the commandment of the
cursed Judge: but one Iustus his servant, sought carefully after it; and carried
it being found unto a garden of his, nere unto the walls of the city, in the
way called Numentana, and there he buried it. Unto which place many Christians
resorted, and there by the merits of that holy Saint, obtained many graces of
God.

The death of S. Nicomedes was on the 15. day of September, Spanish says: 52.
under Cl^^dius.
and on the same day the Church celebrateth his feast. It was then (as Canisius
says) the year of our Lord. 90. in the reign of the Emperor Domitian, and
the same he says of S. Petronilla, as is already, said in her life.

But many think it was much sooner, for if S. Petronilla died in the year of
our Lord. 90. she must be of necessity at that time 60. years old, because she
was borne before that our Lord gave the chiefest prelacy or Papacy unto S.
Peter her father, for from thenceforth he observed chastity. And again, if she
was so old, it is not a thing likely that Flaccus should be ennamoured of her.

We read also in the life of Pope Paul 1. that he translated from one place
unto another, All this the Spanish has not in this place.
the body of S. Petronilla, and that he found an epitaph, which S. Peter the
Apostle had made at her death. Which being so it follows; that before the
year of our Lord. 70. in which S. Peter was crucified, S. Petronilla was dead,
wherefore in mine opinion her death and the martyrdom of S. Nicomedes was not
in the year of our Lord. 90. as Canisius says: but in, or about the year of
our Lord. 60. in the reign of Nero.

The life of S. Cornelius Pope and Martyr.
SOLOMON says in Ecclus: Ca. 23.
The man that swears much shall be full of iniquity, and the plague shall not
depart from his house. The wise man does not say, he that swears falsely, but
he that swears much. For that speaking morally, he that swears much,
swears false at one time or other. This sin displeases God so much, that
he deferreth not the chasticement till the world to come, but punishes it in
this life, sending plagues upon the house where such poople be. So then, if the
swearer be afflicted with necessities, infirmities, and other troubles of this
life; we may think he has deserved it for his many oaths. Those that be free
from such miseries, if they desire to be always free, let them abstain from
oaths, and swearing. The holy Pope Cornelius considering this; to avoid so
evil am use, and custom, among Christians, ordained by a decree: That lawful
oaths, as those that be made by order, and before superiors, and by the law,
should be taken fasting, as a holy thing, where of we should advise us well.
He would for the reverence of the oath, that they which should swear, should
be fasting, to the end they should do^ it, with more advise and regard. The
life of this pope written by Damasus, and other authors, was in this manner.

SIX days after S. Fabianus the pope was martired; Cornelius a man no less
learned then holy, was placed in the chair of S. Peter, who received that
dignity against his will. S. Ciprian says he was a Roman, Lib 4. epist.
and son unto Castinus. When he was chosen pope, the Church was in great
troubles; for beside the temporal sword where with the Christians were sharply
afflicted, they were encombred also with the treacherous heresy of Nouatus,
which they could not wholly root out: yet this blessed pope Cornelius
endeavored with all diligence to confound them, by preaching and doctrine; by
which he reduced many of those heretics to the union of the Catholic faith.

After this, the pope (being aided by Lucina a noble Roman matron) determined
to take the bodies of SS. Peter and Paul, out of the Catatumbae where they then
were, and to put them in a more comely, and eminent place. The body of S. Paul
was carried unto the posession of the aforenamed Lucina, in the Via Ostiensis,
not far from the place where he was beheaded, and there was built a sumptuous,
and magnificent church to his honor. The relics of S. Peter were carried into
the Vatican, where in like manner was built a church, near to the place where
he was crucified. For these good works, and many other which he did, as also,
for that many pagans were converted unto the faith by his means; Decius the
Emperor banished him from Rome, and sent him to Centum-Celle.

S. Cornelius remaining there, wrote oftentimes unto S. Cyprian bishop of
Carihage, a holy man, and very eloquent, who in like manner returned him
answers: and at this day, many of those Epistles be extant in his works.

Decius being certified of the near and private friendship of these two holy
men, took great indignation thereat, and com^unded: that Cornelius should be
led unto Rome, and brought before his judgment seat, which being done, Decius
said unto the blessed pope in great collar: Think thou (Cornelius) that thou
do well, and that which thou ought to do, in doing no reverence to our
Gods, nor obeying our Imperial comaundements, nor fearing our threats? yea thou
writest unto our enemies of the estate of the weale-publike, both in disgrace
of it, and to the prejudice of the same. To this S. Cornelius answered: the
letters that I have received, meddle not at all with the comonwelth, neither
treat of anything appertaining to the same; but they be wholly written in the
laud, and honor of JESUS CHRIST, and of matters only appartaining to the
salvation of souls. Decius was much more moved to indignation then before at
this bold answer; and commanded, that the blessed pope should be beaten in
his sight. After that, he appointed, that he should be led unto the Temple of
Mars, and if he refused to sacrifice, that he should be beheaded.

The holy Pope went with determination to suffer, not one, but a 1000. deaths,
rather then he would deny his faith and his God. By the way he met with Stephen
his Archdeacon, unto whom he gave in charge to distribute the Treasures of the
church unto the poor, and he gave unto him also some records, appertaining to
the government of the Church. When the officers perceived, that there was no
way nor means, to draw S. Cornelius to sacrifise unto the Idols; they led
him into via Appia, near unto the Churchyard of Callistus, and in that place
they cut of his head. After his death, certain priests, (in the company of
Lucina) took up his body, and buried it in a possession, in the San-field.

The martyrdom of this holy Pope was on the 14. day of September, about the
year of our Lord 253. the above named Decius being Emperor. He held the seat
of S. Peter 2. years, 2. months, and 3. days. He gave holy orders twice in
the month of December, and therein ordered 4. Priests. 4. Deacons, and 7.
Bishops. There be in the decrees certain Canons of this holy Pope, as the
before said, that he who is by lawful order and authority to take an oath,
should do it fasting. Also, 22. q. 5. cap. honest.
that Priests be not enforced to swear. Also, that he, that is under the age
of 14. years, should not be compelled to take an oath.

Some hold this holy Saint for an especial advocate against the falling
sickness; but the occasion thereof is not known. It suffices that the prayers
of the saints are of great force and valewe with the majesty of God, for all
human infirmities, as well spiritual, as corporal. We may well think him an
advocate for the palsy, for as they led him unto martyrdom, he healed a woman
that had the palsy, which woman was called Salustia who with her husband
Cereall was also martired the same day. This holy S. Cornelius is one of the
five Popes, of whom mention is made in the Canon of the mass.

The life of S. Cyprian Bishop and Martyr.
THE Apostle S. Paul lothing the world, Ca. 1.
and all the things therein, desired much to go unto heaven to enjoy JESUS
CHRIST, and to that purpose in the epistle unto the Philippeans he says: I
desire to be freed and unloosed from the bonds of this flesh, and to be with
CHRIST. The notice he had, that to come to enjoy his desire, must be by
beheading, did not hinder this his longing.

The glorious martyr S. Cyprian seemed to have the same desire, who when the
judge pronounced the sentence of death upon him, answered joyfully: Deo
gratias. as if he would say: that he did not appeal from this sentence, but
gave God thanks, that it pleased him to call him by that means. When he came
unto the place of execution, to show that he was beholding to the officer (for
the good turn in taking away his life) he requested some of his friends who
were present there, to give him some money, which he bestowed upon the headsman,
as a recompense of his labor.

Pontius his Deacon wrote the life of this holy Saint faithfully, and in an
eloquent style. Of Pontius this testimony is given by S. Jerome, in his book of
ecclesiastical writers: Pontius Deacon unto Cyprian, wrote a worthy book of
his life, until the day of his martyrdom, for he was familier with him, and
also his companion in banishment. For which testimony of S. Jerome (which
gives him auctority) I think best to follow Pontius, and to leave other
authors that wrote that life of this holy Saint.

THOUGH the memory of Cyprian Bishop and martyr of JESUS CHRIST shall endure
whilst the world lasts, for that he wrote so many eloquent and learned
works, yet requisite it is, that beside this, he should be registered for his
famous and renoumed deeds, and for his most holy life, for the good of them
that shall live herafter. And because many have a care, to describe the
martirdomes, that holy men have suffered for CHRIST'S sake, making thereby their
name immortal, it is very just, that the martyrdom of S. Cyprian be also
written, that his eternal memory may be conserved, since he excelled in his
life, even from the time of his conversion, and lastly in his martyrdom. We
need not to make any relation of his life, before his conversion, because it
was of no regard, or estimation in the sight of God.

Cyprian was altogether given unto worldly matters, he studied humain letters,
in the which he came to be very learned. He was a good, retoritian, and redd
that science publicly in Carthage, which was his native country* but after he
was converted unto God, and of an Idollater was made a believer, and of a
painim a christian; he gave himself unto the study of divinity, and thereunto he
adjoined good works, which be very acceptable unto God. He especially resolved
to observe chastity: he sold his patrimony and distributed the money arising
thereof unto the poor: and by this he obtained two things. First: he avoided
thereby worldly ambition, unto which worldly riches do draw men, that be
welthy: and secondly; he was made perfect in virtue, as soon as he had knowledge
thereof, and knew what it was. For our Lord JESUS CHRIST, gave this counsel
unto a young man, that in all his life had kept the commandments of God, and
told him; that if he would be perfect, he must sell all, that he had, and give
the price unto the poor. S. Ciprian beginning to be good, desired also to be
perfectly good, for (as I have said) he sold all that he had, and gave the money
unto the poor. This was in him considerable, and also stupendous, because he
that sows, gathers not the fruit forthwith. He that planteth a vineyard,
does not forthwith gather grapes, he that planteth a melon or a pear, does not
by and by gather a pear or a melon. This wonder was remarkable in Cyprian, for
he had not scarce thrown the seed out of his hand, but he began to reap the
corn; the vineyard was uneath planted, and yet he gathered grapes of it. So,
as soon as the tree of the word of God and of faith was planted in his soul, so
soon were seen in him the fruits of holy and virtuous works.

And though that the Apostle advises us; 1 Timothy 3.
that the Neophite should not be made a Bishop (to wit one that is newely
converted from any sect what soever, unto true Christianity) saying: it is not
fit to bestow on him so soon a dignity of such account, as it is to be a
Bishop, lest there should be any nouelty introduced by him into the Church of
God, which might smell or savor of Paganism; yet this rule was not observed
in the election of Ciprian; for that which is wrought in other men by time,
that did his great and lively faith operate in him presently, and therefore he
was made priest incontinent.

This function he exercised in all sanctity, neither did the memory of the
forsaking of his goods, and to see him self poor, any whit dismay or hinder
him. The flattering and guilefull words of his wife (which he had when he was a
heathen) did not hinder him, nor the preferments and reputation he had in the
world, no not his kinsfolks nor friends were any impediment, or obstacle unto
him. His virtue continued firm with him, being in this state, because it was
well founded: In such sort, Job. 2.
that no temptation prevailed against him any whit: yea rather like another
Job, he blessed and praised God, in the depth of his tribulations.

Being priest, he dwelt apart from others in a house, which was always open for,
and to the needy. Little he could do, because he was poor, but for the little
that he could, there never came widow, orphan, wounded, or discomforted person,
that departed from him without help, succor or good advise.

He was a great friend of a priest called Cecilius, who was the man, that with
his lively reasons, and holy admonitions had won him from infidelity, and had
Baptized him, and this is the cause why he called himself Cecilius Ciprianus,
allwaies esteeming this priest as his father. Unto this Cecilius S. Ciprian
gave and used means, wherewith to sustein and maintain his wife, which he had
before his conversion, as also his children, which he had by her; that is to
say, one half of his patrimony; for the rest he had bestowed upon the poor.

Cecilius took this charge upon him, to the end Ciprian might better attend
unto the service of God, and pious deeds: for the which he grew so renoumed and
famous, that shortly after he had bin made priest, he was chosen Bishop by all
the people of Carthage, which dignity he refused, as much as might be;
alleging, that in Carthage were many priests, more ancient, well lettred, and
of good life also, which deserved the dignity much more then he, who had been
an Idollater. But the more he refused it, the more earnest the People were in
their opinion, and said that Ciprian and none other should be Bishop and
prelate of that city.

S. Ciprian seeing their resolution, withdrew himself unto his house, and
caused the gates to be fast locked. All the People ran thither in plumpes,
and environed the house in that manner that he repented, that he had shut
himself therein; and then he wished, he might get down away from them, as S.
Paul did; but it was impossible, for all the ways were forelaid with
multitudes of people. There were some, who seeing how unwilling Ciprian was, to
accept the dignity, grudged at them which (in a manner) forced him to accept
it, reciting some of his imperfections: and saying also that it was not fit,
that one who was so lately an Idollater should be elected a Bishop so soon.
But S. Ciprian being Bishop, used those persons that depraved him, with great
love and kindness, to the wonder of all men that knew it.

When he had accepted the charge and office of a Bishop, he showed, that in
such, and like occasions, the voice of the people is the voice of God. No
human tongue can express, with what sanctity and prudence, he exercised
himself in that office. He was compassionate toward the brethren and the
humble, but toward the vain glorious and hauty, he was rigorous, and austere.
He always looked with a cheerful countenance, but yet with gravity; in such
manner, that one could not know, whether he was more to be loved or feared,
although he deserved both the one and the other.

His apparel was not very costly, nor yet altogether course and base, because
the too much or excess was a thing reprouable for his person, and the too
little was not fit nor convenient in respect of his function. He was very
merciful toward the poor, and gave them much almose, of the money which many
rich men gave unto him very largely. By these pious deeds Ciprian became in few
days so famous, that among the heathen also he was renoumed and no less
hated; as one, by whose means many left their paganism, and were made
Christians. For which cause they conferred among themselves how they might
take his life away, and to have a commandment for it from Themperours
Valerian and Gallien, who at that time persecuted the Church most cruelly, and
put many Christians to death every day.

God did not permit that this their purpose should come to pass as yet.
Because a man of such holy life, and excellent learning as Cyprian, was for
some short time necessary to be in the church, to the end, he might with this
holy sermons and admonitions, draw many souls out of the bands of sin, and
bring them unto penance; and to the end, he might exhort many to forsake the
world, and enter into relligion, and that many damosells living in monasteries,
might keep perpetual chastity.

This excellent doctor was also necessary, for no preach the truch unto the
heretics, the union unto the schismatiks, and peace unto the children of God.
He was asso necessary for the encouragement of the martirs, and to persuade
them with a willing mind, to suffer torments and death, for the sake of JESUS
CHRIST, with hope to acquire the crown of glory in heaven. He was likewise
necessary, to the end that they which only lost their goods in the persecution,
should be by him comforted, in making them assured, that they should have them
doubled in heaven.

This persecution being run through diverse provinces and cities, came also
unto Carthage; and was put in execution, with such rage and fury, that it was
worthy of note, to see the miserable Christians to go, one this way, another
that way, all of them in fear and dread, laboring one while to save their
goods, another while to preserve their lives. In a short time the prisons were
replenished with Christians; and not with thiefs or malefactors. There was no
offense punished, but that which seemed most heinous unto the painimes, to be a
Christian. After certain days expired, the Christians which were imprisoned,
were taken forth and executed in the high streets with diversity of torments.
Their dead bodies lay in heaps, and no man was so hardy, as to touch, or bury
them.

What did the holly Bishop S. Ciprian in this time of great calamity and
misery? He called the Christians to him, some times one, and sometimes another;
and led them into certain secret places, where he preached unto them; telling
them, that the time was even now come, in which it was to be clearly seen,
who was in deed the friend of God, by perseuering in the confession of the
faith: by not fearing the tirants, that had power to do harm only unto their
bodies, and not unto their souls: but rather, the more the bodies were abused,
the more glory should redound unto their souls: that therefore, they should
not hate the tirants which persecuted them; but rather love, and pray unto God
for them; knowing that JESUS CHRIST has said, that the difference between the
Christian and the pagan is, that the Christian does love his friends and foes
also, whereas the pagan loves none, but his friends. He made unto them
demonstration of this verity, by the example of CHRIST, who prayed for them
that Crucified him: and that therefore, if they would be his true children,
they ought to imitate him in works. Many other things said the good prelate
unto the^ which if the tirants had heared, they might have been converted by
these words. Yet they brought forth very great fruit in the hearts of the
catholics because they did much animate them, not to fear the rigor to the
persecution.

Ciprian also ordained many things, to prevent and avoid many incoueniences,
which happened every day. As to apoint stout and lusty fellows, who in the
night, at certain hours of security, took away the bodies of the Martirs,
which lay in the streets, and buried them: to others he gave in charge, that
the Christians, which came out of prison with life, (yet very evil entreated
with torments) should be led by them unto their houses, and there they should
see them have phisik with all speed. He ordained others to help the
Christians, which were designed to be taken, and fled hither and thither; and
to provide them sustenaunce and clothing. These, and such others the like
prouisio^s, did the Blessed Bishop make, in that time full of calamity: and he
had such a notable gift in commanding things to be done, that every one obeyed
him. And though they put them selves in manifest danger, yet did they perform
all his commandments.

The Proconsull, who had the charge in Carthage to persecute the Christiants,
was aduertiezed of the good deeds that Cyprian did; whereupon he would be
informed, who he was: and when he heard that the people loved him, and that he
was of great authority with every one, he durst not arrest him, to put him to
death; but caused his commandment to be declared unto him; which was, that he
should depart from Carthage, and go unto a city called Corubitana In that place
he stayed about a year, but the Proconsull deceasing, he retruned unto a place
near unto Carthage, and stayed in certain gardens, which had been sometimes
parcel of his own patrimony, and which he had sold to be spent in almose. But
he which had purchased them, had given, and restored them agein unto him
freely, without any recompense. And if the persecution had ceased, S. Cyprian
had sold them ageine, and had given the price (coming of them agein) unto the
poor.

Remaining certain days in these gardens, accompanied with many priests and
deacons, and other friends (among whom was Pontius who wrote his life) many of
the city of Carthage, and of other places also came to visit S. Cyprian, and
to confer with him of heavenly matters; and at all times they found him affable
and courteous. Every one was by him comforted, every one helped; and he
persuaded and exhorted them all to serve God.

Some of his friends besought him to depart from thence, and to remain a litell
further of from the Proconsul who being newly come might seek to get him into
his hands, and put him to death; therefore staying there, he was in great
danger. But he, (who had receued a revelation, that about one years end after
his banishment, he should obtein the crown of martyrdom,) had not the power to
depart out of that place; for he had a great desire to die for the faith of
CHRIST.

The Procon^ull had notice, where Cyprian dwelt; and how much people came
thither to visit him: wherefore he sent officers to attach him, and being
aprehended, he remained one night in the house of one of them, that had taken
him. To that place resorted much people, every one desiring to see their
prelate alive, for they were assured, that right soon they should see him
dead. Thither came also many devout women, but he caused them to depart to
avoid occasion of offense.

On the next morning the holy Bishop was brought before the Proconsull Galerius
Maximus, apparellend in pontifical vestures, which made a goodly, and
maiestical show. when the Proconsull saw him he said; Art thou that Cyprian,
that have the title of Pope, or great Bishop? I am Cyprian (said the good
Bishop) Tell me (said the Procon^ull) if thou know, what our Emperors have
commanded; which is that thou must either sacrifice unto the Gods, or else thou
must loose thy life. Cyprian answered; I am a Christian, and I cannot, nor may
not sacrifice unto your Gods: wherefore do whatsoever has bin commanded unto
thee.

The proconfull waxing wroth said: Thou have lived sacrilegiously, and have
drawn many unto thy devotions, and you all have made a confederacy against
the Gods, whom the Romain Emperous adore, and thou would never obey their
decrees. But because thou art the author of this evil, my will is that thy
doctrine be written with thy blood, to the end, thy adherents may take example
by thee, and be advised by thy death. Having said thus: he pronounced the
sentence, that Cyprian should be beheaded. The blessed Bishop said then. I
render infinite thanks unto God, who is pleased to deliver me from the prison
of this body. The officers of Justice incon^inent led him to be executed
according to the sentence. Much People followed him, every one lamenting, and
all of them saying with a loud voice: Cut of all our heads together with his.

When they came to the place of martyrdom, the B. Bishop put of his
pontifical attire, and wrapped and foulded up the same agein, and gave it unto
his deacons, and remained only in his last linen garment. He then requested
one of his friends, to give him some money, who gave him. 20. pieces of gold, all
which he gave unto the headsman, in recompense of the service he expected to
receive of him. His frinds and the clergy, that were in the place lamented
bitterly, and laid their garments on the ground, that his blessed blood might
fall on the same. He himself put the napkin over his eyes, and being on his
knees, the headsman performed his office.

As Soon as S. Ciprian was beheaded, the priests that were in that place very
reverently took up his body, and carried it unto the grave. But they fearing
lest the pagans would take it out of that public place, and vnbury it, and
pull and dismember it in pieces, the same priests by night took it out of that
place, and carried it unto the field of Macrobius Candidus.

S. Cyprian was the first prelat that was martirized in Africa. Of him, his
life and death, much mention is made by many holy men and grave Authors. As S.
Augustine, S. Jerome, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Prudentius, Maximus. B. of Turine,
Paulus Diaconus, Lactantius Firmianus, and Eusebius Cesariensis.

You must note, that S. Gregory Nazianzen says: that S. Ciprian was a magitian
or inchaunter, who tried by his art, to get the love of a young woman called
Iustina, and that having sent the evil spirits to bring her unto him, they
could not bring her, no not come near her. And this he says, was the occasion
of his conversion, and that the young maid Iustina was martired with him. Marcus
Marulus says the same.

They and the others that say thus, ar deceued; for they make but one Ciprian
of two, that were. Ciprian B. of Carthage, a most holy doctor and martyr, was
one; and Ciprian the sorcerer or coniurer, was another: The times, wherein these
two Ciprians lived, were diverse; and the Church celebrateth their feasts on
several days. The feast of S. Cyprian. B. of Carthage whose life we have
written at this time, is celebrated on the same day that the feast of S.
Cornelius the pope is, unto whom he was a great friend, and many letters were
written from the one unto the other, and they were martired on the same day,
but in sundry places, and not in the same year, as S. Jerome and Ado of Vienna
say.

The day of the martyrdom of S. Cyprian was on the. 14. day of September, in
the year of our Lord 259. But the Church translateth his feast unto the 16.
day of the same month, because that on the 14. day is celebrated the feast of
the Exaltation of the holy Cross. and on the 15. day is celebrated the octaue
of the nativity of our Lady. The Spanish Dioclesian about 300.
The feast of S. Cyprian the sorcerer, who was martired with Iustina the
virgin, is celebrated on the. 26. day of September. This S. Cyprian lived in
the time of the Emperor Claudius. 2. And S. Cyprian B. of Carthage was in the
time of Valerian and Galien. One was borne in Carthage, and the-other in
Antioche.

God some times permits the saints to err in some matter, for if they
should not err in some one thing, they might be thought to be more then men.
The which be fell unto S. Cyprian, whose life we have written: for he was in an
opinion, that those, which had been Baptized by heretics, although they had
observed the form, which the Church observes in Baptism, should and ought
nevertheless to be rebaptised, and herein he erred: but as S. Augustine says the
spot of this error was washed away with the blood, which he shed in his
martyrdom: Venerable Bede says; that the relics of S. Cyprian were brought
from Africa into France, and that they be in Lions.

The life of S. Euphemia Virgin, and of SS. Lucy and Geminian Martirs.
JESUS CHRIST speaking unto his Apostles of the persecutions, that thy were to
suffer for his sake as also others, Math. 10.
which should come after them, said these words: The sons shall arise against
their own fathers, and shall procure their death, by accusing them unto
tirants This was accomplished acording to the letter in a Romain matrone called
Lucy, who was accused by her own son before a tirant, that she was a
Christian for the which she was also put to death.

The church celebrateth her feast, together with that of SS. Geminian and
Euphemia, for that thy were martired all three on one day, by the ordinance of
one and the same tirant, though in sundry places. Their martyrdom was written
by venerable Bede. Vsuardus wrote the same; and like wise Ado Archbishop of
Triers in this manner.

IN the time of the Emperor Dyocletian, there was in the city of Chalcedon a
Senator called Philophronius, he had only one daughter named Euphemia, that
being a Christian, was as much ennobled for her virtue, as for her blood. She
was put into prison by a Proconsull called Priscus, who commanded her to
sacrifise unto his gods. The holy virgin denied it with a valiant courage, for
which cause, he put her into a more loathsome prison, and after a few days,
brought her to a public hearing; and then seeing her to be constant and
resolute, he commanded her to be tortured. The torments were such, that they
would have bereaved the stoutest and lustiest man of his life, and much more
such a tender damsel, as Euphemia was.

At the first, they did beat her with wands of Iron: then they put her on the
torture called Eculeus which disiointed all her tender limbs. Then an engine
was made with a wheel full of knives; which being turned round about, came to
strike alwais in that same place where the holy saint was to be tied. The
wheel was in order, and Euphemia was tied, but because the torment was so
dreadful, the holy saint made her oraisons unto God; and behold there
descended from heaven an Angel, who broke it to shiuers. The maker of that
engine died in that place with many other persons; whereupon the kinsfolk and
friends of the slain men, kindled a great fire to have burned the holy virgin
therein, as though she had been the cause of their deaths: but by the grace and
favor of God, she was freed from those fiery flames, with out receiving any
harm at all.

Lastly, the proconsull commanded she should be given as a pray unto the
cruelty of savage beasts She being already wearied of enduring so great
torments, besought God, that this might be the last, and so it was: for there
were let out upon her two fierce Lions, which killed her: but they did not eat
her flesh at all, and in this manner was finished the glorious conflict of S.
Euphemia.

Of SS. Lucy and Geminian Martirs.
SAINT Lucy was a Romain matrone, who had bin married, and her husband
deceasing of infirmity, she continued widow from the age of. 36 years, until
the age of. 85. years. She was a Christian, and spent her time in pious and
virtuous actions, and had a son called Eutropius, who was fully as wicked, as
his mother was good. And because his mother reproved him for his misdeeds, she
grew odious unto him, and he used a most enormous villainy, that so he might
live as he listed and liked, and this it was.

At that time, the persecution which Dioclesian and Maximian used against the
Christians, was terrible, and executed with all rigor: the accursed son
went to one of them, and accused his mother Lucy, to be a Christian. The Emperor
forth with commanded her to be apprehended, and so she was. And when Lucy
continewed firm and constant in her faith; he commanded, she should be put
into a great Cauldron, full of pitch and molted lead; but the holy saint was
taken out, this torment not doing her any harm.

Then the tirant commanded, that she should be put to open shame and reproach,
causing her to be led gyued and fettered thorough the city; which was not only
a reproach unto the holy saint, but also a grievous pain, with the great weight
she carried; and it was augmented in that she was so aged; and moreover, the
officers forced her to make have, to give unto her the more annoy. S. Lucy
being in this manner evil entreated, came nere unto the house of a noble
citisen called Geminian, who kept certain Idols in a private room, all which
did fall unto the ground, when S. Lucy passed by. This was the cause, that
Geminian with others that imitated him, were converted unto the faith of CHRIST.

Geminian ran unto the place where S. Lucy was; and kneeling on his knees
before her, said that he desired to be a Christian, and requested her to pray
unto God for him, that since God had given him that good desire, that he would
also give him ability to perform and to accomplish it. The officers hearing
this, laid hold on him, and led him unto Dioclesian, who commanded, that both
Lucy and he should be beheaded, and so they were.

The martyrdom of these three saints, Eufemia, Lucy and Geminian was on the
same day, that the Church makes co^memoration of them; to wit, on the. 16. day
of September about the year of our Lord 290. Zon: in vita Copronimi.
the aforenamed Dioclesian and Maximian being Emperors: Metaphrastes, Zonaras,
an Euagrius make mention of S. Eufemia.

The life of S. Ianuarius and others.
AMONG other the great miracles which are read in holy writ, wrought by our
Lord God in his servants; in mine opinion, that in the 3. cap. (...) ^he
prophet Daniell is the most principal and the cheifest. The proud king
Nabuchodonosor desirous to be accounted a God on the earth, caused to be made
that huge, and most prodigious statua, representing his person. He jointly sent
forth a public proclamation; that all and every one of his subjects, none
exempted, should adore it on their knees, at the sound of sundry Instruments*
the three young Hebrew gentlemen called Ananias Azarias and Misael ( otherwise
Sidrac, Misac, and Abdenago) being requested so to do, denied it* they
remained faithful unto God, to whom principally and only apperteineth divine
worship; not respecting the great favors they had receued of the king; not
regarding his large promises and offers of great wealth; not caring for his
threats, nor esteeming the loss of their own life's.

The king, who more rightly might be called a tirant, in a rage and fury caused
a great oven to be beat seven times more, then it used to be; and those blessed
young men clothed as they were, to be cast into the same but they by the merit
of their faith and relligion toward God, were not touched nor hurt by the fire
in their garments or bodies; but walking securely in the midst of the furnace,
as if it had been a hall, or fair street, did sing praises, and lauded God
merrily and joyfully. And that which more increased the wonder, there descended
an Angel down from heaven, who cast the burning flame violently out of the
oven, which burned and consumed the Chaldeans, and officers of the king, that
were nere unto the mouth of the furnace.

It pleased our Lord to do the like thing in commendation, and for the merit of
the true faith and holiness of S. Ianuarius the Bishop. He for that he refused
to worship the Idols, and to wrong the majesty of God, and regarded not the
threats of torments, nor was moved by the flattering promise of temporal
goods, was (after many torments endured by the commandment of a president,
under Dioclesian that cruel tirant, and other his devilish ministers) cast
into a burning furnace, made as hot as it could be: and yet the blessed man
remained without any hurt at all, and he together with the Angels song praises,
and rendered thanks unto our Lord: and the wicked officers were all consumed,
and brent miraculously with the flame of the fire, which came out of the
furnace. The life and death of this holy Bishop and his fellow martirs (as it
is gathered out of the catalogue of saints, the Romain breuiary, and
martirologe) is as follows.

SAINT Ianuarius and his companions, that is to say, Festus Sosius and Proculus
Deacons, Desiderius the lector, Acatius, and Eutiches were martired nere unto
the city of Pozzuole, under the persecution of The Emperor Dioclesian, Tymotheus
governing that province for him. This governor being sent by The Emperor unto
Nola in Campania, with commission to root out the Christians; apprehended and
improsoned Sosius Deacon of the church of Messina, and Proculus deacon of the
church of Pozzuolo, and Acatius, and Eutiches, citizens of Nola and laymen.

But he commanded Ianuarius the B. of Beneuentum, (accused a fore that time to
be a Christian) to be laid hold on, and brought before him. And when he nether
for much entreaty, nor for sharp threats, would be drawn to the sacrifice of
the Idols, the governor appointed a furnace to be heated three days together
with continual fire, and that then Ianuarius, who in the mean space was kept
in prison under a sure guard, should be cast therinto in the midst of the
burning flames with out any release or favor to be showed. He entered the same,
having with great humility made his prayers unto God, where singing together
with the Angels, he went up and down without any hurt at all unto his body.

The soldiers made relation of this miracle unto the governor, who bad them
open the mouth of the oven wider, that it might be seen more apparently if it
was so, as they said: which when they did, the flame broke, and rushed out
violently, and consumed a huge number of the pagans that stood about it. But
Ianuarius came forth of the oven so, that there was no show or apperaunce that
any thing was burned; no not, so much as the hear of his head, or his garment
he had on. The governor attributed (impiously) this thing unto sorcery, and
committed him again into fast prison. but on the next day, he called him to
appear before him, and in a raging fury, made the officers to scourge him,
which they did until the sinews were separated from his body, and then he
returned him back to the prison, in which time he devised and invented new
punishments, and torments, for his further affliction.

Upon this; Festus the Deacon, and Desiderius the Lector of the city of
Beneuentum, went unto the governor, and complained unto him of the great
torturs the holy prelat had endured: but the tirant not disgesting their words
and reprofes, they were (by his commandment) stayed, and laid in Irons, in
the same place where Ianuarius was. This being done, Timotheus the governor
determining to go unto the city of Pozzuolo, commanded all the above named
martirs, to be driven before his chariot in fetters, to the terror and example
of other, and that they should be put into the Amphitheater of that city,
where the Bears should be put out against them. But the savage beasts
forgetting their natural fiercenes, laid aside all their cruelty, and became
mild, and tractable like lambs, lying down at the feet of the martirs. The
Governor not knowing what to do more unto them, at the sight hereof gave
sentence that they should be beheaded.

The which sentence being read forthwith, and the holy Saints being led to the
execution thereof, the governor miraculously became blind of both his eyes.
Wherefore he instantly sent back for Ianuarius, and besought him to make his
prayers unto his God for him, that he might be delivered from this miserable
darkness: which Ianuarius doing, his fight was restored incontinently. The
pagans seeing this evident miracle, 5000. of them were converted unto the faith
of CHRIST. but the governor was no less unthankful for the benefit received,
then obstinate in his evil purpose; but was more enraged, for the conversion
of so many people, and sent back Ianuarius and the others also, to be put to
death according to the sentence.

A certain old man requested Ianuarius to leave some thing of his unto them,
that should be a witness or remembrance of his martyrdom, and of his death, and
avowed that he would keep it as a Jewel; unto whom the Bishop promised to give
his napkin after his death. To conclude, the holy martirs were beheaded: to
wit, Ianuarius Bishop, Festus and Proculus Deacons, Desiderius lector, Acatius
and Eutiches; afterward Sosius, who among the rest showed himself most
courageous and prompt to die, though kept in prison some few days before he
died.

S. Ianuarius did appear unto that same old man after his martyrdom, and
according to the promise he made unto him in his life, he gave unto him his
napkin or scarf, (wetted in his blood) wherewith he had covered his face, when
he was beheaded. The same scar^e or napkin the good old man showed unto the
officers, that came back from the execution. And at the same hour the holy
martirs were put to death, the governor was haled by the devil, and by him
long vexed, and in that misery died. The mother of S. Ianuarius being then in
Beneuento, (where her dwelling was) saw in her sleep her son in the sky up
toward heaven: and she noting the hour, and the day of the vision, (so I call
it rather then a dream) found that at the same time he had received the crown
of martyrdom.

There also befell in this his martyrdom another considerable accident, which
was: when the martyr of God Ianuarius was beheaded, and that the napkin or
scarf was bound over his eyes, there fell unto the earth together with his head
one of the fingers of his hands also. And whilst the Christians attended, and
waited opportunity to bury his body by night, as also the bodies of the other
martirs; Ianuarius appeared unto them, and willed them to search for his
finger, and to bury it with his head, that was cut of: which they diligently
and speedely did, and buried all these blessed bodies nere unto the city with
great honor, religion, and devotion.

Then did every one of the cities there about of a good pious desire, elect and
choose some one of these glorious martirs to their protectors and patrons. The
Neapolitans carried away the body of S. Ianuarius, which had bin first at
Pozzuolo, and after at Beneuento, and then came to the goodly monastery of
Monte Virgin, and lastly, in the time of Alexander 6. Pope it was translated
unto Naples, and entombed very honorably in the Cathedral Church: In which
place may be continually scene very great miracles. And this also shall be
worthy of eternal memory, that when there came from the hill Vesuuius, (now
called Mount de Somma) balls of fire and ashes in such abundance, that not
only the inhabitants dwelling nere thereunto, but also they which dwelt further
of, were in great dread and fear that all the country there about would be
consumed and destroyed by the fire; the same was wholly and utterly extinct
and quenched, by the merits and patronage of this blessed Saint. Wherefore the
Grecians have put him in their Kallender, and do likewise every year make an
honorable memory of him, in celebrating the feastiuall day of his martyrdom.

Yet most stupendous is the miracle, and strange the wonder, that to this day
is seen in the same city of Naples, which is this. His blood, which is kept is
in a violl of glass, congealed and hardened very much, yet let it be put
right, before, and against the head of S. Ianuarius, and it does melt, and
dissolve in such sort, that if seems to boil or sees, as if it were lively,
and did issue and spring even then out of the veins. The passion of all these
blessed Saints, was on the 19. day of September under Dioclesian and Maximian
Romain Emperors in the year of our Lord. 305.

Our holy father Pope Sixtus 5. in the first year of his papacy by a Bull
commanded: that the said blessed Saints should be put in the Calendar, and
their office and mass should be celebrated by all faithful Christians, on the
day of their Martyrdom. *

The life of S. Eustachius and others.
WE READ in the book of Numbers, Ca. 22.
that Balac king of Moab, douting the Israelits would come, and make war upon
him in his realm, sent messengers for Balaam the prophet, that he might curse
them; imagining by that means to have the victory against them. The prophet
went at his request (which displeased God) and rode on an ass.

It fell out that the Ass, after a little travel, stayed, and would not go
forward, The prophet rated and bet her, and stroke her without discretion or
just cause, and (as the scripture said God opened the mouth of the beast, who
also speak unto him. Then did an Angel also speak, in the defense of the Ass
unto the prophet, and moreover tole him what he should do.

This history may be fitly applied unto S. Eustachius; who wandering in the
paths of Idollatry and heathenishe errors (a thing abominable in the sight of
God) was admonished of his errors, by a wonderful means God used toward him,
to wit: he made a heart of stag to speak unto him, and to instruct him what he
ought to do. The life of this glorius saint, and of his fellow martirs, was
written by Symeon Metaphrastes and by S. Antoninus Bishop of Florence, in this
manner.

IN the time of Traiane The Emperor, there was in Rome an honorable and noble
Lord called Placidus, who was General of the horse, And though he was a
paynim, yet did he works in them selves good. He was charitable, pitiful,
just, and faith full unto his Lord.

On day, as Placidus went on hunting, he spyed a goodly heart, and pricked his
horse with the spurs, in pursuit thereof. The ^art or stag made a stand on a
high eminent place; and when Placidus approached nere, it seemed unto him that
the heart had the sign of one crucified between his horns, and withal he heard
a voice which said: why do thou persecute me. Incontinent he alighted from
his horse, and kneeling on the ground, said: who art thou, Lord, that speak
unto me? The voice replied, I am JESUS CHRIST the son of God, who descended
from heaven unto earth, and was crucified for the salvation of mankind, and
rose ageine to life on the third day.

Placidus replied again: Lord, what is thy pleasure, I shall do? In what sort,
will thou have me to serve thee? It was answered unto him. My will is that
thou, thy wife, and all thy family be Baptized, and so thou shall find the true
way to go unto heaven, and when thou art Baptized, my will is: that thou be
patien^, and tollerat willingly the afflictions that shall be fall unto thee,
and this do for my sake. This being said: the heart ran swiftly away, and
departed out of his sight.

Placidus wondered excedingly: and at that instant God touched his heart, and so
enlightened him, that he beheld the blindness and misery, in which he then was,
by giuyng divine worship to stocks and stones. He went home without delay, and
conferred, and showed his intent unto some Christians: and to conclude, he was
Baptized, wherein he changed his name from Placidus, and took the name of
Eustachius, his wife called Theopista and his two sons Agapitus and
Theopistus were Baptized also.

After a few days, Eustachius being well instructed in the Christian faith,
the devil began (God permitting it) to persecute him, Job. c. 1.
as he did Job. The first thing was; he slew all his beasts and cattail,
whereof he had great store; then did all his slaves and bondmen dye: and
briefly he lost all his goods, became so poor, and was so abandoned of the
world, that he was forced to depart out of Rome, and lead a private life in a
poor village. In that place the fiend did also persecute him, for he incited
some wicked persons to take his wife from him, and he had not power to resist
and withstand them, but God did always so preserve her that she was never
dishonored. He lost also his two sons, and he remained alone, in so great
necessity, that he was feign to dwell with a rich citizen, who made him his
baily, and ouerseer over one of his farms in the country.

Although the good Eustachius saw himself brought into this great misery; yet
evidently appeared in him a generous mind, and Christian resolution, to
tollerat every thing with patience. God proved him like another Job, but when
he was in this hard case, he thought of him, and restored him unto his former
estate. For the Emperor Traian having designed to make a war of much import,
and considering that to bring it to the wished end, he must have an expert
general, he called Placidus to his remembrance, whom he judged a man fit for
that charge: After diligent enquiry, he was found, and madegenerall of the
forces. which charge he having received, as he was careful in mustering men
for this great service, he came to the knowledge of his two sons Agapistus, and
Theopistus, who were among the other soldiers of the army. He also found again
his wife, who in poor and mean array was a servant to an Inholder. The joy
Eustachius had, and the infinite thanks he yielded unto God, to see him self
delivered and freed from his former miseries, and to have found again his wife
and two sons, cannot with words be expressed.

After he had accomplished his entreprise committed unto him, he returned unto
Rome with great honor, and found Traian dead, and Adrian installed in the
empire. Eustachius was receued into Rome with great pomp and triumph, as well by
the Emperor as by the wholl senate. And because the custom of the Romain
Capteins was; that when they entered Rome with Victory, they went unto the
temple of Jupiter, and there they sacrificed, Eustachius excused himself,
saying, he could not do it, because he was a Christian. The Emperor, the Senate,
and all the people thought, that if the accustomed sacrifice was not done, they
should never after have any victory, for which cause, thy were very earnest
that Eustachius should sacrifice. Eustachius confidently denied to do it,
saying, he was a Christian; and that he would not sacrifise unto any, but unto
JESUS CHRIST.

The Emperor being wroth at this answer, commanded that Eustachius, his wife,
and two sons should be put to death: and to effect it, he bad, that they
should be put in a place, where a fierce Lion should tear them in pieces. The
Lion was let out against the holy martirs, but he lay down at their feet, and
did them no hurt at all. The Emperor seeing the same, commanded to make a great
bull of brass hollow inward. With in this concauity he caused S. Eustachius,
his wife, and sons, to be enclosed, and then to set fire under it, and in
this torment the glorious saints rendered their souls unto God. The Bull was
opened, and their bodies were found with out any blemish (but that they were
dead) and had not burnt one hear of their head, which astonished the Pagans,
and much edified the Catholics; who took those blessed bodies, and buried them
honorably.

The martyrdom of these holy saints was on the same day the Catholic Church
celebrateth their feast, to wit: on the. 20. day of September, in the year of
our Lord. 118.

The seventh general Sinode, Dam. l. 3. de imag. Nicep. lib. 3. ca. 29.
S. John Damascen, and Metaphrastes make mention of S. Eustacius. Nicephorus
Callistus recounteth his life in particular, and the mystery of the Heart, and
the Crucifixe also. Beside the sayieng of this Author, the universal picture
of the wholl Church is an important proof for that this holy saint is always
painted on his knees before of Heart, which has the Crucifixe between his
horns, which was that which spoke unto him.

The life of S. Matthew Apostle.
WE READ that the prophet Elias considering how few the men were that served
God in his time, 3. Reg. 13. Eccles. 48 Iac 5.
and the multitude of them that offended him, being desirous to to correct
them, that they might amend, prayed, that it might not rain: God granted his
request, and in three years and a half there fell no rain. The people dyed of
famine, and yet they did not amend their wicked life's. Helias also remained
firm in his purpose, that God should not permit it to rain. God said to him
(as. S. John Chrysostom supposes) Behold Helias, it troubles me to see so
many people die with famine: if thou will, that all be good, get thee into
heaven, for there be all good: and let me remain here upon the earth, that I
may make provision for the necessities, which my people and creatures suffer
and endure. I would not have thee think, that they have utterly abandoned me,
for I have yet 7000. men, who have not bowed their knees unto Baal: Among
others, there is Heliseus, 3 Reg. 19.
who is following twelve yoke of oxen, go and call him, bid him leave all, and
come with thee, and be thy disciple.

Elias obeyed strait, and went to the place, where Eliseus was, and said to
him: Come and follow me. Heliseus also obayed incontinent, only he requested,
3 Reg. 19.
to go and take leave of father and mother kinffolk, and friends. The Prophet
was content, and went with him: where upon Heliseus made a solemn banquet, took
leave of them all, entending to follow the prophet Elias. Perhaps his father
and friends said this to him: Heliseus mark well whom thou meanest to follow:
consider that he is a poor man, and has no cloths to his back, but only a
garment of camells skin; he fasteth much, he is much persecuted by Queen
Iezabel, and many others who desire his death: These words were in vain, for
he was resolved to follow Elias: and it was evident, that this his resolution
was good, for afterward being his disciple, 4. Reg. 2.
when Elias was taken away from him, he did more and greater miracles, then
ever Elias had done

This figure fitteth, and agrees to S. Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist:
for. Elias being a figure of JESUS CHRIST, was much displeased to see so many
offend God, and so few to serve him Elias prayed God, that he would not let it
rain, that men might die: but JESUS CHRIST did not so; Math. 9.
for he was by nature merciful, and full of compassion, and to see his
creatures perish, was unto him a most grievous torment: yet went he to seek out
some that might serve God; who though they had not done it before time, yet
might they do it in the time to come. Elias found Eliseus while he plowed; so
JESUS CHRIST beheld S. Matthew with the eyes of his mercy, not plowing, but at
a worse trade; for he lent money unto usury: yet the plowing and sowing has
some similitude with lending to usury. He that sows, always gathers more
then he sows. So the usurer always receives more, then he lends out.
Helias called Eliseus, and he fellowed him, but he would make a banquet to all
his kinsfolk and friends. Luc. 5. Marc. 2.
So also when CHRIST called Matthew and he fellowed him, he made first a banquet
in his house (where JESUS was present) with his fellow publicans and
toll-gatherers, friends unto S. Matthew.

These men might say to S. Matthew the same, that the kinsfolk of Eliseus said
to him or in this manner: Matthew will thou forsake and leave all thy goods and
money, and go with a poor man, and one that is persecuted, as this man is?
what think thou to get in his company? it may be, if the Scribes and
Phariseys determine once to put him to death, they will do the same to thee
also for his sake; for ordinarily the disciples speed as bad as their master.
These words sturred not S. Matthew from his good purpose to give over al and
follow CHRIST. The going in CHRIST'S company was fortunate to him; for he made
him his Apostle, and Chronicler, and gave unto him an admirable spirit, like
the spirit of Eliseus. and after the Ascension of our Lord into heaven, he did
many miracles. The life of this glorious Apostle is collected out of the
Gospel, and other good Aucthors, who do make mention of him.

SAINT Matthew was a Galylean, John 3.
borne in Cana where JESUS CHRIST converted the water into wine. He was a
Publica^, tollegatherer and a usurer, which was the most infamous trade, that
could be among the Hebrews; Math. 9.
they reputing it the most heinous oppression that could be, Luc. 5. Marc. 2.
for the Emperor of Rome to enforce them (being the elect people of God) to
pay tribute and tolles. And all though they paid, yet they alwais protested,
that vyolence and force was offered to them. their aggreeuances were increased,
by the letting out the tributes and tolles to farm, which is the cause, that
the publicans, (who were they that rented them, and moreover lent money upon
usury) were counted by the Jews worse then the Pagans and heretics. for which
cause the son of God (conformable to their opinion) when he instructed S.
Peter how to correct his brother, Math. 18.
said unto him, that the sinner should be reproved first secretly; the second
time before two witnesses; and that at the third time, he should deuounce it to
the Church: and if he did not then amend, he should be reputed as an Ethnic or
Publican. As if he would infer; Repute him then as an Ethnic, account him as
a Publican, toll gatherer, or usurer. Which among the Jews was a name of
surpassing reproach and infamy.

One of these was S. Matthew (Syea Metaphrastes says) he was the head of them
all, for he was a man expert, practical, and of a good in sight. It fell out
then, Luc. 5.
that Matthew being at the receipt of custom, JESUS CHRIST passing that way
looked on him, called him and said, Follow me: As Soon as Matthew hard these
words, presently he left his books, his writings, money, and other things, and
followed him.

Herein there are two considerable things: One is, that JESUS called Matthew;
and the other is, that Matthew followed him. In CHRIST calling of Matthew, may
be considered his exceeding great mercy: for he called him being a pullik sinner,
to be his disciple: Now who though never so great a sinner, will fear to
approach come near unto CHRIST seeing how he did welcome Matthew? If JESUS call
Matthew the Publican, what sinner will he drive away from him? but perhaps the
sinner will say, I am content JESUS CHRIST shall not drive me away from him:
yet if I should not come unto him I wish, that he would behold me, as it
pleased him to behold S. Matthew, and to call me as he called him. To this I
answer, that it is true, God calls not every one with such efficacy, and does
not behold all sinners, as he beheld S. Matthew; for that was a special grace
done to him, and to few others; yet is it most true and certain, that God does
behold, and call every one; and if they will amend, and dispose thmselues to a
better life, he conuerteth them to him, and makes them holy saints. we see
some times, that a lodging has the windows shut, and the sun beats at
them, and cannot enter; if the sun do not enter in to the lodging, it is not
his fault, but of the man, that does not open the window. Open thou the
window, and the sun enters in.

The same does the sun of Justice, Apoc. 3. v. 20.
our Lord God. he says, he stands at the door, and knocks; let the door be
opened to him, let the sinner be disposed, and do his duty as he ought, and
God will not fail for his part. He says not only, that he stands at the
door, but says also, that he knocks and calls. And in deed he says the
truth, for he does never any other thing, but call; and that all men might
hear him speak, he mounted upon the tree of the Cross. To that place every
sinner may look; and see that JESUS is even hoarse with calling so much. He
shall see his two eyes are become two founteins, and for that he sees few
people come to his side, he does not show himself stern or fierce against them
that have offended him; but rather kind and loving. He stands with his arms
abroad, to embrace them that resort to him. He boweth his head to give the^ the
kiss of peace, he shows his pierced side, that they may enter into his heart.
He calls not the Christian to take of the croune of thorns, and to put it on
his own head. He would not be spoiled of his beatings, and load him. He would
not have him drink the gall and vinagre, which was given him. He would not have
him nailed to the Cross in his company. To conclude, he does not call him, to
take life away from him; but to give life unto him. He calls him to come into
his company, and to continue in joy and gladness.

Yet true it is, that he would have the sinner do penance, Math. 22.
and not lay it wholly on CHRIST back. But let the penance be never so great,
if that, which CHRIST hat suffered for the sins of other men be considered,
who will think the penance done for our own proper sins, to be over great.
In this manner CHRIST JESUS calls every one, and repelleth none from him; yet
few there be who are so called, that go after him. To such as these be
happens the same that before to Samuel being yet a child, for God called
him, and he went to Heli being an old man, and near to his death. 1. Reg. 3.
CHRIST calls many also, and they childishly run unto the world, and to
vanity.

Such as these be, do not imitate S. Matthew, who was called but once by our
Savior; and incontinent he followed him. S. Matthew did not say, I will first
dispatch my business, and sum up my acconts, nor sought for excuses as many
sinners do (prolonging their conversion unto God,) but he left every thing at
an instant. S. Ambrose says; he that first took away other men's goods, now
left and forsook his own. When a wand is crooked, if one would streighten it,
he must draw it the other way: So Zacheus, who was another publican, Luc. 19.
said, if he had deceived any man he would restore it four fold. But the good
S. Matthew, not only satisfied the deceit done, with part of his goods; but
left all, and followed JESUS CHRIST. You ought also to understand, that the
same S. Matthew reciting his conversion says, that he made a feast forthwith
unto our Savior; which he did, not so much to honor him, as that he might
convert many of his kinsfoolk and friends, that came to the banquet. This is
true charity, when one is not content to serve God himself only; but procures
and enduceth others to serve him also.

The Scribes and Pharisees who were a people malignant, and envious against
CHRIST, and sought to find faults in his doings and speeches, being certefied
of this banquet, thought they had gotten a just occasion to reprove him, and
forthwith they came unto his disciples, and said; why does your master eat
with Publicans and sinners? as if they would say: Come hither you ignorant and
base fellows; Is it possible, that you dare keep company with a man, that is a
friend to Publicans and sinners, Eccles. 13.
and that eats and drinks with them? Have you never heard the words of
Solomon that he that touches pitch, shall be defiled with the same? and that he
that keeps company with the vicious shall be vicious. Take heed, lest his
behavior do taint you also; and that if he be once punished, you be also
punished as accessaries. Therefore let him go, and come no more into his
company. These malicious foes sought to diminish the reputation of our Lord,
and persuaded the Apostles to abandon him.

When JESUS understood this (nothing being unknown unto him) he congregated
all the Apostles together, (and perhaps they who used those words of
defamation, were present there also) and said unto them: I am defamed and evil
spoken of, for that I converse with Publicans and sinners, and because I eat
and drink with them; but I will tell you the truth, which none of you can deny,
Luc. 5. Marc. 2.
to wit; that they who are whole, have no need of the physician, but the sick
only. This sentence of our Savior may have two senses. One sense is; that he
spoke by the figure Ironia, and said: See that I come not into your company,
for you be all holy men, and need not me, but I converse with Publicans and
sinners, who have need of me. The other sense is; that JESUS CHRIST, spoke
plainly and clearly, that, as the hole man has no need of the physician, but
the sick man has; so JESUS did converse with Publicans, which were sick in
their souls, to restore them unto their health; for we may piously believe,
that he converted many of them, that were at the feast that S. Matthew made in
his house.

There is no more particular mention in the gospel of S. Matthew; but we are
to believe, that he was present in all those things, where the twelve Apostles
are said to be present. as when our savior sent the^ to preach unto the
Samaritans, S. Matthew went thither also: when there was strife among the
Apostles. who should be greatest, he was there also; and it may be he alleged
his reasons, and said: that he ought to have the pre-eminence, for that he had
left more possessions and goods, them any other of them. He was present at the
resuscitation of Lazarus; he was with CHRIST when he made his entry into
Jerusalem on Palm sunday. He was one of them, that eat the paschall lamb:
our Lord washed his feet, and communicated him, and made him priest, and
consecrated him Bishop, as he did his other Apostles. He was with the other
Apostles, when our Lord appeared after his Resurrection; when he ascended into
heaven, and at the coming of the Holy Ghost.

He preached eight years among the Hebrews, after the which he wrote his
Gospel in the hebrew toungue, as he had preached; being then to depart and to
preach among the heathenish paynims. S. Jerome says S. Matthew preched in
Egypt, and converted many to the faith therein: and from thence he went into
Ethiopia: where he preached also, and gained many souls to CHRIST. The Bishop
Lippoman says it is not known certainly, what happened to S. Matthew in those
parts. Simeon metaphrastes also in two treatises he made of this holy saint
passes this matter over succinctly and slightly. This Author says; that the
Apostles went alone, poor, afflicted, passing from one country to another,
publishing the name and faith of JESUS CHRIST before the kings and princes of
the world, and that therefore few could set down their acts in particular. But
for what which is known, (although it be very little) we ought to render thanks
to God who would not permit all their actions to be drowned in oblivion; and
utterly forgotten. Nicephorus makes a different report of the martyrdom of
this Apostle, from that which is ordinarily said of it, and from that which S.
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence writes in his life.

Ioachim Perionius, and the author called Abdias Babilonicus says thus as a
thing certain, (and the Roman Breuiarie of Pius 5. receives it also) that S.
Matthew having preached among the Hebrews, and in Egypt, and having written
his gospel in the Hebrewe tongue, (a copy whereof S. Barnabas the Apostle
carried with him, when he preached unto the Gentills, and layeng it sometime on
a sick person, it restored him to perfect health) passed on to preach in
Ethiope: And that coming into the city called Nadauer, he found there two
magitians, the one called Zaroes, and the other Arphaxat. These two wicked
fellows kept all the people in awe: for with their enchantments, and
Legier-de-main, they did great hurt unto many, depriving some of the use of
their limbs, and weakening other. They bewitched the arms of some, and made
other lame of their legs, and others blind. The apostle seeing the evil and
wickedness they did, (and that there was no remedy, for none could bar them of
their wills, but to their loss and damage,) opposed himself against them, and
healed all them, whom they had made sick.

There was in that city, Act. 8.
an Eunuck (who had been Baptished by S. Philip the deacon, when he departed
from Jerusalem) and was servant to Candaces Queen of Ethiope, as being her
Steward, and having all her riches under his gouernemenr: he lodged S. Matthew
in his house, and by his means many receued the faith of CHRIST: for he
brought many of the people, to hear S. Matthew preach, who were converted to
Christianity, by hearing his admirable doctrine.

The two magitians perceuing S. Matthew to be so contrary unto their
proceedings; by their devilish art, made two dragons to appear, not only to
affright S. Matthew, but also to do him some scath. The holy Apostle made the
sign of the Cross against the two dragons; who, as if they had been two
sheep, returned quietly unto the desert. The people beheld this strange
wonder, wherefore every one besought the Apostle earnestly to set them free from
those two sorcerers: for their pride and malignity was come to that height,
that they would be adored for godds by the people; and they for dread and
fear, were in mind to do the same. The Apostle made answer: To so many, as
would be Baptized, and acknowledge JESUS CHRIST for the true God, it would be
very easy to be ridd and freed from those two villains, or any other such,
who soever would do them any harm.

Them he preached unto them the mistry of the Incarnation of the son of God,
and of the glory and beatitude of the holy saints; and it befell, whilst he
preached a great vproare and tumult arose among the people for the death of the
kings son. Then it came to their ears, that he had been sick some time
before, and the two magitians had been called to help him, and he died between
their hands. and the wicked villains, to hide and cover their falsehood, said:
that the godds desired to have his company. and that therefore it was meet,
there were a Temple builded unto him, wherein he might be adored as a God. The
Eunuke brought S. Matthew before the king, and he by his prayers raised the
deceased young man unto life again, to the great astonishment of them all. The
king was called Egippus, and had sustained unspeakable sorrow for the death of
his son; but seeing him alive again and in health he was glad, and reioiced
out of measure. He showed many courtesies unto the Apostle, and sent posts into
all parts of his kingdom to diuulge this miracle, and to say: Come and see a
God in the shape of a man, who has raised a dead man, and restored him to life.

S. Isidore in his Breviary makes mention of this miracle of raising the kings
son from death to life by S. Matthew, and also of the two dragons, and of
other miracles, and admirable acts the Apostle did in Ethiope, although he do
not particularize the same* he says also, that much people came unto the
place, where S. Matthew lodged, and would have done sacrifice to him, as if he
had been a God, and presented many gifts unto him: and that the Apostle said
unto them: I am not a God, but a mortal man, and the servant of JESUS CHRIST,
who is the true God. Then he requested them, to bestow those presents and gifts
(which they would have given him) upon the building of a temple to the same
JESUS CHRIST, for he (whom he preached, and by whose power, he did those
miracles) was the true living God; exhorting them to be Baptized in his name,
for that was the true way and means to obtain everlasting life. To conclude:
the Apostle said such words, and confirmed them so with miracles, that the king
with all his court, and a great number of other people were Baptized.

The king had a daughter called Iphigenia, who was very beautiful, but much
more commended for her wisdom, who having heard S. Matthew oftentimes in his
sermons to commend and extol virginity, conceived a good liking of him, and
using his advise was closed in a monastery, with 200. other damosells, desiring
to do the same. S. Matthew staid in Etiope. 23. years, continually converting
souls to our Lord JESUS, building Churches, ordering priests, consecrating
Bishops, gaining many souls, and augmenting the faith of CHRIST, and that,
which he preached with the mouth, he performed also in deeds, to the
edification of others, lib. 2. pedagog
his life being holy and exemplary. Clement of Alexandria says; that S.
Matthew never eat flesh, and that he lived only with herbs.

King Egippus afterward deceasing, his brother Hyrtacus succeeded in the
kingdom. This new king to establish himself more suerly in the kingdom, and
also moved with the rare beauty of Iphigenia, intended to marry her. To bring
this his purpose to effect, he acquainted the Apostle with his intent, thinking
it a good means to draw the mind of the young woman to his will. The Apostle
answered the king, that he would give notice unto Iphigenia of the good, that
arises of matrimony, and how it is a holy thing, and that then he might come
and talk with her himself. The king thought this would be a very good course;
and for that the Apostle said he would declare this matter in a sermon, the
king said, that he would also be present thereat. Sunday came, and the Apostle
in the presence of Iphigenia, and the other relligious women (the king being
there also, and all the chiefest Lords of his court,) began to discourse of
matrimony, and to show, how necessary it was for the conservation of mankind,
and gave it other commendations, He also said, that matrimony was ordained and
instituted by God, and how good it was to have children.

All this pleased Hirtacus very well, and he awayted, to hear the Apostle say,
that Iphigenia might forsake and leave the estate of a relligious woman, and
take a husband, and be made Queen of Ethiope. But the conclusion of Apostle
was far otherwise, then Hirtacus exspected; for then he fell in hand to
treat of the grieyous punishment that adulteres deserved: out of which he
seemed to infer; that if the servant of any king was so bold as to take away
his wife from him, he did not merit only, to be put out of favor, and to be
disgraced; but also he deserved to die an evil death; though he did not effect,
but only attempt it. Therefore (o king) I give thee to understand, (said
Apostle looking upon him) that Iphigenia is the spouse of JESUS CHRIST, the
king of heaven; and if thou seek to take her away from him, thou shall fall
into his heavy displeasure. When Hirtacus perceived the conclusion of the
Apostles words, and whereunto they tended; he was moved to great indignation,
which he uttered in his countenance, and so threatening him, he departed out of
the Church.

Iphigenia was heereat surprised with great fear; and with the other
relligious women kneeled at the feet of the Apostle; and asked his advise, what
she and they should do, to be quit of the persecution and assault the king had
begone against her virginity. The Apostle encouraged them all with good words,
and put a veil upon every one of their heads, making them hereby, and by their
vowing the three vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience true Nonnes: and
these were the first Nonnes, the were among the Christians. This being done,
the Apostle said Mass; and having ended the same, there came thither a cruel
fellow (sent by Hirtacus) who gave the Apostle many wounds with a spear, so
that the Altar was all stained with blood, and his body lay dead in the place.
The grief and compassion of the people for the death of S. Matthew was so great,
that they made a commotion, and rose in arms, entending to kill the tyrant;
and had effected it, if some priests had not intromitted themselves, and said
them, saying: that God would not be pleased there with, and that therefore he
commanded Peter to put up his sword into the sheath.

Then Hyrtacus labored by the means of some ladies, to persuade Iphigania to
be his wife; but seeing that this way would not remove the holy virgin from her
good purpose; in a diabolical rage he caused the monastery to be fired; but S.
Matthew was seen in the air to quench it. The sacrilegious tyrant escaped not
this deserved punishment, for God struck him with the leprosy, which was so
sore, that he killed himself for pain. and the kingdom came to the brother of
Iphigenia, son to Egippus, who was a Christian, and ruled that province many
years to the honor and glory of God, which was spread through all Ethiope,
where the body of S. Matthew was kept and holden in great veneration, and
reverence, until the time of pope Gregory. 7. when it was translated to the
city of Salerno in Italy, where it is holden in great veneration to this day by
all good Christians.

Great reason there is to do so, for that this glorious Apostle has three
honorable titles, for every of which he meriteth to be honored: The first is of
Apostle, the second of Evangelist, and the third of martyr. His death was on
the 21 day of September, and on that day, the Church celebrateth his feast, and
in the year of our Lord. 90. in the reign of Domi^ian after Canisius. It is
not with out mystery, that among all the other Evangelists, whom the Church
uses in her service, S. Matthew holds the first place, as likewise do S.
Paul, and David; of the one of which almost every day the epistles be red; of
the other, the psalms be song. The mystery may be, (for that all three were
great sinners,) to give hope to all them, that heartily are converted unto God,
that he not only pardons them, but also shows unto them especial favors,
honoring them first upon earth, and then making them great also in heaven.

Concerning the gospel of S. Matthew (I write this to satisfy curious wits)
it is commonly said, that he wrote it in Hebrew, and some say the contrary.
This happens for that (as Guido Fabricius says) there were two manners of
speaking Hebrew: the one was the Ancient, which the Patriarchs and Prophets
spoke, and the other was called Modern, or Hyerosolimitan, for that it was
used in that city: For in Jerusalem there traded many forreme^s, and strangers,
and by the commerce they had with them, being Syrians, and Chaldeans, and other
nations, there were mingled words of sundry languages therein. This Hebrew
Hyerosolimitane language JESUS CHRIST spoke, as it is to be seen by many words
in the gospel, as Abba father, Mammona, Iniquity: and such like. Then, I say,
that S. Matthew wrote his gospel not in that Ancient Hebrew language, but in
the Modern Hyerosolimitaine, in which CHRIST spoke. The same, which Guido
Fabricius says, is affirmed also by Petrus Gallesinus in his annotations upon
Doroteus Bishop of Tyrus, in his book of the life's of the disciples of CHRIST.

S. Jerome says; that the Gospel of S. Matthew was translated into Greek,
and that it is not known who did it. The same holy saint says: that in his
time, the Hebrew text of S. Matthew was in the city of Cesarea, but it was lost
after that, and was found again in the time of Themperor Zeno, or of
Anastasius, who succeeded him, hard by the body of S. Barnabas the Apostle, who
at that time was found in the Island of Cyprus, as Nicephorus Callistus says.

It was lost again; Nicep. lib. 16. cap. 37.
and as John Eckius that learned Catholic Doctor in the life of S. Matthew
affirms; Pope Nicholas 5. being desirous to find it, send word into all
parts, where he thought he might have notice thereof, and promised 5000 ducats
of gold, to him that brought it to him. But for all that, it was not found
until the time of Themperouor Charles. 5. unto whom God reserved many good
fortunes, among which, this was not the least. This is not in the Spanish.
Afterward the Catholic king Philip. 2. his son, caused it to be put into
the Bible Royal, which he caused to be printed, and it is in it at this
present; and was again translated into Latin, by the above named Guido
Fabricius.

The life of S. Maurice, and other holy Martirs.
THE Evangelist S. John rehearses in the Apocalipse, Ca. 9
that he saw a huge multitude of locusts to come out of a great pit, who were
permitted, and had leave for five months to do all the evil, they could on the
earth. These locusts represented the tirants, who afflicted the martirs, and
vexed them in the five outward senses. They killed their bodies, and not their
souls; and hereof it comes, that the holy martirs perseuered in the confession
of the faith, with such courage; because they knew all the evil and mischief
the tirants could do them, was not extended further, then the body.

This being considered by a noble and valiant regiment of Theban soldiers,
whose Coronell was called Maurice, permitted themselves to be evil entreated
and slain; being assured, that only their bodies endured pains, and that the
cruelty of the tyrant could not hurt their souls by any means. The tirant
that martired them was Maximian, of whom, and of Dioclesian one may rightly
say, that there was never serpent so pernicious, nor dragon so fell in the
craggie mountains of Arabia, or in the thick woods and deserts of Ethiop, as
these two beforenamed tyrants were against the Catholics, as may be seen in the
life of S. Maurice, and his companions martired with him. which martyrdom is
written by Eucherius Bishop of Lions, Venerable Beda, and other Authors of
Martirologes.

THE Emperor Maximian entending to pass out of Italy into France, to pacyfy
certain people, which were in rebellion against the empire; for the better
effecting of his enterprise had commanded legions or Regiments of soldiers,
to be sent unto him out of sundry provinces. One legion (as Vsuardus says)
contained 6666, soldiers And because the great and populous city of Thebes in
Egypt, which stands on the bank of the river of Nilus, was subject unto the
Romain empire, that sent also a legion, of the which Maurice was Coronell and
Exuperius was standerd bearer: The other principal officers of the Regiment
were Candidus, Gereon, Vitalis, Innocentius and Tirsus. All the common
soldiers of this Regiment were Christians, and had bin Baptized by Zabdus B.
of Jerusalem.

This goodly company came first unto Rome, and visited the pope, who was called
Marcellus. This good pope confirmed them all in the faith, and gave them his
benediction, and dismissed them. Then they departed in the company of Maximian
and passed the Alps, and came unto a city, which at that time was the head of
the people of Sedun, called Agaunum, and at this present it is called S.
Maurice di Sauoya. In that place Maximian had a mind to make a solemn
sacrifice unto his gods; to the end, they might be his aiders in this his
entreprise, and commaudned all the principal officers of the army to be
present thereat. Maurice, and his Thebans hearing the same, stepped all aside
somewhat out of the way, saying, that they being Christans would not be present
thereat, Maximian, being certefied thereof, was much displeased, and took it as
a mutiney, worthy of severe punishment.

To which purpose he sent to their quarter the marshall and provost, to
chastise some of them for a terror to the rest, and to reduce the others unto
the army, and to the sacrifice: The chasticement inflicted was this: The
officers made them pass under a spear, and told them; and when they came unto
the tenth man, they incontinent cut of his head: This was the ordinary
punishmenr of that time, when an host or Regiment committed a trespass. The
Thebans which remained and escaped, (in patient and quiet manner,) boldly said:
that they would not be present at the sacrifice, do what they could: The Emperor
seeing them to be resolute, renewed his anger, and bad that they should be
tenthed, or decimated again, for so that punishment was called. This sentence
no less cruel then unjust, being begun to be executed, it is a thing
considerable to behold, with what inconquerable courage, the holly martirs
seemed to tolerate the slaughter made of them.

The Thebans were by nature valiant, and big of body, but herin they showed
singular and rare valor, in that they did not complain of the tirant, and also
for that they looked cheerfully on the matter: They animated one the other,
but above all, Maurice their Coronell went amongst them, exhorting sometimes
this man, otherwhiles that man; and told them, that since they had heretofore
endaungered their life's for, and in the Emperors service, that they should not
think much to offer it for the service of God: for that their death and torment
should have an end very shortly, and tollerating it for such a cause, they
should afterward possess the ioies of heaven cuerlastingly. These and such
other words that Maurice said, made such an impression in the minds of those
servants of CHRIST, that every one endeavored to be the first martyr, and to
enter into heaven before his fellow soldier.

The legion being tenthed the second time, the other, which were left, were
demanded, if they would obey the Emperor Maximian; and they answered: Tell
The Emperor from us, that we do acknowledge our selfs to be his soldiers, and
withal, that we be the servants and worshippers of the true God; we be bound
to obey Maximian in things apperteining unto the war, but much more bound
unto God in matters of religion: from Maximian we have pay for our service, but
of God we receive our being, and our life. we may not nor will not deny JESUS
CHRIT to obey Caesar.

Maximian receiving this answer, finding the martirs resolute, and seeing the
double decimation of them was to small avail, be commanded the wholl army to
set on them, and to cut and hew them to pieces, without reservation of any:
this quailed not their noble courages; but rather their death being occasioned
for so good a cause, they kneeled on the bare ground, and lifting up their
hands and hearts unto heaven, yealded to the butchery and slaughter; their
Coronell Maurice continually and incessantly encouraging and chearing them up:
and in this manner they were all massacred. Many of the bloody villans were so
fleshed herewith, that not content with death, they stripped them, and put on
their apparel and at mour, and sat down to eat the provision, the martirs
had.

It happened, a Christian soldier called Victor, who was not a Theban but of
another nation came by; and beholding so many dead bodies ly in that plain,
(not knowing how it came) asked why those that eat thereby, showed such mirth
and gladness, and did not loath and abhor to eat and drink among so many dead
bodies. One related unto him point, by point what had befalle^, and they bade
him come and eat, and be merry with them, for joy they had done such pleasing
service unto the emperor. when Victor had heard all their speech: he said aloud:
Oh wretch that I am: I wish I had been partaker in their death. By these words
of Victor, they which sat at the bloody banquet, gathered, that Victor was a
christian: wherefore leaving their banquet, and taking their weapons, they
incontinent cut him in pieces, as they had done the Thebans, and by this means
Victor merited the same reward, that the Thebans had deserved. This was the
martyrdom of S. Maurice, and of his Theban soldiers, and the holy church
celebrateth it on the. 22. day of September, in the year of our Lord 301 in the
time of Dioclesian and Maximian.

After certain years passed, the same holy martirs revealed unto a Bishop,
called Theodore, where their bodies were, and commanded him to translate them
to a place more convenient. The good Bishop was not slack or negligent in
fulfilling it: for the people of that country having made many pits, and
having put the bodies of the holy martirs into them, the good Bishop caused
them to dig them out of them, and out of theother places, where those blessed
bodies were, as he understood by the divine revelation: and sent them into
diverse countries, where many Churches were builded unto their honor, and in
them God granted many favors unto such, as, being in tribulation and
affliction, did recommend themselfs unto these blessed martirs. In the vestry
of the church in Toledo in Spain is shown the head of one of these holy
martirs: and they say there, it is the head of S. Maurice.*

The life of S. Linus, Pope and Martyr.
AMONG other precepts which S. 1. ep:
Paul gave unto the Corinthians, there is one in especial, for Christians to
use, when they go unto the Church to pray. He says that men must stand
uncovered, when they be in the Church. O holy Apostle, shall this be used both
by men and women? shall the women also stand with their head uncovered in the
Church? The Apostle answers and says: for the women we have another law
which is this: that women must be in the Church with their head covered. for as
it is an unseemly thing for a secular woman to be shaven, and without long
hair; so is it an unseemly thing for women to be in the Church with their
head uncovered.

S. Ambrose yealdeth a reason of this, and foundeth it upon these words of the
Apostle, to wit: that the man is the image of God, and the woman is the image
of the man, of whom she is formed. This glorious Doctor says also; that it was
the ordinary usage, that slaves had their heads covered, or bound with
certain bands. And the difference that was between the slaves and freemen
was this: that the salues had the head bound or covered; and the freemen had it
uncovered: we may perceive hereby, that God would have us, when we be in his
presence, to acknowledge our quality and condition. The man that is superior in
house, and that has authority to comaund therein, must have his head uncovered
and bare, as a free man, and a master; but the woman, who is his inferior, and
who is obliged to obey in the house, ought to have her head covered, by that
means confessing her quality of obedience.

That the man do comaund, and the woman do obey, is a matter of such
importance, that not only. S. Paul does comaund it (as is aforesaid) but S.
Peter also, as chief and highest Bishop ordained, and commanded the same. But
for that he left it not in writing, S. Linus, who was his disciple and
successor in the Papacy, commanded it, and left it written; that it might be
observed and kept perpetually. and in deed it is not read, that he left any
other order then this; which, yet if it might be observed among all faithful
Christians, were very comendable, and praise worthy.

Now let us see the life of this holy Pope, collected on: of that which Damasus
and other grave Authors write of him. yet first, I think good to admonish you,
that S. Peter being near to his death, thought it convenient to nominate a
worthy, and weldeseruing sucessor, to be in his place after him; who might take
care, and charge of the Catholic Church. To this intent he named Clement his
disciple, who for his great humility willed, that Linus and Cletus, who had
been coadiutors unto S. Peter, should have that dignity before him. So Linus
had the Papacy, unto whom Cletus succeeded; and after him the same S. Clement
was Pope. Returning unto our purpose; the life of S. Linus was this.

SAINT Linus was borne in Vol-terra, a city of Hetruria, and was son of
Hercolanus, of the noble family to the Mauri. Being fully 20. years old, he
was sent by his father to Rome to study, where he remained in the house of
Quintus Fabius, his fathers friend, until S. Peter the Apostle came to Rome,
to preach the Gospel. Then this S. Linus was of his first disciples, who
followed him, asisting him always in his preaching, and in the administration
of the hely Sacraments. S. Peter seeing in him many good parts, as his holiness,
learning, and courteous affability, he made him his coadiutor in the dignity, to
the which he was also elected, after the death of the Apostle. So that first he
was coadiutor, then Pope, and head of the Church. for the which with great care
and prudence he provided all things necessary for the good government
thereof.

He commanded in particular, that women hold not enter into the Church with
their hair loose, and untied, but bound up, and covered, as S. Peter had
commanded, and S. Paul had left written. He gave holy orders twice in the month
of December, and at them he consecrated 15. Bishops, and ordered 18 Priests,
with some Deacons.

In the primitive Church, there was great care had in giving holy orders; and
in receiving any to the office of a priest, or the other orders; and therefore
they kept a reconing, and conserved the memory of the times when holy orders
were given, and how many were ordered. Those ancient fathers did this, for that
this office was so reverend, holy, and so hard to discharge, that many deputed
and appointed to take orders refused it. yea some there were, that cut of some
member or other, as their finger, ear, nose or the like, to make themselves
incapable to receive an office so great, and weighty, as Priesthood is.
Moreover, the Christians at that time were few in number, so that there was
not such need of so many Pastors.

If the same were done at this present, it would surely be a notable benefit,
as well for the one part, as for the other, if that prelates were not so
liberal and ready in giving holy orders, nor secular Christians so bold and
hasty in procuring to receive the same, the Priests should not be so little
esteemed, nor the seculars have such occasion to murmr of the Ecclesiastical
state.

S. Linus wrote the deeds and doctrine of S. Peter the Apostle his master, and
especialy his martyrdom. S. Linus being a most holy man, cast out devils, and
raised the dead to life. He delivered from the devil a young woman, daughter to
the Consul Saturninus; who in recompense of that received benefitt by the
hands of the good Pope, commanded he should be put to death; and so he was
made the martyr of JESUS CHRIST. It is no small honor to S. Linus, that the
Catholic Church has put his name in the Canon of the mass, among other holy
martirs there mentioned.

The feast of S. Linus is celebrated on the day of his martirdom, which was
one the 23 of September, in the year of our Lord 81. in the time of Vespasian
the Emperor. This holy Martyr held the Papacy 11. years, 3. months, and 12,
days: and was buried near unto the body of S. Peter the Apostle. Shortly
after, his holy relics were translated unto the city of Ostia, and laid
comely in the Church of S. Lawrence by Gregory. Bishop of that city. S. Paul
makes mention of Pope Linus, in the second Epistle he wrote unto Timothy his
disciple, in the 4. chapter.

The life of S. Tecla virgin.
THE Apostle S. Paul writing unto the Corinthians says; 1. Cor. 7.
that the virgin sins not in taking a husband, but does a good work; though
it should be better not to take a husband, but to remain a virgin. I may be
that the Apostle preached this doctrine in a sermon: and that a young woman named
Tecla, who had determined to take a hushand was present thereat. Who
understanding that it was better to conserve her virginity left and forsook
her earthly spouse, taking JESUS CHRIST to her heavenly spouse; for whose love
she tolerated very great afflictions and torments, which were procured unto
her by him, that thought to be her husband. The life of this glorious saint,
gathered out of the writings of S. Ambrose, Ado Arch: of Triers, and out of
other grave authors, was as follows.

ON a time, S. Paul departing from Antioch, went unto a city called Iconium in
the province of Cilicia. There had been there before that time Titus his
disciple, and had given notice and signs of him unto Onesiphorus who was a
very virtuous man and dwelt in that city. He had related also unto him the
doctrine which he preached, his life, and behauior; and informed him of the
quality of his personage: to wit, that he was a man little of body, and that he
had a hooked nose, and fair in the face like an Angel.

When the Apostle came unto the city, Onesiphorus knew him by the signs before
told him; wherefore he led him to his house, where some people of good
intention, and desirous to find the true way to eternal life and happiness,
were assembled. The Apostle preached unto them to the great profit of them,
that gave due attention unto him.

In the next house to the place where the Apostle preached, there dwelt a
damsel very beautiful, but much more virtuous called Tecla. This damsel
had a mother living, who had made a match, and appointed to marry her, to a
yongman called Tamirus. It hapened on a time, that Tecla standing in a window
of her house, heard from thence the preaching and words of S. Paul; which made
very great impressio^ in the mind of the young damsel. She being not content
to have heard him this one time, endeauored, and made means, to hear him
sundry other times; and so long, that her mother came to the knowledge thereof,
how the words of the Apostle, had made her daughter to alter her intent, and
purpose to marry. Yea, the virgin Tecla her self, who was a pagan before, said
now boldly that she was a Christian; and she that before was resolved to take
an husband, said now, that she desired rather to loose her life, then her
virginity.

The mother made report of these things unto the spouse of her daughter, who
finding the same to be very true (because Tecla her self told him her mind
freely, and what she intended to do, which was, that she would not marry but
remain a virgin) went unto the Proconsull of the city, and gave him notice,
that there was a forreiner come into the town, who took wives from their
husbands, and brought in new and strange Gods, to the notable prejudice, and
damage of them all, as being contrary to that their fore fathers had believed.
This information was the cause, that the Apostle was apprehended, cruelly
scourged, and put in danger of his life, had he not made it known unto them,
that he had the privilege of a citisen of Rome, by being borne in Tarsus, a
city of Cicilia: yet for all this, he was driven, and banished out of the
city. After this, S. Telcla was taken, and having been examined, and her
intention found, that she desired to be a Christian, and determined to conserve
her virginity, she was condemned to be consumed with fire.

The fire was kindled, and a huge multitude of people were assembled, to behold
that most beautiful young damsel, that would willingly go to die such a cruel
death. The blessed damsel was set in the midst of the fire, which did not any
hurt at all unto her persons. And on the sudden fell from heaven such a storm
with thunderclapps, with such abundance of rain, that it put out the fire,
and afrighted all them that were present; in such sort, that every one
departed; and the holy virgin was left at liberty whereby she might go free.
And so she went to the house of Onesiphorus, where she found S. Paul with some
other Christians, who had continually (for six days) made their prayers for
her; and they were all exceeding glad of her coming.

The Apostle did Baptize her and instructed her fully in the faith: but because
they were assured, that the Proconsull would send again for her, the Apostle
departed from that house and city also, recomending much the virgin Tecla unto
all the Christians, that were in that place. Though all diligence that might
be was used to keep her secret; yet within a few days, Alexander (a lewd
person) apprehended her, and brought her before the Proconsull; who seeing her
to preseuer constantly, in that she would not marry her spouse, but continue a
Christian, gave sentence, that she should be devoured of wild beasts in the
city of Antioch, whether the Proconsull was to go. An especial day was
appointed for this spectacle, and in the mean space S. Tecla was delivered unto
the custody of a matrone called Triphona.

When the appointed day was come, S. Tecla was brought into the Theater, and a
fierce Lioness was let out against her, which drawing near unto the holy
saint, lay down quietly at her feet, without doing her any harm. S. Ambrose
wondering much at that which the wild beasted did to the holy virgin, said these
words; The firstly onesse, which was let out against the blessed virgin, was
mild, lay down at her feet, and hurt her not; and also gave example unto the
other lions, Bears and fierce Bulls; who having bin let loose against her,
stood round about her peaceably, and licked her feet. The people were severe
and cruel; and the savage, and wild beasts were tame, and pitiful; though
they were kept hungry and almost famished, that they might have their fill and
make their pray upon the holy damsel. And though they were provoked, and
pricked forward by their keepers, that they might devour the holy saint, yet
could they not make them to hurt or harm her in the least degree.

The Judge seeing that the wild beasts spared her (she being taken out of the
Theater) commanded she should be cast into a ditch, wherein were many
dreadful, and venomous serpents. when S. Tecla was put into that deep ditch
there descended from heaven a fiery cloud, that slew all the serpents; and by
this means S. Tecla remained free from this third torment, even as God had
delivered her from the other two, to wit, from the fire and the wild beasts.

The people seeing such great maruailes, and especially the matrone Triphona who
had her in keeping, (and in that time had conceived great good affection unto
her) she beginning, and the common people following her, cried out jointly
together: That the God of Tecla was most potent, and most worthy to be adored,
that had delivered her from such, and so great dangers. The Judge fearing some
co^motion of the people, set S. Tecla free, and Triphona led her unto her
house, and adopted her to be her daughter. The holy virgin Tecla departed from
that city, and went to make her abode in Seleucia: In which place many by her
means received the faith of CHRIST, Spanish. adds being. 90 years. old.
and there she ended her days blessedly.

There is extant a history of S. Tecla in the which be many fabulous, and
uncertain things. As that she clothed her self in man's apparel, and would
have gone so in the compaine of S. Paul, and that he would not permit it, but
willed her, to go in her ordinary, and usual attire of a woman. moreover it
says: that a great Lord in the city of Antioche, would have given unto S.
Paul a great sum of money, if he would have given that young damsel unto him,
to be his paramour: and that S. Paul would not do it.

These, and other such like things are read in the abouenamed legend, but Pope
Gelasius commanded that those stories should not be credited, and put them
among the writings apocriphall, and of none auctority: but that which I have
written of this saint is auowed by grave authors, and is authorized, and of
credit. the Church also gives credit thereto, who, in the prayers, which are
said in the commendations of souls, says these words; O Lord deliver this
soul, even as thou did deliver S. Tecla from three most cruel torments.

The Catholic Church makes commemoration of S. Tecla on the day of her death,
which was on the. 23. day of September in the year of our Lord 90. as Canisius
says, in the time of The Emperor Domitian. It is said, that the body of this
holy saint is in Spain, in the city of Tarragona, in the province of
Catalonia.(spanish adds In the Cathedral church of that city, dedicated to
her name.

The life of SS. Cyprian. and Iustinia Martirs.
SAINT Paul to confound the wise men of this world, writing to the Corinthians,
says: God has chosen the foolishnes of this world: This was especially said
unto the Apostles, who being people unlettered, and by consequens, were holden
as folish, in that intending them selves to teach a new doctrine, would preach
unto people learned and full of knowledge: and yet their preaching was the
cause, that many were converted unto God, and receued glaldy the Gospel.

This same is verefied by S. Iustina a damsel, unlettered in humain Wisdom,
yet God made and chose her for an instrument to convert a Pagan, who was very
learned, not only in Philosophy, but also in magike and sorcery, and had dealing
and practice with the devil: and though he was such a one, yet was he
converted unto the faith of JESUS CHRIST by the means of S. Iustina, and was
martired with her. The life and history of these two holy saints, was written
by S. Gregory Nazianzen though he was deceived, in that he thought, he had bin
Bishop of Carthage. well, he, venerable Bede, and other Authors, wrote of these
holy saints in this manner.

EVEN as it is no reproach unto S. Paul, to say of him, that he had been a
persecutor of the Church of God, nor any infamy unto S. Matthew, to say of him;
that he had been a customer, or usurer, before that either of them were
converted, since their heroycall virtues and famous deeds, did cover and hide,
yea rather did wholly cancel and blot out, their former defects. So in like
manner, it is no reproach unto S. Cyprian, to say what he was before his
conversion, for though he had many faults, yet did he deface and abolish them
all, with the holy life he led after it.

There was in the city of Antioche a young damsel, noble of blood, and fair
of face, who was a Christian, and much addcted to virtue and devotion. There
dwelt in the same city one Cyp^ian, young in years, a great Philosopher, but a
greater magitian, who was ennamored on her. At the first Cyprian solicited her
with messages, letters, presents, and promised: but the holy damsel resisted
these assaults with a mind determinat, making small account of his profers, and
least of all of him. Cyprian perceuing this way would not prevail, thought to
obtein his purpose, by the help of his magike. So he coniured up the devils,
and made sacrifice unto them, promising to be perpetual friend unto them, and
that he would not worship any other God but them, if they put him in posession
of that damsel. The devils (his familiers) having gotten this promise of
him, went to Iustina and put into her mind filthy thoughts, and dishonest
imaginations, which they nourished in her heart: Every one of the fiends did
what they could, to bend and bow the heart of Iustina to the love of Cyprian.
They represented unto her cogitations a young man, fair, rich, of courtly
behauior, and deeply engaged in her love. They recalled also many times unto
her mind, the pleasant and amorous words, which he had spoken unto her, of the
which she had before made small reconing.

The holy damsel perceued the storm, that was raised against her: and
resorted unto God for succor, and kneeling in her closet, made a devout
prayer, beseeching his heavenly majesty, that as he had delivered Susanna from
the accurse Elders, Dan. 13.
and S. Tecla from her importunate spouse and other holy saints both men and
women, from other and the like perils, so it would please him, to deliver her
from that danger, where in she was at that present: She also besought most
humbly the glorious Virgin Marie, that she would help her in that manifest
peril. Unto her continual prayers, she added and adioined fastings,
hair-cloths and sleeping on the ground, and in the end, by these means, she
overcame the temptation, she remained victour, and the devil vanquished.

The fiend repleat with confusion, returned unto Cyprian, and confessed, that
he had not the power to do any thing against Iustina the virgin: he told him
also, that the cause thereof was, because she was a Christian, and that the
devils have not any power over any of them, if they them selves do not give it
unto them. When Cyprian heard this, the grief of his heart cannot be expressed:
but that was not so much for the love of Iustina, (because in such like cases
to despair wholly of good success, sometimes proves a manifest help and
remedy) but because he perceived his error, in that he had worshipped the
devils, who had so small power and force. Studieng on this, he determined to
abandon and to forsake for ever the devils, together with their cursed art, and
to receive the Christian faith.

He conferred his determination with a Bishop who was in that city, called
Antimus, who instructed him to the full in the Christian faith; and Baptized
him: but first and before all this, he made him to burn all the books of
Magic, that had. Being Baptized; he made it known unto Iustina, telling her;
that unto her he was much bound, for that by her means he came to the knowledge
of the truth, and of the faith of JESUS CHRIST. When Iustina heard this strange
alteration, she reioiced excedingly, and would confer some times with him, in
the which conference they comforted the one the other, to persevere in the
service of God, and many by their means were converted to the faith, and were
Baptized.

At that time Claudius 2 was Emperor of Rome who had sent a certain Count,
called Aurelius, Spa: Dioclesian
or Eutelmius as venerable Bede calls him, as lieutenant into the Orient. He
persecuting the Christians, (as The Emperor had appointed) had notice that
Cyprian and Iustina were Christians, and that many others had receued Baptism,
by their inducement: wherefore he caused them both to be apprehended. When he
had examined Cyprian, and found him constant and firm in the faith, he caused
him to be stripped naked, and his body to be rent and torn with rakes and hooks
of Iron he caused Iustina to be buffetted on the face, and then scourged with
the raw sinews of beasts.

After he had put them unto these several torments, he laid them both in
prison, where they continued certain days: when he saw them to persevere
steadfast in the profession of their faith, he caused them to be taken from
thence, and cast into a huge big cauldron, seething with pitch, tallowe, and
such other matter: Iustina was some what troubled, when they went about to put
her into the Cauldron: but S. Cyprian comforted and animated her, and so they
were both put into the Cauldron and by the favor of God, they felt therein no
pain at all, for the which they rendered him infinite thanks. Being taken out
they were led back unto the prison: and Aurelius having occasion to go unto
Nicomedia, took order, that the holy martirs should be brought thither, in
which place afflicting them with sundry torments, he lastly caused them to be
beheaded.

Their bodies remained six days unburied, because none was so hardy, as to
take them away; but then, certain Christians conuaied them away in the night,
and put them into a bark, and brought them to Rome, where at the first they
were buried in a farm place belonging to a noble lady, called Rufina: and in
after times, they were translated into the city, and buried in the Cathedral
Church of Constantiniana, nere unto the Fontestone. It is said, that at this
present, their bodies be in Placencia, a city of Lombardy.

The Church does celebrate the feast of these holy saints, on the day of their
martyrdom, which was, on the 26 day of September, in the year of our Lord 272
the abouenamed Claudius 2 being emperor. Spa: says Dioclesian about the year
300.

The life of SS. Cosmas and Damianus martirs.
SOLOMON says in Ecclesiasticus, that the physician deserves to be honored:
Cap. 38. Psa: 138.
David says also in a psalm, that the friends of God deserve to be, and are
much honored. S. Cosmus and S. Damianus were physicians, and great friends of
God; since for to be such, they gave their life, and therefore they deserve to
be honored, even as the Catholic Church in general, and many faithful
people in particular honor them, and have devotion unto them.

Such men desire to know their life's, and martyrdom, which they suffered,
which was written by Nicetas a philosopher, and recounted by Simeon
Metaphrastes, and their martyr dome was written by Ado Archbishop of Triers.

SAINT Cosmus and S. Damianus were brethren, and physicians, and were borne in
Egea a city of Arabya in Asia. Their father and mother were Christians and
Catholics. Their father died, when they were yet litly children, wherefore
their mother Theodora brought them up with great care and diligence: And being
a woman of good behauior, and chiefly, because she was a good Christian, she
would not permit them to commit any fault or offense, but endeavored to enstruct
and direct them in virtue and godliness. So that they became good children, like
to their good mother, and good scholars, like unto their good mistress. Amongst
the other good qualities of these two breathren, the profession of the
Catholic faith shined most in them, for which cause, they despised and
contemned Idolatry, and other wicked superstition.

They were chaste and honest in life, and fled from all sensual delight, and
tamed their flesh with austere sackcloth, disciplines, and fastings; which be
the most certain remedies to overcome that enemy, even as they overcame it by
the grace of God. Also covetousness, that abominable vice, never entered into
their heart: but rather, because they made small account of money, and lived in
poor and mean estate, they were called Anargeni, which is to say Men without
money, and in this sort observing the Gospel, they lived an Angelical life.

And to avoid Idleness, which is the mother of vices, and stepmother unto
virtue, they used the science of physic even from their childhood, and
became skillful, and expert physicians. They gave and ministered physic unto
the sick, without any expectation of temporal gain, but only for the love of
God. When the infirmity was perilous, and not to be cured by art, they
resorted unto God by prayer, and making the sign of the Cross, they healed
and cured them, and herein they followed the steps of the Apostles.

They imitated the Patriarcks in being benign, pi^tifull and charitable, in
living a life in simplicity, without doublenes or hypocrisy. They imitated the
Prophets in that they were zealous of Gods honor, in reproouing them, that were
stubborn, and obstinate in evil deeds: They imitated the martirs in the
valiancy of their minds, showed against the common enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the devil; They imitated the priests in their religious
life, chastity, and gravity, offering their body and soul for an acceptable
sacrifice unto God, to serve him withal humility and obediencence, to observe
and keep his holy commandments. They imitated the monks in obedience,
concinency, and poverty, in silence, and repose of soul. And at one word, they
imitated all the saints, as much, as lay in their power: Thus they ran their
race, making the world to wonder at their sincerity, so that the report of them
was spread very far. The rumor of them being dispersed came to the ears of
Dioclesian and Maximian, those noted persecutors of the Christians, who had
decreed, that all the Judges, governors, lieutenants, and other officers of
the provinces subject to them, should put to death all, that denied to
sacrifice unto the Idols. Lisias the governor in the city of Egeas, having
notice of the blessed physicians Cosmus and Damianus, caused them to be brought
before him, and demanded of what country they were, and their names. They
answered: that they were Arabians, and borne in the city of Egea, and that
their names were Cosmus and Damian, and that they were both Christians.

The governor persuaded them, to sacrifice unto the Idols: but seeing them
constantly to refuse it, he commanded them to be tied hand and foot, and to be
cruelly beaten, and after he had given them other torments, he caused them to
be thrown into the maine sea, bound as they were. They were no sooner cast
into the water, but an Angel came to their aid, who vntyeng all their hands
brought them alive (and untied) unto the shore. The governor was certified of
that wonder: wherefore he caused them ageine to be brought before him, and
requested them to teach him their Art magic, and inchauntments, whereby they
were delivered from the sea, and then he promised to be their good friend. They
answered: We be Christians, and have no skill in Art magike, but were delivered
our of the sea, by the power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

The governor caused them again to be put in prison, and the next day a great
fire to be kindled: then he threw the blessed martirs into the same: but the
flame was divided into two parts, and the holy saints remained in the midst at
their prayers. The governor was astonished to see such a wonder, yet he did not
repent of his wickedness, but caused them to be hoised aloft, and to be beaten
again with wands and stones: and beholding the holy saints cheerful in
countenance, and to contemn the torments, he caused them to be lifted upon
two Crosses, and there to be stoned to death.

The officers threw the stones, and though they cast them with all their might,
yet came none of the stones so far as the holy martirs; but fell upon them,
that stood by to see the spectacle, and wounded many of them, but especially
them tha threw them. The governor seeing this, (an believing assuredly, that
it was done by inchauntment,) enraged with fury and indignation, commanded
them to be shot to death with Arrows, and the same happened to the Arrows, as
did before unto the stones, for they did light on them, that shot them, and
none touched the bodies of the martires. At last, he commanded they should be
both beheaded: and in this sort, the holy martirs finished their life's, and
obtained the crown of Martyrdom: Their bodies were buried by some virtuous
people, with out the walls of the city Egea.

It is said, that jointly with these holy martirs SS. Cosmus and Damian three
other holy martirs were beheaded, whose names were Antimus, Leontinus, and
Euprepius, and were their brethren, as some Authors write. There is a book of
the miracles that God showed by the merits of SS. Cosmus and Damian, whereof
this is one:

A clown sleeping in the field, a serpent crept into his mouth, and so further
into his body, whereby the poor man was in great danger of death. He with great
devotion craved the help of the holy martirs, and they were seen visibly by
his side, and commanded the serpent to come out of his body, and so it did:
These holy saints also gave him phisike which cured him, and then they vanished
away. the second Nicen Council in the third action, makes mention of the
book of the miracles of SS. Cosmus and Damian.

The Church celebrateth their martyrdom on the 27 day of September which was
in the year of our Lord 301 and in the time of Dioclesian and Maximian. The
bodies of these holy saints be in Rome, in a Church dedicated to their name.

The venetians say, not in the Spanish.
that the bodies of the aforenamed holy saints, were brought unto their city,
in the year of our Lord. 1154.

The spanish says: That Procopius in the first book says, that these holy
saints healed the Emperor Instinian, (recomending himself unto them) of a
greenous infirmity, and that in gratification thereof, he built a sumptuous
temple unto their name.

The Dedication of S. Michael the Archangell.
THE sacred scripture recites in the first book of thing, that the reputation
and credit of king Saul was in great peril, when that proud Philistean called
Golias, defied him and all his army. It was not fit the king should accept the
battle, and yet there was not any found in his court, whose heart did serve
him to encounter that proud giant, (who was reputed valiant and strong) and
answer the challeng. King Saul studied and devised how to be freed from this
dishonor and danger. At last, he made a proclamation, that if any man
overcame the Phylistean, he should be made a noble man, and be exempt from all
tribute, and that he would give him an honorable office in the court, and also
his daughter unto wife.

These promises of the king were very great, yet there was not a man in all the
army, that was so hardy, as to behold the face of the giant: only the lowly
little shepherd David, zealous of the kings honor, and of the peoples also,
took on him the enterprise to combat with the Philistean: which he did; and
showed such valor, that with a stone which he threw, he hitte him on the
forhead, and felled him to the ground: then he ran speedily unto him, and out
of his head, and returned with the same, every one making triumph for his
victory, but especially the damsels declared his prowess in a song. After this
king Saul observed his promise, he made him a noble man, and a great officer in
his court, and gave unto him his daughter Michol unto his wife.

This is a perfect portraict of the battle, which was in heaven, between the
Angels: of which it is good the memory be celebrated, as often as their feast
is solemnished; for that, which they did, was a famous and rare work. The
Philistean Golias is a figure of Lucifer, who was the highest Angel, and seeing
himself endowed with grace and gifts, above other Angel, was puffed in pride,
and came into the field against God, pretending to be like and equal to him in
some things. It was not fit, God should come into the field against him, for
then the victory would have been of far less estimation: but S. Michaell
figured by the lowely shepherd David took on him this entreprise, and entered
boldy into the field against Lucifer, in the defense of Gods honor; and behaved
himself so well, that with one stone, (which was his profound humility, saying
who is as God?) he cast the giant to the earth, that is, threw Lucyfer into
hell.

Lucifer being overcome with all his followers. S. Michaell returned
victoriously from the conflict, every one making joy and triumph for it, but
especially the damsels, who sang of his prowess: which happens every time,
this feast of him and the Angels is celebrated, for that many blessed souls
singing the victory of S. Michaell, do rejoice at his honorable enterprise.

God also performed his promise unto him, he made him a noble man and gave him
an honorable office, making him Chief Justice in his kingdom, (for which
cause, he bears the Ballaunce and the sword in his hand, when he is painted)
and gave unto him an honorable companion which was his divine grace, confirming
him in the same, and all the other blessed spirits also.

EVERY time, the Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of the Angels, there is
red in the office of the mass a gospel, which treats how controversy
arising amongst the Apostles, which of them should be the greatest, the son
of God called a little child, and set him in the midst of them and said: If you
be not humbled as this child, you shall not be great in the kingdom of heaven,
but more then that, You shall never come thither. The use of the Catholic
Church guided by the holy Ghost is to read this Gospel in such like
solemnities because there is mention made of the Angels: for in the end thereof
it is said: That, None should contemn the lowely and humble, (as children be)
because their Angels see always in heaven the face of God:

Some Authors, (though not in the literal sense) will draw this history to
the Angels; saying that as soon as God created them; he gave the^ notice of the
mystery of the Incarnation, and set before their eyes that B. child JESUS, who
should give remedy unto the world, and then said unto them: uerily I tell you,
if you be not humble and lowely as this child and imitate him therein, if in
this small space, in which you be viatores, or trauellors, and have time to
merit or demerite, ye do not imitate him, and be likened to this child; If
you do not honor and adore him, you shall not be confirmed in grace, you shall
not enter into my glory.

But Lucifer seeing him felf so fair, beutifull, and honored, judged it would
be an abacement, and vility to imitate a man, and much more to adore him. And
laboring to draw the Angels unto his opinion, said unto them: it would be a
great baseness and shame unto them, to be humbled to adore a man, and with these
speechs drew the third part unto his opinion.

S. Michael (together with all the other holy Angels) obeyed God, and adored
the little child JESUS: and took upon him the defense of Gods honor, against
Lucifer and the Angels that followed him. The fierce war between them was
not of material weapons, but of different wills, and S. Michael and his
company were so potent, that they cast Lucifer and all his followers out of
heaven. As Soon as Lucifer was cast out of heaven, and fallen into the world,
there was heard a great voice which said: woe unto the world because Lucifer is
fallen into it, and will give occasion of offense, but more woe unto him, by
whom such scandals shall come, it were better for such a one to have a
millstone tied unto his neck, and that he were thrown into the sea. This
befell unto the devil, because there was tied unto the neck of his will a
great stone, which was their obstinacy; with which they were drowned in the
bottomless pit. Then said God: take heed that none make small account of these
humble Angels, Spa: as lactan: l: 2. c. 9. D. Ber^^. ser. 17. super. mis. est.
Alex. 3. p. q. 74. memb. 8. Nacl. deoper: sex dier.
which remain in heaven, but honor and reverence them: for I tell you true,
they alwais see the face of the father eternal. This is that, which some
doctors say, (and I had not rehearsed it here, if it had not a good ground) that
the sin of Lucifer was, for that he would not adore JESUS CHRIST. for he
thought he lost much of his reputation, if he that was an Angel, had abased
himself to adore JESUS CHRIST a man, though he was God also.

It is the common opinion of the doctors, founded upon holy writ, that the
sin of Lucifer was pride and disobedience. S. Paul seems to say so, writing
to the Hebrews, where he says, Let all the Angels of God adore him. S. John
Chrysostom says: that this was a precept given unto the Angels. Hereof rises
the great malice and envy of Lucifer against JESUS CHRIST, for that he was cast
out of heaven for his sake: Ad hebr cap. 1.
and because the cursed wretch cannot revenge himself against him, there fore
he labors to wreak his malice against men. whereupon S. Basil says: D. Bas.
1. tom. hom. in lai.
that Lucifer does after the manner of a bull, who seeing a man to cast a snare
or cord about his horns, is chafed and enraged against him, and whilst he is
in his greatest fury, they use to set before him the shape of a man, against
which he utters all his rage, though it put not the cord about him. In like
sort Lucifer does, who, because he cannot be revenged on JESUS CHRIST, who tied
him, and was the cause, he was thrown out of heaven, and also of his torment
he has in hell, strives to revenge himself on men, who are made to the image
and similitude of god.

On the contrary, the Angels do love men entirely, because they see CHRIST, who
is both God and man for whose cause they enjoy the heavenly glory: and also
because they behold the devils to persecute and make cruel war against
them. Hereof it comes, that God commanding them to be the keepers and
guardians of men, and to be their guides, they do not scorn it, yea they
esteem it honorable, and take great content thereat. Therefore in this war,
which the devil makes against men assisted by two lusty fellows his
servants, the world and the flesh; the Angels hold on our sides, helping and
ayding us: As it it happened to Judas Machabeus, 2. Match. 11.
who being ready to encounter with a great army of his enemies, two Angels went
by his side, and aided him, and caused him to obtain a famous victory.

These holy Angels deliver us from many dangers, into which we fall
oftentimes, as it befell to Loath, when the Angels pulled him (almost by force)
out of Sodom, Gen: 19.
that he should not be consumed with fire among the other people of Sodom.
These Angels hold us back, and with draw us, if we go sometimes headlong into
sin; as happened to the prophet Balaam, who being on the way, entending to
curse the people of God, Nu^. 22.
an Angel met him on the high way with a naked sword in his hand, and though
the prophet did not see him, yet the Ass, on which he rode, (such was the
pleasure of God) saw him: and afterward the Angel told him what to do, and
spoke unto him. These holy Angels comfort us in our troubles, as befell to
JESUS CHRIST in that great agony, Luc. 22.
which he had in the garden, when he sweat blood: CHRIST had no Angel
guardyan, for that he needed none, yet an Angel descended from heaven which
comforted him, reducing unto his mind the great good and proffit that would
arise of his death.

These B. Angels keep us company in all our voyages and iourneis, Tobia 3.
as it befell to young Tobyas, who was accompanied by an Angel in a long
journey, and receued by him many graces and favors. They do defend us and
stand on our side, daunting our enemies, as happened to the prophet Heliseus,
4. Reg 6.
when the Assirians besieged him in mont Carmelo, when many Angels environed
him round in his defense.

These Angels guide us in the way, we are to walk, as befell to the Hebrews
when they departed out of Egypt, Exodus 14.
for an Angel went before them as a cloud, and guided them in the day, and in
the night directed them in the form of a pillar of fire. These B. 3. Reg. 19.
spirits comfort us, and provide us sustentation: as befell unto the prophet
Elias; for an Angel brought him sustenance, before he went a long journey,

These Angels present our prayers and our sobbes and tears before God, as
befell unto the beutifull Sara, Toby. 3.
the daughter of Raguel, who was widow seven times, the devil killing her
husbands: and an Angel presented her prayers and tears before the face of
God, and she was delivered from that affliction.

These Angels finally, when the souls are separated from the bodies (if they
go unto purgatory,) keep them company, and comfort them with their often
visitations: if they go unto heaven, they go before them, making triumph and
joy. For which cause it is fit and just, that men, who receive these great
benefits by the Angels, should make great estimation of them, and also honor
them, and be prompt and ready to do them service.

Pope Boniface the 4. who sat in the chair of S. Peter about the year of our
Lord 614. considering and seeing, that in Rome there were many Churches
dedicated to diverse Saints, caused a Church to be builded in the honor of S.
Michaell the Archangell, the which was builded in Rome in a place called Circus
Maximus; which building was fully ended and finished on the 29. day of
September. And in remembrance of the building of the Church, the Pope willed
the feast of S. Michaell the Archangell, and of all the other Angels to be
celebrated through all parts of Christendom. It is our duty to rejoice (on
this day especially,) with them, showing our selfs to be gladsome, of that,
they enjoy the eternal felicity in heaven, of which God make us partakers for
his mercies sake.

Amen.
The life of S. Hierome.
WE READ of the great friend of God Moises, guide and captain to the children
of Israel, that when he took the same people from the hands of Pharao, and
conducted them out of the land of Egypt, the Red sea stopped him: but when he
stroke it with his wand, it divided into two parts, so that all the people
passed through dry foot, the water serving them for a wall, and a defense
against the Egiptians their enemies that pursued them.

Moses is not only a figure of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, the guide and captain
of the Christians, whom he delivered from the hand of Pharao, to wit the
devil, opening the way by the sea of his death and passion, with the wand or
wood of the Cross: but also represents the holy Doctors (though not so
properly) who in some sort are guides, and captains unto the Christians.

Amonghst other Doctors figured in Moses one is glorious S. Hierome: for that
this Doctor, like unto another Moises, is the guide and means, whereby many
that were slaves, and subject to vices, have freed themselves from their
miserable bondage, by the help of his doctrine, and good example, prayers and
meritts. Especially those, who take him for their Advocate, and recommend
themselves unto him. The sea which runs between, is the sacred scripture,
with is a deep sea that has no end.

yet in the red sea there was some end. In this sea be drowned many heretics,
and every day we see one or other drowned; for that they will not take such
holy doctors for their guide, as S. Jerome and others. Of him it may be said
truly, that as Moses taking his wand, did divide the sea; so this glorious
saint with the wand of the fear of God, opened the deep sea of the sacred
scripture.

This is certain, that as unto S. Gregory is attributed the principal gift
in reproouing of evil behauior, and disorderly living; and unto S. Augustine,
in assotling scholasticall doubts; so unto S. Jerome is assigned the praise for
the interpretation and expounding the holy scriptures. So that we may say; that
he divided this sea, and showed away for others that will follow him: and all
they, that pass therein, shall pass dry foot; and the same scripture shall be
unto them a wall and defense, against the Egiptians, that is to say the
devils, and his members, which be the heretics, our mortal enemies. The life
of this glorious Doctor taken out of his own writings, and out of other good
Authors was this.

SAINT Jerome was borne in the time of Constantine, son unto Constantine the
Great, in a place upon the borders of Dalmacy and Hongary, called Str^do; which
city was, in a manner, wholly destroyed by the Goths in his life time (as he
himself says) and hereupon the memory thereof is utterly lost. The Spanish
says: it is at this present a pretty village under the Venetians and is called
Sdrinea, that therein is conserved the memory of S. Jerome
His fathers name was Eusebius, and he had a brother called Paulinus. he had
also a sister, whose name is not known, and the name of his mother is unknown
also. The brother and sister of S. Jerome entered into religion, and in the same
ended their life's in blessed manner. He came of noble blood, yet he does not
speak thereof in all his writings, though other writers report so. He had also
abundance of worldly possessions and goods; which he sold, when he caused the
Abbey to be builded at Bethlem, as he says himself: And by cause his parents
were Christians, epist. 66. ad Ruffin: and epist 26 ad pamach: Epist. 51. ad.
Dom. onem.
he was instructed even from a child, in the Christian faith and relligion.

At that time flourished in Rome the school of the liberal sciences; wherefore
he went thither with intention to study. He first studied the Latin and Greek
toungs, and Donatus was his schoolemaister in grammar. Then went he unto the
study of philosophy, and other liberal arts, and in them he profited much, as
appears by his writings. In Rome he received the vesture of JESUS CHRIST (as
Pope Damasus writes) that is to say; Ep. 57. and 58. ad. Dam.
he was Baptized. It was the usage of that time, to be Baptized, when they were
of years of discretion: and they that were baptized for certain days did
wear a white vesture (in place whereof, when infants are now Baptized, they
put on their head a white cloth), Ep 41. ad. Ruf. lib 2. cont. Iouin.
and that is called the vesture of JESUS CHRIST.

S. Jerome departed then from Rome, with a desire to learn deeper studies: he
went into Gallia or France, traueiling diverse ways, seeking after wise and
discreet men, or learned and good books: and where he found any of these things,
there he staid some time. The books he found, if he liked them, he endeavored
to buy, or else he took pain to copy the^ out, or to translate them. Writing
to Florentius, he says: that he coopied out with his own hands, Ep. 6.
in the city of Triers, a great volume, in which were written certain Sinods
collected by S. Hillary. he found a man of good life, he conuersed with him,
and learned of him all the good he could: and the same he did when he met with
any rare or singular learned man: and by this means he was enriched not in
temporal possessions, but in virtue and science. After some time thus spent,
he returned unto his country; and from thence, unto Rome. He thought he was
not secure in Rome, and the staieng also in his own country pleased him not:
for there he had many kinsfolk, of whom he could receive no help, neither
could he satisfy their desires. And in Rome, he thought, would be too many
occasions of pleasures and delights, dangerous for young men, as he was at that
time. He determined therefore to pass the sea, and to go into Greece; where he
intended to study, and to converse with wise and learned men, of whom there was
store in that country at that time.

Knowing that Gregory Nazianzen was Patriarch of Constantinople, who for his
excellency was surnamed the Divine, he went thither: and though he might well
be a master and instructor unto others, for his learning: yet would he be
disciple to that learned and holy Bishop; that he might say, and vaunt, he had
learned Divinity of Gregory Nazianzen. Then visited he the holy land, and
traveled through all the places thereof, which moved him to great devotion, and
was a great content unto his mind. There was not a thing in all Pallestina,
whereof mention is made in the holy scripture, but he saw it with his own
eyes, which help him much (as he says himself) to understand the same. There
had he also masters, In coment. Esaias. 6. Item. ^ep 99 ad as sellam and in ep.
2. ad nepotia^
who taught him the Hebrew tongue, and likewise the Chaldean; which he
understood best, though he could not speak it. The other he spoke as well, as
he understood it. He also conuersed with the people of Siria, and by that
means, learned many things of their language and speech. and though he
traveled thus to get sundry languages; yet he did not pretermit his first
study of the Latin tongue: yea, he so much delighted therein, that becaused he
would not omit the reading of Cicero, and other eloquent authors thereof, he
spent therein that little time, he might have spent in more profitable studies.
so that I wonder that any man will make doubt, that he was chastised of God for
it, Isid: in quoda^ himno Brevi, ipsius.
since he writes in himself. S. Isidorus recites the same words, who perhaps
might fear to have the like chas;tisement, since he likewise spent his time in
the same study.

S. Jerome writing to Eustochium in that epistle, which begins Audi filia,
says these words: I wretched sinner took pains in reading of Tullyes works,
and his eloquence was very delightful unto me: and if then I took into my
hands a book of any of the Prophets and read it, their manner of speech, their
low and disordered style displeased me much. About the midst of Lent, a
grievous fever took me, and brought me to that state of body, that they who
were with me, prepared for my burial. Remaining thus: I was taken up in
spirit, and brought unto judgment, before the royal throne of JESUS CHRIST;
and being demanded of my quality, and of my faith, I answered boldly, that I
was a Christian. Then the Judge replied: Nay, thou seem rather to be a
Ciceronian, then a Christian; for where thy treasure is, there is thy heart. At
this word, I was struck dombe, and the Judge commanded me to be cruelly
beaten. I sighing and sobbing said: Pardon me o Lord; Pardon me o Lord:
nevertheless my punishment endured, and my tears continewed. many Angels (who
were present) seeing it, fell on their knees before the Judge, beseeching him to
pardon me the errors of my youth, and to give me time also of amendment: upon
condition, that if I did not amend my fault, I should undergo a greater
punishment. I would at that time, and in that estate have promised greater
things: and so I did swear to observe this: which when I had done, I was set
free, and came to my self. Let none think it was a vain dream; witness is the
judge in whose sight I was beaten, the Angels be also witnesses, and so be the
marks of the scourging, which continued in my body for many days.

From that time S. Jerome addicted himself unto the study of Divinity; and
spent not his time any more in other unprofitable and vain studies: and
therefore he says in the prologue before S. Paul unto the Galathians: It is 15.
years, since I took in my hand any book of secular learning; and if it happen
sometime, that I need the science of any such books, I take it out of my
memory. Writing to Damasus the pope, he reproves ecclesiastical persons, that
leave the reading of holy writ, and spend their time in reading of heathnish
books and fables, which do hurt unto many.

S. Jerome thought it time, to set down his rest, and to follow some course
of life. And seeing, that in the ecclesiastical state there was danger, for
the great obligement they have to be good, and to seem to be so also, by
giving good example to all: seeing likewise the great charge they had that took
wifes, he refused this utterly, and feared to assume the other upon him. So he
resolved, to be a monk.

Their order at that time was, to wear a mean and course garment, different
from the clergy and the lay men: yet did not all the monks use one manner of
appareill; for they differed in the stuf, color, and also in the fashion: for
some of them were clothed with course and rough cloth, others with beasts
skinns, sowed together; but in this they all agreed, that their garments were
course, bare, and very mean. They exercise themselves continually in fasting,
watching, and reading of the holy scriptures; they could not have any public
office; but all their business was to serve God. Some of them lived in common,
and had a superior, unto whom they gave obedience. others lived a solitary life
in the deserts, and S. Jerome determined to take that kind of life.

He had some friends, vntowhom he disclosed his mind, and what his
determination was to do. They, although they had followed him until that time
(and had received comfort of his holy conversation abundantly, and had
profitted much by his hole some aduises, and by the example of his holy life)
yet at that pinch, they all abandoned him: only one called Eliodorus staid and
took the habit, and remained within him in the desert a short time; but being
tired and aweried and not able to endure that austerity of life, he also
forsook him, and returned unto the world. S. Jerome wrote of this departure of
Eliodorus unto Julian the deacon, in these gracious words. Our brother
Eliodorus came unto the desert with me, and for that he is holy, and I a great
sinner, and he not being able to suport my manners, is departed, and left me.
As Soon as S. Jerome had taken this course of life, he set his temporal goods
in order, and recommended the charge of them to an honest man.

During the time he stayed in the desert, he staid not long in a place; because
at that time, certain heresies were dispersed in those countries, and the
prelates of Antioche, Alexandria, and Cypres and of other places, under whose
jurisdiction the monks, and solitary livers were, sent ordinarily visiters to
examine them of their faith. These visiters had no trust in S. Jerome; and he
had no confidenee in them. He was suspicious of them, because of some words and
phrases they used, in the mystery of the B. Trinity: Ep. 77 ad mar. Celeden.
and they suspected him, because their conversation and company did not like
and please him. To free himself of this molestation, and to avoid the often
visitations of his friends, who kept him more occupied, the^ he desired to be;
he withdrew himself into a desert and solitary wilderness in Siria; and there he
shutvp himself with his books in a cave, where he remained four years, doing
penance, and leading an austere life.

His chief exercise was to lament the sins of his youth, to chastise his body
with fasting, watching and other austerities, that it would make a man to
wonder at them, sooner then to imitate them. Raw herbs and roots were his
meat; fair water was his drink, and the bare ground was his bed. he was never
Idle, now he studied, then he prayed, and when he felt him self awearied, he
song himnes to the praise and glory of God. This was the life of this holy
saint: and though it was thus, yet the devil assalted him with terrible and
wicked temptations.

He says himself, ep 22.
writing to Eustochium, in this manner: O how many times, when I was in the
desert, (where, by the unmeasurable heat of the sun, men are scorched, their
bodies enfeebled, their flesh burned and consumed) stretching my bones, which
scarce hong together, on the bare ground, taking for nutryment herbs and clear
water (and thus I continued in this exile, yea rather prison, unto which I had
voluntarily condemned my self for dread of hell, and had no other company, but
the savage beasts) how often thought I that I was at the daunces of the
Damosells of Rome? my face was pale with much fasting, and yet my will was
enkindled with wanton desires. In the body cold as ice, yet in my dry skin,
which was in manner dead, lived the motions of dishonest appetits: and when I
resisted and thought to oppress them, thy labored still to bud and increase,
like weeds and bad herbs. Sometimes finding my self abandoned, I fell at the
knees of my Lord, and washed them with my tears, and dried them with my
hairs; I macerated my body with long fasting day by day, and eating nothing.
Do not think, that I am a shamed to rehearse this story of my temptations, yea
I lament, that I am not now, as I was them. I do remember that I have sometime
spent the night in prayer, calling on my LORD JESUS CHRIST; neither did I cease
to knock my breast, until that my heart was at rest, from those unquiet
thoughts. JESUS CHRIST is my witness, that after all these trobles, I felt great
consolation and content, tears, as sweet as honey, with such enkindled and
lovely desires of heaven, that me thought, I was transported beyond my self,
and that I was above the Quiers of Angels. If the flesh make such war
against the^, that afflict and torment it, what will it do to him, that lives
in pleasure and delights? It may be, he shall not have such terrible
temptations: But in that case, I think, there is no greater temptation, then
not to be tempted.

This same holy Doctor writing to Pammachius, says: I exalt virginity, but
not, for that I do enjoy it, but for that I highly esteem them, that do
observe it. Out of these words of S. Jerome some take occasion to say that in
his youth, he lived lasciuiously: but in this they are deceued; for holy men
use this manner of speech, to show their humility, and yet they did not ly; as
S. Paul says of himself, 1 Cor 15. and ephesians: Cassia^ epist 22.
that he was the least of the Apostles, and the greatest sinner it seemed to
him, it was so, as he said having consideration unto his humble mind. S. Basile
also says of himself: I never knew any woman carnally, yet do I not therefore
account any self a virgin. So speaks S. Jerome with lowelines and humility,
reputing himself a sinner. Yet as it appears by an epistle unto Eustochium,
he never did actually commit and dishonesty: and these be his words: we do not
only praise and commend virginity, but do also preserve and keep the same. Spa:
at the least after his Baptism, as sait Marianus Victorius.

After that S. Jerome had been four years in the aforementioned desert, in vit.
eius
he thought, he might now, yea that he ought to go out, and preach unto the
people: yet for all he did not utterly renounce and forsake the desert, but
retired into the company of relligious men, to live among them. It was not fit
such a light should be hid any longer, but should be known. for the relligious
men, with whom he conuersed, and enioied his blessed company, perceued the
great treasure that God had safly kept under that course clothing in the breast
of Jerome, repleat with science and doctrine. He had before that time written
some works, and published them. These books were well liked of the readers, who
bare good affection also to the Author for the same, and by this means S.
Jerome came to be known in many places.

There lived at that time Epiphanius B of Salamina in Cipres, and Paulinus B of
Antioche. These two prelates were at controversy, and to be agreed, they were to
go to Rome unto the Pope. Ep 16. in ep i. taph. mar celle: v.ep 27 in. epitap
paul.
In this their journey they took S. Jerome with them in their company, for the
good opinion they had of him. This was the occasion of his third coming to
Rome. At that time Damasus was Pope, who knowing the worthiness and sufficiency
of Jerome, as well for his virtue and behavior, as for his wisdom and
learning, would needs retain him still in his company. And because he was
already made priest in Antioche, by Bishop Paulinus, Ep: 65. ad pam. D Aug: ad
fratr. in Ere. ser 24.
the pope gave unto him the title of a church in Rome, called Laurence, which
is the same, as it is now to be a Cardinal: though they did not then use the
apparel and the red hatte, which pope Innocent. 4. about the year of our Lord
1250. gave unto them. So that to paint S. Jerome in the habit of a Cardinal
has this foundation; that indeed he was a Cardinal, in that he was a priest,
and Curate of a parish in Rome.

The glorious S. Jerome exercized this charge carefully and diligently, and
labored to root out public offenders out of his parish, and reproved them
sharply, though they were of the Clergy, which caused him to be persecuted and
hated: for it is an ordinary matter for the wicked, to abhor and detest the
good and the virtuous, even as the dog does hate the staff that beats him.
So those, that in their life's were like beasts, and in their deeds were
disordered and unruly people, hated S. Jerome: for he was the staff and the
scourge that whipped them. Whereupon they awaited, to espy out some occasion, to
slander him, and to drive him out of Rome, as they did indeed at last. Their
means was this: S. Jerome used, when he preached the^ to forsake vices, to
love virtues, to despise the world, and to make none account of the pomp and
vain glory thereof

Alitle before this time were fled unto Rome, from the fury of the Arryans some
Catholic priests of Egypt, as S. Athanasius, and others: who told how in
those countries S. Antony, and other holy hermits had made monasteries, as well
of men, as women, who served God, by living in obedience, poverty, and
chastity. Some Roman Ladies hearing this, had a desire to do the same: and
because the priests, who should have animated them therein, were gone back unto
their own country, for that thy heard the persecution was ceased, they were
hindered from building the monastery, as they desired to have done. and finding
S. Jerome to favor their intent, as a thing agreeable to that which he preached
and taught and also proffer to defend them from all that did deprave, or
backbite the act, for they feared him much, as also to speak in their behalf to
pope Damasus, who loved him dearly, they builded up the monastery they
desired. The ladies, that began this laudable work, were Sophronia, Marcella,
Melania, Paula and Eustochium: and many others followed and imitated them.

S. Jerome instructed them all in the way of perfection, he willed them to read
spiritual books, to pray often, to be humble, charitable, and chaste: but
especially, to frequent often the sacraments of Confession and of the
Eucharist. These and such like were the persuasions S. Jerome used to these
devout women, because he desired their increase in holy life. And though this
caused in Rome some murmuring, as being a thing unusual, yet then seeing how
these relligious women profitted in virtue, and how some that were before
gadders abroad, delighting in gay and rich appareill, in novelties, and
vanities, and idle talking, were now quite changed from these thing, and
seemed to be the blessed handmaids of God, the murmr ceased, yea S. Jerome
was extolled, and highly commended, as the diuiser of this holy work.

When he passed by the streets, the people kissed his garments, and said openly
that when Damasus died, he should be his successor. This was the speech of
every one in general: yet some private persons wished him evil, and sought to
wreak their malice on him, because he did publicly reprove their faults.

At last they took this occasion to slander him. The religious women being
many, it was expedie^r, that they should be in diverse places, and we may think,
that Sophronia, Marcella, Melania, and Paula, had them home to their houses,
and that in those places they used their holy exercizes. S. Jerome visited them
oftentimes, and came unto the houses, where they remained, for at that time,
they had no grates, nor any such enclosures, as the Nonnes of our time have,
which is done with great discretion and wisdom, let heretics bark thereat, as
much as they will, for thereby are avoided and prevented many inconuenientes.
Well: S. Jerome visited all these relligious women, but he went more to the
house of Paula, then to any other place, for there (as it was apparaunt
afterward) was most virtue, and good life to be found.

The enemies of S. Jerome, at these often visitations took occasion to
slander, and murmr at him, and said; it was not well done, as they thought:
for though Paula was old, Jerome was not old, being then but. 40. years of age,
and moreover, there was Eustochium the daughter of Paula, and other young women,
in the house. They meant that, by the other relligious women, which were in the
house of Paula, and by her maids and waiting women: for Paula and the
religious women, that remained with her, were of the richest and chiefest
Ladies in Rome. These enemies of S. Jerome wear so void of shame, that they
hired a man (who, as it is thought, belonged to Paula) who said much evil of
S. Jerome, and charged him and Paula with dishonesty.

These aduer^aries of S. Jerome led this naughty fellow up and down the town,
to defame the holy saint, and told it to every one in manner of a scoff and of
a Jest. It may be it came to the ears of Pope Damasus: but were it so, or
other wise, the man was taken, and tortured to confess the truth; and at last
he confessed, that all was untrue and false, which he had said of S. Jerome.
The holy saint seeing the dealing of this man, and perceiving, how his enemies
had contrived to put him to utter shame and reproach, and also remembering the
quiet repose he had in the desert, and what favors and graces he had receued
there of our Lord, and the time, he had there to study, and to write. All these
things united caused him to make a resolution to forsake Rome, and to return
into Siria, as he says himself, writing to a Lady called Asella, in this sort.

I know not, nor cannot imagine (noble lady) what thanks I am to yield unto you
for the great affection you bear unto me, for our lords sake God is able to
render unto thy soul, the reward it deserves: although I am, (as some think)
a hateful creature, and very vicious; yet do thou well to account me for
good, though to thee be spoken much evil of me; because thou notest, who says
it, and of whom they speak. They that speak evil of me (as is evident and
apparent) be deceitful, crafty, and cauelling wicked people. In three years I
lived with them, many relligious women followed me, unto who^ and unto others
with them, I expounded the sacred scriptute, I preached and taught them, how
they should serve God, and do unto him acceptable service let them say, if they
can, if in all this time, they saw any thing in me, not fit for a good
christian? They say I am a man, and that I ought not to co^uerse with women,
which indeed I would not have done, if I had not kowen the virtue and sanctity
of the holy persons, with who^ I co^uersed.

If before time they gave credit to the fellow, that defamed me; why do they
not also believe him now, since he has denied all that, which he spoke before
to my reproach? There was but one man, that at the first condemned me, and the
same man says now that I am innocent. But o the frailty of man's nature, how
soon will they believe that, which they desire, be it never so false! Before I
knew the house of Paula, all the city commended me, and every one said, I was
worthy to be Pope, and also wished it: they called me a holy man, and compared
me unto s. Damasus: I ask this question, if ever they saw me go into the house
of any dishonest woman? was I ever delighted to look after women with sweet
perfumed gloves, or decked with gold or pearl.

There was never a lady in Rome, that could get me to visit her, or to come
unto her house, but she only, who with lamenting and fasting, had made her
face wanne and pale, and her eyes little better then blind: she that was so
continually in prayer, that many times at the sun setting, and at the sun
rising in the morning she was still at her prayer. Her ballers were hymness,
her words were the holy Ghospel, her delights were chastity, and her life a
perpetual fasting. None could please me, but she, that I never saw eating.
As Soon as I began to honor her, for her deserved virtues, I strait was
abandoned of virtue, in the eyes of the enuyous: O envy, that first do bite
and tear thy self? O the malice of Lucifer, who cease not to persecute
virtue and sanctity.

I have written unto thee these few words, in have, (being now entered into the
ship,) but not without tears, and grief at my heart: yet do I render thanks
unto my God for granting me this favor, that I am abhorred of the world. Make
thy prayers unto our lord for me, that when I am gone out of Babylon, he would
guide me in peace unto Jerusalem, lest that Nabucodonozor enthrall me. Some
call me inchaunter, and so was our Savior called, but the servant cannot be
greater then his master. Others say that I am a deceiuer, the same was said
unto S. Paul the Apostle. My soul feels great consolation in this, that we
are to enter into heaven by good report, and by infamy. These and other things
S. Jerome wrote in that epistle, by which may be known the occasions of this
departure from Rome, to wit: because his adversaries ceased not to slander him.

Being departed thence, he passed into Siria, and visited Epiphanius B of
Cypres, and Paulinus B. of Antioche, his two great friends, who had brought him
to Rome, and left him there, they departing as soon as pope Damasus had accorded
their variaunce. S. Jerome visited also those relligious men with who^ he had
bin before time, and desired to stay with them, but importunated by his friends,
he went to Bethlehem, where he built a monastery. To defray the charges of it,
he sent authority into his country (as he himself writes unto Pammachius) to
have all his patrimony sold, ep: 26.
and with the money made thereof, he caused the Abbey to be builded. When it was
diu^lged and bruited in that country, that Jerome had chosen his habitation in
that place, it cannot be expressed, how people resorted thither from all parts,
especially from Rome. The holy woman Paula with other devour women went
thither, (though the other returned, and she only stayed there until her
death) Paula sold her lands and possessions in Rome, and with the money coming
thereof, builded four monasteries in Bethlehem; three for women, and one for
men. It may be that she caused the monastery, which S, Jerome had built before
to be enlarged and made bigger. S. Jerome was the superior, and governed the
monastery of men, and Paula governed the other three made for the women; being
so discreet and holy, that she ruled those three in good sort, dwelling now in
the one, and then in another.

There S. Jerome ended the writing of his admirables works, which the church
keeps and esteems at this day. He translated the Bible viz: the old
testament out of the Hebrew into latin: thee new testament out of Greek into
latin: and wrote commentaries out of Greek into latin: and wrote commentaries
on the greatest part there of, and expounded it excellently. His books being
spread through the world (beside the many epistles, which he wrote almost with
out intermission, unto sondy persons) caused every one to find and know his
sanctity, and profound doctrine; and to accept and account him for a very good
and sound Catholic; for some had at the first doubt thereof, by cause of that,
which Ruffinus his adversary wrote against him. One of these was S. Augustine,
who at the first had a distrust in him, but afterward, he bare unto him such
love and affection, that being Bishop of Hippo, he sent one of his trusty
friends called Alipius, and other of his priests to visit him, on his behalf;
and to be instructed by him, reputing it for a great honor and credit (knowing
as he knew) to be the disciple of the disciples of S. Jerome. There went
persons of great account from all countries to visit him, as Paulus Orosius
did, (who was also sent by S. Augustine) Seuerus Sulpitius, Apodemius, and
other rare and renoumed men. And though the voyage was long, and the danger
great, yet all that seemed a small thing, to see thee venerable old man S.
Jerome, replenished with sanctity and learning.

This holy doctor wrote incessantly against heceticks, and persecuted them with
out any intermission, and they were afraid, and trembled to hear him named.
Origin had written many books before the time of S. Jerome, all which he read,
taking great delight in his delicate and fine wit, and for affection called
him his teacher; but for all that he did not pardon nor spare the errors he
found in his books: yea, he impugned them to the uttermost of his ability. S.
Jerome was subject to many infirmities caused by continual study, and the hard
austerity he had used to ward his body: so that some times he remained whole
years bedrid; yet ceased he not, but endited to others that wrote, so that he
composed many books, being occupied in that exercize 30. years, as he writes
himself.

The country of Greece did much honor this glorious doctor, by translating
the works he wrote in latin into the Greek tongue.

It is said by S. Jerome that as he red one day unto his disciples (whereof he
had many in ordinary, from many parts) there entered into his school or place
of lecture a lion halting. All the scholars ran away; but the holy doctor
receued him without dread. when the lion came near, he lifted up, and showed
one of his forefeet wounded with a thorn, which was run into his foot, and
the holy man dressed it, and when it was hole, the lion would not depart, but
attended in the monastery; as if he had been tame and domestical. This story I
tell, because he is painted with a lion by him.

It is also said: that S. Jerome appointed thereto by Damasus the pope, set in
order the office of the Church, dividing the psalms for every day of the week,
and apointing that every one should end with this versicle: Gloria Patri etc.
Sicut erat etc. He appointed also the Epistles and Ghospells for all the year,
with the lectures, and prophecies that are red in the office of the mass.

S. Jerome being employed in these holy exercises, and such like, in
aunswering, and assoiling douts, which Bishops, and other relligious persons
sent unto him, from all parts of Christendom, and also in giving advise to
people that were in necessity; he came unto such perfection, that he was rapt
and translated some times in spirit, among the Quiers of Angels; and began in
this life, to taste the reward of his pain and traueill, though there remained
some other afflictions for his old age, which was a feeblenes, that he could
not rise from his bed: and, as Sigibertus says, he had a cord tied to a piece
of wood over his bed, and he held by that, when he desired to turn from one
side unto the other.

His infirmity increasing, and he knowing the hour of his death approached,
commanded the B. Sacrament to be brought unto him, and then communicated with
great devotion: which when he had done, he yielded up his spirit unto God on
the 30. day of September, about the year of our Lord 422. Honorius and
Theodosius the second being Emperors. Marianus victorius in the life of S.
Jerome says: that this holy Doctor dyed at the age of 99. years, as some
Authors hold, for some others say otherwise. It is most true and assured, that
he lived till his decrepit age, as S. Augustine says in the first book against
Iulianus.

His blessed body was buried in Bethleham, and after ward in process of time,
it was brought to Rome, and laid in the Chuch of S. Maria ad presepe. which at
this day is called S. Maria Mayor. God showed many miracles by means of this
holy saint as well in his life as after his death. The Church accounts him for
one of the four Doctors, and makes a great feast of him, and especially in
Rome, for that there he studied, there he was Baptized, and there rests his
blessed body.

It is also very fit that france should keep it festival, for there he was a
good space, and saw the principal places of that king dome: Germany is also
obliged in like manner unto S. Jerome, for that he wrote a book of it, and made
the country famous. Greece is in the same debt, for the commodity they reap
by the books of this holy doctor, which are translated into their language.
Egypt is also deeply in his debt, for that it enjoyed a long time his company
and blessed conversation.

The deserts of Siria are in the same debt. for the austere penance S. Jerome
did there, does nobilitate and make them famous.

Bethlehem shall be reconed in this account: yea and we may call it happy for two
respects; first and principally, because our lord and Sauyor JESUS CHRIST was
borne therein, when he came to live in this world: and also, but in far lower
degree, for the S. Jerome dyed there to live in heaven.

But above all other provinces Spain owes an especial duty unto S. Jerome,
for the many epistles he wrote to particular persons therein, as also for that
after many hundredth years that he dyed in Bethlehem, it seemed, he was raised
to life in Spain: not he in person, but his name and religion. for in the time
of Pope Gregory. II. the king Don Alonso the. II. reigning in Spain, there
came out of Italy two holy hermites into the kingdom of Toledo in Spain: and
by their good example of life, and holy admonitions, others were converted unto
that holy religious order. Don alonse Peccia Bishop of Iaen, and Petro
fernandez Peccia his brother, and Hernando Laguez chief chaplen of the kings
Chapel and Chanon of Toledo, who being elected Archbishop thereof, refused
that dignity: and beside these many other noble men of mark and quality.

Many of the before named chose that life, for that they had conceived a great
dread and fear of the king Don Pedro, who at that time reigned in Castile
(after the death of the king Don Alonso his father) because he had a delight to
shed man's blood; so much, that if the offense or fault were never so small, he
caused very rigorous punishment to be inflicted upon the delinquents: which
severe kind of Justice was not used to be excuted in Spain Wherefore the king
gained thereby the surname of Cruel to this day. I cannot tell, if the doing
of his Chronicler who did smally befrend him, (as it seems for some private
respect) did not help forward to settle and confirm that odious name of Cruel
unto him, from that time unto this.

All these lived together certain years in the desert. then they besought Pope
Gregory, to give them a habit and a rule under the name of the hermitts of S.
Jerome: but the Pope gave unto them the rule of S. Augustine, the name and
habit they have at this day. This order was confirmed in the third year of
the Popedom of. S. Gregory on S. Lukes day in the year of our Lord 1373.

The order which is called in Spain of the Isidori which is also of S. Jerome
was instituted in the time of Pope Martin the 5. by friar Lopes de Ouiedo,
professor of the monastery of Guada Lupe, who out of S. Ieromes works took a
rule, which is printed with his other works. and with the help of some that
desired to follow it, and with license from the sea Apastolike, he founded
certain monasteries in Italy, which are called Isidori, or the congregation of
friar Lopes. Of the first named relligious men of the order of S. Jerome there
be in Spain many worthy monasteries, but in especial fifteen which are
called. Royal, because always they have bin favored by the kings. They were
especially favored by the Catholic king don Phillip the second of that name
who built them a monastery an college in the Escuriall under the title of S.
Laurence the Royal, and the rule and institution of the glorious S. Jerome. In
which place be many rare and singular relics of saints; many pictures and
Images; the works of famous painters, and caruers; many books of great vale
we; much rich stuff for the church; Challices, Crosses, and other things, for
the service of the Altar. and there also is buried the corpse of the mighty
Emperor Charles, the fifte of that name, and other of the blood Royal.

By these and other the great and costly things in this Royal house,
evidently appears the devotion of the said king Don Phillip toward the
glorious Doctors S. Jerome, and his blessed religious order. wherefore we may
hope that the same saint will be his good advocate unto God, that his Royal
person and also his Realm shall encreasein temporal and wordlie goods, and
also that he shall inioye the celestial kingdom of heaven, by the
intercession of this blessed saint. To the which God bring us also, of his
infinite mercy. Amen.

The end of the month of September.
OCTOBER.
The life of S. Remigius.
THERE shall spring a fountain, says the prophet Joel, Cap. 3
and come from out of the house of God, and pass by, and water the brook of
thorns: in which words the prophet does fortell us, what shall happen after
the latter judgment. The body of a mortal man is fitly resembled in a
brook; for it runs swiftly to death and perdition: nay further it is a
brook of thorns; for that, of it self, it produces nothing, but evil
desires and worser deeds, shat wound and pierce the soul like thorns. But a
fountain, after the latter day, shall spring from out of the house of God, and
water these thorns; whereby are deciphered those streams of glory, which
shall ouerflow the bodies of the elect, and adorn them together with their
souls.

The Gloss says, this text may be well applied to the primitive Church; when
the Apostles, and preachers of the Gospel, did in the manner of a fountain,
spring from out of the house of God, from the Catholic Church, to water which
their heavenly doctrine the thornie brook of Paganism. In this sense it
fitteth that glorious Archb. of Rhemes S. Remigius; who was indeed a fountain
of life, that springing from out of the house of God, with the sweet and
pleasant streams of his life and doctrine watered that river of thorns
Clodoueus: who being a king and worshipper of Idols, was converted to the
faith by S. Remigius, and with him all his court and army of men. The life of
this glorious Saint was written by Hinc marus Archbishop of Rhemes in this
manner following.

WHEN the hand of our Lord did chastize the Frenchmen for their sins with
along bloody war, which the Vandalls, a fierce and cruel nation, did wage
against them; there dwelled in the desert a holy Monk called Montanus, who had
lost his sight by continual bewailing the sins of his nation. For knowing
that all their afflictions and scourges were caused by their many fold
offenses, he continually prayed, and with tears beseeched almighty God, to
redress all their miseries, and grant them pardon for all their sins, and
be contented with that punishment, he had allreadie inflicted upon them. God
vouchsafed at length to hear his prayers, and grant his request; where fore
he did reveal unto him, that shortly there should be borne a child, whose
name should be Remigius, that, coming to be Bishop, should with his preaching
and good example with draw men from vices; convert them to God, appease his
wrath, and stay his punishment. He revealed also to this holy man the parents
of this Child Emilius and Cili^ia; people of great religion and charity, of
noble blood, and great reuenews, living in the tertitory of Laudum.

Montanus went and acquainted them whith his revelation, whereof both had some
doubt, by reason that both were stricken in years: but especially Cilinia
could not be induced to believe it. Be thou assured, quoth Montanus, thou shall
be a mother; give suck unto thy son with thy own milk; wash mine eyes
therewith; and I shall thereby recover my sight. All things happened, even as
the holy monk had said: for Cilinia conceived, and brought forth a son,
that was called Remigius: she gave him suck with her own breasts, and washed
the eyes of Montanus with her milk, and he therewith recovered his sight, as he
had foretold. The virtue of this saint did shine so clearly in his childhood,
that, even in the day break of his life, he plainly declared, how great would
be the daylight of his perfect age. He was sent to school; where, in a short
space, he did not only profitte much in knowledge and learning, but also in
holy and virtuous life: making learning to serve as a light to guide him in
the path of virtue; and virtue by alaying the storms of passions, further him
in the course of learning. when he came unto the age of. 22. years Bennadius
the Archbishop of the city deceasing, the people assembled for the election of
another pastor. and fixing their eyes on that holy Saint there present, said
there was not any more fit them Remigius, to succeed in that dignity.

The holy young man being there, was troubled much in mind, and made many
excuses; saying, that so eminent a degree was full unseemly for one of his
age, and conversation; that the usage was, not to elect beardles youths to an
office convenient only for men well stricken in years, or of a consistent age.
Unto these allegations they made answer, that his virtues supplied the
defects of his age, and therefore they had determined, that he should be their
Pastor and prelate. Whilst the people and Remigius were thus at variance there
descended on a sodein a great light from heaven, like unto a beam, which
rested on the head of S. Remigius.

The wonderful maruaill of the celestial election and confirmation of S.
Rimigius in the prelacy proceeded further: for beside the light, his head was
found to be washed with a heavenly dew or liqour, and all they, which were
present, felt the most fragrant and sweet smell, that might be, coming from
the same. All the people, beholding this wonder, with one voice praised God,
and gave him thanks, that he had vouchsaued to show plannely, that the election
they had made was acceptable to him. S. Remigius durst not make any further
resistance, least it should seem that he withstood and gain said the will of
God. So he was made priest, and consecrated Bishop by the other Bishops that
dwellt there about.

As Soon as he had accepted this high function, he made evident demo^stration,
that he was of sufficient ability to exercise the same: he showed him self to
be an almose giver, vigilant, devout, courteous, perfect in doctrine and
charity; his conversation was celestial; his words were all kindled with the
fire or Gods love. He was affable, and alwais pleasant in countenance, but with
gravity: his preaching was of that which was necessary for salvation of souls.
and what he preached in words, he practiced in works. He moved them, that
looked on his face earnestly, to devotion; for in him did shine clearly the
lively portraiture of santity. His sight was dreafull and awful unto the
presumptuous and proud; but very mild and gracious unto the lowly and humble:
Toward goodmen his aspect was loving and pleasing, as S. Peter's was: but to the
wicked his countenannce was grimme and stern, like unto S. Paul's.

The riches of his soul were so great, that notwistanding they could not be
seen with corporal eyes, nor expressed in words; yet were they manifested by
his external works. He fled Idleness; and worldly pleasures were to him
displesant: and on the other side, travail was to him best pleasing, and he
had a delight to be contemned. In his sermons he did especially reprehend the
vice of carnallity, and willed his hearers not to account their own wifes
foul: or to think the wife of another man fair or beautiful. He was in diet
temperate; and he sometimes, (because he would not seem hautey or proud,)
called some of his poor kindred and friends to his table.

Sometimes the little birds were seen to fly in at the windoes, and to sit on
the tables side, or on the platter, and he gave them some what to eat, and
when some flewe away, others came back. At this S. Remigius took occasion to
give spiritual refection unto the guests that sat at his table, saying. See,
these bitle birds do not sow nor reap nor have no granaries wherein to
conserve their goods; and yet God does not abandon them, but provides for them
day by day; how much more will he provide for man, for whose sake he shed his
precious blood, and lost his life? ought not man therefore endeavor to do the
will of God, and be unto him obedient, as these little birds be? He said also:
This meat was not dressed and ordained for these little birds, even so, the
goods which our fore fathers have left us, or that we have gotten by our labor
and traueill, we ought to bestow part thereof cheerfully among poor men; to
the end God may make us partakers of his glory in his kingdom, out of the
which the devils were cast for their offense. This good Prelate visited
oftentimes his Bishoprik in person, and committed not the same unto any other.

It happened that on a time, he came unto a place called Calmaciacum: there was
a man possessed of an evil spirit, which made him also blind, from the time of
the first entrance into him. S. Remigius prayed for him, and the foul fiend
departed; the man recovered his sight, and was free from all evil, for which
cause he gave unto God infinite thanks.

Another time the good Bishop being in the city of Rheimes, lodged in the house
of the Church of S. Nicasius martyr, sometime B. of that city, there befell a
great fire, which burned a great part thereof: Notice hereof came to S. Remigius,
who first prayed, and then went unto the place, where the fire was raging and
burning with such fury, that all thought it would have consumed the wholl
city. The Blessed man made the sign of the Cross against the fire, which
approached toward him, and it fled from him, and he followed it so long, until
it came to be like a great boule, and drew back to one of the gates of the
city, and issued out of the same, to the great amazement of all the beholders.
In the Church of S. John Baptist in the same city, he cast a devil out of a
damsel, which at his departure, did so afflict her, that he left her for
dead: S. Remigius made his oraisons for her, and restored her unto life.

At that time France had suffered many afflictions, by diverse tirants that
made war upon it: one of them was Clodoueus son to Childericus, who was
possessed of the greatest and best part of that Realm. This Clodoueus was a
Painim Idollater, but had to his wife Clotidis a holy virtuous Christian woman,
of the house of Burgundy. She had many times persuaded the king to be
Baptized, and to be come a Christian, and he excused himself, alleging that
the soldiers of his army would kill him, if he did so.

On a time being in war against the Allemans and Sueuians, and fighting with
them, he fell into great danger, not only to be discomfited, but also to be
slain in the field. Clodoueus had in his company a Christian, the duke of
Orleance, who advised the king to make a vow unto God, to be made a Christian,
assuring him thereby the victory over his foes. Clodoueus made the vow, and
every thing succeeded according to his desire; for he not only was victorius in
that encounter, but he also made that province subject unto his crown.

Then he returned with victory unto Paris, his place of residence, and made
relation unto the queen Clotildis of the vow he had made, who being ioifull of
it, sent messengers for S. Remigius to come and confer with the king. The holy
Bishop came and spoke with the king, and showed to him such pregnant reasons,
that he was fully resolved to be Baptized. The thing that stayed him was the
fear, that his subjects would rebel against him. To put that doubt out of the
kings mind, S. Remigius talked privately with ^he principal men of the kings
host, and some times he preached to them in publik. These private and publik
speeches of. S. Remigius were of such force, that all said, they would be
Baptized, if the king was.

The day wherein the king should be Baptized, was appointed: and much people were
assembled; and all the chief men were in the Church, where the blessed
Sacrament was to be celebrated. The king being upon the font, the priests (by
Gods permission) had forgot to bring thither the holy oil, and when the king
should have been aniointed there with, S. Remigius perceived the want thereof.
The throng of the people was so great, that it was impossible to have it
brought so soon as was fit: so that the holy saint was much perplexed, but he
had in his heart recourse unto the father of mercies, beseeching him to help him
in this necessity, lest there should arise any offense among the people: and
behold, a Dove, carrieng in her bill a violl with holy oil therein, was seen
evidently to come, and put it into the hands of S. Remigius, and then to fly
away again. The holy saint, after he had given thanks unto God for this favor
received, anointed the king with that oil, after the accustomed usage. The
sweet odor of that oil was so great, that the king and others, who had seen
the miracle, were astonished thereat, and rendered unto God infinite thanks for the
same. Clodoueus was then named Lodouicus, and unto S. Remigius as well the king,
as the other noblemen that were Baptized that day, showed many favors, and gave
him many possessions, and other reuenews; which he distributed among the
Churches of his Diocese.

S. Remigius in his old age knew by revelation from heaven, that there would
ensue a great dearth and scarcety of corn in all France: and therefore he,
like another Joseph, gathered good store thereof against that time of necessity,
and heaped, and staked it up in a village called Celtum. This being done,
certain country clownes upon a festival day (having little to do) talked
together of the great store of grain he had collected: And one of them said:
This Lazy old man (for so they called him for his great age) will I think, by
his engrossing, become a merchant of corn. Another instigated by the devil
said; let us set it on fire and burn it, and so he shall not gain by his
merchandise: The others assented; and so in an instant they set fire to the
stacks, and burned much. As it happened, S. Remigius was not far of, and
being told of this accident, he speedily got to his horse, and went to see if
he could remedy it, but when he came, he found it past recovery. It was in a
cold evening in the winter, which also was a vexation to the holy man, by
reason of his age, and so he alighted from his nagge, and came near to the
fire to warm himself, with out any alteration of his countenance, and said,
God will not forget to punish him that has done this evil, and loss unto
poor men. and so it came to pass; for the pesants that set fire to the corn,
became crook backed, and al their children that came of them were so also: The
Author that wrote this life says he has seen some of their race, crook backed.

To end; the time long desired by S. Remigius, the day of his death aproached,
by which he hoped to have the reward of his travel, tolerated for the love
of his Church, in governing the same, by the space of 74 years; for so long he
had bin Bishop. In all which time, he never did thing, that was not fit or
convenient, neither did he omit to do that, which he ought to do.
Understanding that the hour of his death approached, first he set in order the
affairs of his Church; then he p^ouided to have long oraisons made for him, and
desired to receive the holy Sacrament; and so finally he yielded up his soul
unto his redeemer, who had bought it with his precious blood, being then 96
years old, in the year of our Lord 545 on the 13. day of January. But because
the holy Church on that day solemniseth the octaues of the Epiphanie, the feast
of S. Remigius is put over, unto the 1. day of October, because on that day his
body was translated.

He was first buried in a Church of S. Christopher, in the same city of
Rheimes: but because the Church was little, and the concourse of people, which
came to visit his sepulcher, great; it was made bigger and larger, and of more
curious and costly workmanship: in especial there was made a most beautiful
sepulcher, for the body of the holy saint. but when they would have carried it
thither, they found it so weighty and so heavy, that no humain force and
strength was able to move it, in such sort, that all the clergy and people
which were assembled to make that translation, were pensive and sorrowful; yet
stayed in the Church, singing himnes and spiritual songs. Staieng in this
manner, they fell in a fast sleep; and when they awaked, they found the blessed
body carried into the new sepulcher, by the hands of Angels: whereupon it was
ordained in regard of this miracle, that the feast of S. Remigius should be
celebrated on that day, which was the. 1. of October, as now it is.

The life of the Seraphicall Father S. Frauncis.
WE READ of king David, that when he was persecuted by Saul, 1. Reg 27.
he never staid long, but continually travailed from one place to another, to
escape his hands. Once he came to the court of Achis, king Geth, who was a
Phillistin: being known of the courtiers, he was led unto the king, that he
might also see, and knew him, that had killed in the field the most valiant
Champion of all the Philistians, Golias the Giant.

David feared that coming before the king, he might incur danger of his
life. wherefore to free himself of that peril he used a kind of policy, in
which he showed himself as wise, as he had before time valerous. His craft was
to feign himself foolish and mad; make faces and diffigure his countenance in
diverse strange fashions; to pulle at one, and after at another, and if any
catched at him again, to slip away from them; as also to let spi^tle fall on
his beard, and such like frantic toys. The king seeing and thincking this to
be done for naught but mere foolishnes, scoffed at him, and said to his
courtiers: To what end have you brought this fellow hither? want I fools in my
house? take him away. By this devise David was delivered from the danger of
death, and out of the hands of the Phillistims.

O blessed Patriarch, and Seraphicall Father holy S. Frauncis? how well and
how perfectly wast thou pictured in this pattern? Thou, like a new David,
being yet very young wast persecuted, not by Saul, but by the devil, that
endeavored and labored to deprive thee of the life, not only of body, but
also of soul. Achis the king of Geth is this world, in whose court thou wast,
and continuedst for a time, in company of other worldly men. These made thee
known to the world: and the world did fix his eyes upon thee: But thou,
fearing dangers, which hong over thy head, to deliver thy life out of his
hands did like a wise man feign thy self a fool. Thou did alter thy
countenance: when forsaking all, that the world esteems, thou did embrace
that which he most dispiseth: When flying from all pleasures and delights, thou
did make choice of contempt and afflictions. Thou sometimes did cherish
one, sometime another, thereby seeming to catch hold of them: but if any
began to lay hold on thee, to make the live in sin, as others; thou did
avoid and fly away from them. Thou did many other things as a fool,
according to the judgment of the world, as in loving and seeking poverty; in
appareilling and using of thy body, not only meanly but, also rigourously:
whereby the world reputed thee a fool and a very dizard. But thou like David,
by this diligence, wast delivered from out of the hands of Philisteans, the
hands of this world, that so thou might fight and make fierce and cruel
war against him: not only by thy own person, but also by thy sons and by
thy daughters, the religious people of thy holy order: who continually waging
war against this enemy, obtain many glorious spoils and victories. I have
taken the life of this blessed Saint out of the writings of S. Bonauenture, S.
Antoninus of Florence and others.

SAINT Frauncis was borne at Assisium, a city in the valley of Spoleto in
Italy, in the year of our Lord 1182 and his father was a merchant called
Peter Bernardo. At his Christning he was named John; which name was after at
his Confirmation changed into Francis, for so was the will and pleasure of his
father. He was brought up well, and had good education, as being the eldest
son of his father; who set him to learn both Latin and French, intending to
make him his factoure in merchandise; whereunto the knowledge of many languages
was, as he knew well, very necessary.

S. Frauncis being come to years of discretion began to help his father in his
trafficque, as well within, as without the city. And for that, by this means,
he was as chief master, and much money was returned thorough his hands (a
thing most perilous, and pernicious for young men) he spent very prodigally in
what he liked. This wrought many young men of his years, and of evil behauior
into his company; who moved him to live, as they did, drowned in
lasciuiousnes, in riot, and youthful vanities Thus he gave himself wholly to
delights, to feastings, and vain company; and yet always in this evil
behauioure he showed some tokens of what he should then, and what he would be
after ward. On the one side, he omitted not to commit all sins, with out any
fear: yett on the other side, he did some good deeds; as giving of almose in
liberal sort: for naturally he was very compassionat to the poor.

One day it fell out, that a poor man asked an almose of him; and he because
he was very busy, gave him none. The poor man departed: and as soon as
Francys perceued it, he reproved himself; and running after him found him out,
and not only gave him almose, but also very lowely craved pardon of him; and
forthwith he also made a vow, that from the^ceforth, he never would deny to
give any thing, that was demanded of him for Gods sake, if it lay in his
power. And perseuering in the observation of so worthy a vow, even until his
death, he received many especial great favors of God: one was, that as often,
as ever he heard these words for Gods sake; so often he felt a great tenderness
of heart, the cause of great consolation.

In regard of the Almose, and other good deeds S. Frauncis did, God sent him
many good inspirations, which served as means to pull him out of that evil
course of life, in which he lived. One of these means and motions was a whole
years imprissonment in the city of Perugia, among other citisens of Assisiu^,
caused by a controversy between these two cities. Francis in this prison
showed himself a man of great courage in adversity, as being always merry; and
comforting other his fellow prisoners, that were pensive and sad. Peace was
concluded between these cities; the prisoners were discharged; and Francis
fell again to his former courses; prodigally spending his fathers goods among
his companions, in feasting, gaming, and carnallity: and this life he led
until he was 25. years old.

Coming to that age, God did call him again by a long and grievous
infirmity, the book wherein man learnes many good lessons. First he learneth
a lively and feeling knowledge of this truth, that he is mortal; and that
his health is not of himself. He learneth moreover to know his sins, seeing
that sickness is often times caused by them. He learneth also to fear hell
fire as more nearly threatening deserved punishment; which fear does more
earnestly stir him up, to desire and thirst after eternal joys. He learneth
to despise all worldly riches, as things that cannot restore him to health. He
lerneth to prepare himself to dye, saying infirmity the harbinger of death in
his lodginge. He learneth to fear the just judgments of God, making this
discourse: if in time of Mercy he chastizeth and scourges us thus severely,
what will he do in the time of Justice. All these things S. Frauncis did
learn by that sickness wherewith God did visit him. Where fore being restored
again to health, he arose from his bed with great feruoure, and purpose to
profit in the way of our Lord. Forthwith an occasion was offered him: for a
poor man in evil state and ragged clothes asked him an alms, as he was
going out of doors. S. Frauncis looking on him, knew him well; for he was a
gentleman fallen to decay: and such compassion came into his mind, regarding
him as if JESUS CHRIST were in the likeness of that poor man, that turning
aside, he pulled his new garment of his back, and coped with the poor man his
ragged clothes. The night ensuing, as Francis slept, he thought he was in a
fair room, where in lay many rich pearls and Jewels of inestimable price;
there he also did see our Lord JESUS CHRIST, for whose sake he had given the
garment to the poor man; and he hard him say: I keep these rich Jewels for my
soldiers, who take up my Cross on their shoulders, and follow me. S. Francis
arose with an ardent desire to get part of those riches; and studied (as he
went) how he might obtain them. Then thought he, perhapps it is the will of
God, I should be a soldier in the war against the Infidells, in the holy
land; wherein the Christians did were a Cross on their armor, to gain the
Indulgences given by the Pope to them, that took the Cross. S. Frauncis
therefore intended to have taken that Cross; and to that end bought him horse
and Armor: but it was revealed unto him from Heaven, that Gods holy will was,
he should be a soldier in an other manner. This caused S. Francis to be very
careful, to know what was the will of God.

Sometines he would go into secret places, and there pray and shed so many
tears, that his eyes did verily seem two fontaines. those tears proceeded
from the remembrance of his life past, and of the lewd spending of his time. He
oftentimes said: Ah wretched sinner that I am? how heinous an offender am I? Oh
what an evil reckning can I yield to God of the flower of my years? how blind
was I, to commit so many sins against my God, who is so gracyous, so mighty,
and who has showed me so many favors and benefits? I am now handled even as I
deserve: at this present he is deaff to me, and will not declare in what sort
his pleasure is, I serve him; for that I have been deaff to him, who gave me so
many good inspiration. Thus he prayed incessantly, desiring God to disclose and
declare his will unto him, and what he should do the better to serve him.

S. Francis doing thus; one day he came into the Church of S. Damyan, near to
the city of Assisiu^, and kneeling before the Roode, instantly desired JESUS
CHRIST, to deliver him from this anxiety and doubt, and also to declare his
will unto him and with that he heard a voice say unto him: Frauncis, Repair my
Church which is ready to fall. He was somewhat afraid, when he heard the voice,
but was forth with comforted; imagining, that God did bid him repair that
Church, wherein he prayed. Whereupon he diligently went to put it in effect; and
getting good store of merchaundise together, and having sold them, he brought
the money, and gave it unto the priest of the Church; but the priest would not
take it, for fear of S. Francis his father, who, (as he knew right well) would
storm and chafe thereat. S. Francis seeing the priest refuse the money, put it
all in a purse, and threw it to him, and told him, what he should do
therewith. The father fo S. Francis hearing that his son sold his wares for
ready money, under their value and the true worth, and imagining what the
matter was, went to seek him with a heavy heart: and hearing he was gone to the
Church of S. Damian, thither he went to follow and find him. S. Francis saw
him coming a far of, and to avoid his fury, hid himself in a vault. His
father in a rage came to the Church, and not finding his son there, began to
quarrel with the priest, who being afrighted with his threats, said to him:
your son was here, and would have given me this money, and I would not take
it; whereupon he threw it on the ground, and went away saying: that I should
repair there with this Church, that needed repair. His father took the money
and said; the money is mine. and his choler now being some what alayed, he
returned home, longing to find his son, that he might give him some reproach
full punishment, for that he used in this manner, to spend his goods.

S. Paul says; 1. Tim 6.
that Avarice is the root of all evil: and his father being covetous, it is
no merueill though in him were many evils, and that he did so like unto the
devil, as he did in this. It is the use of the devil, not to persecute them,
that be his prisoners; but them that escape out of his hands: as Laban did; who
persecuted not Jacob, as long as he remained in his house; Gen 3
but pursued him, when he departed. So does the devil also, for when one
flies from him, he pursues him with a 1000. tentations. So did the father of
S. Francis also, for as long, as he gave himself to a lewd and wicked life, he
never examined nor reproved him; but when he was desirous and began to be
virtuous, and to be good, he pursued him even almost to death. S. Francis lay
close in the vault many days, continually and devoutly and with tears praieng
unto God, to let him know his will. At last he came out of the vault and went
into the city, with a firm resolution, patiently to suffer all that might
happen. As Soon as the people saw him altered, pale, and lean, and going
dully, as if he had been out of his wits, in ragged and torn clothes; they
cried after him in the street, as if he had been a fool. His father, being
told of him, came out of his house into the street like a lion, and led him
away, reuiling, and misnaming him. He kept him in a house very hardly, and to
disburden his furyous rage the more upon him, he locked him up in a room, and
bound him to a post. These things S. Francis abode and endured patiently.

After certin days, his father had occasion to ride out of town upon some
business; whereupon his mother a good Christian, and pitiful, having compassion
on her son, and fearing her husband would do some futher outrage, went to
Francis, and weeping as she satte by him, she desired him to show a will to
serve God, to for sake the world, not to spend his fathers goods lewdly, to his
great and just displeasure, and not to behave himself so as to be accounted a
fool, whereby he was a shame and reproach to all his kindred. Having put this
into his head, she unloosed his bands, and set him at liberty, and away went
he from his fathers house; who shortly after coming home, and finding Francis
gone, was wroth thereat, and went to seek him. At last he found him, and to end
all controversies between them they agreed, to go before the Bishop of Assisium
and that there Francis should renounce his right and heritage due to him; and
that his other brethen should have it among them, lest he should spend it
prodigally. S. Francis, the true and perfect lover of poverty, was content
herewith, and when they came before the Bishop, he not only fulfilled his
fathers request, but also stripped himself of all his clothes even to his
shirt, and gave them to his father, saying: until this time, I have called
thee father, but from hensceforth, I will acknowledge no other father, but our
father in heaven. The Bishop seeing this fervent act, and wondering thereat,
stood up, and embraced him, weeping for tenderness, covered him with his cloak,
and commanded his servants to bring him some cloths to put on. They brought
him a very poor and course suite, and the holy man receued it cheerfully.

Taking leave and blessing of the Bishop, he departed from Assisium, and went
to a hospital of lepers, and there remained certain days, attending on the
sick, very charitably. He washed their sores, he cleansed their filth, and did
eat that meat which they did leave. This mortification of the holy man was
great; for before his conversion it was death for him to see a leper: yea, he
would stop his nose and be ready to vomit: but when he began a new life, he
was of a contrary mind; for if he saw a leaper he thought he saw and Angel,
and his soars seemed to be precious stones. In the time of this exercise, he
used incessant prayer. One day the B. man being at his prayers, he heard a
voice, which said to him: FRANCIS: Change sweet into sower, and despise thy
self, if thou will please me. The holy man judged by this voice, that God
required of him some further service, then to stay in that hospital: wherefore
he departed, entending to go unto Gubbio. As he went by the way, singing in the
French tongue, thieues met and asked him, who he was? he answered: I am
trompetter to the great king: The thieues beign wroth at this his answer, and
seeing they could make no booty of him, being meanly arraied, they buffetted
and kicked him; and then threw him into a ditch full of snow. Poor Francis
got out of the ditch, and the snow, with much a do; but iocond he was and
began a fresh to sing spiritual songs.

When he came to Gubbio, an old friend who knew him, and wondered to see him in
that weed, led him home, and gave him very good cloths of his own to wear.
The study and care of this servant of God was, how he might best please
almighty God: wherefore understanding, how the relligious men of S. Augustines
order lived in poverty, obedience, chastity, and holy life; he had a desire to
try if that manner of living liked him, wherefore he went to one of their
monasteries, and desired them to receue him into their house Those relligious
men receued him, and gave him (as Antoninus, and Sabellicus say) a habit of
black say, and a lether girdle; which he wore but a while, neither did he
persevere in this ancient order, for that God had appointed Frauncis to
institute a new relligious order.

One day, being in in the Church, and hearing in the Gospel, that JESUS
CHRIST sent his disciples to preach, and commanded them, to carry neither gold
nor silver, nor any thing to eat, nor staf, nor shoos, nor two garments with
them; he felt in his heart a sudden and unwonted joy, thinking these words were
spoken to him: and that all which he had searched to know, (to wit ^n what
course he might serve God best) was in these words declared unto him; and that
he must expect no other answer. This conceit was so imprinted in the mind of
Francis, that he thought it no time to stay any logner; but forthwith he put of
his black habit of S. Augustine, and left of also the leather girdle, and put
about him a poor and bare garment of course cloth, and guirded himself with a
cord. He plucked of his shoos, and went barefoot: and thus having property in
nothing, he began to lead a true penitent, and Apostolical life.

He went from place to place, from one city to another, and preached every
where, as God inspired him, his words were lowely, simple, and clear, yet so
efficatious, that many which hard him, were moved to compunction, and amended
their life's; and some despising wholly the world, clothed themselves in sack
cloth, or other course habites, as S. Francis, did; and went and followed him.
So that he had II. disciples, of which some were well studied in divinity and
humanity; all which desired to serve God. The blessed man acquainted them all
with his mind, which was to go and preach penannce in diverse places, dividing
themselves, and so they did.

After a while they met again all, at the place where S. Francis was, every
one giving account of what he had done. And beholding the great profit of
souls arising thereby, he had a greater desire to continue this exercize, in
regard the very seeing of men ragged and barefoot, with such palefaces
together with the consideraton of their profound humility, and renouncing all
property to any thing, (yea although they should not speak) was a preaching of
Penannce, and did much good. But when they adioined words agreeable thereunto,
the more plain and the more simple they were, the more did they kindle the
love of God, and were imprinted in the hearts of the people to their great good.

S. Francis considering well all this, to the end that the institution might
have a firm foundation, and go well forward, and increase he thought it meet
to acquaint the Apostolik sea there with, and to desire the Pope to confirm
it, for which purpose, he, and his disciples went to Rome, and carried the Rule
with them in writing, to be showen unto the Pope Inocent. 3. There arose some
difficulty, when they treated of the observation of the Rule: for the Pope and
many Cardinals were of opinion, that no new relligious order should be
instituted and that if any had an intention to serve God in relligion, he might
enter into some relligious order already approved, as into the order of S.
Augustine, or S. Benedict.

It came to pass, that the Pope went to bed, toiled with affairs of the
Church: and falling a sleep, dreamed that the Church of S. John Lateran was
ready to fall, and that he saw a poor, bare, and abject man under propping it
with his shoulders, susteining, and keeping it from falling. As Soon as the
Pope did behold S. Francis, he knew straight that he was that poor man, who
vpheld the Church of S. John Lateran with his shoulders. And considering the
purity and sincerity of his heart, how he despised the world, and loved
poverty; his constancy in this purpose of following that Evangelical life
written in his Rule, according to which he desired to live; and regarding also
his great zeal for the salvation of souls, his fervent desire to imitate
JESUS CHRIST, he said: without doubt this same is the man I saw in my sleep,
and I suppose that this man with his good example of life and doctrine, will
help to sustain and uphold the Church of God; and with all he granted unto S.
Francis his request and desire, and confirmed his Rule, Viuae vocis oraculo
viz: by word of mouth.

Then the holy man made a solemn profession in the hands of the Pope, and so
did all his company, promising to live after that Evangelical Rule. when this
was done, the Pope ordeinted S. Francis General of all the order. These things
happened in the year of our Lord 1209. But because there was no Bull made
thereof at this time, therefore the confirmation of this order of Friars Minors
is not accounted but from the time of Honorius the Pope, who 15. years after
this, confirmed the same by a particular Bull* and other Popes since have
confirmed and illustrated the same, with special graces, and privileges.

S. Francis returned to Assisium, and with his brethren withdrew him self into
a little house n^ere to the city, and there continued in prayer and meditation.
From this house, they went to a little Church or chapel belonging to the
Benedictine monks, who bestowed it freely upon S. Francis. This chapel was
called S. Maria de Angelis, or by another name, S. Maria de Portiuncula. This
was the first house, or formed monastery of all the order The first time S.
Francis came thither, he seemed to be very ioifull, and said to his Friars:
that this place should be the head of all his order.

S. Francis then departed from thence, and so did all his brethren: and went
preaching, not only in the city of Assisium, near unto them, but also in other
places; especially the Seraphicall father beco^ming an Evangelical tro^pet,
passed thorough cities, castles and towns, preaching the word of God, not with
eloquent words, or worldly wisdom, but with fervor and power and spirit of
the living God. The people, who saw and heard him speak, thought him to be a
man of a higher and another world: for his heart and visage was ever ^rected
toward heaven, and he labored to direct every one in his company, to think of
the world to come. many were converted by his words, and many did keep him
company: who for the desire they had to imitate JESUS CHRIST, followed the
footsteps of the holy saint, whom they took for their guide, despising all kind
of worldly goods, and embracing holy poverty.

It would be tedious to recount all the things this holy father did, as his
godly exercises, and the holy life he led, when he began to found his
relligious order: First, he was most abstinent in eating and drinking: his
ordinary diet was bread and water, with some pulse, and sodden herbs: If at any
time he was forced by sickness to eat flesh, when he was recovered, he would for
a requital, repair the abstinence broken, with double austerity on his body.
He so divided the year into lents, that he fasted almost all of it, eating but
only once a day. His first lent began at thend of twelftyde until Easter:
Another he kept after Easter, for the coming of the Holy Ghost. Another for
the Apostles S. Peter and Paul. Another against the Assumption of our Lady; and
when that feast was gone, he fasted tille the feast of S. Michaell tharchangell
and then at the blessed feast of All Saints, he began his Aduent until
Christmas. The bare earth was the ordinary bed for his weak and feeble body;
and for a pillowe he laid a stone under his head. He sl^pt very little, but
watched almost all night in prayer. His apparaill was one gown with a hood,
and a rope was his girdle: he went some times unto the desert places and
mountains, to pray the more quietly.

It happened on a time, that S. Francis being in the night in the desert
Sacianum in a little cave, the devil called him by his name, and the blessed
man answered him, not knowing who it was, that called him. The fiend said to
him: There is not so great a sinner in the world, but God will pardon him, if
he be converted but they that will shorten their days with rigorous penances
shall find no mercy, before the heavenly majesty. The servant of God hearing
these words was astonished; and studied, whither he did well or no, in doing such
and so austere penance. But that he might know who it was that talked with him
(by the permission of our good God) he was surprised with a grievous temptation
of carnallity: as soon as he perceived it, he threw of his cloths, and gave him
self a very sore discipline: and because it did not repel the assault, he
hasted out of the cave, naked as he was; and tumbled up and down in the snow,
of which there was much in that desert. When he had so done, he made seven
heaps of snow in a round compass; and coming into the midst of them, said
to himself: Thou my body; yonder great one, thou see, is thy wife; these four
be thy children, two boys, and two girls; the other two be thy servants: now
thou must take pains to maintein them, and provide cloths for them all, least
they dye for cold. But if thou think it chargeable, endeavor thy self to live
chaste, and to serve God only, which is a great deal better, and more easy. In
this sort the holy saint over came the tentation, and the devil with shame
departed away. The glorious father advised his friars to be abstinent, and to
avoid Idleness, if they would be freed from such tentations.

The great love S. Francis bare to CHRIST may be known by this, that there was
never any so much desired to live, as he did to dye, for CHRIST his sake. this
moved him to go into Siria, among the Infidells, that he might obtein the
crown of martyrdom: but he returned, for that he could not obtain his
desire. Also the glorious father bare great love unto his neighbor, helping
every one in their necessities, as well of the body, as of the soul. It was his
ordinary usage, if he saw any poor man with ragged clothes, to exchange with
him; he used to all of them great respect and reverence: for he thought, he
saw CHRIST in every one of them. The wonderful miracles he did work, as
casting out of devils, healing of the sick, and raising of the dead, be so
many, that, only of them, a just volume might be made. many of them are
mentioned in the Bull of his Canonisation, which is a sufficient proof, that
they be of good credit and Authentical.

Such being his life and deeds; not only men, and they which embraced his Rule
imitated him, but also women; as S. Clara a maid of a worshipful family in
Assisium; who went to the convent of S. Francis, accompanied with the people of
her fathers house (although she had not said any thing to them, of her
intention) and the glorious father S. Francis received her, and gave unto her a
Rule whereby to live in a monastery. And within few days many other well
disposed damosells came to her, who all lived under the Rule, that S. Francis
gave her, which is called the order of S. Clara. So that this blessed father
having also founded another order, there were three Rules ordained by him, all
which were confirmed by the popes.

The first was of the friars minors, whose end is to exercise themselves in
contemplations; and in the active life, by the exercise of preaching. The
second Rule was of Nonnes of the order of S. Clara who be of two sorts; some
have reuenews and lands, and live in common: Some other have no reuenews, and
these are called of the first Rule, and live of almose. The third is of the
Penitents, which are called of the third Rule: and these also be of two sorts;
some have reuenews, and live in colleges, and in common; and these be properly
called relligious persons, and the vow they make is solemn, be they men or
women. The women of this Rule do differ from the Nonnes of S. Clara, in this;
that they were no veiles, and be not bound but only to the observance of the
three essential vows, under pain of mortal sin, as Pope Leo 10. declared.
The other of this third Rule live in their own house, and have reuenews, and
their vow is not sollemne, and these by consequence are not properly
relligious persons, but persons of honest behavior, and are called usually in
Italy Pizzo^cheri.

The seraphicall father S. Francis was not satissied with sending some of his
relligious men into sondy countries to preach the Gospel, and to convert
souls unto God, but he himself in person traveled into diverse kingdoms, and
realms; as into a great part of France, and then into Spain, and especially
to the church of S. James in Galizia. Then he embarked, and passed into Egypt,
and preached in Siria and in the countries of the Souldan, with whom the holy
man talked, and persuaded him to receive the faith of CHRIST, and ha gave him
leave, to preach unto his moors. but for that he gathered no fruit in that
country, he returned into Italy, and went to Rome, where Honorius 3. was pope
after Innocent 3. in the year of our Lord 1216. There he found the glorious
father S. Dominick, who came too have his Rule and order confirmed.

Whilst S. Dominick treated thereof, he had one night a revelation, in the
which JESUS CHRIST displeased for the many sins of the world, seemed to be
ready to ruinate and destroy it: Then saw he our blessed lady to kneel before
him, and entreat him to spare it. And to move him to mercy, she presented
unto him the same S. Dominick, and S. Francis, saying to him; by the means of
those two his servants, there should be great reformation of life in the world.
At this, our Lord was appeased.

In the said vision S. Dominick saw S. Francis, and when thy met in Rome, he
knew him, and embraced him very kindly and tenderly, and conferred with him of
the service of God, and the profit of their religious orders, and told him also
of the vision he had seen.

This B. father being in Rome was presented to the pope Honorius 3. and talked
with him of many things. And the pope, with the consent of the cardinals
confirmed his Rule, and they all received sperituall joy, in hearing his divine
discourses. For though his speech was lowely and familiar, yet did it leave
such an impression in their minds, that it made them even melt and relent. and
though it made them lament their sins, yet were they not therefore weary of
his company, but desired it the more.

His profound humility made every one ^o wonder; for though his life was so
holy, yet reputed he himself to be the vilest sinner in the world. And if any
said to him; say not so, for it is not true, he would answer in this manner. If
God had showed such favors and mercies unto any man, as he has to me; how
wicked and lewd so ever he had bin, he would have rendered greater thanks, and
have kept his commandments better then I have done. And if my sweet Lord
should abandon and leave me, I should commit more evils, then all the men in
the world do good; and therefore I am a greater and more unthankful sinner,
them they. The holy saint bare a most reverent respect to all priests, and used
to say: that if he met a priest, and a saint of heaven, he would give the
greater reverence to the priest, and that he would first kiss the hands of the
priest, and then he would do reverence to the saint: for we are to give most
reverence to him, at whose hands we receive the blessed body of our Lord.

A great volume might be written of the particular accidents that befell to
him, as well with his relligious, as with other seculer men: he showed in them
his virtue, and the great favors and mercies God bestowed on his blessed soul,
and they be briefly written in the chronicle made of him: for say or write
never so much of him, yet much more shall remain to be said or written. I will
speak only of the special mystery, that God wrought in him, when he imprinted
his blessed wounds in his body, a thing most certain. For not only many
relligious men, who conuersed with him (and among others, S Clara who saw them
with her eyes, and touched them with her hands) give testimony of the truth
thereof, but also Gregory 9. who canonised him, affirms that he himself saw
them. It fell out in this manner.

The holy Patriarch being retired and with drawn into a solitary place, to
fast his Lent of S. Michaell, in the mou^teines of Aluerne, two years before
his death: one morning, very early, about the feast of the Exaltation of the
holy Cross in September, he saw the likenese of a six winged seraphin
burning with fire, and casting beams glittering exceedingly, which descended
with great swiftnes, and drew nere to the place where S. Francis was, and
between the said wings appeered the figure of a man crucified. The upper most
wings he held above his head, the two in the middle with which he fl^we, were
spread abroad in the manner of a Cross, and the two other were gathered up
together, covering all the body from the head to the foot. The holy saint
maruelling at the presence of this glorious vision, felt in his heart an
excessive joy mixed with lively compassion, caused by the sign of his dearly
beloved CHRIST JESUS crucified.

He straight ways fell into an extasi as usually he accustomed in the
meditation of the passion of CHRIST; to the which he was devoted more, then can
be expressed. And at this time he was transformed into the similitude of CHRIST
crucified, the figure of his blessed wounds remaining imprinted in this flesh,
his hands were pierced through the midst with nails of flesh, the heads of
which nails, appearing in the palms of his hands were round and black, and
the points long and crooked: the like appeared in his feet, and upon his right
side he had a wound, as if it had been with a spear, the wound being both red
and wide S. Bonuaenture affirms that he heard them say so, that had seen them
with their eyes, and touched them with their hands.

When Ionathas desired to show kindness to David, 4. Reg 4.
he gave him his garments: and when JESUS CHRIST would show his favor to S.
Francis, he bestowed on him his wounds. 1. Reg 18.
when Eliseus would resuscitate the dead infant, he lay over the child, and it
may be, he said to God: Lord join these my eyes to him, that they may see in
him, and these my hands, that they may have feeling in him. so CHRIST lay over
S. Francis, and gave his wounds to him. CHRIST visibly ascended in to heaven,
and for that his will was, to have in his Church a perfect pourtraiture of him,
for a small time he made S. Francis one: for considering his holy life straight
after his conversion, it seems that S. Francis did set down his foot in the
step, from whence CHRIST took up his foot. And to the end he should be
likened unto him in every thing, he imprinted his wounds also in his body.

Sometimes one that is vicious, or one that is good, is bidden to imitate God,
and if perhapps he thinks, he can not do it, God gives him a pattern or a
model, which he may imitate, when he will. S. Francis preached the despising
and contempt of the world, and it seems that many men did not give credit
unto him. Wherefore to the end he should be credited, CHRIST gave him his
wounds, like an instrument which is written and sealed, for that is should be
of sufficient creditt.

S. Francis is like the keeper of the common standard of measure, unto which
all the other keepers of measure resort. CHRIST on the Cross got many
children, some were martirs, some Confessors, and some were virgins. The
children are likened unto the father, some had his similitude in their
patience, others in their humility, and others in other virtues: but for that
none had the similitude of him in the wounds, God elected S. Francis for that
purpose, and gave them unto him imprinted in his flesh. The courtiers, that be
favored of the king, are apparailled in his livery; and because S. Francis was
highly favored of JESUS CHRIST he was therefore clothed in the livery of his
wounds. Jacob wrastled with God, and remained lame: S. Francis wrastled with
God, and he was made lame also, for the wounds of his feet suffered him not to
travel, but he was compelled to ride on a little Ass.

The death of this glorious patriarch drawing nighe, he was much diseased with
a grief in his stomach, and in his eyes, as also with the pains of his wounds.
six months before his death, he fell sick of the dropsy, which thing
persuaded him, he had not long to live. The citizens of Assisium, doubting that
if he died in any other place, they should loose the precious treazure of the
holy ma^s body, sent for him to Sienna, where he remained; and conducted him to
their city, and lodged him in the Bishops house. The holy saint being there,
and knowing that the hour of his death approached, commanded them to carry him
to the Church of Sancta Maria de portinncula, other wise called die Angeli.
Being come th^ther, he made his testament, in which he left his friars heirs
of his holly poverty, which he much recommended unto them, to keep and observe,
jointly with charity and obedience, and gave unto them his benediction. On a
saturday in the evening, on the. 4. day of October, in the time of pope
Honorius. 3. and of Fredericque. 2. the emperor, in the year of our Lord. 1226
twenty years after his conversion, and in the. 45. year of his age, this holy
father heard the voice of God, who called him out of this life unto him.

And because he would make a true demonstration, that he had not any thing
common with the world, not the world any thing with him; The holy father with
feruor of spirit, did arise stark naked out of his bed, and lay on the ground.
He had before receued the sacraments of Confession, Eucharist, and extreme
unction, and having at the reasembly of his friars, (who wept and lamented
pitifully) remenbred them, and ageine commaunthem to love poverty, and to be
subject and obedient to the Church of Rome, He gave them his final
benediction, as well to the absent, as to the present, saying to them: My
children remain in peace, and fear of our Lord, and continue alwais in the
same, for I depart hence to God, unto whom I commend you all.

Then he willed them to read unto him, the passion according to S. John. After
which the holy saint said the psalm of David, which begins thus: Voce mea
ad dominum clamaui, and went unto the last verse, which is: Educ de custodia
animam meam ad confitendum nomini tuo, me expectant iusti donc retribuas mihi.
and with those words, his blessed soul unloosed from the bands of the flesh,
and went out to enjoy the everlasting felicity. His body continued so
beutifull, that only to behold it, would move a man to celestial desires.
There resorted to his burial innumerable people. He was carried to the city of
Assisium, and by the way, the laid it in the Church of Damian, at the instancy
and petition of S. Clara (for there was her monastery) to the end, she and the
other Nonnes her daughters might see him. The sight of him caused them to shed
abundance of devout tears, especially, when they saw the wounds of his
hands, feet, and side, which might be seen of every man.

From thence he was carried into the city, and buried in the Church of S.
George; until that four years after, A sumptuous Church was builded for him
into which he was translated and therein buried. Pope Gregory 9. having first
used the accustomed diligences, canonized him upon a sunday, one year, mine
months and a half after his glorious death.

Spa: Marius Antonius Sabelli^^s says: that in this time which was in the
year of our Lord. 1494 there were Franciscan friars to the number of 60000. in
forty provinces.

The life of S. Placidus and others.
THE hautie pride and boldness of Pharao with the help of the prayer of Moises
was the cause that he was drowned in the red sea, and the people of God escaped
out of his cruel hands. But contrariewise the humillity and virtue of
Placidus, favored by the prayer of S. Benedict, was the cause that he safe and
alive came out of a river, wherinto he fell and was in iminiment danger of
drowning. His good success was very profitable and beneficial for all
Christians, to who^ his good example was a light and direction in the way of
virtue, and God did show them many favors by his prayers and merits. His life
was written by Iordano a household dweller with the same saint, and at the
commaundent of the Emperor Justinian; Laurence Surius rehearses it in this
manner.

THE Goths having conquered, and made them selves Lords of Italy Theoderik the
second being their king, and John sitting in the chair of S. Peter, and
Justinian being Emperor in Constantinople: there came to Rome an honorable man
of the order of Senators called Tertullius surpassing all others in posessions,
and allied to the Emperor in blood. Moreover he was a just man and virtuous;
which made every one to love him, and many call him father of the country. He
had a wife of an equal degree unto him, and by her three sons and one
daughter. The eldest son was called Placidus, the second Eutichius, the third
Victorinus and the name of his Daughter was Flauia. they were all holy people;
for so good a tree did bring forth good fruit. From their child hoode their
father and mother instructed them, to serve God, to love patience, humility,
temperance, and charity. And though Tertullius was continually employed in the
affairs of the Emperor, yet omitted he not to spend much time in visiting
Churches and monasteries, seeking in what he might the good of his soul, and
the service of God.

At that time the most blessed father S. Benedict lived in Sublak, shining with
sanctity and miraculous deeds. Much people resorted unto him from all parts,
with a desire to save their souls, and to be of his holy religious order: so
he builded. 12. monasteries and placed in every one of them people of a pure,
holy and virtuous life, who should instruct in the service of God those that
came newly to his order. yet some of those nouices he kept with himself, to be
their teacher. All these things related in the presence of Tertulius the
Senator in Rome, moved him to go and visit the saint being nobly accompanied,
as his state required, appareled with scarlet, gold, and precious stones.
As Soon as he saw the holy man he fell down with great reuernce and humility
at his feet, and with sobbes and tears requested him, to pray unto God for
remission of his sins. S. Benedict beholding the great humillity of this
noble Senator, raised him up and conferred long with him about things
apperteining to the good of his soul, and the obtaining of eternal life,
aduising him to regard these above all thigs. At this Tertulius took great
consolation and left his son Placidus being vij years old with s Benedict
which happened in the year of our Lord 522. he recome^ded the charge of the
child unto him, and besought him to bring him up, and teach him in his rule,
and so craving the blessing of the holy man he returned to Rome.

Placidus stayed with his Mr S. Benedicte, and profitted so in the way of
virtue, and gave so good hope what he would be thereafter, that the holy
Patriarch showed him especial favor, and very carefully instructed him, how to
a void and be freed from tentations, and how to use them to his profitt.
Placidus loved abstinence; kept his vigills, fastings and austeritie; and with
great care was attent to all things belonging to the service of God, were it
day night or any time whatsoever. And all though he endeavored to adorn his
soul with many virtues, yet was he so complete in obedience, that the father
S. Benedict wondered thereat, considering, how to show himself obedient, he did
those things that were unseemly for one of his birth and of his lineage. As he
was obedient, so he was humble; for these two virtues go alweis together, and
without humlity, obedience is rather forced then voluntary.

On a day there wanted water in the cell. and Placidus went to dippe a paile in
the river: the vessel fell out of his hand into the water, as he dipped it:
and as he would have reached it, he fell in also, and was in danger to be
drowned* but in the instant that he fell in, God revealed it to S. Benedict,
who said to his disciple Maurus that was near him: Son Maurus, run
speedily, for the ^^hld Placidus is fallen into the water; and he gave him
jointly his benediction S. Maurus ran apace, and behoulding a far of the child
ready to sink, not thinking whither it was land or water, but transported with
charity and obedience, ran upon the water, and took him fast by the hear of
his head, and came out with the same speed he went in. Being come to the bank,
he was astonished, to see he had walked upon the water as if it had been upon dry
land, never sinking, nor being as much as wette. Having returned, he told
hather Benedict the case, and the blessed Patriarch said: I cannot attribute it
to my merit, but to thy prompt obedience. And Maurus he said that it be fell
so, for that he had commanded him, and that for his part he had no interest in
this miracle, as done with out foresight delay or reflection. Of this same holy
and humble contention Placidus was the judge and said: when I came out of the
water, I saw over my head the habit of the Abbot, which you (father) do now
were: and so you be the man, that has delivered me from this great danger.
and this was a sign of the great virtue and merit of Placidus, since he
merited to see that, which Maurus could not.

Of the aforesaid 12. monasteries built by S. Benedict in Sublake some were set
on the top of the hill: and therefore the monks were much troubled to fetch
water for their necessary uses, for they were forced to go^ far for the same.
They requested S. Benedict to remove the^ to some other place, avoid this
trouble. He comforted the^ saying: tha^ y^ they would return to their
monasteries God would provide, no doubt, water for them. On the next night the
blessed father accompanied with Placidus only, went up to the hill, and
remained there all night in prayer, and laid three stones one upon another, and
returned to his Cell. The day ensuing the monks came to him for water and the
holy Abbot said unto the^: Go to the top of the mounteine, and dig where
ye find three stones lieng one upon another; for God is able to furnish ye in
that place with water, to ease you of your travel.

They did so, and went to the top of the hill, and found as he said. In that
place they dug, making a pi^t or well deep and wide, like a little bath,
which was filled with water, and rose in such quantity, that it was not only
sufficient for the use of the aforesaid monasteries, but also ran unto the
bottom of the mounteine, and endured a long time. Though this miracle was
done by S. Benedict, yet Placidus was a party therein, for that he went with
him, and prayed with him, and was a testimony thereof.

Virtue is always enuyed and maligned; and the good do ordinarily suffer
persecutions. So one Florentius spiting S. Benedict his neighbor, resolved for
to persecute him. He did it first, presenting to him by a messenger bred
impoisoned, but the holy man knowing what was with in it, gave it to a crow,
commanding him to carry it and leave it in the desert, where it should hurt no
man. The wicked man seeing he could not accomplish his intent by this devise,
agreed with a woman, to enter all naked into the garden of the monastery, and
by dishonest behavior tempt the monks to lewdnes. This villainous trick
against his monks displeased greatly S. Benedict; especially fearing lest
Maurus and Placidus, being young youths, might thereby sustain some wrong and
be annoied, but God spoke to him in his sleep with sweet and amiable words,
bidding him depart out of that country, and go and build a monastery in Monte
Cassin^. The holy man obeyed. and in his journey visited the holy places and
monasteries he had built in that country: and in that season the house fell
upon Florentius that wicked persecutor, and killed him: which thing Maurus
wrote unto his father, seeming to be glad, that their order was freed from that
persecutor: but he reproved him sharply for the same.

Having then set all his conuents in good order, in the year of our Lords 529
he with his two disciples Placidus and Maurus, iourneied toward Mont Cassino:
and as they passed by a village called Aureola nere the city Hercularia, it was
revealed unto him, that in tha^ place was to be builded a famous monastery of
his order; for which cause he commanded his two disciples to stay there
certain days, to lay the fou^dations; and that being done, to go on to Monte
Cassino, where he would be. They obeyed, and the glorious father S. Benedict
proceeded on his journey, and came to Monte Cassino: where for the space of 40.
days he continued in prayer, not far from a temple of Apollo. after which
time inspired and favored of God, he destroyed the Idol, threw down the
Altar, and defaced the foundation, and all signs of Idolatry, which he could
find. Then came his two disciples, and began to found the monastery, which
was after the head of all his order; and built a Church unto S. Martin, in the
place where the Idol before had bin. He made an altar to S. John Evangelist;
and this being done, he also preached unto the people of that country, and
converted the^ unto the faith of CHRIST. These doings of the holy man enraged
the devil: wherefore he persecuted him all that he might: and appeared to him
ougly in dreadful shapes. Placidus and Maurus heard the roaring and howling
that he made, all though thy did not see his shape: He did them also all the
harm he could, by endeavoring to disturb the work, and the building of the
monastery; maki^g the stones very weighty, casting down the walls, raising
fantisticall fires; but; by the prayers of S. Benedict, they were delivered
from all these mischiefs. Monte Cassino and all the territory had bin the
possession of Ter^ullus father unto Placidus; who understanding how S. Benedict
built there a monastery, reioiced much thereat; and went thither to visit him,
accompanied with many other noble Romans, as Boethius, Simmachus, Vitalianus,
Gordianus and Equitius.

When the blessed man understood of their coming; he went with Placidus to the
door of the monastery to receive the^. Ter^ullus seeing S. Benedict, whose body
was feeble and withered with great fasting alighted from his horse, and decked
with rich and gay apparel as he was, fell on the ground, to kiss his feet.
The holy patriarch lifted him up, and embraced him, both of them weeping for
tenderness of heart. The whole company went into the Church of S. Martin, in the
which were many relligious men. Tertullius did embrace them all, and
incontinent in the presence of those noblemen, Consuls, and Senators, which
came with him, offered to God and to S. Benedict the monte Cassino, with all the
lands and villages thereunto apperteyning. and because it was his patrimony,
which he enherited from his father, he made a public writing thereof, after the
Roman use and manner. In like manner he made a deed of gift of other
posessions, villages and castles, and of a house, in the which his son
Placidus was borne, being within Rome, upon the mount Celius, in which place
was after made a Church called S. Erasmus. And Equitius the Senator made a
donation unto the Abbot in the name of him self and of his son Maurus, of
some of his lands and posessions lyeng in Naples. Gordianus in the name of
himself, and of his wife Siluia, offered some villages, and arrable grounds
unto the blessed Abbot, and the^ they returned back to Rome. The posessions
that Tertullius the father of Placidus gave to S. Benedict, were 18. villages
in Sicilie, with havens, woods, ryuers and parks.

When it was know in the Is'land, that Tertullius had given those things unto
the monks, diverse persons injuriously in^^uded themselfs into the^, and kept
the^ by force. The over seers, and bailiues of them certefied S. Benedict
thereof; who assembled his monks to treat of a means to remedy the same: and
it was determined that Placidus should go thither, who should be respected as
being son to Tertulius: and that he, with his discretion, would bring all
things to good pass. He as an obedient son was content to go thither, and
accompanied with two of his household friends Gordianus and Dona^^s departed
from Monte Cassino on the 20 day of May, in the year of our Lord 536, and came
unto Capua, where Germanus B. of that city received them courteously.

At that time Zoffa chief secretary to the Church of Capua was grievously
troubled with the headache and hearing of coming of Placidus disciple of S.
Benedict, whose miracles were renowned in all places, came unto him and said: I
beseech thee o Placidus servant of God, by the name of thy master Benedict,
which is worthy of all reverence, to lay thy hand upon my head. for I
steadfastly believe that if thou do, I shall be healed. Placidus was
aggrieued that he made such a request, and desired him to depart in peace: for
it was not fit to request such things of him, but of his Mr S. Benedict, or of
such other holy me^; for he was a grievous sinner, and needed the prayers of
good men himself. The B. Germanus hearing his words, esteemed him to be very
humble, and besought him to perform the request of the sick man. Placidus
thought not good to gainsay the request of so holy and famous a prelate, and so
he laid his hand upon the sick man, and prayed deuoutely, and ended his prayer
thus. God restore thee to thy former health; and all they that were present,
said, Amen. And at that instant the headache which had vexed him many years,
departed, and he praised almighty God for the same. In that very city he
healed a blind man, by making the sign of the Cross upon his eyes. The fame
and report of these miracles caused sickmen to come from all parts: and though
he was displeased thereat, yet, moved with charity, he prayed for the^, and
healed the^, and, among other many, were these that follow.

A child that was yielding up the ghost; one that had the palsy; one that had
a quartain; one that could stir nothing but his eyes, and in all the rest was
like to a dead body; one that had the gout; a maid blind, deaf, and do^b: she
was brought to hi^, and he called upon the name of the holy Trinity, and forth
with she was delivered from; three infirmities. Wheresoever he went, he healed
sick me^; and there was no infirmity nor malady so great, but he cured the^.
where soever he came, he could not live secret; for men posessed by the devil
howled, and manifested his coming; whom he cured; and cast the devil out of
them.

Placidus stayed a time in some cities of Italy, as in Cairosa, which is
Puglia, a province of the kingdom of Naples in Reggio, which is in the
province of Calabria, and continually he healed the sick, and did many strange
miracles. At the last he embarked, and passed into Sicilia, and came unto the
City of Messina; and before he went therinto he sent to one Messalino a noble
citizen, and his fathers great friend, to come unto him; which he did, and had
him home unto his house. All the city gave him great honor, for that he was
the disciple of S. Benedict; as also for the miracles, and marueillous things
they understood he had done in Italy. But Messalino, for the love he bare to
Tertullius his father, and his ancient friend, knew not how to show him
kindness enough: he kept him and his companions all that day in his house: on
the next day Placidus said unto him; Sr. it is not fitting for monks to lodge
in the house of seculer men, for that their manner of life is different; and
therefore I entend to go unto my fathers land and posessions, where I may
build a monastery. They went away in the morning, and n^ere unto the haven,
they found a place fit for that same purpose, and Placidus with a staff which
he carried, drew out the plott, where, to the honor of S. John Baptist, the
Church should be built, and all the cell^s and chambers of the convent.

Forthwith he set the^ to building of it, and followed it dilligently and
carefully; and in that space he restored his sight to one, that had bin blind.
18. years: and cast out the devil from an other, whereby the fame of him was
spread over all the Is'land and it passed over into Africa, so that from those
costs, sick men were brought to be healed by him, and by his prayers they were
cured.

For these deeds Placidus was extolled unto heaven by the mouths of every one;
and the more he was praised and exalted, the more he humbled and meeked him
self. He was merciful, good, and gracious unto all; he was even consolation it
self unto all those that were in distress; comfort to the afflicted, health to
the diseased; help and releif to the needy; a father to the poor; and a
teacher to the rich; he did good to every one, and all received benefit at his
hand. He had often conference and communication with the bailies and overseers
of his fathers land and posessions, that were informer times, though now
belonging to his order, about diverse things, and left them all well pleased;
and willed them to administer that, which every one had under his charge, with
all fidelity; that making to them selfs some reasonable gain, his religious
order might sustain no damage, nor have any evil report spread of it.

In the fourth year after he came into Sycilia, the building of the
monastery, with the Church of S. John Evangelist (which was consecrated by the
B. of Messina) was finished. Placidus with his companions led a life of great
example; whereby many were moved to abbandon the world, and came unto him: so
that, in a short space, there was thirty of them. The life of Placidus was
wonderful: his words sauoured of celestial fervor, with which he comforted,
and taught them to despize and contemn the world, to hate Lordships,
dignities, delights and noisome pleasures, that they might more freely serve
JESUS CHRIST: to which end he alleged many reasons full of authority, and
modesty. part of the day he spent in prayer and mediation, wherein it was
strange to see how many tears he shed; to hear the sobbes which came from
his breast as he lifted up his spirit to God. In lent he fasted the sunday, the
tuesay, and thursday, with bread and water only: the other days he eat not
any thing; and in all the year he drank no wine; and besides he wore a hair
cloth next his skin. When he was over wearied with praying and kneeling, he
slept a little, rather sitting then lyeng. For any accide^t, that befell, he was
never angry; but alwais grave, mild, and benign. He never spoke but upon
constraint or necessity; to give the monks or the poor consolation, or else for
affairs belonging to the monastery: and, notwithstanding all his affairs, he
had always his spirit elevated to God. When it was made known once in Rome,
that Placidus was in Sicilia, and that he had made there a monastery, in the
whith were already 30. monks; what a blessed life he led, what great miracles
God showed by him; Eutichius and Victorinus his brother, and Flauia his sister,
desirous to see him, having obtained leave of their father, passed by sea into
Sicilia. being disembarqued, they went to the monastery of S. John; where they
saw Placidus their brother, but knew him not; either for the long time he had
bin absent, S. Benedict receiving him at the age of 7 years; or else for that
he was so lean and diffigured, through his exceeding abstinence. But
understanding he was the man, they all embraced him, weeping amain. They
visited the monastery, and stayed with him certain days.

It befell at that time, that a great host of Moors, sent by Abdalla a mighty
tirant of Africa, and guided by Mamucha, came into Sicilia, with intent to do
all possible hurt and damage in the country of Christians; as it had done
already in sundry places. and because the monastery of S. John was nere the sea,
they went thither forthwith, and brake down the gates, and took all that they
found. but Gordianus who came with him from Monte Cassino being a young man, and
finding a back gate, escaped away. Donatus who was an old man, and came from
Monte Cassino also, was beheaded.

Placidus with his brethen Eu^chius Victorinus and Flauia, with Faustus, and
Firmatus deacons, and 30. monks was bound in chains, and presented to Mamucha.
who with a stern look asked Placidus, who he was? he answered a Christian.
The Captain replied: deny CHRIST thy God, blaspheme him, and adore God in that
manner our mighty king Abdala adoreth; and I will set thee at liberty.
Placidus said: I will never deny JESUS CHRIST my Lord, I rather desire to die
for him. The tirant was wroth and said to Eutichius, and the other 30. monks.
What say all the rest of you? Obey our king Abdalla, deny your CHRIST, and
adore our God. The holy me^ with one consent, as if they had had but one tongue
answered: Our will and our desire is all one, our faith is one, our manner of
life is one: that which one has said, think tha^ every one has said. For
CHRIST'S sake we are prepared to loose our lives. The tirant was very wroth at
their answer, and made the^ all be stripped, and cruelly beaten, saying: let
words give place to deeds, and your presumptuous aunswers to the cudgel. The
holy martirs reioiced, that they were worthy to suffer beatings and torments
for CHRIST his sake.

The tirant on the one side, and the executioners on the other side, moved them
to deny CHRIST: but the holy men perseuered in confessing him, whom they
requsted to give them strength, to sustain the torments, which hourly
increased, at the hands of the bloody butchers. But finding the constancy of
the martirs, they were tired to torment them, and so was the tirant to see them
tormented, and left them bound, comaunding them to be kept. Now because the sea
was rough, which hindered their navigations toward Italy, where they had a mind
to do all the hurt they could, they put it first in practice in that Is'land,
ouerrunning all, saving such strong cities as defended themselfs, with robbing,
adulteri^s, spoiling of Churches, and ruinating them to the very ground.
Placidus with his brethren and the other monks remained certain days in
prison, having no vitailes given them: and yet the barbarians ceased not to
torment the^ with scourging and bastonadoes. and when they saw these things
could nowaies make the^ alter their minds; by the apointme^t of the Captain,
they tied the^ aloft by the feet, making a smoke under their heads, and
beating them again very cruelly. When they were taken from this torment, the
tirant commanded to give them a little raw barley and water, to keep them in
life, that they might be able to endure their torments. He made them fair
promises, in the behalf of his king Abdala, if they would once deny their
faith, but these holy men contemned his promises, and also his torments.

That night came to them secretly Cordianus, who escaped out of the monastery,
and craved pardon of Placidus, and desired to be tormented. but Placidus
commanded him to take care, to note that, which he, and others that were with
him did suffer; that he might certify in particular the blessed father S.
Benedict, and the monks of his relligion of all that did happen. So he did,
writing every particular accident in the martyrdom of these blessed saints,
which endured many da^es. the tira^t Mamucha dragging them unto his sight, and
tormenting them from the head to the foot with blows, and with renting and
scorching their flesh with fire; the blessed damsel Flauia sustained a good
part thereof. she being naked and hoised up a loft before many people, the
tirant asked her; how being a Roman, and of noble parentage, she could endure
such a shameful reproach. She answered: That she not only was ready to suffer
to be deprived of her cloths and her honor for CHRIST sake, but also of her
life, by sword or fire, or any other torment that he could imagine.

The hellish man seeing torments prevailed not, sbught to over come her by
another way. And so he caused five lusty and shameless villanes of the Moors to
come and abuse her. The good damsel had excessive grief to hear this, and
turned to God almighty with tears, beseech him to help her; he heard her
prayer; and made such as came near and touched her with their loathsome hands,
to become lame and maimed; whereby they let her alone in quiet, and she was
freed from that reproache.

Great was the cruelty these ministers of the devil exercised in all the
Is'land, in afflicting the Christians; they bound them hand and foot, and put
in their mouths staves to hold them open, and then cast in dirt and filth into
some, and into others salt water of the sea, and vinegar, wherewith they did
choke them. They caused others to walk barefooted upon piks of iron, se^ in
the grod, they dragged others by the legs, until they were torn and rent
asonder, they burned the skins of others with plates of iron, made red hot,
others they roasted, others they sawed, and cut in pieces: of others they bored
the breast bones and until they came even to their bowels; they dragged others
at their horse tails, and spared not the infants, but dashed out their
brains against the walls. They used as little mercy toward the feeble women.
some of them they hanged by the hear, others by one foot, and tied a great
stone at the other. They rubbed the shoulders and breasts of others with plates
of iron made red hoate, and great was the number of them that died every day.

The tyrant Mamucha was not slow to torment Placidus and his companyons. They
were brought every day before him, and he persuaded them first to deny CHRIST,
and seeing that to be all in vain, he ageine would cause them to be whipped:
and because he saw Placidus praised God, and was confortable in the midst of
his torment, he made the executioners to stryke his mouth with a great stone,
which filled all his mouth full of blood, yet ceased he not to payse almighty
God; whereat the tyrant raging more, made them cut out his tongue, which being
cut out, yet he praised God more, and more, giving him thanks, for that he
suffered for his sake.

The tyrant found out a new torment for them, he put upon their thighs glowing
hoate the crooked heads of Iro^ anchors, fastened like boots, hanging on their
feet. In which torment they contyneued a wholl night, and Placidus song
himnes, and his companions praised God. When the day came, and they still
remained constant in the confession of their faith, he gave sentence of death
against them in this manner: For that Placidus, Eutichius, Victorinus with
Fla^ia the damsel, and Faustus, and Firmatus with the other Christians,
despise the commandment of our mighty king Abdalla, and adore CHRIST for God,
who was crucified of the Jews, and hated of the God whom we adore: our will
is, that they be beheaded, and their bodies left unburied, to be food for the
beasts of the field and birds of the air. The ministers of the enraged
Mamucha, hearing the sentence, led the holy saints away, scourginge them till
they came to the sea shore, where they were for to loose their heads.

Placidus made his prayer in that place, and lifted up his eyes and said: My
lord JESUS CHRIST son of the living God, which did descend from heaven unto
earth, and for our salvation did abide death upon the Cross, have mercy on
us o lord; and by thy merits and intercession of Benedict thy servant our
master, we beseech thee, to give unto us the virtue of constancy; to the end,
that passing this cruel passage of death, without any impediment or stay laid
in our way, by our enemy the devil; we may come to enjoy the eternal
felicity of thy heavenly kingdom. let thy holy Angel S. Michaell receive
our souls in peace; and present them before thy heavenly tribunal. This we
request and beseech of thee who art our God, blessed and glorious for ever.
Placidus having said these words; all the other au^swered Amen. And as they
kneeled they were beheaded forthwith in Sicilia, in the haven of Messina, and
their bodies remained four days unburied.

The Barbaryans not content herewith, destroyed the monastery; so that they
left not one stone upon another, and though the Church of S. John Evangelist
stood very near it (whether it was for devotion, for the moors do reverence
him highly, or whether for Gods pleasure) it was not touched nor defaced. And
for that the storms and roughnes of the sea was now ceased, Mamucha commanded
every one to be embarked, to go unto Reggio in Calabria. As they were passing
the Faro, there rose such a tempest, that they could not go forward, nor
return back: and, by the just judgment of God, they were drowned, and sunk
all of them, being 100. vessels, and 16800. men.

The bodies of the holy martyr Placidus and of his brethren, were buried in the
Church of S. John Baptist, by Gordianus his familier friend, who came with him
from Monte Cassino. The same man buried the other 33. martirs in the same
place, where they were beheaded: And in the one place and the other, God did
for them many miracles, many sick men recoueryng from all diseases by their
intercession.

S. Placidus at his death was 26. years old: for when he was 7. years old the
blessed father S. Benedict received him into his company: he remained in
Sublacque 5. years, and upon Monte Cassino 9 years; in building the monastery
he spent four, and there he was Abbot one year. All which make the sum of
26. years. He was borne in the year of our lord 515. and he was martyred in
the year. 541. on the first day of October being saturday.

The life of S. Mark Pope and Confessor.
BY the death of that holy Pope Siluester was chosen to succeed in his place,
and in the chair of S. Peter, Mark, a citizen of Rome, son of one Priscus,
endued with rare and excelent virtues. The church of God enjoyed in his days
great peace, and outward tranquillity; being favored, and freed by Christian
Princes from all foreign enemies. Yet inwa^dly the Arian heretics infested
the same, as spitefully as they could. They had won them selves favor, and
wrought an entrance in to the Emperors house and family; and, inueagling one
of his very sons, drawn him into the snares of their heresies: which was
after a cause of great persecution in the church of God, and many afflictions
laid upon Catholics. The old Emperor continued sound, and always a good
Catholic; and accordingly affected and fauour^d S. Mark as much, as he had
before honored S. Syluestre. Wherefore this holy Pope, furthered and
cherished with the Emperors countenance, employed his care and best endeuoures
in resisting these Arrian heretics, and settling and ordaining such good orders
as for the government of the Church were adjudged necessary. Amonghst which
one was to prescribe, that on Sundays and chi^fe festival days the Creed or
belief should be said in the mass, to the end that the hearers might the
better learn it, and be more strengthened in their faith, by this public
profession made thereof.

He moreover builded two churches; one in the way to Ardea, three miles from
Rome; the other in the city, called by the name of him that built it: both
which churches Constantine endowed with great revenues and possessions, and
adorned with vessels of gold and silver. He granted the Bishop of Ostia
leave to use the Pallium; by reason it was his ancient privilege to
consecrate the Pope of Rome. He gave holy orders twice in the month of
December: wherein he ordered 8. Bisshops. 25. Priests, and 6. Deacons. And
having lived 2. years, 8. months, and 20. days in the chair of Peeter; he
dyed the 7. day of october, on which the church does celebrate his feast, and
in the year of our lord 340: and was buried in the churchyard of Balbina, in
the same church he made in the way to Ardea. Spa: S. Jerome says he dyed in
the year 334: Onuphrius 336. *

The life of SS. Sergius, Bacchus, Marcellus and Apuleius Martyrs.
THE holy martyrs Sergius and Bacchus lived in the time of the Emperor
Maximia^ and served him in an honorable office; the one being Primicerius, the
other Secundicerius, that is Sergius principal, and Bacchus second secretary
of sta^e: both for their virtues especially beloved and honored by the
Emperor, ignorant as yett that they were Christians. Being in the city of
Augusta, in the province of Eufratesia, he came to have some knowledge hereof,
by reason of certain accusations, laid against them. And desiring to be
further certefyed, he called them to wait upon him to Church, wither he was
going, to sacrifize unto his Idols. The holy Saints accompanied him, and
gave their attendance; yett in such sort, that, having brought him to the
church door, they stayed without, when the Emperors went in. When the time
came to offer sacrifice, Maximian looked about for them, and not seeing them,
commanded others to look where they were. The messengers found those holy
Saints at the gates of the temple, making their prayer unto God: who
understanding the Emperou^ did send for them came to his presence. He showing
himfelfe displeased, dimaunded of them; why they came not in whith him, and
offered sacrifice to the great Jupiter. They answered boldly; because they
were Christians, and thought that sacrifice was due to none, but only him, who
was the true God, that made heaven and earth. The Emperor all in a rage
commanded to pluck of their golden chains from their necks, and strippe
them out of their rich apparail, the tokens of rheyre nobility: then to
cloathe them in woemens garments, lade them with yrons, with gyues, and
fetters, lead them with open reproache and ignominy through out all the
city, and so cast them in prison. And having tried, that all his cruelltie
and craft could not make those noble spiritts relent, nor swerve, in in the
least thing, from their Religion; he sent them to Antiochus governor of the
East, a fierce, cruel, barbarous natured man: to the end, that he should draw
them to offerre up sacrifice, or put them to most grievous torments. Besides
that in this he also had another respect, to have Sergius the more auiled and
disgraced, by having appointed for his judge Antiochus; aman, that in former
times was one of his followers, and had bin preferred to the dignity of
Governor of Prefect of the East, by the means of Sergius.

The holy Saints were brought before him; and he committed them first to
prison; where they spent their time in prayer and devotion, beseeching our
Lord to grant them strength, and afford them succoure in their battle.
Afterward Antiochus, fending for them, used all means to win their wills
to offer up sacrifice to his Idols. But they answearing, that his Idols were
devils, and no Gods; he commanded four lusty and merciless fellows to
whip, and scourge Bacchus, with the toughest and hardest finewes of Oxen. This
torment was so terrible, and the lashes so cruel, tearing his flesh, and
wounding him so deeply, that heerewith the martyr ended his life, and yielded
up his spirit to God. He afterward appeered unto Sergius shining with glory
ad heavenly brightness: he declared unto him the endless reward, which he had
received for those short torments; and encouraged him to undergo what pain
soever was prepared for him: to the end, that, as in their punishment, they
might be partners in their victory and triumph.

Antiochus earnestly, to make Sergius more plyant, and reduce him to his
opinion: but seeing all he could do was in vain, led by his fierce and cruel
nature, and desirous to satisfy the Emperor, he commanded a pair of shoes,
all bestudded and thick set with points of sharp nails, to be putt on his
feet; and so to run before his chariott: and after this manner he did drive
him nine miles, to the excessive pain of the holy martyr, our of whose feet
ran streams of blood. But, the night next ensuing, an Angel did come, and
cherish him; and so healed his feet, as if he had suffered nothing at all.

The judge attributed to Magic this favor of God; and being therewith more
enhardened, did command him to endure again the same torment. Then seeing
nothing would avail, nor work the martyr to his will; he commanded that his
head should be stricken of. Sergius kneeled down upon his knees, and made his
prayer to almighty God, beseeching him to accept the loss of his life, as a
sacrifice; to pardon those that did persecute him; and grant them knowledge of
his light and his truth. He heard a voice, which invited him to the kingdom
of heaven, and did congratulate his victory: wherefore, stretching forth his
neck, he was streightwaie beheaded the 7 of october, in the year of our Lord
306. God did honor Sergius from Heaven with miracles, and on earth he was
honored with great gyfts of Princes. For Cosroes, king of Persia, though a
pagan and Infidel, did send to his temple a most rich Cross of gold, with
other precious gifts, in token of preat favors received at his hands, as,
childen by his wife queen Sira, and safety in many great dangers and
perilles. Justinian the emperor built two fair churches in his name, one at
Constantinople, the other at Ptolemaida. At Rome a church with the title of a
Deacon Cardinal is dedicated unto them. And the very city, wherein S.
Sergius was put to death, was called by his name Sergiopolis. Of these two
Saints there is mention made in the second Nicene council, action 5. in the
Roman martyrologe, and many famous authors.

The life of SS. Marcellus and Apuleius martyrs.
ON this self same dai the 7. of October. the Church does make a commemoration
of Marcellus and Apuleius martyrs. They had bin disciples of Simon Magus: but
seeing by his disputations with S. Peeter, that he was nothing but a false
deceaver, they forsook and and left him astonished at the wondrous works and
miracles of the glorious Apostle, received his doctrine were made Christians,
and followed him all the dai of his life. After his death, they lived according
to his heavenly doctrine, until they came to be so happy, as to shed their
blood for that Faith and religion, which they had learned of so good a master.
They were putt to death and martyred, by the commandment of a Consul, called
Aurelian in the reign of Domitian and in the year of our lord 93. the 7. of
October, and were buried without Rome near the walls of the city.

The life of S. Dionise, Areopagite, and others.
SOLOMON in the book of wisdom says, that God disposes all things sweetly,
ordaining most convenient means, to obtain such ends, as he intends. This
was the reason why in his birth he used a star, to guide the three Eastern
Kings to adore him. For they being Magi, that is men skillfull in Astrology,
by seeing a star of so new a fashion, so different in place, in course, and
motion from all other stars, would be the more easily won, and allured, to
seek the author and cause of that star; as they did effectually, finding
and adoringe JESUS CHRIST.

To convert S. Dionise the Areopagite, a great Philosopher, and Astrologer, God
used the like propertionable means: and it was that rare and singular Ecclips,
which, at the time of our sauioures death, happened beyond the course of
nature. For Dionise, marking the strangeness there of, and maruailing at such a
never seen wonder; noted the year, the day, and hour: and after
understanding by S. Paul the true cause, and mystery of that Eclipse; he was
converted to embrace that religion, which was established by his death, who was
principal author, and only motive of that wonder, which surpassed nature. The
life of this Saint, with Rusticus and Elutherius his fellow martirs, collected
out of Michael Singelus priest of Jerusalem, out of Suidas and Simeon
Metaphrastes is as follows.

THE city of Athens was famous in all Greece, for that it was the chief place
of learning, the wellspring of knowledge, and mother of Wisemen. Dionise the
Areopagite was borne therein, of a rich and honorable family; and of parents
morallie just, and courteous; lovely to strangers, and liberal. in his youth
he gave himself to learning, wherein he became so eminent, that as well for his
knowledge, as for his Nobility, he had the chief place amonghst the
Magistrates, which governed the city. He was most eloquent in the Attick
tongue; a most skillfull Rhetorician, a rare man in the doctrine of Stoics,
Epicureans and other Philosophers. But above all he was accounted a just man
and virtuous in exercising his office, not favoring the rich, nor oppressing
the poor; not co^demning the innocent, nor leaving the culpable, without due
chastizement.

He went into Egypt to study the better, and understand the course of the
heaven, the force and influence of the stars, and all that knowledge of
Astrology. Being about the age of five and twenty, and residing in the city
of Heliopolis, in company of one Appollophanes, an Athenian, and a famous
sophister; he did behold that strange Eclypse, which happened at the death of
our Savior: when viewing the creator of al things, the author of life, and
fountain of all light so darkened, so ecclypsed, so ignominiously suffering
death, the Sun, as one ashamed to behold that spectacle, did hide, an wholly
loose his beams, in the midst of the day. S. Dionyse, as a man that was
skillfull in learning, did quickly perceive this Ecclypse was against the
course of nature, by reason it lasted above the natural periode; but much
more, because the Moon was at the full, and wholly opposite to the sun; so
that, supernaturallie running a violent course, she altogether covered the
sun, and keeping him so for the space of three hours, returned again to her
former place of opposition. He wondered at so rare a miracle, that neither was
heard nor seen before; and being amazed said to Appollophanes and others:
Either the God of nature does suffer, or else the wholle frame of the world does
perish and is dissolved. He noted the year the day and the hour in which this
strange novelty and wonder succceded, which was so deeply imprinted in his
mind, that he never forgot it all his life. He returned to Athens, and lived
in his own common wealth with great moderation, and reputation; the
Athenienses honoring him, as a most wise Philosopher, and vprighte Judge. They
made him president or chief of the highest court of Justice, that was in all
Athens. This court was called of the Areopagites: who took their name from a
place, where the court was kept: which was in a street or little hill called
in Greek Pagus dedicated to Ares that is to say Mars: and the Judges of this
court were so grave and upright, that in ancient times to call a Judge
unspotted, severe, uncorrupted, unflexible either for love, or fear, or
flattery or briberie, they would call him an Areopagite. It came to pass,
that about this time, S. Paul did preach the Gospel in Athens. He disputed
sundry times with the Epicurean Pithagorean, Academicall, Stoicall
Peripateticall philosphers, and labored to reduce them to the faith of JESUS
CHRIST, and draw them from their Idolatry. He told them of an other life; of
resurrection of the bodies, of a general Judgment; of a supernatural reward
or punishment, according to each man's good or bad works. These Philosophers
hearing a matter of such consequence, and fearing the danger of new religions,
and thinking it a thing of greatest importance, brought him before the chief
court of Areopagites, and their supreme Judge Dionisius. For allthough the
Romans were in actual posession of the wholl world in a manner, and Lords of
all Greece, yet the Lacedaemonians and the Atheniens were permitted to live in
their ancient liberty governed by their own Laws, officers and magistrates
freely elected by themselfs.

When S. Paul was brought before Dionyse and the other magistrates, in the
presence of the philosophers, who had before given informatio^ of him, he with
a Retorique more divine, then humain, meaning not to exasperat so wise and
learned a nation, by telling them he was come to teach them a thing wherein thy
were ignorant, and to give them notice of gods, that they knew not of; all
which they would hardly have disgested, or else taken in evil part, said thus
unto them:

You men of Athens, I have seen by experience, that you be a very superstitious
people, more addicted to your gods, then the other Greeks: for you labor to
have more, and honor them more, then all the rest as you have more knowledge,
and be more learned, the^ the rest. Now I walking through your city, and
beholding the many temples which be therein, I saw one upon whose altar, there
was this Inscriptio^: To the unknown god. That same God whom you do honor
unknown, is he whom I do preach unto you, and wish you to honor carefully. He
is not for from you, nor from any mortal man, since (as one of your own poets
said very well) we live in him, by him we move, and remain in him; of him we
gave our being, our motion, and life. Then speaking against the multiplicitie
of God, he told them at last of the day of judgment, and of the resurrection
of the dead The answer they gave him, was this: that they would give him
audience some other day, and so dismissed him.

These few words of the Apostle were so full of misteryes, that they put all
these wise and learned me^ to silence, yea and astonished and amassed them The
Apostle departed, but not empty handed: for he caught in his net the chief
magistrate Dionise, with whom he had conference in private: and in the end, the
Apostle gave him prefect and full notice of our faith. He preached unto him
JESUS CHRIST God and man, his death, passion, resurrection, and asce^sion unto
heaven. And because the Apostle made particular mention of the eclipse which
happened at the time of our Saviors death, and S. Dionise was desirous to know
that wonder, as soon as it was laid open unto him, he yielded forthwith and said
he would be a Christian.

It might seem a lightness in S. Dionise, to give creditt so soon unto a
stranger, in a matter of such importance as it is to renounce the gods so long
time adored by his forefathers, and to receue a new God that was crucified:
and the more, for that he was so learned, and was therefore more obliged to
consider very well thereof, before he altered his opinion in a matter of such
consequence. Unto this I answer by the same reason: S. Dionise, because he
was wise and learned, resolved upon an honorable and worthy matter so soon.
For even as he, and all other wisemen of the Paynims were reprouable, to adore
them for gods, whom thy knew had been infamous wicked men, so they desired to
find some, that should give them knowledge of another God, more worthy to be
worshipped, then they were: They knew likewise by the light of nature, that
there ought not to be many gods, but one God only. So that Dionise having this
desire, and S. Paul coming to encounter him, he fled not from the combat, but
did rather (helped by God) follow the Apostle, with out resistaunce, and by
Baptism was made a Christian. There were others also converted, but S. Dionise
did surpass them all in virtuous and holy works: for which cause, the Apostle
made him priest and also Bishop of that city.

S. Dionise was the first Bishop that Athens had, and that was great glory unto
the city, because it had brought up, and given learning unto her first pastor.
This holy saint had private friendship, and conuersed a long time with the
Divine Hierotheus, a Spaniard borne, (after the opinion of many Autors.) who
was instructed in like manner by S. Peter in divine letters, and there upon he
was called Divine. S. Dionise confesses that he was his instructor, and that
of him he learned the knowledge of holy writ. This holy saint understanding
that the Blessed Virgin was yet alive in Jerusalem, had a great desire to see
her; and so he went thither and saw her. Hubertinus recounteth of him that
seeing the great brightness of her face, her heavenly beauty her celestial
words, and the great company of Angels that attended upon her, he said of
himself; that he had adored her for God, if by faith he had not known, there
could be none, but only one God. The same S. Dionise relates, how he was
present at her glorious passage out of this to everlasting life, and reckons
the names of the Apostles there present also.

He returned to Athens, where he continued, exercising his office of pastor,
and in converting souls unto God, until the last year of the reign of Nero,
in the which he went to Rome, to see his master S. Paul, at whose martyrdom
he was present, as he says in an epistle of his to S. Timothee, who was also
the disciple of S. Paul. Then he returned unto Athens; where he stayed until
S. Clement the disciple of S. Peter came to be Pope; who beholding in S.
Dionise good qualities, enjoined him to go and preach the faith of CHRIST in
Gallia, now called France, and adioined unto him a priest called Rusticus,
and Eleutherius a deacon.

S. Dionise thus accompanied went into Gallia, and came unto Lutetia, now
called Paris, which city he found to be great and rich, populous, and furnished
abundantly, both from Heaven and earth: the climat very temperate, producing
noble and haughty minds; the earth very fertile, bringing forth all things
necessary for the body. S. Dionise reputed it even another Athens, as Divining
it should be both in literature and study, such as it after wards came to be.
He resolved to make his abode it that place, and began to open his heavenly
breast, and show the riches enclosed therein, by preaching the Gospel. He added
to his words many great miracles and wonders: as restoring their sight unto
the blind, hearing to the deaf, and speech to the domb; curing many also of
sundry other infirmities. Wherefore in a short space (such was his fame) he
grafted in that place most fertile plants and there made a garden, which
brought forth quickly abundaunce of fruit. He not only preached JESUS CHRIST
in that city; but also blessed, and sent his disciples, to preach in sundry
costs of the world. He sent S. Eugenius the first prelate of Toledo a great
city of Spain, into that country: where he preached the Gospel, and
converted many unto the Christian faith. Some others were sent into Germany:
who likewise gained many souls unto God yea, not only many men were converted,
and made Christians; but also the temples of the Idols were razed to the
gorund: and moreover, many Churches built; where the name of JESUS CHRIST was
lauded and praised.

This was a great torment to the devil the deadly foe of mankind: wherefore he
incensed diverse to persecute S. Dionise, imagining, that with taking away his
life, all this would fade and vanishe like smoke, and the adoration of Idols
would return to its former estate and credit. So some of his ministers,
instigated by him, went to Rome, to certefy themperor Traian thereof, as Suidas
and other Authors affirm, though Metaphrastes says it was unto Domitian, who
in his deeds was a devil incarnate. it may be these complaints were addressed
unto Domitian, and that he meant to send Fessenius Sisinius the governor of that
province, to apprehe^d S. Dionise, or put him to death; and that Domitian
deceasing in the mean space, and the Senate reuoking, and repealing all the
decrees of that bloody tirant, the execution of this decree was stayed until
the time of Traian, unto whom new complaints of Dionise being come, he revived
the decree made by Domitian, upon which Fessenius caused the B. Bishop to be
apprehended. S. Dionise was. 90. years of age, when he with Rusticus and
Eleutherius were taken.

The governor discoursed a long time with them accusing S. Dionise very much
for preaching of new gods, against the edict of the emperor, and Senate of Rome;
and for laboring to extinguish the adoration of the ancient Gods, so much
renowned in the world; gods which had bin so favorable to the Romain empire,
as to extend and enlarge their dominion over all the world. Have compassion, o
Dionise, (said the governor) of this they old age; And make some recompense for
the harm thou have done. Confess they errors, and recant thy opinions; which
be vain, and with out all foundation; persuade the people to abandon these new
fangles, and return to their former vsages. S. Dionise hearing this, repleat
with the zeal of Gods honor, answered; that he had persuaded many to leave the
adoration of the Gods, knowwing it to be a vain and foelish thing, to account
those for gods, who were unworthy to be called men, their wickedness and infamy
was such, when they lived: that it was a great blindness to adore stocks and
stones, and pieces of wood; that what he had preached, was very true,
concerning JESUS CHRIST his being true God; and that neither fear, nor threats,
nor torments should move him, or stur his fellows from their faith.

The governor was angry at this answer, and arose on a rage out of his chair
and said: The Gods be despised, the Emperor disobeied and his subjects and
people seduced by your forceries, in doing false and counterfeit miracles.
These your transgressions deserve a rrigorous punishment, wherefore I give
sentence, that you be forth with put to death.

SS. Dionise, Rusticus, and Euleutherius not showing any the least sign or
token of fear, or baseness of mind, said with a cheerful countenance: Let
them, that adore your Gods, be like unto them; we only adore the God of heaven;
and by his power, and not by sorcery, we have restored sight to the blind,
speech to the do^b, health unto the sick, and freed many that were posessed
with the devil. Let the ministers of the Idols do such things if they can, to
conserve their credit and estimation: but they are far from working such
wonders, whose Idols have mouths, yet cannot speak; have eyes, and see not;
they have ears, and hear not. They do only kindle and nourish the fire,
wherein they themselfs burn; and they that serve them, shall be partakers thereof
with them.

These words put the governor into a further chafe, so that he confirmed the
sentence of death and committed them to the hands of the executioners. So the
glorious martirs were led forth of the city, to the top of a high hill, where
they were to be executed. Then S. Dionise kneeled down, and lifting up his
eyes and hands unto heaven, said: O Lord God omnipotent, JESUS CHRIST son of
God, Holy Ghost the comforter, holy and undivided Trinity, receive in peace the
souls of thy servants; who, for thy sake, do loose our life's. Rusticus and
Eleutherius answered with a loud voice. Amen. After this the venerable and B.
Prelat S. Dionise bad the headsman to do his office. And he being ready, began
with him, and then went to Rusticus and lastly to Eleutherius, and cut of all
their three heads in that order.

Although God permitted these his servants to be put to death, as is above
said, yet was not he forget full of them; yea because he would the more glorify
them, and not suffer their bodies to be dishonored, his will was to work a
wonderful miracle in that place. The headles body of S. Dionise arose on his
feet, and took up in his hand his own head, and went, as it were in manner of
triumph, until it met a virtuous woman, coming out of her own house, not
far distant from the place, where the holy saints were martired. The body of
S. Dionise being come unto that place, where the woman was, delivered his head
unto her, as a precious treasure, and she also receued it as a most goodly
Jewel.

The bodies of SS. Rusticus and Eleutherius continued still in the place of
execution, and the headsman and the other officers talked and devised to cast
them into the river, to be devoured by the fihses, and with all to bereave the
Christians of them, who as they knew well, would reverence and esteem them very
much.

A woman called Ca^ulla, who had bin a defender and helper of S. Dionise and
his companions in this persecution; heard of their wicked design and
intention, and invited the headsman and the officers unto her house, to make
good cheer, and accordingly, did set meat and drink before them. In the mean
space, she sent for certain Christians secretly, who conuayed away and hid the
bodies of the holy martirs. When the officers, and headsman had eaten their
fill, they went out to look for the bodies of the blessed saints, to have put
in practice their lewd design: and not finding them, they streightwaies made a
tumult, and threatened exceedingly such, as had stolen them away: but the
discreet woman appeased them with gifts, and with fair words, and so they
departed quietly away.

The Christians laid the bodies of the holy saints in a private house, without
the walls of Paris; and after certain years there was builded for them a goodly
sumptuous and stately Church; where they now do rest. They who do visit their
holy relics, do obtain many graces by the intercession of these holly martirs.

The death of these holy saints fell on the same day, that the Church
celebrateth the same, viz: on the 9. of October, in the year of our Lord. 96.
in the time of Domitian, or Traian, as others say. S. Dionise was. 90. years
old, when he was martired, as Trithemius says. He wrote certain books
replenished with merueillous and profound doctrine, viz: De Ecclesiastica, and
Caelesti hierarchia, De mistica Theologia, De diuinis moninibus. and others,
out of which, the faithful belee^ers reap no les fruit of his doctrine, them
the former had gathered by the good example of his holy life: as the third
Countell of Constantinople affirms, in which place, 6. Sinod. Co^sta^tinop.
they were acknowledged for his books, and were highly esteemed.

The life of S. Callistus Pope and martyr.
SOLOMON says in Ecclesiasticus, cap. 37.
The abstine^^ man increases the days of his life. This sentence is verified
in Gallen the prince of phisike and medicine. who living 140. years, and being
asked how and by what means he lived so long, answered; I never rose from the
table satiate and full. More are they that die by furfet, and to much, then by
abstinence and too little. This being considered by the B. Pope Callistus, he
ordained the fast, called the Ember, by commanding the faithful, that in the
four times of the year, viz: the Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, they
should fast three days in one week, in every one of these quarters. and
likewise in those days, pray unto God, that he would give, and conserve the
fruits of the earth: and also, that prayer may be made unto God for them that
take holy orders at those times. Also, as the church says in a prayer: fasting
was instituted, for the good of body and soul, being unto them both a
wholesome medicine. oration Quadrag. The life of this holy Pope was written by
Damasus, and other Authors, in this manner.

BY the death of S. Zepherinus Pope and martyr, Callistus the first of that
name was placed in the Chair of S. Peter. He was borne in Rome, and was the
son of Domitius. He builded a Church in the honor of the glorious virgin,
which is called Santa Maria trans Tiberim: though, as Pla^^na says it cannot
be that which is so called at this present; because at that time, the
Christians had not such large liberty, as to build sumptuous Churches. yea
those which they had were little, mean, and private as this was then, because of
the persecutions, but Gregory the 3. enlarged it. and before him Pope
Siluester, the first, that builded publik Churches.

Pope Callistus at this own cost, caused to be made a Churcheyard in the way
called Appia (which is called the Churchyard of Callistus,) where many martirs
are buried. In this Churchyard was afterward built the Church of S. Sebastian.
therein are conserved many relics, and many alters, and little chapples are
under the ground, where masses were said, in great secrecy, for fear of the
Pagans. This same Pope, as is before said, ordained the feast of the Qua^uor
tempora, or Ember days. And because the giving of holy orders was used to be
done, but once in the year; which then was not sufficient: for that the number
of the faithful was very much augmented; it was also necessary to increase the
number of priests and Deacons. and so it was permitted to give holy orders at
those four times of fasting.

Callistus for bad all faithful believers to participate or converse with
persons excommunicate: and also commanded: that no excommunicate person should
be absolved, Cap. Consang. 3 q. 4.
except the cause was first heard, and the party satisfied. He also was the
first, who prohibited matrimony between kinsfolks, and appointed the same
consanguinity until the seventh degree, though it after was limited to the
fourth degree, as it is at this present. This good Pope governed the Church of
God virtuously 6. years. 2. months and 10. days, in the which he gave holy
orders five times in the month of December, and ordered 8. Bishops. 16.
priests and four deacons; and then was martired.

Vsuardus recounteth his martyrdom in this ensuing manner, sa^eng: That the
Emperor Alexander Seuerus, having kept him long in prison, caused many
bastanadoes to be given him, allowing him with all very little sustenaunce, and
lastly, he caused him to be thrown out of a window of the prison, and in that
sort, he yielded up his soul unto God. The Church celebrateth his feast, on
the. 14. day of October, which was the same day he was martired, in the year of
our Lord. 224.

It is to be noted that S. Leo the Pope in his 8. sermon, which he made of the
feast of the tenth month, speaking of the four times of Ember says. It was a
commandment derived from the Holy Ghost. Gemb. Su^ma Commit.
The Council of Magunce held about the year of our Lord 813. in the 34.
chapter, speaking likewise of the four Ember days says, it was the
institution of the Roman Church, and names not Callistus.

But the one and the other of these authorities is not against that which is
here written. for if S. Leo say, that this fast was derived from the holy
Ghost, we may say, it is true: and yet the introducing thereof into the Church
was by the means of this good Pope Callistus. And where the Council says: it
was instituted by the Roman Church, the meaning is; that some Pope brought it
in use, which of necessity must be a holy man, and of a very ancient time.

The life of S. Luke the Evangelist.
THE Apostle S. Paul writing to the Romans, Romans 1.
says of himself: I am debtor to the wise, and to the foolish; to the prudent,
and to the ignorant; to the le^ned, and to the unlearned. Into this debt fall
all the preachers and masters, that teach and preach JESUS CHRIST. They be
bound to satisfy the wise and the ignorant, giving to every one of them meat
agreeable to their necessity; that they may profit all, by applieng themselfs to
every one in the matters they treat of, and in the business, they have in hand.
S. Luke the Evangelist discharged very well this duty: for he instructed the
wise and the ignorant, giving to every one books, out of which to learn their
due^y.

The use of Images in the Church is approved by the Church, as holy and
profitable. Among other the vtilities thereof, this is one; that Images are the
books of the ignorant and unlettered: for in them they see that painted, which
other men read in books. So S. Luke writing the Gospel did satisfy the
learned and wise: and being a conning painter, he painted some Images, wherewith
he satisfied the simple, and the unlettered. By these two means, he that
before was a physician, and cured corporal infirmities, did afterward cure and
heal the maladies of the mind of many, who were saved; being turned to
Christianity, and the service of God by his means.

The life of this holy Evangelist was written by some grave Authors, and among
others Simeon Metaphrastes, whom I principally follow.

THe city of Antioch has always been renoumed among the faithful, for that
they took the name of Christians in that place, whereas before they which
professed the Gospel and faith of JESUS CHRIST, were called disciples. In
this city was S. Luke borne of noble parents. Form his childhood he was
inclined unto virtue, he loved chastity right well, for he observed it all his
life. He was such an enemy unto Idleness, that even in his childhood, because he
would not be idle, he gave himself to study the Greek tongue. Then he passed to
the study of philosophy, and physic, and when he found himself dulled with
study, he used for his recreation to paint. And though any of these studies
require a man's whole atte^tion, yet had wit, that he proved a good philsopher,
an excellent physician, and a famous painter.

The report of the miracles of CHRIST coming to Antioch, S. Luke thought, that
if the fame was true, he deserved, that people should go and see him from the
vt most parts of the earth. but he, especially being a physician, hearing it
reported, that JESUS healed the sick so easily, peradventure had a greater
desire to see him, then others, and in case it was done by art, and might be
learned, to be tought by him. He went to Jerusalem, and heard some of his
sermons, which made such impression in his mind, that although he was very rich
in posessions, and worldly goods, and that he saw them, that followid him,
forsook all, and that other wise they were not admitted into his school,
desiring yet to be his disciple, and to keep in his company, he left and
abandoned all his worldly goods and posessions, as easily, as one would have
shaken the dust from his feet, when they are to be washed. So he came into his
B. company, and Jesus received him to be his disciple, and so he remained, and
was partaker of many mysteries, which our Lord wrought in the world.

He was sent to preach when the other disciples were sent by two and two into
sundry costs. He was in Jerusalem at such time, as our B. savior died. And for
that he had heard him say, that he would rise again the third day, he stayed
till then, on which day he (according to the opinion of some Authors) being
accompanied with another disciple called Cleophas, determined to journey from
Jerusalem unto the castle of Emaus, being. 60. furlongs from thence. Brocard.
in descrip. tenae. sancth Cap. 7.5 5.
Which they did to secure themselfs of the inminent danger, and also to be
informed by passengers of some events. They went in this journey discontent,
talking together of the things which had befallen in Jerusalem, and whilst
they talked, JESUS appeared to them in the shape of a traveler, and kept them
company.

In their communication and conference, he reproved them for their little faith,
and instructed the^ in many things, and reduced to their memory many sayengs of
the prophets, which showed, that CHRIST must suffer and die, and then rise
again. finally, being come near the castle; he made as though he would go
further, but at their request, he stayed still with them. And being set at the
table, they knew by breaking of bread, that he was JESUS, who was risen again.
They returned speedily to Jerusalem to bring this good news unto the Apostles,
and there, and in their company, they saw him ageine. S. Luke was present
likewise, when our Lord ascended into heaven, and at the coming of the holy
Ghost.

After this he stayed in Jerusalem certain years with S. John the Evangelist,
in the company of the mother of God, until S. Paul was converted, and came to
Jerusalem. S. Luke grew into great friendship is thought) because they were
both learned, though they studied different faculties as likewise the cause of
the friendship of S. Barnabas with the same S. Paul, was; because both of them
had studied together in Jerusalem and had been scholars unto Gamaliel. S. Luke
being then in the company of S. Paul, went with him in his long
peregrinations, and was partaker of his trauells.

Of S. Luke S. Paul makes mention in his epistles to Tymothee, Tym. 4.
saying: Luke only is with me; and to the Colossians he says: Coloss. 4.2.
Cor. 9.
Luke my dearly beloved saluteth you And to the Corinthians, he says: I send
to you Titus, and a brother, (meaning S. Luke) whose praise is in the Gospel
in the Churches: and not that only, but he is deputed as a companion of our
peregrination, by all the Churches. S. Matthew being among the Hebrews had
written his Gospel in the Hebrew tongue; and S. Mark remaining in Rome among
the Romans, in Latin. S. Luke wrote his in Greek, because he preached among
the Greeks. It is said: that at all times, that S. Paul says in his epistles,
After my Gospel, Ierom. de scri. eccles.
he means of the Gospel of S Luke, for that he wrote it being in his company.

S. Dorotheus B. of Tyrus says, that S. Luke wrote his Gospel by the
apointment of S. Peter, and not of S. Paul, because he says in the beginning
thereof; that he wrote it by the relation of them, who saw it from the
beginning: and S. Paul did not so. This holy man wrote also another treatise,
which is called the Acts of the Apostles. In the beginning of which he speaks
of the Ascension of CHRIST into heaven, and of the coming of the holy Ghost.
Then speaks he of the miracles and preach^^g of the Apostles, of their
persecutions, the death of S. Stephen, the conversion of S. Paul, the death of
S. James the Great, and the imprisonment and escape of S. Peter. After this he
goes on with (...) peregrinations of S. Paul, his persecutions and trauells,
of all which he himself bore no little part, and goes on, till he leaves S.
Paul in Rome.

Then S. Luke departing from thence returned into the Orient, traueled over a
great part of Asia, and arrived in Egypt. He visited Thebais the higher and the
lower, in all places preaching the faith of CHRIST, sand conuer^ing souls in
every place, where soever he went. At the end of his peregrination, he came to
the great city of Thehais, and was the prelate and pastor thereof: and as such a
one labored to destroy the Idols, and to build Churchs. Which he might the
better do, by reason of the great multitude that receued the faith of CHRIST,
and were Baptized, by hearing his exhortations. S. Luke remained there many
years, ordered bishops and priests, whom he sent into diverse countries to
preach: In such sort, that this province brought forth many good plants worthy
of the eternal life.

This holy Evangelist catied alwais with him two Images he had made himself:
the one of our B. Savior, and the other of his B. mother; which were good
means to convert the Painims, for that not only he did miracles with them, but
all they that saw them, were moved to great devotion. These two Images were so
like the one to the other, that he, which did not know whose pictures they
were, might yet easily know, that there was some near kindred between the two
persons represented by them. To conclude, the holy Evangelist being 84. years
old, passed from this mortal unto the eternal life.

Nicephorus Callistus in his ecclesiastical history says: that S. Luke died a
martyr in Grecia, and that he was hanged on a Olive true; lib 2. Cap. 43.
but it is commonly holden, that he died a natural death. The same Author, and
others with him, say: that Constantin the son of Constantin the Great by the
means of one Artemius, who whas after ward a glorious martyr, brought to
Constantinople, the bodies of S. Andrew from Patrasso a city of Achaia (though
at this time, the body be at Amalphi a city of the kingdom of Naples in Italy)
of S. Timotheus from Ephesus in Asia, and S. Luke from Thebes where it
remained. and that he builded a sumptuous Church to lay in all the said blessed
bodies. Now the citisens of Padoa say; that they have the body of S. Luke the
Evangelist in their city, in the Church of S. Iustina.

The Church celebrateth the feast of S. Luke on the day, whereon he died, which
was on the. 18. day of October, in the year of our Lord. 90. and in the reign
of Domitian as Canisius accounts. *

The life of S. Hilarion the Abbot.
THE Apostle S. Peter, Cap. 4.
in his fiirst Canonical epistle, has one sentence fear full for the good,
and dreadful to the evil viz: If the just shall scant be saved, what shall
become of the sinner? If he that has served God all his life does tremble at
the hour of death, what shall he do, who has bin a wicked man, and is a
sinner, at that dreadful hour?

This was verified in S. Hilarion the Abbot, who being at the point of death,
felt a great fear in his ^oule, but he encouraging it, said: Depart my soul
out of my body: of what art thou afraid? thou have served CHRIST 70. years; and
do thou now fear to die? The life of this holy Abbot was written by S. Jerome
in this sort.

SAINT Hilarion was borne in Tabata five miles from the city of Gaza in
Palestina. His father and mother were both Idollaters, so that he grew as a
rose among thorns. Being a little child, he was sent to study in Alexandria. in
which place, he made demonstration of his rare towardlines, and inclination
unto goodness, rare wit, and moral virtues, which caused all men that knew
him, to love him. But he was much more beloved of God, for in that place he
atteined unto the knowledge of the Christian faith, which he received, and was
Baptized. So that he, who before was only accounted a virtuous man, was now
such a one in verity, and in deed, and delighted in nothing, but in virtuous
actions, and the service of God, spending the greater part of his life in the
Church, and in the company of godly priests: and by means of them, he came to
the knoweledg of S. Antony, who dwelt in the desert, and amazed all worldly men
to see and hear of his strict life, and his sanctity in confounding the
devils, in which he reioiced the heavenly court.

Hilarion had a great desire to see him in the desert, which when he had done,
he changed his ordinary clothes, and put on such weeds as the mo^ks that were
in the company of S. Antony wore, with whom he also stayed two months: In this
time, he marked the order of his life, his gravity in behauior, his incessant
prayer, his humility in the entertainment of straingers, his severity in
correcting offenders, the austerity he used toward his body in diet, apparel,
and sleeping. he saw the multitudes of people, which came from all costs unto
him, to obtein remedy and help for all manner of necessities, by his
intercession and prayers. Hillarion thought, that this was the beginning of the
reward of the long endured travels of Anthony; and that he should do well to
follow his steps. This being determined, he returned into his country, where
the found his father and mother deceased, wherefore he divided his patrimony,
and bestowed part on his brethren, and part on the poor, having in mind these
words of CHRIST: He that does not renounce all that he posesseth, cannot be my
disciple. At that time Hillarion was 15. years old, and by this means being
poor, yet accompanied by CHRIST, he went unto a desert place, which was
haunted by robbers. Wherefore, they that heard of his boldness, wondered thereat;
and told him, in what danger he was like to be, by dwelling there: but he
feared no temporal peril, to escape eternal death.

This holy saint was of a weak complexion, slender and lean, but in mind he
prepared himself to endure all manner of heat and cold, though it afflicted him
never so much: nevertheless he was clothed with a ^ackcloth, upon which he
wore a garment like a mantle, wouen with rough hair of beasts, as of camels;
this S. Antony gave him at his departure from him. His diett was this: after
the setting of the son, he took 15. fruits of Carica, which is a fruit
peculier to Siria, much like figgs. but because as it has bin said above, many
robbers dwelt in those deserts, he stayed not long in a place, so that he had
no cell.

Lucifer being much aggreiued to see himself so over maistred by a monk, before
he had began war against him, began now to molest him with sundry
temptations. He represented unto him filthy and lascivious things, so that the
servant of God was enforced to think of that which he knew not; and to have
that in his imagination which he had never proved nor tried. He was wroth with
himself, and knocked his breast at this, thinking he was able by force to
vanquish this temptation with blows; he was enraged against his own body, and
said unto it: Thou Ass, I will so use thee, that thou shall not kick: for I
will take thy prouender from thee, and I will give thee no meat but straw. I
will quell thee with hunger and thirst, and will lay heavy loads on thy back. I
will torment thee with heat and cold, and will make thee to have more mind of
thy meat, then of thy pleasure. This said the blessed young man, and as he said,
so he did. for the continued some times 3. or 4. days with out meat; and yet
he labored hard in digging the ground, not entending to sow any grain
thereon; but only to get out the thorns and evil herbs, that budded in his
own body. He also made baskets of bulrushes, as the monks of Egypt used to do,
yet not omitting for it his oraisons; wherein he spent the greatest part of the
night and day. When he felt his body faint and weak by travel, he took
ordinary diet, which was a few wild herbs, and whilst he eat, he said to his
body: Take heed my body: for thou shall not eat, before thou do faint: and
for that thou now do eat, prepare thee, and fall to thy labor. By this
course, he brought his body to such a state, that he had nothing on it, but
skin and bone.

The holy hermit was one night at his prayers, and he heard the crieng of
children, the weeping of women, the alarums of armies, the bleating of sheep,
the bellowing of bulls, the roaring of lions, the hissing of serpents, and
sundry voices of different monsters. At the first hearing, he was some what
affrighted therewith: but calling to his mind the craft of the devil, he fell
flat on the ground, and made the sign of the Cross. And as he looked on
either side, if with his eis he could discern what it was that he had heard
with his ears; (the moon shining bright,) he saw sodeinly, a chariot drawn
by furious horses, who made a show, to kick, and run over him. The holy
young man with a zealous and fervent voice, called on JESUS, and in an instant
he saw the earth to open and to swallow the chariott, and there with departed
the noise and fear the chariott made. The blesssed man rendered thanks to God,
saing that which the Israelits said, when the red sea over whelmed and drownes
Pharao and all his host. Viz: Our Lord has drowned in the sea, the horse and
the horseman.

Many other were the temptations where with the devil did try him, Sometimes
as he lay resting on the earth, to give a little repose unto his afflicted body,
there was presented before his face naked women, an other time, when he was
mollested with famine there appeared unto him most costly tables, covered and
laden with many delicate viands, If he was at his prayers, wolfs seemed to go
about him houling, If he song himnes in prais of our Lord, he saw some braule
or fray made before him, and some of them seemed to be dead at his feet, seeming
to say: Burime.

On time being at his prayers, and some what distracted, as thinking upon some
thing not belonging to his oraisons, there came close to him a grime and stern
fellow, like unto those they call Sword players, in Rome, and gave him two
terrible kicks on the sides with his feet, and then with a whippe, lashed him
on the shoulder, saying to him; Holla what now? why do thou sleep. and
having said this, laughed out of measure. And having thus soundly beat him,
said to him ageine: Will thou have a little barley: but Hillarion said not a
word unto him.

This holy saint from the age of 16. unto 20. (to defend his body from the cold
and from the beams of the sun, in the place where he stayed) used the
shelter of a little cottage made of bulrushes, and of another prickled herb
called Carica. from that time afterward, he builded a little Cell, which as S.
Jerome says, stood until his time: and was 4. foot wide, and 5. foot high,
so that it was some what lower then he was, and some what longer the^ his body
was So that it is was more like the grave of a dead body, then the lodging of a
living man.

It was his usage to cut the hear of his head once every year, and that at
Easter. He slept upon a bundle of bulrishes laid on the bare ground, and had no
other bed, all the days of his life. He never changed the sackcloth, which he
once put on: nor ever mended it, for he said, it was a thing superfluous to
seek finenes in a sackcloth. He had by heart the greatest part of the holy
scripture, and after he had said many psalms and himnes, he recited a great
part thereof by order, and alwais continued in devout and reverent behavior;
for that he considered God allwais present, and speaking with him.

He used to alter his diet according to his years. in some years he eat
lentills steeped in cold water, at another time he eat bred only steeped in
water with a little salt, at another time herbs and roots were his only
sustenaunce, and another season he did eat every day six ounces of barley
bread with some little pittance of sodden herbs. when he came to be feeble and
weak, he put a few olives upon the herbs, and this was dainty meat. And thus
he spent the time until he was 63. years old. from this time unto 80. he would
eat no bread, nor any other thing, but a certain meat made of flowe^, and of
stamped herbs mingled together, which served him both for meat and drink.

This thing may cause men rather to wonder, then to put any in hope to be able
to imitate him, because the grace of God strengthened him, and the long use of
thereof, and abstinence in his youth from all carnality, which debilitateth the
body, made it to him more easy, and more able to live such an austere life;
wherein he merited much: and perhaps an other man should offend God by
shortening his days in doing the same.

S. Hillarion living now in his cabin, the thieues had notice, and came to
him, but seeing the estate he was in; they said unto him scoffingly: What
would thou do, to see they self assailed by thieues? He answered: The poor
and naked man fears not the thief. They replied: At left thou may lose they
life: And he said: It is true, they may deprive me thereof, but I care not a
bean, if they do so at this present. The thieues were astonished and amassed to
hear his words, and to see his constancy, which might have been a motive for
them to amend their life spent in wickedness, seeing a man, that had chosen
rather to lead such a straight life, then to fall into any offense toward God.
Hilarion lived in this manner. 22. years, and was known in all the Land of
Palestina.

Upon a day a woman came unawares unto him, and fell at his feet, she
perceiving, that he seemed to be displeased to see her in that place, and to
make signs, to have her depart, she shed many rears, and said unto him; Oh
Servant of God, pardon my presumtion, and boldness, for my great afflictions
enforce me so to do. Do not shun me, turn thy eyes of pity toward me:
behold me not as a woman, but as a person afflicted. Remember that a woman was
mother unto our B. Savior. They that be hole have no need of the physician,
but they that be sick. At the words S. Hilarion stayed, and asked of her, the
cause of her coming thither, and why she wept. The woman made answer: That
this, 15. years she had been married, and never had child, for: which cause her
husband determined to depart from her, and leave her desolate. The holy saint
lifted up his eyes unto heauin, and prayed for her, and so dismissed her. After
a year that same woman returned to visi^e him, with her son in her arms,
which God had given her, at the prayers of S. Hilarion, and this was the first
miracle, that God showed by him.

After this fellowed another mroe wonderful: viz: A noble lady returned home
from visiting S. Antony with her three little sons, and being come unto Gaza,
all three fell sick there, and died, whether it was by the change of the air,
or whether God would have it for the honor of S. Hilarion. The disconforted
mother seeing such a desolation in her house, was in manner, out of her wits,
and called unto mind, one whiles one son, another time, the other son, and
knew not which of them to bewail first. And hearing that in the desert, nere
unto the city, Hilarion did Dwell, came unto him accompanied with two hand
maies, and said unto him with unspeakable grief: I beseech thee o holy man by
JESUS CHRIST, by his sacred blood to come with me, unto the city of Gaza, and
raise my three sons, lying dead in that place, which thing will be for the
glory of God, and the confusion of the Idollaters.

S. Hil^rion refused to do it, saying, it was not his usage to go into the
city, no not out of his Cell: but the woman weeping bitterly, said: o Servant
of God, give me thy three sons, whom Antony has seen alive in Egypt, cause,
that I and thou may see the^ alive also in Siria. The people present heating
the woman's words, wept abundantly; and so did S. Hilarion, who vanquished with
the tears of the woman, went into the city of Gaza, at son set and called
one the name of JESUS upon the dead chileren, who arose incontinent, and gave
thanks unto the holy saint, and all the company rendered infinite praised unto
God. This miracle was diuulged in many places, wherefore much people resorted,
only to see the holy man. And many that were heathens and pagans by the only
sight of him, receued the Christian faith, and took the order of monastical
life, and stay with him. There had not been before his time any monks in
Siria, so that S. Hilarion was the first bringer of that holy institution, and
to live in monasteries, in to those parts.

There was brought to him a woman, who had been blind ten years, and had spent
all her goods in phisike: which when S. Hillarion understood, he said unto her.
It would have done thee more good to have given all thy possessions unto the
poor, because JESUS CHRIST would have cured thee. When he had said this, he
laid a little of his spittle upon her eyes, and incontinent she recovered her
fight perfectly.

There was in Gaza, a Chariott man posessed with the devil, who had left
nothing free in him, but his tongue. This poor man was brought to S. Hillarion,
who said unto him: Believe in JESUS CHRIST, and use this trade no more, which
is perilous for thee, thou being of an impatient nature: And he promised so to
do; and instantly he was hole and sound, both in body and mind.

Another man called Marsitas was able and did carry on his back 15. bushells of
corn, and was in great estimation for it, for there was never an ass in all
Siria, that was able to carry such a load. Into this man the devil entered, and
made him so fierce, that he did much harm, and it was in vain to bind him
with cords, or chains, for he brake them all in sonder. One while he assailed
this man, another time that man; and with his teeth did bite of the nose of
some, and the ears of others. He was led unto S. Hillarion in such sort, as
men use to lead a bull, when he goes to be baited. When the monks saw him,
they were all afraid, because he was a man of a great stature, of a terrible
aspect, and of a grimme countenance. S. Hillarion commanded them to unloose all
his bands, and to take of all his fetters he wore. When he was untied, he said
unto him: Come hither unto me. Marsitas trembled and held down his head, and
fell at his feet and licked them with his ^oung, all his former fiercenes being
vanished away. The Blessed man kept him seven days in his company, and made
continual prayers unto God for him, and to conclude, perfectly cured him.

There was brought also unto him another man posessed with the devil, whose
name was Orion, a very rich man, who had a legion of Devils in him. S.
Hillarion expounding a passage of holy writ unto his monks, the roan posessed
came on a soodein, and flipping out of the hands of them that led him, ran
toward the holy saint, and took him up in his arms, and hoised him aloft in
the air. All that were present, cried out, fearing he would cast the holy man
down hedlong, being weak and feeble with continual fasting. but Hillarion
with a cheerful countenance said: Let me deal alone with this lusty
wrastler, and turning up his hand, took him by the hear of the head, and threw
him unto the ground, and then set his feet on him, yea, he trod and spurned
him with his feet, saying: Here ye shall be tormented, ye accursed dinells; the
poor man yelling and houling, and turning his face toward the ground. And S.
Hillario^ said unto God: Ah my Lord, deliver this wretch, unloose this man that
is bound, it is as easy for thee to vanquish and overcome many, as one.

In this space were hard to come out of the mouth of this wretch sundry and
diverse voices, like a confused shout or noise of people, but lastly, he was
made hole and ^ound. and within a few days after, he came unto the monastery
with his wise and children, and brought presents unto the man of God, who said
unto him, have not thou read, what befell unto Giezi, 4. Reg. 5. Act. 4.
and unto Simon magus, the one sold the grace and gift of the holy ghost, and
the other desired to buy it, and both of them were punished severely for their
sin. If thou know so much, return unto thy house with thy gifts, for I
will not take them Oryon wept and said: father receue them, and give them unto
the poor.

S. Hilarion replied: Thou may do that better then I, for thou dwell in
the city, and know them that be needy: I have forsaken all mine own goods:
unto what end should I take care or charg of other men's? I know, that unto
many, the name of a poor man is an occasion of avarice. there is none, that
gives better unto the poor then he that reserueth nothing for himself. Oryon
was much discomforted at his words, and lay prostrat on the grount before him.
wherefore the blessed Abbot said unto him. My son, be not aggreiued or
afflicted at it, for that which I do for my self, I do also for thy good: If I
should receive thy gifts, I should offend God, and the legion of devils should
return into thee again.

In the city of Gaza, there was a young maid of good life, on whom a young man
was enammored. This man endeavoring by all means possible, to draw her to his
will, and nothing prevailing, went unto Memphis and made his mind known unto
the inchaunters and sorceres of the temple of Esculapius. They gave him a plate
of brass, wherein were graven dreadful figures, and bad him lay it vnter the
threshold of the damosells door, and to cover it with earth, and then to say
certain words, which they taught him. Upon this, the damsel took such
affection unto him, and was so fond, that it was rather madness then love, for
she called fot him, with aloude voice, she scratched her face, rent her hear,
and did other follish and rauing tricks:

The father of the damsel brought her to be helped, unto S. Hilarion, and the
devil who tormented here, howled and said: I have been enforced to come hither,
I was well in Memphis. Alas how great be the torments, I endure? thou do
command me, to come forth, and to depart, and I am bound under the threshold
of the door, in a plate of brass. I cannot depart from hence, until the young
man, who has set me here, do unloose me. S. Hillarion said unto him; Is thy
force then such, that a plate of brass does keep thee in bondag? Tell me now,
why art thou so bold as to enter into this handmaid of our Lord? The devil
answered: I came in, to preserve her virginity, Ah villainy, said the holly
saint, would thou, that art the enemy of chastity, preserve her virginity?
Why did not thou take possession of him, who sent thee hither. The devil
replied: why should I do so, for he is a friend to the devil my companion.

To conclud, S. Hilarion delivered and set free the damsel, and would not
have the impediment the devil named, to be taken away, to show, that nether
magic, nor inchanntment are of power to or withstand the will of God. Then he
reproved the damsel for some light and wanton behauior, she had used; for
punishment whereof, God had permitted the devil to torment her.

S. Antony wrote some letters unto this holy saint, and reioiced to have
answer from him again. And if at any time there came any sick men to him from
Siria, he said unto them: Why do you fetch such long iourneis hither to me, and
have my son Hillarion in your own country?

There were now many Monasteries founded, and the holy man visited them at
usual times, and as he went to visit them one time in this manner, he came by
the way unto a territory called Elusan, and found them celebrating the feast of
their Goddess Venus, in her temple. When the people, though they were
Idollaters, went out to meet and receue him (for they had been much obliged
unto him for doing good unto many of them.) The holy saint enterteined them
lovingly, and wept for tenderness of heart, and looking steadfastly toward heaven,
besought them rather to adore JESUS CHRIST; then those stocks and stones; and
if they would do so he promised, he would come and visit them oftentimes.
These simple words void of retorike were so forcible with that rude nation,
that before he departed thence he set down a plott and the form, for the
building of a Church, and they moved him to make the heathenish priest, which
made sacrifice unto the goddess, a Christian, which thing they obtained.

The holy saint visiting the monasteries builded by his disciples, came unto
one, (whose governor was a covetous man) at the importunity of them that went
in his company. Now hard by the monastery there was a vineiard, and they
perceued that with in it there were many watchmen, to keep out those that came
with the holy man from entering the same, lest thy should meddle with the
grapes, that were ripe, having ^lings, with which they threw stones against his
company. S. Hillarion smiling thereat went unto another monastery of a good man,
who besought, yea importunated him to eat a few grapes, to refresh himself
being faint with his long journey. The holy old man said: Accursed is the man,
that seeks the refreshing of his body before that of his soul: Let us first
make our prayers, and pay our det, we own unto God, after that ye may go unto
vineiard. When God was served: S. Hillarion went unto a high place, and blessed
the vineiard, then he bad his flock to go and feed therein. The number of them,
that went, was little less then. 3000. for so many he had in his company; This
vineiard did usually every year yeald 100. measurs of wine, and. 20. days
ofter the people had eaten the grapes, the vintage was made, and it yielded that
year. 300. measures. But the covetous churl, who would not suffer any to enter
within his vineiard, had much less, then he used to have. and that little,
which he had, became sower, and then he repented (but to late) that he had been
so churlish and discourteous toward the holy saint. This blessed old man had a
gift of God, by the smell of bodies, of garments, and things, which any man
touched, to know the vices they had, and to what evil spirit they were
subject; and with what virtues they were adorned.

Being now fully. 6; years ole, and seeing the multitud of relligious men, that
were under his obedience, and the great concourse of people, that came to him
daily, to have remedy of their afflictions, he was much discontent there at,
and lamented for the same: His religious men askindg him the cause, he
answered them: It seems to me, being esteemed holy by men, that God has
rewarded me in this life, for the small service, I have done unto him. It
seems to me also, that I return unto the world, sins under the color of
susteining and mainteining the relligious men, there are presented unto me many
occasions of sin. His disciples hearing these words did watch him dilligently,
especially Isichius (for the great love and affection he bore unto him,)
fearing he would strale away from thence.

One a time a venerable matrone came to visit him, with intention to go
further, and visit S. Antony also. He understanding her intention, wept and
said unto her; I was also of that mind, if the government of this monastery
had not said and with head me, but now it is to late, for two dais since, the
worle is deprived of that worthy father: This matrone credited his words, and
went no further, and within a few days after came unto their ears, the news
of S. Antonies death.

It were a wonderful thing to consider the graces and gifes of this saint, his
miracles, his abstinence, and his profound humility. S. Jerome says of him: I
am amazed and astonished, to consider the great enmity Hillarion had with worlely
pomp and glory, and with the estimation of men. This blessed old man was
visited by priests by relligious men, by clerks, by all manner of people, and he
to fly from honor, which was dome unto him by every one, determined to depart,
and travel into some other country. When this was known, he was beset and
enuirouned with more, then 10000. persons, who besought him not to leave them
but he striking the earth With his walking staff, said: I cannot abide that my
God should be accounted a deceuier or a liar. I cannot endure to see the
Churchs demolished, the^ Altars trodden under feet, and my children slain with
the sword. By these words he said: many gathered, that God had revealed
vnto-him, some great evil and persecution that should ensew unto his brethren,
as it came to pase after, in the time of Julian the Apostata.

To conclude, the blessed man would not stay with them any longer: and told the
people, he would never eat bit of sustenannee if they did not permit him to go
quietly; and they hindering him, be would not eat any thing for seanen days
to geathey. They seeing his resolution to be such, permitted him to depart in
peace, thought it was much against their wills. and because the good old man
was so feeble that he could not travel on foot, he rode, and choose for to
keep him company. 40. monks whom he judged to be most abstinent. and most
prepared to abide travel and pain.

Passing with them through many countries, he at the last arrived at the Cell
of S. Antony. There he talked with the disciples left by that blessed man and
conforted them being sad for the death of the death of their master. He
recreated himself a while with them, in visiting diverse places which they
showed unto him. In this place (said they) S. Antony used to pray: here he
exercised himself in digging the earth: These trees were planted with his
hands: here he made the foun^ein handsome for their use with his own hands.
Then they showed him his Cell, the length whereof was fit to receue a man, lieng
out in length. They also rehearsed unto him some of his miracles S. Hillarion
demanded of two of those monks for the place of S. Antony his burial, they
only knowing it. It is not known, if they did show it unto him or no, because
S. Antony had commanded them, and bound them by oath, not to disclose it unto
any; and he did it, lest any man should honor, or reverence his body.

After the death of S. Anthony, for three years space, it had not rained in all
that province, wherefore the common people said it was, because the clements
lamented for the death of that blessed man. They besought S. Hilarion to pray
for them, which he did, and then it rayned. Wherefore he was for that benefit
highly esteemed among the people of that country, they saying: that God had
sent him unto them, in the steed of S. Anthony.

He departed from thence, and went to visit two holy Bishops Dracontius, and
Philo; who were banished from their churchs, by themperor Constantius, for that
they would not follow the heresy of Arrius. These holy bishops were comforted
much to see S. Hilarion, who departed from them, and went to Alexandria, and
was lodged by certain relligious men, near unto the city. When night came, he
saddled his little beast, meaning to depart, and when they asked of him, why he
would go a way thus suddenly, he aunsweted: lest my stay be the cause of some
great trouble.

On the next day it proved even so as he had said: for thither came officers of
the emperor Julian the Apostata, guided by some of the citisens of Gaza to
apprehend him, by order from that tirant; but when they found him not, they
wondered, saying; now we find it true, that has been said unto us of this man,
viz: that he is a coniurer and a sorcerer, knowing things to come. Behold: how
he is escaped out of our hands?

The B. Abbot went like a pilgrim in diverse countries, but he was easily
known, where soever he came, for men posessed with the devil discovered him.
He knew that Julian the renegat had made a search for him and his disciple
Isichius, with an intention to put them to death, if he had taken them. In
which, because he missed, he set their monastery on fire, and persecured the
monks with extreme rigor. But within a while after, the wicked emperor being
dead, and also Iouinian who lived a very short time, Valentinian succeeded in
the Empire.

S. Hilarion was entreated to return, and gather his monks together, and to
reedify his monastery which he would not do, but rather be took sea, to go and
dwell in some Islands uninhabited, that the sea might keep that secret, which the
land did diuulge and publish: but he could not be hid, for the people came
likewise unto him in that place also.

So he departed from that Island, and passed into Africa, and from thence into
Cycile, where he made his stay upon a cragey mountein In the day he made a
bundle of wood, and laid it on the back of one of this disciples, to carry unto
the next town to be sold and with the money arising thereof, they bought bread,
with the which, those few, that were with him, lived and sustenied their life's.
He could not live unknown in that place nether, for a man posessed with evil
spirit, in Rome, cried out and faid: Hilarion the servant of God is in Cycilc.
So that many diseased people came thither to recover their health by his means.

By cause he perceived himself honored in that place also, he departed, and
went into Dalmatia, where was a dragon that destroyed all the country devoured
the oxen and other beasts, and killed the husband men, and the shepheres. The
blessed, man having compassion on the people, caused a great stack and pile of
wood to be made, and when he had prayed: he commeunded the dragon to go upon
the stack of wood, and when he was on it, he bad the people set fire there unto,
and thus the dreadful dragon was brent and consumed with fire, in the sight of
all the people.

Then he determined to depart from that place also, for which cause, he was
embarked, and being on the sea he was assailed by pirates. His disciples with
the others, that were in the ship doubted they should be slain, but the good
man reproved them for distrusting in God. And Then standing on the deck, he
prayed, and stretchinh out his hard against the pirates, said: Come no further
this way: O strange and wonderful thing: at the saying of these words, they
turned aside, and returned back as swiftly, as though a strong gale of wind had
carried them away.

The sea was also obedient unto him: for at such time, as he was at Ragusium,
the sea swelled and rose out of measure, and so much, that the people of the
country feared all of them should be ouerflown and drowned. The blessed old man
took land, made the sign of the Cross in the sand, and held up his arms
against the storm, and the sea was assuaged, and ceased incontinent, to the
great admiration of all the country, who kept this deed in memory, and the
fathers used to tell the same unto their children.

Another time as he sailed, and not having any thing to pay for the freight, he
would have given unto the owner of the bark, a book, in the which he had
written the four Ghospells, with his own hand, which he alwais carried about
him: because he had cured before time the son of the master of the bark, he
would not receive the book of him, but he gave him his fare, and rendered unto
him infinite thanks for his former benefit.

Finally, this blessed old man remaining in Cypres, and having sent Isichius
his disciple, to visit the ashes and ruins of his distroied monastery, and to
salute the monks remaining in that province, staid in the city of Papho. unto
which place many sick men, and men possessed came out of all parts of the
Island, and the holy saint by prayer healed them.

Isichius being returned from Siria, the reverend father conferred with him of
his departure from thence, which he did not upon inconstancy, but only to fly
from credit and honor, which was bestowed upon him in that place: So having
found out: a place not far distant from the city which stood out of the way,
and was uninhabitable for the craggines, knowing that the going up unto it was
very difficult, for they must go up creeping with their hands, and that at the
top thereof was a plesante and delightful place, furnished with many trees
and clear founteins, and that (as the fame went) many evil spirits haunted,
and used in that place, and therefore none was so hardy, as to dwell there: the
holy man resolved to make the same his habitation. There were some, that came
to visit him; yea many diseased persons: and among others, one sick of the
palsy, who was the owner of the place. Great were the conflicts and encounters
the servant of God endured in that place by the devils, who did incessantly
disquiet him; because he was come to thrust them out of their long continewed
habitation. The blessed man took thereat great consolation, for that he had
there some enemy with whom to contend and strive.

S. Hilarion being now come to the age of 80. years ( Isichius his disciple
being absent) fell sick: and perceuing that the hour of his death drew nere,
he wrote a schedule, or note of his hand, in which he left by his testament
Isichius his disciple, to inherit all his treasures: the book of the Gospells
written with his own hand, his long relligious weed, the sackcloth or hoode,
with which it was covered. When it was known in the country, that the holy
saint was sick, some came to visit him, and he charged them deeply, that
as soon as he was dead, they should bury him in the same place where he dwelt,
and that they should not keep him above ground the moment of an hour.

When the pangues of death came, all things failing but his senses, which were
perfect, looking with his eyes open, he spoke to his soul, and said: Depart
forth now, depart, fear not: thou have served CHRIST 70. years, and do
thou now fear death? In speaking these words, he ended his life. His body was
buried incontinently, as he had appointed; so that his death and burial was
reported in the city both at one time.

His disciple Isichius being certefied of his death, returned into Cypres, and
faining that he desired to dwell in the same place, where is master did dwell,
and was buried; after ten months passed, he stole away the blessed body of his
master, venturing his life for the same (for if the Cypriots had known it, he
had been slain by them) and carried it into Siria, and buried it in his
ancient monastery, an infinite company resorting thither to see it.

The blessed body was found hole, perfect, and entier, and so were all his
cloths and garments, even as he and they were, when he was alive, casting a
very sweet and pleasant smell. S. Jerome says, that until his time there had been variance and controversy. for the Syrians say; they have his body, as they
have indeed. and the Cypriots say; they have his spirit; but as well in the
one, as in the other place, are seen many miracles, done by the intercession
and merits of this glorious saint: but much more in the place of Cypres, for in
that place the blessed father took great delight.

The death of S. Hillarion the Abbot was on the 21. of October, and on the same
day, the Church celebrateth his feast. It was also in the year of our Lord 379
Valentinian being the Romain emperor. Nicephorus Callistus wrote of this holy
saint in the 11. book cap 14.

The life of S. Vrsula, and the eleven thousands Virgins.
ON the self same being the 21 of October our holy mother the church does
celebrate the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and and the 11000 virgins her companions,
Beda. and Adon in Mart^ol. Molan. in Addit ad Ma^^^ Vsuar
in whose history some things are certain, and other some doubtful. This is
certain that S. Vrsula and all her holy compainons were Virgins, and martyrs,
and were 11000 in number For although neither he Roman Martyrologe nor the
Collecte used in their feast do affirm* that they were 11000; yet because
venerable Bede and Adon in their Martyrologies and Molanus in the additions he
made unto the Martyrologe of Vsuardus and other authors together with the
tradition of the church do auerre it, we have sufficient authority to beleaue
it. But that which is vntertaine, and doubtful is, the manner of their
martyrdom: the voyage which these virgins made to Rome with so great a
train, and their return from thence with Pope S^ricius when he left his
Popedom; and other such things, which some write without either ground,
authority, or any probability; contradicting the truth of Ecclesiastical
Histories, and reason it self. Wherefore leaving out that which commonly is
reported of the manner of their meeting; and the end for which these 11000 were
gathered together, and that they all died for the faith of Christ our Lord, and
thereby purchased unto them selves the crounes of virgins and martirs; I will
relate here what Cardinalle Baronius and William Lindanus Bishope of Rurimund
men of rare learning, Baron in An not. Ma^tirol. 21. Octo. br. and tom. 4
Annal. an. 383. Lindan. apud Baron.
have judged most probable and secure, taking it out of a very ancient book of
the Vatican library of Rome, which treats of Brittanie whose author is
Gaufridus Bishop of Assaffe in the kingdom of England, and is after this manner.

GRACIAN son unto Valentinian the elder being Emperor, a certain captain
of his called Maximus, a very stout and valiant man, natural of the Is'land of
Britanie (which now is called England) rebelled against him, and was proclaimed
Emperor; and by the favor of the soldiers, and of other Englishmen his
friends, and acquaintance, entered into France, and possessed himself of it
all, but especially of one province which then was called Armorica, and is that
which now we call little Britanie; because the Brittons and Englishmen did
conquerre and raze it, and with great rage and fury putting to sword all the
naturalls thereof, left it uninhabited as a wilderness. Maximus thought it
necessary to people that province again, because it lay fit for him, therein
to conserve and transport his English soldiers: and for that purpose he divided
the fertile fields and lands of the lesser Britanie amongst his soldiers which
came to him out of England, to the end they might till and husband and mannure
them, and reap the fruit thereof. But because his soldiers might marry and have
succession, and settle them selves in that province, where there were noe
women, for that they were also putt to the sword; he determined to send unto
the Islands of Britanie, which comprehend England Scotland, and Ireland, for a
great number of virgins, which being brought unto the new and lesser Britanie
might marry with those soldiers, who were for the greatest part naturals of
their own country. The chief commander of all that army was called Conanus,
a man of great birth, and of greatest estimation of all the English nation:
whom Maximus had made his lieuetenant generalle, and Warden of all the ports of
that coaste. Conanus desired to marry with the daughter of Deonocius king of
Cornwall, called Vrsula, a most noble and virtuous lady; in whom did shine all
the gifts of chastity, beauty, and grace, which might be desired in a woman.
Throughout all the provinces of Britanie there were culled forth 11000 virgins,
as well for the intent above mentioned, as also that they might accompaine
Vrsula, who was to be their leader and lady. Some of these virgins went of
their own accord, and others by constraint. but seeing the command of Maximus
then Emperor, or rather tirant, was so peremptory, that no excuse could be
admitted: they embarked them selves in those ships, which were prepared for
their passage unto the new province of Brittanie.

It pleased our Lord, that these ships, lanchinge out of the haven, me^t with a
quite contrary wind, which in stead of carrying that blessed and holy company
toward Brittanie, it furiously carried them quite contrary: and passing by
the Islands of Zealand and Holland, drove them into the mouth of the river
Rhene, a river of great capacity, depth and breadth, and carried them so
high as the water did ebb and flow. At that time which this happened, Gratian
the Emperor understanding what Maximus had done in England, and France, and
that he carried himself as Lord and Emperor, not as his Captain and
creature; for to repress and chastize him, he entertained into his service the
Picts and Hunnes, a fearce, cruel, and barbarous people, who had conquered the
Goths, and done wondrous things by their force of arms. These being
gathered together under the command of Melga, Captain of the Picts, and
Gaunus general of the Huns, began to molest the seas, and to lie coastinge
about after the manner of pirates, robbinge and spoilinge all that fell into
their hands, with intent to pass over into England, to expulse Maximus the
tirant, and to serve Gratian the emperor, who for that purpose had entertained
them. These barbarous people were at that present where these blessed virgins
arrived, and perceauinge that the ships, which brought the virgins, belonged to
their enemies, and to Maximus in particular, against whom they had undertaken
that voyage, they encountered with them; and seeing that they were laden with
virgins (being as dishonest and lascivious, as they were cruel and furious)
they intended to ravish them. But those holy virgins, Vrsula their leader
incouraginge and exhorting them, determined rather to loose their lives, then
their chastetie, and here upon, as well in deeds as in words shewinge their
valor and co^stancy, and that they were prepared rather to suffer what
torments soever then to offend God; those barbarous people, converting their
love into fury, and detestation of the Christian faith, fell upon them like
wolnes upon a flock of lambs, and put them all to the sword; because they
would remain there no longer but pass over speedely into England which they
thought had been uninhabited, because Maximus had drawn so many soldiers from
thence. Of all that holy and virginal company only one called Cordula
remained alive, who through fear hid herself at the time of that slaughter;
but seeinge what had passed, and that all the rest of her companions were
martirized, being encouraged by the motion of our Lord, A don. in suo Mart. 21.
Oct.
who had chosen them all for himself, the next day followinge discovered
herself, and was also martirized, as the Roman martirologe recounteth.

The principal of these virgins which there shed their blood for the faith of
Christ and their virginity were (according to Adon) S. Vrsula guide and theife
leader of all the rest, and Sentia, Gregoria Pinnosa, Mardia, Saula, Britula,
Saturnina, Saturnia Rabacia, Palladia, Clementia, and Grata. On That day, in
with they suffered, Christ their sweet and beloved spouse triumphed in these
holy virgins over infidelity and carnality, over sin, and hell; and declared
of what greater force the virtue of a Christian is in sufferinge death, then
the cruelty of the devil and his ministers in inflicinge it: for that his
soldiers by their fall arise, by their death overcome, and thereby receane a
nowne of eternal glory. The bodies of these holy virgins were gathered
together by the Christians with great devotion, and carried to the city of
Collen, which is seated upon the same river of Rhene, where was erected a
famous monastery of Nuns; and even until this day many heads of these holy
virgins are to be ^eene, and are reverenced with singular devotion, although
they be distributed into many parts of Christendom.

Some are of opinion that the place in which the holy bodies of these virgins
now remain, is the very same in with they were martirized, because the earth
on which that Church is built will not retain any dead body, although it be
of a child newly baptized, but by ni^ht it casts it forth, as Lindanus
Bishop or Ruremund recounteth; giuinge this as a token that God will not have
any other body to be buried, where the bodies of these so many virgins, and
martirs his spouses lie, who there shed their purest blood for the confession
of his faith, and defense of their chastity. It is recounted also that S.
Vrsula and her holy companions favor and assist them at the hour of their
death, who in their lifetime have been devoted unto them. The martyrdom of
these virgins was according to Baronius in the year of our Lord 383. Baron.
tom. 4. Annal an 383.
Graetian and Valentinian and Theodosius the elder rulinge the Empire, whom
Gratian had made his compartener in the Empire, seeinge himself to be
straightened on every side by the wars of so many barbarous people, and
standinge in need of the assistance of so valourous a Captain. It was also
upon the 21. of October, upon which day the Holy Chuch celebrateth their feast.
Of these 11000 virgins (besides those authors we have already rehearsed) have
written wandalbertus, Vide Baron. in. Ann^t. Martirol. 21. Oct. Claud-Rota. Cap
134. Bonfin decad ^. lib. 5. Petrus de Natal. lib. 9. cap. 87. Polid. lib 3.
Surius tom. 5.
who flourished in the year of our Lord 850, Sigibertus Moncke of the Monestery
called Gimblacense who lived almost 500 years since, Rogerius Cisterciensis
Richardus Praemonstratensis, Claudius de Rota; Bonfinius in his History of the
affairs of Hungary, Petrus de Natalibus, Polidore Virgill, in his History of
England, and above all the rest more copiousely Laurentius Surius in his fifth
tome of the lives of Saints. *

The life of SS. Chrisantus and Daria martirs.
SAINT Chrisantus was borne in the city of Alexandria: he was son to an
honorable Gentleman, of the order of senators, called Polemius: who together
with his son, and the rest of his family, came to dwell at Rome, where he
was most graciously, and friendly wellcomed, and honorably advanced by
Numerianus the emperor. Being once settled at Rome, the greatest care of
Polemius was, to have his son Chrisantus, that was of a quick and piercing
wit, and great capacity, trained up in learning, As Chrisantus was turning
over many books, and seeking out such as were most for his purpose, it
happened, by the especial providence of God, that he met with one, wherein
were written all the four ghospells. He did peruse them attentively; and read
them from the beginning to the end: he plainly perceived the steps of
darkness, and shade of death, wherein he had walked; and that our souls had
no other light, saving online CHRIST JESUS. And being desirous to have the
riches, hidden in that book, more disclosed unto him; and understanding, how a
famous clearke in holy writ, named Carpophorus, lay secrett in a cave, for
fear of the persecution; he went unto him, and with tears besought him, to
instruct him in the faith and the gospel of CHRIST. Carpophorus did willingly
accomplish his desire: he instructed him first; and then Baptized; and lasty so
confirmed, and strenghthned him in our faith, that, seven days after, he
openly avouched and taught in Rome, that JESUS CHRIST was the only true God.
Polemius came to have notice hereof: and, partly for zeal of his blind
religion, parely for fear of the cruel laws, and punishments established
against the Christians, he was greatly enraged with his sons proceedings,
whom he therefore committed to a dark and close prison, assigninge him his
meat with a scant and very hard allowance. But findinge this punishment was
to little purpose; and wrought no other effect in Chrisantus but online to
strengthen him in his faith; he took another course of kind usage, and
gentleness, and pamperinge; seekinge by the means of certain bond women of
his own, young, beautiful, and gallantly attired to pervert him, and allure
him to naughtiness; that leesing his chastity, he mighe the more easily loose
faith. They brought him out of prison: they apprailed him richely; they lodged
him in a goodly chamber, most costly furnished and hanged: the women came in,
to perform their lewd and wicked intent: but Chrisantus, fearinge his
frailty and feebleness, lyfted up his eyes to heaven craving help and
succoure of our Lord. Metaphr. in vit. Chrisanti.
And he did afford it him so boundantly, that, as Simeon Metaphrastes writes,
a heavy sleep and drousiness so deeply possessed those women, that none
could awake them, except they were carried out of the chamber: and by this
means God preserved his servant from so great a danger.

Polemius did judge it more convenient for his purpose, to seek our some fair
young gentlewoman, wise, lovely, discreet and gracious, and match her with his
son and make her his heir to the end, that she, as his lawful wife, might
work his mind, and make it more pliant; which the others, being servants,
could not bring to pass. Amonghst the virgens of Minerua they found out one
called Daria, endued with all the rare gifts and qualities that might be
desired and wished in a woman. They acquinted her with all their designs, and
purposes yet hardly could persuade her to marry Chrisantus, and undergo that
task of healinge him from that, which they called madness. Not withstanding at
length the tears of old Polemius, and a strong imagination that herein she
did her Gods great good service, did make her relent, and win her to do it.
She aparailed her self most goregeouslie: she came into the place where the
young mau was, with a comely behauioure; yert some what streigning it to a
light wantoness, aad heedeless demeanure she assailed him with lovely, and
sweet, but well weighed reasons, and gentle terms, endeavoring to persuade him,
to forsake and abandon that faith of CHRIST, and marry with her. But our
Savior was on Chrisantus his side, to stay him from gliding into sin: he
gave his words such a heavenly grace; and printed in his mind such forcible
reasons, that with them he conquered Daria, and made her fall into the self
same snare wherein she labored to entrappe Chrisantus. For moved by his
reasons, and powerfully drawn by the grace of God, she resolved to be a
Christian. They accorded to keep their virginity unspotted; and yet give it
out, and so possess others with a conceit, that they were married: by which
means Chrisantus was freed out of prison, and from the keepers hsi father had
placed about him: Daria was baptized, and both of them did live together, as
brother and sister, keeping their purity undefiled.

Now as it is the property of goodness, freely to impart it self to others,
and of virtuous people to desire and endeavor that others be partakers of that
precious jewel which themselves enioie, each of them counseled all such
persons, with whom they conuersed, to receive the faith of Christ our
savior, and lead a chaste and virtuous life: and many were persuaded to
embrace such good counsel; the woe men by Daria, the men by Chrisantus. This
was speedily known over all Rome; and notice thereof came to Celerinus
prefect of the city; who forthwith comau^ded the^ to be apprehended, and
brought before Claudius the Tribune; apointing him to hear and examine their
cause, and, finding them guilty, to punish them. The Tribune commanded
Chrisantus should be led to the temple of Jupiter, where, because he refused to
adore the Idol, he caused him to be most cruelly beaten. The executioners
performed the Tribunes comaund, with so little remorse and compassion, that his
bones and bowels might be seen through his wounds. They carried him back again
to prison; cast him into a loathsome darck dungeon; loaded him with gives and
fetters; and cast upon the ground many filthy and stinking things. But in the
sight of the cruel officers his yrons were turned into dust: and in steed of
the stinking, noy some smell, there was a most sweet and fragrant sent. Then a
Bulls hide was flaied and taken of, and Chrisantus naked was put thereinto,
wherein he remained a whole day, exposed to the scorching beams of the Sun:
though he received thereby no harm at all. They cast him once again in
prison, laden with yrons, which were straight ways consumed and turned to
powder; and many lights appeared, which made the dark dungeon bright like
noone day. They tied him unto a post, meaning to beat him with rodds of iron;
which when the officers took up in their hands, they became very soft, and
no man could strike with them any one stroke to any purpose. At length the
Tribune Claudius convinced that so great wonders, as these, were not done by
art Magic, but by the hand and power of God, the beams of whose grace did now
begin to enlighten his heart, falling down at the feet of S. Chrisantus, and
craving perdon for the harm which he had done him he desired him to pray to
the God he adored, and by whom he was assisted in so many and so cruel
torments, to grant him pardon for his sins, and knowledge of him self. The
like did all his souldioures: whom the martin embraced most lovingly: and
there were baptized all at one time Claudius with Jason and Maurus his sons,
and Hilaria his wife, all his whole family, and the souldioures of his charge
with many other people.

The Emperor Numerian as soon as he came to the knowledge of so great an
alteration, commanded that all should be put to death. Claudius was cast into
the river Tiber, with a great stone about his neck, and drowned: the rest were
beheaded. Hilaria some days after, being at her prayers in a cave, where the
bodies of the martirs were buried, was taken by the painims: and as they were
about to carry her before the Emperor, she craved some respitt to make het
prayer; wherein she requested almighty God, to take her into the company of
her husband, and sons. His Majesty vouchasafed to hear her prayer, and she
rendered her soul into his hands, and her body remained with the other holy
saints.

The Emperor gave order that Chrisantus should be brought to a prison called
Tullianum, and Daria to the common stews amongst nanghtie women: where, by
the presence of that holy virgen so ignominious and reproachefull a place was
turned with her prayers into a chapel. For God did send in her defense a
lion, who slipping of his chains, and breaking loose out of his den, laid
himself at the feet of Daria, with signs and tokens that he would defend
her. Not long after came in a bold impudent youth, with intention to defloure
the B. virgen. But the lion encounterd him, cast him to the ground, held him
down with his paws, and looked upon her, as one demanding, how he should use
that wretched young man. She commanded that he should do him no harm; and
taking occasion from the lions obedience toward God, she spoke unto the man,
and reduced him to the faith of CHRIST. He seeing in what peril of his life he
had bin, and how once he was rather dead then alive, and seeing himself again
free from all danger by the commaundment of the holy virgen, went preaching
aloude throught all Rome, There was no other God, but JESUS CHRIST, whom the
Christians adored. The keepers of the lion came to have him back: but he fell
upon the^, and cast them to the ground, and staid expecting the will and
pleasure of the saint* she, with so good an occasion, did likewise acquaint
them with the power and strength of the faith of CHRIST; and they were
converted thereunto, and became the publishers and preachers of the glory and
Majesty of our Lord.

Celerinus the Prefecte, informed of all this, caused a fire to be kindled
about the lodging, to burn and consume the virgen and the lion together: but
by the will of almighty God, to whose power nothing is impossible, in whose
sight his martirs are renowned and glorious, the lion having received the
Virgens blessing bowing down his head, went through the flame with out
burning, and through the whole city without doing or receiving any hurt or
damage. After all this, Chrisantus was put upon a torment called Armentarium:
but the post brake in sunder, his bands were unloosed, and the torches which
were lighted, to burn him on the sides, were quenched. Those also, which
would have tormented Daria, had the sinews of their hands contracted, with
such excessive pain that they were constrained to let it alone. Finally they
led them out of the city, into the way called Salaria; where having dug a
great ditche or pit, both the saints were put alive into the same, and then
covered and overwhelmed with earth and stones, and after this manner, iomtlie
martired and buried.

Many Christians had gathered themselves once together in a cave, to celebrate
the feast of these holy martirs. Numerianus the Emperor, understanding this,
sent a company of souldioures, commaundinge them to stop up the mouth of the
cave, and let not one escape with life. There was amonghst them a priest, whose
name was Diodorus: he said mass, and gave them all the B. sacrament,
encouraging them to suffer that death with joy, and constancy, for the love of
CHRIST: they did according as he did exhort them, and ended their life's
gloriously in that place.

The Church does celebrate the feast of SS. Chrisantus and Daria the 25 of
October: and their death was in the year of our Lord God 284. in the reign
of Numerianus Emperor. The martyr dome of these saints was written by Verinus
and Armenius, priests of saint Steven Pope and martyr: Metaphrastes enlarged it
some what more. S. Damasus made certain eloquent verses in praise of these
saints, In annot. and 2. to annal de glor mart. ^. 38.
and set them on their tomb. There is mention of them also in the Roman
Martirologe, and in that of Vsuardus: as also in the 5 tome of Surius; in
Cardinal Baronius, and Gregorius Turonensis.

The life of S. Euaristus Pope and Martyr.
OUR Savior says in S. Matthew: Mat 7
that none can gather grapes of thorns, nor figgs of thistles. This comes to
pass; because a man's power is bounded and limited; but the power of God is
infinite, without bounds or measure: he can therefore, if he please, gather
figgs of thistles, and grapes of thorns; as it appears, he did by S.
Euaristus Pope; who was made a sweet and delicious fruit, being in his life
holy, and in his death, a martyr. God gathered this grape from a thorn, viz
from a Jew that was his father. The life of this holy saint collected by
Damasus, and out of an epistle decretall of the same Euaristus, and out of
other Authors, was this.

EVARISTVS was son to a Jew called Judas and was borne in Bethlehem; and
when then holy Poper Anacletus was dead, he was chosen to succeed in his
place. He was a very learned and holy man; and the first, that divided the
parishes of Rome into sundry titles, among sundry priests, which were
after-ward called Cardinals. The same Euaristus ordained that seven deacons
should accompany the Bishop, where soever he went, and should stand by his
side, whenever he preached. to the end his ministry should be honored, his
doctrine wittnessed, and also that he might show some kind of authority, and be
defended if any Gentill made show of violence against him. He also provided,
that matrimony should be publikly solemnized, and not in secret: and that the
spouses should go unto the Church, to have the nuptial benediction: Tertull
lib 2. ad vxor. Ca siour vir 7. q. 1. 2. q. 7. si qu^ sunt.
though, as Tertulian says, the espousalls and marriage were made in the
Church, even from the time of the Apostles.

Moreover, he commanded; that Bishops should not leave of forsake their
Churches to go unto others which thing is agreeable with the condition of
married folks, who may not abandon their own wifes, for other women. He also
ordained that the accusations of the people should not be receued against their
own Bishops, if they had not notice before, or else some pregnant suspicion of
fault in him.

It is not known, how S. Euaristus died, but that the Catholic Church has and
does account him in the number of the Popes which were martirs. In such sort,
that having holden the Papacy 9. years 10. months and 2. days, and having
given holy orders three times in the month of December, and at them ordered 5.
bishops 6. priests, and 2. deacons, he exchanged this temporal life for the
eternal, (and was buried in the Vatican, nere unto the supulcher of S. Peter,
chief of the Apostles) on the 26 day of October, and on that day the Church
does celebrate his feast. The death of this holy saint was in the year of our
Lord 120. in the time of the Emperor Traiane.

The life of SS. Simon and Jude Apostles.
HOLY writ in the first book of Machabees speaks of Mattathias, who having
done noble acts in the defense of the people of Israel, and finding himself
now tired, old, and near his death, called to him his sons, kinsfolk and
friends, and the chief of them that had served under his standard. When they
were all come, he made unto them a large speech, exhorting them earnestly to
perseruer in the service of God, and in his holy faith: for that he was able to
deliver them, though all the world was against them, as he had done in former
times, when they put their trust in him.

He to this purpose recounted unto them the examples of Abraham, Phynees,
David, Daniel, and his three friends. After this, he concluded his speech with
these words; Behold: Symeon your brother is a man of wisdom, give ear to
him, as to your father. Judas Machabeus also is valiant, and corragious, even
from his child bode, let him be the captein of your host.

This history agrees much for the B. Apostles Simon and Jude: for that
Mattathias is the figure of JESUS CHRIST our Lord, who has done worthy acts in
the world, for the defense of all Christians, which have served under his
banner; and speaks thus to them; Behold you Christians, Simon my Apostle is
your brother, and a man of wisdom, listen to him, and esteem him as your
father, and imitate him in his holy and virtuous life. Judas also, his
companion in martyr dome, is valiant, even from his youth, let him be your
captein in the battle, take him for your Advocate, and commend your self to
him, for that will help you much to obtein the victory.

The life's of these two Apostles, taken out of that which is written of them in
the holy Scriptures, and out of diverse Authors, was in this manner.

SAINT Simon and S. Jude were the sons of Alpheus and Mary Cleophae, and
brethren to S. James the less, and Joseph the just. Simon was called Cananeus,
for that he was borne in Cana of Galyly, and S. Luke calls him Zelotes in the
Greek tongue, for that Cana by interpretation is zealous: He was thus surnamed,
to be known from S. Peter, who is also called Simon; as Judas was surnamed
Thaddeus, to distinguish him from Judas Iscariot.

It is not written, when or how they were called to the Apostle ship, but
there is mention made of them in the Gospel, when the names of the twelve
Apostles are reconed: As also when JESUS CHRIST in the sermon of the supper,
Joan. 14.
said: He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self to him. Judas answered him: How is this to be done, that hout
wilt manifest thy self to us, and not to the world? CHRIST spoke of his death,
and of his resurrection, after which they were to see him again: for that he
would manifest himself unto them really and veritably in body and soul. When
allsoe his eternal father would truly come to inhabit by grace in him, who
loves him, and observes his law.

There is no other particular mention of S. Jude nor of S. Simon in the
Gospel, but that they were present in all places and at all times, that the
Gospel says; the Apostles were with JESUS. As at the banquet in the desert,
Io. 10.
when CHRIST fed much people twice with a few loaves, and a few fishes. They
were present at the raising of Lazarus, at the entering of our Lord into
Jerusalem, when they sange Osanna. They were present at the supper, when our
Lord washed their feet, communicated them, made them priests, and consecrated
them Bishops.

They fled also, when JESUS was taken in the garden, they saw him raised to
life, not as a spirit, but the same that he was, before he died. Our Lord
talked and conuersed with them, as may be seen by the actions of Thomas, who
touched the wounds of his hands and side: they saw him also ascend into
heaven, they were also present at the coming of the Holy Ghost with the other
Apostles; and when they received him, they receued also his gifts, and
especially that gift of toungs, with which they preached the Gospel in diverse
parts of the world.

Simon preached in Egypt, and Thaddeus in Mesopotamia. They kept company in
Persia, and preached therein together, as S. Isidorus, Ado, and venerable Beda
say. As Soon as they came into that country, all the Idols, which before gave
oracles, became dumb. and whereas Baradach captain to the king of Babylon, whom
some Authors call Xerxes, having then in hand a great interprise, desired to be
informed of the success thereof by oracle, and passed from one unto another; at
last one of them, bad him look for no answer, as long as Simon and Jude
Apostles of CHRIST were in the country.

Baradach caused them to be sought out; and brought before him. He demanded who
they were: from whence they came; and what they did in that same country. The
Apostles answered, that they were Hebrews, and servants of JESUS CHRIST: and
that they were come into that country for the good of all manner of persons, in
teaching them the true faith, which if they receued, it should be the right
means for the saving of their souls. Baradach said to them: when I return
from the dispatch of my affairs, I will hear you willingly. The Apostles
said: It shall be better for thee presently to confess him, by whose means,
thou may overcome thine enemies, and reduce them to the obedience of thy
king: Baradach said: I think your God be more potent then ours, sine that your
coming has put them to silence: but, tell me: what success shall the war
unto which I go, have? The Apostles said: To the end thou may see, that thy
Gods be not only impotent, but also liers, and deceuers, we will give them
leave to answer to thy demands, that they giving an answer of that, which
they know, we may show what they be, and what they can do.

The Gods answered by their ministers (whom Baradach had caused to come
thither) That the war should be long, and that therein much slaughter should
be on both sides. When the Apostles heard their answer, they laughed: and
Baradach said to them: I hear these words to my grief and sorrow; and do you
laugh? The Apostles replied: fear not, for too morrow at three a clock, there
shall come ambassadors from the Indian rebels unto thee, who shall most humbly
entreat thee for peace, and submit themselfs wholly to thy mercy. When the
ministers of the Idols heard these words of the Apostles, thy scoffed thereat;
and in a rage against them, said to the captein: These fellows come from the
Indians thy enemies, that thou crediting their deceitful speeches, may not
be provided and furnished with defense; and then the Indians may come and give
thee some notable discomfiture. To this the Apostles replied, and said to the
captein: we do not bid thee to tarry a month, or longer, but one day only: if
thou find us to ly, punish us, as thou please. Baradach answered: I think best
to keep you and them also in prison, until I see, which does deceive me; and
then I will punish them that do deserve it.

On the next day, even as the Apostles said, the ambassadors to the Indians
came, with whom Baradach having concluded a peace, resolved to punish severely
those false prophets. but the Apostles staid him, saying: that thy were not
come in to that country, to take away any man's life, but to give it unto many.
Then the captein would have given them many Jewels, but they would not take
any. He had them unto Babylon, where the king was; unto whom he repeated what
had befallen, between him and the Apostles; and commended them very much, and
said: they had the gift of prophecy, knew things to come, were humble and
virtuous, and coueted no temporal gain.

At that time, the king had in his company two magitians or Inchaunters, one
was called Zaroes theother Arphaxat, who were fled out of India where S.
Matthew preached, for that he had discovered their wickdnes and deceits. These
mallicious fellows, seeing the Apostles to be of the college and company of
S. Matthew their deadly foe, persecuted them, saying of them much evil unto
the king: And with their enchantments, caused many serpents to appear in the
place, to terrify the Gentills, and to hurt the Apostles: but they by their
word only commanded the serpents to wound the inchauntors, but not to kill
them. The serpents obeyed and put them to great grief and pain; and moreover,
having lost hereby their reputation and credit, they were enforced to depart
from Babylon, and to go unto other cities.

They labored what they could, to do some mischief unto the Apostles; saying
in every place, where they passed, that they were enemies to their Gods, and
would not have them to be adored, and that they separated wifes from their
husbands under the color of relligion, and such other things. And in the
places where credit was given unto them, they gave the people warning, that if
the Apostles came that way, they should put them to death, and never suffer
them to speak. The holy Apostles preached the faith, without empeachment or
contradiction in Babylon, and converted many, for that they did many miracles,
especially in healing all sickfolks from their infirmities what soever. They
baptized the king, and all his family, and having instructed many in the faith,
they ordered priests, and deacons, and made Abdias bishop, who had followed
them from Jerusalem, and had (as he says) seen with his corporal eyes JESUS
CHRIST, in his mortal flesh.

If fell out at that time, (as the said Abdias recounteth it, and S. Antoninus
of florence repeateth it) that a woman, daughter to a noble man of Babylon, was
gotten with child, and the author of that wickedness was not known. She being
upon the time of her delivery, her father and mother urged her, to tell the
man, that had dishonored her, that they might inflict upon him some punishment,
agreeable to his desert. She, to free her self from further reproache, for that
he was of so base a condition and estate, that she was ashamed to say who it
was, laid the blame upon a deacon of the Apostles, saing: that he committed
that villainy. The deacon was forth with taken, and led before the king. The
Apostles understanding thereof, and knowing he was innocent, went to the court,
and requested the king, that the parties, and the child that was newborn,
might be brought before him; and so it was done.

The Apostle asked, when the child was borne: and they said that the same day;
then they looked on the child, and said unto him: we command thee in the name
of JESUS CHRIST, to tell us, if this deacon has committed the offense, that
thy mother charge him withal. The infant answered: This deacon is good and
chaste, and never in his life committed any carnal sin, and he is not my
father. His ennemies urged the Apostles instantly, to ask of the child, who it
was, that had committed the offense: they answered: It is lawful for us to
clear the innocent, but it is not fit for us, to disclose them that are
faulty. And at this the wholle company remained astonished and amazed.

The faith being well planted in that place, they departed from Babylon, and
went preaching through many provinces of that kingdom, and at last they came
to a very rich city called Suamir, in which place Zaroes and Arphaxat the two
magitians told the ministers of the Idols, that the Apostles were in the city.
Wherefore many of them assembled, and took the Apostles, and imprisoned them,
and led Simon to the temple of the Son, and Thadeus to the temple of the
Moon, for to adore them: but at the prayers of the Apostles, the Idols and
their statues fell in pieces, and to dust, and out of them went two devils, in
the shape of Negroes, with horrible roaring and houling. The painims were moved
thereat with such indignation, that in a rage, and with infernal fury, they
ran upon the Apostles, and cut them in pieces.

At that time, the heavens and sky was clear and calm: and one a sodein, it
was covered with black clouds, which powered down a dreadful tempest, and
withal fell many thunderbolts, which beat down to the ground the temples of
the Idols nere unto them, and slew many of the Painims, among whom were the
two Magitians, whose bodies were afterward found beaten to ashes. The king of
Babylon, who was a Christian, was much grieved for the death of the Apostles,
and sent men to fetch their bodies unto Babylon, where he caused a Church to be
builded unto them, in which place they remained for a while. They were after
ward carried to Rome, and laid in the Church of S. Peter.

The martyrdom of these holy saints was on the 28. day of October, and on the
same day, the Church celebrateth their feast. The Apostle Jude Thaddeus wrote
one epistle, which is numbered in the canonical scripture. God grant we may
be all written in the book of life. Amen. The martyrdom of these two holy
saints was in the year of our Lord 64. in the time of Nero the Emperor, after
the opinion of Onuphrius and Canisius. *

The end of the month of October.
NOVEMBER.
The feast of all Saints.
THe sacred scripture in the book of Hester recounteth: Cap. 1
that king Assuetus, to show the greatness and majesty of his Empire (in the
third year of his reign) made a most solemn feast, to the Lords and Princes
of his court, and to all other the subjects of his kingdoms. This feast lasted
many days; the tables were allwaies covered, and richly furnished, with most
costly meat, and delicious wines; and every other thing was in great
abundance. No man was forbidden, but every man might ear, when and of what it
best pleased him. Yet that in which the greatness and majesty of the king was
showed, was (as said the text) that there was great store of wine, and that
most excellent, and such was given to every one as pleased him best.

When the king made this feast, Queen* Vasti his wife made also another unto
her Ladies, and the damosells of the court; in which likewise her magnificence
and bounty wasshewed, being served also at her tables with sundry and
different dishes, of most delicate viandes. This feast is a figure, and
representation of that, which passes in the triumphant, and millitant Church.

The great king Assuerus represents our Lord God: who to show the glory and
majesty of his Empire (in the third year of his kingdom) made a most solemn
feast unto the Princes and Lords of his court, and all other of his kingdoms.
These three years signify the three estates, and ages of the world, to wit:
of the law of nature, of the law written, and of the law of grace.

That king Assuerus made this feast in the third year, signifies: that in the
third age and state of the world, to wit, in the time of the law of grace, our
Lord God opened heaven; for before, in the time of the law of nature, and law
written, heaven was shut up from men, and they could not enter thereinto; but
in the time of the law of grace, God opened his royal palace, and invited all
the great Lords of his court, to participate and enjoy the rich treasors he had
therein; as the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins do: who sit
continually at his celestial tables, and eat that which is most to their
content. For the viands or mea^es being variable; to wit, the delights and
contents in heaven being sundry, every one takes, and reaches that, which
sauoureth best to him. But above all, the wine, for that it is most excellent,
makes the feast better, and shows the greatness thereof. This wine signifies
the taste, and suauity of the Holy Ghost, which is bestowed among them in
great abundance, and the blessed being (as it were) inebriated of God, are
made partakers thereof; and have no mind ner thought of any thing that may
bring discontent, or anney: but all things causes unto them unspeakable joy
and delight. This is the feast which the king made. It is said also, that the
Queen made a feast to the Ladies, and damosells of the court.

By the Queen is understood the Catholic Church, who makes a feast unto her
women and damosells, that is: the souls trauayling in her affairs. It is not
altogether from the purpose, if it be said: that they that be in the millitant
Church be called women, and they that be in the triumphant be called men;
because, as man is the more perfect creature then woman, so there is found more
perfection in them that be in heaven, then in them that be on the earth, though
they be all holy persons* the reason is this: they which be in heaven cannot
fall any more, but they, that be holy on earth, may fall again, and so do
many and often times.

Before Queen Vasty kept this feast, she gave unto her damosells to eat,
sometimes of one kind of meat, sometimes of an other, yet moderately, and in
measure; but on the festival day, she gave them all kind of delicacies most
freely. So also the Catholic Church makes ready her table daily for all
faithful believers, yet diversely, some days with one ind of meat, somedaies
with another.

Sometimes she makes a feast, and gives meat to all them that have been good
all the time of their lives, and this she does in celebrating the feast of S.
John Baptist. Another day she dres;seth a dinner for great sinners, presenting
unto them a Matthew, and a Marie Magdalene, which for a season offended God by
their wicked lives. She also makes a feast for religious men on the day of S.
Benedict, S. Dominik, S. Francis, and such others as they be. She makes a
feast to the religious recluses on the day of S. Clare, of S. Catherine of
Siena, and such others. To the married people, when she celebrateth the feast of
S. Joseph. Unto Kings and great Lords on the day of the Epiphanie, when the
feast of the three kings is celebrated: unto Bishops and Prelates on the day
of S. Ambrose, S. Martin, S. Nicholas, and of such like. Unto virgins and
damosells, on the day of S. Agnes, S. Lucy, and many others. But the day of all
Saints, signifies the day that Queen Vasty made the feast, and prepared the
royal banquet unto all her ladies and damosells; because on this day the
Catholic Church does prepare and dress meat for all manner of people, when
she celebrateth the feast day of all the saints in heaven; who be a pattern
and example for all men in the world; that by imitating them, they may reform
their lives, and amend all loose, and lewd behavior.

DIVERSE and sundry reasons have been diversely alleged, why the Church of God
does celebrate a feast of all the saints together. One reason is: the
dedication of a temple, which was consecrated in Rome, in the name of all the
Saints. Ado Bishop of Vienna, and those authors that write the lives of the
popes and Emperors, relate it in this manner. In chro aetat. 6 ano. 604.


About the year of our Lord 608. Boniface the 4. being pope, there reigned in
Constantinople Phocas the Emperor, who though he be noted to be covetous, and
cruel, yet was he a Catholic prince, and very affectionate to the Church of
Rome and a private friend unto Pope Boniface.

There had been built in Rome a most sumptuous temple, in honor of Cybele
(that false goddess, mother of all the Gods) and in the name of all the other
Gods also. This was built by Marcus Agrippa a noble man of Rome, who called it
by a greek name Pantheon, that is to say: the habitation of all the Gods. The
temple is round, and has no other window, but one great hole in the top
thereof, which gives light to all the temple. It is said; Agrippa caused it to
be built in that fashion, for that he would not show himself partial toward
the Gods; in setting one in a more honorable place then another, but to make
them all equal; and by the judgment of those, that have skill in Architecture,
it is held the most artificial building, that is in our known world.

Of this temple, with the consent of the Emperor Phocas (because he had
jurisdiction, and commanded in Rome, and a great part of Italy) Boniface made a
Church, and consecrated it to the mother of God, and of all saints. His reason
was: that even as the pagans in this temple, had adored the devils, and all
the crew of their heathenish Gods, with Cibele their mother; so from thence
forth there should be honored in the same place, the Blessed mother of the true
son of God, and all the whole court of heaven, with the holy martirs also.
For at that time they did not so ordinarily celebrate in the Church the
festival days of the Confessors.

The Pope called this feast, S. Mariaad Martires, and willed it should be kept
on the ninth day of May. Afterward Pope Gregory the 4. who lived in the year
of our Lord 827. (after the opinion of Onuphrius Panuinius) translated the
feast unto the first of November; because of the infinite number of people,
that resorted to Rome, to sollemnise that feast. Wherefore, he thought it more
convenient, to transfer it unto a season wherein the fruits of the earth were
inned, and brought into the barnes, that there might be sufficient store
thereof, and no scarcity for the pilgrims and strangers; as there was wont to
be, and is ordinarily in the month of May.

At this present, that Church is called: S. Maria Rotunda; and the day is
called; the day of all saints. On the first of November it is celebrated with
great sollemnitie, and marvelous concurse of people to the honor of the B.
virgin Mary and all saints. And this may be one of the reasons why the
Catholic Church celebrateth this sollemnity. Another reason is: for that the
Church endeavors to satisfy in honoring all saints in common; since it is
not possible so to do in particular feasts.

The holy Ghost, by whom the Church is ruled, and governed, apointeth some
feast days of saints to be kept festival, besides those days, which are kept
holy in the honor of CHRIST, his B. mother, and the Apostles. The reason why
feast day of one faint is celebrated more then another, may be: because they
were martired in Rome (which is the head of the world, and the perpetual sea
of the vicar of CHRIST, as long as the world endures) as S. Laurence, S.
Agnes, and others. Or for that their bodies have been translated thither from
other countries, as S. Anastasius, and S. Gorgonius. Or else, for that they
have been renowned martirs, as S. Vincent of Valentia, the Spaniard, and S.
Catherine of Alexandria: or it may be, for some other such like cause.

The reasons of them all, are not known but secret. As of the saints which the
same Church puts into the Canon of the mass: Sup: Canon Le^^. 32. lit. K.
for though they imi^ate lively (as Gabriell says) the passion of CHRIST, yet
it seems there be saints of more fame, which might have been set in that
most rare and singular place, as well as other that be there; as S. Sebastian,
S. Georg, and many others. Yea as the same Gabriell says: it hat been known;
that some men in particular Churches, have taken some saints out of the Canon,
and put others in their place; and it has been found; that they that have
been blotted out, have been put in again; and they that were newly written,
were cancelled, and blotted out. So that it seems there is in it some
mystery, for the which it is fit, those saints should be nominated and none
other.

And it seems to be the ordinance of God, that in some particular cities and
provinces, the feasts of sundry saints should be celebrated. As through all
Sp^ine, the feasts of S. Is^^dore, and Ildephonse are celebrated. At Toledo is
kept the feast of S. Eugenius; and at Alcala, the feast of the two saints
Iustus and Pastor.

The Popes do also observe the same order in Canonization of saints, concerning
the saying of their office, and solemnising of their feast. For although he
that is canonised, is to be holden, and reputed a saint of all Christians, unto
all whom it is commanded that they honor him as a saint; yet for the
celebration of his feast, a place is set down and assigned, or else a
particular congregation. As to S. Francis of Paula, founder of the order of the
Minimes, his feast is kept in all the places of his religion, and in some
cities; as in Towers in France where he died. Of S. Catherine of Siena also,
who is canonised, and her feast is kept through all the order of preachers, and
in the city of Syena in Italy.

Of S. Romualdus founder of the Calmaldoly, whose feast is sollemnised in all
the monasteries of his religion, and in the city of Rauenna, where he was
borne, and in the town of Fabriano, where his body lies, yea, not long ago,
Pope Gregory 13, has granted a plenarie Indulgence to all Christians both men
and women, upon the feast day of the said Romualdus, which is on the 19 of
June, that shall visit the Churches of the monasteries of the Calmaldoly,
as well of monks as of nonnes; And the like is also, of many other saints.

Notwithstanding all this diligence of the Catholic Church, there remain
many thousands of saints, of whom is kept no feast nor comemoration neither in
general, nor in particular, yea, of many there is no memory nor knowledge. Of
these then, which be an infinite number is celebrated the feast of all saints.
Which is a reason of great consolation, for afflicted and tormented minds; for
though when the sacred scripture makes mention of those which be saved, it is
done with such restriction, and limitation, that it makes the most valiant to
tremble, and desmaieth the faint and weak hearted: As it is said of them that
departed out of Egypt, that of so many thousands, two only entered into the land
of promise; and also when CHRIST says: that the gate of heaven is narrow, and
the way by which we go thither strait: As also when he speaks of rich men,
and says: that it is more easy for a Camel, to pass through the eye of a
needle then for a rich man to enter into heaven: As also the parable of the ten
Virgins, of which sine were excluded out of the gate. Yet this (I say) is
matter of great consolation, Tho: vvald: de Sacram: tit 16. Gab: de canon.
miss Pighius Coent. Verse. 13. Eck: enchir, Cap. 15. Casti^. lib: 13. cont
here is.
to see that the holy saints be so many, that there cannot be feasts performed
unto them all, through the whole year, and that they must have a particular
day allotted for them all; in which the Church sings for the Epistle a
lecture of the Apocalips of S. John, where it is said; that every tribe had so
many thousands of saints in heaven.

The third reason, why the feast of all saints is kept, is: for that we be much
bound unto the^, for many graces and favors, which we continually receive of
them, and by their means; and for that cause it is convenient, that in their
memory we make some feast, and rejoice for the joy which they have, by
posessing the presence of God in heaven.

This obligement and bond is so great, that before this sollemnitie was
instituted, by Gregory, or Boniface, some Catholics, and devout Christians,
were in particular persuaded to celebrate such a feast; of which number S.
Angustine was one, who says in a sermon: my dear and loving brethren, we
celebrate the feast of all saints under one sollemnitie, of whose company
heaven reioiceth, Sermon. 27. tom: 10.
and the earth is made happy by their aid, and the Church renowned by their
triumphs. That the obligation and bond which we have to the saints is great,
we may see by this: that not speaking of the favors and graces, which we all
receive of God by their merits and intercession; there is not a man in this
world if he look into his life, but he shall find himself obliged to some
particular saint, it being certain; that God for his sake has done him some
good.

Moreover, it is a clear case, that we be bound unto the saints, hearing
CHRIST say of them: Luk: 15.
that they feel an accidental joy, every time that a sinner does repent. By
which we may gather; that if they feel such joy, to see a sinner bewail his
sinues with tears, to knock his breast, to sigh, and lift up his voice to
heaven; if this music please them so much, that for the same, they make
public joy, and sollemnise his conversion: what Iubiley, triumph, and
sollemnity make they, when such a sinner is freed clearly from his sins, and
from the prison of the body, and enters into heaven? If the saints rejoice so
much at our good, it is very fit that we rejoice by celebrating their feasts.

The fourth, and last reason why we celebrate the feasts of all the saints is:
because we should imitate them. When the poor man sees the treasors of the
rich, his poverty is more apparent and manifest; and the sinner sees his
defects better, when the virtues of the saints are represented unto him.

The Catholic Church celebrating the feasts of the saints, Greg: naz orat: in
Athanas: S. E pihhere: 26. Basil: hom: in 40 m art:
does not only intend to honor them, and God in them, but also would lay them
before us, for a pattern and example, to the end we should imitate them, if we
would go whither they be gone, and be saved, as they are saved, and posesse
Gods glory as they possess it. Assueredly we may say; that many that are
called the disciples of CHRIST, and indeed be Christians, for that they be
Baptized and have faith, in works are Pagans, and disciples of the devil,
blinded, and deceived, and that their consciences be harquebuze proof, as may
be seen by that which follows.

In this feast of the sollemnitie of all saints, the Church reads a Gospel,
which was the first that JESUS CHRIST preached in the world. and contains the
despising of all temporal things, and (as S. Augustine says) compriseth the
sum of all that, which is necessary for the perfection of a Christian. He
staieth not on that point, but beginning to preach his new law and Gospel,
teaches us all to make small account of things present, and to make most
reconing of things to come; to extirpate the love of terrene good our of our
hearts, and to direct our love unto celestial things. This is quite contrary
unto that, which the world teaches* for CHRIST says: Blessed be the poor;
and the world replieth: Blessed be the rich. CHRIST says: Blessed be they that
weep. and the world says: Blessed be they that laugh. Our souiour says;
Blessed be they that suffer hunger: and the world says: Blessed are they that
are allwaies full. Hereby we may see, of whose school every one is, and whose
disciple he is.

Some are troubled, vexed and tired, never taking repose nor rest, to get
riches together, to use delights, and pleasures of the world, which are
hurtful unto their souls; and yet they seek after them so earnestly, that
they could not use more diligence, if they should have heard CHRIST say? They
that seek riches, delights, and pleasures of the world, be happy and blessed.
What folly and blindness is this, to profess thy self a Christian, and to live
like a Pagan? Either live as thou beleeuest, or believe as thou live.

In times past, there were in Athens many schools of Philosophers, different
one from another, as the Stoics, Academicks, Peripateticks, Pythagoreans,
Epicureans, and Cynicks: and every one lived conformeable unto the opinion of
his sect. You needed not ask of them, whose disciples they were, for by their
habit and behavior, it was forth with known, unto what school they
belonged. You should see in a stoic a grave majesty, an honest behavior,
quietness, temperance, constancy in one state, and stabillitie like a rock in
adversity. In a Cynick an Epicurean, ye might have seen the inconstancy and
vanity of a dissolute person, a scoffer, pratler, and taunter, so that every
one showed in deed, what doctrine he professed.

It were well if every Christian would do so also, to wit: that every one in
his countenance, his words, and works, would show himself to be a Christian,
and the disciple of CHRIST. That great Philosopher Picus Mirandula says very
well: Not to believe the faith of CHRIST JESUS, and his doctrine, preached so
plainly, and confirmed with so many miracles, is great obstinacy. Then to have,
receive, and to believe the same, and to live contrary to that which it
teaches, is folly in the highest degree.

Is it not extreme folly (as that excellent and famous preacher Thomas de
villa noua says in a sermon) for us, that fight, as we Christians do, under
the banner, and standerd of CHRIST Crucified, to labor and strive for riches,
for delights, and pleasures of the world? CHRIST our captain is nailed on the
Cross, naked, poor, shamed, and reproached; and we that be his soldiers,
will (forsooth) be rich, well apparelled, honored; and enjoy all contentments,
and pleasures we can procure. Is it not a very folly for us, that have always
enjoyed in the world consolations, recreations, and all kind of temporal
delights; and yet make account to be received into the society of the
Apostles, and company of the Martyrs?

S. Paul speaking aloud to all men says: 1. Cor 1
If we suffer as the Saints have done, if we imitate them, and their lives, we
shall reign with them. Which is as if he had said: If we do not imitate them,
we may be well assured we shall not have their company. S. John Evangelist saw
a great company of the Saints in heaven, and wondering much to see them so
bright and beautiful, demanded of an Angel, who they were? The Angel
answered: Apoc: 7.
These be they, which be come out of tribulation, and have endured in the world
many troubles, persecutions, and death it self.

How can they that be nice and delicate, and drowned in worldly pleasures, come
into their company? The Saints sit at the table of CHRIST, and they all wear
the signs, and tokens of their torments; as CHRIST himself carries the
signalls of his wounds. Some carry those marks they received in the world,
having been beheaded, stoned, boiled or flaied. Others how they were broiled,
killed with clubbes or the like. How can those people that were ever rich, and
labored to be tenderly cherished, honored and wholly posessed of worldly
delights, appear among them that were flaied, boiled to death, killed with
clubbes, stoned or beheaded?

The same JESUS CHRIST which said: Mat. 8.
Blessed be the poor. Blessed be those that wail. Blessed be they that be
hungry. Blessed be they that be persecuted; says presently after that. Woe to
you that be rich. Woe to you that have your content in this world. Here you have
it; and in the next you shall fail of it. As if he had said: Remember, that
there be not two paradises. There were two before time, but because man was
rebellious against God; he lost the terrestrial Paradise, and was cast out of
the same; to the end, he should not thinck of it, nor labor to obtain it
again. And if he should strive to obtain the same, he should be assuered,
never to have the celestial paradise. for he that has his paradise here, let
him not look to have the other hereafter.

So was it said to the unfortunate rich man, who being in the flames of hell
lifted up his eyes, and seeing Abraham and Lazarus, asked for one drop of water,
to cool his tongue in that flame; but he was answered: Remember thou have had
prosperity, therefore look not to have it any more. All these things we are
taught by the feast of all Saints, and the Catholic Church does celebrate it,
to the end we should imitate them.

If we cannot imitate the Apostles, let us follow the examples of the Martirs.
If not the martirs, yet of the Confessors. And if not of the Confessors, let us
be ashamed at least that eleven thousand weak, and tender damsells, having
given their lives, to enjoy that, which the holy saints in heaven enjoy; any
man should be such a coward, or recreant as not to do that, which feeble
women, and virgins have endured. This is the last reason, why the feasts of
all saints is celebrated, to wiit: because we should imitate, and follow their
steps, both in life, and death.

For all these reasons before mentioned, it is just and reasonable, that on
this day we should do honor unto them all. And as S. John Damascene says:
Lib: 4. de side or-th o^. cap. 6.
we are to honor the most B. virgin, for that she is the mother of God. And we
ought to honor S. John Baptist, for that he was a prophet, the precursor, and
a Martyr. We should honor the Apostles, as the brethren of JESUS CHRIST, and
witnesses of his life and death. We are to give honor to the Martirs, as to
the soldiers, and partakers of the cup of CHRIST.

We must give reverence of the Confessors, for the conflicts they had within
themselves, living in continual penance, and mortification. We must bear
reverence unto the virgins; as unto the spouses of CHRIST: and unto the other
holy saints, and all the Angels of the Hierarchies, as citisens of heaven,
enioyeng the presence of God. And so honoring them, and imitating their
virtues, we shall receive help and benefit by their asistance, and prayers in
this world, and be received into the glory which they posesse in the eternal
beatitude. Unto the which God bring us, for his great mercy sake. Amen.

The commemoration of the faithful deceased.
THE prophet Daniell being in Babylon, discovered a fraud, and deceyt, which
the ministers of a temple used, in making men to believe, that their I doll
called Bell, did cate up those meats that were offered unto it, when as they
themselves indeed did eat it up.

Darius the king punished these men with death; where upon the people raised an
vproare and commotion, against the prophet, and (the king not being able to
restrain their fury) they threw him into a den among Lions, to be by them
rent, and torn in pieces. In this woeful state the holy man remained six
days, being grievous, as well for the continual sight of the lions, as for
that the place was filthy, and stinking, and beside all this, honger
afflicted him exceedingly.

It fell out at that season, that the prophet Abacuc being in Palestina, and
carrying victuals to his sheapheards, an Angel told him; that God commanded,
he should carry that Victual unto Daniell, who was in the Lions den in
Babylon. Abacuc excused himself saing: that he knew not where Babylon was,
neither did he know Daniell. The Angel said: I will show thee; and with that,
he took him by the hair of the head, and in a moment, set him in Babylon, in
the Lions den, and showed him Daniell, ready to die with hunger. Abacuc said
unto him; Daniell, eat of this meat that is sent thee by God. Daniell did eat
thereof, and was some what refreshed, and enabled thereby to support, and bear
the affliction of that place of punishment, until at last, he was taken out by
the kings commandment.

By this figure is represented lively unto us, the commemoration the Catholic
Church makes for the dead, on the next day after the feast of all saints.
Daniell in the lions den represents the souls, that be in the pains of
purgatory. It agrees also very fitly, that the lions did not rent nor tear
Daniell in pieces, also that the sight of them was grievous, in that place of
pain, and also hunger afflicted him very much. So the souls that be in the
pains of purgatory be not tormented by the devils, which is very just; as
not firt, that they should chastise those, that they could not overcome. The
place it self which is allotted unto them, is painful, and grievous, for it is
full of fire, which is the same with the fire of hell, (as S. Augustine
affirms) Honger does afflict them also, which is the great desire and longing
they have to see God; For though they be secure to see him at length; yet it is
a great grief unto them, that the time is prolonged.

The prophet Abacuc, who carried meat unto his sheepheards, is a figure, of
every good and faithful Christian, which does good unto the souls in
purgatory. For in the carrying of meat unto his sheapheards, viz: unto his
Curate, or any other priest, in bringing bread and wine unto the Church, and
the other alms, which are done for the souls (such as prayers, and sacrifises
be) an Angel comes, and brings it unto Daniell in the den. And in deed,
it is an article of the Catholic faith, that all those things that be offered
for the souls in purgatory, by persons that be in the state of grace: or else
if the work it self does merit, and deserve it, (as the holy sacrifise of the
mass) both comfort and helps the souls that be in purgatory exceedingly.

THE undoubted verity, that there is a purgatory, is an Article of the
Catholic faith, and he that denies it, shall thereby prove himself an
heretic. This truth is proved by the testimonies of the scripture, as that
excellent learned man friar Alfonce de Castro says, in his book he made
against heretics.

Esaias says: Our Lord shall wash the uncleanness of the daughters, of Syon and
the blood of Jerusalem in the spirit of Judgment, and in the spirit of heat.
The prophet Malachy also threatening sinners with the coming of Almighty God to
chastise them says of him: that he is a fire, in which the silver is molten,
and purified. These two places are alleged by S. Augustine to prove; that
there is a purgatory after this life. JESUS CHRISTOUR our savior says the
same, viz: that he that shall speak words against the Holy Ghost, shall not
be pardoned neither in this World, nor in the World to come. S. Gregory uses
this sentence, and so does S. Bernard also, as an effectual proof of this
verity. For they say: if sins be not remitted in the other world, this
sentence, shall not be remitted in the other world, should not have been
written. And the truth being that in all holy writ, there is not any
superfluous word, fot to say there were any (as S. Basile says in his
Exameron) were blasphemy; it follows then, that there is a purgatory: for
it is a clear case that no sin is pardoned in hell.

S. Paul also writing to the Corinthians says: 1. Cor 3.
that the works every one has done be they gold, silver, or stones, wood,
haie, or straw the fire shall try them. And then he says imediatly. that he
whose works shall have need of this trial, shall suffer detriment, so that
such shall not be saved, but by fire. hom. 6 sup. exodus ^
Origin alleges this sentence to prove this verity There is another very
forceable reason for this point, S. John saying in the Apocalips (speaking of
the holy and heavenly city of Jerusalem) that none shall enter thereinto
with any spot or stain of sins. Cap. 21.
yet many me^ dye with venial sins; and others that have mortal sins are
confessed, and have not time to do their enioined penance. Of these who are
pardoned, and absolved of their faults it is clear that they shall do penance
in purgatory, before they enter into heaven: for thither they cannot come with
any spot.

Therefore we must needs confess, that there is a Purgatory, where the souls
shall be purified and refined from all their filth, and defects, with which they
depart out of their bodies, before they enter into heaven.

Moreover, many holy persons, and of virtuous life, who are worthy of credit
herein, have had revelations of this truth, as S. Gregory writes in his
dialogues. But beside all these reasons alleged I will relate one, which is of
great authority, and was (as it is said) the first cause, and beginning, that
moved the Catholic Church to ordain, Gui l^el: in rational ib 7. cap. 25.
and institute the Commemoration of the faithful departed, on the next day
after the feast of all saints and this it is.

In the life of the holy Abbot Odil^ (written first by Peter Damian Cardinal
of the Church of Rome and related by friar Laurence Surius) we read: Jacob
phil: in sumpt vin^. in spec historlib 25.106.
that a religious man returning from the visitation of the holy sepulcher in
Jerusalem, and other places of the holy land, the ship where in he sailed, was
driven forceably upon certain uninhabited I'lands which were full of rocks,
and craggie hills, near unto Thessalonica, and be called the Isles of Vulcan.

The religious man took land in the I Will, and found in an obscure and secret
place an hermit, unto whom he went; and among their conferences the religious
man told him, that he was of the province of Aquitaine in France. The hermit
hearing that was very glad (as appeared by his countenance) and asked him, if
he knew the monastery of Cluny, and Odilo the Abbot thereof. The religious man
said, yes: and desired to know the reason, why he demanded that question. The
hermit answered: know you that in this Island be hollow places, full of wind
and fire, which some call the mouth of Vulcan, by the which are seen devils
to enter in, and to go out ordinarily, in diverse and sundry shapes and forms.

Sometimes by their external looks they seem to be cheerful and iocund, and
at other times they see me to be pensive and sad. I being desirous to know
the causes of this different behavior, adjured, and charged them in the name
of Almighty God, to tell me the true cause; and they said unto me; that they
make show of joy and gladness, when the soul of any person, that has lived
well in the world, whom they could never induce to committ mortal sin, is
brought unto purgatory for some venial sins; and the devils seeing them to
suffer in the flames are satisfied therewith, and show their gladness by
external signs. But if there be given any alms, any masses said, or any good
works done by good people (as fasting and prayer) whereby the soul departs
sooner out of that place, and flies unto heaven, this causes the devils to
be afflicted.

They complain especially of the monks of Cluny, where continual prayers
are made for the souls of the dead; that they may be delivered out of that
pain. Therefore I pray thee (said the sollitarie hermit) and I conjure thee
in the name of God Almighty, to request the Abbot Odylo, and the other to say
mass, and prayers without ceasing, for the souls in purgatory; since so much
good aryseth thereof.

The religious man wondered at his words, and promised him faithfully to
deliver the message. So, being returned into France, he visited that
monastery, and recyted unto the Abbot and his monks all that which befell in
those caves, and mouth of Vulcan. The holy Abbot Odylo, understanding the
same, ordained, and commanded, that in all his monasteries, they should have
the souls in recomendation. Then he made a general constitution throught all
his order, that every year, on the next day after the feast of all saints,
they should make a general Aniuersary, for the souls of the faithful
deceased.

The Bishop of Rome, who was at that time John the 16. having notice hereof
examining well the deed and seeing it to be holy, and repleat with virtuous
compassion; not only approved it, but also commanded the same to be done,
through the universal Church.

This Catholic article that there is a Purgatory, being certain, and also
explaned; ye must understand, that the proper place is one of the parts of
hell; of which there be four: One is of the damned; the other of the children
that dye without Baptism, before they have the use of reason; the other is
Purgatory; and the fourth is Limbus Patrum, or the place of the holy fathers,
where the holy souls) remained before CHRIST dyed, and were then delivered
out of the same place, which now at this present is vacant. It is also very
certain, that by especial order, and decree of Almighty God, some souls
have their Purgatory, in places particular to them selves; diolo: lib. 4. cap.
40. and 55.
as S. Gregory says of one, that had his Purgatory in a Bayne, for his
faults committed therein; and it being manifested unto a priest, and that he
should celebrate Mass for him, he was quitte, and freed, and went unto heaven.

Concerning the pains of Purgatory you must understand, that it is fire, and
(as S. Augustine says) it is the same, that the fire off hell is; and is yet
discreet, and different. For as the natural fire consumes the straw, and
puryfieth the gold; so this fire consumes eternally the soul in hell, after
the manner of straw; and the souls in purgatory which be like gold, it
burns, and purifieth. It has also another property, that it tormenteth not
all men equally, and therefore it is called discreet fire, for it makes one to
feel more pains, another less according to the faults and sins they have
committed.

It is usually said thereof, and it is most true; that the stoning of S.
Stephen, the grydiron of S. Laurence, the arrows of S. Sebastian, the Iron
combs of S. Vincent, and all the martirdomes the saints endured, do not come
near the pains of them, that suffer in purgatory. And there is as great
difference between the one pain and the other, as between the soul that
suffers in purgatory, and the body that suffers here in this world.

There is adjoined unto the pain of feeling, a grievous longing, and desire
the souls have to see God, which is so great, that in some sort it does
surmount the pain of feeling, which is the fire. They see themselves there
without remedy, for any thing they can do of themselves: and they know they
must pay the uttermost farthing, if they in the world do not help them. In
that place does afflict them the negligence and carelesnes of their kinsfolk,
and friends; they sorrow also for the ingratitude of their heirs; and slownes
of their excecutors, in acomplishment of their wills.

They say many times with the holy man Job: Have mercy and compassion of us
you at the least, who in the world are said to be our friends for the hand of
our Lord has touched us. we be in those pains, Job: 3.
out of which we cannot deliver our selves; you may well do it but why then do
you not? you may help us: why be you then so forgetful? you may rid us from,
and out of these sharp and biting torments; why be you then so negli^gent or
rather cruel; as to let us lie still therein?

The father co^plaineth of his son, the wife of the husband, the sister of
the brother; and the friend of his friend, Sometimes God permits those that
have not remembered their friends deceased, to he forgotten themselves. and to
suffer that, which they have permitted other men to suffer, and to be tormented
by the torments, from which they would not help to deliver others.

Lastly you must understand, that to do good unto the souls in Purgatory, is
not only profitable unto them, but also unto those, that do it: sins it is a
work of great charity, acceptable unto God profitable to keep a man out of
sin, and is also good for the health of the body.

The holy Ghost entendeth so much in these words saying: 2. Macha: 12. V. 46
To pray, and to do good for the dead is a holy, and a healthful work: and is
also very profitable for the souls, their pains being diminished, and they
delivered the sooner.

The works that help them are four: viz: Alms; fasting; discipline, with
other penal works; an the fourth is the holy sacrifice of the Mass said for
them.

You must also understand, that there is difference between these works: for
that three of them (if they shall do the soul good) must be done in the grace
of God, and if they be done other wise, they do not help them, except they be
done by the apointment of another. And if that he, that commands the good
work to be done, (as to give alms, or such like) be then in the state of
grace; in this case the work is good and available, and helps the soul,
though the person that did that good work were not in that good estate himself.

Concerning the mass, and these other works (as I have insinuated before)
there is a difference. For that helps always, not with standing, that he
that said it, was not at that time in the favor of God: for that he who
offreth it, does it in the person of the Church, who is always in the favor
of God; and therefore it helps those souls always for whom it is especially
said, and celebrated. So that we may truly say; that this is the best, and
most secure work, that can be done for the souls in purgatory.

If this, which we have said, be the truth, as undoubtedly it is, viz: that the
pains in purgatory be so great and excessive: and that also being true, which
S. Augustine says, as it is for certain; to wit: that to see God, one hour
only, is of more worth then all the treasures of the world; And since with
all them he cannot do that, which one may do with the good works he does for a
soul in purgatory; that is: to deliver it out of pain, and that it may see
God before the time, it should otherwise see him. How greatly and vnspeakablie
shall that soul be obliged, and bound unto the person, that shall so help, to
deliver it? without doubt, more then can easily be said.

And that soul being so much bound unto any party, (after it is heaven, and
enjoys the glory of God) shall be his perpetual advocate, to beseech the
divine majesty, to be gracious unto him, that has been so good unto it, by
procuring it to be freed from the fault, land delivered from pain, purchasing
heaven, by enjoying it, before the deserved time. Which happy felicity in his
kingdom, God grant unto us all, for his heavenly bounty, and infinite mercy.
Amen.

The life's of SS. Vitalis and Agricola Martyrs.
THE Apostle S. Paul in his epistle to the Galathians, Galat. 3.
speaking of them, that are baptized, and have put on JESUS CHRIST, by
receiving his faith, says, that, in the sight of God, there is neither
servant nor freeman, but all are equal. His meaning is not, that among
Christians there should not be masters, and servant; some to command, and
some to obey. for this would be contrary to all good government, and to the
common course, and universal order of the world: wherein the Stars, the
Rivers, the Trees, the Beasts, the Birds, the Fishes are evidently
distinguished, not only by their virtues, but also by their greatness, and
lessenes; and by a certain preeminence and subordination* besides that if
there were equallitie in all men, none would undergo painful, and meaner
offices in the common wealth; none would labor and toil, none plowe nor
sow: and every one rulinge, and none obeyinge, all would run straight ways
to ruin and destruction. So that S. Paul's meaning is not, that Christians
should be all equal in this: but rather as S. Jerome and S. Augustine say,
that in the eyes and sight of God, the servant is no less worthy, nor less
esteemed then the master, if both of them be Christians, and both do the
works of Christians.

Of this we have an example in the two holy martyrs SS. Vitalis and Agricola:
Agricola being the master, and Vitalis the servant. They were both Christians,
and martyrs, and equally esteemed and regarded by JESUS CHRIST, and the holy
Church does celebrate the feast of them both equally. Their life, written by S.
Ambrose, was in this manner.

IN the persecution of Dioclesian, and Maximian, there dwelt in the city of
Bologna in Italy, a noble citisen called Agricola, who had a servant named
Vitalis. They were both Christians, and for that cause were apprehended by the
ministers of these two cruel Emperors. These holy Saints, being in the
presence of the Pre^ident; the servant, to wit, Vitalis, was first put to
torments, thereby the more to terrify the master. And because servants be
ordinarily scourged for their chastisment, and do tremble and quake to see the
whippes; it was the Judges will, that the first torment of Vitalis should be
scourging, and so he caused him to be beaten rigorously.

After that, he put him unto other manner of torments; and herein, the Judge was
so cruel, and the officers so mercylesse, that the body of the holy martyr,
was wholly covered with blows, and wounds. So that search never so narrowly,
you could not see any thing but wounds, and gashes. There was not any blood
left in his veins, but all was shed, and the scourges, and wandes of Iron,
where with they stroke him, hit not, ne touched not the whole skin any more,
but the raw flesh, and the bare bones, so that his very bowels were seen.
The glorious martyr lifted up his eyes unto heaven, and made a devout prayer,
saying: O my Lord LESVS CHRIST, my God and Savior; I humbly beseech thee,
that it would please thee to receive my soul: for I desire much to enjoye the
crown, which thy holy Angel has showed unto me. His prayer being ended, he
yealded up his soul unto God.

Agricola was present at this spectacle, who being a man of good nature,
pleasing behavior, friend to all, affable, doing good, and hurting none; was
generally beloved of all. And therefore the executioners, yea, and the Judge
himself also, being desirous to have him change his mind, and to sacrifice unto
the Idolles, whereby he might be delivered from death; made him to be present at
the martyr dome of his servant Vitalis; to the end, he might learn, (as is
said before) to beware by another man's cost, and affliction. But he that had
seen the success of his servant, was more desirous, to gain a crown as he
had done, rather then to be terrifyed with the torments; and so he remained
firm and constant in his first good purpose.

The Judge and the officers were wroth, and enraged against him. and the more,
for that they had used him courteously, and he had despised, and contemned
them; in which rage, the Judge commanded, he should be put on the Cross. The
executioners were not slow, to execute the commandment of the ludge.
Forthwith the Cross was brought, and Agricola was stripped naked. Then laid
they him at length upon the same, and piercing his hands and feet with sharp
nails, they crucified him, lifting him up a loft. In that place was to be
seen, a wonderful and lively representation of the Lord in his servant, that
is to say, of CHRIST in Agricola. The holy martyr being thus raised on high,
showed, that he made small account of earthly things, but desired heavenly.
He having been on the Cross a good space, on the same day, that his servant
Vitalis, yealded up his soul unto God by scourging, he rendered up also his
spirit on the Cross. And so the master and the servant, were equal in their
martyrdom, and in their reward.

Their bodies were buried in a Churchyard where the Jews were buried; and in
that place they remained, as Roses among thorns, and light in darkness, until
the time of S. Ambrose, as he says himself, writing the story of their
martyrdom. But he having notice of the place, where they were, at the request
of a holy widow called Iuliana, who had particular, and special devotion to
these holy saints, took them out of that place: and translated them into a
Church, which the same Iuliana had builded unto them; where their bodies take
their repose and rest, and their souls expect to be reunited unto them, at the
last day of Judgment.

The martyrdom of these holy saints, was on the 4. of November, and upon
that day, the Church makes of them a commemoration. This befell in the year
of our Lord. 298. in the reign of the Emperor Diocletian.

Spanish says: The bodies of these holy saints, are said, to be in the
Royal monastery of S. Maria Naxara in Spain.

The four Crowned.
THe Apostle S^ Paul writing unto Timothy his disciple says: None shall be
crowned, but he which fights lawfully. which is as much as if he had said: He
that fights acording unto the apointement of his captain, such a one
moriteth the crown, and to triumph.

Amongst the Romans in their wars, some did worthy, and very notable
exploites; but because some were against the apointement of the captain, they
did not only deprive them of the crown of victory, but chasticed them
severely. Some fathers there were, which put their own sons unto death, for
that they went out, to answer a challenger on the contrary part, in single
combat; although he returned with victory, and slew his adversary honorably.
And this; because he had been forbiden Upon pain of death, not to issue out to
any such encounter, without special license. Hereby we se, that that soldier
only deserved to have the crown of triumph, which fought, and got the victory,
by the apointement of his Captain.

It is convenient, that we imitate JESUS CHRIST, even as these holy martirs
imitated him, which are called the four crowned, because their names were not
known. These verily did merit the crown, for that they imitated JESUS
CHRIST; and as he gave his life for their snakes, in like manner did they give
their life's for his sake. The life of these holy martirs, and of other fire,
whose bodies are buried in one, and the same Church, within the city of Rome,
was this; taken out of the Martirologes of Venerable Bede, and Ado, Archbishop
of Treuers.

THe insatiable hunger of Dioclesian and Maximian (those two great, and
professed enemies of JESUS CHRIST, and his holy saints,) was not satisfied,
although by their order and apointement (and of others which were their Judges
and presidents) there was shed much Christian blood daily, through most parts
of the world; but the more they put to death, the more their cruellty increased.

It was told unto Dioclesian; that there were in Rome four citisens
Christians, whose names were Seuerus, Seuerianus, Carpoforus, and Victorinus.
The Emperor commanded that they should be forth with apprehended, and led
unto the Idol of Esculapius, and if they refused to worship it, that they
should be scourged to death; and acording to his apointement it was done.

They were led and conducted unto that devil, and they made account of him as
he was, refusing to adore him; whereupon they began to torment them. They
pulled of their clothes, and bound them unto several pillars. The scourging
which was given them, was such, and so great, that in that torment they yealded
up their souls unto God. The tirant commanded, that their bodies should be
cast into the street, that the dogs might dououre them, and although they
remained there five days, yet they were not touched by any beast, whereby it
evidently apeared; that men were more cruel and bloody then the very beasts.
The Christians took up their bodies, and buried them in the Arenarium, three
miles out of Rome, in the Via Lauicana.

It is said; that pope Melchiades (who lived shortly after their martyrdom)
put them into the Catalogue of holy martirs; and because their names were not
known, he called them; The four Crowned. But afterward it was revealed to a
holy man, that their names (as is said before) were Seuerus, Seuerianus,
Carpoforus, and Victorinus.

Of the five Martirs. SS. Claudius, Nicostratus, Simphorianus Castorius and
Simplicius.
NEAR unto the place where the four martirs last spoken of were buried, there
had been laid two years before, but on the same day, the bodies of five other
holy saints, who in like manner had been put to death for the faith of CHRIST,
by commandment of the same Emperor Dioclesian. Pope Melchiades, (who ordained
the feast of the four crowned to be celebrated) intended, that together with
them, there should be a commemoration of these five martirs, which were called:
Claudius Nicostratus, Simphorianus, Castorius, and Simplicius. These holy
saints were caruers, and remained in Hungary, by the apointment of the
Emperor, and wrought together with many other of their trade, in the quarries
of marble, which the Emperor used in his buildings, in diverse places of the
world. Four of these blessed men were Christians, and Simplicius was an
Idolater. As the wrought together the Chizells, and other tools of Simplicius,
were oftentimes broken, and the tools of the others did never break.
Simplicius being much amassed hereat, demanded of Simphorianus how it fell so
out, and he made answer: my tools break not, for that, every time I take any
of them into my hand to work, I call upon JESUS CHRIST my God. upon this
occasion Simphorianus used such persuasions unto Simplicius, that by the help
of God, he was converted unto the Christian faith, and was Baptized.

It fell out afterward, that Dioclesian gave the charge unto these five blessed
saints of a building, in which they should set the statues of diverse living
beasts, and in the midest of them an Idol, of one of his heathenish Gods. The
holy saints made up the work very cu^ningly, and placed the statues of the
beasts orderly; but for the statue of the Idol, they would neither set it up,
nor so much as ingraue, or make it.

The Emperor (who was then in that province) seeing this building finished,
admired the artificial workmanship thereof; but he was much displeased for
that they had not set up the Idol, as he had commanded. The five blessed
saints were not present, when the Emperor viewed the work, but the other
master workmen were. And for that one ar^ificer oftentimes enuieth, another
especially, ^he ignorant, who are most malicious against the most skillfull in
their mysteries; the Emperor demanding to know the cause, why the Idol was
not set up; the other surueyors and chief workmen answered: that the other
would not do it, for that they were Christians; and refused it not only in that
Idol, but also in all other of that kind.

The Emperor hearing this, dissembled the matter some few days, demanding
of the workmen, if there were any other caruers in stone, that were as cunning
as these five? And when it was answered him, that their like were hardly to be
found, he called them before him, and said unto them: If you will make the
figure of this Idol, you shall do me very acceptable service, and I will
reward you liberaly for the same. The holy saints made this bold answer: we
had rather suffer death, then give men ocasion to comitt Idolatry. Then you be
Christians said the Emperor. They answered resolutely: In deed so we be. And
if in that art or mystery, our knowledge or skill pass in excellency other
workmen, it comes to pass, for that, every time we begin ^o work, we call
upon the most holy name of JESUS.

The Emperor being loath to loose such excellent workmen; gave in charge to
Lampadius atribune, that by mild words and offers, he should persuade the holy
saints to renounce the Christian faith, and to worship the Idols. Lampadius
used all diligence herein, but seeing the holy saints constant, and firm in
their faith he certified the Emperor thereof, who commanded him to put them to
the torments.

The tribune caused the holy saints to be brought before him. and withal,
the sundry instruments belonging to those engines, that Dioclesian, as a f^ll
and cruel beast, had invented, to torture the Christians. But this spectacle
quailed not the resolute servants of CHRIST. whereupon the tribune caused them
to be cruelly beaten, and their flesh to be torn with crookes of Iron, which
had keen sharp points, like unto the claws of Scorpions. It is said: that
when the Tribune had tormented them in this cruel manner, and had spoken many
blasphemies against JESUS CHRIST, the devil entered into him, and killed him.

The wife, children, and kinsfolk of the tribune went unto the Emperor,
complaining, and saying: that the five workmen were inchanters, and that by
their art they had killed the Tribune. Dioclesian being enraged hereat,
commanded they should be enclosed in coffins of lead, and cast into the sea:
and so it was done. Fortis days after, a christian called Nicodemus
accompanied with certain other Christians, sought out the R^^iques of these
five holy mattirs Claudius, Nicostratus, Simphorianus Castorius, and
Simplicius, and carrying them unto Rome, buried them in the Arenarium before
named in the way Lauicana.

The martyrdom of these five was, as the other of the four crowned, on the 8.
of November, and on that day the holy Church makes of them a co^memoration,
though it be always under the title of the Four Crowned. Their martyrdom was
about the year of our Lord. 300. In the time of Dioclesian, two years before
the other holy martirs, as is above specified.

The Dedication of the Church of S. Savior in Rome.
WE read in the sacred scripture, that the wise king Solomon, having finished
the most famous work of the Temple, appointed a day to consecrate it; at which
day there assembled an infinite multitude of people of his realm, aparailed
all in festival garments. The priests and levites were ready in most rich or
naments. The singers, and musitions stood also prepared for their office. There
was a huge company of bullocks and sheep sloyne, to be offered on the Altar, for
a burnt offering.

King Solomon was upon a Throne, in the midst of the Temple, three cubitts
high from the ground, and kneeled toward the Sancta Sanctorum, making his
prayer unto God; and in humble, and lowely speeches, offered the Temple to the
divine majesty, saying: by what means shall I presume, to give a thing unto
thee on earth, if the heavens be too little for thy habitation? Then he made
certain requests, saying thus.

Lord, I beseech thee that every one that shall come into this Temple, to make
their prayer, for any affliction or trouble, thou o my God, vouchsafe to help
him, and ^omfort him. I beseech thee also that this favor may not only be
showed unto the inhabitants of this city, and country, but also unto
strangers; and those that shall come hither, from far countries. If they
shall want rain, and the earth be barraine, and dry, if the people come into
this place, and make their prayer unto thee; I beseech thee Lord, to send it
them forthwith. If there shall be pestilence or mortallitie amongst thy people,
and they shall resort unto this Temple, and desire thee, to turn thine anger
from them; ^hou merciful Lord, veuchsafe, to hear, and deliver them.

If they go unto the wars, be the enterprise never so dangerous, and the
soldiers come first into this Temple to pray, I beseech thee Lord to grant
them victory. If at any time thou be incensed against the sins of thy
people, although thou shall threaten to punish them rigorously, and that thy
hand be lifted up, and advanced to strike the^, yet if they that be in fault
resort to this Temple, and crave mercy of thee; thou o merciful Lord, be
merciful unto them. I request this said Solomon, for thy infinite mercy, for
the love thou bear to David my father, and for the service that I, the king
and guide of thy people, have done to thee, in building unto thee this Temple.

This Solomon said, and for a sign that God granted all his requests, (as
after in the night God told him) there descended a great fire from heaven, that
consumed the sacrifice: and the glory of God fi^led all the house, with
brightness and resplendencie; so that every one lif^ed up their voice, and
shouted, in sign of joy, and admiration. The priests and the leuiles, and
those that had the charge of the music of voices and instruments, sounded, and
praised God; and they all ioyn^lie gave him thancks, that he would vouchsafe to
have a house amongst men, unto which they might resort, to ask for mercy and
grace The feast lasted eight days, in the which the king, and the priests
offered many sacrifices; and the people were in all that time, in continual
triumph, and joy.

Hereof the Catholic Church takes the custom, to celebrate the feast of the
dedication of Churches; as namely in Rome is celebrated the dedication of the
Church of S. Saluator. The history thereof taken out of the life of S.
Siluester the pope, was this.

EVEN from the time of the Apostles, there was always amongst the Christians,
some especial places dedicated unto God, which of some were called Oratories,
and by others Churches. Thither came the Christians, and met together,
especially upon the Sundaies, to hear the word of God, to be present at the
divine service, to pray and to hear mass, and to receive the body of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, in that most holy Sacrament.

But after that the Emperor Constantine was Baptized by S. Siluester, and was
healed by the means of his Baptism, not only in his soul of his sins, but
also in his body of his leprosy; he, as a person thanckfull to the divine
majesty, of whom he confessed to have received this grace and benefitt, made a
law, and published a decree, through all the lands subject to the Empire of
Rome, that every one might build Churches, where it best pleased him.

And that by his example he might encourage others thereunto; in the year of
our Lord 325. he caused a Church to be builded, in the honor of JESUS CHRIST,
Savior of the world, in his own palace of Lateranum, adorning it with many
rich Jewels, and vessels of Gold and Silver, but above all, he beautifyed it
with an Image, representing our Blessed Savior himself very lively; and this
place was devoutly visited, by the faithful believers.

S. Siluester the pope consecrated that Church, which was the first, that had
been publicly consecrated among the Christians, for the celebration of the
divine offices. In that place the same Bishop set the Altar, upon which S.
Peter celebrated the holy mass, and it was of wood, like unto an empty
chest. The Apostle used this manner of Altar, even as the other popes his
successors did, compelled by the necessity of the time. For the persecution
being very sharp, the afflicted Christians flying from one place unto another,
carried with them this portable Altar, to celebrate thereon, sometimes in the
caves under the ground, sometimes in the Churchyards, where the bodies of
martyrs were buried, and sometimes in the private houses of Catholics.

The mind of S. Siluester was; that this Altar should remain for a memory, in
the first Church of the Christians, and commanded: that none but the Bishops of
Rome, should celebrate upon it. And that all other priests should celebrate,
not upon an Altar of wood, but upon an Altar of consecrated stone. And to the
end, the memory hereof should continue, and be perpetual, he ordained: that
every year the dedication of this Church should be celebrated. And this is
the feast which is sollemnised on the 9. day of November.

It is a thing very necessary and convenient, that among Christians there
should be some places dedicated unto God; as Churches, and Oratories be; to
the end they might resort thither, to pray, and demand help of God in their
needs and troubles. For if in cities, and other towns, be diverse shoppes for
particular things; and if in the house, be several rooms for sundry
offices, it is also necessary, that among the multitude of Christians, there
should be some places, where they may treat, and speak with God. And these
being dedicated to such a worthy work, it is also convenient that they should
be consecrated; and also, that all due respect, and reverence be given unto
them.

All this our Lord would give us to understand, by the example of the Temple of
Solomon, the workmanship whereof was of exceeding great Majesty, as may be
seen in two things especially, which the holy scripture recites, to wit:
That in the Temple there was not a thing, but it was of Gold, or ingraued, or
set in Gold. The other was, that the fabric, or workmanship being so
magnificent, and stately, yet in all the time of the building thereof, there
was not heard the noise of hammer, or any other tool therein.

Some expound these words thus; saing: that this was a kind of speech commonly
used, when they would show, what speed a thing has been done withal, as when
it is said: such a thing was done before it was seen or heard. So although the
work of the Temple lasted many years, yet in respect of the hugenes and
magnificence thereof, it may be said: that therein was not seen, nor heard the
stroke of an hammer. Others say: that every thing was brought thither ready
wrought, from other parts, and that they did nothing, but lay and couch things
in their due place. And so this Temple was a figure of the B. Martirs, who are
hewed, and squared in the Quarries of this world, suffering here diverse
troubles and afflictions: but then in heaven, they suffer no more strokes, nor
feel more troubles, but have their reward for that, which they have borne, and
supported in the world.

In these things then is showed the statelines, and magnificene of this Temple;
In the which, although it was the Temple of God, yet was there only in it the
Ark of the Testament, and that not always neither; for at the time of the
captivity of Babylon, the Prophet Jeremy hid it in a hill; and then they put
into it another made like it, and yet for all that, it was greatly honored not
only by men, but even by God himself.

Then by greater reason ought we, to reverence, and honor our Churches, in the
which resideth JESUS CHRIST true God, and true man, and that really, in the B.
sacrament of the Altar. There are not sacrificed Bulls, and weathers, but the
unbloody sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST, upon the Altar of the Cross, is there
represented; where he is offered in a lively sacrifice to his eternal father,
for the salvation of mankind; and the same does the Priest daily in his name,
in the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

In our Churches be also the sacraments, by which are healed, and cured sundry
infirmities. Some be weak, to encounter and fight against the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, and to make such men able and strong, the sacrament of
Confirmation is given unto them. To others, for the same pu^pose, and to make
them rich in virtue, there is given the sacrament of the holy Eucharist. And
to the end others should be continent, the sacrament of Matrimony is given
unto them For others, that be wounded, hurt, and ready to die of sundry
infirmities, and they whose souls are already and wholly dead in mortal
sin, are provided the sacraments of penance, and extreme unction. So that
the Church is as an Apothecaries shop, stored with spiritual medicines, for
all the infirmities and maladies of the soul, and body also.

Besides these, in the Catholic Church be the treaso^s of God. For therein are
pardoned sins: in it are given the gifts of the holy Ghost: in it the
prayers of the faithful are more meritorious, and be sooner addressed, and
sent unto he Judgment seat of the great God. For in it in very deed, is the
ladder of ^acob, Genesis 28.
whereby the Angels go up, and come down. They go up with the prayers and
petitions of the faithful, and present them unto God, and then come down with
their dispatch, for the good and profitt of the faithful believers.

In the Church is preached the Gospel, the observation of the commaundments of
God is taught virtue is commended, and vices be reproved. So that in it some
are stroke with fear, some have compunction, these weep, others rejoice; some
are comforted, and others are inflamed with the love of God. In the Church, the
faithful soul talks with God; there he is prayed unto; and in that place he
is honored. In the Church, the Angels are present; because there is the
heavenly court; yea, the very same God is there: really and personally; and
has promised to be there until the end of the world.

In all these things you may see, how much our Churches be more worthy then the
Temple of Solomon. So then, if that Temple be so much magnifyed by men, and God
also; it is convenient, and most just, seeing that our Churches be in so high
manner honored with the presence of God himself, that they be also honored, and
reverenced by us, and that therein, nothing may be said or done unseemly, or
unfitting of so worthy a place. Let presumptuous people, and the prophaners of
Churches, fear the like severe punishment, as God gave to that wretched king
Antiochus, who profaned the Temple of Jerusalem, 2. Macha: 9.
God striking him with a most terrible, and horrible infirmity. This wretched
caitife knew, that this evil happened unto him, for profaning the Temple of
God in Jerusalem, and therefore he bewailed his sin exceedingly He prayed
unto God, and craved pardon of him, but the text utters there a terrible, and
dreadful sentence viz. The wretch prayed unto God, of whom he could not
obtain mercy. The sorrow of this man, was like the sorrow, and repentance of
Esau, Cain and Judas; Heb: 12. Gen: 3. Math: 27. P. Orosius.
that is to say defective and unprofitable, and therefore he was condemned as
they were also.

We read in ancient histories, that Pompey the Great was victorious in all his
enterprises, and affairs, before he did profane the Temple of Jerusalem; but
after that time he was unfortunate in all his businesses, and finally, he was
vanquished in battle by Julius Caesar; and escaping by flight, repaired for
aid to the king of Egypt, as to his friend but in steed of help, he found his
death: the king cutting of his head, and sending it unto Caesar the conqueror,
as a present.

For prophaners of Churches, and holy places, these two examples are
sufficient: and for those that use small, or no reverence to Churches this one
is enough: That our Lord and Savior himself, chastised them with rigor, which
carried not due respect unto the Temple of Solomon. For he himself in person
(when as man he conuersed with men) did drive the people our of the same
Temple, with whippes and scourges, because they used to and in the same,
small, or no reverence Let them, who profane our Churches (being of far
more excellency then that was) imagine, yea, assure themselves, that they
shall be chastised with much more rigor.

Surely, we ought to bear great respect and reverence to our Churches, and to
behave our selves in them, as David counsels in a psalm, where he says: In
the Temple of God, let every one speak of his glory. All that which is to be
spoken of in the Church, ought to be to the glory of God; and if it be to his
glory, it will redound, and arise to our profitt; since in that place he will
make us partakers of his mercyes, which shall be the beginning of our Beatitude.
God grant us all to find in his Church mercy, for his dear sons sake, our
Blessed Savior, Amen.

The life of S. Theodore, Martyr.
IT is written in the book of Judges, how Sampson that renowned soldier of
God, at his death pulled down a temple of the Gentiles, whereby many of them
were killed, and the temple falling to the ground was utterly destroyed. Herein
Sampson did worthy service unto Almighty God, who had determined by this
means, to chastise that treacherous, and unbelieving nation.

The very like befell unto another valiant soldier of CHRIST, called
Theodore, who set fire to a temple of the Gentiles: for which cause, he was
afterward martyred. And in the one, and the other of the these things, there
was done unto our Lord God, great, and good service. The life of this glorious
martyr, is taken out of an homily, or sermon, made by S. Gregory Nissen,
which he preached on the day of his martyrdom, in the same Church, where he
was buried. He reherseth it in this wise.

THE cause (good Christian people) why you be here assembled from diverse
parts, with travail, and toil of your persons, by reason of the sharpnes of
the winter, is only to celebrate the feast of the glorious martyr S. Theodore.
This is a thing just and reasonable, since we be all obliged unto him, for the
great and many benefitts, which we have received by his intercession. One of
these is well known unto all, namely; how the Barbarous Scithians this last
year threatening to kill us, and having drawn their swords to bathe them in
our blood, returned back unto their countries in manner of flight; not for
fear of our corporal arms, but being terrified with the Cross of CHRIST;
with which, this glorious saint, our patron chased the away. I desire you all
to be attentive, and I will rehearse in what manner this holy martyr came to
give his life for CHRIST, whilst he lived in this world: for I do not know in
particular, the reward he has in heaven. And when we know this, we ought to
take profitt, by endeavoring to imitate him.

I say then, that we have his blessed body in this Church: and although it be
of the same matter and nature, that other dead bodies be, yet it is not to be
likened unto them; for if you open any of their sepulchers, the bodies appear
lothesome to the sight, and be displeasing to the smell; so that we turn our
face from them, considering the misery of our nature, and the frailty of
mankind.

But unto this glorious martyr it falls out otherwise. For as soon as we
enter into the Church, where his blessed body is, (as all we have done this
day) the sight is pleased, seeing the sumptuous, and cunning built Church,
where it seems the caruer and the painter contended to excel each other: the
one, in the building of the same, as well in the pauement, as pillars of the
finest marble (in which be engraven sondrie pictures of living creatures) as in
the rooffe, and covering of timber, which is curiously wrought, and cunningly
joined. The painter was not inferioure in his art, setting forth lively on the
walls, the heroycall acts of this glorious martyr. On the one side are the
tyrants, with their stern, and fell looks, on the other side, the flame, and
fire of his martyrdom; the holy saint keeping always a mild, and quier
countenance. These images and pictures serve us in stead of books: because
without speech, they continually publish, and show unto us, the worthy deeds
of this glorious martyr. For it is the property of a picture by silence to
speak; and being painted on the wall, serves us in stead of a lecture in the
school.

If one has entered into the Church, and enjoyed the sight of these things, and
yet being desirous to go further; if he approach unto the sepulcher of the holy
saint, and touch it with his hands, it seems a holy, and devout work. But if
he be worthy to have the sepulcher opened, and that he may see the holy body
there enclosed; O what great content, has he! for that there was never meadowe
decked with odoriferous flowers, that gave a better smell, or would be more
pleasing to the sight then this. He that is thereof worthy forth with
approaches, his eyes fixed, and his mouth joined unto the blessed relics,
from which issues no evil savor, but a fragrant smell. There are shed warm
tears, there are powered out inflamed sobbes, the saint is heartily besought, to
make intercession for us unto the majesty of God. But it one be worthy, to
have a little of the earth, into which his blessed body was converted, this is
accounted a chief happiness. The use is, to lay it upon sick men, hoping thereby
the may recover their health, as oftentimes they do. I wish the faithful
believers to consider hereof; and withal, whether it be granted unto the
Emperors, and monarks of the world, to have the worthy honor, and veneration
that is done unto this saint. But leaving this, I come unto the history of his
life.

His native country was in a part of this region, which looks toward the
East. In that place he was borne, and in that place he was brought up. but at
this present, the whole world is his native country: for every martyr may call
himself Native, of what country soever is under the sun. This blessed saint
was a soldier, and served under the standerds of Dioclesian and Maximian, at
such time as they ruled the Empire.

These Emperors being lodged in that country for the winter time by advise of
their captains; there arose a most perilous war, not with the Barbarous
nation, but in the same army: which was caused by a devilish decree, made by
the Emperors, and put in excecution by the captains. in which Edict all
Christians that refused to sacrifice to the Idols, were condemned to dye. The
blessed soldier, not now of the Emperor, but of JESUS CHRIST, seeing the
wicked ordinance made, and how cruelly it was executed, showed not any baseness
in mind, nor altered not his countenance, (though he knew for certain, that he
was accounted by all men for a Christian) but said boldly: that this decree
was detestable, and that he meant not to obey it, though he lost this life for
the same. These words came unto the ears of the Coronell, who called unto him
the captain, and even as Herod and Pilate did before, when they conferred
together of the death of CHRIST, and were made friends by depriving him of
life, so these two consulted, and accorded together against S. Theodore.

Causing him to be brought before them, with roughe words, and stern
countenance they demanded of him; how he durst be so arrogantlie bold, as to
despise this law of the Emperors, and to say that he would not obey it? s.
Theodore with a constant, and cheerful countenance said: I do not disobey the
Emperor, when he commands things that be just and reasonable, and wherein
he is to be obeyed: but when he commands me to adore for Gods, those which
be none, and which I do not acknowledge for such, I ente^d not to obey him. I
confess JESUS CHRIST to be God, the only begotten son of his father,
consubstantiall with the holy Ghost, who is likewise God, and yet not three
Gods, but one God, whose faith and religion I profess. If this seem to be
evil unto you, here am I ready and offer my self. Let the hangman come and
cut of my head, let fire come and consume me, and let him that is offended at
my words, cut our my tongue. I am resolved, and my body is here ready,
patiently to suffer any torment what soever, in any part, or in every member
thereof, for the love of his creator, and maker. The two unjust judges hearing
the courageous resolution of the young man, were confounded, studying what
answer to make him.

A certain soldier of that company, who was accounted discreet, and wise,
presenting himself before them, said unto him: o Theodore, if the God whom thou
adorest have a son as thou say, tell me; whether he has begotten him after
the manner of men; who seek out solitary and obscure places, as being loath to
be seen, in so base, and shameful an act? S. Theodore answered: my God
feels no shame in the generation of his only begotten son, but it is a
heavenly generation, convenient unto God only, and so I do believe, and
reverence it. But do thou (which seem to be a discreet and considerate man)
tell me, do thou not hold and repute it, for great reproach and infamy, to
adore for God, a woman (as your Cibele mother of the Gods) who after the manner
of a she wolf, from time to time, is great with child, and brings forth
children? At this question of S. Theodore, not only that saucy fellow was put
to silence, but also the judges cast their eyes to the ground; noting well the
substantial reason of the yongman, and how unfit it was, to adore for a
Goddess, a woman, who was always, either with child, or else that was
delivered of child. Afterward, studying what to do with S. Theodore, they
determined to let him go at liberty, and they gave him time, wherein he should
be better advised what he would do. It may be (said they among themselves)
that when he has thought better on it, he will leave his foolish opinion, and
obey our Emperors. These men called the wisdom of the yongman folly, as they
which be stark dronk, use to call them dronck, which be sober, and most free
from that distemper. The time, which was assigned unto S. Thedore to advise,
and deliberate, he converted to the effecting of a renowned deed, which was
this.

There was in Amasia, the chief city of that province, a Temple, dedicated
unto Cybele mother of the Gods; which Temple was near unto a river, that ran
by the city. S. Theodore determining to burn it to the ground, for the better
performance, expected a wind, that should drive the flame: and so setting fire
unto it, the Temple, and all therein contained, was consumed to ashes. By this
heroical deed, he gave answer of his determination, in the time that was
given him for advise. Great was the vproare and tumult that the pagans made,
searching for the kindler of the fire, entending to punish him, with the
greatest torments that might be imagined. There was no great difficulty in
finding him, for S. Theodore himself confessed that he had done it, and in his
words and countenance, he showed himself to be well pleased with the act, and
the rather, for that an Idol of the same Goddess had been burned therein.
This on the other side was as dispeasing to the paga^s, who held that Idol in
high estimation.

They took S. Theodore, and haled him unto judgment, howling and yelling
generally, as if they had been beasts, or out of their wits. The judges
demanded of them; if he had kindled that fire? The holy saint forthwith
confessed; that he had done it, and willed them to make ready torments, for he
was prepared to endure them. The desire, and willingness which the judges beheld
in S. Theodore to suffer torments, made them have the less will to torture
him, wishing to themselves the like courageous stomach, as the yongman had.
Whereupon, without regard of the complaints, and exclamations of the common
people, who (fearing their Gods would chastise them all, for this trespass
that Theodore had committed against them) besought them with great instancy to
put him to death.

In this rage and fury of the people, the judges said to S. Theodore: notwith
standing thou have deserved death, yet we will pardon thee, and make thee high
priest of the Idols, if thou will sacrifise unto them, and leave and
relinquish the name of a Christian. The blessed youngma^ deriding them said: In
deed you promise me great preferment, and that which may move a man to follow
your counsel. For the priests of your Idols, I hold them to be accursed
wretches, and if I be made chief of them, I shall be made the most accursed
wretch of them all. Long since have I laughed at this folly and madness of many
great men; that sometimes the Consulls, yea the Emperors of Rome themselves,
would take the office of the high priest (which you promise unto me) under a
show of religion, and they which were first clothed in purple, were clad after
in the habit of fools or madmen. And many times they cut in pieces living
beasts for their sacrifice, putting some part thereof to seethe, and some to
be consumed with fire. Such a blindness is not committed, but by them that be
blind, as they be, since by leaving the adoration of the God of heaven, they
adore Gods made of wood, stones, and metal.

The Judges hearing the reasons, perceived they lost their time, and could not
prevail with Theodore: wherefore they called him a sacrilegious, blasphemous,
and wicked villain, and commanded he should be tormented. They bound him unto
a post and whipped him, then rent they his flesh with crooks of Iron, and put
burning torches unto his sides. The more dillige^t the execucioners were to
torture him, so much the more cheerfully the blessed martyr (as if he had been
in a pleasant garden) song this verse of David: I will always bless our Lord,
his praises shall ever be in my mouth. When the cruel officers were tired,
they took him from the post, and cast him into a dark dongeon, in the which
were heard all that night voices, which song sweetly, and the room was filled
with an admirable brightness, and those that were without were partakers hereof.

When the keeper of the prison perceived it, he called some company unto him,
and went into the place where S. Theodore was, finding no more persons there,
but the holy saint, and the rest that were prisoners as he was, who were all a
sleep. The next day they tormented him again, and seeing him firm, and
constant in his faith, they gave sentence that he should be burned, and the
judgment was put in execution. As the holy saint stood in the fire, praising,
and glorifying God, the fire indeed took his life away, but spared his body,
for it did not consume, nor scorch one hair of his head. Wherefore a religious
woman called Eusebia, wrapped it in a clean sheet, and enterred it, that we
might enjoy this precious treasure, which has caused this assembly of people,
to honor him, and celebrate this day of his triumph, where every one is helped
for his sake. Out of this man he casts devils, another he delivers from
infirmities, unto others he releeueth the infirmities of the body, unto others
the necessities of the soul. There those that be tossed with the tempests of
the world, find a safe port, and secure haven. There the Orphants find a
father, the pilgrins an Inn, the afflicted a comforter, and help for them that
are in necessity.

O thou holy saint, and glorious martyr Theodore, that art among the quiers of
Angels, vouchsafe to go unto the presence of God, and pray before the throne
of his majesty for us, that be in this place assembled, to celebrate the
triumph of thy blessed martyrdom. Incline to us that call upon thee, honor
thee, and be present at the sollemnity of thy feast. And though our corporal
eyes cannot see thee; yet cast down thine eyes unto our sacrifises, and bow
thine ears unto our prayers. make present hereof we beseech thee unto the
majesty of God, desiring him to harken unto us, and to hear thee, that unto
him may be recommended, thy country, which is also ours, thy brethren,
kinsfolk, friends, and they, that unto thee be religiously minded, who be here
present: and that he would defend us from all our enemies in general, and in
especial, from these barbarous Scithians. Thou as a valiant soldier fight for
us, as a holy martyr pray for us. Obtain for us a perpetual peace, that we
may employ our selves, in the service of him, whom thou seruest.

And if perhaps there needs greater help, speak unto thy brethren to acompany
thee. Call unto Peter head of the Church, speak unto Paul doctor of the
Gentiles, and unto John the beloved, and famous divine; that the Churches,
which these men have founded, and the souls whom they have converted, may
remain constant, in the holy and Catholic faith, which they once received.
That they may be also freed from heretics and heresies, from tyrants and their
tyrany; and by confessing JESUS CHRIST boldly, and faithfully serving him, they
may afterward posesse and enjoy him eternally, being partakers of his grace
in this world, and of his glory in the kingdom of heaven.

The holy Church makes commemoration of S. Theodore, on the day of his
martyrdom, which was on the 9. of November, about the year of our Lord 300.
Diocletian, and Maximian being Emperors. The body of S. Theodore is in the
Church of S. Savior in Venice, whether it was brought from Constantinople. And
it is certainly belueeued, that it is he, whose life we have here written,
though there were more martyrs of this name.

The life of SS. Trypho, Respicius, and Nimpha, Martyrs.
GREAT was the pride of that hauty king Pharao, in persecuting the people of
Israel, Exodus 1.
seeking all means he could to hinder them from increasing. But the blessed
God of heaven ordained, that the more dilligent the wicked king was against
them, so much the more he should remain defeated, in his enterprise, and
disgraced, all things falling out contrary to his designs, and intent, for the
people multiplied, and increased the more

The same befell unto the devil, for in the first growing and spreading of
Christianity, he desired to root out the Christians, and to that intent he
stirred up the tyrants, to put them to death, and martyr them, as indeed
innumerable of them were. But the more he labored herein, the more the number
of the Christians increased.

This may be seen by the example of three holy martyrs, to wit: SS. Tripho,
Respicius, and Nimpha. The devil began with one of them, thinking to end with
him, but the two others seeing his martyrdom, offered themselves voluntarily,
and without compulsion unto martyrdom, and to dye in company with him, for the
love of CHRIST their Lord. The manner hereof, as it is extant in diners
martyrologes, was in this sort.

SAINT Trypho was borne in Rome, in a street called Saxea. He being very young,
exercised himself in good and holy works, and God by his means did some
miracles, by healing persons posessed with the devil, and grieved with other
infirmities. In that sharp persecution of Decius, this holy saint showed
himself zealous of the honor of God, by preaching JESUS CHRIST publicly;
without fearing the Edicts of the Emperor, or the cruelty that his officers
used against the Christians. He encouraged the feeble, and animated the
faintharted, not to dread the torments which should quickly end, and were
means to attain perpetual joy in heaven.

A governor called Quilinus, being certified hereof, and finding it to be very
true, for that S. Trypho himself confessed the same, he commanded he should be
tormented. The first was the ordinary torment, that was: to tie him unto the
Equuleus, where his body being racked, it was rent and torn with hooks of
Iron. Then set they burning torches unto his sides, and gave him many blows
with kno^ted staves; and lastly, his feet were burned through, with hot
burning nails.

S. Trypho tolerated all this with a courageous mind, and a cheerful
countenance, so that a Tribune called Respicius seeing it, considered thus: That
a man of flesh and blood, could not have such strength, nor tolerate so great,
and so many torments, if he were not asisted, and helped by God: And if God did
help him, it was certain, that he was very high in his favor: Whereupon, it
might be truly gathered, that the God whom this holy man confessed, and for
whose sake he endured so many torments, and by whom he was so much helped, was
the true God; and that all the other were false Gods.

In the time that Respicius stood in these considerations, there came to him a
gracious dew from heaven, unto which he made no resistance, but openly
confessed, that he was a Christian, When the officers that tormented S. Trypho
heard this, they laid hands on him, and began to torment them both together.
Then did they lead them into the Temple, unto the statue of Jupiter: and S.
Trypho kneeled down, not to adore it, but to make the statue fall in pieces to
the ground, as appeared evidently, by that which followed.

There was present hereat a damsel called Nimpha, who seeing this miracle, said
with a loud voice: JESUS CHRIST is the true God, and those which the Gentiles
adore, be false Gods, and of no force, seeing the prayers of the Christians,
make them fall to pieces. By occasion of these words, Nimpha was likewise
tormented with SS. Tripho, and Respicius. The officers beat them with certain
whips, which had plu^mets of lead tied to the end of every cord. This was given
unto them with such cruelty, that they all three yealded their souls unto God
in that torment. Which was on the 10. of November, in the year of our Lord.
251. In the reign of the aforenamed Decius. And on the same day, the Church
celebrateth their feast.

The life of S. Martin, Bishop and Confessor.
WE read in the first book of kings of that valyant and courageous young man
David, Cap. 17.
that when he returned with victory, from the battle with that fierce giant
Golyas, he made all them that came to see him to wonder.

He was young; well proportioned, and talle of body, as Caietan notes well upon
this place, and gives this reason, saying: that Saul put his armor on him,
when he would have sent him against the giant; and that David refused them;
which was not, for that they were to big, but for that he was not used to
bear armor.

Of Saul we know by the Scripture, that he was very tall, and then David
necessarily must be so also. 1. Reg. 9.
He was beutifull, and well set, and had also a comely countenance, and went
in leather like a sheapheared, he carried in the one hand the great head of the
Giant, and in the other the blouly sword, which had cut it of. The stern and
grimme sight of the Giants head, made the beauty and comelynes of David to
seem more. The people came wondering, and euers one was delighted with the
sight of him.

In this manner came he before Saul, with whom was Ionathas his son, the heir
of the kingdom, who seeing the behavior of David (as the text says) took
such affection unto him, that even there in the sight of them all, he took of
part of his garments, and put them upon David.

Thus much of this figure serves for our propose; that Ionathas did show his
great love unto David, in bestowing his garments on him. The same did the
glorious S. Martin with JESUS CHRIST, for with him he divided his garmets,
wherein he showed, that he loved him much, as is evident in the discourse of
his life, written by Seuerus Sulpitius, which we have abridged in this manner.

SAINT Martin was borne in Sabaria, a town of Hongarye. His parents were of
noble blood, but they were Gentills: his father had been Coronell of the horse,
in the army of the Romans, and was retired to his house, to rest, and repose
himself. Martin being ten years old, went to the Church (against his fathers
mind) and requested to be made a Catechumen; which was, to write his name in
the roll of them, that desired to be Christians, for after they were well
instructed in the faith, they were to be Baptized. He spent his time in serving
of God, and intended no other thing, but to please him, conuersing always with
his servants in the Church.

There he was enstructed in learning, and good behavior. He had a great desire
to go and live a solitary life in the desert, if his tender age had not
hindered him, and also an edict that came from Rome, which commanded; that the
sons of the ancient souldyers should be enrolled, and serve in person in the
wars. By this occasion, the father of Martin, who disliked the holy desires
of his son, caused him to be enrolled, and sent him unto the wars, being
then 15. years old; and in those wars of Constantius the son of
Constantine the great, and Julian he served.

He was in the ordinary garrison of Pauia a city of Italy, and with him he had
a servant, unto whom many times he gave attendance: such was his humility. They
eat at one table, and sometimes Martin pulled of his boots, and made them
clean; yea it is said, that once having a servant of a good nature, he
dismissed him, and looked for another, that should be stark naught, that he
might have occasion to merit more. He served in the wars. 3. years, before
he was Baptized, yet he eschued the vices, which be ordinary, and usual
amongst soldiers.

He was affable, courteous, and charitable to his equalles, lowely among his
companions, he was sober and temperate in the cherishing of himself; in such
sort, that he seemed rather a relligious man then a soldier, and before he was
baptized, he did all, that a good Christian should do. He took that wages
which was given him, and reserved no more thereof for his own use, then that
which was necessary for the mayntenance of his person; the rest he gave unto
the poor: for those virtues and charitable acts which were in him, he was
beloved of all men.

On a time as he entered the city of Amiens, which is in Gallia Belgica, he saw
a poor man naked, that craved alms of them that passed by. It was winter, and
extreme cold: S. Martin was at that time armed, and had no other garment, but
his soldiers coat. The holy saint seeing no man to bestow any thing on the
poor man, cut his cote in two parts with his sword, and gave one half thereof
to the poor man, and the other part he reserved for himself. Many saw this
deed; and some laughed to see him with half a garment; and others were ashamed,
to consider they had not done the like charitable deed in all their life; and
better might they have done it, since they might have clothed the poor man,
and not have unclothed themselfs.

The next night, S. Martin being in a sound sleep he saw (in a vision) CHRIST
covered with the piece of the garment he had given unto the poor man, and
drawing nere unto him; asked if he knew that garment? Then he heard CHRIST say
to his Angels, Martin being yet a Catechumen, has covered me with this
garment. By this does evidently appear that which JESUS CHRIST said in the
gospel: That which is done unto the poor, is done unto me. S. Martin was not
proud of this, but yielded thanks unto CHRIST for it, and was very earnest and
diligent to obtain Baptism. and desired to leave the service of the wars;
but at the entreaty and importunacy of his Coronell, he stayed until his time
was expired. He was Baptized at the age of. 18. years, and remained still a
soldier for the space of two years, after which time he left the wars by
reason of a peace ensuing, which seemed to be miraculous, and was thus.

The armies being ready to join battle, a peace was made, upon very honorable
conditions, for the side, whereon S. Martin was: yea it is thought, that
almighty God made it, for his holy saints sake, who being abused in words by
his captain, who called him coward, and base fellow, saying also, that he
desired to leave the soldiers life, that he might not be endangered in that
battle; S. Martin offered to pass through the enemies squadrons with out any
armor; for which cause God to preserve him from that iminent danger, procured
an honorable peace to be made for his side.

Then went S. Martin to S. Hillary Bishop of Poiters, with whom he remained
some certain days enjoying his holy company, and was edified by his virtuous
behauior. Then desirous to return into his own country, he took leave of S.
Hillary both of them weeping abundantly at their departure, at which time S.
Hillary gave unto S. Martin the order of Acolite, and besought him to return
back unto him speedely.

S. Martin traveling on the way was like to have been murdered, for certain
thieues lying in wait for him, one of them striking a full blow with his sword
to wound him, and another bearing it of with his weapon, S. Martin showed no
fear at all. And being demanded the cause, he made answer: I never had
less fear in my life, for that I serve a Lord, who (I am assuered) will not
abandon me in a greater danger, then this is. Hereof the holy saint took
occasion, to preach unto them JESUS CHRIST: and one of those thiefs was
converted, and entered into relligion, and died a blessed man.

At last he came to his own country and preached the faith of CHRIST unto his
father and mother. His mother was converted, but his father continued still in
his Idollatry, and after that, many other persons were converted to the faith,
by his means.

At that time the Arrian heresy was spread very much in the country, where S.
Martin preached: and because he only publicly resisted them, the heretics did
persecute him with all extremity, and on a time they imprisoned him, and
scourged him publicly, (so shameless they were,) and not content herewith,
they sent him into exile.

S. Martin departing from his native country, returned into France, and there
he understood, that S. Hillary was also banished by the Arrians, wherefore he
passed into Italy, and builded a monastery nere unto Millan, where some
Catholics assembling together, lived jointly with him a monastical life. But
he was there also grievously persecuted, by a principal Arrian heretic,
called Auxentius, who after he had done him many wrongs and abuses, never
ceased, until he had driven him from thence also.

S. Martin yealding to the time, took sea, and came to an Island called
Gallinaria, in the company of a holy priest: where they two remained a good
space, susteining themselfs with the roots of herbs only. Then news came
unto him, that S. Hillary was returned unto his Bishoprique. wherefore he
determined to find him out, and when he came thither, the holy father received
him very lovingly.

S. Martin dwelling there, built another monastery nere unto Poiters, unto
which place came a Catechumen, to be instructed in the faith and holy behauior.
It happened that S. Martin being absent, the young man fell sick, and died; and
whilst the other relligious men prepared to bury him, the holy saint came, and
made great show of sorrow, for the death of that his disciple, and coming into
the room, where the dead body lay, he bad all the other depart out: then he
shutt the door, and remained there two hours in prayers; and he that was dead
began then by little and little to recover his senses, and returned to life, and
perfect health. When theother relligious men saw it, they gave unto God
infinite thanks; and the young man that had tasted of death, was baptized, and
lived many years after. S. Martin raised to life another dead man, who had
hanged himself (as it was thought) upon a melancholic humor predominant in
him, depriving him of his understanding: but by the prayer of S. Martin he
recovered, and was restored to his life and health also.

The fame of this holy saint was spread very far wherewith the citizens of
Towers being moved, sought means to have him to their Bishop, but it was a
hard matter, to get him out of his monastery. They that went for him, used this
wile, to get him away: Aman that loved the monastery, told him his wife was
sick in Poiters, and desired him to go thither, to visit and heal her. S.
Martin upon this occasion departed from the monastery, and the messagers of the
city of Towers, carried him away by force, before the monks (who had labored
to hinder his departure) perceived it. S. Martin was received in Towers with
great joy, by all the common people, who said all with one voice; They were now
happy, since they had to their father and pastor, so holy and humble a man.

After he was made Bishop, though he changed his estate, yet he altered not his
life, for he was as lowely, and was appareilled as meanly as he was before
time. He discharged his office and duty to the full: for he was very diligent,
in procuring the good of his flock, and in repelling all evil from them. He
reproved vice, commended virtue: he preached, he punished, he rewarded, and did
not omit any thing, that was couenient and fit to be done; so that thereby he
discharged fully his duty toward his neighbor. To discharge his duty toward
God he caused a monastery to be built upon a craggy mounteine, two miles from
the city, to which place were assembled many relligious men, and there he had a
cell, into which he withdrew himself oftentimes, to pray, and to live in
contemplation.

The relligious men who arose in short space to the number of 80. moved by the
example of S. Martin lived a holy life, in chastity, poverty, obedience, and
continual fasting and prayer, and their habites were made of camells hair.
Their diet was very temperate, none dronk wine, except he was sick, and they
went very seldom out of their cells. S. Martin had some of these monks always
in his company; and when he stayed any time in the monastery, and returned into
the city, they that were posessed of the devil gave notice thereof, by the
fear and dread they showed, and by the pain they suffered before he entered
the town, and this befell, into what city so ever he came.

This holy prelate used great diligence, in the extirpation of Idollatry out
of his diocese, and traveled into many places, throwing to the ground the
Idols of the Gentills, cutting down, and burning the groves and trees, wherein
the devils gave oracles and aunswers, for which cause he was oftentimes in
danger to be murdered by the common people, but his deportment and carriage was
so discreet in all his affairs, accompanied with some miracle, in the sight of
them that were agreued at his doings, that sometimes whole compaines fell at
his feet, and besought him, they might be made Christians.

It would be a long story to recount, how many sick he healed by his prayers:
but among others, one was Paulinus, over whose eyes was grown such a web
that it made him blind, and also put him to much pain. The holy saint did
cleanse them one time with a napkin, and he was made whole, his sight restored,
and his grief ceased.

After this S. Martin (being Bishop) raised to life the son of a distressed
poor mother, whofinding him in the city of Cha^tres in the company of many
Idollaters, laid before him her dead son, and requested him very earnestly to
raise him unto life. The holy saint made his prayer for him, and he revived.
This miracle caused many of those pagans to come to the faith of CHRIST.

S. Martin (after he was Bishop) raised to life none but this child; and
because he had raised unto life two before that, he used to say unto his
disciples and friends; that he was better by two parts, before he was Bishop,
then after, and that his high dignity had diminished his virtue. It is apparent
the holy man said these words for lowlines and humility: for it is well known,
that after he was Bishop, he did many admirable and virtuous deeds, which he
had not done in the former time. But this declares and shows his charity,
and humility.

He was Bishop when he came into Paris, and saw at the gate a leprous man so
full of soies and blaines, that the only sight of him was grievous, and
importable to many; the good prelate came close to him, and embraced him, and
laid his face on the face of the leper, he kissed him very charitably, and
there with cuted him, and made him whole. This leper (whom the whole city had
seen) came the day following to the Church, and gave thanks publicly unto
God, for the recovery of his health.

He was Bishop when Sulpitius who wrote his life visited him: who^ he received
most kindly, and gave him hearty thanks that he was come from Tolose to Towers,
only to see him. The blessed man himself washed his feet, made him sit at his
table, at the which he filled more his soul, then his body, hearing his words,
enkindled with the fire of celestial love, and the gravity of his reasons.
This Author said: I never saw, nor conuersed with any mortal man furnished
with such science, wit, and eloquence, and such abundance of pure and chaste
words, as I found in Martin: and it made me more to marvel, for that I know
he was unlettered. The sum of his speeches, were of the contempt of the
world; to avoid vice; to love virtue; and that which he said, he performed also
in deed. Noe tongue is able to express that, which I noted to be in this holy
saint, in the time I lived in his company: I never saw him angry; I never saw
him displeased or discontent; much less to laugh after a dissolute manner: and
this was, because that what so ever befell, he received it, as sent from God.

The austerityes of his fastings, watching, continual wearing of sackcloth,
were things rather to be admyred, then imitated. He slept continually on the
ground: he used to eat, and sleep so little, that it seemed impossible he could
live with it. He was never idle; when he had dispatched the affairs and
business of his Church, he spent the rest of his time in reading the holy
scripture, mixing it with prayer. Herin he did as the smithes do, striking
upon the hot iron, who that they may continue the better, give now and then
an idle blow: even so did S. Martin, as for a recreation, praying one while,
and reading another. O blessed man, in whom was found no guile nor double
dealing! he never condemned ne judged any; he never rendered evil for evil.

When he was Bishop, he would reprove men for their offenses against God, and
chastise them for aggreuances done against their neighbor; but he never
reproved nor chastised any offense or aggreuance done against himself. In his
mouth you should have always the holy name of JESUS: in his heart was nothing
but piety and mercy; and he would persuade all to make much of that virtue. He
gave an especial charge unto his monks to be obedient; saying be obedyent unto
man for the love of God; since the same God would be obedyent unto man, for the
good of all mankind.

He used som-times, to speak some pleasant words, by which might be taken some
ghostly profit for the soul; as he did one time, when he saw a sheep newely
shorn. This little beast (said he) has performed the Evangelical precept: for
she having two garments, has given one to them, that had none; and so we
ought to do. And this the blessed saint performed also not long after: for
being ready one day to say mass, a poor naked man asked an alms of him. The
blessed Bishop commanded the Archdeacon to buy a garment for the pooreman: but
the Archdeacon, who had in charg to give many alms, was slack, and loath to
give it; whereupon the poor man got up into the vestry, where S. Martin was,
and told him; that the garment was not given him, as he had bidden.

The holy saint forth with pulled of his own garment, and gave it to the poor
man. The Archdeacon came in then, and told him; that the people stayed to hear
mass, and thought him long; the blessed man answered; he could not come out,
until the poor man had his garment given him. The Archdeacon replied; the
poor man is gone, I know not whither, and S. Martin said: Bring (I say) the
garment, we shall find a poor man to receive it. The Archdeacon went out in a
chase, and bought a course garment, and of a small price, and cast it before
the saint on the ground. He took it up, and put it on, and then he reuested
himself to say mass.

When he held up the B. sacrament at the elevation, his arms were left bare,
for that the sleeves of the coat were so short, and the sleeves of the Albe
were too wide. Some that were in the Church, saw the Angels to cover his
arms with plates of gold, which shined very bright. It is said; that hereof
comes the use, that over the priestly garment called the Albe, they put the
maniples of silk, or some fine stuff, finer then the Albe is; but all men use
it not so, nor in all countries: for it was so ordained by some particular
Churches, but not by the pope in the Church of Rome.

The Angels did descend unto the place where S. Martin was, yea one day two of
his disciples heard him talk in his cell, and knowing that none went in, but
himself they entreated him to tell them, with whom he talked; and being
importunated by them, he said: I will, upon condition, that you shall not speak
of it to any man, as long as I live. Know you, that there was the mother of
God, and with her S. Agnes and S. Tecla; and he declared marks of the
countenaunces of our Lady, and the other two saints. moreover he told them,
that sometimes S. Peter and S. Paul had talked with him. This holy saint was
slow in resoluyng and determyning of any weighty matter.

On a time the devil reproved him, for that he received them that committed
heinous sins unto penance, and among others them, that denied the faith,
saying; that God would not pardon them. When S. Martin heard these words, he
said with a loud voice. If thou (miserable wretch) had sorrow for thy sin,
and done due penance, the mercy of God is so great, that I would obtain pardon
of God for thee also. Well, the sanctity of this good prelat, was diuulged
every day more and more.

At that time Maximus ruled the West Empire, which he had usurped upon two
Emperors, murdering Gratian the one, and putting Valentinian the other unto
shameful flight: who fled unto the emperor Theodosius who governed the empire
in the East. This Theodosius shortly after returned the same measure unto
Maximus, as he had done unto Gratian, for he deprived him of his life and
regiment both at a time, and restored it unto Valentinian.

This Maximus had married a noble Lady who was a good Christian, and had a
special affection unto S. Martin. She persuaded her husband (keeping their
court in France) to send for S. Martin to come unto them. Maximus, (though he
was a tirant) did so: not so much for the love of his wife, as for to see S.
Martin, of whom he had heard great reports, and unto whom he bare good
affection. It cannot be expressed, how joyfully the holy saint was enterteined
especially by the empress, who appointed lodgings for him within her Royal
court, where the good prelat treated with the Emperesse of many important
matters, as well bodily as ghostly; and she stood at his feet, like as
Magdallene did before the feet of CHRIST, washing them with her tears.

The good empress forgot her estate, her riches, her pomp, and her self also;
yea she was beside herself, when she was in contemplation of that holy saint.
And he that in his life for the space of 60. years, had never permitted any
woman to come near him, could not forbid the empress to touch, and to kiss
his feer: She also by her many tears obreined of th'em perour and of S
Martin, to dine together at one table, without any other atte^dants, but her
self in person.

When dynner time came, it was a memorable sight to see the dillingence, the
Empres used to serve the holy man. She covered and furnished the table for him:
she placed the stools: gave him water for his hands: and then set on the
meat, which she had dressed her self for him. Whilst the holy saint did ear,
she was careful, that nothing should be wanting. With her own hands she
powered the wine into the cup, when she gave him drink. And when the holy
saint had done eating, she voyded the table, gathered up the meat that
remained, which afterward she eat, thinking it to be more sauory, then if it
had been after the most royal manner she had used before time.

Another time the emperor invited S. Martin, and made him set at the table, and
appointed at religious priest, that came with him, to sit by him, and many great
Lords were set thereat also. When the holy saint asked for drink, the Emperor
bade his cup should be carried unto him, thinking, that when he had drunk, he
would have restored it unto the emperor: but S. Martin did not so, but gave in
to the priest that satt by him; gyuing them to understand, that he was of more
excellency, then the emperor by reason of pri^stly functio. And that which
others would have raken as a reproach, the emperor, and all they that were at
the table commended.

The Emperor Valentinian the second, being restored unto the empire after the
death of Maximus who put him to flight, did not behave himself so. for 5.
Martin coming one day to visit the emperor, who had a wife infected with the
heresy of Arrius, and therefore an ennemy unto S. Martin, she requested
the emperor not to do him any honor, and he yielded to her desire. The
blesled prelate came into the room, where the emperor was, who stirred not
from his seat. The holy saint came nearer unto him; yet the emperor stirred
not, nor made any sign of kindness or curtesy. It was surely the will of God,
that the seat where the emperor sat, fell a fire of it self, and burned and
flamed out. When Valentinian felt the fire, he rose in have and stumbled,
having already burned his clothes, and scorched his skin; and considering
what the cause was, he went toward S. Martin, and did unto him very great
reverence, and before the holy saint said any thing, granted unto him, what
soever he came to demand.

Another time S. Martin went to visit a holy damsel; and it is good to make
memory of her, for the example of others, to the end, the may be advised, that
(if they shutt their gates against apparent wicked men) they should not always
open their doors unto them, that seem to be good. There was in a little village
a damsel, who hued secret and private, whose good report was diuulged thorough
the chiefest cities of France, as well for her beauty, as for her verruous
livers, so that their house seemed to be a monastery.

S. Martin being told of her, was desirous to see, if the report made was true.
and though he was estranged from the conversation and visiting of women, yet
one day passing near unto the village, he desired to see that young woman. All
the people (as the use was in all places where the holy man went) came out to
meet him, as if he had been one of the Apostles, so much they reioiced to see
him.

The holy saint turned out of the way, to go to the house of that virtuous
damsel; who being certified that S. Martin came to visit her, and being fully
resolved not to alter her determination, she sent one of those women, who kept
her company, unto. s. Martin to excuse her, and to alleadg a reason, why she
came not out to meet him. The blessed man accepted it for very good, and as
well done. and praised exceedingly the young woman, and said; that her virtue
surpassed the report that went of her.

S. Martin being gone unto anot her town, the damsel sent unto him a
present, which the holy saint received with a cheareful countenace, though it
be not known that ever he received any gift of any woman but that, in all his
life; and when he received it he said: it is not fit a priest should refuse the
present, sent by a damsel, that was more virtuous in her life, then many
priests.

This good pastor went sometimes to visit his diocese: and at one time
(among others) he came unto a samll village. Because it was winter, they
prepared his lodging in the vestry of the Church, in which place they made him
abed, and a fire also. They holy saint went to rest yet because he was not used
to lie but on the ground, the bed was trouble some unto him. And being desirous
to throw the couerlet of him, by chance he cast it on the fire, and perciued
it not; at last he fell on sleep, and the couerlet began to burn, and set fire
on the room. The flame being now gotten to the top of the house, S. Martin
started up, and ran to the door; but he was so troubled, that he could not
open it. His priests and monks were without, in great care and grief, for that
they knew not how to help him, or save the house. At last the holy saint
determined to fall to his prayer, as the general remedy in all his dangers,
and so he did: whereby it came to pass, that the fire was extinguished, and he
was delivered from all danger in a moment.

He was often in dangers by sundry persecuitions of the Arryans, who never
permitted him to be attepose or quiet, as appeared in many Counsels, in which
the holy saint was present, wherein they outfaced, menaced, adn used
reproachful and opprobrious words of him: yet the holy man prevailed, and
continued a constant and valyant defender of the Catholic Roman Church, unto
which he was always subject, as an obedyent son ought. This good prelat bare
such a reverence in the Church, that he was never seen to sit therein; but
either did kneel or stand on his feet, and being asked the cause, he said:
know you not, that God is present in this place?

Finally, being now old, and tired with these conflicts with the devil, and
his mynisters (the fiend oftentimes appearing unto him, and sometimes by
threats, and other whiles by craft and surrlery seeking to do him harm) and
the time of his death approaching, which he knowing by revelation, being at
Candacense, (a place in his dyoces) he asembled his disciples together, and
certefied them, that the hour of his death drew near. This news, putting
them in great sorrow, and grief; they said unto him: dear father, why will thou leave us? unto whom do thou recommend us? behold the hungry wolfs will
assail thy flock, and there will be no means to repair the loss, when then
shepherd is gone: we know, thou defirest to be with CHRIST, and we know also,
that thy reward remains sure and certain in he auen, and that it is not
lessened, though thou stay with us a little space. Have pity on us, that shall
be left alone, and abandoned.

S. Martin, heating these words, was moved to pity and compassion, and
shedding tears, his eyes fixed also toward heaven, said: Lord, if thy people
have yet need of me, I refufe not the pain and the travel, but thy will be
done: Thus this glorious father was distracted bettewne love and hope and knew
not, which to elect. It grieved him, to leave his disciples: and he was not
willing to stay any longer, from enjoying the presence of God, unto whom he
remitted all. O man rightly to be called valliant, who was not overcome by
travel and pain, much less by death! he feared not death and refused not to
live.

His fever increased, and his disciples seeing his end to approach, and that he
lay on the earth and ashes, which was his usual bed, requested him then to
permit cherishing and comfort to be done to him. And he answered. A Christian
should not dye but on hair cloth and ashes: then it is more fit that I do so,
who am your master, and prelate, and am therefore obliged and bound to give you
good example.

Then they requested him to turn his head a little on the one side, and not to
hold it always upright to look upward, being so painful: and he said: Let me
look up toward heaven, since that very shortly my spirit is to go that way,
which I behold. When the agony of death came, he saw the devil (the ennemy of
mankind) and said unto him: what do thou here, thou cruel bea^. Thou shall
find in me nothing, for which I shall e^damned: and having said thus, he
rendered his spirit to our Lord being 81. years old.

His blessed soul was borne into heaven accompanied with many Angels, who
made much joy, and song melodiously. This music was heard by sundry persons,
that were in places far distant, as of seuerinus Arch B. of Collein, and by
S. Ambrose Arch Bishop of Millan. Who saying of mass, fell a sleep, from the
which, he awaked after three hours; and then said to the standers by: know
you, that my brother Martin B. of Towers is departed out of this life, and I
have been present there to bury his body.

S. Martin lived on the earth poor and humble: and intred into heaven rich and
with great majesty. His death was on the. 11. day of November, (and on the same
day, the Church celebrateth his feast,) and it was in the year of our Lord.
399. in the time of the Emperor Honorius.

This holy saint did many miracles in his life time, and also after his death:
Whilst he lived, he was the means, that many were converted unto God by his
good example, and excellent doctrine: and after his death, many were helped by
his merits and in tercession.

God of his great bounty, and infinite mercy grant, that we may be in the
number of the chosen, to the end we may enjoy his glory, in the company of S.
Martin. Amen.

Many Authors write of S. Martin, beside Seuerus Sulpitius, as S. Paulinus
Bishop of Nola, Fortunaus the priest, Gregory of Towers, Odo the first Abbot of
Cluny: Hebernus Bishop of Turen, and many others.

The life of S. Menna, Martyr.
OUR savior CHRIST says unto his servants in S. Matthew. Ca. 30
When you shall be brought before kings and Judges, take no thought what you
shall speak, for at that time you shall be tought how to answer. This sentence
is verefied in a holy soldier called Menna, who haning spent his time in the
war, among swords and lau^ces, being brought before a tirani, that did
examine him of the faith of CHRIST, which he professed, made some answers, as
if he had been exercised in the study of the holy scriptures, all the days
of his life. Of this holy saint, Metaphrastes writes as ensues.

IN the second year of Caius Valerius Dioclesianus, and in the first year of
Caius Valerius Maximianus, after the death of Numerianus, who had governed the
Empire before them, there was raised a sore persecution against the Christians,
through all the lands subject to the Empire. Into which were sent public
proclamations, containing the will of the Emperors, and the punishment that
should be inflicted upon those that disobeied the same.

There was in the city of Cottieum, which is in the province of Phrigia (or
in Asia minor) a president calsed Pirrhus Arginiscus, who had the government
of that province, and had also authority over the men of war, which were
resident in the same, as a garrison for defense thereof. Notwithstanding, they
had a general captain over them, called Firmilianus. Among the soldiers
there was one in the regiment of Rutilus, called Menna, by nation an Aegiptian,
and by profession a Christian; whose virtue shone among the rest, as the sun
does above the stars. The Emperors edict came unto this city, the tenor
whereof was this: Dioclesian and Maximian Emperors to all their subjects
se^deth greeting Forasmuch as we acknow ledg, to have received many favors,
and graces of of the sovereign Gods, for which we thinck our selves obliged
and bound, to procure all honor and service, to be done unto them, and their
Temples: We therefore command all magistrates, and captains of our Empire,
that as soon as they have notice of this our Edict, that they endeavor with
all diligence (as a thing that concerns the saffetie of our estate, and the
honor of the Gods our benefactors) that all our subjects, as well men, as women,
of what estate or condition soever they be, do worship and adore them, and do
offer sacrifice, in visiring often their temples. And those that be
disobedient, and rebellious against our comaundements, that they be tormented,
in the most cruel forte, that may be invented. This was the tenor of the Edict.

As Soon as the president received it, he caused it to be proclaimed through
all the city, and other places of his province. Commanding withal, that
presently after the proclamation, all men and women should go unto the Temples,
to the end, the disobedient persons might be known. In most places where the
proclamation was made, there were great murmurings amongst the people, for that
it was thought both unjust, and cruel; yet the greatest part of people went
(of force) unto the Temples, to obey the Edict. When the valiant soldier so
Menna understood hereof, he was not able to endure so unjust, and unrighteous
proceedings; as to have the veneration and worship of the true GOD JESUS CHRIST
to be abolished; and that in stead thereof reverence should be done unto the
fiends. Because he would be free, and not be partaker of this wicked
transgression, nor so much as see it, he departed from the army, and withdrew
himself into a desert, where he remained five years, leading a sollitarie
life, in continual fasting and works of penance, which was as an exercise, and
an entrance into the war, and battle, which he expected shortly to make.

At the last, inspired by God, he returned into the city, upon a day, which
was kept very sollemne, as the birthdaie of one of their Godds. The people of
the city were generally assembled into a Theater, expecting certain martial
exercises, as Iusts, and turneis. And there was also the president Pirrhus for
the same purpose. S. Menna entered into the midst of the show, and with a loud
and clear voice he rehearsed a text out of the Pophet Esaias, Ca. 65.
which says: I have been found of them that sought me not, and manifested to
them that asked not after me. At these words, all the standers by, fixed their
eyes upon him; and seeing him to be a rude plain man, meanly apparelled, they
know not what to make of his words nor what he meant by them. The president
Pirrhus causing him to be brought nearer unto him, demanded of him, who he
was? He answered: I am Menna the servant of JESUS CHRIST, who is Emperor of
heaven and earth. The president enquired further. Art thou a stranger or a
citisen, that thou seek to disturb our feastiuall shows in this manner?
what is thy meaning herein? One of them which stood by said unto Pirrhus: I
know the man well. He is a soldier of the regiment called Rutilica, whose
Coronell is Firmilianus; and it is about five years, since he abandoned the
Ensign, and left the war. Then said Pirrhus unto him: Tell me, Art thou a
soudier as this man says? S. Menna answered: It is true, I was a soldier, but
when the wicked Edict of your Emperors was proclaimed, I left the army, and
departed from the war. What moved thee said Pirrhus to leave the warfare?
Art thou a Grecian, or a Christian? S. Menna answered: I have been, I am, and I
desire to be ever a Christian. I left the host, because I would not be partaker
of your impieties. So Pirrhus committed him to close prison.

On the next day giving audience, he commanded that Menna should be brought
before him; and then he said unto him: Come hither thou presumptuous fellow,
what moved thee to come into the Theater; and to hinder our festival days,
which are celebrated in the honor of our Gods? Whence art thou? why did
thou leave the army? S. Menna answered: I am of Egypt, and because I desire to
fight under the banner of JESUS CHRIST; I forsook your armies, which be but
seeble, and weak. And where have thou been, said Pirrhus, all this time? Menna
answered: I had rather live a sollitarie life, for the love of my God in the
company of savage and wild beasts; then contine we with you, that know not
the true God, and loose my soul. for it is written: Lord do not destroy my
soul with the sinners, nor my life with the bloodthirstie men. Soft, not so
many words said Pirrhus. Offer sacrifice unto the Gods; and they will restore
unto thee, the honorable offices thou haddst in the host, and augment the same
also. Menna said: I only desire to please the eternal king, and of him to
receive the crown of imortallity. Loose not time in threatening me; for I
regard not thy torments at all: but desire rather to suffer, for the love of
Jesus CHRIST my Lord, and my God.

The Judge commanded: that Menna should be laid flat on the ground, and then to
be beaten with raw sinews of beasts, until he obeyed the commaundment of
the Emperors. The executioners began to beat him rigorouslv, and during the
torment, a minister of the Idols labored by persuasion, to bring him to
sacrifice to their Gods. The blessed M^itir said to him: Why do thou
persuade me thus? thou counselor of darkness? and captain of iniquity? If I
would not do it at the commandment of the Judge, do thou think that I will do
it at thy persuasion? I give thee to understand, that I have by my side JESUS
CHRIST, who (for this which I suffer, and endure for his sake) will give unto
me, an eternal reward; and unto you and your Emperors he will give perpetual
torments, not only for your own sins and Idollatrie, but also, because you
do your endeavor, that he should not be loved, not served by his own
faithful servants. go to (said Pirhus) make ready the other torments, to tame
the stub brone heart of this fellow.

Forth with was prepared for him the torture with the cord; in the which the
holy saint hanging on high, the Judge said unto him: Menna, do thou yet
remember thy self, and will thou yield, or shall we provide greater torments?
The blessed martyr answered: very little is that I have yet suffered, to that,
which my Lord and king deserves I should suffer for his sake; because he
keeps about me many Angels, that asist and help me, encouraging me not to
shrink at thy torments. Pirrhus said: Scourge this villain and rebel; yet
more severely; who having a king already faith he has another, which is not
known. Then said the saint: Thou indeed do not know him; for if thou
diddst, to have his love, thou would forsake thine Emperors, since he can
better reward thee, then they can. And who is this great and potent king said
Pirrhus? S. Menna answered: This is JESUS CHRIST, the son of the living God,
creator of all things: unto whom, all that is in heaven and earth is subject.

Then said Pirrhus: Do thou not know Menna, that to be the only cause, why
our Emperors have commanded you Christians to be tormented? namely, that you
should neither profess JESUS CHRIST for God, nor adore and worship him? Menna
answered: what is that to me? If that be their intention, their power and
torments are of no avail, Romans 8.
to make me forsake my dearest Lord God It is said: Who shall be able to separate
us from the lone of CHRIST? or from his service? not tribulation, nor
affiction, nor famine, nor persecutson, nor dangers, much less the world. Be
assured, that, what soever persecution is raised against us, shall not make us
alter our minds.

The Judge commanded his gashed and wounded body, should be rubbed over, with
rough sharp clothes: which pain he tolerated very patiently. Pirrhus remained
astonished hereat, and said unto him: verily Menna, it seems thy body, which
is thus tormented, is not thine own, but borrowed of some other. The martyr
answered him: I feel not thy torments, because I have my God by me, who does
help and defend me; and unto those that have him with them, all things succeed
prosperously. Then said Pirrhus: set other burning torches unto his sides, that
we may overcome this his obstinacy.

The fire was brought, and applied; and although they burned his sides two
whole hours together, yet the martyr spoke not one word. Where upon Pirrhus
said: Do thou not feel the fire that burns thee? S. Menna answered: I
feel it not: for CHRIST gives me strength, who has said to me in his holy
writ: Esaias. 43.
That if we pass by the fire, the flame shall not burnevs. He says also in
another place; Mat: 10.
that we must not fear them that kill the body, and cannot kill the soul:
but him we must fear, that can send both body and soul into everlasting
fire. Then said Pirrhus: How can thou alleadg these testimonies out of the
books of thy God, being a soldier? when hadest thou time to read and study
them? Then said the blessed martyr: The same JESUS CHRIST our God, said unto
us: That when we should be brought before kings and Judges, for the profession
of his name, we should not care what to speak, for that he would direct us what
we should answer. Pirrhus said: Tell me Menna, whether your CHRIST did
foretell you, that you should suffer those torments? yet surely (said Menna)
for that he, being God, knew right well, all that was to happen in after times.

Well well (said Pirrhus) leave this vain talk, made, and divised of thine
own head, and sacrifice unto the Gods, or I will condemn thee to be consumed
with fire. Do thy will, said Menna, for as I have told thee already, although
thou have power to torment my body, yet have thou none over my soul. The Judge
said: will thou have days of respitte, to consider of this matter, that thou
may free thy self from this thy blindness and error? The blessed martyr made
answer: Long since have I determined and resolved, rather to die, then to deny
my Lord CHRIST. I am a Christian: and therefore expect not, that I will
sacrifice unto the devils. The Judge was so wroth with this answer, that he
caused calthropes to be set thick on the ground, and the blessed martyr to be
dragged, and haled over them. In this torment the holy saint said: Seek out
other tortures, for these be of too small force to make me worship thy
devils. Pirrhus being now more enraged, said: Beat him with cudgells, and
knotted thongs of leather, and buffet him on the face, till he cease to call
our Gods, by the names of devils. But all these things prevailed not, to make
the valiant soldier of CHRIST, show any sign of fear, or yielding.

There was present a noble man of the court, called Eliodorus, who said unto
Pirrhus: my Lord, these Christians be a people which regard no torments, yea
death is more welcome unto them then life. Do not vex nor trouble thy self any
more with this man, but give judgment of death upon him, (as he has well
deserved) for that he has abandoned his captain, and refused to serve in the
wars. Th^n Pirrhus said unto Menna: If thou will resolve to sacrifice unto
the Gods, I will cause thy captain to pardon thy former offense, and to give
thee more honorable office, and degrees. Menna said: God forbid, that I should
desire such offices and honors; I desire to have them in heaven where true
honor is to be had, not those of the world, which be vain and transitory. The
president seeing the constancy of the blessed martyr, (by the advice of the
other courtiers) condemned him to die, with these words: Because Menna the
soldier does not obey the proclamation of the Emperors and because he
follows the religion of the Christians, and will not sacrifice unto our Gods,
we comaund; that he be beheaded, that others (by his example) may fear, to
comitt the like trespasses.

The blessed martyr was led by the officers unto a place called Potemia, unto
which all the city was assembled. The holy saint with a cheerful
countenance (though meanly apparelled as making small account of any worldly
thing) went comunicating with some of his acquaintance, as if he had not been
going unto death. Recomending them unto God, and taking leave of them, he
lifted his eyes toward heaven, saying: I bless, and praise thee, o father
eternal, for that thou have hitherto kept me, and have not turned thy face
from me, Thou have given me strength, that I should not loose my soul, with
this treacherous and faithles people; but that I might confess constantly thy
blessed name, and thy holy law. I beseech thee through JESUS CHRIST thy
son, that thou will help me, at this hour of death, and deliver my soul, in
granting it victory in this last assault, that it may appear free before thy
judgment seat, and there worship thee. Saying this, he came to the place of
execution; where falling on his knees, and looking toward heaven, the hangman
cut of his head.

Then they cast his body into a great fire, but the fire consumed it not, so
that some devout persons took it, and buried it in a place convenient; whither
many Christians resorted, craving mercy at Gods hands, by the prayers and
merits of this his faithful servant Menna; Who was of Egypt; honorably borne;
just, faithful, mild, and virtuous; and replenished with the grace, of the
Holy Ghost.

He was martired in the city of Cottieum, in the province of Phrigia, on the.
11. of November, in the year of our Lord, 301. [ Spa: says 296.] And on the
same day, the Church makes of him a commemoration. The body of this holy
saint, was after ward translated unto Constantinople.

The life of S. Martin. Pope and Martyr.
THE noble king David would not give leave, 2. R^g. 2
nor permit one of his soldiers, to kill his father in law Saul, when he
might easily have done it, and theother well deserved it, coming to pursue and
search him out, with an army, and a full intention to kill him, if he could
have gotten him within his danger. And though David found him fast a sleep in
his pauilion, and in like manner, all his guard, who should have watched in his
defense; yet would he not once touch him. The reason, which David alleged,
was: because Saul was the anointed of the Lord.

It happened far otherwise unto the glorious S. Martin Pope and martyr: who
being anointed and consecrated, and moreover the vicar and lieutenant of
CHRIST in earth, yet some Christians in name, but in their deeds, worse then,
Pagans, were so bold, as to take him, and use him villanously; as may appear
by his life, collected out of the book of Poper life's, called Pontifical, and
out of other good Authors.

SAINT Martin the first Pope of that name, was the son of one Fabritius, and
borne in Todi a city in Tuscane, a very holy man, and virtuous. As Soon as he
was elected to the government of the Church, he employed all his uttermost
diligence and endeavor, to extirpat and root out some heresies, about the
person of JESUS CHRIST, already condemned in former Counsels: The man who did
bring them again out of hell, (where they had been a good space buried,) into
the world, was a Patriarch of Constantinople, called Paulus: who had some other
prela^s that abbetted him, and were wrapped in the same error. These won
the emperor Constans (the second of that name,) to be of their sect and
opinion, such sleights and devises they wrought with him.

The legates of the Pope, who resided there, certefied him of the proceedings of
Paulus the Patriarch; The Pope incontinent appointed by his letters what order
should be taken therein, and wrote unto the same Paulus loving letters,
beseeching him; not to be so determinately stubborn in ruynating the peace of
the Church, and in patronizing of his errors, so many times condemned by the
holy prelates ingreat assembles, and general Counsels.

Paulus being by nature proud and obstinate, to show what small account he made
of the Popes aduertisements, caused an Altar, which the legates had set up in
the Church, founded by Placida, (upon which they said mass, after the Roman
use) to be cast to the ground, and defaced. The malice of Paulus was so much
augmented, that because the legates, on the Popes behalf, required him, (when
they saw his obstinacy) to amend his fault, and reform his errors, or else
they would proceed against him as a contumacious person, by the censures of the
Church, he made means to the emperor to cause the legates to be restrained of
their liberty and evil entreated; and afterward he sent them into banishment,
into sundry parts of Christendom, which was; as if he had sent trompets, to
sound and publish the malignity of the Patriarch, the tyranny of the emperor,
and the misbelief of them both, being obstinate in the error, condemned by all
the Catholic Church.

when Pope Martin had understanding thereof, he had recourse unto the ordinary
remedies, in the like occasions; and assembled a Council of 105. Bishops in
the Church of S. Saluator, near unto S. John La'eranne. And the question of
the aforementioned errors, being again disputed, certain Canons were
published, by which, all the ancient heresies, and this also, being lately
revived, were condemned, and anathematised; and with them Peter, Cirus, and
Sergius their Patriarchs deceased; accursing, detesting, and depriving Paulus
the Patriarch now living, and all his followers and adherents, of what state,
condition, dignity, or function so ever; and depriving them also of all
offices, and benefices ecclesiastical. And to the end, this holy Council, and
all the decrees and Canons of the same, should be diuulged, and published
through the world, Pope Martin caused many coppies to be sent into most parts
thereof.

The Emperor Co^stans understanding, what the Pope had done in the Council,
took such indignation thereat, that he determined to apprehend, (if he did not
kill) the Pope, in revenge of this injury as he esteemed it. For this purpose,
he sent into Italy (in which, at that time, the Emperors of Constantinople had
some cities and countries) one Olimpius, a noble man of his chamber, but an
heretic, as he himself was, and gave unto him the title of Exark, or Regent,
with secret instructions what to do.

Olimpius arrived at Rauenna, which was the ordinary place of residence of the
Exarks, and having amassed and gathered huge forces, as he could, went toward
Rome, where he endeavored to make a schism in the Church of God. But not being
able to compass and effect it, because the Bishops of Italy, and the Clergy of
the city were of one accord, and held together, in the defense of the faith,
and of the Pope: he then divised means to entrap the Pope, and to take him
prisoner. But finding it hard to be effected, because he could not get him out'
of Rome, where he was well beloved, and had many friends: he lastly determined
to kill him.

For the effectuating of this devise, he agreed with one of his servant, an
ancient soldier, and told him: he had procured the Pope to say Mass, the day
following, in S. Maria Mayor, where he would require the Pope, to give him the
B. Sacrament; and as he communicated, this desperate fellow should come nere,
and stabbe the Pope with his dagger. The soldier promised so do. The next day
came, and the Pope said Mass, and Olimpius, like another Judas, came up to
communicate; yet lingered, till his man came, that should do this treacherous
deed. but our B. God altered all this: for he caused the man to loose his
sight, and though he was hard by the Pope, yet he saw him not: which thing he
confessed many times after with solemn oths. By this means this infernal
sacriledg was not committed, and the holy Pope escaped free from this
treacherous invention.

Aftetwadrs the Sarracens invaded the Island of Sycile, in the which they made
great spoil, and by cause at that time, it was subject unto the emperor,
Olimpius was obliged to go and defend them and so he did; being first
reconciled to the Pope, and making unto him a relation of the true causes of
his coming into Italy. Olimpius fought with the Saracens in a pitched field,
and vanquished them; yet so great was the toil he took in the battle, that a
few dais after he deceased.

When the emperor was advertised of his death, he sent in his place as Exark,
Theodorus Calliopa, who had been there before, and had behaved himself so well,
that he was beloved in Rome and all Italy. Every one reioiced at his coming;
but at the end, every one was deceived and deluded: for the emperor had drawn
him unto his opinion, and had enioined him; that, as soon as he had imprisoned
the Pope, he should send him unto the emperor with a strong guard. And because
he had no assured confidence in him, he joined with him in commission (for the
affairs and business with the Pope only) one Paulus Pallurius a servant of his,
of whom he had this opinion; that he would not fail to perform, what soever
he should command him.

Calliopa and his associate arrived at Rauenna, and with outlong stay, went
unto Rome, where he stayed some few days, treating with the Pope about many
and several businesses: but all that he did, was in deceit. The Pope, (who was
a plain meaning man) had no conceit of the treachery which Calliopa intended
toward him. So that Calliopa one day fained (being in the lodgiing of S. John
Laterane) to go and visit the Pope: but in steed thereof, he laid blows on
him, and the Pope being unable to defend him self from that violence was put in
prison. Calliopa sent him incontinent in bonds unto Paulus Pellarius, who
conveyed him withal speed unto Rauenna, and from thence unto Constantinople.

The wicked emperor Constans reioiced exceedingly, that he had gotten the Pope
into his hands, and endeavored with flattery and fair promises, to draw the
good Pope to favor his error, but finding him steadfast in his faith, he
banished him unto the city of Chersona, which is in the outmost borders of the
sea Euxinus, a very cold country, and almost inhabitable. There the good Pope
was so afflicted, and evil entreated; that within few days, he died very
patiently, as a glorious martyr of JESUS CHRIST.

Pope Martin the first of that name, after the most certain account, died in
the year of our Lord. 654. on the. 12. day of November, and on the same day,
the Church celebrateth his feast. His body was after this brought to Rome, and
buried in the Church dedicated unto him and S. Siluester. God did many miracles
by the means of this saint, who was his vicar in earth 6. years one moenth
and 26. days. He gave holy orders twice in the month of December, in which he
ordered 11. priests. 5. deacons, and 33. bishops.

The life of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus.
HE that bele^ueth in me says CHRIST; John 14.
shall do the works and miracles that I do, and greater also. This sentence was
most plainly verified in S. Gregory Bishop of Neocaelarea, which is the same,
that is now called Trabisonda. Of him it is written: that by his prayers, he
made a huge great rock, as big as a hill, to go from one place unto another.
And also, that he made a lake, which caused discord between two brethren, to
dry up: and he stayed a great river, that it should not ouerflowe, to hurt the
inhabitants by the banks thereof.

We do not read, that our Savior CHRIST did any of these things. we doubt not
but he could have done them; yet he did them not, that his words might be
fullfilled, when he said: that his faithful servants should do greater
miracles (after a certain manner) then those that he did. And because it was
evident in this holy saint, he had the surname of Thaumaturgus, that is a doer
of marvelous things, given unto him. His life was written by S. Gregory
Nissen in this manner.

SAINT Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, was borne in the city of Neocaesaria,
of honorable parents; and even from his childhood he spent his youth in all
virtuous exercises. When he grew to more years, he gave himself unto the
study of philosophy, by which he came unto the knowledge, that the adoration
used by the pagans, was a vain thing, and without foundation, and that there
neither was, nor could be any more, then one God only. This was the cause, that
he listened willingly unto the Gospel, and to the faith of CHRIST; for that
he perceived, that the same acknowledged one God only. He saw also, that the
thing which the Christian believes although it surpass natural reason,
(since a philosopher cannot attain by natural reason some things) yet nothing
is quite contrary unto the same reason: which hapeneth not in any other sects.
Lastly, being aided by God, he determined to be a Christian; and came unto
Baptism, without those things, which others receaning the same at his age, do
bring with them.

And if until that time, he had loved the moral virtues, now he exercised
himself much more in them, and namely his great chastity, which made other
young men of his years, to be ashamed of their lewdnes, and wanto^nes. His
humillitie reproved their pride; his mildnes and patience their intemperance;
so that they enuyed him, and charged him with crimes falsely and slanderously,
to the end, he should not be accounted better, and more virtuous then they. And
upon this, they made an accord with a lewd woman, persuading her; that at such
time as Gregory was in the company of other philosophers, and wisemen, she
should complain of him and say: that he had the use of her body, promising
her a certain some of money; but afterward, that he deceived her, and gave her
nothing.

S. Gregory was on a time in company with many persons, who gave willing ear
unto him, disputing of certain subtle questions, with admirable grace and
eloquence; his apparel being comely, but mean, such as he used every day.
The lewd woman came in, and made her dishonest, and untrue complaint; and
partly threatened, according to the apointment given her. They which were
present, hearing this, turned from the woman, and fixed their eyes on S.
Gregory. Yet knowing right well that he was clear from such a matter, and
that it was a suborned accusation; they turned back unto the woman, minding to
thrust her headlong out of doors. But the blessed man, without changing his
countenance, or forswering the act, calling one of his servants, said unto him:
Give unto that woman what she demands, least she hinder our discourses. The
servant asked the woman, what his master ought her, and she telling him, he
paid it to her.

But God would not permit the chastity of this holy man, to be thus
stained; and the woman to escape without due punishment. for she had no sooner
received the money, but the devil entered, and took posession of her, tormenting
her in such sort, that every one perceived her wickedness. Yet the holy man,
was moved unto compassion, and prayed so long, and fervently for her, that the
devil departed, and left her free. The woman being recovered, published openly
her own iniquity, and told how she was hired by those ungracious, andenuious
young men, to do, and say, that which she had said, and done. Nevertheless, S.
Gregory was better content to be accounted bad, then to be so indeed.

He having now proffited sufficiently in humanity, and philosophy, grew to the
study of the holy scripture; having for his master Origin, a man conformable
to his desire, and most renowned through Christendom in those days, as well
in divinity, as in good and virtuous life. S. Gregory went to find him out,
and became his disciple, remaining in his company so long, as was sufficient,
by reason of his aptnes, and quick wit. Then returned he unto his native
country, where every one expected, that he would discover, and lay open, the
treasures, which he had gotten in his studies; that he might reap some fruit,
with fame, and honor for his long trauells. But he, to avoid worldly glory,
(taking some of his familier friends in his company,) went into a desert,
living solitarily with them, in continual penitence, spending the greatest
part of his time in prayer, and reading the holy scripture.

There was at that time, a holy man called Fedimus, Bishop of Amasia, who was
not only a great scholar, but also very virtuous. He much desired, that in the
city of Neocaesarea (the native place of Gregory) there should be a Bishop,
that Idollatry (which was strong in that place) might be ouerquelled, and that
Christianine might be augmented; for it was openly said: that in all that
city, there were but 17. persons, that professed the faith of CHRIST. This
good pastor thought Gregory would be a fit man for that place, the fame and
report of his learning and life, being so diuulged into diverse parts. He went
into the desert to find him, with intent, to give him the order of priesthood,
and make him Bishop of that city.

S. Gregory being certified thereof, left his habitation, shifting from one
place to another. Fedimus labored to find him, so that the one sought him, to
make him Bishop, and the other fled from that high dignity. At last Fedimus
being weary with seeking him, and they being three days journey one from the
other, Fedimus lifted up his face toward heaven and said: O Lord, thou see
right well, both me and Gregory: I desired to have him present, that I might
have laid my hands upon him, and have consecrated him; but let my words work
the same effect: I consecrate, and offer him unto thee (o Lord) and unto him I
give the charge of the city of Neocaesarea, that he may spread the Gospel
therein, and in the territory thereof, that thy faith and servants, may
increase and multiply, to the honor and glory, of thy most holy name. These
words said Fedimus.

S. Gregory hearing and understanding these words, yealded, and would not
resist any longer; supposing, that if he had done so, he should have resisted
the will of God. The^ he came unto Fedimus of himself, and by his presence was
performed all the ceremonies, which in such a case are accustomed to be done,
for the making of a priest and Bishop. S. Gregory required respite for a time,
whererein he might study, how he might best exercise his office; which being
granted, he spent certain days in prayers, desiring God to instruct, and show
him, how he should perform his duty.

Whilst he was in his devout prayers and contemplation, there apeared unto him
the mother of God, and S. John the Evangelist, his especial aduocats. And, by
the apointment of the B. virgin, S. John gave him instructions, in what manner
he should govern; and of the mystery of the holy Trinity, teaching him,
what he should say, and what definitions, and words he should use. They
commanded him to go forthwith into the city, and to begin to preach, and
convert souls unto God. S. Gregory obeying forthwith, went on his journey
with his familiers and friends, that were in his company.

As they travailed, they near benighted, were unto a Temple of Apollo, not
far distant from the city, into the which, S. Gregory and his friends
entering, he made the sign of the Cross in the air, and forthwith flew away a
huge company of devils, which inhabited there, and gave oracles and answers
unto such persons, as came to make sacrifice unto them. S. Gregory spent the
greatest part of the night in prayers, and singing Himnes and Psalms, so that
the place, that was before the habitation of devils, became now the house of
God.

In the morning, S. Gregory departing to go on his journey, the ministers of
the Idols, (who had the charge of the Temple,) entered therein to, and making
their acustomed salutations and sacrifices unto the Idol; in stead of answer,
there was heard yellings, and howlings out of the Temple, and the devils said:
that they could not enter again into that house, because Gregory had been
within it. Notwithstanding, the ministers made sacrifice unto them, and used
certain ceremonies, to induce them to return into the Temple: but they bad
tho^ not to weary themselfs, nor to loose their time, for they could not
return into that place by any means. The ministers were also informed, that
it was Gregory, and where they should find him. Having learned this, they
determined to follow him, and found him and his company, as they walked toward
the city.

The ministers of the Idols, began to threaten him, that they wo^ld complain
to the maiestrates of the city, for that he, being a Christian, had entered
into a Temple of their Gods, and driven them from their habitation, so making
their Oracles to cease. S. Gregory with great mildnes and modesty said: Be not
offended hereat: for I serve such a Lord, as I can in his name, cast out
devils from any place, and make them to return whither I please. They
maruailing hereat, said unto him: Then make them return into the Temple, where
they were before. S. Gregory rent a leaf out of a paper book he had, and
wrote thereon these words: Gregory to Satanas, ENTER. This note he gave unto
the minister, who laid it upon the Altar, and offered sacrifice, and the devils
gave answers as beforetime.

The minister pondered upon this, and considered; that when Gregory commanded
their Gods, they obeyed him; and that he did it, by his service unto one God.
Hereupon he resolved, that this God was very potent and mighty, since his
servants could do such great things. After this resolution made, he departed
from the Temple to seek out Gregory, (who by Gods providence had done these
things, expecting the fruit to come thereof) and found him. He told him what
had happened, and besought him instantly, to instruct him, what his God was,
(so great and potent) for he would serve him, and forsake these other Gods, so
weak, and feeble. S. Gregory preached unto him JESUS CRH^T, and having given
him notice of the principal mysteries of our faith, said: we do not prove
these things by reasons, because they surmount reason, and natural
understanding; but we confirm them by miracles. The minister of the Idols
said: do a miracle in my sight, that I may believe what you have said, and
Baptize me. What miracle would you have me do (said S. Gregerie.) The minister
beholding a huge great stone, like a mountain, said unto him make this huge
stone, to raise it self from this place; and to go into another. S Gregory
doubted not to do it, and as if the stone had been a reasonable creature, he
commanded it to go unto the place the minister had appointed. His words being
ended, the effect followed. The minister remained so satisfied herewith, that
he, his wife and children, servants and friends (unto whom he related the
matter performed by the saint,) were all Baptized.

S. Gregory came into the city, and lodged in the house of a great man
called Musonius. To this house resorted many, unto whom the holy saint preached
with such fervor, that in a short space there were thousands of Christians in
that city. In this discourses he gave content, and delight to all. To the
discomforted, he used such words, that they took consolation. He persuaded the
young men to chastity, the old men unto patience. He exhorted servants to be
obedient to their masters, and advised masters to be mild and courteous to
their servants. He said: rich men ought to be stewards, and not masters of
their goods. To women, children, and all other that came to hear him, he
spoke that which was convenient, and fitting for their estates; reaping daily
proffit by his preaching.

There was in that city many Temples of the Idols, whereupon, the holy saint
thought fit, that there should be one at least built to the honor of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST, wherein he might be adored, and served. The charge
hereof, he gave unto the chiefest of them that were Baptized, and himself in
person laid the first stone in the foundation.

Eusebius Caesariensis says: li 7. c. 25.
that this holy saint (by his prayers) made a hill to remove from one place
unto another, because it hindered the building of the Church. Gregory of
Nissen does not say thus much, but he says: that in his time, there was a
great earthquake in that city, which threw down the greater part thereof,
but that the Church founded by Gregory Thauma^urgus stood firm, and stirred
not. Great were the miracles that God wrought by the means of this blessed
saint, and by his preaching the Gospel, many people were daily converted unto
the faith.

Among many other wonders, this of the two brethren is notable. They two
dividing the many posessions and land left unto them by their father, fell at
variance about a water, which controversy was caused by a great lake, in which
much fish was taken, and each of them desired, to have that water for their
part. This matter came to that height, that they had assembled many people, and
intended to end their quarrelly by the sword. The holy saint came between
them as vmprie; but seeing no means to bring them to atoneme^t, (they being
even ready to come to handy strokes, hard by the lake, and it was feared much
blood would he shed;) This glorious saint fell unto prayer, and continewed
therein so long, till the water in the lake was dried up; and the ground
thereof was equal with the banckes; so that there remained no sign, either of
water, or lake. When the morning came, the two enraged brethren, seeing now no
cause wondering at this great miracle, that God had done, by the means and
prayer of his servant Gregory.

After this miracle, ensued another. The people dwelling by the bancks of the
river Lyous, (which descends from the mountains of Armenia, and sometimes
increases so much, that it ouerfloweth and spoileth the fields and villages
of the country near adjacent) having knowledge given them of S. Gregory. sent
messengers, requesting him, to vouchsaffe to come, and give remedy hereunto:
for they were not able, by man's wit, or any strength to restrain it. The holy
prelate went thither, and veiwed well the place; and considering withal, that
it would be inconvenient for them to remove their dwellings, having their
houses ready built, and their ground about them; He took his staff which he
usually carried in his hand, and planted it a pretty distance from the Riue^;
on that side, from whence the ouerflowing came, and where the plain fields
were, and many houses of the inhabitants. This holy saint having planted his
staff, went unto prayer, and not long after, the staff waxed green, grew,
and became a very great tree. Then S. Gregory said: this shall be the bounds
of this flood, and the water shall not pass this mark. This blessed man
returned into the city, and it was after seen by experience, that when the
river rose to the hghiest, as soon as the waters came unto that tree, they
returned back, and ran down the channel again, not ouerflowing, as they had
done before-time. By these, and such like works, that S. Gregory did, both in
the city, and in the country abroad, the number of the faithful increased
continually; all sorts of people making great account of him; being advised,
and directed by his counsel, in all their important, and weighty affairs.

The citisens of a city thereby, sent unto S. Gregory, beseeching him to
come, and apoint over them a prelate. S. Gregory coming thither, and
examining some of those that stood for that dignity, was neither satisfied,
nor liked not at all of them. The people with one voice, said as it were in
scorn; If Gregory like none of these, let him take Alexander the collier. S.
Gregory hearing these words, demanded what that Alexander was, and appointed
them to bring him to his lodging. This Alexander was a man of middle age,
meanly apparrelled, his hands and face being black with coals. Those that
brought him laughed, and so did they that were with S. Gregory, and the
collier himself laughed, seeing them to laugh at him; being well pleased, to be
contemned, and scoffed at by them. S. Gregory beheld him, not as others did;
but thought that under that contemptible show, lay hid things of greater
value. He called him aside, and charged him deeply, to tell him sincerely who
he was. The collier opened truly his whole life unto him, to wit: that he was
a philosopher; and that to avoid the vainglory of the world, he had taken
this course of life; and had made himself a collier, not for necessity, to get
his living, but for the desire he had to live chaste, for living thus (says he)
I have no mind of any dishonestie, nor any woman will tempt me unto lewdnes,
seeing me so black and vnlouelie. moreover this good collier said: that the
greater part of the gains of his coals, he gave unto the poor, fullfilling
the counsel of the Gospel.

S. Gregory caused him to be stripped out of his clothes, his hands and face
to be washed, and then to be apparelled with the like garments as he wore
himself. Then assembling the people together, he told them: he had now found
out, and made choice of such a Bishop as was fit for place. They with great
attention, expecting the person elected by so wise, and holy a man, behold,
Alexander the collier came out, apparailed after the same manner that S.
Gregory was, and accompanied by the same familiers, and friends. Those that
were present, knew not whether they should laugh, or take it in evil part,
that such a one should be given them for their Bishop. S. Gregory made aspeech
unto them aduertising them, what a man Alexander was, whom he commanded to
preach in their hearing. The new Bishop obeyed, and preached in such sort, that
they all remained no less astonished, then satisfied. Thus they being all
pleased to have him for their prelate, Gregory, consecrated him Bishop of that
city; and he discharged his office with great comendation.

After this, the holy man returning unto his city, was met by two Jews (in
the high way) who knowing him, accorded together to deceive him. The one of
them lay flat on the ground, faining himself to be dead, and the other wailed,
and made great lamentation. The holy saint coming by, demanded of him the
cause of his sorrow? The Jew answered. O servant of God, vouchsaffe to help and
comfort me: look with pity upon the misery of this my compagnion, who is
fallen dead on a sudden, and I have not any thing to wrap him in before he be
buried. The good man being moved to compassion, put of one of his garments (as
we may say his rochett) and laying it on the counterfaite dead man, went on
his ^ourney, leaving the Jews alone.

The man that had used this deceit toward the holy saint, and had told him
that his fellow was dead, came merrily to his companion and said: Come fellow,
rise up now, we have gotten a good prise see; we have gained this good garment,
and deceived this man whom the Christians hold to be so wise. But the Jew which
lay on the ground answered not, nor sturred any whit at all. The other spoke
louder and said: O how cuninglie thou can counter faite? but I pray thee
rise now, for here is not any body near us. Yet for all this, the Jew lay
still, and stirred not. For as soon as the garment of S. Gregory lay upon
him, and touched him, he was deprived of his life. And so the jest, and scoff
returned, and light upon himself in good earnest.

In those times there was raised a most grievous persecution against the
Christians, and the Edicts of the Emperors of Rome were proclaimed, wherein
they commanded: that the Christians should either sacrifise unto the Idols, or
else, that they should be put unto most cruel death. These proclamations came
unto Neocesaria, and S. Gregory being certified thereof, admonished publicly,
and advised the Catholics, to give place unto this fury, by departing from
the city, until this tempestuous storm were passed over. And himself also
by divine inspiration (as afterward appeared) went with one of his disciples
(who had been minister of the Idols, and was converted, and made deacon by
him) unto a mountain, and there lay close certain days. Other Christians
dispersed themselves into diverse parts.

It was a lamentable thing, and would have moved a stony heart unto compassion,
to see the cruelty that was used in Neocesaria, and the persecution by the
pagans; who continually prepared chains, gallowses, swords, savage beasts,
and an infinite number of other tortures, and all to torment the Christians.
You should have seen the fathers to persecute their sons, and the sons to
persecute their own fathers. The brother procured the death of the brother,
and one friend sought the death of another friend. Some did this under show of
relligion, others for malice, and most, to make themselves rich with the goods
of Christians. For these causes they sought for them, found them out,
aprehended them, put them in prison, and at the end, unto some cruel death.

Notice was given (by some informers) that Gregory lay hidden in the
mountain: whereupon officers were sent forth with to aprehend him. for the
judges thought, that if they put him to death being the chief, the inferior
Christians would be discouraged, to make such bold profession of their faith.
S. Gregory (being on the mountain) commanded his deacon to make his oraisons.
So both of them kneeling with their hands lifted up to heaven, somewhat distant
the one from the other, they besought God, if it were for his service, that he
would deliver them from the persecution: but if his will was, that they should
dye for his sake, and love of his holy Gospel, they did like wise desire,
that his will might be done. The soldiers arryuing at the mountain, went up
and down all the hill, searching for them, and returned unto the Judge,
telling him: that they had found noting but two trees, somewhat distant the one
from the other. The Judge knew for certain, that Gregory was on the mountain,
and therefore he went thither in person alone, finding those that seemed to the
soldiers to be trees, to be Gregory and his deacon at their prayers. When the
Judge saw this wonder, God so touched his heart, that he went unto S. Gregory,
and fell at his feet confessing JESUS CHRIST to be the true God. And he that
before persecuted them, from thenceforth was one of them that fled from the
persecution.

Another time, the holy saint being in prayer, and with him some of his
disciples (with his deacon) he lifted up his voice on a sudden saying these
words of David: Psa: 123.
Blessed be our Lord, who has not suffered us to be taken in their teeth. His
disciples asked him why he said these words? and he answered: that in that
very instant of time, was finished in the city the martyrdom of a Christian,
who had valiantly overcome his persecutors, by continuing firm and constant
in the faith of CHRIST; and said he was called Troadius. The deacon asked leave
of the holy saint, and went secretly into the city, finding all that the
blessed man had said, to be very true.

The persecution then ceasing S. Gregory returned unto this Church, and
recollected together the faith full believers, that were dispersed by flight,
into sundry parts, settling himself again, unto the preaching of the faith.
By which means, some that showed themselves weak, in the time of persecution,
were reduced again to a good estate, and many Gentiles were Baptized. He used
great diligence, to know them that had been martyred, and appointed that their
feasts should be kept every year, on the same day, on which they had been
put to death,

The good father was now very old, and knowing that his death aproached, he
desired to be certifyed, how many Idolaters and unbelievers remained in that
city. It was told to him, there was left but 17. that continewed obstinate in
their Idollatrie. I am much agreeued (said the holy faint) that these continue
in such an error; but yet I yield infinite thancks unto God, because I leave
behind me unto my successor, but so many unbelievers in the Bishoprike, as I
found believers when I was consecrated Bishop. Then made he his prayer for the
Catholic Christians desiring God to give them grace, to continue in his
service: and he besought those that were present, that they would bury him
amongst others, and not in any peculier grave of his own. For I would have it
said of me when I am gone; that I had not in my life time an house of mine
own, nor after my death a sepulcre. This glorious saint, rendered his soul
unto God, on the 17. day of November, and on the same day, the Catholic
Church celebrateth his feast.

His body was buried as he had appointed; all the people making great
lamentation, but especially his disciples, and household servants, for loosing
so loving a father; and so good a master; although they were comforted, knowing
for certain, that they had him for their patron, and advocate in heaven. His
death was in the year of our Lord. 267. in the time of the Emperor Gallien.
Nicephorus Callistus, writes the life of this holy saint, in the 6. book, and
17. chapter.

The Dedication of the Church of SS. Peter and Paul.
THE wise king Solomon was not content to build a house and temple for the
great God: but having finished that work, He intended to do another: which was,
to build a lodging for his chiefest Queen, (among all his other wifes) who was
the daughter of king Pharao. In like sort also, our Lord God would not only
have Churches builded by the Christians, for himself to inhabit and dwell, and
therein to be honored, and reuerented; but his pleasure was, that there should
be also others builded for his saints whose souls were his spouses by faith.

For this cause the holy Church of Rome, celebrateth the feast of the building
of the Church of our Savior, and of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. The
which, I have gathered out of the lessons of the mattins of this solemnity, and
out of some particulers, which are redd in the lives of the Popes and
Emperors, which was in this manner.

IT was a custom in the Primitive Church for the Christians, to assemble
together, in priuar and set places, to celebrate the divine office, to hear
mass, to receue the B. sacrament, to hear the word of God preached, and to
make prayer. They were assembled to do these things, especially, in the places
where the martirs had been buried; and among other, one part of the Vatican was
highly regarded, which they called the Confession of S. Peter; for that his B.
body had been in that place enterred and thither resorted people from all parts
of the world to give honor and reverence unto it.

To that same place came the emperor Constantin the Great. 8. days after he
was Baptized, where he made his prayer, and shed many tears. Then he took a
mattock and dug up. 12. baskets of earth, which he himself carried away in
honor of the. 12. Apostles, in which place they should build a Church unto S.
Peter the head of them. Having thus begone, the work was continewed and finished
and S. Siluester the Pope consecrated it, on the 18. day of November in the
year of our Lord. 325. even as he had consecrated the Church of S. Savior on
the 9. day of the same month.

He made there an Altar of stone, and consecrated it, ordeining, that from
thensforth the Altars should be made of stone. The same Emperor Constantin
caused another Church to be builded in the honor of the Apostle S. Paul in the
way to Hostia, and enriched the one and theother with revenues, and adorned
them with vessels and jewels of great value. Great was the fervor and desire
this Prince had, to raze to the ground the temples of the Idols, through all
the world; and to build Churches, to the honor of CHRIST and his saints: but
especially in Rome, where beside the aforenamed, he builded in the field
Sossorium, the Church of the Holy Cross, that is called in Jerusalem, and in
the field Veranius, without the walls, he built the Church of S. Laurence, and
in the way to Lauico, he built a Church to the holy martirs SS. Peter and
M^rc^llin.

Hither to we have seen the occasion of the feast, the Church celebrateth, the
which is, The dedication of the Church of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul.
Now it will be good to see the reason why the Church makes such account of
these holy Apostles, and of all theother martirs and saints, that it builds
Churches unto them, in which the faithful do assemble, to celebrat their
feasts. Moreover it shall be good to see, what is the signification of the
Vigills and Octaues; and for what cause there is a greater feast kept of one
saint, more then of another. These may be thought by some, to be but curious
questions, yet they may be profitable, and it is very good (in my oppinion)
that every Christian should know the reason thereof.

First I say, that the Catholic Church has had many respects to celebrat the
feasts of the saints. On was, for that in the primitive Church they desiring to
extirpate totally the adoration of the Idols (wherein the Painims were
drowned,) the holy Bishops brought in this virtuous custom of worshipping the
holy saints, to the end, the memory of Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo, Venus, Mars,
and Diana, and of the other Gods might be abolished, by substituting in the
place of them S. Peter, S. Paul. S. James S. John, S. Stephen, S. Laurence, S.
Agnes, S. Agatha, S. Lucia, and theother saints.

Theother reason, that moved the Church was this, that in honoring, and making
feasts to the saints, there is feast made, and honor done unto God himself,
that made them saints.

The Church had also another regard, viz: to satisfy the obligement and duty
we all have and owe unto the saints. They rejoice in heaven, and make triumph,
when we convert our selves unto God; and therefore it is reason we should make
feast, and rejoice in that day, that they begin to enjoy the sight of God in
heaven; viz: the day of their death.

Moreover, the feasts of the Saints are celebrated because of the great need
we have of them, that they may pray unto God for us, the he may truly convert
us unto him; that he may give us perseverance; that he may deliver us from
tentations; that he may teach us to do his will; and that he may give us things
necessary for the sustenaunce of our life. All these things, and many other
such like, God does give us, by the prayers of his saints. And therefore it is
reason, that in some part, we do satisfy our great obligement, that we owe unto
the^ by celebrating their feasts.

Another motion the Church has to celebrate the feasts of the saints, was for
our example. for when we consider, that the saints were men as we be, formed of
flesh and bone, and subject unto the same frailty, and misery of our natures;
yet that they did such famous acts, and heroical deeds; supporting and
enduring such outrageous pains in their martyrdom; such cruel persecutions,
horrible reproaches, and lastly death; by which they came to be so honored and
rewarded by God in heaven: we also moved by their example, should strive to
imitate them. To this purpose, says S. Augustine, they do truly celebrate the
feast of the martirs, who follow their examples: for he, who does not follow
them in what he can, 2. Cor. 1.
can not enjoy beati^ud^ in their company. S. Paul says also: If we shall be
partakers of their troubles and passions, we also shall have part of their
consolations.

Concerning the Virgills of Saints, Isay: that a Vigill properly is not a day
of fasting, but of watching. And so it was used in the feasts of JESUS CHRIST,
of the B. Virgin, of the Apostles, and of some other saints; especially of the
patrons of the Church, when all the people, the night before the day of the
feast, came unto the Church, and remained there all the night in prayer, and
other holy exercises. This holy and good custom began some what to be
corrupted: for the people, who kept the vigills, if they spent a little time in
prayer, they spent a great deal more in eating and drinking; and sometime in
gaming, lewd talk, and uncomely behauior: yea, it came to such a pass, that
many foul and gross abuses were used in the Church. To remedy this mischief,
S. Ambrose (who was informed thereof by S. Monica, the mother of S. Augustine,
at her being at Millaine) did in his Church, as other Bishops in their
diocesses, and the Pope through all Christendom, change the vigills and
watchings into fasting, the day before the festival day, and yet it reteineth
the ancient anme of vigill still.

The vigill signifies also this present life: in the which, we must be
vigilant, and must support troubles, as the body does endure troble by fasting;
that we may have the feast in the next life. But he, that on the contrary side
will first have the feast before the fast, and will be merry and take his pleasure
in the world; let such a one know, that he must make a long and grievous vigill
in theother life: for he shall abide in hell fasting for ever.

For the Octaues: the Church began to celebrat them in imitation of certain
feasts the hebrews had, which lasted seven days, as the Pascha of the
unleavened bread; the feast of Tabernacles; and the Dedication of the Temple: So
the Church ordained, that some of her feasts, which are worthy of all honor
and reverence, (as well as they were) should have Octaues; to the end, the
solemnity should be greater: and in the office of these days, are many things
read of those solemnities, that the faithful might hear and consider the
same, and take profit thereby.

We read that the Idollaters assaulted the Macchabeis on the day of the feast;
and that they, because they would not violat it, (for they thought it was a
work to defend themselfs, and so a breach of the feast, though after ward, they
resolved to do other wise) suffered themselves to be killed rather. So do the
devils also: they do assault the faithful, on the festival days especially;
with more and greater tentations, then on the other days: which is the cause,
that sometimes the sins which are committed on the feast, be more heinous,
then theother of all the week, coming of frailty. For some be so frail and
feeble, that as soon as tentation comes, they confent unto it, and know not
how to resist or with stand it. Let the tentations be of gaming, murmuring, of
loss of time, of unseemly words, and of sensuality, they yield straight, and
resist them not. yet there be some worse then these, who do seek tentations,
and do not tarry to be tempted by the devil; for they themselves seek
occasions to offend God. and especially at those times, when we be most obliged
to to serve him: viz, on the feast day, or in their Octaues, which were
ordained, that we might have more time to be employed in the service of God,
and to solemnize them.

The reason then, why a greater feast is kept on one holy day, then another,
and more to one saint, then to another, is; because, one signifies a more
higher mystery then another. The Resurrection and Ascension of CHRIST, be two
high and principal feasts: yet there is greater solemnity observed in the
first, then in the second: for the cause abouementioned. The same reason is of
the saints. The Catholic Church makes a greater holy day unto one saint, then
unto another, for that the deeds of one, have been greater, then of the other:
or for that his estate and dignity was greater: or else for that he had done
more good in the Catholic Church.

And for this reason the feasts of S. Peter, S. Paul, of S. John Baptist, of
S. Laurence and other like saints, be higher, and more principal feasts, then
others, though they which have the lesser feasts, and they who have the
greater, be all in heaven contented, enioyng God in his glory, unto which he
bring us for his great mercy: Amen.

The life of S. Pontianus Pope and Martyr.
GOD commanded Moises, that to snuff the lights, that burned in the temple,
upon a candlestick which had seven branches, he should cause to be made
snuffers of the most fine and purest gold: These lights be a figure of the
priests, who are called light, by JESUS CHRIST: By the name of seven is given
to understand the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Then he commanding, that the snuffers, where with they must snuff the said
lights, should be of gold, would demonstrate, that unto them, they ought to
bear great respect: And that the reproving and chastising of them, though they
deserve it, is not granted unto every one, but only to him, that shall be of
such perfection, that he is likened unto the most pure gold: And he that
knows of himself, that he is not gold, but that he has some defect and
imperfection: Let him not touch the light: to wit, Let him not murmr, or
speak evil of the priests; but leave the matter to God, or else to his
superiors; who have the office from God, to reprehend and chastise them. But if
they leave the matter unto God, the reproof and punishment will be more severe:
and worthily shall the priests deserve it; if their life be not correspondent
unto the dignity, and function they have, above other men.

The holy Pope Pontianus having in mind the respect and regard, that ought to
be given to priests, makes mention, and gives many aduises in one of the two
epistles he wrote out of his place of exile, unto all the faithful: for he was
banished into the Island of Sardegna, not for any fault he had committed; but
for confessing the faith of JESUS CHRIST. The life of this holy saint, was
written in this manner, by Damasus, and other Authors.

BY the death of Pope Vrbane the first of that name, there was placed in the
seat of S. Peter Pontianus, the son of Calphurnius, borne in Rome. He lived
peaceably in the Papacy a while; and attended to the government of Church, to
the good contentment of all the Clergy and people. At the end of that time
Alexander Seuerus the emperor, who of his own nature was mild, and no ennemy
to the Christians, persuaded by the priests of the Pagan Gods, banished him
from Rome, and with him a priest called Philip, by some martirologes called
Hippolitus. Those two were conducted into Sardegna, and commanded, not to
depart out of that Island. In that place the blessed Pope Pontianus endured very
great troubles and afflictions: yet for all that he forgot not to govern his
Church with good and holy aduises and counsels, when he could not do any other
thing. In that Island, he wrote two epistles unto all the faithful Christians.
In the first, he commends (as has been above said) the veneration and
reverence, that ought to be used toward priests, in regard of the high mystery
they deal in, consecrating by their words, and holding in their hands, the
most Blessed Body of CHRIST our Lord. In the other he exorteth them all
generally, unto charity and brotherly love.

Some Authors attribute unto Pontianus the use, which is kept in the Church, of
singing the psalms of David, in the office of the Hours; and that he
ordained, that the priest before he began Mass, should say the psalm, Iudica
me Deus. but to conclude: the troubles and molestations of the holy Pope were
so extreme, which he endured in this banishment, that he died in the same
Island of Sardegna, on the. 19. day of November, when he had been Pope five
years 5. months and. 2. days.

He gave holy orders twice in the month of December, and ordered 6. Bishops 6.
priests and 5. deacons. His blessed body was buried in Sardegna: but some years
after, S. Fabian the Pope caused it to be brought unto Rome, and buried it in
the Churcheyard of Callistus among many other Martirs. And because he died in
exile through the vexation and trouble he endured, he was accounted among the
holy martirs. His death was in the year of our Lord 236* Maximinus being then
emperor of Rome. *

The presentation of our B. Lady.
THE great king Assuerus, having depryued Queen Vasthy his wife of the royal
crown; and having expulsed her out of his palace, because she would not obey
his commandments; All the princes, and great lords of his kingdom were
assembled, to seek out another wife for the king; which should not only be
equal to Vasthy, but should rather surpass her, in all favor, and beauty.

For this end, all the choysest damosells were sought out, through the realm:
to whom there was appointed a room by themselves, and an Eunuch called Egeus
had the charge of them; who saw them provided of all things necessary, as well
for their diet, as also for their apparel, and adornements. There wanted no
odoures, perfumes, or Jewels, which might aggrandize, and show forth their
beauties. This was done, the more to please king Assuerus, unto whom they were
led one by one, as their turn was: to the end, he might choose one, that lyked
him best, to be Queen in stead of Vasthy.

The prudent, and beautiful Esther being elected out of the rest for that
purpose; the day came, that she was to be presented before the king. As Soon as
the king saw her, he was so pleased with her favor, and beauty, that he
chose her out from among the rest, for his wife, and Queen; and set the royal
crown on her head: commanding all his subjects to honor her, and to regard,
and esteem her as their sovereign Queen, and ludy.

This king Assuerus, is a figure of our Lord God: who being offended with
mankind, for the first man; many damosells were sought, who were kept enclosed
in the Temple of Jerusalem; to the end, his just indignation, might be
mitigated, and assuaged. In that place were the damosells furnished of all
things necessary to make their souls fair, and beautiful; by adorning them
with virtue, and perfuming them with the holy excercises of prayers, and
meditations. Thither was brought the most fair, and prudent Esther: to wit,
the sovereign Queen of the Angels, Mary the virgin; who was elected to be the
mother of God; and who pacified, and appeased the wrath of the heavenly father.

This is the solemnity, which is this day celebrated in the Church; that is to
say when the most blessed virgin was presented in the Temple. There she
remained for a time, until she was presented to the heavenly Father, who was
pleased with her favor, and beauty, and crowned her Queen of heaven and
earth. The eternal Father elected her for his daughter, the Son for his
mother, and the holy Ghost for his spouse.

This history is recounted by Simeon Metaphrastes, German Archbishop of
Constantinople, George Archbishop of Nicomedia: and the Bishop Lippoman
reherseth it in this manner.

THE most blessed virgin being come unto the age of three years, her father
Ioachim conducted her unto the Temple of Jerusalem, and there offered her unto
God, leaving her in a college of damosells, where they, being most of the^ of
noble blood, were brought up, and especially the first borne daughters of the
royal tribe of Judah, and of the priests tribe of Leuy, and there they stayed,
until they came unto the age to be married. In this mean space, they were
continually employed in holy excercises, as prayer and working, spending the
time in all virtuous occupation: and to that purpose they had many mistresses,
who taught, and instructed them without intermission.

We may very well believe, that Anna the prophe^esse (of whom S. Luke the
Evangelist makes mention, that she spoke of our Savior JESUS, the same day
that he was presented in the Temple) we may believe I say that she had
friendship, and familiar^tie with the B. virgin, they living both together in
the Temple, in that virtuous manner. As also, that her love was exceeding much
toward her, as expecting, that God should work the great mystery, and
benefitt of our redemption by her.

When the glorious virgin was brought unto the Temple, she was placed on the
first ascending step of the fifteen, while the offering was prepared, that was
to be offered with her. The Priests went to meet her, and the B. infant, leaving
the hands of them that brought her thither, and without the help of any person,
only favored, and sustained by the grace of the holy Ghost, began to climb
the steps, and went even to the Altar, without other help, as if she had
been of perfect age. so that the priests of the Temple, and they that were
with her wondered; but yet they rejoiced much thereat, having knowledge thereby,
that God began to show maruaillse, in the childhood of her, that should be his
mother.

The little holy virgin remained in the Temple: and because her capacity and
understanding were excellent, she profitted exceedingly in such things, as the
damosells learned in that place* which was: to read, write, sow, weaue, sing
the Him^es of David, and to pray at certain times, and hours. The blessed
virgin surpassed all others in these excercises and in all virtue. In her shone
clearly Charity, devotion, and all other virtues, which made her beloved of
every one. This B: virgin remaining there, made a vow to observe virginity.
yet some doctors say: that her vow was conditional, and not absolute; so that
we may pyously believe; that she kneeling on her knees, with her hands, eyes,
and heart lifted up unto heaven, might say these, or the like words.

O^ny God, maker of heaven and earth, who of thy only goodness and bounty, have
created my soul and body: I promise withal integrity (as much as is expected
of me, and as shall please thy majesty) to serve thee with them both, to
observe virginity, and never to know man carnally, but to applly my self
wholly in thy service. This we may believe to be the vow the holy virgin
made.

When (by the providence of God) she was espoused unto the patriarch Joseph,
she gave him notice of the vow she had made; and that ^^er desire was to
observe it. He rejoiced, and was well content there with: for that, as it is
thought, he also had made the like vow, though conditionate; in such sort;
that both of them by inspiration of the holy Ghost, had made a like vow of
virginity This noble gui^t virginity was always highly esteemed, both of
God, and men; both of believers, and unbelievers.

All the time Eve stayed in paradise, she was a virgin; but as soon as she went
out, she lost her virginity. The high priest of the Hebrews could not marry
one, that was not a virgin: The Gentiles did nor permit any woman, that was
not a virgin, to inhabit in the Temple of the Goddess Vesta.

If women desire to keep this precious treasure, it is requisite that they
live apart from the world, and retired. Dyna the daughter of Jacob, by her
walking abroad to see the country (whereunto she was new come, with her father
and brethren) and to see the woeme^ of that country, lost both her virginity
and honor; and was also the cause, that all the men of that place lost their
lives. If the mother of God continued withdrawn, and shutt close up; let not
young damosells be grieved to be kept in, and to live retired. For if they
remain retired, and shut in, they shall be out of danger, and in security;
but if they will walk abroad, gadding, and gasing, they shall incur^e great
peril and danger; and oftentimes come to reproach, as some find by experience;
who to late perceive their error, when there is no remedy. For as S. Jerome
says: the loss of virginity cannot be recovered; and being once lost, it is
without remedy.

Concerning the feature, and corporal disposition of the B. virgin; I will say
that which S. Epiphanius said (as Nicephorus Callisthus reherseth it) which
does also agree with the Image S. Luke painted, who saw her, and drew her
picture whilst she lived. The virgin Mary was of a middle stature; her color
was of the wheat; her face was some what long; her eyes great, and of a good
color; the eyeliddes black; her mouth little; lips of a lively color; her
teeth white, and little; her hair yellow; her hands and fingers long; and all
her other lyneaments well proportioned. She was surpassing fair and gracious
of countenance; her look was very grave; and her speech delectable. She never
wore any cloth, that had been died. She covered her forhead somewhat with her
mantle.

Pope Pius 2. who sat in S. Peter's chair, in the year of our Lord 1461. gave
license; that the feast of the presentation of the glorious virgin Mary might
be kept on the 21. November.

The life of S. Cecilie.
ONE of the virtuous excercises that the holy matrone Judith used in the
service of God, and to please him was: that she wore a course haire-cloth, by
which she tamed her flesh, and brought it in subiestion. This was the cause
that she had the victory over her flesh; and that she lived many years, a
continent and chaste life; and was freed from all danger; and brought home an
honorable victory, at such time as she was in the hands of Holofernes.

We may say the same of the glorious virgin and martyr S. Cecilie: who
amongst many other her pious, and virtuous excercises, wore continually a
haire-cloth; and she was delivered from a danger like unto that of Judith; for
she was preserved a virgin, though she were espoused: and brought her husband
to be a Christian, and to keep perpetual chastity with her, which both of
them observed during their lives. The life of this holy saint was written by
Symeon Metaphrastes, after this manner.

MANY and great were the graces and favors that JESUS CHRIST bestowed upon men
discending from heaven unto earth; and delivering them with his own death from
eternal death; ouercoming thereby him, that had power in the world, and then
guiding them by his doctrine unto heaven. Many men acknowledging this good done
unto them by our blesses Savior, followed him.

The first were the Apostles, then the martyrs Confessors, priests, virgins,
wydowes, and married people; and those that exercise themselves in all virtuous
works. To conclude, his divine majesty: calls every one, by the means of
his evangelists saying: Come unto me, all you that be wearied and afflicted,
and I will refresh you. I will lighten the weight, that lies so heaven upon
you.

This comfortable saying was heard by S. Cecilie a virgin of Rome, who was
beautiful of body, noble of blood, and rich in posessions. She believing
the Gospel, carried it always about her, reading often thereon, and praying
unto God continually. Her father had espoused her to a very goodly gentleman
of Rome, called Valerian; who being inflamed with the love of Cecilie, desired
much the wedding day. At last the day came, and the glotious virgin, though
she were in rich apparel of silk, and gold, conformeable to her own birth,
and the estate of her husband; yet under her said apparel next to her skin
she wore a course haircloth.

Three days before the appointed t^me of the wedding, she fasted, wept, and
prayed continually, desiring God to preserve her virginity, for that this
marriage was not by her desired; neither should it be by her will, since she had
given herself wholly to JESUS CHRIST, and offered to him her virginity. And
that her prayer might the rather be heard, she desired the Angels, Apostles,
martyrs, virgins, and all the court of heaven to make intercession for her.

The time at last being come, that she and Valerian, were to be private in
their chamber alone, she spoke to him after this manner: My honorable Lord, and
dear love: I will discover unto you a weighty matter; if you will promise to
keep it secret. Valerian forth with promised, and then Cecilie said unto him:
The secret is this: I have an Angel of God in my company, who is jealous of
me, and guardeth my body very dilligentlie. If he see thee so hardy, as to
come near, or touch me, with carnal or lascivious love, he will chastise thee
rigorously; but if he see, that thou love me with pure and chaste love, he will
love thee, as he loves me^, and will bestow the like precious favors, as he
bestows on me.

Valerian, hearing th^se words, was some what troubled, and fearfully said: If
thou (my dearest Cecilie) desire that I believe thy words, let me see the
Angel. If I see him not, I shall thinck it is some person that thou love in
dishonest sort, which is a wrong to me that am thy husband. And if I find it
so, I will not fail to kill you both. To this S. Cicilie answered: If you
desire to see the Angel, you must be Baptized; and believe in one God,
eternal, and Omnipotent, Creator of heaven and earth. The conclusion of their
long speech was: they agreed; that on the next day Valerian should talk with
the blessed Bishop Urban, who at that time sat in the Chair of S. Peter: and
by him Valerian (being first instructed in the faith) was Baptized.

Then returning home, and coming into the chamber, where Cecilie was; he found
her at prayer and an Angel by her, in the shape of a beautiful yongman, from
whose face came a glorious brightness. The young man had two garlands in his
hand, made of Lillies, and fresh odoriferous Roses. The one he gave unto S.
Cecilie, and the other unto Vallerian. When he delivered them he said: I have
brought these garlands for you, wrought with flowers gathered in paradise; and
in sign I say true, they will continue allwaies fresh, and smell very sweet;
and may not be seen, but of them, that endeavor to live chaste, as you do.
And because thou Valerian, have given credit unto thy spouse, and have received
the faith of CHRIST: the same JESUS has appointed me to tell thee from him:
that demand what thou will, and he will grant it unto thee.

When Valerian heard this, he kneeled on the ground, and rendered thanckes unto
God, for the great benefitt bestowed on him, and said: I desire this favor,
that my brother Tiburtius (whom I love most hartelie) may be converted unto
the faith. I shall not show the love that I bear him, if I being now delivered
from the blindness of Idollatrie, wherein I lived, do not help to deliver him
also out of it, if it be in my power. To this the Angel answered, with a
cheerful countenance: Since thou have demanded so just a thing, God does grant
it unto thee. And as Cecilie thy spouse has been the means of thy salvation,
so shall she also be a means for thy brother Tiburtius.

All came to pass as the Angel said for Tiburtius coming by hap into the
chamber, and feeling a sweet smell of lillies and roses, and seeing none,
demanded of them, whence the fragrant smell came that he felt? Valerian told
him: that it came from two garlands which he and Cecilie had on their heads,
and had been brought unto them from heaven. Valerian took occasion hereupon to
give him knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, and told him also, that he himself was
Baptized. Then leading his brother Tiburtius to Urban the pope, he instructed
him in the faith, and Baptized him also.

It befell afterward, that the two brethren, excercising themselves in good
works, and especially in burieng the Christians, that were martyred;
information was given of them to a governor called Almachius; who imprisoning
them, and tormenting them in diverse manners (as is written in their lives on
the 14 of April) they were beheaded for the profession of the faith of CHRIST,
and S. Cecilie buried their bodies.

After their deaths, the governor Almachius intended, to get the goods of the
two brethren into his hands; but understanding that Cecilie had distributed
them unto the poor, he caused her to be brought before him. She confessed unto
him the truth: namely, that all the goods of the two noble gentlemen
Tiburtius, and Valerian, were given unto the poor. The governor therefore
seeking a quarrel, and desiring to be revenged on her, said in a great rage: I
think we shall have a Christian of you also? but I will have you to sacrifice
unto the Gods in my sight; that I may be witness, whether you deserve the same
punishment, that those brethren deserved, and had.

The officers of the governor urged her to sacrifice. to whom she said: Harken
to me brethren. You be the officers of the governor, and you think it meet,
that I should obey his commandment; but I on the other side, think it very
unjust in him to comaund me, to sacrifice unto those Gods, which be not such
indeed; and to leave of to sacrifice unto the true God, that is JESUS CHRIST.
Be assured, that I will suffer and endure, and the torments that can be
inflicted upon me, and at the end, rather lose my life, then do his
commandment. The officers made show of pity and compassion toward her;
seeing a damsel so young, so discreet, so fair, and gracious, ready to
abandon and leave all these, yea life and all, for her faith and religion.

They said unto her: Consider thy youth and beauty; have compassion on thy
self; and change not all other thy good parts, in these tender years, for
untimely death. The holy virgin said unto them: To change earth for gold, is
not to loose, but to gain. Or to give a cottage half-ruinated for a house
built with perles, and precious stones; or a life repleat with troubles and
miseries, which shall quiklie end, for a life replenished with riches and
treasure, that shall endure for ever. These and the like speeches used S.
Cecilie, and her words were of such force, and wrought so, that many that were
present, resolved to be Christians, and were afterward Baptized by S. Urban.

The governor was astonished to hear the holy virgin speak, and viewing her
angelike beauty, asked what her name was: for till that time, he knew no other
name, but only that she was the wife of Valerian. She told him that her name
was Cecilie. and then the governor replied: know thou not that the
Emperors of Rome have commanded, that the Christians either do sacrifice unto
the Gods, or else that they be put to death? I know it right well said the
holy saint. What will thou then do said the governor? I determine to die,
said she. For it is far better to dye for confessing JESUS CHRIST, then to
live denying him. Consider (said the governor) that it will be best for thee, to
leave and forsake this thy oppinion, and to sacrifice unto our Gods. S. Cecilie
said: It were better for thee to open thine eyes, and to consider, that those,
whom thou call Gods, be but stocks and stones. If thou will not believe me,
touch them with thy hands, or throw them into the fire; and there will come
lime from the stones, which may serve to build with: so shall there be no
deceit in them, as there is now.

Then said the governor: How should I suffer thee to speak such words in my
presence? know thou not that I have power to give thee life, or to take it
away at my pleasure? S. Cecilie answered: thou think my words void of
reason, and I know thy words to be false, and no truth in them. Almachius said:
do thou say Cecilie that I speak not truth? The holy virgin said: I say
it, and avouch it, in that thou say thou have authority, to give and take
away my life. Thou may take life from the living, but to give life unto the
dead, it is most clear and certain, thou can not. So that I may well call
thee the minister of death. I will be such an officer unto thee (said Almachius)
if thou will not sacrifice.

So when he saw she was constant and resolute, and would not sacrifice, he
caused her to be put into certain bathes, which were in her own house, and
having shut her in one of them, being empty and without water, they made a
great fire under, which burned a whole day and a night. The holy saint
received not any hurt thereby; but it seemed to her a place rather of pleasure
and refreshing, then other wise. when Almachius heard thereof, he commanded one
to cut of her head in that place. The hangman gave her three blows, yet did he
not cut of her head altogether, but left it even as it was hanging by the
skin.

The blessed virgin being thus wounded, lived three days, many Christians
coming to visit her. Among these were some that had received the faith by her
means, whom she seeing sorrowful, comforted. They dried up the blood that ran
from her wound with napkins, and other clothes; with intent, to keep them as
relics.

S. Urban went also to visit her, and she told him: that she had desired of
God to live three days, that she might dispose of her goods, and request him
to consecrate that house of hers into a Church. When the three days were
ended, this holy virgin, and glorious martyr (being in prayer) yielded her
blessed soul unto God, on the 22 of November.

Her body was buried by pope Urban in the Chruchyard of Callistus, and her
house was consecrated into a Church. In process of time, pope Paschalis
translated the bodies of SS. Cecilie, Tiburtius, Valerian, and pope Urban, into
the Church of S. Cecilie The Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of this
holy saint, on the day of her martyrdom.

At the end of the life of SS. Tiburtius and Valerian, on the 14. of April, is
rehearsed the saying of Canisius, to wit: that these saints were martyred in the
time of Alexander Seuerus, in the year of our Lord 225. the same he says of
S. Cecilie also. and because mention is made there of pope Urban, the account
comes to be just at that time. But the Roman Breuiarie of Pius 5. puts her
martyrdom about 50. years before, in the times of the Emperors, Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, and Commodus. Her name is in the Canon of the mass.

The life of S. Clement Pope, and Martyr.
GREAT was the fame and credit, which Moises the guide, Exodus 27.
and captein of the Hebrews, acquired and got, when the said people being in
the desert, and at the point to die for thirst, he, by the apointement of God,
struck a rock, out of which issued water in abundance, sufficient for them all
to drink, and to be refreshed, and comforted.

No less glorious, and worthy of fame, was S. Clement the holy Pope and
martyr, who did the like. He lived in a desert, banished thither, with many
other Christians, for the profession of the name of JESUS CHRIST: and they all
endured great and extreme thirst, for that, they were to bring their water from
a place distant far from them.

This blessed and holy saint struck the earth, in a place where our savior in
the figure of a lamb appeared unto him: and there sprang up a plentiful
fountein of water, pure and clear, with the which all the distressed
Christians were recreated, and conforted. The life of this holy Pope was
written by Damasus, Simeon Metaphrastes, and other grave Authors: in this manner.

SAINT Clement was the son of Faustinus, and borne in Rome, in the region
called Caeli-montana: Where at this present, is the Church of S. John La eran.
This holy saint did help the Apostle S Paul in his preaching, as he writes
thus: philip 4.
that thou help the persons that travel with me in the Gospel, with Clement,
and my other coadiutors, whose names are written in the book of life. Yet S.
Dorotheus Bishop of Tyrus, says: that Clement, of whom S. Paul speaks, was
Bishop of Caria; and was disciple unto the same S. Paul; and that he was one of
the first, that received the faith by his preaching among the Greeks. The most
common received opinion is, that this Clement (of whom we now treat) was the
Pope, and went with S. Paul, for a time: nevertheless, he was after the
disciple of S. Peter.

S. Clement was not only a man of very holy life, but also very learned; and
wrote many things, which have been lost by antiquity of time. There are extant
yet his five epistles: the first of which is most elegant, being al repleat
with learning, and a true Apostolical spirit: which some of the Popes his
successors do allege in many places. He wrote likewise the Canons of the
Apostles, and the eight books called Apostolic Constitutions; which ordeine,
that in the seven regions of Rome, should be seven Notaries, to write the deeds
and martyrdom of the Christians. He commanded also, that unto them, that were
Baptized, should be given the Sacrament of Confirmation, as soon as they had
learned the principles of the Christian faith. He also ordained; that the
Bishops Chair should stand in a public and eminent place.

This holy saint preached thee word of God with such fervor, and so great
courage, that many Gentills and pagans were converted unto the faith, and many
that were already converted, not content with the observation of the precepts
of the Gospel, did keep also and observe the counsels thereof. As a holy
damsel did called Domitilla, who was niece unto the Emperor Domitian, as
daughter to one of his sisters, and to Flauius Clemens the Consul: which holy
virgin was by this Pope consecrated and veyled for a Nun. He also converted
unto the faith Theodora the wife of Sisinius, a man great and potent in Rome.

This man desirous to see, what the Christians did in their oratories, where
they used to pray, and whither his wife used to go, went thither one time very
secretly, but by the permission of God, he was struck blind. This blindness of
his body was an occasion unto him, that he recovered the sight of his soul.
for the prayer of S. Clement caused the recovery of his corporal sight; and
his holy words and admonitions were the cause, that he was Baptized, and
recovered there with the sight of his soul. Sisinius being Baptized, many
noble men of Rome moved by his example, receued the faith. So that for this,
and many other miracles the holy Pope did, he was much malliced by the
ministers of the Idols, and other lewd people, whom the diuill used, as
instruments and means to disturb the increase of Christianity, and to
dispatch out of the way Clement, who did him much scath and harm. These moved
a mutiney and vproare against him, though there were some, that took his part,
and defense.

Some accused him at the judgment seat of Mamor^inus governor of the city, and
others defended him, saying: that Clement did not any evil or hurt to any
person: but did rather good unto them, in curing the sick, reliuing the
necessity of the poor; that he quieted controversies, and made atonement
between many men. They, that accused him, said; he brought in a strange
relligion, and persuaded men to adore for God a man, that had been crucified,
and did what he could to annihilate the adoration of the ancient Gods: that he
caused many maids that they married not to them, unto whom they were espoused,
making the title of relligion, an excuse and color for the same.

The Governor of the city hearing all this, caused Clement to be brought before
him, unto whom he said: I understand that thou art borne of an honorable family
in this city, and that thou art of the Royal blood: therefore thou art more
obliged, not to transgress the customs and laws of thy forefathers. Tell me,
I pray thee, what strange relligion is this, thou preachest: and what is that
crucified man whom thou would have adored for God, to the notable despite,
and disgrace of the know^n Gods, adored by out elders. S. Clement made this
answer: Most prudent Judge, I desire thee not to be ouer-ruled by the speechs
of the vulgar people, who are ignorant and malicious, but to give ear unto me:
and if of that whereof I am accused, I do not with just reasons defend my self,
then condemn me, without any favor. Mamertinus said: I will present thy cause
before the emperor Traiane, where thou may, (if thou can) excuse thy self,
and justify thy cause, for I will neither condemn thee, nor absolve thee.

When the Gouernou^ saw time convenient, he made relation of the mutiney
raised against S. Clement, (and what was the cause also) unto the emperor; to
the end, he might set down, what should be done therein; the person accused
desiring to make proof of his Inocency, in showing that the faults imposed
upon him, had no sufficient ground. Traian decreed: that Clement should
sacrifice unto the Gods, or else be banished into Chersona.

Mamertinus having this direction, labored all that he could to bring Clement
to sacrifice unto the Idols. and he on the other part, endeavored to draw him
to be a Christian; and to let him know, that the banishment, which he was to
suffer for professing CHRIST, should be unto him pleasant and acceptable. It
pleased God to give such efficacy and grace unto the words of the holy saint,
that Mamertinus yielded, and shedding many tears for compassion of Clement, and
his vexations, said unto him: The God, whom thou adorest, help thee in this
tribulation, which thou art to suffer for his love. Then he provided him a
bark, and of things necessary for the voyage, and sent him into exile.

There went many voluntarily in the company of the blessed Pope. who being
arrived, and come in saffly unto the Island, found there more then 2000
Christians, who by the sentence of the emperor, had been condemned to dig
stones out of the quarries. These holy confessors of CHRIST, among their other
mollestations, had one which vexed them much: in that, their labor being very
painfulle, yet wanted they water to drink: and that lirle which they had, they
were compelled to fetch it, two miles of.

The holy Pope Clement moved unto compassion with their intolerable pain and
toil, made his prayer unto God, beseeching him, to have pity on his people.
His prayer being finished, he lifted up his eyes (as Metaphrastes says) and
saw upon a little hillock a lamb, who held up his right foot; as though he
showed, where the Water was. S. Clement was fully persuaded that the lamb was
JESUS CHRIST, because none saw it it, but himself only. so he went to that
place, and said: In the name of JESUS CHRIST dig here.

Some began to dig on the one side, and some on the other, and to cast up the
earth, not in the place where the lamb showed, but in a place hard by. S.
Clement himself took a spade, and making a little hoale, where the lamb had
showen, there sprang out incontinent a vein of pure and clear water, which
gave great consolation unto the holy saint, and to the other Christians; who
were much confirmed in the faith, by the same. This miracle moved also many of
the Painims, to go, and hear his doctrine: by which, they were converted unto
the true faith.

Because the number of Catholics increased, and the report of that which
happened in the Isla^d was so spread abroad, that it came to the ears of
Traia^; he was enraged thereat: and sent thither a Governor called Aufidianus,
who put many of the Christians to death. But when he saw they died willingly,
for the profession of their faith; he thought the best way would be to put
Clement only (as their guide) unto death: whereupon, he caused him to be
apprehended. When he saw him to be firm and stable in his faith, he gave
sentence against him, that he should be carried into the main sea, and thrown
into the same, with an anchor tied unto his neck.

The sighs, the sobbes, the lamentable voices of those afflicted Christians,
cannot be expressed, when they saw them selves deprived of Clement, in whom
they found refuge and comfort in their laboursome and discomfortable life:
having him, they thought they had a father, and a master: every one found him
to be their faithful friend, and their loving brother, he made much of them
all; he instructed them all, he gave help to all, by all the means, he could.

The Christians being in this tribulation, (seeing then, that if they lost
Clement, they lost all these things,) besought God with great instancy, to
deliver him out of that peril and danger, or else that they might end their
life's with him. The holy Pope also, aggrieued to leave them in this
tribulation, lamented for them, and yet comforted them, in the best manner he
could. At the very instant, that he was to be cast into the sea, the people
standing on the shore, lifted up their voices, and cried aloud: Lord JESUS
CHRIST, save him: and the blessed Pope said: Eternal father receive my soul.
This being said: he was cast into the sea, where he ended his life, and all the
Christians were very pensive and sad.

Among others, there were two desciples of the holy saint, the one called
Cornelius, and the other Phoebus, who said to the rest of the Christians:
Brethren, let us make our prayers unto God, and beseech him through his
favor, to show unto us the relics of his holy saint. This counsel pleased
them all very well, and so they went unto prayer, and they had not yet finished
the same, when the sea began to decrease, and to depart away, for the space of
three miles from the shore, and was so firm, that men might pass all that way
dryfoot: where they found a chapel builded, in the midst whereof was the
body of S. Clement in a sepulcher: and there was also the Anchar, which had
been fastened unto his neck.

This miracle did not only happen at that time, but also did befall every year,
for seven days continually in that place: beginning on the day of his
martyrdom, and enduring for six days following. Thither resorted much people
from sundry quarters, to see the myraculous sepulcher of the holy saint, at the
time of the annual discovery, which endured and continued many years, as
affirms Symeon Metaphrastes; who auerreth, that in his time, viz: about the
year of our Lord 620. this miracle was seen. And it is also affirmed by Ephrem
B. of Chersona, venerable Beda, Gregory. B. of Towers, Ado. Arch B. of Tryers,
l. 3. (...). 28.
and Nicephorus Callistus, yea all these Autors writing the life of S. Clement
make mention of this miracle.

Ephrem B. of Chersona, and Gregory. B of Towers report another strange and
admirable miracle. as, that a woman going with her little infant a pilgrimage to
this place, and being in the Church, where the body of the blessed martyr lay.
The infant fell fast on sleep, and the seven days being passed and expired,
the sea increased and returned to the wonted place in such have, that the
mother of the child which slept, whether fearing the speedy flowing of the
water, or else upon forgetfulness, saved her self, and left him there behind her.
When she was escaped all danger, and the sea was risen to the shore,
remembering then that she had left her little son behind her, she showed
great signs of dollour and grief* yet she knew not what to do, but ran, now
hither, now thither by the seashore, and looked about, that at the least, she
might see the dead body of her little infant. but she could not so she
returned home to her house sad, pensive and discomfortable, and passed all
that year in continual lamentation.

When the yearly day of the martyrdom of this holy saint came again, she made
another journey unto the sepulcher: and coming to the same, she found her
little son sleeping sweetly, even as she had left him the year before. She
took him in her a^mes, and kissed him often, and weeping for joy and tenderness,
asked him, what had become of him, all that year* The infant answered her; that
he knew not, that a year was passed, for he had slept all the while.

Then in the time of Pope Nicholas. 1. being in the year. 860. the body of S.
Clement by the ordynance of God, (as it may well be believed) was taken out of
that place in the sea by a holy man called Cyrillus, and was carried unto Rome,
and buried in a Church builded unto his name. The same Pope caused also another
Church to be built in the Island, where the fountayn sprang up, by the prayer
of S. Clement, and intitu^ed it also to his name.

S. Clement was Pope 9. years. 2. months, and 10. days. He gave orders twice,
in the month of December, and ordered. 15. Bishops, 10. priests, and 21.
deacons. The Catholic Church celebrateth his feast on the day of his
martyrdom, which was on the. 23. of November, in the year of our Lord 102. In
the time of the emperor Traian.

The life of S. Felicitas, Martyr.
ONe of the affections, which parents ought to conquer, and bring to a mean,
is the ouer-great fondness of love to their children. For though nature has
engrafted a love unto them; and reason teaches that love is due to them; yett
is it due with such proportion and measure, that the love of their children
deprive them not of the love of God, which ought to be prized and preferred
above all other. Moreover, they ought to mark well and regard, wherein
consists the true love of their children. For many times parents desire and
procure for their children the false, feigned, fading goods of this world, with
such painful endeavor, such unquenchable thirst, that every thing seems
to mean and to little; in repect of that which most they wish them, and feign
would have for them. And herein they bound the limitts of their love; this
they prefixe as their only mark: not regarding how to enrich their children
with virtues, nor make them worthy of those very goods, which they painfully
scrape, and carefully heap up together for them: little mindful of instructing
them, how to purchase those everlasting vnspeakeble treasures of glory; in
whose comparison all the good and riches of earth are only shadowed
conterfayted goods.

To teach and instruct parents in this truth, and set before their eyes a
rule and pattern of their duty, the holy Church makes this day a
commemoracion of Holy S. Felicitas. She was a most honorable Matrone of Rome;
where being left a widow with seven sons, she lived without blame or
reprehension; bending her greatest care and endeavor, to serve her self, and
make her children serve almighty God. And so much prevailed her good example,
and holy education; that Gods love was so deeply rooted in their heart, as
to make them holy martyrs of his, in the time of the Emperor Antoninus: when
before the eyes of their blessed mother, with cruel torments and sundry
kinds of death, they bought one everlasting life: as has bin said in the month
of Iulie. But after those glorious Knights of CRHIST, JESUS, the sons of
blessed Felicitas, had manfully fought and won the victory; all the rage and
fury of the Emperor was turned against that holy mother: whose words had
encouraged, and given her sons weapons to fight the battle. The Tyrant
therefore commanded, that she should be cast into a loath some prison; to the
end, that sparing for some time her life, he might make her grieve daily more
and more for her childrens death. For though she rejoiced, as knowing that now
they were citizens of heaven: yett could she not, as a mother, but feel some
sorrow, they being lost to her; allthough she had gained them to God. There he
kept her four months in prison, to afflict her, and molest her the more: and,
at the length, seeing that still she perseuered constant in the faith of JESUS
CHRIST, he commanded her to be beheaded. Of this blessed mother, the pattern
of all christian mothers; of this martyr, or, as S. Gregory says, more then
martyr (for she was eight times martyred, seven in her children, and once in
her self) the same S. Gregory has these words: Let us behold, my brethren,
and consider this woeman; and be ashamed, to see her so much surpass us. Often
times one only word said against us, does trouble, and vex, and make us break
all our good purposes: whereas neither torments, nor death it self was able
to conquer blessed Felicitas, nor make her yield or give back one foot. We
with a blast of contradiction are straight ways dismayed, and shamefully fall:
she wrought a way thorough steel and flint, to obtain and everlasting crown.
We give not the least part of our goods to the poor, for the love of CHRIST;
she offered him her flesh in sacrifize. We, when God calls back for our
children, which he had given us in loan, wail everlastingly, without comfort:
she, be-wayled her children, until they died for CHRIST; and rejoiced, when
she did behold them dead. And Peeter Archeb. of Rauenna says: B hold a woman
whose children living were cause of her care; dead, of her security. Most
happy she, that now has as many fair shining lights in heaven, as
heretofore she had sons on earth! Happy in bringing them into this world;
most happy in sending them up into heaven. She was far more diligent and
industrious, when the tyrant commanded them to be slain, and when she walked
amonghst their dead bodies; then when she did rock them in the cradle, and
gave them milk with her own breasts* she viewed full well with the eyes of her
soul, that as many wounds as they received, so many should be the precious
jewels of their victory; how many their torments, so many their rewards;
the crueller their combats, the more glorious their crowns. what shall I say
of this valerous woman: only this, that she is no true mother, that loves not
her children as this loved hers. Hitherto are the words of S. Peeter of
Rauenna. The martyrdom of S. Felicitas was on the 23 day of November: the
year of our Lord 175. There is mention made of her in the Roman and other
Martyrologes. *

The life of S. Chrisogonus Martyr.
GREAT was the ioje and content the holy man Joseph conceived, when he was
taken out of prison, in which he had remained a long time, suffering therein
many troubles and ^fflictions; especially being, upon his delivery ou^, made
governor over all ihe land of Egypt.

No less was the content, and spiritual joy S. Chrisogonus, had, when he
departed out of prison, where he had continued two years, and had endured the
ordinary molestations, incident to prisons* though he was not taken out to be a
prince on the earth, but to be a glorious and happy Saint in heaven; whether
his soul presently ascended, by means of his martyrdom.

The life of this holy Saint, was written by Venerable Bede, and by Ado
Archbishop of Treuers, in this manner.

SA^NT Chrisogonus was borne in Rome, of a noble, and honorable family: and was
in all his carriage, and behavior, no less worthy, and gracious with all men.
He was apprehended by the comaund, and apoyntment of Dioclesian the Emperor,
and was kept in prison two years contynually; being there relieved with all
things necessary, by a vertous woman (his disciple) called Anastasia, wife unto
Publius, a man great, and potent in the city, but an Idollater.

This Phlius having knowledge of that, which this wife Anastasia did, shut her
up, and locked her strongly in a chamber of his palace, setting a guard, and
watch over her, to the end, she should not send any help, or relief unto
Chrisogonus, as also, that the should not have any sustenance for here self;
determining, that both the one, and the other of them might dye by famine.
Notwithstanding, the blessed woman was shut up in this sort, yet she found
means to write a letter unto Chrisogonus, after this manner.

Unto the holy confessor of JESUS CHRIST, Chrisogonus, Anastasia sends
greeting. Although my father which begot we was an Idollater yet my mother that
bore me (who was called Fausta) was a Christian, and a virtuous chaste woman.
She instructed me in the Christian faith, ever from my childhood; and after her
death, I was married unto a sacrilegious and cruel man, whose bed and company
I have oftentimes refused, excusing it with infirmities, which I desired God to
send me for that purpose. I spent the night and the day in prayer, desyring my
sweet Savior, that I might imitate his blessed example.

This most cruel man, after he bath consumed my patrymonie, amongst wicked and
lewd company, like unto himself, has imprisoned me, as if I were a malefactor,
or a detestable offender, and forbids any sustenance to be guie^ unto me,
that I may perish, and dye for want of food. Although I shall be glad to loose my
life for CHRIST his sake; nevertheless, I find great grief, that my goods be
wasted, in such lascivious sort, in such lewd company, and in the service of
the false Gods.

Therefore I beseech thee, thou servant of JESUS CHRIST, to pray unto God
Almighty for me, and that the either alter the mind of this my husband, that
he may be converted; or else, if he continue, and perseu^r in his hardness of
heart, and obstinacy, that he take him out of this world. And better it shall be
for him, to be taken out of this life, then to add daily sin, to sin which
will put him to double torments in hell.

I promise and vow unto Almighty God, and to thee his servant, that if ever I
get clear, and freed from this affliction; to spend all my time in the service
of my Blessed Savior JESUS, as my use, and custom was; and in helping and
providing fot thy necessities, and to relieve the wants of all other holy
confessors Our Lord keep thee ever, thou B: servant of God. Remember me, and
pray for me.

S. Chrisogonus having received this letter, made his prayers, and oraysons for
Anastasia, and then, together with other confessors that were in the same
prison, he answered her in this manner.

Among the tempestuous storms of this world, in which at this present, thou
art enwrapped, be assured that thou shall be relieved by JESUS CHRIST, who will
easily cast headlong into the bottomeles pit, the devil that does assa^le,
and torment thee. Have patience in the midst of thy troubles; and put thy
trust in him, for he wild deliver thee. Cry out aloud unto him. Exalt thy voice
with the prophet, and say: why art thou so sad o my soul? and why art thou so
disquieted with in me; Trust in God still, for I will ever confess, that he is
my salvation, and my God. Thinck (Lady) that it is his will, to bestow on
thee, the riches, and treasures of heaven, since he takes away, and depriueth
thee of wordly comforts. Be not too much troubled nor afflicted, for that
crosses, and tribulation lights upon thee, that live virtuously. God does
try us, but does not deceive us. To trust in man is vain, and deceitful; an
he that puts his hope or confidence in him is accursed, and ever deceived,
but blessed is he that puts his trust, and affiance in God; who never
deceived any.

Continewe in thy virtuous excercises: and hope for rest and quietness only in
God, whose comaundemers thou keep; when it shall best please him (and thou
think least) he will send thee tra^quillitie, and a calm time. The darkness
shall fly away, and the light shall appear. The frost, and pinching cold of
the winter shall pass, and the joyful sweetenes of the spring shall succeed.
A quiet and comfortable time shall come, that thou may cherish and relieve
those again, that suffer persecution for the love and profession of CHRIST;
God giving thee here means, that thou may help other with temporal
necessities, and receive thy self of him everlasting rewards. Our Lord be with
thee (good lady) and pray for me.

With this Epistle S. Anastasia received great consolation, endeavoring to
equal, if not to surpass thereby, the many compla^nts she had made, of her
hardharted, and cruel husband. Her persecutions increased still, he giving to
her now, but the fourth part, or one quater of a a small oridinary loaffe. And
she thincking verily that her death approached, wrote another letter to S.
Chrisogonus after this tenor, and to this effect.

To the blessed martyr and Confessor of CHRIST Chrisogonus, Anastasia sends
greeting. The end of my life draws near, vouchsaffe to remember me, and to
pray unto God to receive my soul, when it departs from my body, since for
his love, and the profession of his holy name, I suffer all this torment.

The holy man returned this answer. Chrisogonus to Anastasia. As darkness
precedeth and goes before light; so after infirmity ensues health, and life
comes after death. Prosperities, and adversities have the like, and the same
ends: therefore let not the heavy and sorrowful fall into desperation; nor
the happy, and fortunate be proud, or too much puffed up. Be of good comfort,
o handmaid of CHRIST: for thy peregrination, which has been repleat with
tempestuous storms, shall be finished with a prosperous and happy conclusion;
and thereby desires shall be acomplished, enjoying CHRIST by the palm of
Martyrdom. The further course, and process of her grievous persecutions, may
be seen in her life on the 25. day of December.

Of S. Chrisogonus you are to understand, that the Emperor Dioclesian, being
in the city of Aquileya, martyrising the Christians, he sent to Rome to have
Chrisogonus brough thither to him; who being come, the Emperor said to him: I
will bestow on thee high dignities: I will make thee Prefect of the city,
that thou may so arise to be Consul. And indeed, such places, and
preferments, are fittest for men of noble lineage, and such worthy parts as
thy self has; but upon this condition, that thou will worship our Gods.

S. Chrisogonus answered: I adore one only God. With my soul and heart I
reverence him, and with all external signs and tokens I confess JESUS
CHRIST, to be the true God. And as for thy Idolles which be habitacles of
devils and fiendes, I detest and accurse them. Dioclesian commanded that he
should be beheadded, and that his body should be cast into the sea; and so it
was done. A priest called zoilus found his body afterward, and buried it
honorably.

His martyrdom was on the day whereon the Church celebrateth his memory,
which was on the 24. of November. on a Tuesdaie, in the year of our Lord. 302.
Dioclesian being Emperor. His name is in the Canon of the mass. Of this holy
saint, wrote Suidas, Ando, venerable Bede, Vsuardus, and the Roman martyrologe.

The life of S. Catherine of Alexandria.
IN the Book of kings it is said of king Solomon: that he had many wines. It
was the will of God, that the Hebrews should be increased, and therefore it
was tolerated, at that time, for a man to have more wives then one. Solomon
took benefit of this leave that was given; desiring in this also, to show his
magnificence and state; and therefore he took more wives then David his father
ever had, or any of the Patriarchs before him; some of which had more wives
then one at once, as Abraham, and Jacob, unto whom it was lawful in like
manner, for the reasons which the doctors allege. But for that those reasons
have no use for our times, it is not lawful for any now, to have any more then
one wife.

The wives which these ancient fathers had, either in the law written, or in
the law of nature, were of (...) sorts: Some were called wives or Queens (if
their husbands were kings) and the other were called Concubines: and though
they were called so, yet were they as true and lawful wives, as the others;
and their matrimony, a^ true and lawful. The difference between the one and
the other was this: first in name. For some of them were as mistresses, and
commanded in the house; the other, which were called Concubines, did give
attendance, and had less authority and reputation. Solomon had 300.
Concubines and 700. Queens, or wifes, call them which you will.

Among these he had one, whom he regarded, and esteemed more then all the rest,
and that was the daughter of king Pharao; who as she passed all the other in
nobillitie, so she was of more excellent beauty, and of more discretion then
the rest; and therefore, for her only, Solomon built a house, and severed her
from the others. It may be he did so, in respect that she was a gentile, and
an Idollaeter, and all the other were of his own religion. It is most assured,
that of her he made great account; as appears by the sumptuous house he built
for her, and by the servants and attendants he appointed for her. And this is
the cause, that she is absolutely called Queen, and wife of Solomon.

This history fitteth, and agrees very well, to the glorious virgin and
martyr S. Catherine of Alexandria. For as Solomon was the figure of CHRIST, so
also, he had many holy damosells his spouses; some of which be of less name,
and these be they which remain in this world, in his grace and favor, doing
him service. Others be of greater name, which be they which already reign in
heaven. Therefore the figure of this history touches both the one, and the
other. Among all the wives of Solomon, the most favored was the daughter of
Pharao king of Egypt, who is a figure of S. Catherine. For as the other was, so
she was also of the blood royal of Alexandria, a city of Egypt. She was
advised and discreet, of excellent beauty: and to conclude, she was such a
one, as may absolutely be called the spouse of CHRIST.

We read of her, that before she was Baptized, she had a revelation in a
dream, in which she saw the most blessed virgin Mary, with her child JESUS in
her arms as a most beautiful infant. S. Catherine seeing this was enamored on
him. Blessed JESUS hid his face, and she desirous to behold it, went to and
fro, but the infant made signs, as being displeased that she should look on
him. The glorious virgin his mother said unto him: my son see thou ^ot bow
this young girl is enamoured of thee? why will thou not see her? behold how
fair, wise, and discreet she is. The blessed infant replied: you know right
well how many damosells I have in my palace more fair and more wise then she
is; nay, she seems to me very disgra^ious, for that she is not Baptized.
JESUS saying this, Catherine arose, conceiving the cause of her unworthiness to
behold the face of CHRIST to be, for that she believed not; therefore she
determined to be Baptized.

When she was a Christian, the same JESUS apeared unto her in the former
manner, without any sign of discontent, in that she beheld him, but he showed
himself, and looked upon her with a gracious countenance. And before his
blessed mother, the Angels, saints, and all the court of heaven, he espoused
her, and gave her a ring as unto his true spouse. when Catherine awaked, she
found the same ring on her finger.

These things we may piously believe of this blessed saint, coming in this
sort to be fully the figure of the daughter of Pharao, and to be the Queen
among the other wives of Solomon, and to have a house severed from others. So
also JESUS our blessed savior, gave unto her a particular house, bestowing on
her many doctors and learned men, who by her means were converted unto the
faith of CHRIST, and passed before her unto heaven, by the crown of
martyrdom, to make ready a lodging for her.

The life of this glorious saint, was written by Simeon Metaphrastes, who
says: that Maxentius the Emperor put her to death, and the same say all
those, that make mention of her martyrdom. But herehence rises a doubt: for
Eusebius Caesariensis, which was in that time, says: that Maxentius, all the
time that he reigned, continued in Rome, using great cruellties, until the
Emperor Constantine came against him; who was called in by the Romans, being
not able to support the same Maxentius any longer. He standing to defend
himself, was drowned in Tyber, as he went over a bridge of boats, which he had
made near unto Rome. and it is not said of him, that he was ever at
Alexandria, where S. Catherine was martyred.

Some dilligent, and curious authors have noted this, and Judged: that the name
should be altered, and that he that martyred S. Catherine, should be Maximinus,
and not Maxentius. This may easily happen in writing of latin; for when they
would write the proper names, they used in ancient times, to set the first
letter, or beginning of their names. And Maxentius and Maximinus having the
same letters at the beginning, it might well come to pass, that the name was
changed. And so much the more likely, for that, at that time, that Maxentius
was in Rome; Maximinus resided in Alexandria, and other cities of the East,
showing great cruelties against the Christians.

This is sufficient by way of advise, but I will call the tyrant, that
martyred her, Maxentius, as the Author that I follow does. He recounteth her
life in this sort.

AT such time as the Emperor Maxentius was monarch of the Roman Empire (being
on a time in Alexandria) he set out a public edict, in favor of his false
Gods, and to the greatest damage he could of the faith, and profession of
CHRIST. For therein he commanded: that every one should sacrifice to them,
and those that disobeyed, or denied, should be put to death. people flocked in
great numbers to Alexandria, from all parts, to obey the Emperous commandment;
every one bringing one beast or other, (acording to their abillitie) for the
sacrifice. The beasts were of such great number, that the Altars smoaked
continually with the sacrifices offered upon them.

This was very pleasing to the Emperor: who yet to encourage others, appointed
a sollemne sacrifice of 100 Oxen to be made; which being ready to be
performed, it happened, That a young damsel of Alexandria, borne of the blood
royal, learned in diverse sciences, and also very beautiful, called
Catherine, who acknowledged no other God but JESUS CHRIST, desirous to defend
the law of her lord and savior, and greeuing that so many people should be
drowned in Idollatrie, and especially, for that the Emperor caused these
people thus to offend, determined to go speak to him, and to reprove him; and
to prevent (if she could possibly) this mischief, that it might go no further.

Departing with this entention from her house, well attended by her
men-seruants, and handmaides, she came unto the Temple, and sent one to tell
the Emperor, that she desired to speak with him, and he gave her leave to come
in. S. Catherine came into the Temple, and at her entrance, all the people
present were amassed, at her wonderful and Angelical beauty, as also, for her
modest, and lowelie behavior. The Emperor wondered also, to see a young maid so
gracious and desired to hear her speak, that he might know the intent of her
coming. This render virgin, very modestly, yet with a Christian boldness said
unto him:

O mighty Emperor, it seems to me that thou should in thine own
discretion, take notice of thine error, and not to sacrifice in this sort unto
Idols, which represent unto thee men subject to many vices. And if perhaps
thou do not know, who they were that thou adorest enquire of those that can
certify thee, who will tell thee; that they were principal men in the world,
that for some benefits done in the country, where they dwelt, obtained of the
people, to have statues erected unto them, that their memory might be
preserved, and that others seeing them, might be encouraged to do the like
deeds, and thereby attain such like honor, and reputation. But the rude and
ignorant people began to call them Gods, and to sacrifice unto them as Gods,
not regarding that they had been men. And though in some respect they were
rare, and deserved honor and regard; yet in many other things, they deserved
reproach and infamy, for that they had been vicious of life, and wicked.

Thou (o Emperor) ought to draw the people from this their error, and
blindness, and not to persuade them thus to run further from the light, to the
prejudice of their souls. Acknowledge the true God, that created thee, and has
given thee the Empire, who being immortal, was made man for our sake, and of
his own will did subject himself to dye, that we might be delivered from
death, which our disobedience deserved. This Lord will not know them that know
not him, nor suffer them to enter into his kingdom. But those that acknowledge
him he rewa^deth, and gives to them everlasting life.

The Emperor, hearing the bold speeches of the virgin, stood still a while,
and could not speak a word for anger: considering withal that unto the reasons
the damsel alleged, answer could hardly be made. yet he said unto her:
young girl, we will first end our sacrifice, and then we will make you an
answer. withal he commanded, she should be led unto his palace.

The sollemnitie of the sacrifices being ended, the Emperor returned unto his
palace, and causing her to be brought before him, he said unto her. Tell me
young damsel who thou art? and of the words that thou have spoken this day?
Catherine answered: It is well known in this city what blood I am of: my
descent being both from Emperors and kings. My name is Catherine: and I have
spent my time in the study of Rhetorique, philosophy and other sciences; but
that which I most esteem and regard is, that I am come to the knowledge of
JESUS CHRIST, true God, and true man; who^ I have taken to my spouse, and he
has said: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and refuse the prudence of
the prudent. for all the wisdom and prudence of man, compared to that which I
have learned, is nothing worth, and not to be regarded.

Whilst Catherine spoke, the Emperor viewed her, and wondered at her rare
beauty, her comely feature, and force of her reasons. He thought her not a
woman borne on the earth, but did liken her to one of the goddesses, which he,
and the other pagans adored. The more he talked with the holy maid, the more
he was confounded: for the more strongly she proved and concluded, that his
Gods were devils, and that JESUS CHRIST was more potent then they, for that
the sign of the Cross made in the air, did both fear them, and drive them
away. wherefore he douting to be overcome by her, and put to reproach,
determined to send for wise, and learned orators, to dispute with Catherine,
and to convince her, by their reasons. The Emperor himself told the saint
hereof, and in the mean space, caused her to be kept in his palace, under a
strong guard. This being done, he gathered famous men out of diverse countries:
and fifty such were assembled at his palace.

They understanding the cause, wherefore they were called, the chief of them
said unto him: Though there be found (o mighty Emperor) women of good
intendment, and sharp wit; and though I think this woman may be such a one;
yet unto us have thou done apparent wrong, since thou make such account of
her, by equalling her unto us, and by thinking that her wisdom and learning
may be compared with ours. Some of our disciples may dispute with her, though
that be also superfluous, and more then needs, for that she has not the
method to propound, nor order to alleadg, not to deny nor grant. Yea if she
speak with a philosopher that can dispute with her, she shall not have a word
to say, but will presently show her ignorance, and yield.

The Emperor answered him: I would not have you deceived: I have studied my
self, though not so much as you: and as far as I can gather, I think her
worthy to be compared to Plato, or any other famous philosopher. Be assured;
that if you overcome her, you shall have victory, not of a woman, but of
another Plato. On the contrary part, if you be overcome by her, remember, you
shall be vanquished of a woman. If this happen, you shall be put to great reproach:
but if you overcome her, you shall be highly honored, and bountifully rewarded
by me.

The day appointed for the disputation being come, the holy damsel was
called for that purpose: but first she making her prayer unto JESUS CHRIST, an
Angel appeared, who said unto her: Fear not thou spouse of CHRIST; for unto
thy humane wisdom, gotten by study and pains, shall be adjoined wisdom
infused, and supernatural: with which thou shall overcome those philosophers,
and shall reduce them, and many others to the faith of CHRIST the true God: and
jointly with them (though they shall suffer before thee) thou shall be crowned
with the crown of martyrdom. With this the Angel vanished away, and
Catherine was led before the Emperor, the great and famous philosophers of the
gentiles, being on the other side against her. There resorted unto this great
meeting an infinite company of noblemen, and gentlemen.

The philosopher that was accounted more learned the^ the rest, turning toward
Catherine, and, as it were in scoffing manner, said disdainfully unto her: Art
thou she, that with saucy and malapert words have so wronged our Gods? yea,
said Catherine, I am even she: yet I do it not with saucie, and malap^rt
words, as thou say, but with true and certain arguments. The philosopher
replied: If thou have read the famous poets, thou should also have noted the
stately, and magnificent names that they attribute unto them; far different,
and more honorable then those that thou give them.

S. Catherine answered: what be those ports, and what be the names they give
unto thy Gods? The philosopher said: Homer is one of them, who calls Jupiter,
the most glorious, and greatest. Orpheus also, a famous poet, speaking of
Apollo, the son of Latona, calls him potent, that sees and comaundeth
mortal men. These by them honored, and highly esteemed, and called Gods: you
cannot show me that any of them said, that a crucified man was a God. To this
S. Catherine answered: It is true, the poets, that thou have named, give unto
thy Gods names of excellency; yet with all, thou can not deny, but many
times they lay upon them most heinous crimes, and abominable deeds.

Mark what Homer (chieif of the poets) says of Jupiter. Sometimes he calls
him a liar, and perverse; then a deceiuer, and that the other Gods have
co^spired to chain him with fetters; and that if he had not been certified
thereof, he had come into manifest danger. Orpheus also (who is the other poet
thou have named) says of thy Gods: that they know not the troubles, and
afflictions of men, and when they do know them, they cannot deliver them out of
them. Sophocles also affirms: that those that adore and do reverence to the
statues and Idols of many Gods, do evil, and offend grievously. for says
he: there is but one true God (which is none of these) who created heaven and
earth, and all that is therein.

Where you say: that JESUS CHRIST crucified whom I adore, is not famous nor
known of the poets, and ancient wise men, this shows plainly your small
reading. Know therefore, that the Sibills were renowned, for their excellent
skill in poetry, being illuminated by the holy Ghost. One of the Si^ills wrote
long before it came to pass; that JESUS CHRIST should be taken by envy, and
slain by his own people. That he should rise again, and ascend into heaven,
and that he should come at the last day, to Judge the quick, and the dead.
Another Sibill said: JESUS CHRIST being God is made man, conuerseth with men,
and does great marueiles, and miracles both on the sea and land. But let us
leave the Sibills.

The same Apollo, not using his accustomed dark manner of speech, said in
plain words long before it came to pass: He that is the light and splendour of
heaven, he that is God and man has suffered, not in the divinity, but in his
body; he has suffered reproaches, and was buried; he has shed many tears
form his eyes; he fed 5000. men in the wilderness with bread, by the power of
God: ^he was crucified, and dyed on the Cross; was buried; and after ascended
into heaven.

These be the words of Apollo thy God, and by his oppinion, thou ought not
to adore him, but him whom he calls God. These and the like were the words of
S. Catherine, alleging the sayings and sentences of the philosophers, and
wisemen, who contemned the Gods of the Gentiles, proouing how contrary it was
to good philosophy, to say there should be many Gods But yet, if it were
possible that there should be many, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and the others
which the pagans adored were not, nor could not be Gods, for certain it is
that they were men. And if they had been good for any respect, or had done any
notable proffit unto the people by their industry, or new inu^ntion, as of
plowing, and reaping grain, of making armor of defense, or offense, and such
like, yet in some respects, they were most bad and vicious.

The holy virgin prosecuted her speech, and declated what JESUS CHRIST
preached; of his life, his deeds, his miracles: and showed, how they were all
conformable, to the nature of God. This holy saint spoke these things so
discreetlie, and eloquently, and with such feruencie of spirit, that is was
most evident and apparent, that it was the work of God, and that within her was
somewhat more, then humane wisdom. And in such sort, that the philosopher
which began the disputation, was not only convinced, but also turned to her
side; whereof he gave plain proof by his words.

The Emperor persuaded the other philosophers, to take the defense of the
matter, which the chief had given over (as being overcome) and to dispute with
the damsel. but they answered: that it was to no purpose. For now their chief
man being vanquished, they were also overcome. And they confessed withal: that
the damsel had said truth, and that themselves till that time, had ben^ blind
worshippers of those for Gods, which were not so indeed; and that there was but
one God* to wit, JESUS CHRIST, whom Catherine confessed, and adored. It cannot
be expressed how these words caused the Emperor to storm and rage, which he
showed by this: for without stay, or observing any order of law, or course of
Justice, or without any examination, he commanded, there should be kindled a
huge fire, to burn them all to ashes.

The fire being kindled forth with, the wisemen fell at the feet of S.
Catherine, and weeping, besought her, to pray unto God for them, that he would
pardon the sins they had committed against him through ignorance; and they
said they were prepared, and desirous, to receive the sacrament of Baptism.
The glorious saint rejoicing in spirit (as we may well think) to have gained
so good a pray, animated them saying: Assure your selves that God will pardon
you, since that for his sake, you leave the earthly king, and loose your own
lives. The fire, which is prepared, shall be in steed of Baptism unto you, and
shall cleanse your souls; that they may be forth with presented unto God; who
will bestow upon you a reward, for the service you now do unto him. These words
confirmed the wisemen exceedingly; and they often making the sign of the
Cross, and naming JESUS CHRIST, were in this manner cast into the fire, where
they yealded their souls unto God, on the 17. day of November.

Some Christians came in the evening, to gather together the relics of the
saints, and they found their bodies entire, and whole, and not a hair of their
heads perished. God suffered this, to show and manifest the new friendship he
had made with the^. This strange accident caused many pagans to be converted to
the faith.

The Emperor was sollicitous what he should do with Catherine: and it came
into his head, to deal mildly, and lovingly with her. He made her great
offers and promises, and said unto her: young and tender damsel, be content at
least to do sacrifice unto Mercurius, father of the Muses, of whom thou have
received thy great wisdom, and unto whom thou art much bound. If thou do but
this, thou shall remain in my palace, and I will have the same care of thee,
as I have of mine own daughter. The blessed virgin answered him: loose not
time in using such flattering, and deceitful words; those cannot persuade me.
for I had rather lose a 1000. lives, then to forsake the profession of JESUS
CHRIST my God, whose pleasure is (without any desert of mine) to take me for
his spouse, and to give me those Jewels, which he gives to his best beloved,
and I hope he will give me the garment of Martyrdom, which I more esteem,
then all the purple, and princely roabes that be.

Advise thy self (said the Emperor) or I will cloth thee with the purple roabe
thou speak of, and I will cause thee (though against my will) to be put to
most cruel torments. S. Catherine answered: do what pleases thee. for thy
torments, be they never so cruel, will quickly end, but the reward that I
shall enjoy, shall endure for ever. I hope JESUS CHRIST my spouse will give me
grace, that by my means, many of thy house and family, shall obtain eternal
life, and be saved. It pleased Almighty God to confirm in heaven the words
his holy servant spoke upon earth.

The Emperor beginning now to show rigor, and severity against her, caused
her to be stripped naked, which was no small affliction unto the modest virgin
(being so honest, and shamefast) as to be seen naked in the sight of so many
people. After she was stripped, the Emperor commanded she should be beaten
with all cruellty; and the officers for two hours together whipped that young
and tender virgin. Her body and flesh, which before was as white as snow, was
altered in coullor, being black and blew, all bathed in her own blood. This did
so pity the standers by, that many of them wept abounda^tly. The holy
damsel endured this torment so courageously, as though her body had been made
of stone, and not of flesh, yet no man could imagine it: seeing the blood run
down in streams over all her body.

Then the holy saint was taken from the torment, and put into a dark dongeon,
a watch being set, that none should dress her wounds, nor give her any
comfort, yea he forbad also, to give her any meat. The malice of man is of no
force against the power of God, as apeareth by this: God providing all
necessary things for his spouse, by the ministry of his faithful servants
the Angels, who not only comforted her, but also cured her, and brought her
victuals. And for twelve days that she remained in prison, a dove provided
her things necessary.

S. Catherine remaining thus in prison, the Empress Faustina desired to visit
her, which at the last she did, by the means of a great captain of the
Emperors called Porphirius. The Empress had heard much of Catherine, and had
affection unto her in her absence, but when she had seen her, and heard her
profound speeches, and enjoyed her delightful conversation, it came to pass
that she, Porphirius, and 200. soldiers of the Emperors guard, received the
faith of CHRITS, and were made Christians, with a firm purpose to lay down
their lives, for the profession of his name, when occasion served.

The twelve days being expired, the Emperor caused her to be taken out of
prison, for he vndersterstood she was yet alive, which made him to wonder, both
for that she had been so long without mea^, as also, for that her body was in
so pitiful estate, as the whipping had brought it unto. He was much astonished
to see her more cherfull then before; for that in stead of beatings,
imprisonment, famine, and other afflictions, it seemed she had been in
continual comforts, and cherishings.

Upon which occasion, the Emperor with a dissembling, and fained smile said
unto her: Truly, thou deseruest to be an Empress, for thy excellent parts and
rate beauty. The virgin said: It is to no purpose to esteem or regard
temporal beauty, which is soon lost, the estimation and account must be made
of the beauty that lasts for ever, which the saints in heaven enjoy.

With this there came unto the Emperor, a governor being a conning enginer,
but of cruel disposition, and said unto him: My Lord, if you be pleased. I
will invent, and make an engine, wherewith this rebellious damsel, shall
either do that which you command, or else she shall be torn in pieces unto
death. This engine shall be made with four wheels, in the which shall be sawes of
Iron, sharp nalles, and sharp knifes; the wheels shall be turned one against
another, and the sawes, the knifes, and the nai^es shall meet; and when they
be moved, they shall make such a noise, as when she sees them, she shall fall
down with fear; and so she shall be brought to do your will; but if she be
still stubbe^ne in her opinion, she shall be put between the wheels, and
shall dye a most cruel death.

This wretched invention pleased the Emperor well, and he commanded the
engine to be made up within three days. In that time he labored to persuade
the holy virgin to leave her stubbernesse, and not to be so obstinate; but
seeing that he labored in vain, and that the engine was now ready, he brought
the holy saint thither, and caused the wheels to be turned in her sight. She
showing no sign of fear, he commanded to tie her to one of the wheels, to
the end, that the other being turned the contrary way, might rent her body
in diverse places, with the sharp instruments.

S. Catherine was tied to a wheel, and they laid their hands on the other
wheel, to turn it about; but it fell our far otherwise, then was expected
by the cursed wretches: for an Angel of God descended from heaven, who brake
the bands where with the virgin was tied, and she fell to the ground, without
any hurt. Then the same Angel struck the wheels, which fell among the pagans,
and killed many of them. Those which escaped the danger by running away,
cried out with a loud voice: Great is the God of the Christians.

This altered not the wicked Emperor from his cursed purpose, but he studying
to d^uise new torments for S. Catherine, the Empress his wife came unto him,
and sharply reproved him; for his cruelty used against that holy damsel,
and the other Christians, and told him plainly: that she also was a Christian.
The Emperor astonished, and almost mad with anger, to see things go in this
manner; in a great rage commanded the Empress should be put to death. And for
that Purphirius the captain spoke in her behalf, and the Emperor understood
he was a Christian, and 200. of his soldiers also, he gave charge they should
be all put to death; fullfilling herein, that which this holy saint had said
before; namely, that many should be saved by her means.

As the Empress was led unto her death she met S. Catherine on the ways, and
they embraced affectionatly, requesting each other to pray unto God which
they both promised; hoping they should shortly meet together in heaven. The
Empress was beheaded on the 23 of November, and so was Porphirius and his
soldiers. The Emperor being in a manner beside himself, to see the constancy
of Catherine, and not knowing what to do more, commanded to behead her also.

The hol^e virgin was led to the place of excecutio^, where was a great
concourse of people, as well men, as women; many of the company weeping for
compassion. Before she was beheaded, she prayed unto God, and yielded him
thancks, for many graces, that she had received at his hands; but especially
for this, which she was at this instant to receive: to wit, the loosing of her
life for his sake, which she took, for the greatest sign of his love toward
her could be.

She besought him also, that after her death, he would not permit her body,
to come into the hands of the perfidious Infidells, least they might reproach,
or abuse it. Moreover, she besought him: that those that in their necessity
remembered her, might be delivered from their afflictions, so far forth as was
convenient for them. This prayer being finished, one of the soldiers cut of
her head, and out of the wound came milk, in stead of blood. Then were Angels
seen, to lift up her body from the earth, who carried it in the air unto the
mount Synay, and there the same Angels buried it. The Emperor Justinian in
process of time caused a sumptuous Church to be built in the same place, and a
monastery also, in which the holy saint is honored, and reverenced.

Her death was on the 25. of November, and on the same day the Catholic
Church celebrateth her feast, with great sollemnitie, which is done with good
reason; for God has three crowns with which he croweeth some of the faintes
in heaven.

One is of red coullor which is for the holy martyrs. The second is of
skie-coullor, wherewith the preachers be crowned: and the third is white, which
is agreeable unto the virgins. It seems all these crowns were due unto S.
Catherine. For she was a Martyr, and both before, and at the time of her
martyrdom, she converted many person unto the faith of CHRIST, and she was a
virgin also.

And for that she has such rare prerogatives (beside, as she said of her self,
that she was the especial spouse of CHRIST) with great reason deserves she
to be honored, and reverenced, of all Christians. especially of students, who
by her means do receive (as we may believe) many graces and wisdom also
infused by God. This blessed martyr and virgin S. Catherine, suffered
martyrdom, about the year of our Lord 310. in the reign of Maxentius, and
Maximianus.

SPanish: The ordinary painting her, with a sword in her hand, and setting her
foot upon the head of an Emperor, deuoteth: that she conquered victoriously
the tyrant that martyred her. *

The life of S. Peter of Alexandria Bishop and Martyr.
THe prophet Zachary saw in a vision JESUS the high priest sore beaten and
wounded, his hands were all bruised and pierced through; and being demanded
who had used him so he made answer I have received these stripes and wounds,
in the house of them that loved me.

This is spaken figuratively by JESUS CHRIST, who being of his heavenly father
loved infinitely yet he willed him or permitted him to dye. This may also very
well be said of them, that have received greater favors and benefitts of
Almighty God; having higher, and more eminent dignities, and functions; as he
has done unto priests. And if they offend, or transgress his laws, he is
more displeased at their offenses, then he is at the faults of others. And
through he be highly displeased with sinners; yet he complayneth of them, more
then of all others.

This very same befell to S. Peter of Alexandria, who saw JESUS CHRIST with a
coat, rent, and torn to pieces. He demanding who had used him in that
manner? answer was made: Arrius the heretic. The son of God showed himself
much displeased; that that accursed man had set his tongue against his honor, in
deprauing, and touching him in his deity; it being his duty to defend the
same more then others, for that he was a priest.

The life of this holy Bishop and martyr Peter, collected out of Eusebius of
Cesaria, venerable Bede, and other authors of Martyrologes, is in this manner.

SAINT Peter of Alexandria was borne in the same city of Alexandria, and
thereof he took his surname. For his great virtue and wisdom, he was elected
Bishop, after the death of a holy man called Theonas. And as some authors say;
he was the 16. prelate of that city, after S. Mark the Evangelist.

In the persecution of Maximinus the Emperor great were the troubles he
suffered; in so much as many seeing, and beholding his patience, and
perseverance, were stirred up to imitat him: neither did they quail in the
confession of their faith, but perseuered in the same, even to the loss of
their temporal lives. Although the cruelty, and tyrany of the ministers in the
persecution, increased daily against the Christians, yet the ho^ie Bishop left
not of, to look about, and to provide for the good, and vtillitie of his
Church. And whereas the accursed heretic Arrius, continued in the sowing of
his cockle, and infernal heresy, he not only resisted him, but excomunicate
and separated him, from the congregation, and comunion of the faithful.

Having done this, he was (by the commandment of the Emperor) apprehended,
and put in prison. And as soon as he knew that he was taken, he sent a comaund
unto the officers to cut of his head. This sentence being diuulged through the
city, it was a thing very remarkable, to see all the people run to the
prison (to defend him from death as much as lay in their power) so great was
their love unto their Pastor.

The accursed Arrius having a desire to be Bishop after Peter, (if he happened
as he hoped, to be put to death) labored guilefully, and d^c^^tfully, to be
reconci^ed unto Peter. To that effect he spoke to many Catholics, and desired
them to entreat him in the peoples name to absolve him; and to signify unto him
that he was willing, and ready to submitt himself to his will, and correction.
There were chosen two priests, (the one called Alexander, the other Achillas to
go on that Embassade or message; who coming to the prison where Peter was,
propounded unto him the cause of their coming.

The holy Bishop fetching a great sigh, made them this answer: Arrius is
already dead in the sight of God; for that he has so grievously blasphemed
against the divine essence; denying that there is one naturality of all the
three persons. Peter then took the two priests aside, and said to them in
secret. Although I be a grievous sinner, God out of his mercy has called me to
martyrdom; and I will show you part of mystery reueiled unto me; and I do it
the rather, for that you two are to succeed me in this dignity, wherein I now
am, the one after the other, first Achillas, and then Alexander.

I was at my prayers (with great attention) as my custom is; and on a so
daine, JESUS CHRIST my Lord and God appeared to me, in the likeness of a little
infant. The glory of his face could not be seen, so great was the splendor
and brightness that did proceed from it. He was apparailed with a long harment,
which reached down to the ground? but it was rent, from the top to the
bottom, and with his two hands he pulled it together, to cover the nakedn^s of
his breast which when I saw, I was in a great fear; but after being somewhat
reuyued, I asked him: Omy Lord IESV what is this that I see; how petifully is
this your garment torn? And he answered me: Thou talkest often hereof, but
do not endeavor to know it. But know thou, that Arrius has done this evil
unto me, who seeks to get away may people from me, which be my herita^ge, and
which I have purchased, with the shedding of my very dearest blood. This which
thou have seen, I wish thee to show to Aquila and Alexander which are to
succeed the, that they may, as thou have done, Anathematize, and excomunicate
him, that his soul may he saved. This being said; and charging, and enioyning
them so to do, it being the will of God he dissimissed them, and sent them away
in peace.

And it happened, that people perseuering, and awayting at the door of the
prison; for the defense of the life of their Pastor, to avoid a tumult and the
effusion of blood, the tirannous ministers of the Emperor gave direction and
order; that in the nigh at, the officers should make a breach through the back
side of the prison, and take out of the same, the holy Bissop Peter, and to
lead him to the place where S. mark had before time been martyred; and even
thus the cruel officers did, and there beheadded him.

His body wad buried in the same city of Alexandria, by the Christians. This
was on a wedensday, being the 26. of November, on which day the Church
celebrateth his feast. And it was in the year of our Lord 312. Maximinus being
Emperor.

Of this holy saint makes mention the Council of Ephesus, and the seventh
general Synod. S. Gregory Nazianzene. Eusebius in his 8 book 14. Chapter.
and 9. book, 6. chapt. Nicephorus. The Tripartite history. Vsuardus. Venerable Bede and Ado.

The life of S. Saturnine, Martyr.
OUR first father Adam having offended Almighty God, in breaking his
commandment, God ^^ioyned him in penance for his sin to dig, and till the
ground. Hereof it comes, that all men being partakers of his sin, (for as S.
Paul says all sinned in him) we be also partakers of his penance, and
punishment. So it befell to S. Saturnine that glorious martyr, who being old,
was condemned by the Emperor Maximian, to labor about the building of
certain Thermi, or hot bathes, by carrying sand, mortar, and stones, from one
place to another; though the cause why he suffered this slavery, and drudgery,
was, not for any sin he had committed, but only for that he was a Christian,
which this tyrant hold, and accounted to be the most heinous offense of all
other; and therefore he laid on him these grievous afflictions. The life of
this holy martyr, with the life of S. Marcellus the Pope, was written by the
notaries of the Roman Church, and is rehearsed by Laurence Surius, in this
manner.

The Emperor Maximian returning from Africa to Rome; and being desirous to
please Dioclesian, that had advanced him to high estate, and made him his
partner in the Empire; and knowing that Dioclesian had commanded certain
artificial hot Bathes to be made; was very dilligent to further, and hasten
the works. for which cause he commanded all them, that were convicted of any
grievous, or heinous oftences (among which he held and accounted the
Christians, not to be the least) to wor^k and labor about that building under
a saffe guard and watch, having many overseers, and masters over them.

Among other that were condemned to this slavery, an honorable old man called
Saturnine was one. His work was to dig sand, and to carry it from one place
to another; and for that through his weakness, and debillitie of age, he
fainted, and tired oftentimes, and was not able to do his task, as the
overseers of the work required, they often rated, and reviled him. But he was
helped out very charitably by other Christian, that were younger; and especially
by one Sisinnius, who carried those burdens that were appointed for himself, and
most of those that belonged to Saturnine; and that so cheerfully, that they
went singing H^mnes and psalms in the praise of JESUS CHRIST.

The surueiors of the work wondering at the same, acquainted a Tribune called
Spuriu^ there with and he certyfied the Emperor Maximian thereof, who
commanded they should be brought to his presence. They being before him, he
said to Sisinnius: what is your name; Sisinnius answered: I am a sinner, and a
servant of the servants of JESUS CHRIST, and I am called Sisinnius.

The Emperor said unto him; what verses be those that you sing as you work?
Sisinnius answered: If thou diddst understand them, or haddst notice of the^,
thou should also know thy ceator. who is the Creator (said Maximian) but the
invincible Hercules? To us Christians (said Sisinnius) it is a thing
abominable, and detestable, to speak such a word, or to name him in such sort.
Choose one of these two things said the Emperor: either sacrifice to our God
Hercules, or else assure thy self thou shall be put to a terrible death.
Sisinnius answered: I have always desired to dye in that manner, and to be
worthy to obtain the crown of Martiredome, for the profession and love of my
Lord JESUS CHRIST. Maximian chasing at these words, delivered him to Laodicio
a prefect, charging him: either to compel Sisinnius and Saturnine to sacrifice
to their Gods, or else to put them to a cruel death.

He put them into prison, where they remained a while, and there they converted
many Pagans to the faith of CHRIST. Then were they taken out from thence,
laden with gives, and fetters, bare foot, and barelegged, and so l^d into a
Temple to do sacrifice. when they were brought before the Idol, Saturnine
lifted up his voice and said: O lord confound the Idols of the Gentilles, At
these words the Idols fell down on the ground and broke to pieces.

Two soldiers, the one called Papias, and the other Maurus, seeing this cried
out and said: Assuredly, JESUS CHRIST, whom Saturnine, and Sisinnius do adore,
is the true God. The prefect being in a great rage, commanded his officers to
torment them. they put them on the torment or Rack called Equuleus, and hoysing
them up, they scourged them very grievously, and rent, and tore their bodies
with iron books, and scorpions. They being in those torments song Himnes, and
said: Glory be to thee O Lord JESUS CHRIST. for that we are found worthy, to
be partakers of afflictions with thy seruans.

The tWo soldiers Papias, and Maurus, (which were converted, when the Idol
fell to the ground, as is before said) were present, and near the holy martyr.
These men being stiered up with a desire of the crown of marty^dome, and
repleat with holy anger against the excecutioners, that tormented them with
such rigor and cruelltie, said to them with a loud voice: How great is the
devil with you? that he makes you so cruel, against the servants of the
living God? When the Prefect Laodicio heard their words, he was enraged
against them, and commanded the officers to strike them on the mouth with
stones, and to carry them to prison, from whence they were after taken, and
ma^tyred.

After this, he commanded the officers, to set burning torches to the sides of
Saturninus, and Sisinnius. And when he saw all this would not make them yield,
and that they showed no sign of grief or sorrow by their countenance, he
caused them to be taken from that torment, and to be led two miles out of Rome,
into the way toward Numenium, and there they were beheadded.

Their bodies were buried by a devout man called Thraso, in one of his
posessions. This was on the 29. day of November, and on the same day the holy
Catholic Church makes a commemoration of S. Saturninus. His death was about
the year of our Lord. 307. In the reign of Maximian, and Dioclesian. Of S.
Saturninus writes Ado venerable Bede, Vsuardus, and the Romain martyrologe

The life of S. Andrew Apostle.
THE sacred scripture says of that proud captain Holophernes, Judith
that as he went with his army and banners displayed, against the city of
Bethulia, there happened a thing, which did before never befall unto him: for
the Hebrews shut the gates against him, and fortified the city for their
defense. Holophernes wondered thereat not little, wherefore he assembled all his
captains to council, and said: that the desired to know the cause, why the
people of that city did stand more to their defense, then all the other thy had
ouerpassed, and desirous to know wherein they trusted, he willed them to certify
him, what any of them knew.

The^ arose up a captein of the Ammonites called Achior who said unto him: know
you most pote^^ Lord, that in this city dwells a nation called Jews, who
have a God so mighty, that if they have his favor and freindship, neither the
mighty army under thy conduct, nor all the world (if they should assault them)
can overcome them. But if perhaps they have offended him (as they do
oftentimes) it shall be very easy to vanquish them, and to take this city, let
them fortify it as much as they can. So that my council is; first to inform
thy self, whither they be in the favor of their God; and according to that
relation, if they be in his favor to stay, but if he be displeased with them,
to assault them.

Holophernes took great indignation against Achior for his words, for he
thought no force was able to resist his puissant army. Upon this he commanded
some of his soldiers to lead him unto the city of Bethulia: to the end, that
when he had taken the city by force of arms, Achior should with his blood and
life, pay the penalty of his rash unadvisedness, in taking upon him the defense
of the Hebrews.

The soldiers led Achior up on the mountein, near unto the city, and there
they left him tied unto a tree. The Jews issued out, found him, and led him
into the city: where Achior, in the presence of Ozias the high priest, and of
all the people, recou^ted what had happened unto him. They heard his speech
with great admiration: and then feasted and enterteined him kindly. and because
they thought he had defended the honor of God, every one embraced him, and
shea^ed to him great tokens of love. But above all Ozias took him to his house,
and made unto him a solemn banquet.

This figure agrees very fitly to the glorious Apostle S. Andrew: who being
figured in Achior, defended the honor of God as he did preaching the Gospel
among the infidells: where Egeas the tirant, figured in Hol^phernes took him,
and delivered him unto his officers, who led him up on a mountein, and bound
him to a cross, where he remained a while, until the Angels (citisens of
heaven) unbound him (viz: when his blessed ^oule departed from his body) and
le^ him to the supreme city of God, and there in the presence of the high
priest JESUS CHRIST (diuulging how he took the defense of his honor) all the
blessed spirits (that illustrious and honored nation) made him cheer, and
enterteyned him kindly, embracing him as their brother. And the priest JESUS
CHRIST made him a feast, apointing him a special seat in his celestial
beatitude.

The life of this glorious Apostle collected out of the gospel, and the
writings of his disciples, who were present at his martyrdom, was in this
manner.

SAINT Andrew the Apostle was borne in Behsayda a twon in the province of
Galily, and was the elder brother unto S. Peter the Apostle, and also disciple
unto S. John Baptist. With whom being one day, he saw him, when he pointed his
finger at JESUS, saying: This is the lamb of God. Andrew staid not a whit, but
jointly with another disciple, left S. John Baptist, and followed JESUS CHRIST,
who turnyng his celestial face, and seeing, asked them, what they sought. They
answered: that they desired to speak with him in his house. Our Lord l^d them
with him, and kept hem one day in his company, in which time thy talked
together, and they knew him to be the Messiah.

Andrew departed then from our Savior, and met Simon his brother, and said
unto him with great joy* O, brother Simon, that thou had seen that, which I
have seen. Know thou, that the Messy as (so much desired, and so long
expected by the Jews) is come. My master John Baptist showed him unto us: and
I have been with him; and I tell thee, that his words and deeds confirm that
he is that same. Come thou and see him. So the two brethren came together unto
JESUS, who said: Thou art Symo^ the son of John, but thou shall be called
Cae^has, that is, Peter. Another time those two brethren being a fishing in
their barck, JESUS CHRIST passed by the bank, and called them, sa^eng: follow
me, and I will make you Fishers of men. at this they left their bark and netts
and followed him: and from that hour, they kept him company, and he made them
his Apostles.

S. John makes mention of S. Andrew in the recou^ting the miracle our Savior
did on the mount, when he would seed. 5000. persons that followed him, and
asked S. Philippe, where he might buy as much bread, as would suffice all those
people? and he made an answer, showing little faith. S. Andrew showed a little
more faith, then he, saying: there was a boy that had five loaves and two
fishes: though he doubted some what, saying, it was too little for so many. The
same S. John says also of S. Andrew, that some Gentills desired to see JESUS
CHRIST, upon the ^ame that was of him, and spoake to S. Philip to being the^ to
see him, and he spoke to S. Andrew, and both of the^ told JESUS how some
desired to see him.

There is no other particular thing written in the Gospel of S. Andrew,
though it be very certain, that he was present in those things, where it is
said, that all the Apostles of CHRIST were there, as being one of them. He was
present at the resurrection of Lazarus, he was at the entry in to Jerusalem on
Palme-sonday: He was at the Supper, where he was made priest and Bishop, and
communicated. Then with the rest, he abandoned our Lord, flyeng as the others
did: he saw our Savior raised to life, and also ascend into heaven, and
received the holy Ghost, and his gifts also.

He preached in Scithia Europea, which fell to his lotte. He passed into
Thracia and Epyrus, in all which countries, he preached, did miracles, and
converted much people to the faith of CHRIST. Finally, he came to the city of
Patras in Achaia, and there he stayed, and made it his place of abode, and
residence; preaching, and gainyng many souls, by converting them to the faith,
not only in that province and city, but also in the countries adjacent. in a
small space there was not standing one temple of the Idols, for that they were
all turned into Chappells, or into oratoryes, where the Apostle said mass, as
occasion served. He ordered deacons, and other ministers to help him in this
holy mystery. Every one loved and reverenced him, for that they knew our good
God had bestowed many benefits on the^, by his means. His life was an example
to them all: with his words he comforted every one; and his deeds were very
gracyous unto them; for that he healed the sick, and cast out the devils. To
every one he did good, and did not permit any to do evil.

There came into this city as Proconsull, Egeas, sent by the Romans to govern
that province. He seeing how matters went, began to persecute the Christians,
compelling them to sacrifice unto the Idols. S. Andrew came said unto him: It
is good reason, that thou, who art a Judge over men, should acknowledge thy
Judge which is in heaven, and honor him, for the true God, as he is indeed, and
leave the honoring of them, who be no Gods. Egeas said: perhaps thou art that
Andrew, who did destroy the temples of the Idols, and persuade men to receive
the superstityous sect of the Christians, which the Romans have appointed to
be persecuted, and to be rooted out.

S. Andrew replied: The Romans have not yet understood, how the son of God
is come from heaven unto earth, for the salvation of mankind; who has taught,
that these Idols be devils, and deceivers, who bring men from the true
service of God, that they may depart out of this life replenished with sin,
and be punished in the life to come, with eternal torments Egeas said: these
be the things your CHRIST preached to the Jews, for the which they crucified
him. you say true (said the holy Apostle) that JESUS CHRIST died on the Cross;
but that was done by his own proper will: How by his will, said Egeas? Is it
not known, that one of his disciples sold and delivered him into the hands of
the Jews, who presented him before their governor, and he caused him to be
crucified? All these things show, that he dyed not of his own will.

S. Andrew replied: I was and am still his disciple, and I auow, that he died
by his own will, for that he knew and said these things before, viz: that he
should be taken, crucified, and rise again the third day: yea and I tell there
more, that my brother Peeter would have hindered him, to the end, he should not
have permitted such thing to be done, and was called Satan for the same: in
which he showed, that the hinderance of his death was unto him displeasing.

And when he said, that one of us, that were with him at the table, should
betray and sell him, his best beloved disciple called John asked him, who it
was, that should be so treacherous: and he answered that it was he, unto whom
he gave a soppe dipped in the platter; at which word he gave it to Judas, who
was the man that sold him, and had already bargeined to betray him. by this you
may know, that my master who knew all things, might have prevented it: and if
he did it not, you are compelled to confess, that he dyed by his own will.

Egeas said: were it of his own will, were it by force, I reckon not: but I
meruell at thee, that thou will worship for God, a man crucified. S. Andrew
said: very great was the mystery of the Cross, and I will declare it unto
thee, if thou will hear me with patience. Egeas said: I will hear thee
patiently: but after that, if thou do not harken and obey me, I will make
thee to feel the mystery of the Cross upon thy shoulders. Menace not me (said
S. Andrew) for that: if I feared it, I would not preach the glory thereof.

The first man having incurred the punishment of death, for eating the fruit of
the forbidden tree it was convenient, that with the fruit of the tree of the
Cross, should be cancelled the death of the world, and remedy given to the
loss of mankind. And as the first man was formed of the virgen earth, and the
ruin of the world was caused by him; so it was fit, that CHRIST should be
borne of the imaculate virgin Mary, true God, and true man, that he should be
the cause of the redemption of the world.

Adam stretched out his arms to gather the fruit of the forbidden tree, and
CHRIST stretched his out, because they should be nailed to it. Adam tasted the
fruit, and CHRIST tasted gall. To conclude: I tell thee, that my Lord was
clothed with mortal flesh, and would dye upon the Cross, that he might cloth
us with immortality, and give us eternal life.

Egeas having given care to the Apostle a while, said: Tell these thy tales, to
them, that will believe thee: and believe thou me, that if thou do not
sacrifice to our Gods, I will put thee on the Cross, thou commendest so much.
S. Andrew answered: I sacrifice every day, to the omnipotent, living, and true
God, not the smoke of incense, nor flesh of bulls, nor blood of skeep, but the
immaculate lamb, in consecrating his most blessed body, which being received by
the faithful, the lamb remains intyer and whole, as he was before, although
the faithful do truly and really eat his flesh, and drink blood. How may that
be said Egeas? The Apostle answered: if I should tell thee, and if thou
would understand it, it were first necessary for thee, to be a Christian.
Egeas replied: I shall make thee by force of torments to tell me, how, and by
what means I may understand it.

Then put he him in prison, unto which place resorted much people, who would
have taken the Apostle away violently, if he had not hind^^ed it: for out of
the prison he preached to them, and persuaded them not to rebel against the
tirant, whose cruelty would be unto him an occasion of merit. If he shall
afflict the body, said the Apostle, he has no power to hurt the soul: his
torments will quickly end, but the reward shall endure for ever. We ought
rather to make much of him, and to honor him, then to use him displeasantly,
since he may do us much good, and but a little harm with these and the like
words the Apostle stayed the people, from any commocion or insurrection against
the Proconsull.

The next day Egeas caused the Apostle to be brought before him, and said: I am
persuaded thou art now better advised, and wilt fortake thy follyes, which have
darkened thy mind: and that thou will leave the worship of that thy CHRIST, and
enjoy the sweet and delightful life of this world and avoid withal bitter
death. The Apostle answered: without the belief of CHRIST, there is no true
content, nor true life, as I have always preached in this province, whither he
sent me, to the end men should leave and abandon the adoration of Idols, and
receive the true faith of JESUS CHRIST, and so escape eternal death, and
obtain everlasting life.

For this same cause (said Egeas) I will also procure thee to adore the Gods,
to the end these people whom thou have deceived, may forsake the vanity of the
doctrine, and return to the relligion of the ancient Gods. for (as I guess)
there is not a city in all Achaia, but the Temples are abandoned, and thou art
the cause of it. I will have thee also to be the cause, to alter their course,
and to frequent the Temples again, and to renew their sacrificing: in which
doing, the Gods will be appeased toward the, for now against thee, they be sore
offended. But if thou be resolved to do other wise, prepare thy self to endure
and support terrible torments, which shall be inflicted on thee, and lastly, thou
shall die on the Cross.

To this the Apostle answered: Listen to me, thou son of death, thou dry rotten
logge, designed to nourish hell fire: hitherto I have spoken myldly to thee,
thinking, that thou, being a reasonable creature, would have made use and
benefit of my words, and have forsaken thy false and vain Gods: but since I
see thee so obstinate and hard hearted, I tell thee plainly, think not to
terrify me with thy threats. do thy worst: for the greater the torments be, so
much more shall the reward be, which JESUS CHRIST will bestow on me: and the
greater shall the pains be, which are prepared in hell fire for thee; where
the Gods, whom, at this time, thou adorest, shall give thee thy due reward,
tormenting thee eternally. for indeed they be no other but devils.

Egeas raging exceedingly at his words, caused the Apostle to be stripped, and
appointed seven fellows to beat him with all cruelty: who gave over three
times, for others to come in their place. And so many were the blows, they
gave to the Apostles body, that it powered blood out so abondantly, that there
was not one place free from wounds, from the head to the foot. Then Egeas
said: oh Andrew have compassion of thy self: consider that the blood, thou
sheddest is much: and if thou do not change thy oppinion, I must crucify
thee: The holy Apostle answered, saying: I am the servant of JESUS CNRIST, and
do not fear, but love the Cross. Thou have more reason to fear, for that, if
thou do not believe in CHRIST, thy torments shall differ from mine, for mine
shall end in two days, and thine shall be everlasting. Egeas could keep patience
no longer: but commanded that he should be crucified; yet not nailed to the
cross with nails, but bound with cords: which he appointed not for any pity he
had, but to the end the torment might continue the longer.

Whilst the executioners led him to his martyrdom, an infinite company of
people resorted to him, crieng with a loud voice: What has this just man, and
friend of God done, that he should be Crucified? The holy Apostle entreated
them not to hinder his martyrdom, but went ioifull and merry, and by the way
preached to those that acompanied him.

When he saw the Cross a far of, he said devoutly: I adore thee o precious
Cross, consecrated with the body of CHRIST, and adorned with his members, as
with perles, and Jewels Before CHRIST came to thee, thou diddst terrify men;
but now thou causest joy, and delight. O good Cross made so beautiful by the
body of CHRIST, I have desired thee a long time, I have sought thee
diligently, and now I have found thee; receive me in thine arms, and lift me
up from men: present me to my master, that he may receive me by thy means,
who has redeemed me by thee.

Having said this, and being now near unto the Cross, he stripped himself out
of his clothes, and gave them to the officers, who binding him to the Cross,
lifted him up, as the sentence, and judgment was. There was a great number of
people about the Cross, all lamenting, and complaining of the cruel, and
wrongful torments that the Apostle suffered. But he comforted, and encouraged
them, to suffer ioifully the like torments for CHRIST his sake, when occasion
was offered.

S. Andrew remained two days on the Cross, the people complaining, and criyng
out aloud: It is not just, that a man so holy, so modest, of so good parts;
and that teaches so good doctrine, should die in this manner. Egeas
understanding that the people murmured against him, fearing some tumult,
determined to take the Apostle from the Cross; and for that intent went unto
him. The Apostle said unto him: What do thou here Egeas? If thou come to
believe in CHRIST, he will as readily pardon, and receive thee* as any other.
But if thou come to take me from the Cross, it is in vain, for I am now going
to my Lord and king. It seems I am now before his judgment seat, where I
shall be rewarded, and thou shall be chasticed.

The Apostle seeing that they yet labored to take him from the Cross, and that
the hangman began to untie him, he lyfted up his voice to JESUS CHRIST, and
said: Lord, I beseech thee for thy holy names sake, permit me not to be taken
from the Cross alive. Receive me my master, whom I have loved, whom I have
confessed, whom I have preached, and of whom I hope to be rewarded. Oh good
JESUS, receive my spirit in peace, for now is it time to come to thee, whom I
have so much desired. Whilst the Apostle said these words, there descended
from heaven a great brightness in manner of a beam of the sun, (which every
one saw) and covered the body of the Apostle, that for half an hours space it
could not be seen, at which time it vanished away, and then they perceived
that the was dead.

One Maximilla a devout woman, and a disciple of the Apostle, being of that
city, and very rich, went to the Cross with some of her servants, and took
the body of the saint, and buried it, anointing it first with precious
ointments. When Egeas understood what Maximilla had done, he meant to complain
unto the Emperor, both of her, and of many other that asisted her. Whilst he
was in the public hall taking informations thereof, the devil entered into
him, making him to roar, and cry out as a beast, and tormenting him in the
sight of the people, made him to yield his soul to be tormented in hell. This
judgment of God caused many to be converted to the faith of CHRIST. The
martyrdom of S. Andrew, was on the 30. of November, and on the same day the
Church celebrateth his feast. His death was in the year of our Lord. 62. (as
Canisius says) in the reign of Nero.

In the time of the Emperor Constantine, the body of S. Andrew was translated
to Constantinople, and from thence to diverse other places, till lastly, it was
carried into Italy, to the city of Amalfy, in the kingdom of Naples, where
it is at this present. And it is said, that out of this blessed body, comes a
most precious liquor, that cures, and heals diverse infirmities. When Pius
the second was Pope, his head was brought to Rome, and set in a tabernacle made
for that purpose, in the Church of S. Peter.

S. Gregory of Toures recounteth many miracles, done by the intercession of S.
Andrew. namely; the curing of diverse, and sundry infirmities. He says also:
that in the time of Clodoueus king of France, in a war he made in Burgundy,
and in the sacking of a country, fire was set on the Church of a holy martyr,
called Saturninus; within the which were some relics of S. Andrew. The fire
enereased, and the people were much agreeued, that the relics of the holy
Apostle should be so consumed. There was a soldier borne at Toures, who
perceiving the sorrow of the people, entered resolutlie into the midst of the
fire, and went unto the place where the relics of the holy Apostle were, and
brought them away safe, without hurt. And God was pleased to show, how
acceptable this pious deed was to him, preserving the soldier from the fire,
that it hurt him not at all.

We read also of other miracles of S. Andrew: as of a Bishop, whom the devil
(in form of a damsel) would have deceived; and the holy Apostle went to his
house, in the shape of a pilgrim, and told him of the deceit; but for that I
have not read it in any approved author, I do not auerre it, yet God can, and
uses to do those, or the like things by the intercession of his holy saints.
And we ought not to doubt, but he has done many miracles by the intercession
of S. Andrew, who followed, and loved him so, that at last he died on the
Cross, for his love, as himself had done. It is just therefore, that we be
devout to this holy saint, that by his prayers, and meritts, we may obtain
of God eternal glory Amen.

DECEMBER.
The life of S. Bibiana virgin and Martyr.
MANY were the vexations, and great were the tribulations the holy man David
suffered at the hands of sundry persons, who without any cause given on his
part, endeavored to do him all the mischief they could: as among others his
father in law Saul did: yet he supported all these troubles with patience, and
myldnes: but the insurrection of his son Absalon nipped him to the heart, and
mollested him above all the rest: wherefore he said in one psalm: If mine
enemy had said evil of me, and had persecuted me, Ps. 54
I would have supported it, because that of an enemy, no friendly kindness is
expected: but I am aggreiued, that this my son, he who satt at my table, and
eat with me in the same dish, should be the man, that should persecute me. Oh
how worthy was he and such as he was to descend alive into hell!

Many were the tyrants that persecuted the Church, and many more were they that
put the Christians to death, but S. Bibiana had reason to complain of none
more, then of Iulyan the Apostata, because the others were her professed
enemies in that they were Idollaters: But this wicked and damnable man was a
Christian, and within holy orders: who put her to very great sorrow, and moved
her to desire God to chastise him, as indeed he did, by depriving him in a
short time, both of his empire and life, it being not known by whom, nor in
what manner.

This is only certain; that the lewd and wicked man, being in the midst of
his army, was wounded with a spear, whereof he dyed, blasphemyng and reuiling
at JESUS CHRIST, his cursed soul falling as a pray into the devils hands. S.
Bibiana was martyred in the time of this wicked emperor. Venerable Bede, and
other Authors of martyrologes write her martyrdom in this manner.

SAINT Bibiana was borne in Rome, and was daughter unto Faustus and Drafosa,
who were both Christians, and holy mat^yrs. S. Bibiana being very young, did
exercise her self in holy and virtuous woorks. She was taken in the time of
the emperor Julian the Apostata (a cruel foe unto Christians) and delivered to
the custody of Faustus the governor, who was appointed to hear and determyne
her cause.

He persuaded her to sacrifice unto the Idols: and the souer to draw her to
the same, he threatened to put her unto grievous torments, if she refused it*
But the holy saint answered with such godly reasons, that she persuaded the
Governor himself to forsake and relinquish the Idols, and to be made a
Christian: and consequently to endure torments and death courageously for the
same. The holy damsel Bibiana was very joyous, that she had made that gain,
as to gain a soul to her spouse JESUS CHRIST. Then was she led before the
Emperor, who exhorted her to sacrifice unto the Idols, and she answered
him, that the God creator and governor of heaven and earth was only worthy to
be adored. The Emperor hearing this answer commanded Bibiana to be beaten with
cudgells, which was done with such cruelty, that she yielded up her spirit
unto God, in that torment, on the second day of December, on the which day, the
Church celebrateth her feast. This befell in the year of our Lord. 364. in the
time of Iulyan the Apostata. The body of S. Bibiana, was buried by a priest
called John, in the city of Rome, in a place near unto the palace of Licinius.

The life of S. Barbara virgin and Martyr.
THE prophet Ezechiel recounteth a vision, Cap. 40
saying: that he saw a man, who measured the temple, and the house of God, who
had in his hand a rod wand to measure: which was six cubits long, and one
handful. The Giant Golyas with whom David sought, (and cut of his head) was
also six cubits, 1. R^g. 17
and one handful hi^.

It is not without mystery, that these two measures are alike. It may be; by
the man whom Ezechiell saw to measure the temple, is signified, our Lord God:
And by the Giant Golyas is meant the devil. In that he was of the same measure,
that the rod of the other was, shows: that the devil, to the uttermost,
strives to be likened unto God. And omitting many other examples, I will speak
of one serving our purpose.

God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his own son, Genesis 22
who incontinent prepared himself to do^yt, and had performed the same, if God
who bad him, had not hindered and let him by an Angel. Out of this act of
Abraham redounded very much honor unto God, it being thereby seen, hat he had
such a faithful servant, that to do him service, he was willing to kill his
own son.

The devil to be like unto God in this, persuaded one of his servants called
Dioscorus to kill his only daughter, who was called Barbara a blessed damsel,
to do service to the same devil. The life of this holy saint was written in
this manner by Symeon Metaphrastes and Ado. Arch. B. of Treuers.

IN the time of The Emperor Maximian, there was in the city of Nicomedia, a man
very rich in worldly posessions, and of a noble family; but in relligion, he
was an Idollater, and was called Dioscorus. This man had one only daughter, who
was to be his heir, whom he loved dearly. This damsel was very beautiful,
and witty: and in religion (which is the thing most to be regarded) she was a
Christian; and very virtuous: though her father was ignorant, that she was
Baptized.

Dioscorus doubted, lest the young woman living alone in the house, and being so
fair, should be sued unto in some inconvenient manner by one or other. which
to prevent and avoid; he enclosed her in a tower of his palace. It was no
grief unto the holy damsel to be so shut and mewed up there, since she might
bestow her self wholly by this means in the service of God, as she did;
spending her time in prayers and meditations: the inspirations of the holy
Ghost recreating her soul.

There was in that same tower a fair hall, and many chambers furnished: she
might also go down from the tower into a garden, for her recreation: and her
father, for her better contentment, made therein a bayne or bathing house, with
two wyndowes to give it light. The work was not yet finished, when Dioscorus,
was occasioned to go on a long journey: wherefore he gave directions unto the
master work men, and departed.

By hap Barbara went one day to see the laborers as they were working on the
two wyndows, and bad them make three. The men said, they durst not do so, for
Dioscorus had commanded them to make but two. Barbara said: I would have you
make three in any case, and if my father be offended therewith, tell him that I
bad you, and I will yield him a reason, why three be made. So the workmen made
three wyndowes, as she bad them. The work being furnished, Barbara went unto
the Baine, and in seeing the three wyndowes she contemplated the mystery of
the B. Trinity.

It befell one day, she meditating the misteryes of the passion and death of
JESUS CHRIST; and shedding tears from her beutifull eyes (which like precious
perles, drapped into the fountein, and were mingled with the pure and
christalline water) she came unto a pillar of marble, out of which the water
issued, and on the same with her finger, she made the sign of the Cross: A
merueillous thing to recount, the mark made in the marble with the finger of
the virgin, continued, as if it had been imprinted by some seal into wax.

The sign remained there: and after that the holy saint was martyred, many
came into the baine, and looking on it devoutly, and calling on the name of the
holy Saint, were delivered from many infirmityes.

When the holy damsel had made the Cross, she kissed it devoutly many
times, and casting aside her eyes, she saw some statues of the Idols, her
father adored, which he had caused to be set there for the more ornament of the
place. It grieved her very sore, and caused her to sigh and lament for
compassion of them, that adored such Gods: and moved with indignation against
them, she spit in their faces, saying: Let all them that adore you and seek
for help at your hands, be like unto you: having done this, she returned unto
her tower, and spent her life in fasting and prayer, her mind being always
fixed upon God.

Her father came home, and went to visit his daughter, and also to see his
new baine, having the master workmen with him. When he saw, they had made
three wyndows (and he had appointed them, to make but two) he asked them the
cause thereof, and they told him again that his daughter charged them to do as
they had done. So he said no more at that time.

Afterward being alone with Barbara he said unto her: daughter, what was thy
meaning to cause them to make three wyndows, when I appointed the^ to make but
two. The holy damsel without any fear answered: father; I caused them to
make three, because it was more convenient and agreeable to reason. How so, said
Dioscorus? Barbara replied: for that three lights do illuminate every man, that
comes into this world. The good virgin spoke this with an intention to signify
the high mystery of the B. Trynity. Her father was somewhat troubled at her
words, and said: Explain these your speeches a little better. What is the
meaning that three wyndowes illumynate every man, that comes into this world?
Then Barbara said: Come with me, and you shall understand my meaning.

They went to the Bayne, and being near the pillar, the holy damsel showed
him the sign of the Cross, which she had made therein with her finger, and
said unto him: My father, the th^re wyndowes signify the three persons, viz:
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost: by this light every creature is
illuminated, to the end, the high and sovereign mystery of the holy Cross,
upon which JESUS CHRIST dyed, may be believed.

There was never bull bayted by dogs, or wounded, showed such rage and fury
as Dioscorus did, at the hearing of these words, and he was repleat with
indignation and choler, and as a man posessed, to see his daughter so much
contrary unto him in relligion.

Then he called to remembrance that many times, when he talked with her
concerning marriage, she had wished him not to take care for her, for she had
no thought of any husband, whereupon he perceued that she answered him so, for
that she was a Christian, and he knew that among them many observed chastity.

It came into his head, that the emperor Maximian persecuted the Christians,
and that in the city was a governor, that tormented and put many of them to
death: All these things together caused Dioscorus to be so much distracted,
that being overcome with passion, and forgetting, that he was her father, and
taking on him the person of a tyrant and parricide, he laid hands on his sword
with a full intention, therewith to run through the breast of his own
daughter.

The holy damsel, that she might be reserved to a more glorious triumph,
departed away, and fled from her fathers sight. By this means Dioscorus had
space to be advised, that by killing his daughter, he might fall into some
trouble, and could not justify it, if he did not declare and publish the cause
and reason of his doing. he stayed not so much for any piety, as to have an
occasion and means to be more revenged on her, and to show unto the other
Idollaters, how great his zeal was to the honor of his Gods. Wherefore he took
order, that his daughter Barbara should be brought before the governor
Martianus, whom he informed, that she was a Christian, and moreover, he humbly
besought him, to proceed against her, according to the late decrees of
the emperor.

The governor much wondered at Dioscorus, seeing him so cruelly bent against
his own daughter: but he was much more astonished, to see her Angel-like beauty,
which was so goodly, that it seemed to him, though she had done the greatest
offense in the world, the sight of her only would have obtained her pardon. And
yet her own father was the only man, wh^ (without any wrong offered on her
part) labored all he might to procure her death.

The judge spoke unto her mildly: saying; Babara, I see, thou art a tender
delicate virgin, and very beautiful; therefore have compassion on thy self;
sacrifice unto our Gods; for I cannot be rigorous against so beautiful a
damsel. The blessed maid answered: I offer sacrifice unto my God, who created
heaven and earth; but of those, whom thou call Gods, hear what a holy king
and prophet called David says: The Gods of the Gentills be gold and silver,
the work of men's hands; Psalm. 130.113.
and they who are represented by them, be devils, but the true God made heaven
and earth. I say and confess the same, and therefore trouble not thy self to
persuade me, to adore them*

The governor was so vexed with this speech that taking no pity of this
beautyfull damsel, he caused her to be stripped, and to be beaten, without
mercy, with the sinews of oxen: and when all her body was wounded and made
sore, he commanded the officers to rub her with a course heare-cloth, which
put her to a grievous pain: and the blood ran abundantly from her body unto
the ground: then he caused her to be led back into prison, that he might have
time to devise some more grievous torments for her.

On that same night, there was a great brightness in the prison, where Barbara
lay, in the midst whereof appeared JESUS CHRIST, who comforted and encouraged
his handmaide, and told her, that he would alwais assist her, and keep her in
his custody, and that the inventions of cruel tyrants should not prevail any
thing against her. These words were scant ended, when the blessed damsel
perceued her body to be healed of all her hurts and wounds, which thing did
excedingly rejoice her in spirit, and for the same, she rendered infinite
thanks unto the highest God, for that he vouchsafed to visit her; as also, for
that he had healed her in this manner.

On the next day, the holy virgin came again before the judge: he seeing her
hole and sound, was amazed thereat, and so were many other, who had seen her
the day before, when she was led unto prison bruised and wounded. The governor
said unto her: See Barbara, how the Gods have had compassion of thee, and have
healed again thy wounds, they be so desirous to reduce thee unto their service
by mildnes. Be not thou unto them unthankful, nor obstinate in thy error,
lest thy do hereafter use rigor and severity against thee. To this, the holy
damsel answered: They who be blind, as thou art, think as thou do: but I
will tell thee the truth how I was healed (if thou desire to know it) It was
JESUS CHRIST the son of the living God, whom thou can not see, thy soul
being blinded and drowned in the profound darkness of iniquity.

The governor seeing he prevailed not with this ^light, commanded two lusty
fellows to take the sides and breast of the damsel, with iron combs: and
then burning torches to be set to her sides, and many strokes to be also given
her on the head, with a hammer. The holy damsel Barbara in the midst of these
torments lifted up her eyes, unto JESUS CHRIST, saying: Thou o Lord, who see
the secrets of hearts, behold like wise, I have put all my trust in thee: I
beseech thee, Lord, not to abandon me, but sustain me with thy pityfull hand,
for as without thee, I cannot do any thing; even so, with thee, I can do all
things.

The tirant not content with this cruelty, but proceeding further, bad them to
cut of the nipples of her breasts, which put her to much pain, but much more
was the love that she bore unto JESUS CHRIST, which caused her with patience
to suffer the pain: for all which respect she said with the prophet David:
Psalm. 50.
O Lord my God turn not thy face from me, and do not take a way thy holy
spirit from my heart. The very sight of her body (so misused and bruised) put
men in fear: wherefore the tyrant to do her the more shame, and for to terryfie
the Christians the more by her example; commanded her to be led through the
high streets naked, and all the whiles to be beaten with staves.

When the holy damsel understood the sentence of the tyrant, perceuing they
meant to put it in execution, she lifted up her eyes unto heaven, and said. O
sovereign king, and my sweet Lord: thou couerest the sky with the thick
clouds, and the earth with darkness, of the night: may it please thee to cover
my naked body so, that it be not seen of the unbelievers, who, if they see me,
will blaspheme thy holy name. Our pityfull Lord, who gives care unto his
servants who resort for his help in their tribulations, heard her prayer, and
covered her bo^y with a brightness in manner of a long vesture, even to the
ground, so that the paynims could not see her. The holy saint was let thorough
all the city, and brought back unto the governor, who seeing her constancy,
gave sentence, that she should be beheaded.

The cursed father of the blessed damsel, who had been present at this
dollorous spectacle, and was not any thing mollified, but rather more
incrudelized, desired the governor, to show him the favor, to execute the
sentence pronounced by him against his daughter: which request was easily
granted. The glorious saint was led out of the city, unto a h^l^e, where was
the ordinary place of execution: and there kneeling on her knees, she made a
devout prayer unto God, rendering him thanks, for bringing her, to that
passage. Then bowed she her head before her: father, who void of pity lifted
up the sword, and cut of her head.

Then returned the cursed wretch unto the city, vaunting he had done a
memorable act for the service of his Gods, saying he deserved to be honored by
the emperor, and to have his name eternized. But God almighty was not pleased
with his boasting of so inhumane an act: for unexpectedly it thundered, and
therewith, a thunderbolt fell, which struck and killed him out of hand. So that
at one time, the daughter ascended to heaven, where she was receued with joy
and triumph of the heavenly citisens and of the celestial king; and the father
descended into hell, where he is and shall be perpetually tormented by the
devils.

The body of this glorious damsel and martyr S. Barbara was buried by a holy
and religious man called Valentinian, with music and songs, to the praise and
laud of God and of S. Barbara his spouse.

The martyrdom of this blessed damsel, was on the. 4. day of December in the
year of our Lord. 288. in the time of Diocle^ian and Maximian.

This holy saint is a special advocate against tempests thunder and
thunderbolts. Petrus Galesinus, the Apostolic protonotary wrote the life of
S. Babara, and says; that he collected it out of S John Damascen, out of
Arsenius, and out of other Grecians: and it is conformable to that which is
here written.

The life of S. Sabba Abbot.
SAINT Theodoret writes in his relligious history, that holy Abbot called
Publius congregated together many hermus, and builded a convent. On a day
conferring with them, among other things, he said: That as one going to the
high stret or market place, to provide things necessary for his house, and at
one shop buieth cloth, at another shoes, out of this is furnished with bread,
and out of another is provided of wine, even so the relligious man in the
convent is from one man to lern patience, from another humility, from an other
chastity, and he like of other virtues.

For this cause in ancient timme some servants of God, although it was pleasing
and to yous for them to like in the desert and wilderness, yet did they gather
many disciples together, and make conuents: to the end, that some being
instructers of others, and some lerning of their superiors or betters, all
might be saved. One of these was S. Sabba the Abbot. whose life collected out
of Cyrill the monck, and some Authors of martirologes, was in this manner.

SAINT Sabba was borne in the province of Cappadocia, in a city called
Mutalasium: his fathers name was John, and the name of his mother was Sophia:
and it was in the time of Theodosius. 2. the emperor of Rome. It fell out, that
the father of S. Sabba went to serve in the war, that was then in Alexandria,
and recommended his son unto his brother called Jeremy, whose wife hated the
child, and could not abide to see him, but used him hardly. This was, in part,
the cause that S. Sabba went unto a monastery, in the which Gregory a holy man
was Abbot.

He received Sabba into the monastery, and gave him the relligious habit:
where he lived a holy life, exercising himself always in virtue, but his
abstinence was most remarkable, and his mortification was admirable, and so was
his humility and patience. wherefore God showed by him some miracles, and one in
especial, which befell in that monastery, and this it was.

The baker had one day put his cloths into the oven (which was somewhat hot)
to dry, and forgetting them, put in fire, which already flaming thorough all
the oven, he remembered the cloths, but could not get them out by any means.
The poor man made moan for his mis-happe: and by chance, Sabba was there
present, who made the sign of the Cross in the oven, and then he went into
the oven flaming as it did, and took out the cloths whole and without any hurt.

Then he asked leave of his superior to depart from that monastery, and to go
into a desert, where he lived a solitary life certain years, and endured many
terrible tentations of the devils. He went also unto Jerusalem, to visit the
holy places, where the misteryes of our redemption were wrought; And being one
day in that city, near unto the Church of S. John Baptist, he healed a woman,
that had a bloody flixe, he cured another that was cruelly tormented by the
devil.

Whiels S. Sabba was in Jerusalem, there was exceeding scarcity of water, and
there was not any to be found, not to be had to drink: in such sort, that the
people were ready to dye for thirst. The good father Sabba fell to prayer,
prostrated on the earth with his body, but his soul being lifted and fixed in
heaven, and in that manner he continued in prayer all night. the tears which
bathed the place on earth, where the holy saint was, gave testimony with what
efficacy he had requested God to succor and relieve his people in their
necessity. It pleased God to show favor unto his servant: for there fell a
very great shower of rain, that filled the cisternes and satisfied the
people, every one yielding infinite thanks unto God, that had showen
compassion unto them: though many of them did not know, who had been the means
to obtain so notable a favor.

Then did this good father collect and assemble toger her many disciples, and
founded some monasteries, and lived a holy relligious life, and finally died
in Jerusalem in the year of our Lord. 424. being 94 years old.

His body was buried between two Churches, and was afterward carried unto
Venice, where at this present he ^eth in the Church of S. Antoninus.

The life of S. Nicholas, Bishop and Confessor.
WE read in the book of kings, that God talking of the noble king David, 2.
Reg. ^3.
said of him: that he had found a man according to his own heart, and herefore
made him captain and ruler over his people: These words, though at the first
said of David; may be very well applied unto the glorious S. Nicholas, for he
was a man according to Gods own heart: They were verified of David, because he
was pitiful and myld: and the same may be said of S. Nicholas, for he was
merciful, and myld also, and endued with other good qualities and ver^ues: ^^r
which cause God elected him, to be the captain and pastor of his people, in
the city of Myrrea: The life of this glorious saint, was written by the
Patriarch Methodius, Symeon Metaphrastes, and other Greek authors, our of whom
John the Deacon, and Leonard Justinian made a collection. Out of these two was
this sumarie taken, and is in this manner.

SAINT Nicholas was borne in Patarae, a city in the province of Licia. His
father and mother were Christians, noble by birth, and deuote servants of God.
To this good couple God granted a son in reward of their many tears,
prayers, and continual alms deeds, desiring him, to send unto them an heir,
who should use their goods in his service: God heard the prayers of his d^uou^e
servants, and comforted them by gyuing unto them their son Nicholas.

Of him it is thought, that he had the spirit of God, even from his infancy:
for that as soon as he was borne, he began to serve him. As Soon as he knew
what it was to eat, he knew also, what it was to fast; for he would not take
the breast to suck, but one time only in a day; especially tw^se a week, to
wit, on the wednesday, and the Friday: and this fast he observed all the days
of his life. Being somewhat grown in years he showed signs of great virtue,
which increased in him as his years did. His father sent him to school to
learn to read, and also other sciences, where Nicholas made proof of his
delicate wytt, because in very short time he profitted very much.

He would not keep company with other young men of his years, who suffered
themselfs to be transported into all vices and wantonness, but his conversation
was only with the most virtuous, and honest people. He avoided also not only
the conversation of women, but abhorred them even as a deadly poison for youth:
And to eseape the war, which is made by wicked thoughts, and carnal
cogitations against youth, he tamed his flesh with watchings, fastings,
hayrecloths, and such like exercises. He frequented the Churches and oratories
of the Christians, for he desired to be as the Temple of the Holy Ghost. These
holy exercises, and other virtues, in which Nicholas was employed, did so shine
in him, that he was praised and commended of every one. For as to see old men
behave themselves like young men, see meth a monstrous thing, so on the other
side, to see a young man to have the deportment and carriage of old men, is a
thing very commendable and laudable.

S. Nicholas had an uncle (who was Bishop of the city where he was borne) a
learned and a holy man. He persuaded the father and mother of Nicholas, to
dedicate their son unto God in the service of his Church, and to be a priest.
It was an easy matter to obtain it of them: for they remembered God had
granted that son unto them, through their many prayers; and therefore they
willingly rendered him unto God again, with right good will, that he might
always be employed in his service. The father and mother of S. Nicholas having
made this grau^^, his uncle made him priest, and whilst he gave him orders, he
said these words unto them that stood by: Brethren, I see a new son arise in
the earth, who shall be a great consolation and repose for the world. Happy is
the pasture and happy be the sheep, that shall deserve to have such a
sheapherd. The day shall come also, when you shall see him reduce many straying
sheep unto the flock of CHRIST: you shall see him to be the consolation of the
co^fortles, health of the sick, and rest for them that be in tribulation: All
that which this good Bishop said, was afterward found in S. Nicholas.

When S. Nicholas saw he was a priest, he thought it convenient, that with his
new dignity he should increase his austerity, and strict life: imitating
heerin the trees and plants, which the more they spread their branches, the
larger their roots grow also under the ground: So the holy saint stro^e to be
more sober and temperate, more continen^, more rygorous toward his own body,
chastising the same with more severity, not to make it dye, but to make it more
subject unto the spirit. He deprived it of the ordinary sleep, of eating and
of apparel, although he did not like to go in stained or spotted apparel (as
some hypocrites do) but such as was comely and fitting for one of his dignity of
function. He frequented the Church more, ^h^n he had used: he was more earnest
at his prayer then before time; he would never read any book, nor take it in
his hand, but the book of the holy scripture; or else some holy lecture,
treating of some ghostly matter. He showed more modesty in his countenance,
more gravity in his speech; so that it seemed, although he were in mortal
flesh, that he led the life of a man imortall.

There befell in the country of Lycia and in all the East, a great contagious
pestilence, which killed very many, and among others within the space of three
days died both the father and mother of S. Nicholas, and he remained sole
inheritor to all their goods. The young man being already dedicated to God,
regarded not to be the heite, but rather desired to be the dispenser of his
fathers goods; giving out of them continually many alms deeds. And because
among many other he did one rare deed of charity, it shall not be amiss to
make a recital thereof by particulers.

There was in the city of Patara, a gentleman of a good house, who had been
before time very rich, and now was become poor. This man had three daughters,
which were of good years, and ma^igeable: but because he had not wherewith to
maynteine and endowe the^ with portions, he urged and sollycited them, to get
their living, and his also, by dishonest life. The poor father, though he was
ashamed so to do, spoke to them to that purpose, and the distressed maids
shed tears incessantly, considering to what a miserable estate, their fathers
poverty had brought them.

S. Nicholas had an inkeling hereof, and thought he could not bestow his alms
better, then with the same to deliver their bodies from shame, and their souls
from sin. He took a good some of money all in gold, and lapped it in a napkin,
and departing from home by night, he went to the house of the poor decayed
gentleman. The holy man looked about, to put in the money in some place, where
the distressed man might light upon it, taking care that he should not know,
who bestowed in upon him. whilst he studied thereof, hesa w^y M^n^light, the
casement of the chamber window where the poor man lay not fully open.

S Nicolas cast the gold wrapped in the cloute, in at the wyndowe, and went
down: The poo^e man rising up, and finding there the money, (the benediction of
God) he was in a mase, fearing it had been a craft and deceyt of the devil, or
pollycie of some of his enemies: At the end, seeing it to be good Gold, he
set fear aside, and for that he knew not his benefactor, he rendered unto God
infinite thanks, and said: O Lord, I know, that thou art indeed very merciful;
since thou use such curtesy and benignity toward me. I studied to offend
thee, and thou have helped me: and the help has bin such, that I am thereby
obliged rather to lose my life, then once think to offend thee. I am heartily
sorry for my former determynation; and I ask pardon most humbly of thee. This
poor man thought he could with this Gold provide for one of his daughters, and
so he did; for he ma^ryed lier according to his estate.

When S. Nicholas heard thereof, he was very glad, and purposed in his mind, to
give the man means to marry his other two daughters. this his determynation he
put in effect, gyuing him as much Gold as he did before: and with that the
poor man bestowed his second daughrer in marriage. This poor man desirous to
know his benefactor (unto whom he was so much obliged) watched almost
continually, to see if he returned any more, since one of his daughters was not
yet set out. this was not in vain: for the holy man returned, and cast as much
Gold in at the wyndow, as at the first.

The poor man, who stood close, ran after Nicholas and calling unto him,
fell at his f^et, and kissed them, saying: Oh Nicholas, why did thou hide
thee from me? wherefore would thou not let me know him, unto whom I was so
much obliged? Thou have helped me in my necessity; thou have delivered my soul
from hell, and the bodies of my daughters from infamy. if God had not moved thy
heart, to do that which thou have done, I and my daughters had liu^d in
necessity, in infamy and shame, and afterward in the next world, we should have
been cast into perpetual torment, and damnation in hell fire. By thy means
God has raised the poor out of the mire, and the needy from the dunghill: All
the while the poor man talked thus he kissed the feet of S. Nicholas, and
shed reares in great abundance.

S. Nicholas was much displeased, that the thing he handled so covertly was
made manifest; for he desired to have had it secret: and therefore he asked in
way of guerdon of the poor man, to keep the pleasure he had done him secret:
but his request was in vain. for as long, as the poor man lived (wheresoever
he went) he published openly this act of the holy saint, and other such good
deeds done by him to other, although this only be recounted in this place.

The Bishop of the city, (who was uncle unto S. Nicholas) was exercised al^o in
virtuous works: and among other things, having founded a monastery of religious
men, thought Nicholas a fit man to be their superior: He moved it unto him,
and with great difficulty he got him to yield, he was so humble, and so
unwilling to take any charge upon him, wherein he was to have authority or
commandment, yet continued he in that office certain years. then being
desirous of greater perfection, he determined to go into a desert, but first
he had a desire to visit the holy land. To this end, he was embarked, and
having entered the voyage, the sky being clear, and the sea quiet he told the
maryners, that shortly there would be a hydeous storm, for he had seen the
devil enter in the ship, with a naked sword in his hand, menassing to kill
all the men in the same. Shortly after came the storm S. Nicholas had
foretold: wherefore the Maryners reputed him for a holy man, and being out of
hope to escape, they resorted unto him, requesting him to pray for them. So he
prayed unto God, and the storm was assuaged.

It befell in the same voyage that a maryner mending or dressing the sails,
fell down from aloft into the ship, and dyed with the fall. All the maryners
were sorrowful for it: S. Nicholas prayed for him, and he rose on his feet,
without any hurt. He arrived in Palestina, and visited the place where CHRIST
our Lord was Crucified, his sepulcher, and the other holy places: and being
desirous to live retired in the deserts of Syria, he had a revelation from God,
commanding him to return into his own country, for he would not have his
service in the desert, but in some other place. S. Nicholas to obey this
revelation, was embarked in another ship, and the maryners deceitfully
carried him toward Alexandria; but when he came near theru^to, the wynd
changed, and against their wills, the ship came into a haven of Lycia his
native country, unto which place they had agreed to carry him.

When the mariners perceued this marvelous accident, they were amassed, and in
great dread, and craved pardon of the saint, who returned unto his monastery,
wherein he was received by the monks, with great joy: for they were grieved
much with the former absence of their good father and pastor. S. Nicholas
stayed with them a good space: but for that they honored him much, and also
because he knew that God would dispose of him otherwise, he determined to go
unto the city of Mirrea, which was the head city of that province, being also
very populous, and S. Nicholas thought he might have lived there unknown.

It came to pass, that when as Nicholas came into the City, therein were
assembled some Bishops of the Cities adjacent, with the clergy of that
city, to choose a Bishop for the same, wherefore every one made their prayers
unto God, to give them grace, to make a good election: and it was revealed unto
one of the Bishops (that was an anciant man, and of good life) that Gods will
was; that he, who entered first the church on the next day (whose name was
Nicholas) should be elected by them to be Bishop of the city. The good old
Bishop told his vision to the other prelates, and the rest of the clergy.
This caused them to remain all night in the Church; awaiting in the next
morning to see him, who^ God had elected unto that d^gnitie.

They were all in prayer, and the old Bishop stood at the Church doo^e, to
see who came first into the Church. S. Nicholas had been at his prayers in his
lodging from midnight, (as his custom was) and when day was come, he went unto
the Church, and as he came to the door, the old Bishop came unto him, and
asked who he was, and what was his name. the holy Saint answered with great
humility, and said: he was a poor sinner, and that his name was Nicholas.

The Bishop looking in his face, thought him to be a person worthy of great
reverence: he respected also his name, which was correspondent unto the
revelation he had, and said with a joyful and cheerful voice: My brethren
come you hither, here is the Bishop: behold you this Nicholas: behold the man
elected by God: they ran all thither, and liking his grave countenance, told
the people of that had passed, and consecrated him Bishop (every man rejoicing
thereof) so that he knew not how to resist them, thinking it to be the will of
God, though it was much displesant unto him, as he declared in his oration,
wherein he manifested his great humility and sanctity.

As Soon as Nicholas saw himself a Bishop, he reasoned thus to himself,
saying: Nicholas, this dignity requires another manner of life. Until this
time, thou have lived unto thyself: now, thou must live for the good of other
men. The example of life that thou must give unto every one, must be such,
that thou need not by talk to persuade thy people to be good. This the saint
said, and if until this time he used in his life great mortification, and
austeritie, he afterward much augmented the same.

His appatell was more course, he eat but once every day, but never any
flesh, he would have something of holy writ read at his table: he spent the
greatest part of the night in prayer and meditation, and the small time he
slept he lay on the bare ground: he arose before day, and called up his
priests, to sing hymns and psalms in the praise our Lord JESUS CHRIST. When
the son arose, he went unto the Church, and there he heard divine service:
the rest the day he bestowed in the affairs of his Church.

He was careful that in the Churches of his Dyoces, there should be curats
borne in the same village or parish, and that they were also learned and
virtuous in their life's: These he assembled once every year in the month of
September, and kept a Synod with them, making those ordinances, that were
convenient for the good and profit of his flock, and took information of the
public sins, that befell within their charges, and also of all needy
persons: and then for the one, and for the other he provided remedy, in the
best manner he could. For the relief and help of the poor and needy, he would
resort unto known rich frindes which he had, and they gave alms largely and
bountifully: for that the good father in his house was very poor, and after
he was Bishop he had not any thing to sell, nor to lay unto pledge: the books
he had, were borrowed, for he would not have any thing of his own.

For the necessity of souls, he had the judges and magistrates on his side,
who having notice of any public crime, remedied the same. This good prelate
desired to do the will of God in every thing. Although he was expert and
skillful in the dispatch of affairs: yet he trusted not to himself, but took
unto his counselors two me^ well learned and grave, the one was called Paulus
Rhodius, and the other Theodorus Ascalon^a: by the advice and approbation of
these two men, he did all things.

At that time the two most cruel tyrants and enemies of the name of CHRIST,
Maximian and Dioclesian were emperors of Rome, persecuting the Christians
withal extremity, either by themselves or by their Judges. This persecution
arrived at the last, at Mirrea, where S. Nicholas was Bishop. First they
imprisoned the Christians, whom the holy prelate (zelouslie moved with the
honor of God) exhorted and animated, and showed himfelf a defender of the
Christians his subjects, and others under his charge; both in public and in
private, reproving the tyranny and cruelty of the judges. whereupon they
imprisoned him; but they were not so hardy, as to put him to death; douting
least the people would make an insurrection: wherefore they only banished him.

S. Nicholas being sent into exile, he found many Christians, who took very
great consolation at his presence. The holy Bishop was not idle in that place:
yea he served God in the best manner he could; no we comforting one, then an
other, and exhorting them to support patiently the persecution, and hold them
in their necessities to his power* but because God assisted him in his actions,
some help and relief he gave unto them, for the which he was beloved of all
them, with whom he conuersed.

The fury of that persecution passed away, and the golden age of the emperor
Constantin succeeded, and then S. Nicholas returned to his Church, all the
people rejoicing for the same: and because Constantin had made an edict, by
which he commanded the temples of the Idols to be thrown to the ground and
in Mirrea was a most goodly temple dedicated to the goddess Diana, which stood
still, because of the conning workmanshippe thereof; and lest the people should
raise a commocion, none durst lay on hands to demolish the same; S. Nicholas
moved with zeal, and without respect of any, got together many lusty and
strong young fellows, and he as their captein, guided them unto the temple, and
cast it down even unto the foundations. Whiles they ruynated the walls, the
devils were heard to howl and rore, for that they were expelled out of their
ancient habitation.

After this arose a new trouble against the Catholic Church by the Arryans,
for remedy whereof a general Council was assembled in Nice, by the
commanndement of pope Syluester then Bishop of Rome, and by the good diligence
of the emperor Constantyn. In this assembly, among the 318. Bishops, that were
there, S. Nicholas was one, who by the means of the disputations he had with
the heretics, and by the virtue of his continual prayer, wherein he desired the
good of the Church, was a great cause that Catholics prevailed, and obtained
victory against the heretics, and that it was declared by the Council: That
the son, one of the three persons, is of the same substance with the father,
and is God as he is, for that is the state of the questyon, which was disputed
between the Catholics and the heretics. When the Council was ended, S.
Nicholas returned unto his Church, and then befell a great dearth.

At that time a merchaunt had laden ships with wheat in Sicilia, intending to
transport it into Spain. S. Nicholas appeared unto him in his sleep, and
requested him to bring it into Lycia, and agreed with him for the price, and in
wytnes of the truth, gave him three pieces of gold in earnest. The merchaunt
awoke, and finding the three pieces of gold in his hand, determined to go into
that country: and so he did, and sold the wheat according to the bargain made
with the saint, and so the dearth of corn was remedyed.

At another time, there was a great scarcity of bred in that country, and
certain ships laden with wheat passed by, traveling toward Constantinople.
S. Nicholas requested the owners of the ships, to give unto him a 100.
measures of wheat, out of every one; promising them, that when they came unto
the vnloding at Constantinople, they should not want any thing of their
measure. The patrones and owners gave credit unto the saint, and gave the wheat
unto him: whereupon two miracles ensued. One was: when they came unto
Constantinople, they found no diminution of their measure they had laden:
theother was; that the wheat which the owners gave unto S. Nicholas (although
it was but a small quantity) yet was it so multiplied, that it sufficed all the
people until harvest came. These things brought S. Nicholas to that credit and
auctority, that the clerg^ and the la^tie of his city, had a great respect unto
him; and obeyed him, as if he had been the true owner of all their goods.

It befell also, that the governor of the city called Eustathius being
corrupted with money gave an unjust judgment against three young knights, in
sentencing them to death. S Nicholas was at that time out of the city: for he
was gone to pacify the inhabitants on the sea cost, which were up in arms,
against certain bands of souldyers, which were to pass into Africa, by the
commandment of th'e^perour Constantin. These souldyers aggreued the people
(as souldyers use to do, as they pass on their voyage) and they were ready to
fight it out. S Nicholas went thither in person, and all of them gave unto him
great respect. He talked with the three captains, whose names were, Nepotian,
V^rsus, and Herpilion, and brought the matter to a good pass, and ended the
quarrel.

In that place he was certified of the unjust sentence given by Eustathius:
wherefore he forthwith sped him home, and came unto the city at such time, as
the three wrongfully condemned persons had their eyes covered, and awayted,
when the executioner would give them the mortal blow. S. Nicholas being come
unto the executyon, passed through the throng of the people, and coming to the
executyoner, pulled the sword out of his hand, and then untied the three young
men, and taking one of them by the hand, lead them all three away, none of the
officers being so bold, as to resist him.

Eustathius being ascerteined thereof, and having a remorce in his conscience,
went unto S. Nicholas, and kneeling before him, asked him forgiveness for that
(he said) he perceued S. Nicholas knew certainly, that his sentence was unjust,
since he was so hardy, as to take and rescue the prisoners, and also, for that
he had at other times bidde^ him do justice, and to chastise the^ that deserved
punishment. S. Nicolas reproved him thoroughly for this fault, and menaced to
certify all things unto the emperor, if he ever committed the like fault,
again.

At this, the three captains of Constantin were present: who being returned
from Africa (having archieued th'entreprise, for which thy we^e sent) were
accused of some offense, at their coming home to Constantinople: and the issue
was; The Emperor gave judgment, they should be beheaded, according to their
deserts, for their offenses evidently proved against them; though the matter
was falsely contrived by a Justice of the city, who was bribed by the
adversaries, to bring them to their end, were it right or wrong.

When the three Capteins were certefied, that on the next day they should die,
they called to remembrance, that S. Nicholas had freed and delivered three
innocent kinghts from death, in the city of Myrea. So they remained all the
night in prayer desiring God to be merciful unto the, and beseeching S.
Nicholas to help them in that danger. it pleased God to hear them; and to
honor the blessed man. for, S. Nicholas appeared unto the emperor in his
sleep, and with a venerable aspect saluted him first; and then with a stern
and gr^m countenance, said unto him: Arise up, thou Emperor, and deliver out
of prison Nepotian, Versus, and Herpilion, for they be wrongfully accused, and
be clear and innocent of those faults, which be imposed upon them.

If thou do not so, as I tell thee; I denounce against thee, as a messenger
from God, most deadly war, in which shall be destroyed thy nation; and thou,
thy state, and family, shall come to utter ruin. The Emperor was wonderfully
afeard thereat, and said: who art thou, that do menace me thus? The holy
saint answered: I am Nicholas, Bishop of Myrrea, and withal vanished away,
and went unto the Justice called Ablanius, and threatened him after the same
manner.

On the morrow the emperor, and the Justice met, and conferred of their
visions: and causing the three capteines, which were prisoners, to be brought
before them, the emperor said unto them: Tell me, have you any skill in art
magic? and they answered no: and wondering at the questyon, they demanded of
the emperor why he asked such a question of them. The Emperor replied: Because
this last night one Nicholas, I know not what he is, menaced me grievously, if
I do not ley you go, and discharge you. The captains hearing this, kneeled
down, and kissed the ground, and yielded infinite thanks unto God, and wept
for joy. The Emperor commanded them to declare this secret, and they told him
to wit: how Nicholas saved the life's of the three young knights at Myrrea, and
how they had recommended themselfs unto him, and therefore he was come to help
them. Then they declared to feature of the holy saint, and the emperor
perceived, that he was the same man, that he had seen in his sleep.

These things moved the emperor to reuiew their cause more dilligently, and
having found the^ innocent, he caused them, which had accused them falsely, to
be punished, and delivered them out of prison, and he gave them a book of the
Gospells, written with letters of Gold, and a thurible (or senser) of Gold, and
said unto them: Carry these things unto Nicholas, and desire him not to
threaten me, but to pray unto God for me and my empire.

The three capteins went unto the holy saint: and when they came unto him, they
fell at his feet, and publicly told the former history, and delivered unto
him the present, which the Emperor had sent unto him. The holy saint was
ashamed, and blushed to have these things told unto him publicly, wherefore he
said: my sons, render thanks unto God, and not unto me, for I am a sinner.
The^ he called unto him aside the three capteins, and told them, that they fell
into those perils and dangers, for certain secret sins they had, and
exhorted them to amend them, lest God punished them, with some more grievous
punishment.

The end of this holy saints life drew near, and he fell into a grievous
infirmity, and being at the point of death, he lifted his eyes toward heaven,
and he saw many Angels to descend unto the place, where he was. wherefore he
began to say this psalm: In te domine speraui, and when he came unto that
verse, In manus tua^, domine, commendo spiritum meum, he passed from this
mortal life unto the eternal, on the sixth day of December, in the year of
our Lord 343. His body was buried by his citisens, with great pomp, and with
no less sorrow, for that they were deptiued of such a pastor, and father.

Asso one as he was dead, the Christians began to visit his sepulcher, with
great devotion: And it happened, that certain Christians departed from the port
of Tanais in a ship, to go unto Myrrea, to visit the sepulcher of the holy
sait. When they were embarked, that devil, who had dwelt in the temple of
Diana, which S. Nicholas had demolished, being wroth that he was expulsed out
of his habitation, labored all that he might, that the holy saints should not
be honored, nor visited by the pilgrims.

This cursed fiend took on him the shape of a woman, caryeng a great vessel of
oil, and coming to the passengers, said unto them: I know you go to visit
the body of S. Nicholas; I desire also to go in this voyage: but now I cannot
conveniently. I pray you therefore carry this vessel of oil, to burn in the
lamps upon his sepulcher: They, imagyning the devil to be a devout woman,
took at her hands the oil, and sailed with a prosperous wind one day: on the
second day there rose a great storm, in such sort, that they all feared they
should be drowned: and when they were out of hope, they saw a venerable old
man came close to the ship, in a little bark, who said unto them: The fear
and danger you abide in this storm, is for your faults: Throw into the sea
that vessel of oil, that the woman gave you, and you shall be delivered; for it
was the devil. As Soon as the oil was cast out into the sea, in the place,
where the oil fell, was kindled a f^er, which made a great noise and a filthy
stink. that they might easily perceue, it came from hell: The ancient old man
told them he was S. Nicholas, and then vanished out of their sight.

Memorable is the history of a child, son unto Ce^rone and Euphrosina, two
devout persons unto S. Nicholas, who celebrated his feast every year. This
their son was stolen away by the Agarens, people wholly given to robbing and
spolying, who carried him prisoner to Babylon, where he was given unto the
king, on whose table the child attended. On an evening the child remembered,
that it was the day of S. Nicholas, on which day his father and mother made
great feast; and then he began to weep. The king demanded of him, why he wept;
he told him the reason. The king understanding the cause of his plaint, said
unto him in scoffing manner: If this Nicholas be so mighty, bid him carry thee
away out of thy captivity. The child had in his hand the kings cup, wherein he
used to drink: and behold, in an instant, one took him by the hair of his
head, and lifted him, and he vanished quite from the sight of the king, and of
all the rest, and within a little time after, he was found in the Church of S.
Nicholas, where his father celebrated the feast of the holy saint, also that
year, with sighs and sobbes, for the loss of their son: but when they saw
him set free, they renewed their joy and devotion toward the holy saint.

The same Authors that write the life of this holy saint Nicholas, write this
story, that ensues: An army of pagans, being vandalls passing from Africa into
Calabria, made great spoil in the coun^trey, and carried away a great pray and
booty: An Image of S. Nicholas, among other things, fell to the share of one of
them, and when he came into his country, he asked of certain Christian slaves,
what that picture represented. They told him, that it was the picture of a holy
saint, called Nicholas, who, (though he was dead) did many miracles, and help
them that were devout unto him.

This paynime was a usurer, who had taken a good some of money out of his
chests; and hasty and important business calling him sudd^inly away, he had not
time to put it up in the places appointed for the saffekeeping thereof: wherefore
he said unto the Image of S. Nicholas, in this manner: Nicholas, be careful,
and look well to the money that lies here. When the paynime was gone forth,
certain thiefs got into the room, and stole away the money. when the usurer was
returned, and saw his money stolen, he said unto the Image of S. Nicholas:
Thou have kept my money well indeed Nicholas; look to it, and see my money be
gotten again, or I shall cast thee into the site, and burn thee. The thiess
were gone into a secret place, to part the money they had gotten, among
themselfs.

S. Nicholas appeared unto them, and threatened to punish them, except they did
restore the money unto the true owner again: which they (fearing to be
discovered and punished) did, even to the value of a penny. When the pagan saw
this miracle, he was converted to the Christian faith, and diuulged this
wonderful work abroad: and herupon all the Christiansin Africa, took great
devotion unto this glorious saint. To this end did God permit the pagan to do
such a thing, which, if it had been done by another, he had been punished by
God for his fool hardynes: for the saints are to be entreated, not with
brauing words, and menasses, but with tears and submission; knowing, that for
the one, we may be chastised, and for the other we may obtain mercy, as God
uses to do by their means.

The Venetyans say, that they have the body of S. Nicholas in their city, and
recount a long history, how it came thither if it be so, they have good reason
to esteem highly the grace and favor of God showed unto them, in grannting
unto them the posession of such a rich treasure. It is said, that the
translation of S. Nicholas was in the year of our Lord God 1086.

The life of S. Ambrose doctor of the Church
SAMSON that valiant captain, departing from his home unto the country of his
wife, who dwelt among the Gentills, being gone a little out of the high way,
found a dead lion, which he himself had killed a few days before; and the
scripture says, he found bees had made honey within him. Samson approached
thereunto, and took some of the honey comb, and eat the honey, and carried part
to his spouse.

This lion signifies S. Ambrose, of whom it is said: that, when, being a
child, he lay in the crad^ll, there came aswarme of bee^, and entered, and came
out of his mouth, as though they would have builded there. It is said, the lion
was dead, for that when this happened Ambrose was not yet Baptized, for he was
not Baptized until his consistent age. The honey of his mouth signifies his
doctrine, which was assuredly sweet and mellifluous, which JESUS CHRIST, (
signified by Samson) gave unto his spouse the holy Church, appointing him one
of her doctors.

The lion of Samson remained always dead: but it happened not so unto S.
Ambrose. for when time came, he roared like a lion, in taking the defense of
God and his Church, not only against the A^ryan heretics (her deadly enemies)
but also against the emperor Theodosius, who was Catholic, whom he
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church, because he committed a cruelty, and
would not suffer him to enter into it, until he did penance therefore.

The life of this glorious doctor, collected of Paulinus the priest, Symeon
Metaphrastes, Paulus Diaconus, The tripartite hisstory, Nicephorus Callistus,
and out of his own writing, is in this manner

SAINT Ambrose was the son of an honorable Roman, who was also called
Ambrose. and unto him, being governor of France, with the title of Prefect,
was borne this son. On a day, the infant Ambrose being in the cradle, there
came on him sudainly a swarm of Bees; many of the which entered his mouth, and
others went out. The nurse would have chased them away: but the father of the
child forbad her, for he was much amassed to see it, and stayed to see the end
thereof: the Bees rose then, and flew so high that they were out of sight. The
father being astonished, said: God will do some strange thing by this child, if
he live to it. This was a foretoken of his admirable eloquence and doctrine.

It happened that the father of S. Ambrose dyed: and his mother, being widow,
brought him to Rome, jointly with his sister, who had vowed virginity, and
perpetual chastity. There was another damsel with her, that made the same
vow, who, as Paulinus, who wrote his life, says, was in his time an old
woman, and living in Carthage: Ambrose being very young, seeing on a day that
his sister kissed the hands of the Bishops and Priests, when they were at their
house; as it were in jest, he reached out his hand to the women, and said:
kiss ye my hand also, for I shall be a priest and a Bishop also. The women
reproved him, but they excused him as a child, yet the end proved, that he said
true.

Ambrose being come unto the years of discretion, employed his time in sundry
studies: in the which he made demonstrance of his sharp and quick wit; for
he became famous in Retorique, and other sciences. He had a great liking to
exercise the office of an Advocate, which at that time was the office of
Rheto^itions: and he pleaded the causes, in the which he was retained, with
such eloquence, that a great Nobleman called Probus, who was governor of Rome,
made him one of his counsel, and bestowed upon him other honorable offices in
the Ci^ty: in which he behaved himself so well, that the Emperor Valentinian,
made him Governor of Millan, and Genoua, Cities subject unto the Empire of
Rome.

It is a thing considerable, that when Probus (in the Emperors name) gave him
his dispatch, he said unto him; Ambrose, take on thee this charge, which
Valentinian has bestowed on thee, and exercise it not as a Judge, but as a
Bishop. The meaning of Probus in these words was; that in the administration of
his office, the should not be extreme and rigorous, but to use mildnes, like a
pastor or a Prelate. The words of Probus were not in vain: for Ambrose used
that office with such prudence and disretion, that every one were very well
pleased with his government, and he was also esteemed, and beloved of all men.

It happened that S. Ambrose residing in Millan, Auxentius an Arryan heretic,
and Archbishop of that city died: and because there was a commotion of the
people, about the election of a new Bishop, (the Catholics desiring to have a
Catholic Bishop, and the heretics laboring to have an Arrian) Ambrose went
thither to quiet the people as a thing belonging to his office, and spoke to
them, bidding them to choose them a Prelate, not with vprores and outcries, but
with regated to the qualitive of the person, and to the conditions fit for such
a dignity. Whilst Ambrose talked thus: a young child said with a loud voice:
Ambrose the Archbishop. The people hearing this voice (esteeming it as the
voice of God) was quieted and every one, as well the Catholics, as the
heretics, said the same.

The mind of Ambrose was not to take this charge on him, and therefore he
departed away to his lodging in the manner of a flight. And to remove the good
opinion of the people from him, and to make them dislike, he began to execute
instice with more rigor, then he used in former times, and contrary to his
mild nature also and because that would not serve, Paulinus says, he made
defamed harlots to come unto his house, not to do evil, but because he
desired to diminish his credit with the people, and to give them occasion not
to elect him to their Bishop. Nevertheless, because every one knew him to be
right honest of his body, and also, because it was known to what end he did
it, they were more instant with him to be their Prelate, crying all with one
voice. Thy sin fall upon v^.

Ambrose seeing, that the former dillingences were to small purpose, found out
another devise, which was: he depatted out of the city seretly to go unto
Pauia: and though he traveled all the night, yet loosing his way, he found
himself hard by the walls of Milan. The people understanding the same, took
him, in a manner, by violence; and conducted him unto his house; where they set
a watch upon him, that he should not fly. Then sent they unto the Emperor
Valentinian to request, that he would confirm the election of Ambrose. The
Emperor received the embassage with great joy, for it pleased him much to see,
that the judges which he sent to govern the people, were such, that they
deserved to be Bishops: whereupon forthwith he confirmed the election, and gave
order, to effect the same.

Whilst the people used this diligence, S. Ambrose was stolen secretly gain
out of the city, and lay hidden at the farm of one Leontius, his assured
friend, and a man of great authority in Millan. When the Ambassadors returned
from the Emperor with his consent, and Ambrose was missed, a great forfaiture
and penalty was imported by proclamation on them, that did not bring him out,
if they knew where he was: so that Leontius, to avoid the forfaiture, told them
where Ambrose was. The people ran in have to the farm, and brought him unto
Millan, and then Ambrose, thinking it to be Gods will, agreed unto the election.

S. Ambrose was at that time a Catechumen only: and necessary it was he should
be Baptized: and for that the desired a Catholic Priest, this was the first
thing that made the Ar^ia^s to dislikehim. After he was Baptized, he passed by
degrees, according to the orders of the Church: and on the eight day, which was
on the seventh day of December, he was consecrated Bishop, and on that same day
he was enstalled. The life of this saint was full of good examples. He was very
abstinent: he fasted every day, except the saturday and Sunday: and when the
feast of any Martyr was celebrated; he was very watchful; and spent the
greatest part of the night in prayer: he also appointed certain hours in the
day to that use: he would also be present at the divine service, in his Church;
and at the same he was very devout and curious, adding and diminishing many
things; so that at the last, he ordained a particular office for his Church. He
composed many Hymns, Antiphonaries, and Responsories, some of the which are
used to this day in the Catholic Church.

Whilst the divine office was celebrated, he would have all the clergy very
attent, and to use devotion: And to the end, it might be done with more decency
and majesty, he would not permit that any lay or seculer man should remain
among the clergy, were they never so great and mighty: yea one time seeing the
Emperor Theodosius to be place among the Priests; he told him, his place was
not there, and that the purple garment made him not a Priest.

The good Emperor obeyed, and replied not: yea the zeal and the Christian
boldness of Ambrose did so please Theodosius, that on a time being in
Constantinople, the Patriarch invited him, to sit in a seat in the quier among
the clergy. The Emperor answered; that it was not his place: and that only
Ambrose (of all that he had seen) deserved to be called a Bishop, for the
zeal he had of Gods honor, and of the reputation of his Church, having put him
out of that place, whereunto the Patriarch did inuit him: and with these
words, he commended Ambrose, and reprehended the Patriarch.

Moreover, this holy saint was busied continually in composing and writing of
the works, whereof the Church makes great use: all which he wrote with his
own hand; and that he used to do even unto his death. He preached also
ordinarily unto the people, and always he persecuted the Arrians, unto whom he
was a deadly enemy. He reduced many unto the faith, and many he wholly
converted: of whom, one was the great Augustine, who by means of his sermons,
and private conferences forsook the sect and error, wherein he was drowned,
for he could not be called an heretic, bacause he was not baptized. S. Ambrose
himself did baptize him, and at his baptism they two did compose that can^cle
used, and frequented by the Church in the time of joy, which begins with Te
deum laudamus; S. Ambrose saying one verse, and S. Augustine another, even to
the end thereof. This good Bishop baptized many other also, and (as S. Paulinus
says) the only travel to baptize so many people, was sufficient to hold five
Bishops in work.

Moreover, he was very careful and dilligent in helping poor men, prisoners,
and other needy persons. The gold and silver which fell to his part of his
patrimony (being a great sum) which he had, when he was made Bishop, he
bestowed all, partly in ornaments of his Church, and partly to the poor: for
at that time, his mother was dead also. He bestowed the possessions which
remained unto his Church: upon this condition; that his sister might have the
profit of them, during her life. He reserved nothing for himself, that naked
and needy, he might the better follow CHRIST, that was poor and needy.

This holy saint was of a noble and gracious condition: he laughed and was
merry with them, that were merry; and also lamented with them that were in
sorrow. When any man confessed unto him any heinous sin, he lamented so
grievously, that he caused the penitent to sorrow, were he never so hard
hearted. When he knew of any sin out of confession, he used great diligence
for thee amendment, and that he did secretly. And many times he obtained his
purpose, as well by the means of his prayer, as of his mild correction.

When he heard that any priest was dead, (whom he had known to be a man
studious, and of good life) he received great sorrow thereof: and never ceased
to lament for it. And if he was asked, why he did so; he would answer, there
were two causes: the one was, because a man that worthily exercises the
function of a Priest, was hard to be found: and the other was, because he was
dead before him. Such was the life of S. Ambrose; and yet there were some that
persecuted him. For the Emperor Valentinian dying, the Empress Iustina (who
was secretly an Arrian, and had dissembled during her husbands life) began to
discover he venime and poison, Valentinian her son, who remained Emperor in
Italy, being very young: upon which ground this wicked woman began to persecute
the Catholics, and specially S. Ambrose, as the chief of them.

One time, there was an election to be made of a Bishop in the City of
Sirmium. The Catholics desired to have one Annemius a man of virtuous life to
be Bishop: and S. Ambrose going thither at their request to further it, the
election was made accordingly. But because the Empress Iustina being present,
labored that S. Ambrose should not consecrate him, but that an Arrian Bishop
should; the people were congregated in the Church for that purpose: and on the
one side sat the holy saint, and on the other side sat the Empress, with
many Ladies and damsels attending on her, with other Courtiers.

The Empress said to her Ladies, that she was heavy to see Ambrose do that
office: whereupon one of her women, more presumptuous then the rest, (thinking
to please the Empress therewith) arose and went unto the chair of the holy
saint, with intention to bring him (as it were by force,) unto the place where
the Empress sat; meaning to use some violence or abuse toward him, and to
thrust him out of the Church. The mild Bishop, with patience putting the
presumptuous woman from him, said unto her: Although I be not worthy of this
place and office; yet it is not lawful, to put me away, and to detain me,
from laying hands on this Priest. Well (said he) take heed, thou be not
shortly punished by God. As S. Ambrose said, so it came to pass: for on the
next day that wretched woman dyed, and the holy saint honored her by
accompanying her corpse unto the grave. The Empress, and the other Arrians
beholding this accident, knew not what to do: and so S. Ambrose consecrated
the Catholic Bishop, without any further disturbance.

The holy Doctor went then to Rome; and as Marcus Marulus says of him, he
lodged in the house of a rich man, who boasted, that in all his life he had
received no great misfortune of affliction. S. Ambrose called his cleargimen,
as soon as he heard it, and said unto them: Let us depart from hence, lest unto
us happen some evil with this fortunate man. and as soon as he was departed
out of the house, they saw the earth to open, and swallow it, and all that was
within it.

At Rome S. Ambrose visited his sister, and that damsel (that kept her
company) who now was ancient in years. This was that young woman that laughed
at him, when he (being a child) did hold out his hand, that she might kiss it,
saying unto her that he should be a Bishop: and the holy saint remembered her of
it, when she kneeled down before him, requesting that the might kiss his hand.

S. Ambrose also visited a great Lady (at his sisters request,) who desired him
to say mass in her house. The holy man being gone thither, in the company of
his sister, (there was brought to him a woman sick of the palsy in a chair,)
and she besought the holy saint to pray for her: which when he had done, the
sick woman kissed his priestly garment, and was healed.

After this S. Ambrose returned unto Millan, where the Empress Iustina
persecuted him grievously, using also both requests, and threats. Then with
rewards she labored to draw the chief men of the City, yea and the clergy
also, as well as lay men, unto her opinion and partiality, against S. Ambrose
entending to send him into exile.

Matters were so prepared and wrought, that a rich man, and mighty called
Eutimius, (but much more wicked) had prepared a chariot, in the which he
purposed to set S. Ambrose by fair, or by foul means, and then to carry him
unto banishment. This wicked man had so purposed, but God disposed it
otherwise: for as Aman had made a gibbet whereon to hang Mardochey, and was
hanged on it himself, so Eutimius was banished, and carried away in the same
wagon he had made for S. Ambrose.

This holy saint found the bodies of some Martirs, which were laid in places
uncomely and indecent: therefore he translated them into other places, where
they were laid with more reverence; as the bodies of S. Geruasius and
Protasius, and of S. Nabor and Faelix. In the translations of these saints were
may miracles done; and many sick men healed. The Arrian heretics calumniated
the miracles, and moreover said, that Ambrose had hired persons to feign
themselves blind or lame, and that when they came near to the bodies of the
saints, they fained to be healed.

It came to pass, that one of the most malicious cauillers thereat, was in the
sight of them all posessed by the devil: who being within him, by the
judgment of God, caused him to confess the truth which he denied, when he was
in health as well in the miracles of the saints, as also in the mystery of the
B. Trinity, the wretch yelling aloud, and saying: That, which Ambrose
preaches, is true: and that, which the Arrians teach, is false, and untrue.
Then many of the Arrians who by reason should have given credit to that
apparent testimony, came unto him; and adding evil to evil, threw him into a
pond of water, wherein the man was drowned.

An other obstinate heretik, which was one of the most principal, was
converted unto the true faith: And when he was demanded, why he changed his
faith so suddenly, he answered; he had seen an Angel speak in the ear of
S. Ambrose, when he preached; and tell him what to say.

At that same time was discovered in France a tyrant called Maximus, who by a
stratagem murdered Gratian, who governed France and Spain, all the life of
Valentinian his father. And not resting content therewith: he marched against
his brother called Valentinian, son unto Iustina, who then ruled Italy. The
young man not daring to oppose himself in the field, fled with his mother
Iustina (the mortal persecutor of S. Ambrose) and came to Constantinople, to
demand succor and aid of the Emperor Theodosius: S. Ambrose went unto
Maximus, who took upon him the name of Emperor; and requested the dead body
of Gratiane to be bestowed upon him.

Strange it was, that although the holy bishop went to talk with him, that was
a tyrant; and also went for to obtain a favor of him; when it seems he
should have used lovely words: yet did he with his accustomed, and Christian
boldness, reprove him for his tyranny, and for the unjust murdering of his
Lord. He also bad him to do penance for his sins: and because he would not
obey, he excommunicated him, and gave order in all places of his
Archbishoprique, where the Tyrant passed, that he should not be admitted to
hear the divine office, and commanded all his priests under great pains none
should be so bold to celebrate Mass before him, nor to converse with him. But
above all, he foretold him, saying: that God would chastise him for his
rebellion, as afterward it befell for when Theodosius came against him, he was
slain by his own soldiers.

After the death of Maximus, Theodosius went unto Millan; and there the Jews
complained of S. Ambrose unto the Emperor, for burning their Synagogue. The
Emperor thought S. Ambrose had done them great wrong, and bad him to reedify
it at his own cost and charge. After this S. Ambrose preached before the
Emperor, and reduced to his remembrance all his former life, and told him; he
ought to remember, how from a poor captain who fled thorough Africa, for
fear to be slain, (which was presently after the death of Valens the
Emperor) God had advanced him to be Emperor, and bestowed on him many
victories, and therefore he had reason to behold and mark well the reward, he
should render unto God in restoring the Synagogue, and causing it to be builded
for the Jews, which were enemies unto God, and all Christians.

When the sermon was ended, the Emperor said unto him: Art thou this day
mounted into the pulpit to preach, and speak evil of me in mine own
presence? Yea, said S. Ambrose, I have done it: but we will say well of thee in
thy absence, to the end, that none do murmr of thee, for that thou will be
partial, and favorable unto the Jews, and build a Synagogue for them. Thus
S. Ambrose dealt with the Emperor, and it was so effectual, that he forbad the
reedifying of the Synagogue.

It was a notable case, and example worthy to be marked, ha^ S. Ambrose did
unto the same Emperor Theodosius, because of the cruelty committed in
Thessalonica. There was at that time a great City in Maced^ry, inhabited by
Christians, called Thessalonica; the usage was in all Greece, to have pastimes
and p^^^es called C^^censes, in which ^a^ne horses in ^ace, some alone, and
some in wagons, and great care men had to get the prise, which was given to
the Victors: and because those plays were very delightful, they which were
skillful in guiding the horses and wagons, were highly esteemed, and regarded.

The time of these pastimes being at hand, it fell out that one of the
waggoners which was to run for the wager, and was famous for his skill, and
beloved of all the people, was imprisoned by Bulericus the governor of
Thessalonica, under Theodosius; the cause was this, the waggoner was accused to
have offended carnally with the governors page. The Emperor was coming in
person, to be present at the pastimes, which were to be made. All the people
thought the triumphs would be disgraced, if the waggoner (thus imprisoned)
were not delivered: Therefore with one voice, they besought the governor, that
he would upon their entreaty deliver him. He answering them arrogantly, and
using some opprobrious words unto them, (with the which the people thought
themselves wronged,) the raised a commotion, and in a fury took arms, and
killed the Governor, and some of the Emperors Court also in their rage.

It happens many times, that the good subjection and obedience of subjects is
turned into fury and vproare, when some small matter which they earnestly
request, is to them denied, as in this present example. These doings displeased
the Emperor exceedingly, (as reason was it should) but for that he had in his
company some Prelates, (and S. Ambrose also, as some say) that besought him to
pardon the multitude, he made promise by word, that he would pardon them. yet
afterward, being instigated by some courtiers, (who sometimes use to insence
princes to wrath, when they ought rather to appease their anger) he altered his
mind, and determined to punish the people, for the example of others, without
course of law, or order of Justice.

And so when the people was in the city, busy and occupied to see the
triumphs of that day, the armed soldiers, appointed by the Emperor,
assaulted, and set upon them: and neither regarding age nor sex, massacred all
that they met, old and young, little and great, innocent or culpable,
Cittyzens or strangers: so that there were 7000. slain; although it be said,
that the Emperor commanded there should be but 2000. slain. The miserable
city remained moistened with the blood: and all the Empire of Rome was filled
with the report of the cruelty.

The first time, the Emperor went unto Millan, S. Ambrose, (unto whom this
cruelty was much displeasant, for the offense committed thereby against God)
was desirous to give remedy to the soul of the Emperor, but yet he doubted
there might follow some scandal in reproving him, on a sudaine: therefore he
judged it were good to dissemble a while, and withal he would not see, nor
converse with him: so that, when the Emperor approached near unto Millan, he
departed from thence.

The prudence S. Ambrose used in this case, may be an example for other
Prelates, how to behave themselves with great Princes. And the desire of a good
Pastor, much moved the mind of S. Ambrose, to reduce home this wandering and
straying sheep: yet considering, that the Emperor was not of his dyocesse,
and so none of his particular flock, and douting a greater scandal might
arise; determined, as is said above; and departed out of the city: by which he
stayed himself, and refrayned his Christian earnestnes.

The Emperor being come unto Millan, and not finding the good prelate there,
showed himself to be displeased. The holy saint wrote unto him an epistle; in
the beginning whereof, he used mild words, and very lowly: but afterward, he
told him in plain terms, that he was departed, because he would not speak
with him: for if he should speak that which was fytt and convenient, he should
be thought to pass the bounds of modesty; and if he should be sylent not
reprove him; he might be noted for a man, that wynked at notoryous faults, and
sought not to give due and fit remedy unto them.

In the rest of his epistle, he called to his mind the cruel massacre
committed at Thessalonica, and willed him to do penance, and withal gave him
many good admonitions, and rehearsed unto him many examples. At the end, he said
plainly, that he durst not say mass in his Church, if he were present, and
that he had a particular commandment from God, thus to do. Then concluded he
the epistle with these words; my Lord, if thou believe me, behave thy self, as
I advise thee: and if thou do not believe me, pardon this, that I have done in
departing from the city, for I did therein make more account of God, then of thy
displeasure.

When S. Ambrose had written this letter to the Emperor, ^e thought, that when
he had red it, it would have moved him to penance, and therefore he returned to
Millan: but yet he would not visit the emperor, accounting him as an
excommunicate person. The more the holy saint estranged himself from his sight,
the more th'mperour thought himself bound to seek unto him.

Things standing in this state it happened, that one day S. Ambrose was
reuested to say mass in his Church: and it was told him, that the emperor was
coming to Church. The good Bishop went to meet him out of the door, and in the
midst of all that proud and stately company, took him by the purple robe, and
with the same liberty that he wrote he said to him, in this manner: Stay my
Lord: for unto a man spotted and stained with such inhumaine cruelty, and that
has shed so much innocent blood, it is not lawful to enter into a house
consecrated unto God: and less deserves he to be partaker of his mysteries,
except he do penance first.

I am of opinion, that thou take no knowledge of the sin thou have
committed: and though the fury which drew thee headlong into it be past, thou
have not yet entered into consideration thereof, with the light of thy
understanding, to see what a great offense thou have committed. I suppose thy
Royal estate, and thy Imperial majesty do hinder thee, and suffer thee not to
see, and to take notice of thy heinous fault: but look down with thy eyes, and
consider, that thou art a mortal man. Take heed lest thy royal vesture, thou
wearest, do dasell thy sight, that thou cannot see within thy self the
fragility of thy flesh, of which thou art formed, as other men are: if thou
consider rightly of thy frailty, think also how great and mighty God is, that
is the universal Lord of all.

Fear him then, for thou art his subject: crave pardon of him, for thou have
offended him: and until thou do this, be not so bold as to enter into his
Church, nor appear in his divine presence; lest thou double thy sins, and
provoke him to more wrath against thee. This say I on his behalf, and so I
command thee, laying on thee this lawful punishment, by which the Church does
separate all them, which do not make satisfaction with due penance.

The Emperor gave ear attentively unto the words of the holy saint: and with
himself considering the manner he had used toward him, in telling and reproving
him; and taking it in the best part, judged that he had done with him, as a
good prelat should do: and returned to his palace pensive and sad, as they be,
which begin a new to feel the sorrow, which is caused by the remembrance of
their offenses, when they be represented unto a repenting soul. Theodosius
remained thus certain months, and never entered into the Church, sighing
secretly, and lamenting for his offense.

The feast of the Nativity of our Lord approached, and the general of his
forces called Ruffinus seeing his Lord pensive, asked him, what made him so
discontent. The Emperor fetched a deep sigh, and shedding tears, said:
Ruffinus, the cause of my grief is this: I see other men yea slaves and bondmen
enter freely into the Church, and house of God, and whenever they come
thither, they find the door open, and the entrance is denied only to me: unto
me only is the Church door shut, and heaven gate also. You may go all to the
Church to celebrate the feast of the nativity of our Lord: and I wretch being
debarred, will remain here, and lament and weep alone.

Ruffinus understanding the cause of the emperors sorrow, said: My Lord, if it
shall please you, I will talk with Ambrose, and entreat him to permit you to
enter into the Church: for the sorrow, you have had, and the tears you have
shed for the evil of which he reproved you, is sufficient. Theodosius
answered: Thy words will do no good: for I know very well his constancy in
virtue: he is not a man will omit any matters belonging unto God, for fear or
dread of imperial majesty, or might.

Notwithstanding these words, Ruffinus assayed how it would prove. And when he
treated with S. Ambrose, he found him so constant and resolute, yea so ready
and prepared to dye, if violence were offered, for the defense of the authority
of the church, that he forthwith sent word unto the emperor to stay: but he
trusting upon the former words of Ruffinus, was coming toward the Church. When
Theodosius heard this message, he stayed not, but went forward, saying: I will
go unto the Church, and there the Bishop shall tell me my fault, and enioine
me penance (if he will) as I deserve.

S. Ambrose stayed for him without the Church: and when the Emperor came, he
besought S. Ambrose in most lowly wise, to absolve him: alleging the example
of David, who sinned, and yet God pardoned him. S. Ambrose replied: If thou
set David that sinned for an example; consider also that he lamented and
did penance for his sin. The Emperor said again: I have sorrowed very much
for the same: The said S. Ambrose; This is not enough, for thou have committed
a public offense, and thou must also do public penance. The Emperor said:
I will, so that shall suffice.

S. Ambrose said: I would have thee do another thing, which shall be a remedy
for thy wrath and indignation, for the time to come; viz. That thou make a law,
that when thou, or any other Emperor, command any offender to be put to death
forthwith: that the execution be staid, until thirty days be expired.
Theodosius was content to do all, as the holy Bishop willed: and did the
penance, with great sorrow and humility; and also made the law, which is extant
to this day in the Codex Iustiniani: when this was done, he went to the Church.

I have stayed some what long in recounting this accident: as well, for that it
appertains unto the story of S. Ambrose: as also, for that Theodosius was a
Spaniard, and it is fit that the Spaniards should have knowledge of a man, that
was so worthy to be Emperor, as Theodosius was: who though he sinned, did
receive with such lowelines the correction and penance, imposed upon him, by a
particular Bishop.

Another notable thing happened unto S. Ambrose with Stilico Governor of
Millan for the Emperor. The case was this: Certain public baiting of beasts
being made in the high streets, the Governor thought the time fit to
apprehend one Cresconius, who was fled unto the Church: for he much desired to
punish him for certain faults he had committed. To effect it, he sent his
officers, who came into the Church. and took out Cresconius, pulling him by
force from the Altar, to which place he was fled for succor. S. Ambrose saw
it, but could not help it, for he had but a few Priests with him at that time:
wherefore he fell on his knees, and wept bitterly for the violence offered to
the Church, not being able to remedy the same.

The officers led the man away: and having put him safe in prison. came to see
the sports, where they found Stillico, and certified him of that they had done.
They had not yet told all their tale, when two Leopards set upon them, and for
all the rescue and defense that could be made to save them, they tore them to
pieces, and put the Governor to great fear: who incontinent commanded the
prisoner to be restored unto the Church, and to be set free, and he made
satisfaction for the violence committed.

Many other things God did by this glorious saint: for with his prayers he
healed many sick men, delivered many men that were posessed, many were by him
converted to the faith, and attained unto salvation.

The fame of this holy saint was spread over all the world, and people resorted
from far distant places to see him: as did Fridigildis Queen of the
Morauians, who was a paynime, and having heard marueillous things spoken of S.
Ambrose, and desirous to be a Christian, went to visit him, and to crave of
him a rule, which she ought to beliue, and how also she ought to live.

The holy saint converted her, and satisfied her in every point, and especially
he appointed her to procure, that her husband should keep peace, and be in
league with the Romans. And so she departed after she was Baptized into her
country, very well pleased.

The end of the life of S. Ambrose approached, whereof he had a revelation long
before: and so he had found that he should dye about Easter. Being sick in his
bed, Stillico the Governor of Millan said; that the death of this man menaced
the ruin and destruction of all Italy. then called he some of the chief men
of the City, and bad them to speak unto S. Ambrose, and to exhort him to pray
unto God for the prolonging of his life, for the great good they received by
him. The Citizens went unto the holy saint, and did their message, and he
answered: I have not lived so among you, that I should be ashamed to live, and
I have not served such a Lord, that I should be a feared to dye, and therefore I
put my self wholly into his hands: His holy will be done

S. Ambrose was now at the point of death, and two deacons, that were in the
same chamber (although a good way from him) talked to themselves in a low
voice, who should be Bishop after him. One of them said: Simplician should be
Bishop for that he was a man of very good behavior, and an Abbot of a
monastery unto whom S. Augustine was a very dear friend. Whilst they talked,
S. Ambrose said aloud; He is old, but very good. The deacons were much
astonished: seeing him, to hear their speeches: and after his death, by the
relation the two Deacons made of those his words, Symplician was elected Bishop.

When the holy saint was at the last point of death, there was in another room
Honoratus Bishop of Vercellae, who heard himself called by one that said to
him; Run, for it is time now: He hearing these words, went to the place,
where the holy saint was; and gave unto him the B. Sacrament, which he received
with very great devotion. Then laid he is arms acrosse, and said his prayers;
and in saying of them, he rendered up his soul unto God, on the fourth day of
April, about the year of our Lord 400. in the reign of the Emperors
Valentinian and Theodosius, after he had been Bishop 20. years.

The Catholic Church celebrateth his feast, on the 7. day of December, which
was the day he was consecrated Bishop, which is done because those other days,
for the most part, fall in the holy week, or else Easter.

His body was buried in the same City of Millan in his Church. God did many
miracles by means of this saint after his death, even as he had done many
whilst he lived. Let us all pray unto God, that by the merits and intercession
of S. Ambrose, he would make us partakers of his heavenly glory Amen.

The immaculate Conception of the mother of God.
GREAT was the indignation, that the potent King Assuerus had conceived against
the Jews, that were in his Realm: whereupon he made a law, by which he
commanded all the Jews to be put to the sword. And to the end, none should
appeal from this, nor entreat for them, he made another law, by which he
commanded under pain of death; that for certain days, none should be so
hardy, as to come and speak unto him, except he were by him called.

The beautiful and wise Queen Ester, understanding what the King her husband
had decreed, desired to go and entreat for the people: yet feared to be the
first to prove the rigor of the law, if she came to the kings presence,
before she was called. But at the last, her pity overcame fear. She adorned
her self in rich and costly apparel, she set on her head a royal Crown,
and accompanied with two Damsels, one of the which led her by the hand, and
the other held up her train, she came into the place, where the King was: and
lifting up her eyes, she was in great fear, so that she swounded, and fell
unto the ground.

The king seeing that: stood up, and sustained her by the arms, that she might
not fall: and then touched her with the rod of Gold, which he had in his
hand, in sign and token of clemency and pity, and said unto her: Be not
afraied my sister, for the law was made for others, not for thee. Hester was
somewhat comforted, seeing the king so mild and grati^us toward her, and craved
pardon of him for her people, and obtained it.

This figure is very fit and agreeable to our purpose, for the Immaculate
Conception of the most B. Virgin Mary. King Assuerus signifies our Lord God,
who published a law against all mankind, for the sin of the first man, and
because all men are borne in original sin, the law would therefore, that
they should be deprived of his sight, and thrust out of his presence. This law
being promulgated, God concealed himself, and would not permit any human
creature to see him, as Esaias the Prophet said: Indeed thou art a hidden God,
and th^re is no man that has seen thee.

Queen Hester, which accompanied with two damsels, went with such fear unto
the king, signifies the mother of God, whose chief attendants were chastity
and humility. When therefore this Queen was to be in this world and her soul
was infused in the body organized, and fashioned in the womb of her mother
Anna, by little and little, it had fallen into original sin, and therewith
bin distained, if the King Assuerus had not prevented it: God hasted to it, and
sustained it with his arms, by preserving it from all spot of sin, and
telling her, that the law was not made for her: whereby he would infer, that
he exempted her from the general law, by the which all other are conceived in
sin. Then bowed he the rod of gold, and touched her therewith, which
signifies the person of the word.

The Virgin was touched with the rod of Gold, when God was made man in her
sacred womb, for to that end God preserved her from sin, that she might be
the worthy mother of his only begotten son. The king Assuerus bad her also to
crave a grace and favor, and she was not slack therein; yea all mankind
receive especial favors of God, by the merits and intercessions of this most
pure Virgin.

I also hope to receive of her, one particular grace, which shall be this, that
by her means, her Son will grant me grace, to entreat truly of the misery of
the pure Conception of his mother. Wherefore, for the understanding thereof, I
say: That.

OUR Lord God having created our first fathers in his favor and friendship, he
enriched them with gifts and graces natural and supernatural. He gave unto
them the Lordship and dominion over all corporal and earthly creatures: he
clothed them with original justice, which was a gift granted not only unto
Adam, but also unto all his posterity: he gave unto him a most blessed house,
which was the terrestrial paradise, a place full of felicity and content.

And because Adam seeing himself so rich and honored, should not have occasion
to grow insolent and proud, he gave a precept unto him, (as a paying or owing
fee and vassellage, by acknowledging God for his Lord) which was: he forbad
the^ to eat of the fruit of one only tree in the garden. Adam broke the
commandment, and offended him; for the which God did chastise him exemplarly.

There was a public act, or arraignement made, in the which were present the
three divine persons Angels, and many other creatures. Before all these were
Adam and Eve brought as public penitents, in body, with their heads uncovered,
and in place of fetters their guiltines (which the divines call Reatus) which
remained in their soul after they had sinned, and was like a cord which tied
them. In steed of a taper, which public doers of penance carry in their
hand, served natural reason, which notwithstanding had lost for the most part,
its light by their sin.

In this manner were our first fathers produced, and accused before the
judgment seat of God: and being examined of their sin, Adam confessed it,
yet he laid the fault upon Eua; and Eua likewise excused her self by the
serpent. The guilty persons having confessed their offense, they were sentenced
so, that from that time they began to dye. Their goods were confiscated, and
they thrust out of the terrestrial paradise: their posterity were proclaimed
Traitors, their discendents that were borne of them the children of wrath, and
disfauoured of God.

And wholly to execute the sentence against Adam, there was a degradation made
of him; for he lost (as we may say) the red or inflamed Vestme^t of charity,
the Stole of immortality, the Maniple of original justice, the Girdle with
which reason restrained sensuality, the white Albe of innocence, and the Amice,
which was as a helmet of fine temper, with which he defended himself from the
temptations of the devil.

This degradation of the person of Adam being performed; holy writ says, that
God gave unto him and Eua certain short garments, which was as the habit of
public penitents; and from these our garments fetch their original. It were
well that so great regard were not had of those garments, and that men and
women were not so proud and curious of them.

This was then the chastisement God inflicted upon Adam, of the which some
lights on his posterity, as this universal law, that we be all conceived in
original sin, and borne the children of wrath. This law was promulgated in
the world three times; first in the law of nature; secondly in the law written;
and thirdly in the law of grace.

Job was the trumpet of the law of nature: but first preceded the music of
the trumpet conformable to the law: for the law was rigorous and the music
rigorous, as thonder, storms and thonderbolts, which fell on his flocks and
herds of cattle and killed and consumed them all. The miserable man being
thus afflicted, and oppressed with infinite adversities and troubles, opened
his mouth, and said: Let the day, wherein I was borne, perish; and so let the
night also, wherein I was conceived: let that night be turned into darkness,
and be filled with misery and bitterness. The Holy Ghost says, that Job did not
sin in saying these words, whereby it is evident, that Job did not curse the
day, wherein he was borne, nor the night, wherein he was conceived: but he
cursed the original sin, for that he endured and suffered so many troubles
and adversities, because he was conceived and borne in original sin, which
is the fountain and spring of all evils.

The trumpetter in the law written was David, who says in one psalm: My
mother has conceived me in sins, as if he had said: That which I say of my
self, I say also of all them that are borne, and shall be borne.

S. Jerome in his translation does not say sins, but sin; although it be
all one, and the self same thing: for the original sin in Adam was one
sin only, and all men commit it in him. This sin is called in the plural
number, because it is the occasion of all the sins committed in the world.
The denouncer of this law in the law of grace was S. Paul, who writting to the
Romans says All have sinned and have need of the grace of God.

Hitherto we have showed the publication of the law: now let us see how it
comprehends the posterity of Adam, and if there be any exempt from it. To
this I say, that although the soul of it self is not distained, because God
created it; yet as soon as it is infused into the body, at that very instant
that they be together body and soul, that creature is one of the posterity of
Adam, and per consequens, the child of wrath: and is in original sin. Of
this JESUS CHRIST was free and clear for that he was the natural son of
God, and by the same, of nature Impeccable. He was also free of this sin, for
he that contracteth this sin, must descend from Adam by natural propagation,
as to be borne of a woman by the work of man. And CHRIST though he was borne
of a woman, yet was it not by work of man. So that he descended from Adam
after the corporal substance, as the divines say, which is the same we have
said to wit: that CHRIST was borne of the virgin Mary, and was conceived
without original sin.

After JESUS CHRIST, I say the same of the B. Virgin his most holy mother, that
she was conceived without sin: but not for the reasons spoken before of the
son; but by grace, and especial privilege, which it pleased God to grant
unto her. This is confessed in celebrating the feast of her conception, to wit,
that there was not a moment nor instant, in which her soul was in the disfauor
of God: but that as soon as she had her being, she was gracious in his eyes, she
was fair, and without any spot. That this is so, may be proved by many
reasons and congruencies very efficacious.

One is; that of, and from original sin, arise two damages and losses,
which be the effects thereof. The first is, the rebellion which we have within
our selfs, making us to be slow and negligent to do good, and dilligent to
do evil. This says S. Paul, writing to the Romans: I feel a law within
my self, I feel a subjection, an enemy, who hinders me, and will not let me
do that, which reason wills. The other damage is: that we are subject to
corruption, and to be turned to dust, after our death. This said God unto Adam,
as soon as he sinned: Thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return.

So that, these being the effects of original sin, and not being found in the
most B. virgin, as indeed they were not, it is a necessary Consequens, that
there was no sin in her. That these two defects were not found in her, of the
first, it is a thing certain, and the doctors confess it, to wit: that in
her, that biting dog, who is called by the divines, Fomes peccati, was quite
quenched and tied, and therefore she had no inward temptations, but most
assured peace and quiet, in such sort, that though she had appetite and
sensuality, yet did they never annoy her, but were always subject unto reason.
And hereof it comes that she committed not any sin, either mortal or
venial in all her life.

She never spoke idle word, she never was wroth (out of reason,) no not, when
she saw her son hang on the Cross, and that the officers, and other
soldiers who stood about him, scoffed at him, haled him, and used reuiling and
opprobrious words to him. This would have moved any man's heart unto
indignation: yet the B. Virgin was not wroth with them, nor gave unto them any
evil language, whereby to commit sin; and this is the common opinion. We may
then say that in her was not that spot of original sin.

And that her body was exempt (on the other side) from being converted into
dust, it is the tradition of the Catholic Church, that her body and soul was
assumpted into heaven. Then if the effects of original sin, which be found
in them, that are stained therewith, were not in the virgin; it follows that
she had not that sin, and that her Conception was most pure.

The other reason is this; That either God was able to preserve the B. Virgin
from this defect, and would not do it; or else, that he would have done it,
and could not. If you say, that he was able to do it, and that he would not;
herein you put want of will to be in God, that he would not do unto his mother
all the good, that he could: and this you may not say by any means. Then if we
say, that he was willing, and could not do it, in saying so, great prejudice
is done unto his omnipotency, yea it is great blasphemy. Let it be said then,
that he was able, and would do it, and that really he did it.

Moreover the greatest dignity, that God could impart unto a pure creature, was
to make her his mother: and this so rate and singular gift was bestowed on the
Virgin Mary. Why then having bestowed so great a benefit on her, should he
deny her the grace of preservation, which was fitting and convenient for her?
He exempted and privileged her from the pains of childbirth, and from being
turned unto dust: which be general laws: was it not also reason that he
should exempt and set her free from original sin? Eua, who was the cause and
occasion of all our evil (as S. Anselme says) was created in grace: is it
mere then, that Mary by whom we have had so great good, should be thought to
be conceived in sin? Moreover, they which be conceived in original sin, be
called by the Apostle children of wrath, and slaves to the devil: and to say
so of the most B. virgin, is a thing most inconvenient.

Further a good son ought to do to his mother all the honor, that he can:
and in not doing of it, it seems, he does not intyrely fulfill the precept of
God, to honor his father and mother. Our Lord JESUS is the true Son of the
glorious Virgin: and it is fit he should do that for his mother, that any other
good son would do to his mother. And though the B. Virgin was preserved from
it, therefore cannot we say that CHRIST was not her Redeemer: for that in
preserving of her, she was more deeply redeemed: for there be two manners of
redemptions, one preservative, and the other subleuatiue, or restoring. The
first is more excellent then the second; for it is evident, that one shall be
more obliged and beholden to him that sustaineth him, that he fall not into the
dirt, and mire; then unto him, that lifts him up out of it, and then wipeth
his cloths.

Likewise if God caused a Temple to be builded, the most sumptuous and stately,
that ever any was in the world, wherein to set the Arc of the testament, which
(for that it was to conserve the Manna, the table of the law, and the wand
wherewith Moses did the miracles) was to be covered with most fine Gold
within, and without, and to be made of incorruptible wood: more just it was
that God should give rare, and sovereign perfections unto the bowels and
womb, wherein he would enclose his son, and where his divinity should
inhabit in a manner ineffable. If God commanded the children of Israel to be
sanctified, when they desired to come and talk with him; it shall be then very
just, that she who was to be the mother of God, and cloth him with his
humanity, should be adorned with singular purity.

God conserved the garments and shoes of the Hebrews in the desert for the
space of 40. years, so that they were never torn; which thing he did for his
honor: and much more fit was it, he should preserve the soul of his mother,
to the end, she should never fall out of his favor, or be without grace.

Joseph made all the land of Egypt, tributary unto King Pharao, except the land
of the Priests, signifying, that our Lord and redeemer ought to exempt from the
tribute of original sin, the B. virgin, with whose flesh, the true Priest
after the order of M^lchizedech, should be clothed. Our holy forefathers,
though they spoke many great commendations and praises of the B. Virgin, yet
said they not that she should not be conceived in original sin neither has
any ancient Counsel made any decree, or said their opinion in it.

This came to pass, because God has not declared all thing together at one
time unto his Church nor unto the faithful: neither was it convenient to be
so. Therefore he said unto his Apostles, after he had declared great matters
unto them at his last supper, as S. John writes: I have many things to say,
but yet you are not capable of them, your understanding is not able to conceive
them, the holy Ghost shall reveal them unto you. This was true, for when the
Holy Ghost came, he declared all things, that were fit for that time, and
continually does declare, and manifest things.

Those which are now laid open, do not contradict that which was discovered
before, yet are not all things which were before hidden and darkened with a
cloud, discovered and opened all together; for some Counsels of our times do
declare some things belonging to faith, which our forefathers did not. And so
the saying that the mother of God was conceived without sin, was hidden and
secret many years; which was a thing not without cause. The reason might be
this. That the common people was ordinarily so deuote to her, that if it had
been published and affirmed in former times, when things were not so well
declared, and when that they which had erred, could not so well have been
instructed and reformed, as it is fit they should in such a case, it might have
been that the B. Virgin should have been adored for God.

To avoid this inconvenience, it seems good reason, this secret should be
kept close. At this present time, the Church has opened this secret in giving
leave that we may hold and believe, that the glorious Virgin was conceived
without sin. And when the Church grants this license, is it not necessary
for us, which be so much obliged to her, and travel to serve her, to seek out
such reasons and means how it should be? And so much the more, for that beside
the former reasons alleged, there be many more, which ought to enforce any
curious person, or man of an indifferent understanding.

The first is, that though the ancient fathers say not in plain words, that
the B. Virgin, was conceived without sin, but rather seem to infer the
contrary, for it was conformable to their time: yet is it most sure, that if
they had written in our time, they would have said and written otherwise, then
that they now write: for all that, I say, they all, namely S. Bernard, give a
note touching the Virgin, saying: that whatsoever is honorable and and can be
said in praise of any saint, ought to be attributed unto her with surplusage
and advantage.

But being so, as it is said that many saints after baptism sinned not
mortally, as S. Nicholas S. Bernard, S. Thomas Aquinas and others: If it be
said (which is an Article of the Catholic faith) that S. John Baptist and
Jeremy were sanctified in their mothers womb, it is apparent by the rule
given, that this, and much more may be said and believed of the B. Virgin. Then
she was not only sanctified in her mothers womb, but also preserved from all
sin.

He spoke not much from the purpose, that said: That when JESUS CHRIST said by
S. John Baptist, that among the sons of women, there was not a greater arose
then John Baptist, though the Greek text says, no prophet, yet the Latin
text, (from which it is not lawful to appele,) says: none borne of a woman:
the^ the B. Virgin being greater and more holy then John Baptist (as all
confess and grant) when our Savior says none arose, she is excepted, for
she never arose because she never fell.

The other reason is, the holy Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of the
Conception of the B. Virgin, not with the title and name of sanctification, but
of Conception, which was on the 8. day of December. And this is not instituted
for particular Churches to celebrate, but it is instituted to be kept generally
in all Christendom, since the breuiary of Pius 5. which is received by all the
Church.

Finally I conclude, that among all the feasts solemnised of the B. Virgin,
none is so solemnly celebrated by the faithful, as this is, and that is done
to show her virtue and nobility the more thereby, and in respect of the great
good which begins this day for us all. Let us also consider what a great
main we should have had, to have wanted the glory that we shall receive by
her company in heaven. And though that the essential glory of the saints
proceed from God, yet receive they also a very great accidental glory from the
company of the B. Virgin. for though the estate of the kingdom depends of
the King; yet always, or for the most part, particular feasts and triumphs,
as iusts, torneys, daunces, maskes, and other pleasant shows, are made for the
honor of the Queen, and of her Ladies and damsels. So also is it in heaven,
but in another manner, it is clear that there is accidental glory, with joys
and triumphs, continually made, for the mother of God.

But we wretches here in the world, what should we do without the glorious
Virgin? to whom should we have recourse in our troubles and necessities? Who
should comfort us? who should give us help? who will show themselves so
pitiful and merciful, as this glorious Virgin, when we call upon her
deuoutely? how great our lost and damage should be without this gracious
mother, may be known by the great joy we ought to make this day of her
conception, in the which she began to have her beginning in this world.

Let us then rejoice and solemnize this day confessing our selves devout to
this B. mother, and her pure Conception; that, as many have been favored by
her, that have done so, some being delivered from most dangerous perils, and
others having obtained particular favors; So we also being delivered by her
means from our offenses and faults, may merit to obtain everlasting life.
Amen. Spa: Caesar Baronius says in his martyrologe; that this feast was first
celebrated in England and after at Lions, and then in other countries.

The life of S. Melchiades Pope and Martyr.
WE read in Leuiticus, that God commanded; that salt should be put in all
their sacrifices and if that any offered sacrifice, and did not put salt,
therein, it was not grateful unto him, neither did he accept in. In ihis our
Lord would give us to understand, that in all our works, though they be good in
themselfs, yet must they be done with prudence, for if they be done otherwise,
in steed of serving him, they shall offend him.

Almese is a good thing, yet of one give almose unto a strager, and let
necessaryes in his own house and for his children be wanting, this pleases
not God. Good and holy is prayer, but if one kneel on the ground to say his
prayer, and shall leave undone something, unto which he is bound this his work
shall not be altogether good. One cannot deny but the Communyon is a very holy
thing; nevertheless, if one, that is wicked and has a conscience clogged and
burdened with mortal sin, will ^et comnunicate, he does loose more thereby,
then he gayneth Fasting is a good thing, but he tha^ will f^st, as do the Jews
and the moors; in st^ed of doing the action of a Christian he shall give a
sign to be a painime. And therefore we should do well to put the salt of
prudence in all our works.

The holy pope and martyr Melchiades considering this, made a decree, by which
he commanded; that the faithful should not fast upon the sunday and thursday,
for that on one of those day^s the Jews fasted, and the moors on the other,
and a Christian ought not only avoid to be a moore or a Jew, but also to make
any show to be such a one. The not fasting the sunday remains in general
use; but that of Thursday is grown out of use. The Christian w^e^ he fasteth
ought to have the intention pure, not to do inwardly as the Jews and moors
do, though be does the same thing outwardly that they do. The life of this holy
saint, was written in this manner by Damasus and other Authors.

Melchiades the pope was an African, and succeceeded Eusebius in the papacy.
From the time of S. Peter unto his popedom, there had been 20. popes, which
had been martired for the faith of JESUS CHRIST. There is extant an epistle of
Melchiades, written unto the Bishops of Spain, in the which he shows himself
to be a godly and learned man. In that epistle he says: that all the Apostles
acknowledged S. Peter to be their superior: And by cause those Bishops bad
moved a question, which was the greater sacrament, Baptism or Confirmation? he
answered: saying, that Baptism is of greater necessity; for that without it,
none can be saved: but that confirmation was of greater dignity, for that none
give it, but a Bishop: And then he recites unto them the effects of the one
and the other sacrament. Moreover he treats of the great profit the Apostles
received by the coming of the holy Ghost, and how great the goods be,
Christians attain, by receiving the holy Ghost in Baptism, and then in
Confirmation.

In the same epistle, he ordained that, which is already aforesaid: viz: that
Christians should not fast on the sunday and thursday, to avoid the imitation
of the Jews and the paynims.

Melchiades found in Rome many heretics of the Manichees, against who^, he
ordained many things apperteinyng to the offerings and other duties to be done
in Church.

Some Authors say, that in the time of this pope was celebrated the provincial
council of Neocesarea, (which is at this day called Trapezunda) in which be
ordained some things perteyning unto the state of the Church, conformable unto
that time.

Lastly Melchiades, having governed the Church as Damasus says 3. years, 7.
months, and 8. days, and having given holy orders one time in the month of
December, and ordered 6. priests, 5. deacons, and 11. Bishops, was martyred in
the time of the emperor Maxentius, about the year of our Lord 304. Some say
that Maximinus did put him to death: but in my opinion they are deceived. for
that Maximinus persecuted the Christians in Alexandria and Egypt and not in
Rome: for there Maxentius always remained, and used intolerable cruelty,
until the time that Constantine deprived him of his Empire, and of his life
also.

The Church celebrateth the feast of this pope on the 10. day of December: and
his body was buried in the Churchyard of Callistus in the Via Appia

The life of S. Damasus Pope and Confessor.
THE prophet Malachy said: Cap 2.
The lips of the priests ought to keep wisdom, and the law must be learned
from their mouths: for he is the Angel of the Lord God of Hosts. These be the
properties of a good priest. And for that S. Damasus was really good, this
sentence fitteth and agrees unto him. For the prophet saying, that the lips
of the priests ought to keep wisdom, he would infer, that they should be
wise, and so was S. Damasus. That the law must be learned from his mouth, this
also agrees ^oh^m, for that he expounded many important things of the faith,
there being celebrated in his time diverse councels in which many things
apperteinyng to the faith were determined, which he approved. That the priest
is the Angel of our Lord, agrees most fitly unto S. Damasus, for that his
life was Angelical, Chaste, and honest. The which taken out of the ^ontificale,
and other grave authors, is as follows.

POPE Damasus was a Spayniard borne; the Son of one Antonius. It is hard to
say for certain of what province thereof he was. Doctor Beuther in the history
of Spain, says he was of Taragona. Ma^yneus says he was of Madrill, and that
in the Church of S. Saluator of that city, there is some letters that say so.
Vaseus says he was a Portughez and borne in Guimaranes a place in the country
called Beyond Duero and Minio three leagues from Braga.

There is no particular knowledge of his life (and for what cause he came to
Rome, and what he did there) until he was Pope: only it is said, that
Liberius his Predecessor being banished from Rome, he never abandoned him: and
he took such kindness at his charity, and consolation at his words, that he told
him he should be his successor in the chair of S. Peter after his death. And
that, which the good Pope Liberius said, came afterward to pass.

As Soon as Damasus was elected Pope, there fell great contention between
those his electors, and the friends of Vrsicinus the deacon. They fell from
words to blows, in the cathedral Church of Licinius, so that many were
wounded, and some slain, on both parts. The which (as we may well believe)
happened against the will of Damasus. When the emperor Valentinian was certified
of this uproar and tumult, he took order to displace Vrsicinus: whereupon
Damasus was confirmed peaceably in the Apostolik dignity. Of this schism and
of this broile mention is made by S. Jerome, Ammianus Marcellinus, Ruffinus,
Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and the other authors of the ecclesiastical historyes.

After a few days, the faction of Vrsicinus seeing they could not prevail
against Damasus this way, suborned two lewd men, that were deacons, the one was
called Concordius and the other Callistus, who accused the holy Pope of
Adultery. He was enforced to defend his cause publikly, which moved him to call
a council of. 40. Bishops, to be kept at Rome, who treating of his cause,
found him innocent, and without fault, and condemned his accusers, and cast
them out of the bosom of the Church. In the same Council, with consent of the
fathers that were present therein, it was ordained* that the punishment du^
unto the accused (if he were not found guilty) should be inflicted upon the
accuser, if he failed in his proof.

S. Damasus was a famous Pope, and did many things in the defense of the faith,
and in the government of the Church, for the which he is commended diversely by
all the writers of that time. Theodoretus says that Damasus was an admirable
man, and worthy of souerein praise, and adorned with the splendor of many
virtues. S. Jerome, writing unto Pammachius, among other praises of Damasus
says, he was a virgin, as a true Pope of the Church pure, and without spot. S.
Ambrose says, that Damasus was chosen to the papacy, by the ordinance of God.
The fathers of the sixth Constantinopolitan Counsel call him the Adamant of
the faith, for his firm constancy, against diverse heresies.

In the time of S. Damasus, was celebrated one of the four General Counsels
(of the which S. Gregory says: that he reverenced them, as the four
Ghospells) and this was the first Council of Constantinople, in the which were
assembled. 150. prelates in the time of the emperor Theodosius: and they all
with one consent confessed the faith of the Nicens Council, and condemned
Macedonius, and other heretics, and Damasus confirmed all the decrees of that
Council. In his time was celebrated another Council at Aquilegia also. This
good pastor labored, not only to destroy the heretics and heresies, but also
to take away the abuses, which had crept into the Chuch: and this was one.

From the time of the primitive Church, there was a kind of priests, who served
in the place, where was few people, as in the villages. These kept company
with the Bishops, and were called Chorepiscopi, and at that time, they were
thought to be convenient and fit to be there. for a principal charge of the
Bishops was, to provide things necessary for the poor, and to distribute among
them the goods of the Church, in helping the sick and needy. And because the
Bishop alone could not perform all things with his own person, he had need of
some others to help him. These Chorepiscopi, though they had not a greater
function or degree th^n other priests, yet they began to intrude themselfs
(upon p^ide) into some things apperteining only to the office of a Bishop, as
to consecrat deacons, subdeacons, nonnes, Churches and Crisme. wherefore it was
fit to remedy and take away the abuse. And so the Church by a public decree,
ordained: that the Chorepiscopi should be taken away, considering that our Lord
JESUS had only Apostles, whom the Bishops represented; and disciples,
represented by the priests. And that there was never any such order in the
Church, different from others: wherefore the holy Pope Damasus in one epistle
(among many which he wrote)) says: that in the Catholic Church there neither
be, nor ought to be any Chorepiscopi as needful, yea rather the contrary is
true, and the holy Canons are expressly against them. By this diligence of the
holy Pope, grew in the Church of God, a universal peace and repose,
the emperor Theodosius helping thereto, who was in like manner a Spainiard,
borne in Italica, a city not far from Civil. This quiet repose of the Church
gave time and means to the good Pope Damasus, to build some Churches in Rome.
As he builded one, to the most blessed martyr S. Laurence, with a goodly
palace, which until our time serves for the Popes Chauncery, and is called S
Laurence in Damaso. he builded another out of Rome, in the way to Ardea, at the
Catacumbe, where he consecrated Platonia which was the sepulcher of S. Peter
the Apostle, and there he offered many vessels of silver and brass. Also he
beautified another Church of S. Laure^ce with rich gifts. S. Damasus wrote
some works: of which are extant 5. decretall epistles, and a work in verses at
the sepulcher of the Apostles SS. Peter and Paul: and another work, in the
which he wrote the life's of the Popes, who were his predecessors. He also
ordained that the psa^mes of David should be song, one part of the quier saying
one verse, and the other part another verse. which is observed unto our time,
through all the universal Church, though it was used before, in some
particular Churches, by the notice of S. Ignatius, unto whom it was reueiled,
that the Angels in heaven song in this manner, as he saw it himself being in a
trance. Also Damasus (Councelled thereto by S. Jerome) commanded there should
be said at the end of every psalm. Gloria patri and filio and spiritui sancto,
sicut erat in principio, and nunc and semper, and in secula seculorum. Amen. He
ordained also that the priest, before he began mass, should say the general
confession. He also gave authority and approbation to the translation of the
holy Bible made by S. Jerome: for before, the translation of the 72.
interpreters was commonly used. This good Pope ended this life on the 11. day
of December, in the year of our Lord 380. in the time of Theodosius, being 80.
years old: of which he was Pope 18. years, 3. months, and 11. days. He gave
holy orders 5. times, in the month of December; and ordered 32. priests, 11
deacons, and 62. Bishops. His body was buried in the Church of the Apostles
(which he had bu^^ded) in the same, where his mother and sister were buried. He
was afterward translated unto another Church, which he had builded, called S.
Laurence in Damaso.

The life of S. Lucy virgin and Martyr.
AT such time as Gedeon was captain of the people of God, Iudi^. 7.
they were in great danger and fear, because their enemies were near them,
and very potent, and strong, themselves being but few in number and weak. God
commanded Gedeon to do some enterprise; and the people trusting in God, hoped
to atchieue victory, yet they conceived not any means, how it should come to
pass. For to fight hand to hand, they might seem rash, and foolish, to run
headlong on their own deaths.

The people remaining thus in doubt God spoke unto Gedeon, and bad him to
divide his people which were 300. into three parts, and when night came, every
soldier should have in one hand a Trompet, and in the other hand a vessel of
earth, and within it a burning light. In this manner they should assault their
enemies on three sides and when they came near them, they should sound the
trompet^s, and break the vessels of earth, knocking one against the other,
that the burning lamps might be seen on a sodeine, and then all of them
should make a great shoute.

As God appointed, so it was done. The soldiers sounded the Trompets, which
awaked the Madianits, who seeing on a sodeine so many lights, and hearing such a
noise, remained astonished, and full of dread, and knew not how to defend
themselves, or to offend their enemies: but, in steed of striking the Hebrews,
they wounded one another. By this stra^ageme, the madianites were ouerthrewne,
and quite discomfited, and the Hebrews obtained a notable victory.

By this figure we learn; that when the vessels of earth are broken, the
lights are discovered, and the enemy overthrown. which thing notes: that in
the war^e which JESUS CHRIST ( figured in Gedeon) makes against the
Madianites, (which are the devils) vessels of earth are used, having within
them burning lamps, that shine most clearlie, when the vessels of earth be
broken. These earthen vessels, signify the hole^ martyrs; for their bodies
were of earth, which being broken (when they were diversely tormented) their
burning and lively faith, did shine more gloriously.

It is seen by experience, that holy men are most known, and reputed the
light of the world, by the means of their death. Then is laid open their
constancy, fortitude, and patience, their lively faith and other virtues,
where with they were adorned. whilst they lived, their virtues were covered
(as the torch is) in the earthen vessel: but when the vessel is broken, that
is to say when the holy person dies, the light is discovered, and their
death weakneth the devil utterly.

Though this figure may be apropriated to all the martyrs, yet in particular
it agrees very fulie unto S. Lucy, who by her death showed the light, and
discovered the brightness of her lively faith, and other virtues, which were in
her soul. Moreover, she is the advocate for the sight, the object of which is
the light. Yet we will not say, that she had her name Luce of the light. The
life of this glorious saint, was written by venerable B^d^, Ado Archbishop of
Treuers, and other approved author.

SAINT Lucy was borne in the City of Syracusa in the is'le of Sicilia, of
honorable parents, and of a great family. She was a Christian from her
infancy, and so instructed in the faith, that she persuaded her own mother,
to exercise her self in all virtuous works, and especially, in giving large
almose, and relieuing the necessities of their neighbors. The holy damsel
finding a fit opportunity, distributed to the poor all her patrimony, which
was very great, to set her self free from a rich Nobleman, who by the consent
of her mother and kinsfolk, should have been her husband, though she never
consented to it. An occasion fell out in this sort.

The mother of S. Lucy, called Eutitia, had been sick four years of the
bloody flixe, and no worldly help could be had to cure her. At that time, the
report of S. Agatha was spread over all Sicilie, who a little before had been
martired; her body being in the City of Catanea, where many miracles were
done, and many sick persons of sundry infirmities were cured, by visiting her
sepulcher. S. Lucy persuaded her mother, that they might go together, and
visit the relics of the holy saint, not doubting: but that by her means
she might be delivered from her infirmity. Eutitia was content, and went with
her daughter unto Catanea, attended in such manner, as was fit for their
degree, and estate.

When they came unto the sepulcher of S. Agathata, Lucy fell to prayer,
requesting the glorious Martyr, to obtain of God by her intercession, health
for her mother. Lucy being thus in prayer, S. Agatha accompanied with many
Angels appeared unto her; and with a familier pleasing countenance, said unto
her: Sister Lucy: wherefore do thou demand that of me, which thou thy self
may give unto thy mother? Ask thou this favor of God: for if he love me,
he loves thee also; and if he will hear my prayers, he will also hear thine:
and where I have given my life for his sake, so shall thou also give thy life
for his love. And if I be the cause that the city of Catanea be famous and
and renowned, for that it is washed, and bathed in my blood, and posesseth my
body; so shall the city of Syracusa, by the same means, be famous and
renowned for thee, and thy sake.

After this, S. Lucy returning, came to her self (for the vision had caused
her, to be in manner of a trance or ecstasy) and found her mother exceeding
joyful, for that she felt her self cured; so both of them rendered thanks
unto God, and to the glorious S. Agatha.

Then returned they home, and Lucy desired her mother, to permit her to bestow
the dowry she would give her to her marriage on the poor. Her mother answered:
Good daughter, first close up mine eyes, and then do even as thou will. The
holy damsel replied: most dear mother, I heartily wish and desire, that the
almose to be given, be not only profitable to me, but to you also; and that of
the benefit coming thereby, you may have chief part thereof. If almose be
given after your death, and only by my consent, it will not do you so much
good.

If a man travel by night in places where he may stumble, and dangerously
fall; he shows great indiscretion, if he carry a light behind him, when he
may carry it before him, if he will. this world is like a dark night, in
which we all do travel, and wherein be many places, whereat we may stumble.
The good works we may do, and especially almesdeedes, be like burning
torches, which enlighten us to walk securely, without danger, or stumbling;
we ought therefore to carry the light burning before us, for though it be
good to leave almose for the poor after ones death, yet it is much better, to
give it them in our life time. By these, and other like reasons, S. Lucy
obtained leave of her mother, to bestow her whole portion, and dowry on the
poor.

When he that should have married her, understood this; he was displeased, that
he had missed so great store of riches. And remembering (being himself a Pagan
or Infidel) that Lucy did these good deeds as a Christian, he accused her
unto the Governor of the City called Paschasius, who causing her to be
brought before him, used all mild persuasions he could, to draw her to
sacrifice unto the Gods. But S. Lucy answered: To relieve the poor in their
necessities, is a sacrifice very acceptable unto God, and this sacrifice I have
already offered unto him; now not having any more goods to bestow, I do hear
offer up my self, and my life also unto him, being all that I have to give.

Then said the Governor: Perhaps the God, whom thou speak of, is CHRIST,
who was crucified by the Jews in Jerusalem That same is he indeed said the
holy saint. The Governor said: How stands this together? that he being God,
should dye such an opprobrious death? The blessed Virgin answered: It is not
meet that your Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, or the rest should be called Gods:
neither is it lawful for any man to adore them, for they were of lewd and
wicked life; some of them being Adulterers, manqu^llours, and most cruel
tyrants. These qualities beseem not a God: but to dye as JESUS CHRIST did
(whom I confess to be the true God) does not gain say that he is God, since
he was made man, that he might dye, and by his death it pleased him, to bestow
life upon men.

Thou talkest too much said Paschasius, and art too saucy: being so young: who
taught thee to prattle in this manner? The holy damsel said: The servants of
CHRIST shall never want answers, when they be brought before Judges and
Maiestrates, for so much he promised unto them saying: you shall not speak,
but the Holie-Ghost that dwells in you. The governor said: Then thou have
the Holy Ghost. S. Lucy answered: They that live in chastity and purity, be
the Temple of the Holy Ghost. If it be so, said the Judge, I will drive out
the Holy Ghost, thou speak of, out of thee. For I will have thee led unto
the stews, where when thou have lost thy chastity, thou shall also loose the
Holie-Ghost, thou esteemest so much.

Then said the holy Virgin: O wretched man! thou are much deceived: for if
thou make me loose my chastity by force, I shall gain two crowns in heaven;
the one of a chaste woman, and the other, because I have been forced, and for
defending my chastity. Then the Judge said: leave your words, for we will come
to deeds; and then instigated by the devil, he commanded, that she should be
led unto the brothel-house. Many people flocked thither.

Some intending to satisfy their lust, laid violent hands upon her, to draw
her by force unto their pleasures. But God did help his handmaid, by making
her to be immovable. And though many endeavored to pull her with their hands:
yea, some with ropes, and lastly with many yoke of Oxen, yet could they not
draw her one foot out of the place. wherefore the Judge said: Be these thy
witchcraftes? that being, as thou art, a sorry girl many men, nor many yoke
of Oxen cannot stu^re thee? Assuredly, the devil thy familier helps thee,
that thou may scoff, and delude us. The young damsel answered: this is no
witchcraft, nor enchantment, much less is it the devil, that makes me stand
immovable; the devil rather desi^eth, that I had been led to the place by
thee appointed, that there I might have lost my chastity: but it is the spirit
of God, who, being omnipotent, and dwelling in my soul, is able, and does give
me such constancy, that all the world shall not be able to move me from this
place.

Then the judge commanded officers to bring store of wood, and to place it
about the holy damsel; and that they should power thereon Oil, Pitch, and
Rosin, and then set fire thereto, that she might be consumed to ashes. The
flame did her no hurt, and in the midest of the fire she said: My most loving
and gracious Lord has granted me a little space in my martyrdom, that the
faithful believers may be encouraged, and not to fear torments, which be not
indeed so rigorous, as they seem to be: and that Idollaters may be confounded,
when they see how little they can do, against the servants of the most high
God.

The Governor not knowing what to do more, caused asword to be thrust through
her throat, which wounded her mortallie: but before she died she spoke to
certain Christians present, (who lamented to see her so wounded) and said unto
them: Be of good comfort brethren: for the Church of God shall have peace ere
long; and the emperors that have done such damage thereto, shall shortly loose
the rule, and dominion that they have. We read also, that the Blessed Sacrament
was brought thither secretly by a priest; and that when she had received the
same, she ended her life in peace.

Her body was buried in the same city of Syracusa, where it remained many
years; god showing diverse favors and graces to his faithful servants, by the
merits, and intercession of the blessed virgen. In process of time, her body
was carried unto Constantinople, and from thence unto Venice, in great regard
and estimation, as it well deserves.

The Church (beside all her other merits) holds and accounts her for
advocate of the eyes, and for the sight. It is therefore requisite that we all
have particular devotion, and recommend our selves unto her; that God may by
her merits, and intercession, preserve our corporal sight, and grant the
light of our souls; that we may be able, and worthy, to see his divine
majesty in heaven Amen.

The Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of S. Lucy, on the day of her
martyrdom, which was on the 13. of December, in the year of our Lord 305. in
the time of Maximian, and Dioclesian.

Spanish: Her name is in the Canon of the Mass. One of the hands of S. Lucy,
is showed in the vestrie of the Church of Toledo. Of S. Lucy write Sigisbert,
the Breuiarie, and the Roman Martyrologe.

The life of S. Thomas Apostle.
WHEN it happens sometimes that the predestinate and just man falls by
negligence into a heinous sin. cap: ^4
God uses the words of the Prophet Esaias unto him, and says: A little moment
will I hide my face from thee; and in everlasting mercy will I remember thee,
and have pity on thee. Which is as if he had said: I will turn my face from
thee, because thou have offended me: but for that thou did quickly
acknowledge thy sin and the unhappy estate in which I found thee, and did
not continue long in thy fault, but forthwith did crave pardon, I will turn
my face toward and thee, and will behold thee with the eyes of my mercy: I have
made peace with thee, and will take thee into my favor, wherein thou shall
continue for ever.

This sentence fitteth, and agrees with S. Thomas the Apostle: who offended
God, in not believing the article of his resurrection. wherefore God turned his
face from him, yet he returned forthwith, when he remembered his error, and
touched with his hands, the wounds of his master; which caused him to become
as soft as wax and to say: My God, my Lord, I confess my sin; and I
confess, that thou art true God, and my Lord. I confess, thou art him, whom I
saw dead, na^led on the Cross: and I confess, that thou art risen again. For
this cause God looked wildlie, and lovingly upon him, renewed friendship with
him, and took him again into his favor, in which he continued till his death.

The life of this blessed. Apostle is gathered out of the Evangelists, S.
Isidore, Simeon Metaphrastes, and Gregory of Toures in this sort.

SAINT Thomas the Apostle was a Galilean: but it is not known how, or when he
was called to the Apostleship. S. John the Evangelist makes of him particular
mention; when Mary Magdalene, and Martha sent to JESUS CHRIST, to tell him that
their brother was dead. And when he talking with his disciples told them: that
he would return into Judea, and the Apostles sought to stay his journey saying
to him: Master, they would lately have stoned thee, and will thou yet return
amongst them? he answered: there be twelve hours in the day Giving them to
understand: that so many times their hearts might be changed, and altered from
that they intended to do. S. Thomas seeing he was determined to go, said to the
other disciples with a stout resolution: Let us go also, and dye with him. S.
Thomas in these words showed himself to be of a good courage, and that he
loved JESUS CHRIST sincerely.

At the evening, after the last supper, which our Savior made with his
disciples, S. Thomas was present also, and was made Priest, and communicated as
others did. When our Savior made that sweet and lovely sermon, saying among
other things: that he went to prepare mansions for them, and that they knew
whether he went; S. Thomas said to him: Joan 14.
Lord, we do not know whether thou go, how is it possible for us to know the
way? After the death of our Lord, and after his resurrection, yea the very
same day he rose again, late in the evening, the Apostles being assembled in
the dyning parlour, none being wanting but Judas, that had hanged himself, and
Thomas, who was gone forth upon especial business; Joan: 20.
JESUS CHRIST appeared unto them, and showed them his wounds letting them know:
that he was the same, that had conuersed with them, and dyed for them, and that
he was raised again.

When Thomas was returned, the other Apostles said to him: O brother; whilst
thou were absent, we have seen our Lord and Master, the very same whom we saw
taken in the garden; the same that was beaten, and crowned with thorns;
nailed, and dead on the Cross; whose side was opened with a spear; that was
taken down from the Cross, and laid in his sepulcher. This our Lord we have
seen risen again, glorious and immortal. We have seen the signs of his
wounds, which seem not, as they were, all stained with blood; but they be
adorned wonderfully, they show as Diamonds, and Rubies set in Gold; and but
even now, he departed from us. S. Thomas answered: It is assuredly some
fantastic vision: and for my part, I tell you plainly: that before I shall
see him with mine own eyes; and put my hands into his wounds; and my fingers
into his side; I will not believe that you have seen him: or that he is risen
again. Thus S. Thomas remained in his hardness of heart eight days, John 19.
v. 27.
without relenting.

We may piously believe, that the Apostles, the Mary's, and perhaps the Mother
of God also, said thus unto him: As it is the sign of a lightheaded person,
to credit and believe all things he hears; so is it the sign of a stubborn,
and perverse mind, not to believe that, which so many affirm, especially,
such people as these be. How shall the Jews (which be enemies to my Son)
believe, that he is risen again; if thou, which art an Apostle, wilt not
believe it? Do thou not remember, that he said oftentimes with his own
mouth, that he must suffer? yea, he named some of the torments, which he was to
endure: and withal he said, that he should arise again the third day.

Now: if thou have had trial that he said truth in these things, why should
thou think that he lied in the other? If thou think that the Apostles and
the Mary's be deceived, and that he whom they saw is another: be assured; that
at least I am not deceived; but that I know him perfectly well. For I have
brought him forth; I have attended, and borne him company, this thirty and
three years. Although the rest should be mistaken, yet I cannot be deceived.
And I tell thee again: that my Son and thy Master is raised to life: and I
beseech thee, not to be obstinate, or incredulous any more. These and the like
words, we may well suppose, that the glorious Virgin said to S. Thomas, who
nevertheless, remained in his hardness, and unbelief, saying: If I do not see
him, I do not believe it.

I know not the reason why S. Cyrill takes part and defends S Thomas. Other
Doctors who be of his opinion (as Albertus Magnus) say: that S. Thomas did not
sin mortallie, in not believing it, alleging some reasons thus: that
although he had told them before, yet they interpreted his words otherwise, and
understood the meaning of them to be: that he should be made King of the
Hebrews, to diliuer the^ from the subjection of the Romans; and S. Thomas
desired to see CHRIST risen again to that effect. Which as a thing much
desired, he could not believe, if he saw it not, and touched him with his
hands. They say moreover, that ^he other Apostles said to Thomas, that JESUS
had his wounds, and he ^udged it a thing impossible, that a man so grie^ously
wounded could live.

Of small force be these excuses (as Theophilactus says) since, as it is a
token of a light head, to believe easily important things, so is it a sign of
rusti city, and blockishnes, not to believe things avouched by credible
witnesses. CHRIST had said; that he must rise again: and although they did not
understand it well, when he spoke it; yet having afterward understood it, and
upon such testimonies as avouched it credibly unto Thomas, that they had seen
him risen again; it was just, and reasonable, that he should believe it, and
therefore it seems, that he cannot be excused; but must needs be in a fault.

God permitted him to fall into this error, for the good or many men For the
article of the resurrection being so high and mystical, and withal so
important and necessary, it was convenient that it should be made most plain,
and clear; and that in it should remain no doubt, which all came to pass, by
the doubt of S. Thomas. Wherefore S. Gregory says: that the obstinate
dubitation of Thomas, did us more good, then the ready belief of Magdalen.
The Holie-Ghost foresaw, that there should arise the heresy of the Manichees,
who should say: that JESUS CHRIST had a fantastic body; unto which S. Thomas
answered by his doubting; that he lied like a false heretic, since he made
experiment with his own hands; and saw, and acknowledged, that he had a body
as we have; yea, after the resurrection. And if another heretic would say:
that he rose not again verily and indeed. S. Thomas may shut, and stop his
mouth quickly and say: This doubt I have already cleared; I also doubted: and
trying, touched his wounds with mine own hands. Now that I have taken away all
doubts thereof, let no man make any more question of this matter.

Eight days being passed, after the resurrection of our Savior, he appeared
another time unto the Apostles, Thomas being also with them. First, he spoke
those loving words of peace to them, which he ordinarily used after his
resurrection: then he turned toward S. Thomas, not with a displeasant
countenance, but chearefullie, and peaceably, and said unto him: Come hither
Thomas, reach forth thy hand; and, if thou have a desire to touch my wounds,
behold my hands and feet; lo here my side; put in thy hand or finger at thy
pleasure; and be no more incredulous, but a believer.

S. Thomas seeing his Lord, and having touched his wounds; being now assured,
that he was not a Phantasma. (or having a fantastic body) and hearing him
say, that he should be no more incredulous (whereby he perceived, that ^his
Master knew right well, what he had said and done, although he was absent, and
by this also showed, that he was very God) yielded, as being overcome, and
said: My Lord, my God. As if he would say: I my Lord do confess, that I am
overcome, and do acknowledge; that not only I shall believe, that thou art he,
whom I saw to dye, and now I see risen again; but also that thou art my Lord
and my God. Our Savior said to him: Thomas, because thou have seen, thou have
believed: thou have touched my body, and thou beleeuest that I am God. Blessed
be those that believe in me, and never see me; yea, believe in me, as thou
beleeuest, that I am God, and yet, have never seen nor touched me.

There is mention made of S. Thomas another time in the Gospel of S. John,
when S. Peter took certain of the Apostles to fish with him, one of the which
was S. Thomas. They labored all night without taking any fish, and in the
morning our Savior appeared to them on the bank, and bad them cast their nets
on the right side of the boat: which when they had done, they took a great
multitude of fishes: and brought them to the land, where they saw our Lord
JESUS; Mar. 16. v. 18.
who in that place, gave the authority of highest Bishop unto S. Peter.
Although there be no more particular mention made of S. Thomas in the Gospel,
yet it is very certain, that he was present at all those things, at which the
Evangelists report all the Apostles of CHRIST, to have bin present. He was
present therefore, when CHRIST ascended into heaven: before, and at the last
supper, and at the coming of the Holy Ghost. When the Apostles made the
division of provinces wherein they should preach, the country of India fell to
the lotte of S. Thomas: but before he went thither, he preached to the
Parthians, Medians, Persians, Brachmans, Hircanians, and Bartrians: in all
these places he reaped much fruit, many receiving the holy faith of CHRIST.

S. John Chrysostom says: that S. Thomas Baptized the three Kings or wise
men, which came to Bethleem, to adore JESUS CHRIST; and that then he went into
India, into which country he entered very poor and humble, with his hair
long, and curled up, a pale face, a weak and feeble body, that he seemed to
be but the shadow, or picture of a man; and that he wore a Garment all torn.
In this manner the holy Apostle came among the Indians, preaching to them
JESUS CHRIST in their own language, disgracing the Gods, which they adored,
the principal whereof was the Sun. Then did he some miracles; and, by little
and little, the people drew to him, and forsook their false Gods, and were
Baptized.

Then he came to the City of Calamina, where the King of that Barbarous
nation kept his Court. And although the Apostle did some miracles in his
presence, in confirmation of the doctrine he preached: The king, in stead of
receiving his doctrine, and to be enflamed with the love of JESUS CHRIST, as
others, and many of his subjects had done: was moved to fierce indignation
against the Apostle, for that he said the Sun was not God, but tho
workmanship of God: and that a man was of more dignity, then the Sun, a man
having the use of reason, which the Sun had not. The king caused many
torments to be given him. among others this was one: they put many plates of
Iron upon his naked skin, and then cast him into a burning oven.

But seeing this did him no hurt at all, he commanded he should be led to a
Temple of the Sun, where was the statue of brass, and he willed him to adore
it. The Apostle fell on his knees, and besought God to break that statue, that
the people, (seeing the small force of their God) might be ashamed, and forsake
the errors, wherein they were enwrapped. The Apostle having finished his
prayer, the statue fell on the earth, into diverse pieces. The ministers of the
Idols being present, and seeing all this; enraged with fury, they ran the
Apostle through with Lances, and killed him. His body was buried in the same
City of Calamina, and was after translated to the city of Edessa, in Syria,
where (as S Gregory of Toures says) was built a sumptuous Church, in which
God showed many miracles, by the merits of his holy Apostle.

The death of S. Thomas was on the 21. of December, and on the same day the
Church celebrateth his feast. This was in the year of our Lord. 75. in the
reign of Vespasian. Beside the afore-rehearsed things, there are recounted of
S. Thomas many other, which be taken for vain, and Apocripha and this is one:
that he was brought from Cesarea even to India, to build a Palace, and that
great store of treasure was given him to build it. The king departing from
thence for two whole years, and the Apostle giving all the money to the poor;
the king at his return, put him in prison, that he might g^t again the money
of him.

It is said also, that S. Thomas being invited to a marriage, whilst he dyned,
an Hebrew woman song certain verses in the praise of God; and the holy sunt
stayed, contemplating the words which she said: Wherefore one of them that
waited at the table, seeing he eat not, but ^ate musing, gave him a buffet on
the face, whereat the Apostle being wroth, said to them: I will not depart from
this table, until I see the hand that struck me, in a dogs mouth: which
caine so to pass, for the fellow going for water unto a spring, was devoured
of dogs, and one of them came in with his hand in his mouth.

These things thus reported, give testimony what they be, as having no great
foundation, nor good authority for them. Yea, this especially, of the hand
and the dog, was invented by heretics, who mingled this tale, in the life of
this saint, and holy Apostle, to the end, revenge, cursing, and wishing evil
unto our neighbor, should be reputeda thing lawful. Anf if any should judge
this to be evil, that then the Apostle; should be accounted so also: and by
this means, he should loose his credit, and authority. I marvel, that of
this holy saint, who was so slow in belief, such unlikely, and improbable
tales should readily be believed of him.

Also, I do not know of what credit it is, that is said in some Cronicles of
him, as of his being present with the Lord of the country, that is now called
Preter Iean, where they say, his body is kept till this day. We read also of a
thorn, that bears grapes on S. Thomas day, of which as made must, or sweet
wine, and they celebrate Mass therewith. I think, he that will avouch this
for true, had need to have greater authorities, then the places where they be
written.

Howsoever these things be, this which I now say, is most certain: that S.
Thomas was carried to the passage, and death of the glorious Virgin, as well as
the other Apostles. And for that when he came thither it was the third day,
after the death of the blessed mother of God, and that her body was already
buried, (God willing it so,) he was desirous to see it. The Sepulcher being
opened, the body was not found therein, for that it was raised again, and was
assumpted into heaven, as is said in the sollemnitie of the feast of her
Assumption.

The Nativity of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
AMONG the other marvelous histories of the sacred scripture, 4 Reg Cap 4.
we read one most notable in the book of kings, of the woman Sunamite, the
hostess of the prophet Eliseus. Of her it is said: that she had a little
child, an infant, which she tenderly loved. This child being one day abroad
in the field with his father, complained of a great pain in his head:
whereupon, his father caused him, to be carried home unto his mother, in whose
presence the child dyed. The woman felt as great grief, as might be, for the
death of her child: and going to the prophet Eliseus, fell at his feet, weeping
and lamenting; showing by outward signs the inward sorrow of her heart.

The prophet having compassion on her, sent with her his servant Giezie, and
gave unto him his staff, to lay it on the dead body of the child, which was
cold as Ise. The servant did as he was appointed: but the child by that means
was not raised to life. The afflicted mother returned unto the prophet, and so
much her prayers, and suit prevailed, that she brought him in person unto her
house. The prophet entered into the room where the child lay, and shut the
door close; and after he lay flat on the body of the little infant, using this
diligence: he laid his face on the face, his hands on the hands, and his feet
on the feet thereof. Then he cried aloud seven times, and the child beginning
to be warm, opened the eyes, and recovered life. This being done, the holy
prophet restored him unto his mother, who received him with more joy and
gladness, then can easily be expressed.

Though (as it be said before) that this indeed be a true history, which
happened really; yet was it a lively pattern of the high and maruailous
mystery, that God wrought, in being made man. For the woman Sunamite, is a
figure of the Church: who having a little son which is mankind; ass one as he
was created, and put into the pleasant field of Terrestrial paradise, felt a
pain in his head; for from thence issued fumes of desire, to be like unto God.
This was our forefather Adam, who dyed of this infirmity, when he eat the
fruit of the forbidden tree, whereby mankind be came cold, frosen and without
the grace of God.

The miserable afflicted Sunamite went for help unto the prophet, for the holy
Church did continually beseech God, to give remedy for this great loss. The
divine majesty had compassion on her, and sent Giezi with his staff, which
were the two laws, the law of nature, being figured in Giezi, and the law
written, figured in the staff of the prophet. This yet raised not again the
dead child to life, nor gave remedy unto the loss, the world had: as S. Paul
says, writing unto the Hebrews of the law written, that the law reduced not
things unto perfection, nor gave not full remedy unto our losses. Yet the
Church ceased not to desire God more instantly, until he came in person into
the world, and was enclosed in the secret chamber, of the bowels of the most
blessed virgin. He entered in, and shut the door fast, leaving it sealed, with
the virginal seal. There that venerable prophet, that Giant, that could not
be comprehended, neither in heaven nor on earth, lay flat on the humanity,
took it on him, conioyning face unto face, hand on hand, and feet with feet.

All this God did, in conioyning unto him humane nature in hipostaticall vn^on.
He cried aloud seven times, when he infused in it the seven gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Then mankind began to wax warm, to open the eyes; and was restored to
life; and so holy Church remained glad and well content to see that, she had
so long prayed for; and desired. The glorious virgin was replenished with great
joy, seeing her son, and the son of God also in her arms, as she saw him,
this day of his birth.

This history is recounted by the Evangelist S. Luke in this manner.

THERE was a proclamation and decree made by the Emperor Caesar Augustus,
(called Octauianus) wherein was commandment given, that all the subjects of
his empire, should go unto that city, which was the head of the places, where
they dwelt, and there they should register their names, and pay a certain
piece of money; confessing thereby their subjection unto the Roman empire. This
Octauianus being Lord of almost all the world, he was thus cu^ious, desiring to
know exactly, how many people were under his subjection; peace being then
generally ^uer all, which lasted six years before the birth of CHRIST, and
six years after. This decree was published in Nazareth, where S. Joseph, with
his blessed spouse the mother of God did then dwell; and this happened in the
last mouth of her being with child. And for that Joseph was of the house, and
family of David, he was to go to Bethleem, both to pay the money, and to be
enrolled; to which place also all other of that lineage went.

The delivery of the blessed Virgin being near at hand, although she was not
bound to go thither (for the decree did not oblige any but men) yet would be
have with him. God had given to him in charge that most precious treasure; and
he thought it not fit, to trust any other person with her; nay, loath he was, to
be deprived of so great a good, as to be present at the birth of the Son of
God, not only to adore the Son, but also to attend the mother. All this came
to pass by the apointment of God, to the end, JESUS CHRIST should be borne in
Bethleem, and so the prophesies of him be fulfilled.

If we consider this well, we shall see, that the birth of our blessed Savior
in Bethleem, came not so to pass, because the Prophets had foretold it,
(though it was convenient, their prophesies should be accomplished) but rather
they said so, because God had determined he should be borne there. This moved
almighty God, to choose so poor and abject a place, for the birth of his
son, agreeable to that he says by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias: Cap. 55
My ways be not as yours be; my ways be of one sort, and yours be of another.
Men strive and desire, to be honored, and esteemed: and they seek all means
that may bring them to estimation in the sight of men; and avoid all things
that may hinder them thereof. To be borne of Noble blood, and a rich house,
pleases all, and every one seeks it; but God does the contrary. He came to
manifest his glory to the world; and when he should be borne, he chose not to
that purpose the glorious City of Rome, much less the royal City of
Jerusalem; but the little village of Bethleem.

He was not pleased to be borne in the house of men, but in the stall of
beasts. And his birth being so honored by the Angels, and his death so
ignominious in the company of thieves; he covered his honors in the cottage
of Bethleem, and published his reproaches in the City of Jerusalem, giving
unto us hereby a notable example of humillitie. O happy Bethleem! O fortunate
stall! that pleased the Lord of heaven more, then the stately Capital of
Rome, or the rich palaces of Jerusalem. Thus we see, how God chose Bethleem,
to give us an example of true humillitie, and therefore the prophets wrote it;
and they having written it, it was convenient that it should be fulfilled.

Holy Joseph (as is said) went unto Bethleem, and took with him the most
blessed Virgin. It cannot be expressed, what troubles the holy damsel
endured by the way? not for her being with child, (which annoyed not her, as it
does other women) but because it was midwinter, when there be snowes, Ice,
winds, and tempests. If men in their houses do often feel them, much more
must a young and tender Virgin, travailing at such a time, and being but meanly
appointed, as may well be presumed; her husband Joseph and she being but poor.
If in their journey on the way they had toil and trouble, when they came unto
Bethleem, they had little refreshing: for the chambers were taken up, and
filled with the great concourse of people, that came unto that town for the
same purpose.

The good Joseph demanding for a lodging, was answered, that they were all
full; so he seeking, and enquiring further, the same answer was made him as
before. Hereupon the good old man with the holy Virgin, seeing they could have
no lodging, got them under a shead, or penthouse, where also was a stall for
beasts. We may well think this good couple shed tears, to see themselves in
such a miserable strait plight. Joseph had with him two beasts, as is gathered
out of the prophet Abacuc, Cap. 3.
after the translation of the 72. interpretors, which says: Our Lord shall
appear, in the midest of two beasts. Holy Church sings the same in a
Responsorie of this sollemnitie at Ma^tins; and of this the usage is, to paint
the nativity of our Lord with an Ass, and an Ox by him, Joseph took the Ox
with him to sell: as well to pay the tribute, as for the expenses of the voyage:
and on the Ass was our B. Lady, the mother of God to ride.

At that time was the solstice of winter, when the Sun begins to rise upon
our hemispheare and makes the day to increase. And if at this time, the
solstice comes before Christmas day, it happens by reason of the day, that
is added in the leap year, which yet lacks. 8. minutes, being about the. 7.
part of an hour; and these be so increased; that they have made as many days,
as be from the day of the solstice, unto Christmas day. It was on the 25. of
December, on the saturday, and in the night, as Peter Com^stor the Master of
Histories, proves by the computation of that year, saying that then, it was
midnight. the glorious Virgin knew that the hour of her delivery was at hand:
but not as other women do, who perceive it by the afore-comming pains, which
be as reuengers of the delight, in their lustful conception. The holy Virgin.
(as S. Augustine affirms) had not that delight, in the conception of the
redeemer of the world; and therefore she had not sorrow, and pains. Moreover,
it was not fitting that she should suffer pain, that brought forth the joy
and comfort both of heaven and earth.

The sacred Virgin was advised of that hour, by new joy which she felt in her
soul, even as her virginity, and purity deserved: and it being now midnight,
all creatures, after their travail, were at their rest, and usual repose. The
Moon showed clearlie (the Sun envying her, himself being absent) and she
attended on that mystery, with her bright beams. The stars that straved in
the midest of heaven, desired to stay, to see that great, and new marvel.
Those stars, that were passed, desired to turn back again: and those, that
were behind, desired to hasten their journey, to be present at this happy and
fortunate hour. All things created, yea nature it self stood astonished and
amassed, beholding this strange manner of delivery.

The happy hour being come: the blessed Virgin lifted up her hands and eyes
unto heaven, and said: Behold O father eternal; the time is come, that thy
only begotten Son is borne, and the precious treasure is given unto the
world, to pay the debt it owes thee. I offer unto thee, that art the giver of
all good things, this fruit of life, gathered out of the tree of my bowels. I
offer also unto thee this precious pledge, which thou gave me, and which
until this time I have faithfully kept. The blessed Virgin speaking these or
the like words, she felt in her soul an unspeakable content, and casting down
her eyes, she saw the Son of God, and her Son also newly borne. Forthwith
she kneeled down before him, and shedding tears for tenderness and joy, adored
him, and rendered thanks to him, that he was made man, and that he had elected
her to be his mother, yet kept her a most pure Virgin, as she was before her
delivery.

Then took she him in her arms, and said unto him: Oh the most tender, and
dear Son of my bowels; how can I now cherish thee? With what shall I cover
thee, to keep thee from cold, which is thy first torment? Thou did determine
to be made man, wherefore did thou choose so poor a mother? Were there not
in the world many great Ladies and Queens, that could better have been able to
have clothed thee in silk and gold, as thou do deserve, being God as thou
art? I can give thee but mean, and course clothes. But since it was thy
pleasure to choose so poor a mother, why would thou be borne, in so base,
and abject a place? If thou haddst been borne in Nazareth, where thou wast
conceived, I could yet something better have attended, and served thee in my
poor house: but what can I do here my dearest Son* Thou my God have
delivered me, from the panges and throws, that other mothers endure in
childbirth: why would thou permit me, to feel now this torment? I mean, to
see this heavenly visage, (on which the Angels, and all the Court of heaven
desire to gaze, as in a mirror) to look sorrowfully with the cold.

Oh my Son! how is the joy that I have to have brought thee forth, and to see
my self thy mother, mingled with grief, that I have not where withal to
attend, and cherish thee as I would? If not as thou deseruest, yet at least as
thou have need. I beseech thee therefore my dear Son, that since it is thy
will to choose me for thy mother, that thou will supply our wants: so that, to
my will, which to thee is best known, and manifest, there may be no want,
which my be for thy service. We may imagine the blessed Virgin said such like
words, either outward and openly, or at least inwardly in her soul. Then
again adored she the infant as her God, and kissing his face as of her son,
and his feet, as of the creator, lapped him in those clothes, which she had.

Although the Evangelist had not said as he did, yet we might well believe,
that the holy Virgin was provided according to her abillitie, and was not
negligent in that case, especially she knowing the time of her delivery to be
at hand. Having then wrapped, and swathed him, she laid him upon a little hay
in a manger, as the Evangelist says in these words: She brought forth her
first begotten Son, Luke 2. v. 7.
and wrapped him in clothes, and laid him in a ma^ger, for there was no other
place for him in the I^ne. And if, when the Son of God was borne, there was
not present any human creature, but the B. Virgin, and her beloved Joseph
(yea some are of opinion, that he was gone to provide victuals for himself,
and the B. Virgin) there wanted not thousands of Angels, who descended from
heaven, apparailed in the liuerie of their king (that is: in the shape of men)
and began to make triumph with music, singing with sweet, delectable, and
true Angellicall voices.

Very fit it was, that those blessed spirits should accomodate and apply
themselves unto the usage of the world; wherein, at the rising of the morning
Sun, the little birds sing sweetly, as it were saluting it, and rejoicing,
for the coming of the same. So also, when the Sun of Justice was borne in
the world, it was fit, that the birds of heaven, (which be the Angels) should
show their joy by their sweet singing. Some Authors say: that the song of the
Angels was begun by the blessed Virgin and that thereof began the usage, that
at Mass, the priest that celebrateth begins the Gloria in excelsis, and the
Quier follows. So the glorious Virgin having laid her Son in the Manger,
and again adored him, began to say with a loud voice: Glory be to God in the
highest. v. 14.
The Angels forthwith answered: And in earth peace unto men of good will, with
the rest which follows. And that which was song in that stall, the Angels
song likewise throughout the places, where they carried tidings of the birth of
JESUS CHRIST.

The Evangelist S. Luke says: ver: 8.
At that time, there were sheapheards watching, keeping their flocks; unto whom
(according to the opinion of diverse Authors) the Angel Gabriell appeared,
accompanied with many other Angels, and unto them he told the news of the
birth of the Savior of the world. S. John Chrysostom says: he went not unto
Jerusalem to tell the Scribes and Pharisees, Hom. de not. dom: ^om. 2.
much less unto king Herod, because they were proud, and drowned in vices, and
deserved not, that God should do them that favor; but he went unto the
sheapheards, which were mean, and humble. And allthough at the first they were
afraid, yet the Angel secured them, and told them the Messiah was born. And to
the end, that they desiring to go and adore him, might find him, he gave unto
them sure tokens, saying: you shall find the infant wrapped in clothes, and
laid in a manger.

O thou blessed Angel, these signs, that thou give, are more like to make
one miss God, the^ to find him. How; is God an infant: God wrapped in clothes?
God in a manger? Have regard what thou say (thou glorious Angel) for all
these things denote and show baseness, contrary to the state, and majesty of
God. The Angel replied: believe me, it is as I have said. God, without being
changed, has made a wonderful mutation. He, being eternal, is now a little
infant newly borne. He whom the earth cannot contain; and for whom the
heavens are too little; is now in a poor small chamber wrapped in course
clothes. God, who has his seat above the Cherubins, at this present is laid to
rest in a manger of beasts.

O great mystery! O strange wonder! All ye that be full of curiosity, and
love to hear things the like were never heard, and to see strange maruailes,
the like were never seen, see, and consider this marualie. Go to the stall of
Bethleem with the sheapheards, to see God a little infant newly borne: to see
the Virgin Mother, that has brought forth a child, and that in so strange, and
admirable a place. Let me advise and counsel you, that you go not thither
with empty hands, since the poor sheapheards brought presents unto him. Let
us carry that, which is most agreeable, and for our profit. He was found in a
base place: let us bring unto him humillitie. He lamented: let us come unto him
shedding tears, for that we have offended him. Let us beseech him to use us
favorably, and to show his mercy toward us, since he was borne for that end,
and purpose. And in especial, let us beseech him, that among all others, he
will do us this favor, that is: to give us that grace, that we may be worthy
to enjoy his glory. Amen.

Nicephorus Callistus says: that the Emperor Justinian commanded, that the
feast of the nativity of our Lord should be celebrated. Before the time of
this Emperor, this festival day was celebrated in some particular Churches.
But he having (as we may assuredly think) conferred the matter with the Pope,
the Bishop of Rome, ordained it to be celebrated universally, through all
Christendom, on the 25. of December, and on the same manner, as it is kept at
this present; accompanying the same, with other festival days, as of S.
Stephen, S. John, and of the holy Innocents. The aboue-named Justinian
governed the Empire, in the year of our Lord. 565. The nativity of our
Savior CHRIST was in the year of the world. 3962. by the most common received
opinion.

The life of S. Anastasia. Martyr.
KING David talking with God in the person of the martyrs says: We be passed
by fire and water, and thou have brought us into a place of refreshing. This
may be well applied, to the glorious martyr S. Anastasia, who after a long
imprisonment, suffered martyrdomes, the one of water, the other of fire, and
being delivered from the one, by means of the other, her blessed soul
obtained the place of refreshing, which she enjoys at this present in heaven.
The life of his holy saint, was described in the manner that ensues, by
venerable Bede, and Ado Archbishop of Treuers.

SAINT Anastasia was borne in Rome, and was married unto Publius a noble man of
great account, but yet a pagan. He having knowledge that his wife gave much
almose unto the Christians which were in prison, judged that she was a
Christian also. And fearing to loose his goods, (though he had the greater part
thereof, in marriage with her) he determined to accuse her, the persecution of
Dioclesian, and Maximian being at that season very sharp, and rigorous. And
least any other should accuse her, and so g^t his goods, he determined to do
it first him self.

This cruel man shut her up in a chamber, where he kept her many days, giving
her mea^, by stint and measure, and entending to famish her, he did every day
d^minish it. Whilst the holy saint remained thus in prison, she wrote
certain letters to a holy martyr called Cris^gonus, who was likewise in
prison, and returned her answers, whereat she received great consolation.

Shortly after, Anastasia was freed of her imprisonment, but she fell into
other troubles, for she was taken by a governor, who kept her two months in
prison; where she was relieved by a good and virtuous woman called Theodora,
who was martyred also afterward. The two months being expired, the governor
put her in a Bark, together with. 270. Christians men and women, that they
might be cast into the sea. The officers performed the decree of the governor,
yet the water pardoned, and did not drown them, but cast them on the shore in
saftie, in the Isles called Palmaria.

To that place came the governor of Illiria, or S^lauonia, with his soldiers,
who had in charge also, to put the Christians to death He put them again in
prison, and tormented them after diverse manners. S. Anastasia was bound to
four posts, somewhat high from the ground: and when they had racked her by
the hands and feet, in most cruel sort; they kindled a fire under her, which,
by little and little, deprived her of her mortal life, whereby she obtained life
everlasting.

Among these holy Martyrs, there was one called E^titianus, a man very rich,
plain, and void of malice. From this man they took all his goods, of which he
seemed to make no regard; and if any thing had been spoken to him thereof, he
would answer thus: Take from me what you will, yea, all that I have to lose;
you shall take my head before you take CHRIST from me.

The body of S. Anastasia half consumed, was buried by a matrone called
Appolonia, after she had dressed it with costly ointments. And when she had
many times embraced and kissed it, she wrapped it in most pure white linen,
and buried it in a garden she had, where shortly after she caused a Church to
be builded, after the name of the saint. This glorious martyr is one of the
saints* named in the Canon of the mass, which is no small privilege.

Her martyrdom was about the year of our Lord 300. ( Dioclesian, and Maximian
being Emperors) on the 25 of December. And, because on that day the nativity
of CHRIST is celebrated, the commemoration of this saint is only made in the
(...) Mass of the three, which on that day are (...).

Some write; that Pope Telesphorus ordained, that three Masses should be said
on that day. And some Authors say; that the first Mass signifies the
Gentiles, who were in a manner blind in their Idollatrie; and therefore it is
said at midnight. The second is said at break of day, when the light is seen,
although but a little; and this signifies the Hebrews, who had some light from
God, which was but little; for they had all things in figures, and shadows. The
third Mass which is said at the clear day, signifies the Christians, who
have the clear light of God, because they have most clear knowledge of him.

Other authors say; that in these three Masses, are represented three states.
By that which is said at midnight is understood the darksome state, full of
obscurity and confusion, of those that be in hell. By the other, that is said
at the break of day, when the light begin to be seen, are understood those
that live in the world; who be in the middle, between the light and darkness;
and do not know, what shall be their end. By the third, which is said at clear
day, is understood the state of the happy, which be in eternal clearenes,
and posesse the joyful, and blessed vision of God. This is the signification
of the three Masses, which are comonlie said on Christmas day, as the doctors
generally say.

The occasion that moved Pope Telesphorus to make this ordinance was: The
first Mass is called ad Galli cantum which is at midnight, or a little after,
because at that hour JESUS CHRIST was borne. The second is called at the
daie-break, because at that hour he was visited, and adored by the
sheapheards. The third is said at the ordinary hour, as on other days, and
is called the high Mass. [The spanish says:] Of these three Masses w^iteth
Innocent 3. in the third sermon of the birth of CHRIST. Galfridus, lib; de reb:
Eccles: cap. 21. Albinus de divine. offic. cap. 1. Sicardus Cremonens: and
others.

The life of S. Stephen the first Martyr.
ROBOAM the king of Israel, 3. Reg. 12.
suceeding his ^ather Solomon in the kongdome, made some laws and ordinances,
to be observed of his su^iects, who esteemed them to be too rigorous: ^here
ca^^^d them to assemble together, with intent, to rebel against the king
Roboam, saying, and professing open^^, that they would not obey him, nor
acknowledge him for king. Those which did thus rebel, were ten tribes of the
twelve, into which, all the hebrews were divided.

The king being certifyed of this commotion, called o^e Aduram, his faithful
servant, and one of great account in his court, commanding him: to go speak
peaciblie to these rebellious people, thereby to quiet, and appease them. Aduram
caused the ten tribes to be warned to appear: and choosing out the most
principal of them, he showed him some reasons, whereby he might reduce them to
the service of the king: but they hearing him named, with great indignation
took up stones, and stoned Aduram to death.

Roboam, in as much as he is king of Israel, is a figure of JESUS CHRIST, unto
whom the father eternal gave the lordship and power over all flesh, and
especially over that people, unto whom he was sent for guide and captain, and
for king also, as the Prophet Zachary calls him. This king made his
ordinances, Cap: 9.
when ascending gloriously into heaven, he commanded his holy Apostles, and
disciples, to publish the Evangelical law, and make known unto all men, that
the old law was abrogated. Many of the Jews thought this to be very strange,
and rigorous, and therefore they took counsel together and determined, that
they would not acknowledge JESUS CHRIST, nor receive his Gospel, and doctrine.

He understanding their consultation, and intent, sent a principal man of his
court unto them, which was S. Stephen, figured by Aduram. whilst he talked to
the principal of them, to persuade them to acknowledge CHRIST for the Messiah,
and that they would obey him, and receive his doctrine; they on the contrary
part, being obstinate, and rebelliously bent, took up stones against S. Stephen
and with extreme fury, led him forth of the city, and there stoned him to
death; the martyr remaining victorious, being crowned in his own blood.

The life of this glorious martyr, written by S. Luke the Evangelist, in the
Acts of the Apostles, and other good approved authors, is in this manner.

THE Apostles preaching, and doing many miracles in Jerusalem, the people of
the city, and the countries there abouts came, and brought their sick in
great abundance, and they were all healed. This was the cause, that the number
of the disciples increased daily, Cai^t: upon this place.
for all those that were Baptized, were called by that name. It befell, that
amongst them arose a little controversy, moved by the Greeks against the
Hebrews They were all Hebrews, cap. 6. V. 1.
but some of them were borne in Greece, and others in Palestine and these were
called Hebrews, and the other Grecians.

These Grecians seemed agreeued, that their widows were not admitted into the
public ministry, and affairs; because in those times they that were
converted, brought all their goods unto the Apostles, cap. 4. V. 37.
and they provided for them their diet apparel and all other things
necessary. And to the end, that all things might be done in order, they
appointed to every one a particular office: and to the widows, (that were
honest and devout women,) they gave in chatge to dress the meat, and to attend
the table. The Grecians requested, that the widows of their nation might be
admitted unto that service: for every one desired to be employed in some
office, and to do the best service they could.

The Apostles assembled together to stay this matter, least it might grow to
discord. And, having called all the disciples, said unto them: It is not fit,
that we should be busied in matters of such small importance; therefore let us
find out, and make choice of some good quiet men, of honest fame, who may have
authority to provide persons, which shall have care of the provision of diet,
without aggrieuance of any nation, one or other: and out of both nations may be
chosen widows dilligent, and apt to dress meat for the multitude. And when in
this matter there may happen any occasion of disagreement, they may resort to
those that be elected, who may quiet all dissentions, if any arise, and that we
may attend to preaching, and prayer.

This resolution pleased them all, and out of the disciples were chosen seven;
and as the head, and chief of others, Stephen a faithful man, and full of the
holy Ghost was chosen. S. Augustine out of this gathers: that S. Stephen was
a man of great continency, and government; since unto him was given an
office, in which he should have so great dealings amongst women. The Holy
Ghost says also of him; that he was replenished with grace and fortitude, and
that he did ^ignes and many miracles. He showed himself to be very valiant,
and courageous, preaching JESUS CHRIT to the Hebrews, persuading them to
forsake the law of Moses, (which now was of no force) and that they should
receive the Gospel and be Baptized.

The matter was brought to that pass, that S. Stephen was more famous, then
any other of the disciples; because he disputed face to face with the masters
of the Sinagogues, in which were congregated the Grecians of sundry Provinces,
as of Cyrene, of Alexandria, of Cilicia, and of Asia the less, who altogether
could not make resistance unto the words of Stephen. For he propounded his
reasons with such a spirit and wisdom, and resolved their arguments so
cleerlie, that they remained ashamed, and utterly confounded. Where they should
have taken profit by the same, they (contratiewise) took such indignation
against him, that they hired certain false witnesses, to accuse him unto the
high priest.

Hereupon S. Stephen was taken, and the witnesses accused him, that they heard
him speak blasphemy against God, the Law, and the Temple. And they added
also, that he said: that JESUS of Nazareth should destroy that sacred place,
and change the traditions, and ordinances given by Moses. This was an apparent
slander; for this last they had not heard S. Stephen say, but the priests said
to themselves that it must be so, since JESUS CHRIST had said so; yet they
wrong understood him, when he said unto them: John: 2.
Pull down this Temple, and in three days I will build it up again. In these
words our Savior spoke of the Temple of his body as the Evangelist says: that
they should put him to death, and on the third day he would rise again.
Whereupon the false witnesses, (in^yted thereunto by the Scribes and Pharisees,
the enemies of S. Stephen) deposed, that he affirmed the ruin of the Temple,
and the change of the Traditions, and ordinances given by Moses.

This accusation being laid, all they that sat in Counsel, looked steadfastly
upon S. Stephen, and they saw his face, Cap: 6. v. 15.
as the face of an Angel, glistering out of measure. The high priest demanded
if this were true which they affirmed to him? The glorious saint (having craved
audience) reduced to their memories all the accidents that had happened to that
people; and the graces, and favors, that they had received from God: beginning
at Abraham, even until that present time. He made relation how Jacob going
into Egypt, with all his sons, in the time of Joseph (flying from the great
dearth, which was in the land of Canaan) remained there, and inhabited in that
country. And how Joseph being the dead, the Egiptians dealt evil with them;
Cap. 7.
wherefore God sent Moises to bring them out of that country, and to deliver
them from the hands of Pharao, that kept them as slaves, and made them to pass
the red sea on the dry land, having drowned all their enemies therein.

He told them also, how God gave them the law, by the hand of Moses, who
prophesied and said: that God would raise a prophet of the people of the Jews,
and that they should and must hear, and obey him, even as they had done Moses
He also charged them, with their unthankfulness toward God, they having
received of him so many great benefits and graces; how they left to worship him
and fell to adore Idols, made with their own hands; how they had persecuted
the prophets, and killed many of them, and finally he said unto them: You
indeed do show your selves to be their children, for they were obstinate, and
stifnecked, aagainst the commandments of Gods law; and you be also like
them, resisting the Holy Ghost.

They persecuted the prophets, that spoke of the coming of that just and Holy
Prophet, of whom Moses spoke likewise; but you have imprisoned that same just,
and holy Prophet, who was the true Messiah, and the CHRIST promised in the
law, and you never ceased persecuting him, until you had put him vno the
death of the cross. The scribes and Pharisees which sat in Counsel were so
moved, that they gnashed their teeth against him, showing thereby their
indignation; and off^ing withal to lay violent hands upon him.

S. Stephen lifting up his eyes to heaven, saw the glory of God, and JESUS
CHRIST standing at his right hand; as it were, to show him his power, and
favor to help him in this sharp conflict, which he undertook for his sake.
The glorious saint could not conceal nor hyde it, but certified them of the
great glory, cap. 7. V. 55.
saying: Behold, I see the heavens open, and the son of man, at the right
hand of God. When these devilish, and hardharted people, (who awaited to find
any occasion against the holy man, that they might wreake and discharge all
their malice and rage conceived against him) had heard him speak these words,
they esteeming it to be blasphemy, lifted up their voices and said: Let the
blasphemer dye, let us put him to death; and herein they fained to show their
zeal unto the law, and shut their ears, as if they had heard some absurd
speech against God, or his honor.

But this was not all. For as thought S. Stephen had been indeed a blasphemer
(who the law commanded to be led out of the city, and there to be stoned)
they laid violent hands on that holy Deacon, and with a furious vproare and
noise, they led him out of the city, where the witnesses that had given in
evidence against him, gave their garments to be kept by a ^ong man called Saul,
(who seemed to be very joyful that S. Stephen was put to death) and then they
began to stone him with stones.

The holy saint seeing that his death approached, lifted up his eyes unto
heaven; and said: My Lord JESUS receive my spirit. Cap. 7. V. 59 60.
This prayer he made for himself, standing on his feet: but when he whould
pray for his enemies (to the end they might see he prayed for them from his
heart) he kneeled on the ground, and with a loud voice said: O Lord pardon them
this sin, for they know not what they do. Little did this his pious act
mollify the obstinate, and hard hearts of his adversaries: yea they rather
threw down stones upon him, like a shower of hail. Some missed him, some
hitte him, some hurt him, others returned back, and some stuck fast in his
sacred head. In this torment, the blessed Martyr ended his life. His ^olie
body was buried by some virtuous people, shedding over him many sorrowful
tears.

Of this holy Martyr are read great matters in particular treatises, which S.
Augustine, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Fulgentius, S. Peter Crisologus, Eusebius
Emissenus, Nycetas, and many other authors write of him. All this and much more
S. Stephen meriteth, as well for his many virtues, as for the great zeal,
wherewith he preached JESUS CHRIST, and his honor: and also, in the great
charity he showed, in praying unto God for them, that took away his life.
Hereof it came, that his prayer was heard, and was so acceptable to God. for as
S. Augustine, and S. John Chrysostom affirm: the Catholic church does at
this day, by him enjoy S. Paul, who was one of the furtherers of his death.

It is truly said, that S. Stephen was a deacon, ordained together with six
others by the Apostles, when they gave them the charge of the ordinary
services, that daily occur^ed among the disciples. Moreover, S. Augustine
writes many miracles which God did by the merits of S Stephen: but for that
the greater part happened at such time, as his blessed body was found; I refer
you unto the feast of his Invention, which the holy Church keeps on the
third of August, in which place you may read some more of them.

At this time, we will speak only this: That seeing this saint made prayer for
them that stoned him; we, which desire to honor him, in celebrating his feast,
may hope, that he will be a good means, to obtain mercy for us of the
heavenly Majesty and that, by his especial favor, we may have the gift of
perseverance in his service unto our death, that afterward we may be worthy to
see him in his glory. Amen.

Eusebius says: the death of S. Stephen was in the year of CHRIST 34. in the
reign of Tiberius Caesar. Durandus in his rational says: that the death of
S. Stephen was on the third of August, when his Invention is celebrated, which
as he says in the same book was on the 26. of December, being the day,
whereon his principal feast is kept. The Chruch changes it (as the same
Guilielmus says) to have the Martyrdom more festiual, adioining that, rather
then the Invention, unto the birth of Christ.

The life of S. John the Evangelist.
THE holy and valiant man Mardocheus ( the faithful Chronicler of the King
Assuerus and Esther) recounteth: that he being advised and attent, and having
continual regard to the health and welfare of his King and Lord, heard one
day, that some servants of the King had made a conspiracy to kill him, and
resolved to put it speedily to effect. Mardocheus noted the words, and taking
knowledge of the men, made a memorial, wherein he wrote all their conspiracy,
and wrought so, that it came to the Kings hands, who caused the affendors to be
imprisoned, and after they had confessed their offense, to be punished
according to their deserts.

There was no reward given to Mardocheus, for discovering this treason: but
there was made only a no^e in the Annals of the Kings of Persia. Some days
after it happened, that the King commanded that book to be read unto him,
that he might reward the services done unto him, whereof in that book the
memory was conserved, and when he came to that place, where mention was made of
Mardocay, the King perceuing, that he had been the cause of a great and
man^^est delivery from a danger of his life, studied what reward to bestow on
him: At last he determined that Mardocay should be arr^ied gorgeously, and led
th^rough the City upon a goodly Horse, and that before him should go trumpets
sounding, and declare, that i^ was the Kings will and pleasure, that Mordecay
should be hounoured: and every man was charged to do him honor.

This history agrees and fitteth well S. John Evangelist figured in Mord^cay.
For as he was Croni^l^r to the King of Persia, so S. John was a faithful
Cronicler of JESUS CHRIST: The one was holy, the other most holy. Mardocay
discovered the conspiracy made against the King, whereby he avoided a greiuous
hurt; S. John having notice also of another conspiracy, that the Ebyoni^es
heret^kes plotted against JESUS CHRIST ( denying, that he was God,) wrote his
Gospel against them; whereby their iniquity was disclosed, the damage
prevented, and they confounded.

This writing was written in the memorial of God, and then came the day,
wherein the memorials are read, and seeing what S. John had done for JESUS
CHRIST'S sake; not only for this service, but for diverse others worthy of
reward, it pleased his Lord to honor him, even as it happened to Mardocay. To
this end, was given unto him a gorgeous and rich vesture, the like whereof is
hardly to be found: for the tittles that do agree unto this holy saint, do not
ordinarily concur in any other, at one time.

He was set upon a horse, which was the special favor bestowed on him by God:
The horse was, that which David means in a Psalm saying: O Lord, thou shall
save both men and beasts: In some sense, you may understand by beasts, the
bodies, as by the names of men, we may understand the souls: as if he had
said: that at the day of judgment the holy saints shall go to heaven both in
body and soul.

Upon this Horse, viz. his own body, it pleased God, that S. John Evangelist
not staying for the day of judgment, should rise again, as soon as he dyed,
and go up into heaven, as many great authors hold, who yield many strong
arguments to prove, that S. John Evangelist is in heaven both in body and
sou^e, whereunto be entered like another Mordecay triumphantly with trumpe^ters
before him, who proclaim all his heroical acts, and declaring that God will
so honor him, and that he would have him honored of all. The life of this holy
Apostle and Evangelist ensuyng, is collected par^ly out of the Gospel and in
part out of diverse good and grave Authors.

SAINT John the Evangelist was the son of Zebedee and brother of S. la^es the
greater, who was beheaded by Herod. S. John, (after Onuphrius) was borne in
the third year of CHRIST. Lib. 1 ^a. 28
He was of a noble house as Nic^phorus and S. Jerome say. And they be of that
opinion, for that S. John was familier in the house of the high priest, as
appears in the night that CHRIST was taken, for S. Peter was suffered to come
in by means of S. John, as one whom they respected.

Though he was a gentleman, yet for to avoid idleness, (the nurse of many
vices,) he used the trade of fishing, jointly with his father and brothers: and
the rather, because their house was nere the sea, of Galily. This shows, they
were not so poor as some make them, in that they had a bark of their own,
wherewith they fished. They being then one time busy at their fishing, CHRIST
called them, and bad them follow him; and be his disciples. They knowing him to
be their kinsman (and reputing it happy that he would accept them into his
school) forsook their father, the barks and the nets, and went to JESUS
CHRIST.

S. John was now about 28, years old, and a virgin (as he was all his life) of
a good nature, beautiful in countenance, very amiable, and wise. Whereupon the
son of God took unto him an especial affection, and made him his favorite,
among all the Apostles. This same Evangelist esteemed this prerogative so
highly, that when he recounteth any thing in the Gospel, where he is to name
himself, in steed thereof he uses this phrase. The disciple, whom Jesus
loved. JESUS CHRIST showed often to him particular kindness; of the which one
was, that when he was to be transfigured upon mount Thabor in the presence of
three Apostles, one of them was S. John. he was one of them, that was present,
when our Savior raised the daughter of the prince of the Synagogue in the
presence of two other Apostles, he being the third.

S. John gave notice to his mother of the great affection CHRIST bore to him:
who guided by motherly affection, or persuaded with the opinion, that all, or
the most part of them had, that conuersed with JESUS CHRIST, to wit; that he
should reign temporally, it seemed to her an easy matter to obtain of him,
that the two brethren her sons should have the highest place of dignity in his
kingdom: so she besought him, to bestow on them that favor. But he entending
to make her know, how they had deceived themselves in this demand, for that
his kingdom should not be in this world, but in heaven, where if they would
have a peculier place; they must (he said) if they would obtain it, both
drink the same cup and suffer troubles for Gods sake, and that therein they
must also look for his help.

The night of his last supper, our Savior showed especial favors unto S.
John: for when he said that one of them that sat at the table, should sell and
betray him, though S. Peter was favored much of CHRIST, yet it appears, that
CHRIST would not disclose this secret to him, but to S. John: yea S. Peter
requested S. John, to ask that question. S. John might do it fitly, as sitting
by our Lord; who answered that he was the traitor unto whom he gave a morsel
of bread dipped in the platter; and then he gave it to Judas. In the same
supper S. John leaned upon the breast of our Lord, and there slept; in the
which sleep, he saw many high and secret mysteries, which he afterward wrote in
his Gospel. When our Savior went to pray in the garden, S. John was one of
the three disciples, that he took with him, and willed them to watch in
prayer. At the time the Jews apprehended him, S. John fled as the other
Apostles did, but in continent he returned, and jointly with S. Peter followed
him to the house of the high priest, where he saw how S. Peter denied him, and
our Savior to look upon him; and how S. Peter repentant for his fault, went
forth and wept bitterly for his sin.

After this S. John departed from thence, and brought the news to the mother
of God of that which had befallen. She was at that time in Bethania, or else,
as others will, in the same house, where CHRIST supped with his disciples,
though she was not present thereat, but was with drawn in some other lodging
or room. S. John accompanied the holy Virgin with grief (as we may well
imagine) as well to see her in that heauynes, as to think what torments his
dear master had and did suffer and endure.

This same disciple stood with the blessed Virgin, at the foot of the Cross,
when our Lord did him that favor above all favors, never sufficiently praised
and magnified: since, in such a time and such circumstance, our Redeemer looked
with his eyes upon two such persons, as were his mother and his disciple, and
studied in what manner he should show the bond he ought unto his mother and how
she should satisfy the love he bore toward his disciples, he resolved to give
the disciple for son unto his mother and the B. Virgin for mother unto his
disciple; whereupon he said unto her: Woman behold thy son: It was not
forgetfulness of JESUS CHRIST, that he called the B. Virgin, woman and not
mother, for the name of mother, is a word of great tenderness, and it would have
caused the B. Virgin to have shed abundance of tears, who had before powered
tears like rain from her eyes, therefore he called her woman, and not mother.
Then he said to the disciples; Behold thy mother there, as if he had said, John
take her to thy mother, for I leave her unto thee: She is a Virgin, and thou
art a Virgin, it is very meet, that she hold thee for her son, and as a
son love thee, and that thou hold her for thy mother, and as a mother love
and honor her.

S. John stood at the foot of the Cross, all the time our Lord remained
thereon, learning of him, as of a man reading from a chair, things wonderful
and admirable, and chiefly when by heard him pray for them that crucified him:
for then he learned a wonderful lesson of love, that ought to be borne not
only to ones friends, but also to his enemies. CHRIST had said it before unto
them by word of mouth, but on the Cross, he confirmed it by deeds; to the end,
they might better learn their lesson.

At the time our Savior called for drink, and that vinegar was given him, S.
John felt incredible grief, to see his Lord an master, (by him so much loved)
to endure such torments: lastly JESUS being dead, when his side was pirced with
the spear, S. John with the sharp eyes of the Eagle, saw water and blood to
issue from the wound, and noted the same in his Gospel. When our Lord was
taken from the Cross, S. John took him in his arms, and gave him to the
pensive and discomforted mother, and with her, and with the other that were
present and that came to take him from the Cross, carried him to his
sepulcher. And having heard the third day after by the Maryes, that our Lord
was risen again, S. Peter and he returned thither, yea he ran before Peter,
and came first, but stayed at the door, and did not enter in, until S. Peter
came.

Then late in the evening he saw our Lord risen again, jointly with the other
Apostles excepting S. Thomas and Judas. He saw him also another time, being
with S. Peter and the other Apostles fishing in the Tyberia^, when they being
in the bark, and our Lord on the shore S. John was the first that knew him. And
for that the disciples said to our Lord, that they had fished all night, and
had taken no thing, our Lord appointed the^ to cast the nett on the right^ side
of the barck, at which time, they took so many fishes that it was agreate
wonder the netts were not broken, which S. Peter seeing, swam me to him, and
the other came to him being upon the land by barck.

There our Lord gave unto S. Peter the Papacy, which he had promised unto him,
and did not give it unto S. John, for certain reasons, which the doctors
allege: One of the which is this, that if the Pope gave unto a servant of his
an office, which was worth yearly 1000. ducats, but paid out of it a pension of
800. ducats, and if to another he gave an office worth yearly. 500. ducats
without pention out of the same, it would appear, that the second man should be
thought to be in the greatest favor.

So also was it a great favor to give the Papacy and the charge of the Church
unto S. Peter, but this benefit paid a great pension out of it, for the many
cares and troubles adjoining unto it. It was also a benefit to apoint and
assign unto S. John the mother of God, for his mother, which thing was without
trouble or charge, and therefore greater was the honor done unto S. John.

It is also very clear, that he who is to he head of others, must have both
honey and gall, for he must (at one time) be affable and myld toward the lowly
and humble, and must show himself stern and rigorous to the proud and hauty: S
Peter had these conditions, he was not altogether mylde, for when occasion
served, he knew to fight with his sword, and to wound men: but S. John he was
peaceable and myld at all times. Moreover, S. John was the kinsman of CHRIST
after the flesh, and ^f he had given him the Papacy, it would have been thought
(and he should have given occasion to think so) that such a dignity might have
been bestowed upon their friends and kin. He gave it then to S. Peter with
whom he had no kindred. S. Thomas says also that our Lord gave the Papacy to
S. Peter for that he loved him more, John. 21.
then any other, as it is collected out of the same Gospel, and therefore it
was good reason he should be preferred unto that high dignity.

Christ having given that function unto S. Peter, and said to him obscurely,
that he should dye on the Cross, as he did; S. Peter, who loved S. John
dearly, asked our Lord. what should become of him, as if he had said: Shall
John also die on the Cross? the son of God answered him: what if it please
me, that John stay till I come to judge both the quick and the dead, to the (o
Peter) what imports it to know it? the same S. John also recounteth, that the
brethren talked amongst themselfs, that he disciple should not die, but they
marked not, that CHRIST, said not, that he should not die, but if it pleased
him, that he should live until his second coming, what had S. Peter to do to
know it.

This speech S. John made himself is not sufficient, but that some make a
doubt: for there the many that say, that he lives yet, and is to come and
preach against Antechrist in the company of Enoch and E^^as, whom God keeps
alive for that intent: and that S. John is to be martired with the^. Some
ag^ine be of a contrary opinion, and say, that the same S. John who treats of
the coming of Enoch and Elias in the Apocalipse, Cap. 11
says thy shall be two, so that if he should have him joined unto them, he would
not have concealed it.

And to the end it may appear which of these two opinions is of greatest
authority, I will in this place name them that be of those opinieus, this I:
say, if it be lawful to put this matter in opinion, for that considering the
words of S. John of himself against the other Apostles, that douted of his
death, it seems not secure to say, that the Apostle did not die.

They that affirm, that he dyed not, be Abbot Ioachin and George of Trapeunt a
grammaryan, who made a treatise of this matter, and Francis Mairon red this
treatise, and says also that S. John is yet alive. He was a franciscan friar,
and was the first that determinately says; May. 4. dis. 49.
that the mother of God was conceived without original sin: for thought that
Scotus, who was a friar mynour also, moved the question, yet he did not resolve
the matter clearly, though he seems to be of that opinion as Mairon is, who
affirms and determyneth it to be so. These three Authors I have seen, and I
know not, if any other be of that opinion: for that Theophilactus and
Euthimius, who be grave and ancient autors, (if you mark their words well) say
only; that in their time, it was the opinion of some that S. John was not dead,
and the same says Symeon Metaphraster also.

But other holy doctors be of a contrary oppinion S. Jerome says plainly in
many places, In mat. 20.
that S. John dyed; and the same in avouched by S. John Chrysostom: Tertullian
who wrote the martyrdom of S. John, H^. 26 in epis. ad h^. lib* de. In ^^. 21.
Lib. 3. c. 3. Lib. 1.35.4. d. 43 art. 3.
when he was put into the boiling oil, says; that then he was delivered from
death, but he afterward dyed, and the same says venerable Bede, Eusebius of
Cesarea in his ecclesiastical history; Polyerates. B. of Ephesus said that S.
John dyed Nicephorus Callistus not only says, that he dyed, but also that he
rose again incontinent, and that he went into heaven in body and soul, and S.
Thomas Aquinas is of that opinion also S. Jerome and venerable Bede seem to
infer, that S. John is in heaven both in body and soul: for they say, that he
dyed without grief, and that his body was not turned into dust. So that the
Authors who say S. John did not die, be not of any great account, and against
them is the opinion of many and ancient doctors. Judge then, whom we shall
believe. But in my opinion there is no dout, but that S. John did by.

After that JESUS CHRIST ascended into heaven, and after the coming of the
Holy Ghost, at the which S. John was present with the other Apostles, and
disciples, S. Luke recounteth in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. ^.
that S. Peter and S. John going into the temple to pray at the nynth hour,
healed a lame man, to the great wonder of all the people. Whereupon the two
holy Apostles were led into the consistory of the Iewews, where they constantly
professed the faith of JESUS CHRIST. They were also put in prison and beaten,
whereof they much rejoiced, and thought they had receued a singular benefit,
in that they had suffered persecution for the name of JESUS CHRIST. In this
consistory was present Gamaliel a disciple of CHRIST who labored to set the
Apostles free without punishment, but he could not effect it.

S. John remained in Jerusalem certain years, and that was (as some think)
as long as the B. Virgin lived after the Ascension of our Savior into heaven.
He had a great regard and care of her^ he stayed ordinarily in her company. He
said mass unto her: and she did often times receive the B. Sacrament at his
hand as S. Bonauenture says. The communication, that these two blessed
creatures had together, was questionles even ^eraphicall, being both of them so
inflamed with the love of God, as they were.

After the death of the B. Virgin, S. John went to preach in Asia, which
country fell unto his lotte, in the division of provinces. This glorious
Apostle preached with great zeal, and founded seven Churches in seven
principal Cities viz Ephesus, Smirna, Perg^mo, Thyatira, Philadelphia,
Sardis, and Laodicea. In all th^se places he ordained priests to administer the
sacraments to the Christians, that were many in every one of these Cities.

It befell that Domitian a most cruel tyrant was made Emperor of Rome, who
persecuted the Christians in all the lands subject to the Empire. In this
persecution S. John was taken in Ephesus, and brought to Rome, and was there
put into a vessel of boiling oil, In prol. in Ioh. De pres. cript.
(as Tertullian and S. Jerome say) out of the which he came without any hurt,
and then he was banished into an Isle called Pathmos, which is one of the
Islands called Cyclades, and is not far from Rhodes. There the Apostle stayed
a whole year, and on a Sunday he had a vision and a revelation, in the which
was discovered the successes of the Catholic Church, that should happen until
the day of the general judgment: and all that he wrote in a book, which he
called the Apocalipse or Revelation. Apo^. 2.


Whilst that S. John remained in that Island, he converted unto the faith of
CHRIST almost all the inhabitants thereof, and such was their love toward him,
that (as Symeon Metaphrases says.) When he was to depart from the back unto
Ephesus, they were like to dye with sorrow. Procrus Cap. 49.
He was released from the exile, after the death of Domitian and succession of
Nerua; who did by the advice of the Senate, reuoque and abrogate all the laws
his predecessor had made.

The Islanders understanding that S. John would depart from the, went all unto
him lamenting and wailing: some called him father, others Lord, and all said
with one voice he was their joy, and comfort. They besought him with great
affection, saying: Oh John, thou holy and admirable man, wherefore came thou
into this Island, if thou art to depart hence so soon? Why was the knowledge
of thee bestowed on us, if we were to loose thy company so soon? Whither will thou go to be beloved, as thou art of us? Where shall thou be obeyed, as thou
art here? Where shall thy words be so esteemed, since we listen to them, as if
they came from God, and do believe that God speaks in thee?

Then o father have pity on us thy children* behold that without thee, we are
left in danger and peril to loose our selves: Oh Emperor Domitian thou have
done to none such evil, as thou have done good unto us: thou have sent hither
the elect disciple of God, whom we have known, and received Baptism by his
means. Thou have done right well: but for that, to do good was far from thee,
of this good arises this present evil, that now we must loose him, whom
before thou made us to know

They all came to the holy Evangelist, and kneeled at his feere, took his
garments in their hands, kissed his hands with great humbleness and reverent
behavior, for that they thought to make him stay there, more by prayers and
entreaties, then by force or violence. They holy Evangelist saw the grief of
this Islanders for his departure, but he promising not to forget them, and to
send them some that should take charge of them, they remained somewhat pleased
and satisfied: And so he embarked and returned to Ephesus, where he was
received with great and incredible joy.

As the holy saint was to enter the City, they carried out to buryall a noble
Matrone called Drusiana who had loved S. John very dearly. He understanding
the same by many persons that followed the corpse lamenting and mourning, for
the loss of so virtuous a woman, that was charitable and had done many good
works of piety toward all kind of persons, and he remembering the same prayed
for her, and God at his request raised again the dead woman to life, and the
holy Apostle went to lodge at her house.

Then he began to govern that province again: and he understood that two young
men in a City had distributed much riches unto the poor, desiring to serve
God in poverty, (which life S. John had commended and praised much in his
sermons) but after perceiving themselves in great want of necessary things,
they repented of what they had done. S. John talked with them, and badde them
bring him, two great branches of trees from a Hill he named, and some stones,
and the young men did so. Then the Apostle by the power of God turned the
stones into most precious Jewels, and the branches into Gold, and said to the
two young men; Behold now, see you may be as rich, as you were before, but
consider well, that the riches of the world do puff men up, and do not
satisfy them. Think also that there is but one paradise, and he that will have
it in this life, and enjoy and posesse worldly riches: delights, and pleasures,
cannot have it also in the other world.

The Apostle did also in their sight raist to life, a young man, son to a
poor widow, who with many tears besought him, to have compassion on her, as
he had on Drusiana: The two young men having seen this strange miracles,
determined to continue still in poor life, and besought the Apostle, to pray
unto God for them, and gave him back his Jewels and Gold, and he threw it upon
the ground, and they returned to their former nature, and he prayed unto God
for them, and they led a holy life ever after.

S. John had a great controversy and variance with a priest of the Goddess
Dyana, called Aristodemus, who said, that the miracles, the Apostle did, were
not by the power of God, but of the devil, and if he would have him to believe
it was by the work of God, let him drink a cup of poison (that he would
temper for him) without any nocument or hurt to his life, or health. The
malicious villain thought by this means, to take away the Apostles life, and
to repair the loss his false gods sustained thereby S. John accepted of the
match, and took the impoysonned cup in his hand, and made thereon the sign of
the Cross, and drunk it of, without receuing any hurt.

Some Authors say, for this cause, S. John is painted with a cup in his hand,
out of which comes a serpent, and he seems to bless it, which signifies,
that he destroyed the force of the venime. Others say, this is not the cause,
but that he is painted so, upon the words, CHRIST said to him, when his mother
requested, that he and his brother might have the next place unto him, the one
on the right hand, and the other on the left; and the words of CHRIST were
these: Can you drink the cup, which I must drink? and they answered; I: and
our Savior replied: I say unto you in verity, that you shall drink my cup;
This cup (as some say) is signified by the cup, which is painted in the
hand of S. John. and it may be, it is painted there for both the causes.

S. Clement of Alexandria, S. John Chrysostom and other Authors recount also a
story which befell between S. John and a disciple of his, being a beautiful
young man. And it was this: S. John kept the young man very strait, and would
have brought him to strict and a mortified life: And having on a time occasion
to visit one of his Churches commended him unto the care and government of a
Bishop, desiring him to have good regard of him: In the absence of S. John, the
young man began by a little and little to fall unto lewdnes: and at the last,
to be a Captain of robbers and murderers by the high way: S. John being
returned, and understanding what was become of the young man, was aggrieued for
the same, and went unto the desert, where the young man kept and haunted: in
fine, he met him. He at the sight of the Apostle, began to fly, and S. John
followed him, saying: My son, why do thou fly? behold I am weary, and
even tired in coming to seek thee in this desert, and uninhabited place: do
not thou perceive, that it is evil done of thee a young man, to fly from me
an old man? If thou do it for fear of the account, thou have to render unto
God for thy sins, I offer my self to answer for thee, at the day of
judgment. The heart of the young man relented at the words of S. John, and at
the tears he saw to fall on his white beard; so he fell at his feere,
bewayling his sins. S. John took him home, and the young man amended his
life and served God, with great fervor after that time.

Sometime this servant of God showed indignation against them, whom he knew,
would not amend their faults. S. Policarpe (his disciple) writes of him, that
being one time in a bayn, Cerinthus the heretic came in, and then he made have
to get out, saying with indignation; Let us get hence quickly, lest the filthy
and corrupt water of Cerinthus infect us, meaning by the water, the false
doctrine of the heretic.

His disciples importunated him to write that which he preached, that they
might have it in continual remembrance: The Apostle condiscended to their
request, and commanded a general fast and continual prayers to be kept by
all the people: Then went the upon a mountain, and took only with him his
disciple Procurus: Metaphrases says, they heard thunders and thunderclaps with
whirlewinds, which put Procurus in great fear and dread: but these tempests
being aleyed: S. John began to say: In principio erat verbum, and so Procurns
wrote and continued the Gospel after his enditing, wherein he labors to
destroy the error of the heretics called Ebionits, who held that CHRIST was
not God, and the principal intent of S. John was to show and prove that CHRIST
is true God. And because he flew so high, the figure of an Eagle which is a
foul that soareth aloft is attributed unto him.

The holy Evangelist was now far in years, and when he talked with his
disciples, he had always in his mouth these words? My sons, love one
another: and they said; Master, let us hear some other words, for we have
heard this very often; And he answered them: I say this thing unto you, for
that this is sufficient, and he that does this, does all.

Having then had revelation of his death, being 99. years ald, he assembled
all his disciples, and led them upon a high mountain, where a Church stood: In
that place he caused his sepulcher to be opened, and stripped himself of part
of his cloths and put off his shoes, and so alive he went into his sepulcher,
(his disciples making great lamentation) and then there came from heaven a
clear brightness upon that place, enuironing the body and the holy place; And
they that were present remained in a trance, as it seemed, for great dread,
and being come to themselves, they saw S. John no more, but the grave covered
with earth, which seemed to boil up a precious liquor that cured many
infirmities.

This was the passage of S. John, and as S. Jerome and venerable Bede affirm,
his death was without any grief, and his body never felt corruption. Of which
words, S. Thomas, Nicephorus, Callistus, and many other Authors take occasion
to say; that S. John was raised again, and ascended into heaven, both in body
and soul, where he has an eminent place, since the titles he had in the world
were so honorable. He had the title of Virgin, Apostle, of Evangelist and of
martyr, at lest in will and desire, yea S Augustine, S. John Chrysostom, and
Ruffinus call him martyr, for when he was put into the vessel of oil, he
should have dyed, if God had not myraculously delivered him: and his will was
always prompt and ready to dye for the love of JESUS CHRIST.

Beside the said titles, he had another rare and singular name of the Disciple
beloved of CHRIST, of his brother, and sons of the same mother, by the will
and appointment of the same God.

This glorious Apostle did spend 70. years in preaching and converting of
souls, all which time he continued busy in the service of God, always loving
him, and always persuading others to serve him.

But all this, which we have said, is but little to equalize the great glory,
that he enjoys in heaven: although that which he has, and what place he
possesses there God and he best knows.

Let it suffice us, to recommend us to him by taking him to our Advocate, and
imitating his life, as much as lies in us: And so aided by him, we may be
rewarded by God, and see S. John in heaven, yea God himself, enjoying him in
his glory for ever. Amen.

The Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of S. John Evangelist on the. 27.
day of December: And his death was in the year of our Lord. 100. or there
about, in the time of. Traian the Emperor.

The feast of the holy Innocents.
THERE is mention made in the book of Kings of a most cruel woman, 4. Lib.
Cap: 11.
called Athalia, who was the mother of k^^g Ochozias. This woman (her son
being dead) upon ambition and desire to reign, got into her hands the
children, which were of the blood royal, and put them all to death. One only
escaped he^ hands, who was called Ioas. This child was saved by the care, and
diligence of the nurse that brought him up, and of Ioiada the high priest, who
hid him, so that Athalia could not get him into her possession and power, and
in process of time Ioas was king of Israel.

This cr^ell Arhalia, was a figure of Herod, who holding the kingdom of
Israel by violence, for that he was a forrainer, and of a strange country; to
assure himself of that kingdom, he killed many innocent children, as Athalia
had done before; out of whose hands escaped Ioas, by the industry of his
nurse, and of Ioiada, which kept him secret.

So JESUS CHRIST figured in Ioas, fled from Herod, by the care and industry of
his most B. mother, and of S. Joseph, who delivered and kept him free out of
Herod's fury, when they carried him into Egypt. Ioas was afterward king of
Israel; JESUS CHRIST was, and is King of heaven and earth, and the universal
redeemer of all mankind. The history of these holy Innocent infants, was
written by S. Matthew the Evangelist in this manner.

AFTER the birth of the son of God into the world, Luke 2.
and after his circumcision on the eight day. After he had been visited, and
adored by the three kings, on the thirteen day, and after he had been
presented on the 40. day in the Temple of Jerusalem. S. Joseph and the B.
virgin, with their little child, being returned unto Nasareth; the Evangelist S.
Matthew says: that an Angel of our Lord appeared to S. Joseph in his sleep,
and said unto him. Arise, and take the child with his mother, Mat. 2. v. 13.
and fly into Egypt, and stay there until I bring thee word, for Herod will
seek to kill the child. God has great care of his friends, unto whom he
shows the remedy, before the hurt.

God (being omnipotent) was able, to have made Joseph, and the virgin, with the
little child, to have remained saffe in Nasareth by miracle; but he does not
always miracles, where provision may be made by man's help. This you may
perceive in Abraham, who feared to be murthred in Egypt, for his wives sake,
who was very beautiful (for the Egiptians if they had known she had been his
wife, would have killed him, and taken her away) bad her say, that she was
not his wife, but his sister. He might well say she was his sister, for the
near kindred that was between them. The holy man Joseph did not stay long to
execute the commandment of God, but gave notice of his revelation unto the
blessed virgin, and without stay, they traveled with their infant, into
Egypt, and there they stayed in secret manner, unto the time of Herodes death.

The old Adam broke the commandment of God, Gen: 3.
and fled from him, but the new Adam to fulfill the commandment of God, went
to hyde himself, and lay hid as a stranger, for certain years in Egypt. This
was done for the consolation of the saints, that they should not wonder, if
they were forced sometimes to fly, and if at any time they lie hidden or
secret, it is no great matter, since they be in a strange land. But if they
will be in all places happy, and secure, let them have the child JESUS in
their company, though it be in the land of Egypt, as Joseph and Mary had, who
were well entertained, and much made of by that barbarous nation, for the child
JESUS sake, who they had with them.

A delinquent, or offender, flies often unto the Church for succor; and some
times he will take a little child if he can, and get with him upon some steeple,
or tower. The people will shoot no harquebuze or arrow at him, least they might
kill the child, but they will rather give him victuals to eat, least the
inocent child, should dye for hunger. So also, if a just man seeing himself
persecuted, take JESUS CHRIST which is the child with him in this life he
shall be secure and saffe; but if he stay to take him in the other life, then he
shall be potent and strong, and then it will little help, to seek to take him up;
as it is to small purpose, for them which be in hell, to pray unto God. CHRIST
in this life may be taken up as a little child, and he that shall have him in
his company, may be secure and assured, to have means, and remedies, to be
delivered out of all dangers and perrills, that can come unto any man, Lib 16.
Cap: 7.
though all the men on earth and devils in hell make war against him.

Josephus says in his book of Antiquities, that Herod had been busied with
controversies, that he had against his own sons, for the succession of his
kingdom; and had been enforced to go to Rome, to defend his allegations before
the Emperor Caesar Augustus. And when he had ended that varyance, he began
another, with the children of the citizens and inhabitants, of the territory
of Bethleem. Herod called then to his remembrance the three kings, which came
to seek the newborn king of the Jews. If they had said he had been in a
stable, and laid upon a little hay, it might be, he would not have regarded it;
but the wisemen told him, that they sought the king of the Jews, who was
lately borne. Herod kept that kingdom by tyrany and force, not coming to it
by kindred or blood, for he was a stranger borne; yet he had received the
religion of the Jews, and observed their law.

He knew that people looked for the Messiah and king, which should set them at
liberty, and deliver them from all opression, which he understood temporally.
when he heard the three wise men say, that this king was borne, he grew into a
great suspicion, and sought by all means to know of the law, where this king
should be borne; and he being told by them, that he should be borne in
Bethleem, he sent the kings thither, apointing them to return unto Jerusalem.
and to certify him, where the new king was to be found, because he also, would
go to adore him. The cursed wretch said this in deceit, because he would have
murdered him. The malice of man cannot prevail against the wisdom of God,
for he was so blinded, that he had not the reason to send a messenger of his
own with them, to certify him of their doings. It happened after, that the
kings warned by God, returned unto their own countries by another way.

Herod seeing that the kings had mocked him, and dou^ing utterly to loose his
kingdom, he called all his captains and men of war, and (as Basil Bishop
of Seleucia says, who is alleged by Simeon Metaphrastes) he spoke to them in
this manner: I have oftentimes had experience, (my loving servants and friends)
of your courage, and valiant hearts, in the affairs, which have happened in my
kingdom, though they have been many, and of great difficulty; in which you
have not refused to adventure your lives in my service. At this time is fallen
out a most important business, unto which, if I give not remedy; I shall
(remediles) loose this my kingdom, and you your king; who has always showed
you many favors, and graced you, and studieth still, to do you many more. Now
it shall appear if you be as desirous to serve me; and if you account your
selves valiant soldiers, now is the time to show your valor; for even in mine
own house is a great mischief ready to oppress me.

Know then, that my royal estate is secretly threatened, yea, the utter
subversion, and overthrow thereof. There is no open war proclaimed, or made
against me: neither am I assailed, by any public enemy; but a child, who is
not yet two years old, threateneth to deprive me of my crown, and of the
scepter of the kingdom of Israel. He is borne in the city of Bethleem, and
there he remains at this present time; and of this child have the prophets
said, that he shall be king of Israel, and that he shall set my crown on his
head, and shall take the scepter of the kingdom out of my hand. I fear the
prophets, because I have not seen their words fullfilled yet. Do not you
remember the three kings that came from the East who plainly reported, that
this king was borne, and that they came to worship him, and to give him
obedience.

If these kings so far distant stood in awe of him, much more cause have I to
fear, that am so near unto him. I appointed these kings, that they should
give me notice when they found him, because, I would have gone to see him; and
then I would have been freed from this danger. But they (I know not for what
cause) have mocked me, and be returned into their countries, and kingdoms by
another way, and have given me no notice. I fear, I doubt, I faint, and
consume with sorrow, when I study on the success of this business. I have no
remedy, and I know not unto whom to resort, but unto you.

My will therefore is this: I would have you go unto Bethleem, Math. 2. v. 16.
and into all the territory thereof, and the country thereabout, and with
your naked weapons, rushe into the houses, pardon the old men, touch not the
young men, spare the women, only kill all the children, all of them, from two
years old, unto a day old. My will is, that you kill them all, spare none of
them, for if one of them remain alive, that same one shall deprive me of my
kingdom. Take no regard, nor pity not the tea^es of the mothers; yea; in
their arms, I would have you search our mine enemies. And if any woman will
defend her child, kill her also with him. Fear not to be accused for this
fact, for it is by my command that you do it. Go into the city like Lions,
search it through diligently, least any remain hidden, and perchance it may
be that child, that the kings came to adore.

The captains understanding the kings mind, and intention, gathered all the
army, recyting unto them the same reasons, that the king had alleged before.
They all accorded and agreed to perform this mischeiuous act, and so to
Bethleem they went, and he seemed the best and worthiest fellow, that
traveled thither with most speed. So coming to Bethleem, they began the
massacre; the cruel butchers slaughtering the quiet lambs. All the houses
were repleat with the outcries of the afflicted mothers, the ways streamed
with rivers of blood, and the streets were filled with bodies of the hoie
Innocents, Herod desired to slay JESUS CHRIST in the person of every one of
them; and so every of them dyed for CHRIST, who being in Egypt, had yet
compassion on them, seeing they dyed for his, sake.

Truly Herod did unto them herein more good then harm, and more proffit, then
damage, since they be all saved. If these children had not been put to death at
that age, and by such occasion, it might have come to pass, that many of them
might have been damned. But JESUS CHRIST our blessed savior, and of all
mankind, would not, that nay of them that were borne in that province, and at
the time that he was borne, should be condemned. The slaughter, and butcherie
continewed, the ways were all stained with blood, and the number of dead
bodies increased, but the rage, and cruel fury of these barbarous ruffians,
was no whit diminished. The most secret rooms could not defend the holy
infants from the slaughter, neither was the Temple, where God was honored, a
sufficient refuge, or safftie for their lives In that their Temple, they
assembled to make their prayers, but they offered no sacrifice therein, for that
was to be done only in the Temple of Jerusalem.

They began now to make sactifices in the Temple of Bethleem, not of brute
beasts, but of innocent children. Every thing was stained with blood: graves,
and di^ches were filled with children, and their dead bodies were lying in
every place. And if perhaps any mother did hide her son from the soldiers,
the child manifested himself, seeming with his crying to call those butchers to
kill him, because he would not be deprived of so happy, and blessed death.
Some mothers that were more bold, thrust forward on the executioners, desirous
rather to receive the blow themselves, then it should light on their children;
but his was to no purpose, for themselves were wounded, and their children
slain.

Some other mothers held them so hard in their arms, that they could not get
them from them; then would they cut and divide them in the middle, so that one
part of the child remained in the hands of the mother, and the other in hand of
the soldier. Some women ran to and froe, with their children in their arms,
to get out of the place where the slaughter was, and stumbling on the dead
bodies, killed their own children themselves.

Some other turning unto these bloody fellows, said unto them: How is it that
you become so senceles, and void of pity? Have none of you a mother? have you
not wives and children? Do none of you know how great the love of parents is
toward their children? How savage and beastly is this your cruelltie? If in
this city has been com^mitted any offense, these who^ you kill, have not
done it. Slaievs that deserve death, the rather, for that we have lived in
company with such men as you be, and brought the^ children. The soldiers
hearing these words, were moved unto compassion and shed tears, but
remembering the commandment of king Herod, they became more fierce, and
enraged then before, killing a fresh the children in their mothers arms.

S. Augustine who also wrote hereof, faith in a sermon: when our Lord was
borne, ser: de sanct: and. 1. huius fest:
there was heard many plaints, not in heaven, but in earth. The Angels in
heaven rejoiced, and the mothers which were in earth lamented. God was borne a
little child, and his will was: that unto him should be offered a sacrifice of
children. He that was to be sacrificed like a lamb, on the Altar of the
Cross, would have the Innocent children sacrificed unto him. It was a
lamentable spectacle, to see soldiers, with naked swords in their hands, to
kill so many little infants, and not to know the cause, seeing none of them could
committ such an offense, as might merit so untimely a death. It was evident
therefore, that envy was the only cause.

Their poor mothers tore their hair, stroke their breasts, and made pitiful
outcries, their eyes running like fountains of water. The more they labored
to hyde their little infants, the sooner they were discovered; they not having
the skill to hold their peace, for they had not learned to fear such butcherly
ruffians. The mother and the soldier strugled together, the one to deliver her
son, the other to take him away. The mother said: why will you pull from me,
him that was borne of me? Ah my pretty tender infant, I have not brought thee
so carefully up, that thou should be thus rudely handled. If any fault or
offense has been committed, I have done it; let this babe live, and kill me.
Others said: If you look for one alone, why murder you so many? Oh come now
Savior of the world, let these soldiers see thee, without any peril ar
danger unto thee, since the power to live and dye, is at thy pleasure; so shall
thou deliver us from this great sorrow; and our children from death.

S. Gregory Nissen says: It was pitiful, to see the mothers of the
inocents, how they embraced their little infants, and bathed them in tears,
awaiting to have them shortly bathed in their own blood. The cruel edict of
Herod having been brought to Bethleem and the cruel soldiers being come, they
assailed the little infants so furiosly, that they wounded the mothers also, and
mingled the blood of the mother, and the infant together. Some mothers saw the
sword to come, and pierce the body of her infant, as she gave it suck, so that
at one time, the mother gave milk unto the child, and the child restored as much
blood unto the mother.

There was one sorrowful mother, that had two sons at one birth. She saw the
sword drawn against them both, and she knew not which to defend first from the
blow, she looked on the one, and held it fast to her breast, and left the other
further from her. Then seeing the blow come, she pulled it close to her, and
thrust out the other. The poor distressed mother, had not much time to
deliberate, which of their lives she should longest save. for no sooner was the
one wounded to death; but the sword was thrust quite through the other. and
this was the case of many woeful mothers, that had two children in their arms.

It happened also in this massacre, that two butcherly villains came unto a
mother, that had two sons; they severed themselves to kill them, and withal
severed the heart of the afflicted mother. The one infant wailed, and the other
cried also. The woeful mother knew not which to answer first, with the like
music. Lastly, she could but lament, and sodeinlie she saw them dead at her
feet.

S. Basil Bishop of Seleucia (cited before) says: that in all the city of
Bethleem, nothing could be heard, for the confused noise, which endured as long
as the slaughter of the innocents continewed; because the Infants that were
killed cried pitifully, the elder brothers and sisters lamented, and so did
the fathers; but the outcries of the mothers exceeded all the rest. The oldmen
said: that there was never committed such a cruelltie in any place, no not in a
long sustained war; for though all were put to the sword, yet infants were
spared.

Complaints were generally made, yea, of the sun it self, that stayed so
long, to keep back the darkness of the night; whereby the fury of these enraged
people might cease. When these ruffians found no more infants in the city to
murder, they departed into the villages thereabout, to do as they had done in
Bethleem. Then the lamentable outcries of the woeful mothers was renewed, when
they went to seek out the bodies of their dead infants. Some, that found them
cut in pieces, laid their severed members together; using pitiful, and
compassionat complaints.

Some kneeling down to their slaughtered pretty babe, said unto him: A wake
now my son, thou have slept enough; shake of this heavy drowsines, which the
cruelltie of Herod has caused. Come, come, arise my sweet babe, take thy
mothers breast, which thou have so often tasted; Ah will thou not speak? do
thou slumber still? Alas, alas, too long lasts this heavy sleep, that thus
oppresses thee. would to God it were possible for thee to enter again into my
womb, that thy pretty members thus mangled, might be reioyned, and return
unto life. These and such like words, said the mothers of the Innocents.

When Herod understood that his commandment was performed, he made show of
great joy, and adorned himself with a crown of victory, as if he triumphed
over some dangerous enemy. Neither did the cruel tyrant care, though his own
child (that was nursed in a place near Bethleem) was murdered among the
residue.

Macrobius reports: Lib: 2. Satur. Cap: 4.
that this came unto the ear of Octauius Augustus, and that he said: that it
were better to be a hog in the house of Herod, then his son. By which
speech he meant, that Herod being a Jew, the hog had been secure, for he would
not have killed it, nor have eaten thereof, but his son was not so safe, for
he was killed amongst the other children. Herod could not have devised a better
means then this, to diuulge, and spread abroad, the birth of CHRIST. For
hereby it came to the knowledge of all, that a child was borne, who was a king,
and had been adored of the kings, and of whom he was afeard, that his kingdom
should be taken from him. But he stayed not so long, for before CHRIST was of
age, Herod was deprived of his kingdom, by loosing of his life, killing
himself with those hands, with which he had persecuted our Savior CHRIST.

It is often seen, that God does punish, and chastise men, by the same thing,
and means, wherewith they taken occasion, and whereby they offend him Saul
desired to kill David with his own hands, 1. Reg: 31. Mat. 27.
and with the same he killed himself. Judas sinned by selling JESUS CHRIST, and
the wretch hanged himself with his own hands. Some thinck that the number of
the slain children, was the same, which S. John names in the Apocalipse, Cap:
14. v. 1.
when he says: that 144000. follow the lamb; but this is not certain. It
seems rather a thing impossible, that in the town, and territory of
Bethleem, should be so many children, of two years old and downwards.

The Evangelist S. Matthew says: that the^ was fullfilled the words of the
prophet Jeremy: A loud voice was heard, weeping and lamentation, Math: 2. v.
18.
Rachell weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not. In this place, Bethleem is called Rachell, because the fair Rachell,
who was wife to the patriarch Jacob, was buried near to the city of
Bethleem. The holy Innocents were the first martyrs that dyed for CHRIST; and
he being come into the world, offered them to his eternal father, as the first
fruits of the garden of his Church. He did them also an especial favor, for
that they were all saved.

Their patents also had no cause to be aggrieued: for if they were deprived of
their lives (which he had before given unto them) for his sake, we may also
believe; that he bestowed others on them, in their place; Job: 42.
as it happened to Job, who being deprived of seven sons, and two daughters;
God gave unto him as many more, when he returned unto his former prosperity.
Lastly, we may know as by the event hereof, that when the people of Israel
departed from Egypt, one may well say: that God departed out of that country,
in the company of his people; and that the Egiptians remained in lamentation.
For one, and the last of the plagues that he sent upon them was: when he slew
all their first borne. So also, when JESUS CHRIST departed from Bethleem, the
Bethleemits remained also in lamentation. For a sure thing it is, that in the
place, from whence God departs, there remains nothing but sorrow, and
wayling.

Let us pray unto his divine majesty, that he always remain in our
compaine; that we may always be glad and joyful in him; and that our joy may
be true and perfect; enjoying it in this world by grace, and after in heaven by
glory. Amen.

The Catholic Church celebrateth the feast of the holy Innocents, on the 28.
of December, and their Martyrdom was in the time of Octauian Augustus, in the
beginning of the second year of CHRIST according to Ioannes Lucidus.

The life of S. Thomas Arche Bishop of Canterbury and Martyr.
THE life of this holy Prelat and famous martyr, collected out of four
Historiographers of his time, Wilhelmus Cantuariensis, Ioannes Carnotensis or
Sarisbe^ens. Alanus Abbot of Teukesbyrie, Herbert of Hos^ham clerk, Petrus
Blessensis, Archedeacon of Bathe, and many epistles of Popes, kings, and
Bisshops, is in this manner.

SAINT Thomas, usually called of Canterbury, B. and martyr, was borne in
London, the head city, and royal seat of great Britanie. His father was one
Gilbert surnamed Becket, a man inferioure to none of his citizens for kindred
and riches; and superioure to most, for a singular good carriage, and holy
conversation. This Gilbert being in the flower of his youth, voluntariely
received the holy cross, an ensign of such as enrolled their names to serve
against Infidells, and travailed into the holy land: where, as he returned
from visiting those sacred places of Jerusalem, he, together with others, was
taken by his enemies, that lay in ambush; and made prisoner to an Admiral, a
Prince of great account amonghst the Infidells. There he remained in
captivity, the space of one year and a half; wherein, the only daughter of
the aforesaid Admiral was so won with the carriage, and excellent good
parts and qualities of Gilbert, with his discreet and weighty reasoning of
matters that concerned Christian Religion, and also with his noble and stout
resolution to dye for Gods honor, that (he afterward by flight having
obtained his liberty) she, wounded with his love and led with desire of being
a Christian, forsook all her wealth, abandoned her fathers house and her
country, and followed him secretly into England. There being first well
instructed in Christian religion and baptized in the Church of S. Paul by the
Bishop of London with great solemnity, in the presence of six Prelates, she
was married to Gilbert: all, but especially the Bishop of Cicester wondering at
this heavenly vocation, and admirable providence of God; and prophesying that
her womb should bear a child, whose sanctity and holy labors would make
Gods Church renowned and glorious. Not long after was Thomas borne, and
brought up by his virtuous mother in all good manners and excercises. But he
learned of her especially the fear and love of allmighty God, with a great
devotion to his B. virgen mother Marie; next after Christ reposing in her his
greatest confidence, and making her Patron and Protectriss of all the ways and
steps of his life. He was first brought up in a religious house of Merton;
after was instructed in liberal sciences; then sent to study in the
university of Paris: from whence returninge home, he discharged with honor
and great good satisfaction some public offices of the city of London. And
having now for the space of three years attended unto temporal affairs, and
followed courte-businesses; showing himself therein quick, discreet, and
well advised; and thereby attained great creditt, and learned much prudence
and experience: having also been carried with affection to youthful sportes of
hawking and hunting; yett ever without staining or blemishing his good name
with any vice or imperfection; led by the instinct of the holy Ghost, more
then by any friends persuasion, he retired and weaned himself from secular
affairs; and betook himself to Theobald Arche B. of Canterbury, where his
industry, diligence, and well advised managinge of matters won him a chief
place and great reputation amongst the Arche B^. most familiar and trusty
friends. After his admittance into the company of Theobalds counseloures and
chiefest followers, he studied at Bolognia and at Al^isiodorum: was greatly
employed in Church affairs of greatest importance: oftentimes sent, for
decision of weighty controversies to Rome; from whence he evermore returned
with good dispatche in his business: lastly he was made Archedeacon of
Canterbury, a place in those days of highest degree in the English clergy,
next unto Lord Abbots and Bissh.

Much about that time Henry duke of Aquitaine and Normandy succeeded king
Stephen in the crown of England. Theobald fearing least the kings good nature
might be abused by some of his crafty counselours; and by such as under the
cloak and pretense of public authority thirsted after the Churches revenues,
and the commons spoil, drawn to some over sharp course and rough proceeding:
desirous also, that the bond of love and amity might increase between the
Prince and his Prelates, and the kings gracious favor shine upon his clergy,
a thing most necessary, for the good and well fare of all the kingdom: and
well assured of his Archeadeacons sufficiency to do all faithful service to
the king, and good offices to all manner of people: brought him to the court,
and wrought him into the favor of his Majesty; from whom he received the
office of high Chanceloure of England. It might seem in outward show and
appearance, that Thomas had now forgotten quite, that ever he was an
Archedeacon. His retinue was great; his followers men of good account; his
housekeeping such as might compare with, if not surpass, the greatest Earls
of the kingdom; his stuff very costly and full of bravery, so far forth
as bridles of beaten silver; his principal care to retain his Princes
favor, and win all men's good will; which care did also compel him
sometimes to show himself plyant to this Maty in his fare, his discourse, in
hauking in huntinge and sporting, as well as in his serious affairs: A table,
that daily and Honorably entertained Barons and Earls: a house, that
wellcomed all needy and afflicted persons: a hand, that bountifully bestowed
large gyfts in howsehold stuff, apparail, provision, plate and coin. Finally
fortune did seem to have made him her darling; and all things so flowed
according to his wish and his desire, that one would have Judged him, to have
laid clean aside the very thought of a clergy man. But this was only the
outside of Thomas: for inwardly, he was humble and abject in his own eyes:
much addicted to prayer and devotion: a great tamer and curber of his own
body; in so much, that many times he would chastize himself with a cruel
discipline, lashing himself upon the bare back* his zeal was great for the
good of the church, and relief and succoure of the commons; undergoing for
this cause many encounters and afflictions; many calumniations, slanders,
and snares, armed to entrap him, by such as in court know not how to rise but
by others ruins. Nay sometimes, as far as Majesty and duty would permit
it, he gently, and with great respect and reverence, withstoode even his
Prince; who liked therein his constancy, and took it in good part, and not as
proceeding of any disloyalty. for why? he did find him most faithful in all
his proceedings: advised and discreet in counsel: provident and un appalled
in doubtful business: and in adversity valiant and magnanimous: in purity
of mind, and chastity of body evermore unspotted and undefiled: many great
trialls having bin made to prove his honesty. And, for most of that which we
have rehearsed, let this one thing serve as a sufficient witness. There was
in Stafforde a beautiful young woeman, whom the Prince greatly favored. She,
as often as the Chanceloure came that way, did send him many tokens and
favors. Her guardian, misdoubting that all this kindness proceeded from some
lewd intention; and, seeing the young, fresh, beautiful years of Thomas, and
the neerenesse of their lodginges did increase his suspicion, he needs would
be acertained thereof. In the dead of the night, by a secret way, and with a
close lantern, in he goes to his chamber; and findinge his bed with our any
print of his body or once being touched, was strongly confirmed in his
suspicion: but lifting up his lantern, and looking some what further, he
found, that after long kneeling upon his bare knees in prayer, he was fallen
fast a sleep upon the ground, in a very incomodious manner. whereupon
altering his opinion, he verily deemed him a saint, whom before he suspected
to be dishonest.

Not only in this of Chancelour, but also in many other offices Thomas did the
king good service: for, being made tutour to the young Prince Henry, his care
was great to bring him up with the sons of many Lords of the court, in
learning and civility, and all manner of courtly and Princely knowledge and
behavior. Moreover he served the kings Majesty in his wars of France with
a choice band of seven hundred souldioures of his own family, besides many
others, with whom alone after the kings departure, he obtained a worthy
victory. yea another time, he himself in person unhorsed a frencheman called
Enguerranus de Creya, a most hardy soldier, and most renouned in all deeds
of arms and chivalry. And with his good example he so encouraged all his
followers, that in all the kings army the Cha^cellours soldiers were
esteemed the very flower and the valiantest. These and many other virtues
made him honored eue^ amongst his foes, the Peers and Prince of France; and
greatly beloved amongst his friends. Especially the kings Maty of England
sometimes after hunting, sometime after riding, would, upon a soddaine and
without any biddinge, come the Chancelours house when they were at dinner, and
somewhiles dine with him, other whiles sit by him to see the order, and hear
the discourse which was at his table; whereof many things were spoken with
admiration.

It fell our the Theobald Arche B. of Canterbury dyed; and news there of came
beyond sea to the king: who weighing well the great sufficiency of his
Chance^lour, whom even then he had in his company, after some deliberation
turninge about, commanded him to prepare himself to go on a journey: and
having now received his instructions, concerning many other affairs; and
coming to take leave of his Maty, and go forward on his journey; Nay soft,
quoth the king, you know not fully yet what you must go about: My pleasure
is to have you Arche B. of Canterbury. The Chancelour first starting, and
afterward smiling upon the king, and showing him his riding suite, full unfit
and uncomely for such a calling, said: Oh! and lo here how religious and how
sanctlike a man your Maty will place in so holy a seat, and in the co^uent of
so many blessed Mo^ckes! If ever I have done your Maty any service, let me
crave and obtain this as a reward, that this charge be not imposed upon me.
For I certainly know, that if I undergo it, you will quickly with draw your
favor from me, and turn it into deadly hatred. envious people will never be
wanting, who upon some exactio^s of your Maty in Ecclesiastical affairs, and
some resistance, which I must of duty and necessity make, as Primate of
England, will wholly alienate your royal heart and affection from me, and
extinguishing all the former grace, enkindle such flames of enemitie, as never
will be any more alayed.

These words of the Chanceloure, so little tasting of Ambition, so plainly
disclosing a constant resolution, did more enkindle the kings desire.
Wherefore joining others in his company to effect his purpose, he called to
the chiefest of the^ Richard Lucie commanding him to effect as diligently the
promotion of the Chanceloure to the sea of Canterbury, as he would the
succession to the crown of his son Prince Henry, in case that the king
himself were deceased. To the same effect he like wise spoke to Henricus
Pisanus Cardinal, and legate of the Pope; who at last brought Thomas to accept
that dignity. He was chosen at London at westminster by the whole consent of
all the Bishs. of the Realm, only London exepted, and by the voice of
Canterbury monks; and after was presented unto prince Henry. who, by the
authority of his Father, committed unto him for this effect, freed the
Chanceloure from all former debts, accounts, and obligations of court or
exchequer, and in his full liberty restored him unto his clergy, who
received him with great joy and spiritual canticles. After his election at
London he went to Canterbury; where in white sonday-weeke he was made priest
upon the satterday (hitherto he was but Deacon) and consecrated Bishop upon
Trinity sundaye* Prince Henry heir apparent of the crown, fourteen Bishops,
and many other great Peers of the realm being present at the solemnity.
Streightwayes after, Alexander 3. Pope of Rome did send him the Palle: which he
received with unaccustomed devotion, going barefoote, and lying prostrate on
the ground.

Having now received that sacred unction, he was changed into an other man. He
gave not himself to a vain, loose, ftately, wide and free manner of living,
as many accustom after dignities obtained. but rather observed greater
abstinence; watched more; prayed more; preached often unto his flock; judged,
he never could rule well others, if first he did nor rule and master himself.
His outward apparail was of a Bishop; under, a friars weed; next to his
skin, a course roughe he^re cloth, like an Hermit. Having done his office
straight after the cocke-crowing, he served thirteen poor men at the table,
waiting on them in person, washinge also their feet, not only with water,
but with his own tears, craving most earnestly their prayers, and giving
each of them four pence in money: in the morning, very early, twelve more
were served by the Arche Bs. almoner; and about nine of the clock a hundred
poor men called Prebens, on whom two monks of the convent attended. The
Bishop, having discharged his part, and reposed a little to refresh his
senses, bestowed all the time he could steal from his rest, without great
disparagement of his health, in prayinge, weeping, and holy meditation. When
he was to celebrate the most dreadful oblation, then he did seem to pour out
his heart with tears and sighs and sobbes, that cames as often as his words.
He was somewhat speedy in discharginge this office, fearinge distractions;
yett all ways attent, and recollected, without vain addinge of more then the
church appointed; performing the communion with such devotion and tears, as
if he did visibly behold the wounds of our savior JESUS CHRIST.

Not only his own, but also the hands of all his household were so free from
receiving bribes, that an Abbot coming to his court with important business,
and desiring to win his officers good will with gold, and not findinge any
that would receive it, he himself notwithstanding receiving great satisfaction
in his suite, cried out at his departure: I have found a court more golden,
then ever I could have believed or imagined: for not only it walks not after
gold, but also scorneth, despises, and flies from gold. Semblable to these
were all his other virtues: so upright a Judge, that no might nor means could
with-drawe him right: so good a father to the poor, that none departed from
him without relief: so bountiful in giuinge alms, that he twice doubled the
usual allowance given to the poor by all his Predecessoures: so zealous a
prelate that no vice, especially no schism or error could take root with in
his Jurisdiction: so addicted to learning that his conversation at table and
upon the way, was allway of learning: so provident in giving orders, that he
never impossed his hands upon any, without mature and diligent examine,
whither he had sufficiency enough in means, in learning, and virtue: least
any of these three being wanting, priesthood should turn into scandal,
derision, and beggerie: so great a favorer and Patron of learned men; that
his most especially be friended followers were the most especial learned men
of those days: of English men Ioannes Salesberiensis, afterward B. of
Carnotum; Robert Foliot, afterward B. of Hereford: William Glauile, aftewards
B. of Rochester; Gerard Maid, afterward B. of Couentrie: of stranger, Hughe
Dantinant a Norman Archedeacon of Oxeford, afterwars B. of Couentrie; Herbert
of Woscham, afterward Cardinal of Rome, and Arche B. of Beneuentum, Humbert
of Lumbardie, afterward Arche B. of Milan his native country, and lastly Pope
of Rome by name of Vrbanus tertius. these were his followers of greatest name,
besides many others of a lower rank in dignity, though inferioure to none in
learning and virtue.

Finally his watching in meditation, his tears in praying, his purity of
life, his modesty in speech, his vprighteousnes in his works, his truth in
his word, his compassion of the poor, and care of the commons good and
welfare did spread his fame so wide, that it made the Kings Majesty heartily
to rejoice for the good election he made of so holy a prelate. More over he was
renowned in foreign countries, where coming to the Council of ^owers in
France he was so joyfully received by Pope Alexander 3. and all the Cardinals
and Prelates, that all of them saving the Pope and two Cardinals who stayed to
accompany his Holiness went out of the town to meet and well-come the Arche
Bishop.

Hitherto he might seem to have had a prosperous course and nauegacion: but
God would have him also tried in adversity, and therefore suffered a storm of
persecution to be raised against him. First certain men of great account,
out of whose hands he had wrested churche-liuings, which they had wrongfully
usurped, began to calumniate him with his Maty, alleging that his royal
favor emboldned the Arche B. to such attempts and wrongs, which he had, and
did offer unto many: yet they could not impair the good opinion, which the
king entertained of the Arche B. Then followed his renouncing the office of
Chanceloure, which somewhat exasperated the King: next some resistance in a
matter belonging to the Exchequer. But lastly that which enkindled his Matys
indignation was in this manner. The friends of a certain, man that was slain,
accused a priest for committing the murder: he, being apprehended, and brought
before his Bishop, so denied the fact, that his adversaries could not
sufficiently convince him; by reason their information was weak; neither he
Canonically clear himself. He therefore remaining thus infamous, and branded
with suspicion, his cause was referred to the Arche B, who deprived him of all
Ecclesiastical benefice, and shut him up in a Monastery, commanding that he
should be perpetually recluded, and made do hard penance all days of his
life. About the same time one Philip de Lidrois a Canon had contumeliously
abused one of the Kings Justices of peace: the complaint being brought to the
Archbishop, he commanded the Canon should be publicly whipped, and for
certain years deprived of all Ecclesiastical benefice and office. These
punishments, esteemed rigorous enough, could not quiet the rage of some of the
laity: for laying some few men's faults upon all the clergy; and pleading,
that priests and clearks presuming on their privileges, and that they were not
put to death, committed many outrages, offenses and vilainies, they made a
great vproare and commotion in all the country.

The Kings Majesty as zealous of the peace and quiet of the commonwealth, as
the Archbishop of the Churches liberties; and being informed by some of the
cleargies enemies, how their manifold offenses daily increased, presuming upon
their privileges; he made an assembly of all the Bishops of the Realm, and
clergy of London, demanding, that all such Priests as committed any
offense, should enjoy no privilege of the Church; but, delivered over to the
secular Justice, be punished with corporal paiue; the only means as he said,
to stop the course of their wickedness, who building to much upon their order,
stained and shamefully debased the renoumne and glory of their order. For the
higher one is seated in dignity, the fouler is his crime and more exhorbitant;
the more scandalous his example, and of greater consequence, to draw meaner
people into sin: and therefore such deliquentes ought to feel the smart of
more heavy punishments.

To this demand the holy Prelate mildly and constantly replied: That sacred
Canons, and General Councels, and holy Popes, and glorious Kings and
Emperors had so ordained, that clergy men should be judged and chastized by
none, but only their own superiors and Prelates.

That when crimes were such as deserved death, the Church did not wink at her
ministers faults; nor foster enormous offenses with privileges; but first
degrading them from their order, abandone and forsake them as none of hers; and
then turn them over to the secular power and Magistrates, to give their
wickedness it is due revenge and recompense. That seeing this had been the
ancient practice of the primitive Church in her glorious days, and now we
had no new Christ, nor new Church; he besought the royal clemency of his
Majesty not to bring in this new manner of proceeding, so contrary to the
statutes of all Antiquity: neither so to be lead with a zeal of Justice, as
to raze the very foundations of Justice: which could not stand firm, without
conseruing the bounds and limits prescribed unto each power and authority.

But the King esteeming this so round and resolute an answer to be a
disloyalty in his Bishops, and open-withstanding his sovereign authority;
did press them further to make him a promise of keeping his ancient
prerogatives and royal customs.

The Archbishop with the assent of his brethren answered, they would; so far
forth as they were not contrary to the privileges and prerogatives of the
Church, so firmly established.

Now amonghst those royal prerogatives these six were included amonghst many
others. 1. That upon no cause whatsoever, any appeal should be made to the Sea
Apostolic, without having obtained license of his Majesty. 2. That it should
never be lawful for any Bishop or Archbishop to depart out of the kingdom,
or come at the command of the Pope, without license of the King. 3. That it
should not be lawful for any Bishop to excommunicate any person, that holds
in Capite of the King, without license of the King, nor grant any interdict
against his lands, nor the lands of any his officers. 4. That it should not be
lawful for any Bishop to punish Peri^rers nor False witnesses. 5. That
Clergy men should be bound to answer, and have their trial and punishment in
secular Tribunals. 6. That the King and his secular Justices, and other
officers should be Judges in matters of Tithes, and other like causes
Ecclesiastical. These were contained amongst many other articles, drawn by his
Majesty's officers, as ancient prerogatives of the Crown: and notwithstanding
they were so contrary and prejudicial to the practice of the Primitive
Church, and privileges of great Kings and Monarchs; yet his Majesty,
thereunto moved by his officers, and esteeming it a great disparagement of his
Princely authority to be subject to the Church; and want of Justice, not to
chastize the offenses of cleargie-men most earnestly insisted to have all the
Bishops promise without any restriction or limitation, to keep the aforesaid
prerogatives, contained as he said in their temporal allegiance.

And not having obtained his desire, he was greatly incensed against the
Bishops, and rising in a great wroth and indignation went forth of the place,
wherein was the assembly, and next day very early, without giving audience to
any of the clergy, out of London. All the court was in a tumult and vproare;
and now of the Bishops some began to shrink, and seek by all means, though
with shipwreck of their conscience, to recover the favor of their Prince, and
remain assured of their temporal goods, though with evident hazard of loosing
those which are everlasting. Amonghst the Prelates, some, that should have
advanced the unity of the Church, gave the King counsel to set the Prelates
at variance amonghst themselves. Others labored to make the Archbishop more
plyant to his Majesty's will; with promises, with menaces, wi^h rehearsing
benefits received, dangers iminent to the whole clergy, the fruits of
peace, the bad sequeles of disunion betwixt Prince and clergy: That rigor
was not fit for all times; that sometimes yielding, though with some
inconvenience, did afterward draw on many greater commodities; that troubles
and vexation, now threatening the Church, were matters of more weight, then some
liberties of the Church: that his Majesty protested his desire never was to
prejudice the Church, but only to be honored before the Peers of his Realm;
and that a bare promise and consent would give him satisfaction. Wherefore
oppressed with the weight of many Noblemen and Prelates persuasions, and with
the tears of many, that bitterly wept the utter ruin and destruction of the
clergy, he yielded to the will and pleasure of his Majesty, and in a
General Parliament holden at Claringdon promised in the word of Truth, and
without any restriction or limitation, to keep the aforenamed Prerogatives,
and so did likewise all the other Bishops.

The King was not yet contented heerewith: but, having drawn a writing of
those prerogatives, would, for the greater evidence and strength thereof, have
it signed with all the Prelates seals. The Archbishop, craving some little
respitte to consider of so weighty a matter, took one coppie of the writing
with himself, and gave one to the Archbishop of York, leaving the third in
his Majesty's hand: and so, being licensed by the King, departed from the
Court, and went toward Winton.

And now being retired, and alone by himself; and reflecting upon all his
former actions: and duly poising the sequel of all this business: how
preiudicious it would be to all the Church of God; what a breach and confusion
of Ecclesiastical liberty; how great a slavery to men, that were the
particular lot of JESUS CHRIST; and how bad a precedent to all the world, and
scandal to all other Princes and Prelates; sorrow, grief, tears sighs, and
sobbes proceeding from a repentant heart, did make him consume and melt away.
Neither was he content to do rigorous penance in fasting and sackcloth, but
he also suspended himself from the Altar, and from the communion of the body
and blood of our Savior CHRIST; until he was restored thereunto by the
absolution, and spiritual consolation of the Bishop of Rome.

The King understood of the Archbishops change and alteration: and all his
proceedings were aggrauated and misconstered by his calumniators and
adversaries. His austeritie of life was superstition: his zeal of Justice
nothing but cruelty: the care of his Churches revenues was attributed unto
couetuousnesse; his contempt of wordly favors was desire of vain glory:
following the will of God a proud conceit of himself: insisting in his
Ancestors steps in defending right, and a little more care thereof, then
some of his later slack temporizing Predecessoures, rashness and overmuch
wilfulness: finally some made no scruple to say, that, if the Archbishops
power went on in that manner, the Kings Majesty's royal dignity would quite
decay: and Princes should here after reign, such, and so long, and with only
that power and authority, as the Archbishop with his clergy would.

Hereupon the Archbishop was cited to appear before his Majesty at
North-Hampton. First he was judged both by Nobleman and Prelates to have all
his moueables confiscated, for not appearing personally upon a citation of the
King: and yet his answer to their objection was very sufficient. Now in the
very first entrance and beginning here were two strange things (as the
Archbishop pleaded) and never heard of before in the world; An Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of England, spiritual father both of Prince an People,
judged by the Peers that were his children: and Suffragans pronouncing
sentence of condemnation against their Metropolitan, over whom they had no
jurisdiction. He was further called in question about 500li. received of the
King, during the time of his Chanceloureship. He acknowledged the receite, but
pleaded 'twas a gift; and yet was the money adjudged to the King; and he
straight ways enforced to give security for the payment thereof: or in plain
terms commanded to his face to remain there as prisoner. When some
perceauing the Archbishop quite forsaken of his brethren, and in danger of
shipwreck, offered themselves of their own accord to enter band, for the
payment of the money, and so this danger was eschewed. Many other
controversies of old forgotten Excheq. matters were maliciously enforced
against him by his Adversaries, only of purpose, as men talked then, to
ouerwhelm the Bishop. But Henry Bishop of Winchester a man renowned for
nobility of birth and a sanctlike life, found a way to free him from all
further troubles in this kind; by auouching: That when, being Archdeacon and
Chanceloure, he was chosen for to be Archbishop, he was by the Kings authority
freed and acquitted of all debts and obligations of Court and Exchequer, and
so delivered over to the Church of England. Which testimony, being so
evidently, true none could withstand. Now remained the last and the fiercest
assault concerning those royal Prerogatives.

The Archbishop hoping thereby to move his Majesty the sooner to compassion
and clemency toward the Church, resolved the last day to go to Court in his
sacred roabes, and bare footed with his cross in his hand, and kneeling on his
knees entreat his Majesty for peace. Herein also his adversaries depraved
his good intention, and informed the King, that he was come all armed to
court. His Majesty hearing the brute of arms, and not informed, nor
reflecting of what sort and condition they were, withdrew himself into an
inner room: and there, calling unto him the Noblemen and Bishops, made a
grievous complaint and narration, how the Archbishop was come, not as into the
Court and Palace of a King, but the house of a Traitor; in so odious and
despitefull a manner, as never was heard of before in the court of any
Christian King.

There wanted not others that seconded and amplified his Majesty's speech:
alleging that his pride had now drawn him so far, as to make him fall into
open Treason and Perjury, himself; and, with his manner of proceeding, cast
upon the King and all his kingdom an aspersion, and infamous note of Treason.
All the chamber rebounded with Perjury, Treason: and the officers of the
Court came forth, and with enraged looks pointed at the Bishop, that was
left all alone with his cross in his hands; the banner under which he was to
fight, the portraiture of him, that he was to follow, only some few of his
Chaptaine about him; and even those were not permitted by the officers to
speak unto him. Proclamations were made, that none should declare himself of
the Archbishops side, under pain of being accounted an enemy to the state.
The Bishops they appealed against their Primate, as one that was perjured; not
observing the allegiance he had sworn to his Majesty. The Earls and Barons
were now come forth to give judgment against him. To whom all, but especially
to the Earl of Leister, that had spoken in the behalf of the rest, the
Archbishop made this answer; Judgment against me, my Lord and my Son?
neither law nor reason does permit, that children should judge and condemn
their Father. My ordinary Judge is the Bishop of Rome: to him I appeal from
your Judgment. And likewise I summon these my brethren, to appear and decide
all matters and controversies in his Tribunal. Having said these words, and
fearing with his stay to give them occasion of heinous sacrilege, he
forthwith departed from the Court, many of his adversaries, and some others of
the Courtiers following after, and reuiling and calling him a haughty, proud,
and perjured Traitoure.

All his train and followers were fled: and only some clergy men attended
on him, with a great number of sick folks and poor men, that heartily
rejoiced and praised God; who had delivered his servant from the hands of his
enemies. How glorious a procession, quoth the Bishop, does accompany our
return from the face of tribulation! Sithence they have shared in our
affliction, let them all come in, that we may all feast together in our Lord.
After prayer some mention was made of the bitterness and dreadfulnesse of that
day: Unspeakably more bitter, quoth the Bishop, and more dreadful will the
latter day be. And I charge you all, that each man demean himself modestly,
quietly, patiently: and that none be so bold as to utter any rough or
distasteful words. In such traunces as these, a patient and mild suffering is
most grateful to God; and most available to work good in all men, whether
inferiors, or superiors. In the dead of the night two Noblemen of great
renown in the kingdom, and his faithful friends, came unto him, and with
ruefull looks, and tears in their eyes, and knocking their breast protested
by the dreadful judgment of God almighty, how they certainly knew, that some
debauched and wicked people had conspired together, and with mutual oaths
bound themselves to kill him. Wherefore, greatly fearing, least the cause of
the Church, which was not fully made known to the world, should be not only
endamaged, but utterly overthrown with his death; he resolved to depart out of
the kingdom. He desguised himself, and travailed by night, went strange and
uncouth ways, lay secret and hidden even in his own Lordships, hearing
service from out of a little hoale; and finally apparailed in a white monks
weed, and going barefooted, and calling himself brother Christian, got safely
in a little boat out of the Realm; and with great labor, penury,
affliction, difficulties, and danger, sometimes travailing twelve leagues in a
winters day barefooted, arrived at last at Sens, in France where Alexander 3
Pope, driven out of Italy by a schism, resided. The King had sent, before his
coming thither, an honorable Embassage by the Archbishop Of York, and 4.
other Bishops; the Earl of Arundell and other Noblemen, to certify the Pope,
and complain against the Archbishop, and obtain that he might be sent back
into England, with a ^egat which they call a latere, to have his cause decided
there. And although they obtained not their suite, by reason of the Archbishops
absence, who according to law, should first be heard in his appeal, before any
course were taken against him; yet so had they alienated the affections of the
Cardinals from him, that verily esteeming him a rash, presumptuous,
stiff-necked man, and one that for matters of no importance, had made an
vproare in the kingdom, and broaken that unity and bond of peace, which
before was between the king and the clergy, none of them would show him any
countenance. The day next ensuing, wherein the Archbishop in the presence of
Pope and Cardinals was to deliver the state of all the controversy; having
first related the glory wherein he lived before, the exceeding great favors
which his Majesty had showed him, the respect which all the kingdom did bear
unto him, how all things flowed even according to his will, until the time of
his Majesty's indignation: having furthermore declared, how easily he could yet
be reconciled, and win the Prince his favor again, and be admitted into as
great grace as ever before, and that without any bodies mediation. in case he
would swerve from his constant resolution, and subscribe to that, which the
king demanded: Having also showed, how, although he abounded not in wit, yet
he was not so destitute of common sense, as to leese matters of such weight for
only trifles; Lastly having told them how that for the same cause, for which he
had lost all other temporal goods, he would most willingly sacrifice the very
last drop of his blood; But whether, quoth he, rashly and unadvisedly, led by
curiosity and ambition, or discreetly and virtuously, moved thereunto by a
well grounded resolution, let these serve for witness and evidence. And with
that he drew forth the original coppie of those Articles, which his Majesty
would have established, as ancient and royal Prerogatives. Which Articles
being read, not only the Pope, but also those Cardinals, who before were
offended with the Archbishop, did now with tears thank almighty God, for
giving him grace and constancy, to withstand such pernicious constitutions, so
oftentimes reproved, and condemned by General Councels and sacred Canons. And
all of them with one assent concluded, that, to help the Archbishop, was, in
his person, to succoure the universal Church of God.

There Thomas would have resigned his dignity; and drawing to that purpose his
ring from his finger, and offering it up, most humbly besought his holiness,
to provide a more fit and worthy Pastoure to rule his flock. It seemed not
convenient to the Pope, to condescend unto his requests: nay rather he
confirmed him in his dignity, to the end, other Prelates should not in like
cases slacken in their duty, and fear in future times to withstand Princes
wills, in matters that were damageable to the Catholic Church, seeing one
that had so valiantly fought in her defense, deprived of the dignity of
Archbishop. And promising him to do his best endeavor to reconcile him unto
his king, he commended him to an Abbot of a monastery called Pontiniacum, of
the order called Cisterciensis, which flourished with renoune of sanctity.
There S. Thomas lived with an admirable peace and quietness of mind, amidst
all his troubles, giving himself wholely to reading, to prayer and meditation:
chastizing his body with extraordinary rigor and penance. His diet was
certain unsavory roots, and herbs and other gross meats, which he
himself eat though privately, bestowing all other daintyer dishes upon the
sick and the needy. Next to his skin he evermore did wear a long rough
haireshirt, that covered all his body from the neck to the knees. His
disciplines were usual and very cruel; and sometimes for a greater
mortification he would standnaked in a cold ycie river until such time, as he
was almost frozen. And accordingly to this his life did seem a continual
death. All which austerities, though he did courageously undergo them, with a
cheerful countenance, at length did cast him into such a sickness, that he was
even at the point of death.

But none of these things did afflict him at all, in comparison of the grief,
which he received by the banishment of his friends. For the king, first
confiscating all the goods of the Archbishop, proceeded in like manner against
all his kindred, and such as by familiarity, or any other title had dependence
of him; and afterward, neither sparing age, nor sex, nor quality nor
condition, banished them from out of all his dominions, compelling such, as
might for age, to swear they would go unto the Archbishop, wheresoever he
was, and complain of him, as of the sole cause of their misery, losses, ruin
and destruction. The calamity of so many innocent people, banished for his
sake, yet without his fault, did greatly grieve the good Archbishop: he offered
up these troubles, and commended their cause to God and his friends; who so
bountifully provided for the banished; that, in a short time, none did feel
any want; and many found that plenty in foreign countries, which they had
lost for Gods sake in their own.

The king, moved thereunto by his officers, did not desist to further molest
the Archbishop. For writing to the General chapter of the Cistercienses he
threatened all their order with grievous punishments, if they kept his enemy
any longer in their monastery. S. Thomas understanding this, lest those good
religious men should suffer any damage for his sake, departed from thence of
his own accord, and with license of Jews king of France, who appointed him a
Princely allowance out of his own Exchequer, went to make his aboade in the
city of Sens: where he was most joyfully and honorably welcomed by Hughe
Archbishop of that city and all his clergy.

The Kings Majesty of England endeavored also to cast him out of France; and
to that purpose did send an Embassage, and write his letters, complaining
against Thomas, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, who like a Traitor had
fled out of his country, desiring King Jews not to relieve him, nor permit him
to abide any longer in his country. Thomas sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury,
quoth the King! And who, I pray you, has deposed him? Certes I account my
self as absolute a King, with as full authority, as the King of England; yet
neither may I, nor can I depose the meanest priest of all my kingdom. Tell
your King that he will not suffer those, which he calls ancient
prerogatives, to be abrogated, nor any ways impaired; although, as men say,
they be not so conformable to the law of God. Much less reason the^ have I, to
overthrow this ancient custom, hereditary to the crown of France; which,
even from time out of memory, has used to cherish, relieve, and defend all,
that are distressed, and exiled, especially for justice. Wherefore, following
herein my auncestoures most royal steps, and trusting to the protection of
God, I will not diminish one iot^e of this accustomed favor to my Lord of
Canterbury, at the entreaty or suggestion of any person. Many strange means
were used also to withdraw the Popes affection from S. Thomas; and win his
good will to favor the King against the Archbishop; and with cunning
dissimulation close up the matter; so that the King should admit the
Archbishop into his favor and restore him peacebly to his Sea, but with this
addition saving the dignity of his kingdom, and Thomas should promise to
observe the royal Prerogatives without adding this clause Saving the liberty
of the Church. And surely some of the Cardinals had condescended to the Kings
request, but that S. Thomas always cried out; The Church of God ought not to
be ruled and directed with hypocritical dissembling, and worldly craft and
policy, but with Justice and Truth, which freeth her followers from all
dangers. At length the King of France with entreaty, and the Pope with the
terroure of the Churches censures, made a full atonement and reconciliation
between his Majesty of England and the Archbishop: the King not only
recalling him and all his friends from his banishment, but also writing into
England, that peacebly, well, and honorably he and his might be restored to
all, which they enjoyed three months before his departure out of England. He
led him also aside, and talked with him so long, and so familiarly, as if no
disagreement had ever bin between them: he gave him leave to proceed against
such of his suffragans, as had offended during his absence: and at his
departure willed him to forget all former hatred, and restore unto each other
their ancient love and affection: and so the Archbishop humbling himself at
his Majesty's feet, took his leave and departed toward England, after seven
years of banishment. And although he understood by the Earl of Bullen and
many others coming out of England, that no other preparation was made there
to receive him but of prisons and bonds, and treacherous proceedings, and
thirsting after his blood and his life; yet would he not stay his journey, but
answered. Allthough I should be torn in pieces, I will not break of my intended
journey: no fear, no force, no torment shall stay me any longer: let it
suffice that the flock of CHRIST has, for seven years space, bewailed the
absence of her shepherd. At his return into his Church he was received with
great joy and devotion, by the clergy and all well affected people; though
some others, guilty of their own wickedness, repined thereat, and endeavored
to have hindered his landing with armed men. Wheresoever the Archbishop went,
there was exceeding great joy and triumph; each Parish, with their crosses and
Parish priests, wellcoming him with a solemn procession, and jointly singing
and weeping for joy; and praising God, that had sent them home their Father
again. Whithin some few days after, at his coming to London, there was the
like public joy and triumphing. For all the clergy and poore-schollers of
the city, to the number of three thousand men, went forth to meet him
without the city. So did likewise the flower of the city, with an
innumerable number of people: and all-together, singing Te Deum laudamus,
accompanied him unto his lodging.

But this rejoicing and gladness lasted not long: for some Bishops and other
men of great account, that were excommunicated by the Pope, resorted unto the
Archbishop, and earnestly required to receive their absolution at his hands.

He answered, that, notwithstanding their excommunication and suspension was
from the Pope, yet he would presume so far, as to absolve them, in case they
would make him a Canonical caution or assurance, of standing to the Judgment
of the Church in those things, for which they were excommunicated. They
esteeming it to much pride in the Archbishop, to tie them to any such
conditions, went over to the King in Normandy, and complained unto him: That
Th^mas was rather more haughty, proud, and imperious after his banishment,
then before: that he went up and down with great troops of men, both horse and
foot, that attended on him, as upon the Kings own royal person: that, to be
a King indeed, he wanted but the name, and setting the Crown upon his head,
and saying that he would be King. That such, as were most loyal to his
Majesty, were most oppressed with frequent exactions and excommunications by
the Archbishop: and many other aggreeuances and calumnations to the same
purpose, which so much enraged and enflamed the Kings indignation, that, with
anxietie of mind, he burst forth into these impatient words. And is it
possible, that I cannot peaceably enjoy neither Kingdom, dignity, nor life;
and all this for one only Priest? Cursed be all such as eat my bread, since
none will revenge me of this fellow. Upon these words some principal gentlemen
of the Kings chamber, conspired together, and with oaths and protestations
combined themselves, to kill the Archbishop: imagining it would be most
grateful service to the King. For flattery, and desire to humor Princes,
and execute, not only what they command, but, what they incline or bend unto,
is a passion that is ouer-powerfull in Courts, and blinds many men, to work
their own everlasting perdition. They embarked themselves, they landed in
England at a castle called Flatwide, associated themselves with others of
great rank, but little grace; and with many armed men came marching to
Canterbury, and went to the Archbishop, and with discurteous and unseemly
speeches reviled him for many treasons committed against the Kings Majesty.
The good Prelate answered to all their objections, and with humility and
modesty, and yet with valor and constancy, defended him self against all
accusations wherewith they did charge him; alleging that for some of those,
which they esteemed enormious crimes, he had express leave and license from
the King. At this they began to cry aloud and say, this was to touch the
honor of the King, and appeache his Majesty of Treason; and fearing the
number of the Archbishops seruau^ts, they went forth, both to arm themselves,
and call in other company prepared to assist them: and in the mean time the
B. went in to evening prayer. At the noise of arms and armed men all the
church was in a tumult: some flying away; some hiding themselves; some
shutting fast the doors of the Church. Only the Archbishop did so behave
himself, as one deuoyde of all dread and fear: and coming to the doors did
set them wide open: saying that Churches ought not to be defended as castles
besieged with enemies: and that he should overcome, far better with
suffering, then with fighting. In came they rushing to the Church, crying out
aloude: Where is that Beket the Archbishop? Where is that Traitor to the King
and all his kingdom? He without any trouble or alteration answered: Here I
am, no Traitoure to the King; but a Priest and servant of JESUS CHRIST; ready
to leese my life for my Lord, and shed my blood in defense of his Church. I
command ye in the name of God, and under pain of excommunication, that none
of ye do hurt any of these which are present. if there be any fault, it is
wholly mine; that have raken upon me to defend the cause of the Church, for
whom I embrace death most willingly, hoping, that by the effusion of my blood,
she shall enjoy liberty and peace. And the^ joining his hands and lifting the^
and eyes and heart to Heaven, and settling himself to prayer, he said these last
words. To God, and Lady, to all the saints Patrons of this Church, and to
the blessed martyr S. Dionyse I commend my self, and the cause of the Church.
Afterward kneeling upon his knees, and continuing his prayers, his enemies
crying out kill him, kill him, his head was cloven with many wounds, all
lighting in one place, his brains were scattered about the ground, and his
body did fall close besides the Altar, before which he had offered himself
to God as a sacrifize.

The Monks and clergy men fearing to leese that precious treasure of their
Prelates body, assembling together did strippe him of his clothes, and found
all his body, from the neck to the knees, covered with a rough hair shirt,
and his breeches also made of hairecloth. With this token of his santity, and
the remembrance of his virtues, they did shed many tears, saying one unto
another; how far was he from affecting the Crown, and seeking after earthly
honor, that did so despise and chastize his own flesh, as if it had bin his
mortal enemies! They apparailed him in his Pontifical roabes, and buried him
before the altar of S. John Baptist and of S. Augustine first Bishop of that
city: God that is wonderful in his saints working many miracles to witness
his santity and glory. This renowned champion of JESUS CHRIST, Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, Legate of the Sea Apostolic,
and glorious martyr suffered in the year of our Lord 1171. in the 53 year of
his age, scarce a month after his exile, after he had bin Prelate 12. years,
5. whereof he lived peacebly in his chair, and 7. in banishment. Of him Petrus
Blesensis a Frenchman by birth, a great favorite of Henry the 2. King of
England, and a grave writer of those days, has these words. [Thomas] was the
publisher of Gods word; trumpet of the Gospel, friend of the spouse, pillar
of the clergy, sight of the blind, tongu^e of the dumb, foot of the lame,
salt of the earth, ornament of his country, minister of the highest, Vicar of
CHRIST, the anointed of our Lord. All his conversation was a school of
virtue, the rule of good manners, a pattern of salvation. He was upright in
judging, industrious in executing, discreet in commanding, modest in speaking;
circumspect in his counsel, most sparing in his diet, most liberal in
giving, peaceable in wrath, in flesh an Angel: meek in injuries, fearful in
prosperity, well-assured in adversity, almost lavish in alms giving, and
even altogether mercy; the glory of religious men, and the love and greatest
delight of the people: with many other praises to the same purpose. Neither is
it only he, but all the most famous men of those days, who extol S. Thomas
as the only pattern and myrrhoure of good Prelates.

King Henry himself did plainly declare, how much he did lament his death.
For he not only swoare, that he never so much lamented the death of father nor
mother, nor would have bin so sorrowful for the death of his own child: but
he also of his own accord ca^^ unto Canterbury; and, going barefooted from S.
Dunstans Church, presented himself before the shrine of S. Thomas; and,
bathing the ground with his tears, stripped himself out of his Princely
roabes, and upon his naked back received ^. stripes of every Bishop, and 3.
of every monk, that was present; and afterward fasted all that day and night
with great devotion. A rare example of piety, humility, and devotion in a
Christian Prince; such, as scarce has his match and paragon in all
Ecclesiastical Histories. And surely God did manifestly declare, how
acceptable this penance of the King was in his sight. For the self same day,
he, by his Captains, obtained a glorious victory; wherein the King of Scotts
was taken prisoner. And many other prosperous successes ensued this act of
humiliation; the holy Saint evidently ayding him from Heaven, that humbled
himself so much upon earth: and helping him, that subdued and conquered thus
himself, to conquer, subdue, and gloriously triumph over all his enemies.

Moreover his murderers, notwithstanding they were men of known nobility and
great possessions, and in high estimation for their valor and cheualrie; yet
forsook they all riches, and voluntarily crossed all the hopes of their
preferments, going in pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where they did public
penance. All of them dyed within three years after the fact committed, very
penitent for their offense, calling upon the saint, desiring his patronage and
intercession, whose death they acknowledged to have bin wickedly contrived and
executed by themselves, yet precious in the sight of God, and glorious in the
eye of all the world. That time, which they lived, was always with a
perpetual trembling of body and soul; like men astonished and distracted,
having evermore wind and weather against them, acknowledging all to be the
just Judgment of Almighty God for their heinous offense. But especially he,
that gave the saint his first wound, dyed with a consumption, and rotte of
all his limbs, he himself casting away the flesh, which rotted off from the
very boanes, and calling upon the most glorious martyr for pardon and
forgiveness, God of his mercy and by the intercession of this holy Prelate
grant us pardon and grace to follow his steps.

The life of S. Siluester Pope and Confessor.
SAINT Paul writing unto Tymotheus his disciple, said: a Bishop ought to live
sincerely, and it is fit, that in him, be not any thing to be justly reproved.
And for to show what ought to be in him, he sets down some properties,
that a good Bishop ought to have* among other things, he says: that he ought
to give good example to them, that be without the Church, which be the Pagans,
left he fall into reproach, and into the snare of the devil.

S. John Chrysostom says: that one of the things, wherewith the Apostles
spread their doctrine through all the world, and the Gospel was received of
all men was: because they lived without reprehension, and gave good example to
every one, and submitted themselves to great pains and desired no reward at
all. They fled from honors, riches, pleasures, and embraced troubles
tribulations and afflictions. They did not complain, nor sought revenge, but
pardoned and did good to them, that did them evil: wherefore the pagans said,
it was not possible for the man, that lived so, to be in any error, for that
God, (as they said) would not have suffered it, and so thereby they judged the
doctrine they preached to be true and veritable, and so helped by god, they
receued it.

On the other side, those, who by their office and function they have, are
bound to give good example, and live evil, do very much hurt by their wicked
life. And these (as S. Paul says.) Fall into reproach, and snares of the
devil, for with their evil and wicked life, they give others occasion to do
evil, and chiefly unto the painimes, who (as S. John Chrysostom says) seeing
the Christians to steal, murder, commit fornication, and other sins, say:
that their God cannot chastise them, or else, that he is like unto them. And so
by their fault, the holy name of God is blasphemed.

Assuredly glorious saint Siluester the Pope, was far and free from giving of
scandal by his life, for it was such, and gave such a glorious light in the
23. years, that he was Pope, that innumerable people were converted unto the
faith of JESUS CHRIST, and among others the Emperor Constantine the great. We
read that the life of this holy Pope was in the manner ensuing, as Damasus, and
other substantial Authors write of him.

SAINT Siluester was borne in Rome, and was the son of Ruffinus. Spa: Cyrinus
the priest was his master, and he being 30. years old Pope Melchiades created
him Deaco^ of Rome; which was in dignity, as a cardinal is now. Before he was
chosen to be Pope, he was taken by a governor in the city for receiving and
harboring some Christians, that came from places far distant, as one of their
relligyon. moreover the governor willed Siluester to deliver into his hands the
goods of certain Christians, that had been martired, and had been (as it was
said) left in his custody: As they were leading S. Siluester toward the prison,
his friends lamented, and made moan, and he told them, that his emprisonment
should not be long, and so it proved: for on the next night the judge who had
committed him, died, and on the next day he was set at liberty. Melchiades the
Pope dying afterward: S. Siluester was set in the chair of S. Peter.

The remnaunts of the persecutions of Dioclesian and Maximinian endured still
in Egypt, and though by the coming of Constantine (afterward called the Great)
unto the Empire, the fury of the same was well assuaged, yet Siluester after he
was chosen to be Pope, douting to be taken, departed from Rome, in secret
manner, and was hidden in a cave of the hill Soracte in the Phalisci, not far
from Rome, which hill upon this occasion, is called Monte de San Siluestro.
There the holy Bishop staid a certain time, until that it pleased God, that
Constantine was healed of an incurable leprosy called Elephantia.

To remedy and cure himself he had been counseilled by the priests of the
Gentiles, to be washed in a baine of. 3000. Infants blood. The good Emperor
refused to commit that detestable cruelty, but chose rather to dye of that
infirmity, then to be cured by so inhumaine remedy. The children were brought
to that purpose, but he caused them to be restored unto their motheres, sending
them back with joy to their homes, and also bestowed many gifts on them.

That same night there appeared unto him SS. Peter and Paul the Apostles, who
commending him for his pitiful deed, in saving the life of the innocent
children, bad him send unto Monte Soracte, for the Bishop of the Christians,
who should show him another baine, and that should cure him of his leprosy. The
Emperor sent forthwith for S. Siluester, who went to Rome, as one douting he
should be led unto martyrdom. But when he came thither, the Emperor told him
his dream, whereat S. Siluester took heart, and preached to him JESUS CHRIST,
persuading the Emperor to be Baptized, which he did, and was incontinent cured
of his leprosy.

Helena mother unto Constantine, being at that time in Britain, was certified
hereof, and wrote to her son, commending him for forsaking the Idols; but she
wished he had turned unto the religion fo the Jews, and not unto the faith of
the Christians, who adore one, who, as a mortal man, was crucified, and so
dyed. Constantine sent her word to come unto Rome, and to bring with her the
most wise and learned Jews she could find. Helena did so; and the Jews
disputed with S. Siluester (two great philosophers, called Cato and Zeno, being
as judges) S. Siluester answered so substantially unto the arguments made by
the Jews against the articles of our faith, that they were not only convinced,
but also converted and Baptized, and so was Helena the mother of Constantine
also. Whereupon the Emperor made a law and decree, that JESUS CHRIST should be
adored as God, and that malefactors should not be crucified (as the use was
then) That none should blaspheme the name os JESUS CHRIST upon pain of death,
that the Temples of the Pagans should be demolished, and that Churches should
be builded, into the which if offenders came, they should be secure from
danger, and enjoy the privilege of sanctuary.

The same Emperor caused many Churches to be builded, as well within, as
without Rome, and turned his own palace into a Church, which is called at
this day S. John Lateran, or Basilica Constantiniana, and adorned it with many
Jewels of price inestimable.

It is holden for a thing certain, that Constantine gave unto Pope Siluester
and to his successors, the city of Rome, and the Lordship or seigniory of
Italy, and it is likely to be so, for that he translated the Imperial seat to
Constantinople. Some Authors deny this to be so, and our former report of his
Baptism, and of his leprosy also: but therein they show rather their malice,
then a desire to say the truth, since that many autenticall authors do avouch
our former report of his Baptism, of his leprosy, and of the donation he made
to the Church also.

Constantine builded also beside that Church other two, the one of S. Savior,
the other of S. John Baptist, which he builded in his palace. He also builded
the Church of S. Paul, in the way to Ostia, S. Croce in the palace
Se^phorianum; which is now called Holy cross in Jerusalem, one to S. Laurence,
in the way to Tibur, and another to S. Agnes, in the way to Lauicum, between
the two bay trees, at the request of one of his daughters. He builded another
in the honor of S. Peter and Marcellin martyrs. In the city of Ostia, he
caused to be built the Church of S. Peter and of S. Paul, and of S. John
Baptist, and in Capua, one to the same Apostles, and one in Naples. These and
many other Churches the deuou^ Emperor caused to be builded at the instance of
S. Siluester, and adorned them, with vessels of gold and silver, and with rich
Jewels.

The persecution against the Church of God was ceased, but there began another
war by the heretics, raised by one Arrius a priest of Alexandria. This man
was ambitious, and because he would be famous in the world, he published an
impious blasphemy, against these words of CHRIST I and my father are one. This
heresy was dispersed into sundry countries, whereupon S. Siluester appointed a
Counsel to be holden, (and the Emperor was at the charge thereof) which was
kept at Nice a city of Bithinia, where were present. 318. Bishops: among whom
Osius B. of Cordoua in Spain was famous and renowned. There was also present
in person the Emperor Constantine, who seeing many of those prelates and
religious men, that were in the Counsel, some to lack an eye, another a hand
or such like (which had happened to them, for the love of CHRIST in the passed
persecutions) the pitiful Emperor embraced them one by one, and kissed the
place, where the eye wanted, and where the hand been cut of, (shedding the
whilst, tears for devotion.) And said, they were happy, in that they had
suffered such torments for the love of JESUS CHRIST. The Counsel was ended,
and Arrius was declared and denounced an heretic: and his doctrine also. And
because he was obstinate in his false and erroneous opinion, he, with six of
his followers were sent into exile, by the decree of Constantine.

And because, whilst the Counsel endured, this great and potent Emperor did
a notable thing worthy of eternal memory, it shall not be amiss to write it
in particular, that other seculer Princes may learn to make account of
Ecclesiastical persons, and not to intromit to judge their life's, nor to
break their privileges and immunities.

Great was the resort of people from sundry nations unto the Counsel, as well
for to dispute of the propositions of the Arryan heretics, as also to crave
Justice, and to be remedyed of many aggreauances. Every day were brought unto
the Emperor supplications, sceduls, or bills of complaints, against some of
the Prelates. As Well of those present as of some absent: yea the Prelates made
complaints, one of another. The Catholic Emperor took all these
supplications, and kept them, and never read any of them. After upon a day, in
a full assembly of the fathers, he showed them all their sceduls and
supplications, and said unto them: Our Lord God has made you priests, and has
given you authority and power to judge all men, and me also among others; So
then, I must be judged by you, and you can not be judged by me, therefore awayt
and stay you for the judgment of God. Your variances and controversies, let
them be of whatsoever matter they be, shall be reserved unto the judgment of
God: I desire you earnestly yo leave those private quarrels, and let us all
attend unto the deciding of matters of faith, for the which, we are here
assembled. When he had said thus: he threw all the writings into fire, to
abolish and extinguish them for ever: A worthy deed of a renoumed Emperor.

Nicephorus Callistus, and Gregory a priest of Caesarea, say: that in this
Counsel of Nice, there died two Bishops, the one called Grisantus, and the
other Musonius, before they could subscribe unto the decrees of the Counsel,
and that the other Bishops went one night, unto the place, where, the two
Bishops were buried, and one, in the name of all the Counsel spooke unto them,
requesting them, that having before their death approved in the Counsel, that
CHRIST is God, which Arrius denied, that they would also subscribe thereto, as
the other Bishops had done: having said thus, they laid the paper upon their
graves; and in the morning their names were found to be subscribed in that
paper: and many of them, that were present, and knew their handwriting, said,
that it was the hand of the deceased Bishops.

The Counsel being finished and ended, all, that had been determined therein,
was sent unto Pope Siluester, to be approved, and they also certified him, how
the Emperor Constantine, had banished the wicked man Arrius, and six of his
adherents.

The Pope for the greater confirmation of the truth, (and for that he could not
be in Nice, being far distant from Rome, and the voyage long) assembled
another Counsel at Rome, of. 227. (Spa: 284.) Bishops, who being all of one
opinion, and with one voice, confirmed that, which had been determined at Nice,
by the. 318 Bishops: and again condemned Arrius, Photinus, and Sabellius, and
other Arch heretics.

The Council of Nice was holden and celebrated in the year of our salvation.
325. and therein was declared and decreed, that the Church of Rome is the head
of all other Churchs: And that unto him, the next is the Church of Alexandria,
which had been governed by S. Mark the Evangelist. The third in dignity, is
the Church of Antioch; where S. Peter made his first residence, and the fourth
is the Church of Jerusalem, where S. James was the first Bishop.

We read of many wholesome statutes and ordinances made by S. Siluester: viz:
That the priest having finished the Baptism, he should anoint his forehead
with Chrisme, though this was used before, in some particular Churches, as, for
example, in Aphrica; for S. Cyprian, who was Bishop of Carthage before this,
writing to Ianuarius, says: It is fit and convenient, that thou anoint with
oil, the forehead of him, thou do Baptize: So that Pope Siluester
commanded it should be observed through all the Church universally, which
before was done, but in some particular places.

He commanded also, that the Corporals should be of white linen cloth, not of
silk, nor any other stuff, nor of any other color.

That Bishops only should consecrate the Crisme, and the same he might use in
the sacrament of confirmation.

He commanded that the Deacons should use the Dalmatica or Tunicle and the
maniples on the left arm. He forbad priests to go to suite in law before
seculer judges, for any occasion whatsoever.

In the time of this Pope was celebrated a counsel in Spain, in a city near
unto Granada, called Illiberis, and therefore the Counsel was called
Illiberitanum. Though that others say that this Counsel was celebrated in
another Illiberis, to wit: in Colybree. Another provincial Counsel was
celebrated in his time at Arlez in France, and some others, in other parts:
Whereby it is apparent that the faith, and the Gospel was enlarged and spread
very far in many countries, and had taken deep root in Spain.

In the same time, the people of Scotia, the most northerly part of the Island
Britannia, received the faith of CHRIST JESUS.

It is said, that Pope Siluester changed the name of the days of the week,
from the monday until the Saturday: for that the Pagans called them by the
names of the Planets: viz. Monday of the Moon, Tuesday of Mars, Wednesday of
Mercury, Thursday of Jupiter, Friday of Venus, and Satterday of Saturn, and
appointed they should be called Ferias: the first, the second, the third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, and Saturday: but this ordinance is not used at this
present, but in the divine offices: that which is commonly called Sunday, Pope
Leo. 1. called it the Lords day though some called it so even from the time of
the Apostles.

S. Siluester had very great care of the poor and needy, and had many
memorialls, whereby he had always the better means to know their needs, and
to provide for their necessities. He had especial care, that the Reclused
Nonnes should have all things necessary provided for them, to the end, they
should not go wandering out of their monasteryes, under pretext to seek their
meat and drink, or any other necessary thing.

S. Siluester lived in the papacy 23. years, 10. months, and 11. days, and
then died, and was buried in the Churchyard of Priscilla, in the way called
Salaria; He gave holy orders six times in the month of December, and made 65.
Priests and 26. Deacons.

The Catholic Church celebrateth his feast, on the day, that he died, to wit:
on the last day of December, in the year of our Lord. 333. in the reign of
Constantine the Great.

The end of the twelve months.

