FIVE GODLY SERMONS, Preached by R. T. Bachiler of divinity.

1. The Charge of the Clergy. 2. The Crown of Christians. 3. The annointment
of Christ, or Christian ointment. 4. A festival Sermon upon the Nativity of
Christ. 5. The fruits of hypocrisy.
LONDON, Printed by I.H. for John Harison. 1602.

To the right worshipful Master John Smith Alderman, Master William Wilson
Senior Burgess, Justices of peace, and the rest of the Brethren, Governors,
and Magistrates of the Borough town and corporation of Kendall: Grace, mercy
and peace, in Christ Jesus our Lord.
AS The Bear (to begin not with an homely comparison as it may seem, but such
as the best wits, and most learned have not been ashamed to use before me) when
she brings forth her young one, as Aristotle, or rather as Scaliger the
subtle refiner of gross Philosophy, when she casts out her abortiue
brood, finding it to be a rude, unformed and confused lump of flesh, not
liking the shape thereof, never cease to lick the same, till it has brought
it to a perfect form and fashion, with apt proportion of every part and
member: Even so (right worshipful) those sudden, extemporall, and
tumultuarie speeches, which at the first I did rawly and rudely deliver in your
audience, as no absolute brood of full grouth, but rather as unripe fruit of
little labor, for matter sound I am sure, but for manner not so sweet as I
could wish, such howsoever as God the^ presently gave me grace to utter;
Behold here the same reduced into better form, perfected, polished,
published, and presented unto your selves, not for mine own praise which I
never deserved nor desired, but for your profit, which I always aimed at, and
sought after, wishing not only your worldly wealth that you may flourish still
as hitherto you have done, in peace, plenty, and prosperity, but thirsting
after your souls health that you might grow up more and more in grace and
knowledge, which is the final and fruitful end and intendement of all
sermons either preached or written: as Peter making it his conclusion of his
latter Epistle 3. Chap. 18. 2. Peter. 3.18.
For therefore have I especially and of purpose, directed and dedicated these
few sermons unto you (worshipful and well-beloved Brethren in the Lord) that as
you first hard them, so you might again regard them, yea remember and
ruminate them, that by often reading and pervsing them, through continual
meditation they may be so inwardly engrafted and engraven in your hearts and
consciences, that you may take proffit, and make use of them in the actions of
your life and conversation. O that you would consider thankfully, that as our
Gracious Sovereign has greatly graced you, in making your town of a country
village, a corporate Borough, and vouchsafed to bestow upon you a fair and
large Charter for the establishing of your state of government, and public
benefit of your populous multitude. So likewise that God himself has as
graciously blessed you in commending by his good providence your parish, for
the spiritual cure and charge of your souls, to the patronage of so
flourishing a College, and so fruitful of learned preachers, that you may be
certain and sure, never to fail of a sufficient and vigilant pastor over
you, and whereby noe doubt you shall evermore co^tinew: I speak it to your
comfort as one of the goulden candlesticks of Gods true catholic church,
alwaise shining with the bright light of the Gospel. And would to God that as
your town is famous thorowgh the most parts of this Land, for your great
trading lik a little Tirus, for your mean yet nceessarie and profitable
commodities for the common wealth; so your fervent zeal and fruitful
obedience unto the word, were as faithfully shown here and as famously known
else where, to your own commendation and consolation of others, that with
gratulation unto God I might truly say of you and your people and the rest of
my parish, as the Apostle Paul of the Romans. 1.8. I thank my God thorough
Jesus Christ for you all because your faith is published thorough out the whole
world: which would be my credit and crown, yea and a cordial of comfort to my
conscience, among my many tedious discontentments in this place, which would
gladly feast it self with the fruits of my labors in you, which I hope
hereafter to find in such ample measure in you all, that I again may say with
the Apostle unto the Romans That I shall reap and receive at the length
consolation together with you thorough our mutual faith both yours and mine.
1.12. Which grace I trust in due time the Lord God in Christ Jesus will
vouchsafe to grant unto us both to our own good and his glory.

Your most loving Pastor in the Lord, R. T.

The charge of the clergy: And the crown of Christians.
1. PET. 5.3.4. v. Not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that
ye may be examples to the flock: And when the chief shepherd shall appear,
ye shall receive an incorruptible Crown of glory.
PETER the blessed Apostle of our Savior Christ Jesus, Pe^^r.
as he names himself in the beginning of this Epistle and first verse, Cephas.
that Cephas which was accounted one of the pillars of the Church as Paul
confesses Gal. 2.9. writing to all the dispersed christians thorowout almost
all Asia the great and the less, even Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, and
Bythinia, after a few precepts of doctrine and instruction to the building up
of their faith in the first Chap. and then certain general exhortations to
the reforming of their life and manners, from the beginning of the second chapter to
the end of the fourth, in this cha. which is the fifth and the last of this
Epistle, he comes to a particular admonition only, concerning the Pastors of
Christ's flock and preachers of his word, which were in those regions and
countries mentioned before, and that especially in the four first verses of
this chapter: which admonition of his contains three especial things to be
considered of us. Three things to be considered.
First, the preface of Peter in the first verse: secondly, his special
exhortation in the second and third verses: thirdly, a promise of reward in the
fourth verse. The Preface contains 3. things.
The preface in the first verse contains three things: a description of
himself, the person that wrote this Epistle, and that made the exhortation,
and by three names: not in vanity and ostentation as boasting of these titles,
but to the honor and glory of God, that vouchsafed him these favors. The
first of office, I which am an elder: wherein he calls and accounts
himself but fellow, and not above those to whom he writes: and after this
manner exhorts the second of degree, and that the highest of all christians,
eue^ of martyrdom, partly in regard of that he was to suffer for the name of
Christ Jesus, and partly for that he had suffered, and that in way of prophecy
of himself of his death and crucifying, which happened under Nero afterward,
and as our Savior foretold of him, that another should gird him and lead him
whither he would not Ioh. 21.18. in these words and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ. The third of honor, a reward of the second, which surely
follows the former as the shadow does the body in the third and last place:
and also a partaker of the glory that shall be reueiled, and this for the
description of his person.

The second thing in the Preface, is his humble obsecration and supplication in
this word I beseech, a great deigning and vouchsafing of Peter, as though he
were their inferior or fellow at the least: as the words signify in the
original (...). The third thing, the persons to whom he wrote in the first
words of this Chap: to the Elders that are among you, and this in the first
verse. Then in the second verse he beginnerh his exhortation, and that of
feeding, a necessary duty which he puts them in mind of, as properly
belonging unto them being Pastors of the Church: but what should they feed the
flock of God, as likewise in the next verse it is called Gods heritage with an
article and particle annexed thereunto, signifying the cure and charge which
they have or ought to have thereof, and therefore very well translated (...),
which depends upon you, or which is committed unto you, or else if you will,
it may import the manner how they should feed, that is, (...), as much as in
them lies, or as it is expressed afterward more plainly. First generally in
the word (...) caring for it, or watching over it: and secondly more
particularly, and that in three respects in a threefold Antithesis or
opposition (...) first, and then (...), first how they ought not, and then how
they ought as first not by constraint, but willingly, secondly not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, and this in the second and third verse, not as
Lords over Gods heritage, but as examples of the flock, and this in the third
verse.

The third general thing to be considered in this portion of scripture, is the
promise of reward contained in the fourth verse upon the following of those
things which they ought, and flying of those things which they ought not to do
in the two former verses, which compriseth in them three things. First, the
reward in particular in those words ye shall receive: what? no small reward but
a princely, even a crown. Secondly, what manner of crown, an excellent crown
commended by two Epithites or adjuncts, first of glory for the worth and value
of the price, and pretiousnesse of it: secondly of the continuance: no earthly
material temporanie crown, but an incorruptible crown: and when? not out of
hand when we wish and would, but when it pleases God to appoint and bestow
upon us, that is, even when the chief shepherds of our souls shall appear,
even at the second coming of our Savior, after the end of the world at the
day of judgment, when every man shall receive according to his works. And thus
much of the division and resolution of these four first verses, of the two
first whereof I mean not to speak: as of the preface in the first, nor of the
beginning of the exhortation, nor of the two first oppositions comprehended in
the second: but will keep my self only within the compass of the two last,
the third and fourth: which, as they contain four members and clauses in them,
so I will presume to borrow but to each of them but a quarter of an hour, for
the entreatie and handling of them.

Not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage.

As Peter thrice denied our Savior: first, simply with a bare negation:
secondly, with an asseueration and an oath: thirdly, with cursing and perjury:
Matt. 26.70.72.74. And as thereupon our Savior with a Tantundem dat tantidem,
or a quid pro quo gave him a semblable threefolde caveat and Memorandum of
feeding his flock, least he should eftsoons fall again into his former
infirmity, saying unto him thrice together, Simon Bar-Iona, Love thou me?
feed my lambs, feeed my sheep, feed my lambs, Ioh. 21.15.16.17. To which Peter
answering said, Thou know Lord I love thee. Whereupon Austen in his 123.
Tract. upon John has these words: Redditur negationi trinae trina confessio,
ne minus amori lingua seruiat quam timori, and plus vocis elicuisse videatur
mors eminens, quam vita praesens, vt sit amoris officium pascere dominicum
gregem, sicut fuit timoris indicium negare pastorem. So likewise in this place,
our Apostle remembering his own threefold denial, and also upon our Saviors
threefold warning his threefold protestation in professing that he did love
him, and then his threefold promise included in the same, as that he would show
forth a sign and effect of that his love in diligently keeping his
commandment, and carefully feeding his flock. That which before he affirmed
with all asseuerance, he now confirms with all assurance, in not only himself
painfully preaching the Gospel to all both Jews and Gentiles in his own
person, and for his own part: but also exciting and stirring up others, even
all pastors in all congregations whatsoever, to do the like as he now does to
the elders of the Churches. To whom he writes, and that with a threefold
prouiso, as our Savior warned him, that they should carefully feed the flock
or heritage of God, not as upon constraint, but willingly: secondly, not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind as in the former verse and third, as in
this verse, not as though they were, etc. A threefold exhortation answerable to
this threefold confession, and a threefold contestation answerable to this
threefold protestation: wherein, Ministers warned to avoid three monstrous
vices. Idleness. Avarice. Tyranny.
as with three watch-words he advises all the Ministers of the word to avoid
and abhor three monstrous and ugly vices, to which most commonly they are
subject. The first, Idleness: the second, Auatice: the third, Tyranny or
ambition. But to leave the other two, and to tie my self to the third
contained in my text. If Ambition or tyranny, is and always has been the
cause of all calamities and inconveniences in all states, and common wealths,
as breeding not only danger and destruction to the person that is affected
therewith: but bringing also damage and detriment to the people that are
afflicted therewith. Cyrus.
As in Cyrus king of the Medes and Persians, who in aspiring the Monarchy of
the whole world through his exceeding pride and cruelty made himself and his
people a pray unto a woman. As also in Alexander the great, Alexander.
whom seeking to be Lord over the whole earth, ambitiously tyrannising over his
servants, soldiers, captains and counselors, was cut off by poison in the
prime of his age, and flower of his youth: whereby his conquest was not
accomplished, and his great segnories and kingdoms rent asunder and divided
among his captains, who brought themselves likewise finally to confusion by
their continual contention among themselves. As likewise in Julius Caesar and
Pompey, Julius Caesar. Pompey.
whose ambitious dissension, the one in not suffering a Peer, the other a
superior, brought themselves to untimely death, the one by Caesar, the other
by the Senators, and the slourishing estate of the City of Rome to a very
low ebb, through the mighty factions and cruel-ciuill wars which followed
after. Whereupon Euripides in his Phoenisse upon occasion of the ambitious
contention of Eteocles and Polenices, and the destruction of Thebs, Ambition.
that followed thereupon, says, (...), that is, that ambition is an unjust
goddess, or rather if ye will, a wicked fiende: because into what house or
City soever it enters, were it never so happy and flourishing, it never
comes out without the destruction of all those that she lays hold upon. And
therefore Plato he calls it (...), a thing that will fall out contrary to our
expectation, and worse then we wish and would, as causing infortunitie when we
look for felicity, and adversity when we hope for prosperity, or if you
will (...), a mischief that turns all topsie turuie. Whereupon also Aristotle
Pol. 2. cha. 7. says, (...), that is, that all wrongs and injuries for the
most part are caused through ambition and avarice. Then much more in the Church
of God is hautie ambition and cruel tyranny dangerous and damnable, both to
those that are possessed therewith, and to those that are oppressed by it:
which is such a vice, that whatsoever minister and preacher of the word from
the highest to the lowest be tainted and infected with it, he cease to be a
shepherd, and becomes a woolfe, a thief, and a robber, such as were the
Scribes and Pharisees of whom spoke our Savior, when he said, Ioh, 10.8. All
that ever were before me are thieves and robbers when as they do not feed, but
fleese, and not fleese but flea the flock of Christ, and pull the skin over
their ears, and not milk them but spoil them and spill their blood, devour
their flesh and eat them up as it were bread, that is, grind the faces of the
poor people, and tread them under their feet, dominering over them by
intolerable pride and presumption, crushing and oppressing them by violent
tyranny, contrary to all piety and equity, as the word in the original
does purport and signify (...), which is here translated odiously and of set
purpose, as we read it. And I wonder that it has been so long suffered
uncorrected, as though ye were Lords over the flock to disgrace our
Ecclesiastical government, to control the estate of our Church, and check
and checkmate our Lord bishops, interpreting the compound as the simple (...)
for (...), making no difference between a gracious government and a moderate
Magistracy, and between an ambitious usurpation and cruel tyranny, as they
do also unlearnedly and maliciously. That other place of the Gospel, which
they use as the strongest engine of their battery against the present state of
the Church, Mat. 20.25. Luke 22.25. Where (...) is translated likewise gracious
Lords to take away the title of Grace from our Archbishops, and Lordship from
our Bishops, when as the word signifies no such thing. For what smatterer is
there in the grammar, or that has but small skill in the Greek tongue that
knows not what (...) or (...) and (...) or (...) signifies, that is properly
a Benefactor, an ambitious title of honor which the Emperor of Rome and other
kings and Princes did vainegloriously affect in a politic and popular praise
and applause of the common multitude, in bountifully bestowing some public
beneficence and benevolence upon the people, to color their accustomed
tyranny and cruelty, and to insinuate themselves into the favor of their
oppressed subjects. Philip of Macedon.
For so was Philip of Macedon called (...) of the Thebans, as Demosthenes
witnesses in his oration pro Ctesiphonte, and besides Philos and (...). As
also Ptolomey the son of Philadelphus King of Egypt, Ptolomey.
was so surnamed, and finally Antiochus king of Syria, Antiochus
which because partly it was a profane name of the Gentiles, and partly for
that it was an ambitious name or title of tyranny, our Savior would in no
wise have his disciples termed by that name: for it had been strange and
wonderful, as also too too offensive and odious for those sorry and silly
fishermen, although they were our Saviors Disciples and afterward the pillars
of the Primitive Church, then in the infancy of the Gospel, the swaddling
cloutes of christianity and nonage of the church, to have suffered themselves
to have been called by such princely and reyall names, and those also taken
from Ethnickes and Pagans, who were to follow the president and example of our
Savior in the like lowliness: That as he himself performed the whole work
of our redemption and salvation in humility: so were they to lay the
foundation of this new Church, not on the rock of offense, but in submission
and subjection, although otherwise they deserved and enjoyed as great
spiritual titles, nay more high, Christ's disciples Fishers of men.
honorable and holy titles then that. As first, when they were called of our
Savior, Fishers of men, for catching the souls of men with the hook of the
Gospel within the net of the Church. Secondly, Apostles, Apostles.
as being Christ's chief commissioners and Ambassadors sent into all the
quarters of the earth to preach and to baptize. Ambassadors.
3. Evangelists as Gods messengers to carry the glad tidings of peace
throughout the world. Evangelists.
Fourthly, Shepherds
Shepherds, for feeding the flock of Christ with Angels food, the spiritual
Manna of the word, as Homer was wont to call the princes of Greece (...).
Fifthly and finally, Gods.
Gods, because unto them the word of God was given, Ioh. 10.34. as David called
kings and Princes, Psalm. 82.6. As also they might have been called (...) had
it not bin an heathenish name, for bestowing on the people wheresoever they
became the inestimable benefit, yea the most precious and peerless jewel and
margarite of the word of God, as likewise (...) for saving the souls of so
many, (...).
whom they daily added to the Church. But to leave this and follow the word of
my text which I have in hand, as the same word is used in the same sense
together with (...), as it is in this place in Matt. mentioned before, for that
this word is here taken in the bad, and not in the good part it is manifest; as
also in Matthew, although Beza be of the contrary opinion, therein injuriously
and rashly controuling the judgment of Erasmus, and that because Luke in
harmony and consent with Matthew. 22.25. uses the simple for the others
compound, Beza.
which is but once in the whole Scripture so taken, and no where else, and that
therefore is meant thereby not tyrannical rule, but all civil government of
temporal good politic magistrates. But it may be said of him as it is in the
Proverb of Bernard, Beza non vidit omnia, although otherwise a learned father,
and an excellent writer very well deserving of the Church of God. But to put
this matter out of controversy, if we will make Mark a moderator between
Matthew and Luke, and take him for a Judge between Beza and Erasmus, we shall
find not that word which is in Luke, but that which is in Matthew, and that
which is in my text: and who will not say that the place of Luke is to be
suspected of an oversight in the libraries in leaving out the preposition
because he differs from the other two Evangelists, as Beza has suspected
many places of less account, and for smaller cause then this. And I am
persuaded if some original were thoroughly searched, a (...) would be found in
Luke as well as in the rest; but who is so blind as he that will not see, for
absurd it were that the preposition (...) found in the compound should make no
difference from the simple, but to stand as a Cipher in Augrim, or as a pilcrow
in a latin Primmer, what simple Gramarian will say this? But if any thing be
to be gathered out of Luke his difference from the rest it is this; that even
the simple also (...) is taken for a severe tyrannizing, and not for serene
governing; and therefore much more (...) the compound: for that it does so
signify it appears Acts, 19.16. which place may stand in steed of a
thousand, because we will not spend time in repeating many, hasting to other
matter. Where the evil spirit is said to have overcome the four sons of
Sceua by a violent assault, as it may appear by the two effects following of
rending their clothes off their backs, and wounding them (...) in the
original. And therefore Hesicheus he interprets this word by (...), which
signifies not only Dominari but domare even to curb a man, and to keep him
under by constraint, and in setting himself against him to vanquish him by
fine force, for that the preposition (...) is taken always in the compound for
aduersus every Grammar scholar knows it. And the opposition in this place
makes the matter most manifest, for these two are put here as Antitheta,
(...), insinuating thus much unto us, that a man cannot both (...) and also
show himself an example; and yet who will not say that many Kings, Princes,
and Lords both ought to be and are oftentimes in their government presidents,
and examples of many virtues unto their people and subjects: so that the word
is not here barely taken for any lord governor simple, but for cruel and
tyrannical Lords, which wring and wrong the poor people underneath them. And
that therefore though the latter be here inhibited, yet the former is not
forbidden, neither by Peter the Disciple, nor Christ the Master, being a state
which may and ought to stand as well in the Church as in the common wealth,
where there ought to be government, degrees, and dignities, because of the
difference of gifts and graces in one another, and that to the glory of God
and good of his people; for where there is an (...), there must needs be an
(...): For want of government breeds confusion, and equality brings contempt.
Here then in a word these Elders of Asia, and in them all the preachers of the
word, of what degree, estate, condition soever, are dehorted from all hard,
severe, austere dominering over Gods heritage, they must not be (...), to
allude unto the words of our Savior in the Gospel Mat. 25.24. Luke 19.21. As
the false prophets did in the days of Ezechiel: for the which he inueigheth
against them, who did never strengthen the weak nor heal the sick, nor bind
up the broken, nor brought back that which was driven away, nor sought that
which was lost; but did rule them with cruelty and rigor, feeding themselves,
and not their sheep, eating up the fat, clothing themselves with the wool,
and killing those that were fed among the flock, Ezech. 34.3.4. As likewise the
Scribes and Pharisees in the time of our Savior Christ; who did bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be borne, and laid them on the shoulders of the people,
etc, like the taske-masters of Egypt upon the children of Israel; for the which
he sharply reproves them, Matt. 23.4. And finally, as the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, and Clergy of Rome do, and ever have done since Antichrist put
forth his horns, in behauing themselves too lofty and lordly over the poor
people, exercising upon them an intolerable cruelty and tyranny, and laying
on them a yoke of miserable servitude and slavery, ouerburdening them with
their innumerable decrees canons and constitutions, powling, pilling and
impouerishing them with their Peter's pence, penance, pardons and purgatory:
and finally, utterly undoing them by their insupportable impositions,
exactions, and oppressions.

And as I fear me too many do in these our days, who follow herein the false
prophets, Pharisees and popish prelates, who care not, nor spare not to use
hardly, not only the common multitude, but also the ministry of the Church,
in not only lofttie looking over them as the Devil looks over Lincoln (as we
say) but also in laying greater charge and burden upon them then they are able
to bear. But would to God these would remember, that for all their
superiority, they are but shepherds; for all their magistracy, they are but
ministers; and for all their Lordship, they are and ought to be laborers in
the Lords vineyard, and lovers of the vine, which they neither ought themselves
to spoil nor waste, nor suffer the wild boar of the wood to root it up, nor
the savage beasts of the field to devour it. They ought neither to be (...) nor
(...), they must not be like the great oaks of Basan and the tall Cedars of
Libanon, which with their bigness and height hinder the growth of young trees
underneath them, by keeping the moisture of the rain, the heat of the sun,
and the air of the wind from them: so they to wipe the fat from other men's
beards which they have deerly bought, as they to have the sweet and that which
other men have painfully sweat for, others to beat the bush, and they to have
the bird.

As covetous Vespasian was wont to use his officers underneath him like
spunges, Vespasian.
to let them alone till they were full, and afterward to press them out
again; to suffer them first to stuff their bags with silver and gold, that
he at his pleasure might empty them again. Not to be like the great fishes
which only live by eating up the less, nor to make their treasure houses to
be as the spleen is to the body, the receptacle of all ill humors; so they to
be the storehouse of evil gotten goods.

O that the shepherds of Christ's flock would vouchsafe to follow the wholesome
counsel of an Heathen tyrant in this behalf, even Tyberius Emperor of Rome,
Tyberius.
to a rigorous exactour underneath him, Boni pastoris esse tondere pecus non
deglubere. Or else as Alexander the great, who being also offended with the like
hard vsages and sore extorsions of his subjects by his officers underneath him,
Saying unto those that were about him, (...), that is, That he should not abide
that Gardener that would not cut his herbs, but pluck them up by the roots;
nor that would not croppe his trees, but fell them wholly to the ground: when as
rather this is the duty of a good governor either in the Church or common
wealth, not to diminish and impouerish the estate of the people, but to
countenance and comfort, to defend and shend them against all adversaries
whatsoever. And therefore Isocrates to Nicocles councelleth him to take this
for a certain sure and sound token of a wise and welordered government, when
all things did proceed well, and when the common people did profit and prosper
every one in his place and calling through his prudence and providence.

And thus much should suffice to have been spoken of this first proposition,
but that we must needs say something of this last word which is in the
original (...), and interpreted Gods heritage, which is indeed al one with
that which in the former verse is called Gods flock; for as God vouchsafes to
call himself a shepherd, his Church a sheepfould; and our Savior to term
himself the door of the sheepfould, his word the green pastures, wherewith he
feeds, and the waters of comfort whereunto he leads his flock, and the
faithful and the elect, the sheep of his flock. Psalm. 23. Ioh. 10. So it
pleases him to liken himself to a rich man, whose lot is fallen in a fair
ground, and has a goodly heritage, as David Psalm. 16. And his son Christ Jesus
our Savior to be his heir to succeed him in his Heritage, and this his
heritage or inheritance to be the Church, the number of them that believe his
word and Gospel, and every particular congregation in any town or country
to be as Farmers, Lordships and manners, as it were parts and parcels of his
whole inheritance committed to the several charges of his ministers and
pastors, being as it were his stewards, bayliffes, and farmers, who shall one
day be called to a reckening and account with this sound of summance, Read
rationem villicationis. A deed of gift; of which inheritance the Lord did grant
to our Savior from the beginning; the term whereof is contained in the 2.
Psalm. in those words of David, in the person of the Lord God himself. Thou art
my son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee Heathen
for thine inheritance, and the outmost parts of the world for thy possession,
sealed unto him by an everlasting decree from before all worlds, as an eternal
Charter for ever, and confirmed unto him by diverse other testimonies of
scripture, of which inheritance he has now present fruition, then seizing it
into his own hands, when as he himself was here upon earth, and claimed his
right in his own person, and sent his servants his Apostles to all the coasts
and quarters of the world by the warrant of the word and seals of the
Sacraments, to take possession for him of al people and nations whatsoever,
admitting them his tenants by giving them the Gods penny or earnest penny of
his spirit, that they might be assured to be his, whereby we that were before
of the number of the heathen Pagans, and Gentiles, as dogs thrust out of
doors, as wolves without the fould, as aliants and strangers from the common
wealth of Israel, and finally as tenants in villinage unto Satan the prince of
the world, are now become of the society of faithful Christians, as servants,
or rather children of the household of God, sheep of Christ's flock,
franck-denisons and fellow citizens with the Saints; and to conclude,
freeholders, and that in Capite, even in our head Christ Jesus, who is the
great King and Lord over all the world, of whose proper heritage and
inheritance we are, to whom only we belong, and to no other: which inheritance
of his is of such account and regard with him, that he will not suffer it to be
spoiled and wasted at any hand, nor any of his tenants to be abused or
oppressed by any landlords, farmers, stewards, auditors, receivers, bailiffs,
or surueighers, which he has set over them.

Some unskillfully do suppose because of (...) in the Greek, that this word is
only here taken for the Clergy, because the whole ministry of old was
wont to be so called by a peevish imitation of some doting fathers, who did
catachrestically use or rather abuse this word after this manner: but unmeet it
is and amiss, to restrain that name and appropriate it to a few, which the
scripture attributes in common to the whole Church of God, and all the members
thereof, the holy Ghost using in this word a Metonomia of the adiunct for the
subject (...) for (...), Lot for heritage, because they were wont in old time
to divide all inheritances by lotte, as the children of Israel had the land of
Canaan by equal portions parted amongst them. And thus much for the first
proposition of this third Antithesis and first part of my text which is
negative or dehortatorie, declaring to the ministers of the word what they
ought to avoid in their charge and government of Gods Church.

Now therefore of the second proposition of this opposition which is
affirmative and exhortatorie to a duty, which they ought to perform being
the second principal part of my text, of which more briefly. But that ye may be
examples of the flock; In Jury the shepherds which led and fed any sheep,
went before them, and their flocks always followed after them, contrary to our
common use and custom. Even so here Peter, he would have the spiritual
shepherds of Christ's flock to go before them, Preachers should be good
examples to the people.
non corpore sed animo, non via sed vita, non exeundo sed exemplo, that is,
that they would show themselves patterns and presidents, platformes and
examples unto the people in good life, godly manners, and virtuous behavior:
which how necessary and behoouefull it is, Example to them that believe in 6.
things
Paul himself signifies, when as he charge Timothy to be an example unto
the^ that believe in six things. First, in the word that is, in the doctrine of
the Gospel. Secondly, in conversation; that is, in keeping the same, and
expressing the obedience thereof in all Christian demeanor. Thirdly, in love,
which signifies what manner of conversation he requires, even all deeds of
mercy and works of charity which are contained under love, which is the
complement of the law, and the accomplishment of the Gospel; the old
commandment of the Lord God, and the new commandment of Christ Jesus; and
contains in it our two principal duties both to God and man: upon the which
two things do hang both the law and the prophets. Fourthly, in the spirit;
that is, in the gifts and graces, fruits and effects of the spirit, with which
both preacher and people ought to be endued. Fifthly, in faith; that is, in
steadfastly believing the truth of Gods word and certainty of his promises, and
in wholly relying upon the mercies of God the Father, and the merits of Christ
Jesus his son and our Savior, the only badge and cognizance of true
Christians, who are only thereby discerned from Turks, Saracens, Moors,
Indians, Barbarians, and Infidels whatsoever. Sixthly and lastly, in purity;
which is the perfection of all religion, when as God is served and feared in
soundness and sincerity, simplicity and singleness of heart, without all
doubting, deceit and dissembling, which may be as six rules of observation and
imitation included, although not expressed in these words of our Apostle. To
the which if we add a seventh particular virtue to make up a perfect number,
which is humility, I hope we shall fully attain to the meaning of the holy
Ghost in this place: for that Peter here would especially that they should be
types and mirrours of humility, it is as clear as the noonday by the former
part of the Antithesis or opposition in the words going before; for in steed
of the lordly lowliness which he wishes them to abhor before, he commends
unto them lowly humility, as principally requiring the same at their hands:
and signifies unto them, that they shall not show themselves to be Lords over
Gods heritage, if they make themselves examples of meeknes and mildnes,
modestic and moderation unto their flocks.

The like exhortation also does Paul make to Titus, that above all things he
show himself an example of good works with vncorrupt doctrine, and this
generally, then particularly how with gravity and integrity of life and with
the wholesome word which cannot be reproved. For doctrine, to what end or
effect? even twofolde, as a double fruit redounding from thence; as first to
the shame and blame of his adversaries and his own good name and fame, that
they which withstand may be ashamed, having nothing concerning you to speak
evil of Tit. 2.7.8. Herein following the steps of our Savior Christ Jesus,
who before warned his Disciples, and in them all the ministers and preachers of
the word of what degree or place soever, that the light of their life do shine
forth before men, etc. for these two ends, for the good of men, and the glory
of God; when he says, Let your light so shine before men, etc. Mat. 5.16.

But more especially to this particular virtue of humility, which our Apostle
principally aims at in this place Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart, etc. wishing them to show themselves examples of humility
unto the people, as he declared himself a president of meekness and
lowliness unto them, and that in heart, and not in tongue; in deed, and not in
word; in truth, and not in show: for the learned ministry ought so to consult
with their science, that they correct their conversation according to an
upright conscience, and so to frame and fashion their whole life and manners,
that they being in holy as Christ is holy, they righteous as he is righteous,
and perfect as their heavenly father is perfect, their flock may imitate them
as they themselves are followers of Christ; and that as the word is a rule and
square unto them, so they to be a line and level, a platform and scantling
unto others. Yea they ought to endeavor so to be endued with all the virtues of
our Savior, that if it were possible they might obtain to his perfection, and
attain unto the measure of his age and fullness, as Paul exhorts Ephesians. 4.13.
that all their works might be nothing else but oracles, and their works
miracles; that although they be men, yet they may live as Angels; and albeit
they have their habitation here on earth, yet to have their conversation in
heaven; that they may be called Gods for practicing the word, as they are
termed Gods for preaching the Gospel. Ioh. 10.35. For they being as Cities
situate upon an hill, as our Savior, as watchmen placed in a tower, as Ezech
and as candles set upon candlesticks, as John in the Apocalip. ought especially
to show themselves as lights unto the feet, and lanthornes unto the paths of
the people, who are carried with full force and swift stream, to follow the
steps of their guides, and governors, for as it is in the Proverb, Regis ad
exemplum, etc. Such as the king is, such are the commons, as the magistrate, so
the multitude; as the ruler, so the residue; as the Pastor, so are the people;
and as the minister, such is the meanie, who think it lawful and laudable to
tread the same paths with their teachers, who ought to conduct them in life
as they do instruct them in learning.

In which respect all ministers and preachers ought carefully to look unto
themselves, that they direct their ways according to Gods will and word, since
their sins are far greater and more grievous, yea more heinous and horrible
then the trespass of any other, being no single solid sin; but double, Sin
by example two fold.
and therefore dangerous and damnable. Nam bis peccat qui exemplo peccat: For
sin by example is twofold: first, by sinning himself: secondly, by causing
others to fall, by following his folly.

Herein resembling Satan, or Lucifer the great Dragon, who when he forsook
his first estate and came tumbling down out of heaven; fell not himself
alone, but drew down with his tail as a train, a great number of stars
with him. Whereupon the best Schooleman very wittily says in this behalf,
That Magistrates and Ministers when they sin, they do, Peccare in quid
essentialiter, but all others but in quale accidentaliter. But good God, what
ministers, what manners in this our time, in comparison of the days of old?
What face, what fashions, what form of a Church, in regard of the former
state? Heretofore have been holy Bishops, Reverend fathers, Zealous preachers,
Godly livers, Learned writers, and constant Martyrs, Sed quantum mutamur ab
illo? how far are we fallen from the purity and perfection of our
predecessors? For now as our common shepherds go not before but follow after
their sheep; so do for the most part our spiritual Pastors suffer the
people to be an example of good life, and Godly conversation unto them, and
give them good leave to go before them into the kingdom of heaven: but yet
so, as they list not themselves to follow after. As Augustine of the Churchmen
and Clergy of his time, Venit indoctum vulgus and rapit coelum, nos vero cum
tota nostra doctrina ruimus in gehennam. But not to enforce this point with any
particular application for fear of offense, Nam quicquid tetigero vlcus erit:
For ye know the old Proverb, A gauld horse will soon winch, and a scabbed
head is soon broken: Wherefore to pass on to the next words.

THE CROWN OF CHRISTIANS.
1. PET. 5.4. v. And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive
an incorruptible Crown of glory.
IN these words as I have partly declared before, are contained two things;
the first, the person that shall reward them, that shall show themselves to be
examples of the flock, whom here he calls the chief shepherd: and the
time when they shall obtain the same; that is, when as he shall appear: first
therefore of the one, and then the other.

By chief shepherd, Christ a Shephard in three respects.
no doubt in this place our Apostle means our Savior Christ Jesus, who is
our shepherd, and that in three respects. First generally, in that by his
heavenly fathers grace and providence, he prepares and provides, grants
and gives, feeds and fills us with all temporal benefits and blessings,
and all spiritual gifts and graces, needful and necessary for us, and that
with a full hand, full horn, and full harvest. And so is he called our
shepherd, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shepherd, therefore shall I want
nothing. He brings me into green pastures, and leads me to the waters of
comfort, etc. And therefore is called the Shepherd of Israel, that leads
Joseph like a sheep, Psalm. 80.1. And in diverse other places of scripture,
which I cannot stand to repeat.

Secondly, and more particularly, in feeding our souls with the spiritual
bread of life, that Angel food, that heavenly Manna of the word, whereby we
are nourished and grow up to be the lively members of his mystical body, in
which regard he calls himself a shepherd, Ioh. 10.11. as Esaias also calls
him, 40.11. being that shepherd of whom David was a type, mentioned before by
Ezec. 34.23. who was such a vigilant heavenly shepherd, as Jacob was a
worldly; who in keeping and watching his flock, was in the day consumed with
heat, and in the night with frost; so that the sleep departed from his eyes
Genesis 31.40. such a careful spiritual shepherd as David was an earthly, who
followed his Ewes great with young, feeding them according to the simplicity
of his heart, and guided them according to the discretion of his hands, Psalm.
78.71.72. And finally such a diligent eternal shepherd, as the shepherds of
Bethlem were temporal shepherds, who abode still in the fields, and kept
watch by night, because of their flock, Luke 2.8. Such a painful shepherd as
gathers the Lambs with his arm, and carries them in his bosom, and
guides them that are with young, as Esaias, 40.11. says. Such a tenderhearted
shepherd, as whose bowels yearne within him, when he sees his sheep
scattered or going astray, Mat. 9.36. And such a loving shepherd, as who (if
that any of his sheep be lost and go astray) never cease seeking and
following after it, until he find it: and when he has found it, lays it on
his shoulders with joy and reioicing, Luke 15.4.5. But thirdly and principally
is he called a shepherd, because he laid down his life for his sheep,
preserving them with his own precious blood, Ioh. 10.11. in which respect he
is called the good shepherd in the same place, and the great shepherd of the
sheep, and therefore great, because of the blood of the everlasting covenant
which he shed for his sheep, Heb. 13.20. and the Prince that feeds, or the
princely shepherd of his people Israel, Mat. 26. out of Miche. 5.2. as Homer
calls the Princes of Greece (...). And therefore to conclude, here called
(...) the Archshepheard, as being the head and chief of the church, insomuch
that all other ministers, bishops, and archbyshops, of what degree or dignity
soever they be, are nothing else but subpastours and vndershepheards unto him.
He being that hundred eied-shepheard Argus signified by the Poets, that was no
idol or idle shepherd, nor once sleepie or slothful, but always watchful
and vigilant, being all eyes and nothing but an eye to look over his flock.
That wise Arcadian shepherd Apollo Nomius, who for his feeding of sheep may
well be called Nomius; so also for his excellency above all others, as having
no compeere or compagnion, may rightly be termed Apollo, finally that great
Pan and God of all shepherds, who has put down all other Gods and idol
shepherds, and is become himself all in all.

Exceeding therefore and intolerable is the pride and presumption of the Pope
and Bishop of Rome, in taking upon him, and calling himself Universal Bishop,
head of the Church, and Lord of all, bereauing and robbing Christ of his honor,
wherein he shows himself to be the very Antichrist, a woolfe, an Hienna, an
Hypocrite and hireling, a thief and robber. But the use hereof unto us to
apply it to our selves is twofold, both which our Savior teaches and tells
us himself; that if he be our Shepherd and our chief shepherd, that first
we ought to hear his voice, Ioh. 10.3. that is, not to hear it only with the
outward ears of our body, but with the inward ears of our souls; but also to
believe it faithfully in our hearts to keep it obediently in the actions of our
life and conversation, and to bear fruit, and to bring forth with Patience,
some thirty, some sixty, etc. For, not the hearers of the law, but the
doers, etc. James. And blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
it, Luke 11. And finally, whosoever hears my word and does the same, etc.
Mat. 7. And again, his voice and not the voice of any stranger nor of any
other, not the voice of any risen again from the dead, nor of any Angel
coming from heaven, that is only the truth of his word and Gospel.

Secondly, that we ought to follow him as he is our Shepherd, Ioh. 10.4. and
to fly from a stranger or any other whatsoever which is not a follower of him,
and how to follow him, even in all his virtues; as first in his humility as he
commands us himself, Learn of me, for I am meek, etc. Mat. 11. the place
mentioned before, and even so to humble and submit our selves one unto another,
as if occasion require to do the most base duties and services that can be
each to other, as he himself did when he washed his Disciples feet, and
enjoined them to do the like; Saying, Ioh. 13.14.15. If I, then your Lord and
Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet, for I
have given you an example that ye should do even as I have done to you.

Secondly, in suffering adversity, and bearing the cross as he himself
likewise warns us in the Gospel: Saying, He that will be my disciple, let
him take up his cross and follow me; To which also Peter exhorts us, saying:
For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow
his steps, 1. Pet. 2.21.

Thirdly in love, as he himself likewise requires, Ioh. 15.12. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you. Finally, least I
dwell too long in this point, in all the works of charity, in all the deeds
of mercy, in all the fruits of the spirit, that we may be holy as he is holy,
righteous as he is righteous, and perfect as he is perfect, although not
aequaliter as (...), which is altogether impossible; yet similiter and (...),
as far forth as lies in us, that we may grow up to a perfect man, even unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ; Ephesians. 4.13. And thus much of
the person of the chief Shepherd.

Now of the time when he will bestow, and we shall receive the reward mentioned
in the words following; that is, when he shall appear. There are two commings
or appearings of this chief Shepherd. The first in humility, the second in
majesty: the first in poverty, the second power: the first grace, the second
glory: first to be judged, secondly to judge: the first to die, the second to
restore life; the first is gone and past, the second is coming and
approaches, of which our Apostle in this place and not of the other. Which
second coming is called by diverse and sundry names in the Scripture,
according to the diverse and sundry effects and fruits, benefits and blessings,
which we shall reap and receive thereby. As sometimes it is called the
kingdom of God, as Luke 17.20. because then the spiritual, heavenly, and
everlasting kingdom shall be restored to Israel, when as our Savior shall
show himself to be the king of heaven and earth, and shall have an Archangell
sounding a trumpet before him as his herald, or harbinger: and the rest of the
Angels, even (...) as the author to the Heb. an whole troop of heavenly
soldiers which shall attend upon him as his guard, when as he shall make all
the elect and faithful his subjects, and admit them free-denizens and fellow
citizens with the Saints; yea when as they shall as heirs and heirs annexed
with Christ, possess, inherit and enjoy that kingdom which God the Father
prepared and gave unto them; God the Son purchased and appointed unto them;
and into the which, God the holy Ghost recorded and enrowled them. which
kingdom has these four surpassing privileges and prerogatives, besides many
other liberties, immunities and franchises, even those four last articles of
our creed. First, the communion of Saints: secondly, remission of sins:
thirdly, resurrection of the body; and fourthly, life everlasting. Cuius pax
charitas, lex veritas, modus aeternitas, as Austin: the peace whereof is
nothing but charity, etc.

Secondly, it is called the day of Christ's coming, Mat. 24. and Luke 17.
because that then our Savior shall not only be with us in spiritual presence
and presidence, as hitherto be has been since the ascension of him self, and
the descension of the holy Ghost, but shall come both in person and spirit,
both in body and soul, both in his humanity and in his divinity: of which
coming of his, Austin has these words, Veniet tanquam rex gloriosus e Palatio
tanquam sponsus speciosus ethalamo, etc.

Thirdly, the great day in many places of the Scriptures: great in respect of
the greatness of our Savior that then comes, the great King of glory, the
great Lord of heaven and earth: again, great in regard of the great things
that shall be done that day; and finally, great of it self, greater then any
of the feasts of the Jews, then the feasts of Tabernacles, Penticost or
Easter, which were but shadows and significations of this great day; Yea
greater then the great high and solemn holy days of Christians; greater then
the day of the Incarnation, Passion, or Resurrection of our Savior.

Fourthly, the latter day oftentimes in the Gospel wherein we must take our
dernier adewe, after which there shall be no other day, which shall be neither
artificial day, nor natural day, but an eternal day: a day without night,
wherein shall be a light without darkness, wherein shall neither Sun shine
nor Moon give light, nor star appear, but only the brightness of the
glory of God the last Sabbath of Sabaoths; the day of that everlasting Iubile
wherein all men shall rest from their labors, receive continual quiet, and
live in perpetual peace for ever and ever.

Fifthly, the time of cooling or refreshing, (...) Acts, 3.19. wherein after we
have sweat and swounke in this toilesome and troublesome world, and been
scorched in the purgatory of this life in the parching heat of persecution,
we shall be cooled and comforted, refreshed and revived again; not only with
the fresh and wholesome ayrie wind of the holy Ghost, but with the sweet
springing water of the mercy of God: with which not only the tips of our
tongues shall be cooled, which was all that Hel-burnt Dives did desire, but our
whole bodies and souls shall be sprinkled with.

Sixthly, (...), Romans 3.5. the day of wrath and of the declaration or revelation
of the just judgment of God. As first the day of wrath of the effect in
respect of the wicked and reprobate, who shall then find and feel the Lord to
pour out the terrible effects of his furious affection of anger upon them,
when as he shall show himself to be (...) hard and austere, as the slothful
servant said of him, even a severe judge and a consuming fire, as it is Heb.
12.20. out of Deuteronomy. 4.24. whose fiery wrath so hoatly inflamed against them
they shall not be able then to quench, no not with streams of drerie tears
and floods of bitter flittings. And (...), the day of the Revelation of the
just judgment of God, because that then our Savior will declare and reueile
himself to be the Judge of the world, to give dome and definitive sentence
both of quick and dead, and that as it were in open court of general Sessions
or assizes, when as he shall render to every man according to his works;
vengeance upon the wicked, and reward upon the righteous, destruction and
damnation unto the ungodly, but souls health and salvation unto the Godly.

Seventhly, (...), the day of the Epiphanie, not the first Epiphanie when
Christ's birth was manifested to the wise men of the East, by the leading of a
star: but when Christ's glory shall be reueiled by the final eclipse of the
sun, the darkning of the moon, the falling of the stars, and the shaking of
the powers of heaven: when as the son of man shall so come as the lightning
comes out of the East, and shines unto the West, Mat. 24.27. and 29. when as
the hearts of all men shall be made manifest.

Eighthly, (...), the day of visitation, when as Christ Jesus the great bishop
of our souls shall visit the ample diocese of his Church, and shall call all
the clergy before him and cause them to render account of their cures and
charges, and shall make those shine as stars for ever and ever, that shall
win souls unto God, but will remove those candles out of their
candlestickes, or else the candlestickes out of their places, which either give
no light or bad light, or are either dropping candles by their lewd and
loathsome life, or spitting candles by their troublesome and seditious doctrine.

Ninthly, the day of appearing as in this place, because that then our Savior
the sun of Righteousness shall suddenly pearse the clouds and break fourth
in glorious brightness, by the shining beams of his heavenly grace;
fulfilling the hearts of all the faithful, with the cheerful light and
comfortable heat of his divine presence, which have lien long as it were in
Joseph's cold yrons of adversity and affliction, and languished in Daniels
dark dungeon of despair. As the natural sun with his gladsome glee after
the dismal darkness of the weary night, dispelleth and dispierceth the
thick clouds being long looked and longed for, at the last appears to the
chearing and cherishing of all mankind: so called an appearing to the comfort
and consolation of the good and the godly, that when they see the least glimpse
and glimmering of him to peep out or appear, they should then lift up their
heads and look up, because their redemption is at hand: for then, and never
till then shall the workman receive his wages, the labourer in the Lords
vineyard his penny, the faithful servant the rule of the Lords house, the
thriftie vser of his talents, the government of so many Cities, the constant
runner his propounded garland, the spiritual soldier his promised crown, the
little flock their prepared kingdom, the followers of Christ in their
regeneration, their thrones of judgment. Which time teaches us that we should
not so doat as to dream of any crown, throne or kingdom in this life, or
once to look for any paradise, heaven, or other blessedness in this world,
nor any time to hope for any happiness before our chief shepherd do
appear. For as there is no heavenly paradise but in Abraham's bosom, nor any
pleasures for evermore but at the right hand of God, nor any true ioies to be
found, but in the kingdom of heaven: so are we not to enter into this paradise
to enjoy these pleasures and to be partakers of these ioies, until the day of
his appearing.

In the mean time therefore, we must not with the husbandman look to reap
with joy, before we have sown with tears; nor to look to live with him, before
we have died with him: to reign with him before we have suffered with him: to
be glorisied with him, before we have been crucified with him: to sit with him
on his right hand and on his left, before we have drunck of the cup that he
has druncke of, and been baptized with the baptism that he has been baptized
with: to be crowned with this crown of glory, before we have bin crowned
with his crown of thorns: to be found as fine gold for the treasure-house of
the Lord, until we be purged and purified in the fire and furnace of
affliction: to be good corn in the Lords garner, before we have been sifted by
Satan. Finally, not to sit on his throne, before we have continued with him in
his temptations. For first must the Church be militant here upon earth, before
it can be triumphant in heaven; first must we suffer affliction, before we can
live Godly in Christ Jesus: and to conclude, first must we be in tribulation,
before we can enter into the kingdom of heaven. It follows in the next words.

Ye shall receive, etc.
Now come we to the reward which our Apostle Peter promises in the person of
our Savior Christ, which is no light thing of small value, or mean account;
but the greatest gift and richest reward that can be given and received; a
bounty beseeming the person of our Savior the bestower, and worthy the party
that is partaker. Kings and Princes, when they liberally confer gifts and
rewards, they give not toies and trifles, but great and royal guerdons, such
as are agreeable to their maicstic and magnificence. Aristotle writes of his
Magnanimus, that he bestows benefits upon others freely and franckly; and that
herecompenceth above measure and proportion, and that he will not vouchsafe to
give light and little things, but precious and peerless presents. But
howsoever the Philosopher frame such a man, according to his own fantasy as a
Phaenix, seldom, or no whereto be found: yet such a one the Scripture
describes God the Father, and Christ Jesus his son and our Savior to be in
all respects; as first to be the giver of all things, and that liberally (...)
and not vpbraidingly, and those that he does give to be (...) good gifts and
perfect gifts, James, 2.17. far surpassing in worth and worthiness the gifts
of any Palatines or Potentates, Kings and Keysars, Conquerors and Monerches in
the world. Pharo King of Egypt gave noble gifts unto Joseph, when he gave him
his own signet to wear on his hand, fine garments of linen to put on his
back, a chain of gold to put about his neck, and gave him to wife a Princes
daughter, and made him Viceroy of all his land, and gave him his best coach
but one to sit in, Genesis 41. Saul king of Israel honorably rewarded David, when
as he gave him his royal robe and all his Princely garments, unto his sword
his bow and his girdle, and made him lieutenant general of all his forces; and
smally his own daughter to wife, 1. Sam. 18. The Queen of Saba gave princely
presents to Solomon, when she gave him sixscore talents of gold, and an
exceeding quantity of sweet odours, and an infinite number of precious stones,
King. 1.10.10. And king Solomon himself was most bountiful, when he gave Hiram
king of Tyrus 20. Cities in the land of Galilee, 1. King. 9.11. And when he
gave to the Queen of Saba whatsoever she would ask, besides that he gave of
his kingly liberality, 1. King. 10.13. And finally, when as he gave silver in
Jerusalem as stones, and gave Caedars as the wild figtrees which grow in great
plenty on the plain, 1. King. 10.27. Mordecay the Jew was highly honored of
Asuerus, when he caused him to wear his own royal apparel, and to ride on
his own horse in the streets of the City, and made Hammon a great Prince to
proclaim before him: Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will
honor. Ester, 6.11. Daniell the Prophet was greatly exalted of King Darius,
when as he made him chief ruler over 120. gouerners, Dan. 6.1. The wise men of
the East which might seem to be great states or Potentates by their great
gifts, offered unto our Savior precious presents, even gold, incense and
mirrh. Mat. 3.11. Constantine the great, that renowned Emperor and Monarch of
all the world, greatly promoted and enriched the Church, when as he bountifully
bestowed upon the same most liberal collations and donations, large rents and
revenues, ample lands and possessions; and with all, princely privileges and
prerogatives. As also diverse others Godly and christian Kings and Queens in the
like royal benevolence, and benificence have followed his excellent example,
in showing themselves foster fathers, and noble nourcing mothers unto the
Church. Finally many earthly princes have notably exalted diverse of their
wel-deseruing subjects and servants, by giving unto them great manors and
honors, high degrees, honorable dignities, even Lordshippes, Earldomes and
Duchies, and to make them the second persons of the Realms, but yet so, as
they always reserved and preserved their own crowns, thrones, and kingdoms
unto themselves.

But our Savior Christ Jesus, who is the king of all kings, the most mighty
Soucraigne Monarch of heaven and earth, who so far surpasses all worldly
princes as the sun does the moon or stars, heaven the earth, and the
creator the creature being (...) as Basil calls him a giver of great things,
bestows nothing upon those whom he will prescree and promote, honor and
exalt, but a crown, throne or kingdom, surinounting them in greatness of
reward, as he exceedoth and excels them in essence and power. And no
marvel is it if our Savior give nothing else but a crown, as thinking all
other things to be base for him to bestow upon those to whom he promises any
reward, when as all principalities, dominions and kingdoms are at his command
and appointment, and at whose feet all kings and princes shall lay down their
crowns, mounds, and scepters, as having received the same before at his hands,
of which he so often ascertaineth and assures the elect and faithful in his
Gospel, as Job. 14. Fear not little flock, for my heavenly Father will give
you a kingdom, Luke 22. As my Father has appointed unto me a kingdom, even
so do I appoint unto you, Mat. 19. ye shall sit on twelve thrones, and judge
the twelve tribes of Israel. Finally never does our Savior or his Apostles
offer and profer in the name and person of Christ any reward unto the
righteous, but it is either a crown, a throne or kingdom as it may appear
every where in the Gospels of the Evangelists and Epistles of the Apostles. So
gracious always is God in his gifts, so rich in his rewards, and so bountiful
in all his benefits, and blessings; so that in this, if ever in any thing,
that Proverb of the Poet is found most true, Non libet exiguis rebus adesse
Ioui. As likewisein respect of us that receive the same, he gives this so
great a guerdon even to crown us with mercy and loving kindness, in
bestowing upon us of his own gracious good liking more then we could expectare
vel expetere require or request, deserve or desire, hope to have or dare to
receive at his hands, of his favorable vouchasasing to make that account and
regard of us, as to deem and esteem us worthy of no meaner a reward, then of
a crown; and that therefore, because we have attained to that dignity to be
called the sons of God by the election of the Father, the redemption of the
spirit, whereby we even loath and neglect al worldly things whatsoever and
account them with Paul (...) even as doung be they never so godly, and glorious
in the sight of flesh and blood: but only to aim at the high price of the
calling of God in Christ Jesus. As whose heroical spirits should disdain al
their temporanie and transitory trash, and trumperie, toies and trifles, but
to cry and say, (...), As Achilles when he followed Hector in Homer, and
again, Neque enim leuia aut ludicra petuntur, with Aeneas pursuing Turnus in
Virgil, for seeing all the faithful are Eagles (as the Scripture terms
them) they must neither creep on the earth with the Serpent, nor sit on
dunghils with the Ravens, but soar aloft for their pray, and where the
carcass is, thither must they resort, as our Savior in the Gospel, even to
aspire and ascend up where he himself is to sit with him in his throne. For as
it is in the Proverb, Aquila non capit muscas: The Eagle will catch no flies,
that is, regard little and light things: but as he is the Prince of birds, so
will he be crowned as a King and Sovereign. But if we shall then receive a
crown, what manner of crown shall it be? Diverse sorts of crowns.
For there is diverse sorts of crowns: there is Ciuica corona a crown made of
Oaken bows, which was given of the Romans to him that saved the life of any
citizen in battle against his enemies. Secondly, Obsidionalis which was of
grass given unto him that delivered a town or city from sicdge. Thirdly,
Muralis which was of gold, given unto him that first scaled the wall of any
town or castle. Fourthly, Castrensis, which was likewise of gold, given unto
him that first entered the camp of the enemy. Fifthly, Naualis, and that also
of gold, given unto him that first by valor bourded the ship of the enemy.
Sixthly Oualis, which was of Myrtle, which was given to those captains that
subdued any town or City, or that won any field casily without loss or
shedding of blood. Seventhly and lastly Triumphalis, which was of Laurel given
to that chief General or Consul, which after some notable victory and
conquest came home triumphing. But all these or the most of them were rather
garlands then crowns, yea the very best of those that were of gold, rather
coronets then crowns, and if crowns, rather crowns of honor then of glory.

This crown therefore, that our chief Shepherd shall give, and the faithful
elders of the Church shall receive, differs from all other crowns in two
respects, signified by these two adjuncts annexed unto the same by the
Apostles. As first, in that it is a crown of glory; and secondly, in that it
is incorruptible. Aristotle affirms in his Ethickes, virtue to be only bonum
landabile, making (...) to be the adiunct thereof: but his felicity to be
bonum honorabile, making (...) to be the adiunct of it as far surpassing
virtue, and all other things in the world. But our Apostle goes far beyond
the philosopher in promising a blessedness to the elect and the faithful,
which far surmounteth this Ethick and Ethnicke happiness, not a gift of
honor, but a guerdon of glory; that as the giver thereof is called the king
of glory, and the place where this shall be bestowed is termed the kingdom
of glory, and as his spouse is also glorious within, and as his Angels in
heaven sing nothing else but glory to God on high, and and his Saints on earth;
but glory be to the Father and to the Son, etc. and as nothing but glorious
things are spoken of his City, so he gives nothing else but a a crown of
glory.

We read of Princely crowns, Royal crowns, Imperial crowns, and we hear
of the Popes Triple crown, and all these for matter and metal of fine pure
gold, for form and fashion most curiously wrought, according to the skill and
cunning of the Artificer, pollished and garnished with flower-deluces, and
pomgranets, with other varieties embelished and enameled with most flourishing
and Orient colors, beautified and beset with precious stones and pearls of
great price. But none of all these is like to this crown of glory, which he
has prepared for the elect. For if the streets of the City of God be of pure
gold and shining crystal, and the walls of the same of precious stones, and
the gates thereof of pearls, whatshal the crown belonging to this kingdom
be? who is able to express the glory of it, or to what glorious thing in the
world may it be compared? I must needs cry out and say with the Poet putting
my self to silence, Ingenium fateor transcendit gloria doni, Materia vires
exuperante meas. If I had the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able to
discipher it asit deserves, for sooner shall a man measure the heaven with his
spanne, hold the wind in his fist, ande contain the maine sea in a vessel,
then declare the excellency of this crown, which is not only a crown of
glory, but has diverse other titles of pre-eminence given unto it, which all
shall be partakers of which are possessours of the same. As 2. Tim. 4.8. It is
called a Crown of righteousness, by the imputation and participation of our
Saviors righteousness. And James, 1.12. the Apostle terms it, as also John
Apocal. 2.10. a Crown of life, because those that have the same shall be
partakers of life eternal; and finally Apocalips. 12.1. a Crown of stars,
because they that shall receive this crown, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Not to speak of other crowns not found in the Scriptures, but in
the Fathers, as of the crown of virgins, the crown of Doctors, the crown of
Martyrs, and the triple crown which Augustine mentions in his 243. Epistle
to Cyrill, being told thereof by Hierom himself, whom he there says he saw
and talked withal in his vision: because I deem Auguistin not to be the
Author of that Epistle, so I doubt of the truth of these things, because we
have no evidence of them in the written word. We leave therefore this Adiunct
and come to the next, which is, that this is not only a crown, but also an
incorruptible crown.

Our Apostle having used here in this reward, which he promises and
propounds a metaphore or borrowed speech taken from wrastlers and champions,
from their manner of crowning after they have lawfully striuen, and vanquished;
now notwithstanding he seems to show a difference in this word between this
crown and their crown, in that this is incourruptible, but theirs to be
subject to corruption, notably amplifying the excellency of the reward.
Likewise the Apostle Paul does the like, but more fully following this
Metaphore, 1. Cor. 9.25. Every man that tries maistries abstaineth from
althings and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we for an
incorruptible crown. The word which our Apostle uses in the Original is
very significant (...); that is, which cannot perish or vanish, wear or waste
away, being a Metaphore taken from flowers, which after they be gathered do
soon and suddenly wither and fade away, or from the bodies of men which by
labor are enfeebled, by age decayed, and by sickness consume away, and not
only (...) but (...), signifying hereby that not only all other crowns, but
also all other things should be corrupted and come to nothing, and only this to
continue for ever, and therefore far excelling all other rewards whatsoever.
For what is there in the world so sound and substantial that is not
transitory and subject to corruption? Gold the most solid metal of all
others, yet in time it wears away. The Adamant though otherwise not to be
broken, by Goats blood mouldreth in pieces. Yea the sun shall be darkened;
the moon shall loose her light; all the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and
the heavens themselves shall wax old as does a garment, according to that of
the Poet, Tempus edaxrerum, that is, as our Beaucleark interprets it, Eld
eats al things, only this thing, this reward, this crown, remains and
abides for ever. All other things whatsoever, whether they be rich araie,
silver, gold iemmowes or jewels, either the mothe freateth, or canker
corrupts, or thieves break through and steal them. Let us therefore lay up
only this treasure in heaven, aim only at this crown, seek only this
glory, labor only to reap and receive this reward: for this treasure is
only sure, this pleasure only sincere, this reward only remaining, this
crown only incorruptible; finally this glory only everlasting. Tigranes
king of Armenia said of his roial golden crown (considering the heavy burden
of his chargeable government) that to wear and bear a crown, was not so
happy as honorable, nay so honorable as hard; and that therefore if it were
to take again, he would not vouchasafe to stoop for it, if he found it lying
on the ground.

But this Crown of which our Apostle speaks, and the chief shepherd
gives, cannot be termed hard, because our Savior often offers and
profereth the same, now does promise, and hereafter will perform it unto us;
and yet withal, honorable, for it is a crown of glory; yea and happy too,
because it makes us happy and blessed; yea and everlasting happy, because it
is an incorruptible crown; and that therefore all men of euerre degree, state,
and condition, young and old, rith and poor, high and low, even Potentates
and Princes, Kings and Keysars, Monarchs and conquerors ought not only to
stoop for it, but to bestirre themselves and endeavor with all might and
maine, and all means possible, yea with all the outward parts of their bodies,
and inward powers of their mind to attain unto it.

And here to conclude, let us mark what Peter says, Ye shalreceeive this
crown, and this crown of glory, yea and this incorruptible crown of glory:
but how? not in way of merit and desert, but as a grant and grace, gift and
guerdon, which our Savior vouchsafes to bestow upon us, for so we read in
the conclusion of every Epistle belonging to the seven Churches, in promising
unto them crowns, thrones and kingdoms, he tells them that he will give and
grant them; and yet in a manner of reward, when as Austin says, Coronat in
nobis dona sua, non bona nostra, munera sua, non merita nostra. And thus much
of these words, and of this whole text, etc, The Lord, etc.

FINIS.
THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST, OR Christian ointment.
JOHN. 2.20. But ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye know all
things.
THis Text (as it may appear by the first words hereof) is nothing else but an
exception or correction, An exception or cor rection.
whereby our Apostle in this his Catholic Epistle seems to except and exempt
those elect and faithful Christians, unto whom he writes from those of whom
he speaks in the two verses going before. As if he had said: They were
Scismatickes which cut themselves off from the body of the Church, for they
went out from us, but they were not of us, but you have fellowship with us, as
in the 1. chap. 3. They rejected castawaies, but you erected children; and
therefore terms them not once, but often by the tender name of babes. Again,
they Antichrists or Antichristians, but you Christians; and thereupon tells
them that they have an ointment from him that is Holy: finally, that they seem
to know much, and indeed know nothing; but ye have known all things. The words
themselves being but one verse, Division.
divide themselves very plainly (as it is evident) into two principal parts.
The first a cause in the former words, But ye have an ointment from him that is
holy. The second, an effect of the same cause in the words following: And, or
rather; for, ye have known all things. In the first part the cause, are these
four things to be considered: First, an having; But ye have, that is, a
benefit received, and blessing bestowed. Secondly, who are they that have the
same (ye) those elect and faithful to whom John writes. Thirdly, what they
have (an ointment.) Fourthly, from whom, even from him that is holy. In the
second part, the effect, are to be noted two things: first knowledge in
general: secondly, what kind of knowledge, a full, perfect and absolute
knowledge of all things, of all which in their due order as they lie in the
text.

But ye have,
Before I begin to entreat of the matter or material points belonging to my
text, mentioned before in my Division; I think it requisite first to speak of
the manner of this speech, and of the exception and signification of the first
word in the entrance of my text, which gives a light and understanding to the
whole verse following. The word in the original is (...), which the Apostle
here uses, which commonly is taken for a conjunction copulative and
signifies, And; but in this place it is otherwise to be accepted for an
exceptiue particle, and therefore very well translated, not et, but ac, by the
Latin interpretors and faithfully Englished, But, making this whole sentence to
be nothing else but an exception or exemption as is before declared. And that
this word is so usually taken in the Scripture, it is evident by many and
manifest places; as Mat. 11.19. (...). But wisdom is justified of her
children, whereas our Savior makes an exception against the blasphemous Jews
which ceased not to rail and revile him by the name of glutton, wine-bibber,
Samaritane, friend of Publicans and sinners; as if our Savior had said,
exemptinhg others from them, that although they condemned and contemned him so,
yet there were others even his own children that did justify and glorify him
likewise, Mat. 12.39. An evil and adulterous generation seek a sign in the
Greek (...), but no other sign shall be given them, but the sign of the
Prophet Jonas. Again, Act. 20.28. in those words of Peter unto Cornelius and
his company: Ye know that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to
accompany or come to one of another nation (...), howsoever in the original to
be Englished; but God has showed me that I should not call any man common or
unclean. The like in many other places of the Scripture, which I cannot stand
to rehearse that I may proceed from the manner of this speech to the matter of
my text.

The first of the four things to be considered in the former principal part of
this verse, is an having, where first we are to note that the Apostle here
uses not either the preterperfect or the future tence, but only the present,
saying not, either you have had or you shall have, but (...) Habetis, you have:
wherein he signifies the happy state of those to whom he writes, in now
possessing and presently enjoying the heavenly blessing, of the which he here
speaks: for had he said either you have heretofore, insinuating that their
benefit past, he had seemed to have accused them of unthankfulness, and
argued them of misery: Miserum enim est fuissE and miserum habuisse, for this
were an unhappy state for a man to have had wealth, but now to be disabled by
poverty; or to have had health, but now to be diseased by sickness; or
finally to have been endued with many temporal gifts or spiritual graces,
and afterward to be dispoiled and dispossessed of the same: as the Trojans
once of themselves Fuimus Troes, that sometimes they gloriously flourished,
although afterward they were victoriously vanquished by the Grecians;
whereupon Virgil, Nunc seges est vbi Troia fuit, the soil where Troy diastand,
is now become corneland; and where of that old Proverb, sere sapiunt Phryges,
that the Trojans are wise afterward. So the Jews at the first as Peter
terms them 1.2.9. out of Moises. Exodus 19.6. were a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, an holy nation, and the peculiar people of God; but now by
reason of their rebellion against God, the rejecting of his Gospel, the
killing of his Prophets, the crucifying of Christ, and the persecuting of the
Apostles, The Jews.
are become of children of the covenant, heirs of promise, and servants of
Gods house, as banished rebels exiled out of his kingdom, ungrateful tenants
thrust out of the Lords vineyard, and as envious dogs shut out of the doors,
even as rejected reprobates, and runnagate castawaies scattered over the face
of the whole earth, without land, without Lord, without a Church, without
common wealth, without government, without grace, or without any good thing at
all. The abomination of desolation.
Their divine law changed into a corrupt Cabala, their heavenly Temple turned
into a den of Idolatry, their mount Syon the hill of exaltation, and holy
Jerusalem the City of Sanctification, the one the seat, the other the
sanctuary of God, become according to the prophecy of our Savior in the
gospel; not only a desolate habitation Mat. 23.38. but also the abomination
of desolation Mat. 24.15. as it was also foretold by Daniell, 9.29. The like of
the seven (sometimes excellent Churches of Asia) mentioned in the first of the
Revelation, of golden candlesticks then, now, made leaden shrines, Synagogues
of Satan, sinkes of sin, and puddles of perdition. First planted by Paul, as
it appears in the Acts: and watered by John, as it is manifest in the Apocal:
and flourishing in Christ, but afterward supplanted by the false Apostles,
choked with Mahometisme; and finally fallen away by Apostasy. As also may be
said of the church of Rome which was sometimes a congregation of Saints, Romans
The church of Rome.
1.7.8. but now a confusion of sin and sinners, in Paul's time famous for
faith, and obedience throughout the whole world 8. and 16. chap. 19. but in our
days infamous for Infidelity and Apostasy throughout all christendom. Then
treading down Satan under their feet 16.20. but now trampling the Saints of
God under their feet, then the seat of Christ, now the chair of Antichrist;
and therefore now not old Rome, but new Babylon, as Peter terms it by the
confession of the Catholics themselves. The use of all which unto us is this:
That having the good benefits and blessings of God, especially the gifts and
graces of the spirit, we keep sure and hold fast the same with might and
maine, with tooth and nail, with hand and foot, especially the inestimable
jewel and invaluable margarite of the word of God and Gospel of Christ,
whereof Mat. 13.46. least by unthankful neglecting and lothing it, we finally
leave and leese the same: for as the Poet,

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri, It is no less masterie to
keep and save that which a man has gotten, then to have and get at the first.
Having therefore present possession and full fruition of this so great a
treasure; let us take heed betimes, least by unthankfully abusing the same, we
afterward lament the lack thereof, Carendo enim magis quam fruendo, when as
rather by wanting then by enjoying, we shall perceive how gracious a blessing
this is. Nor does our Apostle here say to the elect and faithful Christians to
whom he writes; Ye shall have, as that they should have hereafter, but had not
yet, which although it might seem to carry some show of an houering hope of
future consolation, yet had it not been half so comfortable; for many things
may happen between hope and having. According to the Proverb, (...), Multa
cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra, many things may happen between the
cup and the lip. And while the grass grows the steed may starve, and it
is ill hoping for dead men's shoes, as we say: and one bird in the hand is
worth two in the wood; a little in re and esse is better, then much in spe and
posse: and a small thing in present possession is more, then a great deal in
reuersion and remainder. If he had allured them by promise it had been very
forcible and effectual, because God is faithful in all his promises: nor is
not as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should repent,
and when as all the promises of God are yea and amen in Christ Jesus, but he
confirms them in putting them in remembrance of a divine benefit already
performed and bestowed upon them, which at that instant they enjoyed, which
must needs be more auailable and aduantageable: they then feeling and finding
in themselves the fruit and effect thereof; and the rather, because the promises
of God are but conditional, that if we accomplish what he does require, then
shall we be sure that he will perform what we do desire, otherwise he may
seem to be changed in his word, Non Deus mutatur, sed nos ipsi mutamur Aug.
by not observing covenants with us, when as indeed we are changed in our works
by not keeping his commandments. So that our Apostle could not have spoken
more fully and Emphatically to show forth their perfect and happy state
wherein they now stand, wherein also note the great bounty and beneficence of
the Lord God toward these his faithful, as being a Lord of great largeness
and liberality, as James describes him 1.5. and that of his best gifts. If
any of you want wisdom let him ask it of God, who gives to alimen liberally
and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. Not given sparingly as man
does by pence, farthings, and mites; but plentifully by talents, by pressed
down measure, and running over; and not with one hand, but with both hands, yea
with a full hand, full horn, and full harvest. Nor obraidingly as we usually
do by hitting men in the teeth with that we have bestowed upon them; As the
Comicall Poet Haec commemoratio est quasi exprobratio, but graciously and
cheerfully above our desert or desire, and still multiplying his gifts and
graces upon us more and more beyond our hope and expectation; and not content
once but often to prevent and present us with the blessings of his goodness,
but always to crown us with mercy and loving kindness, as it may appear
more in particular.

As our Apostle puts them in mind, that first they have fellowship with the
Father, and with his son Jesus Christ. 1. chapter 5. v. Secondly, that they have
an advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ the righteous 1. Ioh. 2.1. And
that now thirdly, they have an ointment from him that is holy: therefore
insinuating that God has so abundantly blessed them, that they have no want
of any heavenly gifts or graces, yea so bountiful and beneficial is the Lord
God toward all in general, Simile.
that even as Kings and Emperors at their coronation use to cast out among the
people handfuls of money, and to cause the common conduits to run with wine
for all comers to drink thereof, and to feast al whosoever will taste of
their princely liberality and royal munificence. And as Aristotle describes
his Magnificus in his Ethics lib. 4. cap. 2. not only to be sumptuous and
surpassing bountiful in his gifts, according to the name and nature of the
virtue which he uses, but also to be large in his expenses, as that he will
not vouchsafe exactly to take reckening and account of that which he lays
out: of the which the Philosopher gives this reason, (...), that to require a
strait and exact account of things, is a sign of a base and miserable nature;
and the benefits that he bestows, to be both private and public both to
profane uses and holy services not only bestowing private profits upon
particular persons, but also conferring common commodities to whole cities and
societies and all these (...) for honesty and honor sake; even so deals the
Lord God with all his creatures, by opening his hand and filling all things
living with plentifulnesse, yea hand over head by scattering and squandring his
gifts, not caring nor sparing to whom, when or where, by conseruing and
preserving, guiding and governing, ordring and administering all things in the
world for their good and his own glory: bestowing his ordinary benefits and
blessings generally upon al alike, as when he gives the air to all that
breathe, with the fire, water, and earth for the common use and necessity of
man, and makes the sun to shine on the evil and the good, and sending rain
on the just and unjust, as our Savior in the Gospel Mat. 5.45. And in
bestowing his choicest and chiefest gifts and graces upon his chosen children,
which are most dear and near unto him. Even as the mighty Kings and Keysers,
the greatest states and potentates of the world do usually give to their
counselors and courtiers, to their servants and subjects, gold and silver,
Simile.
chains and bracelets, lands and livings, offices and honors, and other
princely preferments according to their desire and desert, and upon their suite
and service; but yet reserving his casket of precious pearls and peerless
jewels, his rich treasury and exchequer, his royal crown and dignity, his
Princely throne and chair of estate, and all his glorious kingdoms and
dominions unto his own son the Prince and Heir apparent, which is to
succeed him in his Sovereign rule and government. Semblably deals the Lord
God with those that are Dilecti and electi Dei his chosen children, his
darlings and delight, for whom only although he bestow upon all others both
good and bad, his temporal benefits and blessings; even as Aug: says of
riches, so of all other external things of this life, Dantur bonis ne
videantur esse malae, and dantur malis ne videantur esse bonae, making them
common as it were to all mankind. He provides and prepares, to whom alone he
promises and performs his spiritual gifts and graces, as pecullars properly
appertaining unto them. So the prophet David, He showed his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel; He has not dealt so with any nation,
neither has the Heathen knowledge of his laws, Psalm. 146.19.20. So upon the
faithful which are the true members of the holy catholic church, Four
privileges of the faithful
God bestows four especial privileges and prerogatives, 1. to be a
communion of Saints, 2. remission of sins, 3. resurrection of the body, and
4. life everlasting. So unto the Disciples and Apostles of our Savior tells
them in the Gospel. It is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven, but unto others it was not given, Mat. 13.11. So unto the little
flock says Christ, the heavenly Father will give a kingdom. So, unto all
those that love Christ's appearing, Paul affirms that there is laid up a
crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8. And to him that endures temptation and
loves the Lord, shall be given a crown of life, as James, 1.12. And to the
Elders that feed the flock of Christ committed to their charge, an
incorruptible crown of glory, as Pet. 1.5.4. As finally John in this place
testifies, that upon these babes and beloved of God, is bestowed an ointment
from him that is holy, which others had not obtained nor could attain unto, as
those Antichrists mentioned in the last verse going before; who also are said
in the next and former verse by our Apostle, to go out from us because they
were not of us; not partakers of this ointment, because they were enemies of
the grace of God, and such as denied Jesus to be Christ, as it is in the verse
next following, but on the 22. whereby it cuidently appears what difference
the Lord makes of his gifts, and what choice of his elect in singling them out
from the rest, in reserving his especial and singular blessings for them
alone, that they might be anointed with the oil of grace and ointment of
gladness above their fellows, as it is said of David and of Christ, Psalm. 45.
And such were these unto whom John. writes in this place, and of whom may it
be said as the Prophet, Psalm. 144. Happy are the people that be in such a case,
yea blessed are the people which have the Lord for their God, and Christ for
their Savior. And here likewise consider how the Lord God rewards the
gracious and grateful receiving, and careful and circumspect employing of
such gifts and graces as he bestows upon us, even by giving us a greater
growth and increase thereof, and by amplifying and multiplying the same upon us
in more full measure and plentiful manner, whereas contrariwise they which
either disdainfully contemn, or dissolutely neglect, or slothfully let slip
or sleep the good gifts of God in them, thereby suffering them to decay and
die by not putting them in ure and use, shall be utterly deprived of Gods
heavenly grace, and finally bereaved of all his divine blessings: for the one,
first as the Preacher, of Alms of devotion, of charity, works and deeds of
mercy, Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou shall be sure
to find it, Eccl. 11.1. As it is manifest by the widow of Zereptha: The meal
of whose barrel wasted not, nor the oil of whose cruse diminished not,
although she did make and bake cakes thereof, for Elias, her self and her
son, 1. King. 17.16. And as our Savior in the Gospel; of constancy and
continuance in the time of tribulation and persecution, even to the loss of
life, friends, lands and goods: Verily I say unto you, There is no man that
has for saken house, or brethren or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or land for my sake and the Gospels; but he shall receive an hundred
fold more at this present; houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life,
Mar. 10.29.30. As it is evident in Job: that president of patience, whose
captivity for his perseverance in his temptations the Lord turned into
liberty, his misery into felicity, his poverty into wealth, and his
sickness into health, blessing his last days more then his first, causing all
his neighbors, friends, and kindred and acquaintance to flock and flow unto
him, to accompany and and comfort him, and to confer and contribute unto him
of their money, goods, and Jewels; multiplying his cattle in exceeding number,
increasing his offpring with a fair issue, beholding his posterity unto the
fourth generation; and finally in crowning him with honorable old age and
fullness of days, John the last Chapter.

So our Savior, Mat. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he
shall have abundance; but whosoever has not, shall be taken away even that
which he has. As we may see in Elizeus the Prophet, upon whom for his
willingness and forwardness in accepting that holy function, and for his
faithfulness and zeal in following the same, and for his earnest and fervent
prayer, was doubled upon him the spirit of Elias, 2. Kings, 2.9. but otherwise
in Saul, from whom the good spirit of the Lord was taken away, and an evil
spirit of God was sent to vex him, 1. Sam. 16.14. Of both which, we have a
double evident demonstration. First in the parable of the Virgins, of the which
the first five being wise, used well their lamps, by trimming preparing and
filling them with oil against the coming of the bridegroom, and therefore
were received into the wedding: but the other five foolish, abused their
lamps, in suffering them to go out for want of oil, and for not watching the
time and season of the bridegroomes coming, and therefore were worthily thrust
out of doors. Secondly in the similitude of the talents, wherein is declared;
that first he that had five talents occupying with them and gaining other five
to his masters profit; and again, he that received two to get other two to his
masters use, and that therefore they had not only the praise of good and
faithful servants, but also the reward of their weldoing, in being made rulers
over much, because they were found faithful in little; and were bidden to
enter into their masters joy.

But as for that other evil and slothful servant, which had but one talent,
who wrapped it up in a napkin, and went and hid it in the earth, accusing his
masters hardness: His Lord did not only reprove him of idleness, and bereft
him of his talent, bestowing it on him that had ten talents; yielding that
for a reason before remembered, mentioned of our Savior, Mat. 13. but did also
cast him as an unprofitable servant into utter darkness, where is weeping,
wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25. The use hereof in a word, is thus much
unto us all, upon whom God in any manner or measure has bestowed any temporal
benefits and blessings, or spiritual gifts and graces, that we take heed that
we neither disuse them idly, nor abuse them vainly, nor misuse them
unlawfully, but wisely and warily, carefully and circumspectly, to use them to
the honor and glory of God, to the good of our neighbor and brother, and to
our own souls health and salvation.

As for those in general that have the world at will, that they follow the
precept of the Apostle in using the world as though they used it not, and
particularly for those that have riches, that they make themselves friends of
the unrighteous Ma^mon, for those that have wit and wisdom, that they be
wise, not in their generation, but unto regeneration for those that are endued
with knowledge, that they be not thereby puffed up, but that they use it unto
edification and so forth of the rest. For we are all of us from the highest to
the lowest, but Gods stewards of such gifts; graces, and other good things
which he lends us, and lets us have for the term and time of our life,
to be disposed, not according to our will and wish, but for his advantage and
advancement; of the which we shall all at the last day of judgment be called
to a reckening, when as our Savior shall say unto every one of us, as the
Lord unto the unrighteous steward in the Gospel, Read rationem villicationis
tuae, Render an account of thy Baylieweeke, when as Justice with equity, and
judgment with severity shall be ministered unto us. And thus much of the two
former points of this first principal part of my text. Of this having and of
the persons that are here said to have. Now therefore let us go forward to the
next; that is, to the thing that they are here said to have: which is said to
be an ointment.

But ye have an ointment.
Of many kinds of ointments read we in the Scriptures. Many kinds of
ointments.
The first whereof as far as I can remember is that of Jacobs, with which he
anointed the Pillar which hoerected at Zuz: when he consecrated and named it
Bethel the house of God. The second, Bethel. Genesis 6.28.18.31.13.
that of Moises, the oil of holy ointment which God commanded him to make for
matter of the principal spices, namely of pure mirrh, sweet Cynamon, sweet
Calamus, Cassia, and oil olive for form after the art of the Apothecarie, for
use to anoint the Tabernacle therewith, The holy ointment.
the Arc of the testimony, the table, the candlesticks, the Altar of incense,
with all their implements, yea and Aaron himself, with his sons, with an
inhibition of not anointing any man's flesh therewith, nor to make any
composition like unto, it, Ex. 30. Of the which ointment David, Psalm. 133. to
the which brotherly love is by him resembled, where he calls it the precious
ointment, which was powered on Aarons head, The priests ointment.
and ran down on his beard, and so to the skirts of his clothing. The
semblable or the selfsame was that oil or ointment, with which the Kings and
Priests of Israel were wont to be anointed. As that viole of oil, with which
Samuel anointed Saul, 1. Sam. 20.1. The Kings ointment.
And that horn of oil, with which the same Prophet anointed David, 1. Sam.
16.13. And that box of oil, with which one of the children of the Prophets
anointed Iehu, 2. Kin. 9.1. And finally as that ointment, with which Elias
anointed Elizeus, 1. Kin. 19.16. Other ointments likewise we read of, as of a
feasting ointment of which David, Thou shall prepare a table before me against
them that trouble me, thou have anointed my head with oil and my cup
runs over, Psalm. 23.5. Where the Prophetical king or kingly prophet
reckening up his outward blessings and princely pleasurs, with which God had
enriched him at his royal banquets, among his full dishes of delicates and
plentiful bowls of wine, for which he gave the Lord thanks, he had likewise
no want of every precious ointment, both for the refection of his body, and
the refreshing of his spirits; all which, he acknowledges to proceed from the
divine providence of God.

After the manner of the great Kings and Keysars of the world, who for their
more magnifice^ce at their pompous feasts wherein is all excess, are wont to
have three sorts of costly ointments, as sumptuous as may be. (...).
The first (...), which being liquid, they used to drink. The second (...),
(...).
which being thick, they were accustomed to eat. The third, the mean
between both, (...), which being neither so thick as the one, nor so thin
as the other, they did anoint themselves with all these, that deep delight
did invent, and lascivious luxury did practice in their times: as does the
Roman writers, Plutarch and Pliny; and the ancient greek Authors Atheneus
and Aeschylus testify.

Again, of a fastiing ointment of which our Savior in the Gospel: When thou
fastest, anoint thy head with oil, and wash thy face, Mat. 6.17. where he
charge his Disciples and the common people, that they would not follow the
hypocritical guise of the dissembling Pharisees in looking sowerly, and in
disfiguring their countenances; but to use means of cheerfuluesse and comfort,
that they seem no^ outwardly to men to fast, but inwardl^ unto God. An
ointment of Lust.


There were also other ointments bot^ of Lust and of Love; of the one the
Prophet Amos, who among other lustful delights, which the prodigal Princes of
Israel, the Epicures and Libertines of his time, who put far from them the
evil day, and approaching unto the seat of iniquity, together with their
stretching them upon their Iuorie beds, eating the fat lambs out of the
fould, and the calves out of the stall, singing to the sound of the viole,
inuenting to themselves instruments of music, and drinking wine in bowls,
did also anoint themselves with the chief ointments, Amos, 6.5.6. Of the
other Evangelist Luke, being the ointment of that woman that was a sinner, with
which she anointed our Savior Christ's feet, the cause whereof according to
the verdit of our Savior was the love of the woman, whether she were Marie
Magdalen as some think, or any other; and therefore may worthily be called an
ointment of Love: An ointment of Love.
and hereupon had for her reward, remission of all her sins, were they never
so many in number, so heinous in quality, so grievous in circumstance; for the
which she was more notoriously called a sinner, Luke 7. We read likewise in
the Gospel of burying ointments, and those of two sorts. A burying ointment.
The first General, General.
even those sweet ointments with which the Jews by common custom were wont
to embalme their dead; whereof Mark. 16.1. As Marie Magdalen, Marie the mother
of James, and Salome would have anointed our Saviors body. Special.
The second Special, as that of Marie the sister of Martha, an ointment for
matter, of Spicnard, for quantity a pound weight, for quality very costly,
for valewe worth 300. pence, for sent so sweet, fragrant, and odoriferous,
that the savor thereof filled the whole house: the end hereof, against the day
of the burying of our Savior by his own confession, An healing ointment of 2.
kinds.
Ioh. 12.3.4.5. There are also healing ointme^ts of 2. kinds in the gospel,
both extraordinary; the one material and marvelous, the other spiritual and
divine, both spiritual, and both eye-salues. Of the first, Ioh. 9.6. which our
Savior like a most skillful Apothecarie vouchsafed to make himself, by
spitting on the ground, and making claie of the spittle; but homely in form,
yet heavenly in force: with which he anointed the eyes of him that was borne
blind, and healed them, contrary to the common course of nature. For this
medicine might seem rather to hurt, then to heal, and to extinguish the
eyesight, then to cure and recover the same. But this did our Savior of set
purpose, to show forth his Almighty power, in working sometimes
extraordinarily without means, and sometimes wonderfully against means, and
sometimes ordinarily by means, thereby declaring his goodness, and to teach
us not to tempt God, but to use those secondarie causes as lawful means which
God has appointed us by his blessings, to our benefit. Of the second, Apocal.
3.18. (...).
even that heavenly medicinal Collyrium (as it is termed in the Greek) or
wholesome spiritual eiesalue; which the holy Ghost like a good Physician of the
soul, prescribes to the Angel of the Church of Laodicia, blindness, not
outward but inward, the darkness of his mind, and the ignorance of his heart,
by which is meant the very word of God it self; which so opens the eyes of
our understanding, that it is the only light unto our feet, and lantern unto
our paths, as that without the which we should dwell in darkness, blunder in
blindness, and grope as it were at noone day. None of all which ointments is
this which our Apostle speaks of in this place, which is indeed such an
ointment, so sovereign, that for sent and savor, for purity and perfection,
for grace and goodness, and many other notable and surpassing qualities and
properties, it does far exceed and excel all other sweet odors, oiles and
ointments in the world whatsoever, being the holy Ghost and the spirit of God
it self, which although it be resembled and that very fitly to many other
things in the word, as expressing in many respects the effects thereof; Spirit.
As when it is termed the Spirit and likned to the wind, and therefore called
(...), as being the Spirit of all spirits, as Genesis 1.3. The spirit moved upon
the waters, because it is as it were the air of God that fills all places,
Iouis omnia plena, and for that like unto the Wind, Wind.
it is swift and nimble, passing and piercing through, even to make a privy
search into the inward secrets of the soul of man.

And again, for that our Savior, Ioh. 3.8. As the wind blows when it
lists, and we hear the sound thereof, but cannot tell when it comes nor
whither it goes; so is the heavenly course of the spirit to inspire whom,
when, and as it lists; and no man knowing the manner how. Sometimes to Fire,
as in those words of the Baptist, Fire,
He will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3.11. And
therefore it pleases the Spirit of God oftentimes in the gospel, when it
speaks of it self, to use Metaphorical phrases, and borrowed speeches taken
from the fire, as 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. (...), Spiritum ne extinguite, Quench not the
spirit: and 2. Tim. 1.6. I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift
of God which is in thee. The word which, there the Apostle Paul uses, being
(...), which signifies a kindling again of a fire, which is raked up in the
embers or covered in the ashes, thereby exhorting Timothy to revive again the
spirit of God, which was in a manner decayed and dead in him. The holy ghost
being semblable to fire in refining our cankred consciences from the dross and
corruption of sin, and inflaming our cold benumbed hearts in such a flood of
iniquity, and in such a frost of charity, with a fervent zeal to Godward.
And sometimes to water, Water.
as Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Where the latter word spirit is put (...) and
expounds, what should be meant by water going before: The spirit being like
unto water, not only in mollifying and resolving our obstinate hearts, and
making them of hard, soft, and of stone, fleshie; but also in purging and
purifying both our bodies and our souls, from the contagion and contamination
of all worldly wickedness. As it is likewise represented by diverse other
things in sundry other places of the Scriptures, but to nothing more commonly
and fitly then to an ointment. As Psalm. 45.7. God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. First in type of Solomon:
Secondly in truth of our Savior, Psalm. 92.9. I am anointed with fresh oil.
David of himself, Esaias, 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me, repeated of Christ, and applied to himself, Luke 4.18. Dan.
9.24. The anointing of the most holy, or holy anointing, meaning our Savior,
Messiah, or Christ anointed.
who therefore is called Messiah in the Hebrew, and Christ in the Greek, which
signifies nothing else but anointed. Likewise Acts, 10.38. where Peter says,
That God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost: and 2. Cor. 1.21.
where Paul certifieth the Corinthians, that God had established them together
with him in Christ, and had anointed them; and least they should doubt with
what, he afterward declares in the verse following 22. even the spirit with
which they were sealed, and whose earnest they had received in their hearts.
And so finally in this place, and in the 27. verse of this Chapter, where the
holy Ghost is twice termed together the Anointing by our Apostle; when he
says, But the anointing which ye received of him dwells in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of
all things, which as it is most commonly compared unto, and called by the name
of an ointment; so has it the nature of an ointment, and expresses all the
qualities, properties and effects of an ointment. That as material anointing
has these six uses: Six uses of ointment.
1, to prepare the body to fight: 2, to refresh: 3, to heal: 4, to cause a
cheerful countenance: 5, to make us sweet smelling: 6, to consecrate Kings,
Priests, and Prophets. So this our spiritual ointment to be as profitable to
so many ends and purposes: Simile.
as first, even as wrastlers, champions and martialists, that give themselves
to valerous and venturous exercises of the body before they come into the
Lists, to try the maisterie or to perform the combat or fight, are wont
before to anoint their bodies all over to supple their ioints, and to soften
their sinews to make them apt and able to show forth such feats of arms and
actiuitie as are expected at their hands, as was the custom in the old
grecian Olympian games, and the late Roman Circenses ludi: and therefore as
they were termed Athletae of their striving, so were they called Alyptae of
their anointing: So the soldiers of Christ's camp, his Church, that wear and
bear his badge, his cross, and fight under his banner, his gospel, that are
daily to wrestle by temptations with the common enemies of the elect and
faithful, not flesh and blood, but powers, principalities, and worldly
governors in heavenly places, Sin, death, hell, Satan, with all their
accomplices and adherents in the field of this world, being anointed with this
ointment, need no other coate-armour, nor complete harness to defend
themselves with: for having this, they are rightly garnished with all the gifts
and graces of the holy ghost, and are fully furnished with that perfect Panoply
of proof which Paul commends to all Christians, Ephesians. 6.12. etc. Even the
helmet of salvation, the breastplate of righteousness, the girdle of verity,
the shows of the preparation of the Gospel, the shield of faith, and the
sword of the spirit.

The profane Poets prate much of their hellish river Stix, that whosoever is
dre^cht or dipped in the same, his body as plated with steel, is so surely
fenced, that neither the force of fire, nor sword could any wise hurt or harm
it. As they report of their Achilles, whom they affirm thereby to be made
impregnable and invincible, which is indeed but a fabulous fiction, and a
shadow of this undoubted, true, and certain effect of this divine ointment;
that whose soul soever shall be anointed herewith, shall be so safe and sure
from all devilish temptations, suggestions and prouocations, that Satan
notwithstanding all his Machines and methodies, that I may use the very words
of the Apostle, (...).
and maugre all his power and policy with all his fiery darts, shall not be
able to fasten one wound or venue upon him; without the which our Savior
himself, even the Prince and captain of our salvation had not been
sufficiently armed, to have withstood the fierce assaults of the temptour our
graund enemy, in that his Monomachie or single combat which he had with him
in the wilderness. For then and not before, as says the Evangelist Luke 4.22.
returned Jesus from Jordan, when the holy ghost was come down in a bodily
shape upon him like a Dove, and 4.1. was led by the spirit into the
wilderness, when as he was full of the holy Ghost.

Secondly, The 2. use. Simile.
as common ointment does relieve, refresh and revive the bodies of men that are
ouerwrought and ouerwearied with work, for-swat and for-swunck with labor;
finally, toiled and turmoiled with overmuch travel: So does this
extraordinary ointment of the holy Ghost cool and comfort the elect and
faithful in this life, aster we have been tormented with the troubles and
tribulations of this world, scorched with the parching heat of persecution,
and singed or rather burnt in the fire and furnace of affliction; with which
the three children in the midst of Nabuchodonosors furnace, were so
preserved, Dan. 27.
that their garments were not scorched, their skins not touched, nor the
hair of their heads so much as singed, notwithstanding the infinite heat
thereof. And with which John the Evangelist was so protected, John the
Evangelist. Ante portam latina^.
that when he was cast into an hot boiling cauldron of scalding oil, by the
commandment of Domitian before the Latin gate of Rome, he came forth safe
and sound, without any hurt or harm at all of his body, the same indeed being
of greater force in this respect then the Nasturcium of the Persians, The
Persians Nasturcium.
wherewith they were wont to recreate themselves again, after that in their
long hunting they were welny faint with labor, and famisht with hunger, which
by the way, I take to be a more precious and sovereign plant then our common
Cresses, although it be vulgarly deemed the same. Of more virtue then Homers
herb Moly, Homers Moly.
which Mercury ministered unto Ulysses against the charms and enchantments of
Circe. And finally, having a more gracious operation then the Poets Ambrosia
and Nectar, Ambrosia Nectar.
the meat and drink of the Heathen Gods, whereby they do but feign, that
they were made immortal. And to conclude, bringing a more blessed effect with
it, the^ any powerful ointment of the Thessalian witches, Apuleius.
with which as Apuleius writes; they were wont to Metamorphose men into
brute beasts, when as this contrariwise conuerteth men into gods, and makes
them partakers of divine nature.

Thirdly, 2. Pet. 1.4. The 3. use. Simile.
as ointments made of drugs and simples by the Apothecarie, and applied by the
Physician or Chyrurgion, do remedy and redress the sicknesses and diseases
of the body: So does this ointment of Gods own making administered only by our
Savior Christ, heal and help all the soars of sicknesses of our soul,
being indeed that same (...) or (...), which easily cures and cleanses us of
all our infirmities, were we as full of botches and boiles as were the
Egyptians Job or Lazarus, yea although we we were as the Prophet Esaias
describes us, even our whole head sick, and our whole heart heavy, from the
sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there be nothing but wounds,
swelling, and soars full of corruption, The balm of Gilead.
4.5.6. being more saluing then the balm of Gilead which God gave as an
extraordinary and an especial medicine to his people, the Jews and
Israelites; by the power whereof our Savior Christ in his time, and the
Apostles after his ascension healed all kind of maladies and diseases, not only
the sicknesses of the body, but the sins of the soul; taking away together
both the effect and cause, as it appears in the Gospel and the acts.

Fourthly, The 4. use.
as ointment gives such a pleasant sent and savor, that it greatly
delights the sense and smell of man, yea and in most corrupt and filthy
places, the most infectious and contagious aires; the excellency thereof
takes away the contrary stench, even where the most vile and loathsome
carkases and carrions are cast: Even so this ointme^t makes us, although of
our selves as loathsome as a monstrous cloth, and by reason of our sins more
stinking then Lazarus that had lien four days in his grave, Ioh. 11.39. more
sweet, fragrant and odoriferous in the nostrels of the Lord God, then the best
smelling sacrifice, then the incense of the Altar, or then the perfume of the
Tabernacle, being the sweet savor of life unto life, as Paul says 2. Cor.
2.16. unto all the elect and faithful, which make their prayers, that I may
use the words of the Prophet David as the incense and the lifting up of their
hands, as the evening sacrifice, even like the precious ointment of Marie the
sister of Martha, filling the whole house even the church of God with the odor
thereof, Ioh. 12.3. giving to all the members of the same, even all the Saints
and servants of God, the sweet sent of a good name and fame, according to
that of Solomon: That a good name is better then a precious ointment, Eccl.
7.3. which those famous Fathers and honorable men had in their generations, who
were well reported of in their times and left a name behind them, so that
their praise shall ever be spoken of, mentioned by Eccl. 44.7.8. And all those
Elders which were well reported of, numbered by the Apostle, Heb. 11.

Fifthly, The 5. use.
as ointment causes the countenance of man to be cheerful and comfortable,
notwithstanding all inward cares and corosiues, or outward crosses and
calamitics; and therefore as at feasts, so at fasts, Christ would have his
Disciples and the common people, contrary to the custom of the Pharisees, to
anoint their faces, not to look smoothly as Hypocrites, but sweetly as I have
before declared out of Mat. 6.26. So this ointment, by reason of the continual
feast, which is within us, even a good conscience, as Solomon calls it; and
the welcome guest that lodges with us, even the holy Ghost, makes us and all
the elect and faithful, which are anointed therewith, to have a lightsome and
lovely countenance, amiable in the sight of God; as having a shine and sign of
divine grace, and delectable in the eyes of men, as upon whom God himself has
shined with the light of his countenance. Such a countenance had our Savior
Christ, Christ.
as he is described by Solomon, Psalm. 45.2. Fairer art thou then the children
of men, and full of grace are thy lips, because God has blessed thee for
ever; and why, as it follows afterward verse, 7. because God, even thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness, above thy fellows. Moises.
Such a countenance had Moises, when as after forty days and forty nights he
descended down from mount Sinay, with the two tables of the testimony in his
hand, the skin of his face shining bright, that the people were astonished at
the goodly hew thereof, Exodus 34.30. And such a countenance had Stephen,
Stephen.
when as he stood before the Elders and Scribes in the council, not like other
prisoners, that are arraigned before the Judge; and because they are guilty,
are either pale for fear, or blush for shame, according to the Poet, Ovid Met.
Acts 6.15.


Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu? His face seeming to all the
beholders to have been as the face of an Angel. Finally, such joyful
countenances no doubt had the Apostles in the midst of their persecutions,
when after they were beaten with rods by the commandment of the high priests,
they departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were worthy to suffer
rebuke for Christ's name, Act. 4.41. This spiritual ointment in this respect,
far surpassing all other material ointments for the use of man: As the
Prophet has declared most evidently, when he says among the creatures of
God, which he numbreth in their order ordained for the service of man, That he
has given him bread to strengthen his body, wine to glad his heart, and oil
to cheer his countenance, Psalm. 104.15.

Sixthly, The 6. use.
as the precious holy ointment did anoint, appoint, and consecrate priests,
kings and prophets, according to the common custom of the Jews, and the
express commandment of the Lord God, insomuch that none durst presume to take
upon him any of those honorable offices, before the holy oil was powered upon
him; but after the receiving thereof, was usually accounted and called the
Lords anointed; as David calls Saul, when as he would not suffer his men to
lay hands upon him, because he is the Lords anointed, 1. Sam. 24.7. and
terms himself, when he expostulateth with the Jews and Gentiles, Princes
and people, for assembling themselves together against the Lord, and against
his anointed, Psalm. 2.2.
meaning himself. So were Aaron and his sons so called, after they were so
consecrated to minister before the Lord in the Priests office, Exodus 30.30. And
so are the Prophets of the Lord termed in those words of the Psalmist, in the
person of God himself, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
the latter being put exegeticos, expounding the former, as who to be the Lords
anointed, even the Prophets, Psalm. 105.15. Even so does this inward, pure and
precious ointment of the holy ghost, of the which the other outward holy oil
was a type and figure, consecrate and sanctify the chosen children of God, to
be unto him spiritual Kings, Priests, and Prophets; as we are oftentimes so
termed in the Scriptures. As first king and priest, so called by Peter, A
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, 1.
Pet. 2.9. out of the 19. Exodus 6. where the Lord promises to his people the
children of Israel, that he will make them a kingdom of Priests, and an holy
nation. Again by John, he has made us kings and priests unto God, even his
father, Apoc. 1.6. As also Prophets, as likewise Peter, I will power out my
spirit in the last days upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters shall
prophecy: out of the Prophet Joel, 2.28. The elect and the faithful showing
themselves to be such kings, when the kingdom of God is within them, when
Christ has set up his throne in their hearts, and when they rule and reign
over sin by the power of God, the sword of the word, and the Scepter of the
spirit; not only making their appetite to be subject to their reason, and
their will to their understanding, but also their outward man, to be obedient
to their inner man, and the law of the members to the law of the spirit, by
macerating their lust and lustful bodies, by mortifying their carnal and
corrupt affections, and by crucifying their fleshie and filthy lusts and
concupiscences, and by giving their members servants unto righteousness, in
holiness, and not as servants to uncleanness, to commit iniquity, Romans 6.19.
And such priests declare they themselves to be, when they offer up those
Christian spiritual sacrifices, which God requires of them. As first, that
whole burnt offering which Paul commends in giving up their bodies, a living,
holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God, which is their reasonable serving of
God, Romans 12.1. And secondly, the sacrifice of righteousness, which David
commands, when he says, Offer the sacrifice of Righteousness, and put your
trust in the Lord, Psalm. 4.5. Which sacrifice of righteousness is twofold, of
the heart, whereof the prophet, A sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God, a
broken and contrite heart Lord shall thou not despise, Ps. 51.17. And of the
hands, of which the Apostle, To do good, and to distribute forget not, for
with such sacrifice the Lord is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. And finally, such
Prophets do they appear to be, when they search the Scripture as our Savior
bids, Ioh. 5.39. when they exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day as Paul warns, Heb. 3.13. and when they labor to grow up more and more,
in grace and knowledge, as Peter requires, 2. Epist. 3.18. and last verse, we
see then how honorable, holy and happy the estate of all the children of God
is, in being made partakers of this heavenly ointment, in not only bringing
forth the former blessed fruits and effects; as thereby to be made both valiant
Champions and victorious conquerours over our spiritual and ghostly enemies,
and contraries to be refreshed and eased in the midst of our afflictions and
adversities, to be healed and helped of all the outward sicknesses of our
bodies, and inward sins of our souls, to present us as a sweet smelling
savor or odor in the nostrels of the Lord, to give us a glad heart and a
cheerful countenance both before God and man, The spiritual effect of this
heavenly ointment.
and to consecrate us Kings, Priests, and Prophets unto God, but also in
bestowing upon us so high a dignity, privilege and prerogative, as to make us
the elect vessels of such a divine liquor, whereby we may be worthily termed,
not the gally Pots, for that is too base a name; but rather the Allabaster
boxes of so precious an ointment, yea and to be no silver shrines, for that is
too mean a metal for such an excellent matter, and that not of Danae the
Image that came down from Jupiter, but indeed the golden Temples and
Tabernacles of the holy ghost the spirit of God, which descended down from
Iehoua himself.

This being that (...), of which first our Savior himself is called Christ,
and we next his members, termed of the same Christians, that glorious title
wherein we have cause to joy and rejoice, for this is that precious ointment
which David figuratively prophesied, should first be powered upon Aarons head,
which is Christ, and then fall down upon his Disciples and Apostles, which
were the goodly ornaments of the golden age of the Church; Psalm. 133.
and the beard as it were of Aarons body, annexed to the Head Christ; and
lastly, which ran down to the skirts of his clothing, even to the Preachers
and teachers of the gospel which live in this last age of the Church, which
are as it were the hemme of Aarons garment, even the lowest and least members
of the Church, and last ministers of Christ. And not only unto them, but unto
all the number of the elect and faithful in general, as being purfles and
appurtenances of Aarons body the church, and partaking as being the communion
of Saints in proportion, according to the measure of Gods gifts and graces, of
this holy and heavenly ointment. The duty therefore of us all and every one
of us, is this, so to prepare our selves, as that we possess our vessels in
holiness and pureness. As the Apostle warns us, even to purge our hearts
from all Hypocrisy, to cleanse our souls from all iniquity, and to purify
our minds from all impiety, that being washed with the water of regeneration,
perfumed with the incense of faith, and seasoned with the salt of grace, and
sweetened with the fruits of charity, we may be found fit vessels and sweet
receptacles for so sovereign an ointment. For as new wine (as our Savior
says in the gospel) must be put in new vessels, least that both perish; so
must this precious liquor be powered into new and pure vessels that both may be
preserved. For even as the dead flies (as Solomon says) does cause to stincke
and putrisie the ointment of the Apothecarie, Eccl. 10.1. So do the carnal
affections of our mortal bodies, corrupt and contaminate this spiritual
ointment of the holy ghost, by making it to be unto us, not the sweet odor of
life unto life, but the bitter savor of death unto death, and to prevent it
rather to our destruction and damnation, then to convert it to our souls
health and salvation. And thus much of the benefit or blessing, which they,
unto whom John writes, had received, even an ointment. Now therefore to that
which next follows, of the person who bestowed the same upon them; which is
here said to be him that is holy.

From him that is holy.
There are many things in the Scripture which have the name of Holiness given
unto them, as they are often so termed; Holy.
as the holy Temple, the holy Tabernacle, the holy law, the holy catholic
Church, the holy gospel, the holy word of God, the holy sacraments, the holy
City of Jerusalem, the holy Angels, holy Saints, holy priests, holy Prophets,
holy ointment, holy oil, etc. For it were infinite to repeat al, and too
tedious to note and quoate their several places, and these but in the
inferior degree of holiness. This Attribute of Holiness, Holiness.
more especially and most properly belonging to the lord God himself, one in
substance, three in person; Holy Father, Holy Son, and Holy Ghost. As the
Seraphins cried in Esaies vision 6.3. and the four beasts in John's Revelation,
Apoc. 4.8. And Ambrose in his song, Holy, holy, holy; these being holy in
themselves, and of themselves, they holy by them, even by the imputation,
participation, or imitation of their Holiness. These holy essentially, they
holy accidentally; these holy (...) in way of singularity and excellency
above others, they in their degree and estate, as they can be capable of
Holiness. And first, that God the Father is oftentimes so called in the
Scriptures, it is evident that we may severally make proof thereof Leu. 20.26.
Be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, 144.13. The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works, Esaias, 1.4. The holy one of Israel. And
therefore our Savior in his prayer in the gospel, calls him by this name
especially, Holy Father, Ioh. 17.11. And that Christ himself is so likewise
termed, it is manifest: first by that of the Angel Gabriel in his
annunciaation unto Marie, when he says, that an holy thing shall be borne of
thee, Luke 1.35. And by the Virgin Marie her self in her Magnificat, For he
that is mighty has magnified me, and holy is his name, Luke 1.49. And by that
of Peter, Ye denied the holy and just one, and desired a murderer to be given
unto you, Act. 3.14. And this could not the Devils themselves but confess,
even when they were cast out of him, that he was even the holy one of God,
Mark. 1.24. This being very requisite and necessary both for himself and us,
that he being our holy high priest, might enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the
holy of holiest for us. And as says the Apostle, Such an high priest it became
us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, etc.
Heb. 7.26. Lastly, that the third person in Trinity is so termed it
appears, being the spirit of God himself, which cannot otherwise be named
without this title of holiness, this being the proper attribute thereof; as it
is evident every where in the gospel, when as it is not only holy in it
self, and of it self, but also holy by making others holy; both holy in
cause, and holy in effect; holy by his own instinct, and holy by inspiring
others. But now of which of all these, which have the name and title of
holiness, does John here say, that these babes had received the foresaid
ointment? Certain it is, that hereby cannot be meant any of the first sort of
holy things, or holy men, which are but in the lower degree of holiness, and
which draw and derive all the holiness they have from the other, as being the
welspring and fountain of Holiness. For none of these are so good and
gracious, as to purchase and procure so great and glorious an ointment, or of
such worth and worthiness, as to give and bestow so high and heavenly a
thing, which is far better and more blessed then themselves, no not the
Apostles themselves, although they were the most holy of all other, next unto
our Savior Christ himself, were not able to give the same. For although Simon
Magus seem to ask the holy ghost even this ointment at the hands of the
Apostles, as though it were in their power to give the same; Yet it is
otherwise, if we mark the words of the Scriptures; that is, that Simon Magus
only offered them money, on condition that they would give him also the same
power, which they had themselves, that upon whomsoever he might lay hands, he
might receive the holy ghost, Act. 8.19. As Aug. himself has very well
noted, there being no mention of giving, but only of receiving the holy ghost,
De Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26. He that gave this ointment must needs be one of
the three most holy persons in the Trinity, either God the Father, or God the
Son, or God the holy ghost. And yet can it not be said, that any one of these
does alone give it, because it is indeed the common gift of them all; according
to that old Scholasticall rule of divinity sound enough. A rule in Divinity.
Omnia opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt communia, and most certain it is, that
as the holy ghost in essence proceeds both from the Father and the Son, as
Athanasius evidently declares in his Creed; Athanasius Creed.
so the same holy ghost in effect: for the gifts and graces thereof, are
conferred and bestowed to the public profit of the whole Church, and to the
private use of some special children of God, by all the three persons in the
Trinity: for so Paul 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6. Now there are diversities of gifts, but
the same spirit. And there are diversities of administrations, but the same
Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but God is the same, which
works all in all. Albeit, because here is one especially pointed at, we must
find out which of the three he should be, that gave this ointment unto them,
and which is here more especially said to be holy. First, although it may be
said to be God the Father, because every good and perfect gift comes down
from above from the Father of lights, as James, 1.17. Or that he is the holy
one of Israel, as Esaias, 1.4. Or again, to be the holy ghost, because this
ointment may seem to be a gift of the spirit, and for that most properly he is
called the holy ghost. Notwithstanding, if we mark the circumstances of the
text, the purpose of the Apostle, and the drift and intendiment of the doctrine
of the whole Epistle, the scope thereof being nothing else but this, even to
prove Jesus to be Christ against Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion and Carpocrates,
with their sectaries, which were the Heretics, Scismaticks, and Antichrists of
this time. The same point which John aymeth at, both in his gospel, and in his
Revelation, as it may more evidently appear by the 22. v. of this Chap. Again
it is manifest by the coherence of the words, that by him in this place he
means none other but him, 1. John 11.7.2.1.2.
whom in the 1. chap. 1. he calls the word of life, and affirms to be the
purgation of our sins, verse, 2. at whom he especially drives, from whom he
draws and deriueth the whole tenor of his exhortation following unto this my
text, and so forth to the end both of the Chapter and the Epistle: besides it
cannot so conveniently be understood of God the Father, for that the giving of
the holy ghost is very seldom or never ascribed unto himself in the
Scriptures, nor of the holy Ghost; for that the holy Ghost cannot fitly be said
to give it self this ointment, being as it is already declared, no particular
gift or grace, fruit or effect thereof, but the very spirit of God it self,
which in the 27. verse, is said by the Apostle to dwell in them. And Aust.
himself puts this matter out of doubt, when he says, Qui promisit, misit.

First therefore to declare the cause, that Christ did certainly promise and
faithfully perform, in sending afterward the holy ghost, and did oftentimes
give the same unto his Disciples and others, there is nothing almost more
common in the gospel; As in John, 14.16.26. the 15.26. and the 16.7. and in
many other places which were too long to rehearse. Where although sometimes
God the Father is said to send and give the comforter; yet must we remember
withal, that it is in the name and by the means and mediation of Christ alone.
And therefore the Baptist likewise promised the same in Christ's name, saying,
that he should baptize with the holy ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3.11. at the
first coming of Christ. As our Savior also does himself in his own person,
when he says, Ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, within these few
days, Act. 1.5. And this for his promise, now that he did likewise send the
holy ghost accordingly, it appears Act. 2 when as upon this day of Pentecost,
he sent the holy ghost in sensible and visible form of fiery cloven tongues,
ver. 3. And that he gave the holy ghost oftentimes, both before and after, it
is manifest: As first, when he endued his 12. Disciples with the holy ghost,
and consecrated them his 12. Apostles; when as he first sent them forth by
commission, to preach unto the Jews only, Mat. 10. Again, bestowing the same
spirit on the 70. disciples his forerunners, which he sent likewise to preach
by two and by two, when he gave unto them power to tread on Serpents and
Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and that nothing should hurt
them, Luke 10.19.

Secondly, when he breathed the Holy ghost into his Disciples, when he
commanded them by a second commission to go and preach unto all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. John, 20.22. Mat. 28. And
afterward, when he replenished the 7. Deacons, Stephen, Philip, etc. and also
Paul, Barnabas and Cornelius, with diverse others, with the holy ghost, as we
may read every where in the Acts. Now that he most properly deserved to be
called holy, it is evident, not only by that which is already said in this
behalf, but also showing himself so to be in all respects; not only as he was
God, but also as he was man, holy in his conception; for he was conceived by
the holy ghost, and ouershadowed with the power of the most highest. Holy in
his birth without corruption, and holy in his death without destruction; holy
in his tentation, wherein he was victorious; holy in his transfiguration,
wherein he was glorious; holy in his words, which were divine oracles; and holy
in his works, which were heavenly miracles; holy in his prayers, which were
fervent and faithful; holy in his preachings, for they were earnest and
powerful; holy in all his afflictions, for they were pure; holy in all his
actions, for they were perfect. Finally, holy in all his goings out and coming
in. And therefore without all question, he only is the person who is here said
of John to be Holy, and of whom, they to whom he writes, received the foresaid
ointment. Now for the use of this unto our selves.

First, for those that have already received the holy ghost, or any gift,
grace, and fruit thereof, they must not brag, boast or be bold thereof, as
so to presume of their own worthiness, as though they had obtained it by
their own merit, when as they can neither possibly procure it of themselves,
nor purchase it by any means; for every good and perfect gift comes down
from above from the Father of Lights, James, 1.17. Christ Jesus, being the
only bestower of this ointment, from whom it proceeds, who has promised it,
and who has prepared it for all those that are able and capable of such a
blessing; and therefore let them remember what the Apostle says, to pluck
down the Peacocks feathers of all proud presumers, which are carried away with
an ouerweening conceit of their own endowments. What have thou, that thou have
not received? etc.

Secondly, for those that have not at all this ointment, but want as yet such
necessary graces as are meet for their calling, let them hold up holy hands,
and lift up holy hearts unto him that is holy, especially upon the Lords holy
Sabbath day in Gods holy house, and by holy prayer to ask this holy ointment,
and endeavor to be holy as he is holy, and to serve the Lord in holiness all
the days of their life, and they shall certainly be endued with the holy
ghost and heavenly spirit of God, and shall fully be replenished with all
complements convenient for their vocation, according to that promise of Christ,
Luke 11.13. That the holy ghost shall be given them that desire him, we must
not then ask this ointment, that is the Holy ghost; neither of the Pope as the
Catholics do, who chalengeth arrogantly and presumptuously unto himself, to
have authority to give the same, with all the gifts thereof; and therefore
wears a girdle about him, having seven keys, with seven seals hanging
thereupon, according to the seuenfold grace of the holy ghost, of binding,
loosing, shutting, opening, sealing, resigning and judging.

Pascall the second, Bishop of Rome succeeding Hildibrand, and more hautie then
he, being the first that took unto him this girdle of vanity, contrary to
the Apostles girdle of verity, putting it upon him as an ornament of his
holiness, or rather as a monument of his blasphemy, and as a recognisance of
his heavenly power, or as a resemblance of his hellish pride and presumption.
Nor of Simon Magus, as his sectaries, the horrible Heretics, the Simonians
did, who termed him and his strumpet Selene the holy ghost, as the Samaritanes
called him the great power of God, Acts, 8.10. Nor of the Apostles as Simon
Magus himself did, Act. 8.19. because it is not in their power, nor of any
other Saint or Sorcerer, holy or unholy, Archheretike or Antichrist whatsoever.
But of him which is here said to be especially holy, (...), in way of
singularity and excellency above all other, who only gives it, and in whose
name, and for whose sake it is only given. And thus much and no more would I
speak of these words, and so finish this first principal part of my text; but
that our adversaries the Papists, who absurdly abuse this place, Catholics.
as they do many other; wresting it to their Hypocritical purpose, and forcing
it to stablish their Heretical doctrine, do urge me to contend with them in a
matter contrary to manifest truth. Seeing that they are not ashamed corruptly
to deprave these words, in confirmation of their forged Sacrament of extreme
unction, and applying them unto themselves grossly after this manner: The
Popish forged Sacrament of extreme unction.
That by this ointment, the Apostle here means nothing else but extreme
unction, and that it only appertains unto them, because they are Catholic,
and that they have the same (as the Apostle says) from him that is holy; that
is, from their holy father the Pope and Bishop of Rome.

First, therefore of their unction, what affinity it has with this our
ointment. Secondly, how fitly they may be called Catholics, as John terms
this his Epistle Catholic. And thirdly, what agreement there is between him
that is here called holy, and their holy, or rather unholy Father the Pope. For
the first, their extreme unction, the Catholics describe the same after this
manner: The matter.
As for matter to consist of oil olive consecrated by a Bishop, the use
thereof to anoile the sick above and beneath, forward and backward, upon the
eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands and feet; a man upon the reins of the back,
and a woman upon the belly; filthy to speak of us, and more filthy to be done
of them; because say they, concupiscence reigns most in those parts. The form
For form, the words of the Priest in the time of the anointing, The use.
the effect thereof, to put away forgotten sins, and to purge all venial
sin committed by mispending our senses; a Sacrament as they term it,
comfortable to the soul, and healthful to the body, as far forth as it is
expedient, the holy Ghost, strengthening the weak with grace, against the
violent assaults of the Devil, and the fearful terror of death, other
circumstances and ceremonies belonging here unto these. The circumstances and
ceremonies thereof.
The minister thereof sent for by the patient, who must first be confessed of
his mortal sins and receive absolution, and then humbly desire for Gods sake
this extreme unction. And if happily the party want any of the forenamed
members, then must the next adjoining parts unto the same be anoiled: for this
reason as they allege, because they have those members grounded in the soul.
But with this double caveat. First, that the persons that are capable of this
unction, must be men and women, which have reason, discretion and devotion to
require and request the same, and not babes or infants; and those, such as lie
in peril of death by Gods visitation, and not by violence of war, or at the
time of execution. This Laurence Vaux, that compendious compiler in English, of
Catholic Catechismes. But Kamnisius that Canon of Catholics, and pillar of
Popery, in his Catechism first says as concerning this unction; that we must
believe whatsoever the Catholic Church has constantly taught. Then he
defines the same after this manner: To be an holy sign instituted in
consecrated oil, as whereby, heavenly virtue is applied to the sick for the
health, not only of the soul, but also of the body by divine institution. I
come as near his own words as I can, And goes further in bringing in the
testimony of of James the Apostle in confirmation hereof, Chap. 5.14. Is any
sick among you? Let him call upon the Elders of the Church, and let them pray
for him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord, etc. This as a
precept, and withal, alleging the example of the Apostles for practice
thereof, Mark. 6.13. that they anointed many that were sick with oil, and
healed them. And the Tridentine Council denounces a fourefold Anathema, or
bitter curse against all those that shall not acknowledge and accept the
foresaid extreme unction as a Sacrament, with all the ceremonies belonging
thereunto before mentioned. But Bellarmine the great Champion of Rome, and
refiner of many gross errors of other drossie Papists, although he seem not
in every respect to admit the former doctrine, but makes exception of that
place of Mark, as that the oil there, not to be the very Sacrament of
unction, but only a figure, shadowing, and insinuation of the same. Herein
warring and iarring from the rest of his fellows, in this answering unto his
name: yet in effect does he conclude and confirm that which the other said
before. All which let us consider, and compare the oil of James with the
ointment of John, and the Apostles anointing with the Priests anoiling.
Theirs, a material oil of olives; ours, the spiritual ointment of the holy
Ghost; theirs, hallowed by a Romish Bishop; ours, sanctified by the great
Bishop of our souls, Christ Jesus: theirs, outwardly anoiling the body; ours,
inwardly anointing the soul; theirs, against corporal diseases; ours, against
spiritual sicknesses; theirs, at the peril and point of death; ours, at all
times and seasons; theirs, must needs have confession going before; ours, faith
the only means to obtain the same; and theirs, not for infants in any wise;
ours for babes, for so our Apostle calls these that are here said to have
this ointment.

Now to try their extreme unction, how it is allowable by the touchstone of
the word of God, and agreeable to the analogy of faith, Catholics high
traitors against God
first in making it a Sacrament. First we accuse them of high treason against
the divine majesty of God, for forging this and other sacraments and seals,
when as he himself has ordained and appointed but two only, as his Petty or
Privy seal of Baptism, and his great or broad seal of Eucharist; for which,
they may truly be termed Sacramentaries themselves, as they falsely call us.
Secondly, in the matter and element thereof, they show themselves absurd, when
as they say that a Bishop must needs consecrate the same, when as they make any
common hedgepriest among them, sufficient to consecrate the greatest Sacrament
of all other, as they will not deny of the Lords supper by uttering only
these words; Hoc est corpus meum, which they therefore call the words of
consecration. Thirdly, in the use ridiculous and filthy, in anoiling a woman
on the belly, no holy action but an unseemly gesture, not to be named with
pure lips, nor to be heard with chaste ears, for the form without form, the
words of the Priest, not the written word of God, when as in every Sacrament
the word ought to be added to the element. As Aust: Austin.
Addatur verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum. Fourthly, for the effect
which they make double, both void and vain; the first for healing of the
sicknesses, which never happens; the second for remission of sins, which is
frivolous in two respects. First, because this is the effect of the Eucharist;
and secondly, because it immediately follows the absolution, and therefore
altogether needless. Lastly, for all the rest of the circumstances and
ceremonies belonging thereunto, being altogether fond and foolish; and the
reasons thereof are rude and ridiculous, for the anointing of so many and
outward members, or those adjoining unto them, when as a Sacrament as they
cannot but confess, concerns rather the soul and the powers thereof, then
the body, and the parts thereof, for the patient always to require it of
necessity which oftentimes cannot be, when as sick persons most commonly lie
speechless at the point of death.

And again, in depriving those of the benefit of this their Sacrament, which
seem to have most need thereof: As malefactors that are put to execution, and
soldiers that die in wars, when as the Sacraments ought to be common to all
that are capable thereof, for those places of Scripture which they allege for
the foundation and confirmation thereof. As first for that of Mark, although
herein they descent among themselves, some of them leaving this hold, as
taking it to be weak for their defense, as the Tridentine Council; Bellarmine
and others, who sees not that the example of the Apostles makes little for
their purpose, being altogether extraordinary and miraculous, being an
especial and peculiar prerogative power given unto them, for the time of their
first receiuiug of the Gospel, that by such works of wonder the simplicity
of the word should be established by signs following, as it is Mark. 16.26.
when if we should for their healing of the sick, attribute that to the virtue
of the oil which is to be ascribed to the grace of the spirit of God, and gift
of the holy Ghost, granted unto them by Christ himself. To add authority
unto this calling, his Disciples should rather be called Apothecaries then
Apostles, and this oil to be accounted not a Sacrament but a medicament, and
rather an impediment then an Adiument to their miracles, which faculty by that
manner and means to cure diseases, our Savior did not vouchsafe to bestow
upon the posterity of these primitive pillours of the Church, by any
hereditarie right and ordinary custom, but only for a season made it to be a
seal unto the Gospel then preached. And secondly for that of James, which
they abuse with common consent most superstitiously, corrupting the old
institution, and blending with all new fangle inventions and very unskillfully
usurping it as a continual tradition, and turning the temporary use thereof
into a perpetual practice, without the warrant or witness of the word; thereby
arrogantly assuming to themselves equal authority with the Apostles, and
prowdly presuming of the semblable spiritual power too too simply making that
a Sacrament, which offers unto us no other thing signified, which our faith
should apprehend; but only that which was forthwith effected, even an healing,
when as by as good reason, and for as good cause, they might make the clay made
of dust and spittle by our Savior, wherewith he healed him that was borne
blind. The hem also of Christ's garment with which he cured the woman of the
bloody flix and many others, Matthew. 8. the chirchiefes and handchirchiefes
that came from Paul's body, and healed many diseased. And finally Peter's
shadow which likewise healed many, Act. 5.15. to be Sacraments, by making
every mean of healing to be a Sacrament, as they have already filled the
word with Sacraments, by making every mystery therein to be a Sacrament, and
so to number not seven, but seventy Sacraments at the least. But this their
Apish imitation of the Apostles, cannot bring in ure again that heavenly
operation, which ceased 1500. years ago. James. 5.15.
And besides, it is manifest (if we mark the words of James) that it was not
the force of the anointing with oil, but the efficacy of the prayer of faith
that should save the sick, and therefore ought now only to be used both
publicly and privately without others.

And again, lastly the Apostle in those words, in the name of the Lord,
sets not the form of this their Sacrament, as Beliarmine will have it, but
only gives al Christians a prouiso, how they ought to pray, that is not to
use any Devilish enchantments, Magical charms, and Idololatricall
inuocations, as does John also give the like caveat unto them, John. 4.
unto whom he writes in the conclusion of this his Epistle, when he says:
Babes, take heed of Idols; that is, from all idolatrous worship, service and
invocation, but faithfully to call upon the name of the Lord, John 1.5. 12.
even the Lord only who he says in the next verse 16. can and will raise up
the sick. And thus much of their extreme unction how far it differs from
our ointment in this place. Now of the second point briefly, for challenging
this ointment to themselves, because they are Catholics and for that the
Apostle entitleth his Epistle, Catholic Epistle, how taken.
a Catholic Epistle: John terms his Epistle, so as it signifies in the
original as General, because it was not written to any particular Church, as
Paul to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. or directed to any private person, as
likewise to Timothy, Titus and Philemon: or as our Apostle John his second and
third; To the elect Lady, and to Gaius, but in common, belonging to all the
new borne Christians in that time: or likewise James both Peter's and Iudes
Epistles, but they not so Catholic, because they are of a particular Church,
even Rome, which cannot be universal, because it is but a part or member of
the whole Church (if we may call such an Apostolical Synagogue by that name)
except we will term it Catholic, as the common woman, so named for her
naughtiness. For neither can they be Catholic, according to the true
original notation of the word, nor as the same more commonly and customably,
then syncerely and sensibly, in the Ecclesiastical History and ancient
Fathers is used for the Orthodoxi; that is, for those that were of a sound
judgment in matters of faith. Neither Arrians, Donatists, Nouatians,
Pelagians, nor any other sort of Heretics, when as they are not so, but
contrariwise such as have a tacke and taste of these Heretics; and of all
other whatsoever. And for the third and last thing which in a word we will
conclude, how can the Pope be named an holy father, unless it (...) as Plautus
calls a bad fellow Homo sacerrimus, Catholic, so called why.
when as although he sit as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he
is God; he is Antichrist, and exalts himself against all that is called God,
or that is worshipped, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And who is full of the name of
blasphemy, being drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; A poct.
17.1.5.
and finally which is adversary and contrary unto him that is here called
Holy, even unto Christ himself in all respects. As Beza has very well and
excellently set down at large in his book entitled Antithesis Papae and
Christi, Antithesis papae and Christi.
to the which I refer you, for the further proof. And thus of these words,
and of the whole first principal part of my text.

And ye have known all things.
In these words, as in my first division I have declared, being the 2.
principal part of this my text, is contained in effect, that follows upon
the former as of the cause: which is first generally knowledge, then
particularly an absolute knowledge, even of all things; of both which in their
order. But before I enter into the discourse thereof, somewhat of this first
word And, in the original (...): (...).
which as I said before of the other And and (...), in the entry of my text,
as that it is not to be taken as it is translated, not for a copulative, but
for an exceptiue; so here for a causall conjunction. And as to be interpreted
But, so here For, and not And: as it is evident by many semblable places of
the Scriptures, as Psalm. 108.12. O help us against the enemy: and in the
Hebrew, but to be translated, For vain is the help of man, likewise Esaias the
6.4.5. Thou were angry O Lord; and as it is in the original And, but to be
interpreted, For we have sinned. So Luke 1.42. in those words of Elizabeth unto
Marie, Blessed art thou among women, (...): in the Greek but, in steed of for,
for because the fruit of thy womb is blessed. Even so in this place our
Apostle proves, that they had the former ointment by an argument from the
effect, as appealing unto themselves, they could not find and feel it to be
in themselves, by reason of that wisdom and knowledge of the which they were
made partakers; and that not shallow or slender, but complete and sufficient.
But before we speak of this, Knowledge
let us say somewhat of knowledge in general; as to show what a notable gift
of God knowledge is, and how greatly these to whom the Apostle writes, are
bound and beholden unto our Savior Christ Jesus, and how thankful and how
duetifull they ought to be unto him for so great a benefit, and blessing
bestowed upon them.

First therefore for knowledge, although rude and rough-hewed Ajax in Euripides
sometimes said as being a Martialist, Ajax in Euripides.
affecting arms, rather then a Mercurist given to the Arts, or rather in his
mad mood to cross his wise and learned enemy Ulysses, (...), That to know
nothing, is the sweetest life of all. Again, Agricola de vanitate Scientiaru^.
although Agricola write a book of the vanity of sciences in comparison of
the verity of the science of sciences, Divinity it self: And finally,
Solomon.
although Solomon he say, That in the multitude of wisdom is much grief,
and he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccle. 1.11. speaking this
of humane learning and knowledge of all worldly things, with the which he was
now so inglutted, that being a new regenerate, a mortified man, he did
altogether loath the same. Notwithstanding true is that old Greek Proverb:
(...), no sweeter thing in the world then to know all things. And therefore the
Poet accounts him the most happy man that knows the cause of all things,
Virgil.
Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. This is it that makes a difference
between man and brute beasts. For so says the Psalmist, Man being in honor
has no understanding, but is compared to the beasts that perish, 49.20. and
between blessedness and misery, as says the same Prophet, Blessed is the
man O Lord, whom thou instructest and teach in thy Law, and between this
life and the life everlasting: as our Savior in the Gospel. John 17.3.
This is life everlasting to know thee to be the only true God, and him whom
thou have sent Christ Jesus. This is that has made many to wast their goods,
weaken their strength, spend their spirits, intoxicate their brains, and
abridge their life, according to that old Greek Proverb, (...). And finally
this is it, that has caused, many to take great pains in travel, even to
cross many seas and to compass many lands unto the uttermost coasts,
quarters and corners of the world, not sparing to weary their bodies, to spend
their years, and to leave their own country, that they might attain unto
this. As it may appear in those two famous Philosophers, ancient Pythagoras
and Divine Plato, Pithagoras. Plato.
of which the one travailed into Egypt to be instrucin Divinity, into Caldea
to be taught Astrology, and into Metapontum to learn to make laws. The other
into Italy to be instructed better in Philosophy by the Pythagorians, into
Egypt where it is thought he read the books of Moses, into Sicise to see the
fiery gulf of Aetna, and into Aethiopia and India among the Massagetes and
Bracmans, to confer with the Dypnosophists and Gymnosophists, and to hear
that noble Philosopher Hiarchas reading in his golden chair. But to leave
profane Histories, and to come unto the Scriptures. This made the Queen of
Saba, or the Queen of the South to come from the uttermost parts of the earth
to hear the wisdom of Solomon, as our Savior; Queen of Saba or South.
Eunuch, Act. 8.
this brought the Eunuch from Candace Queen of Aethiopia unto Jerusalem, to be
instructed of Philip the Evangelist. This drew the wise men of the East from
the farthest parts of Persia unto Iewrie, The wise men of the East. Matthew. 2.
to learn where Christ should be borne. This finally made the common people of
the Jews to flock and flow to our Savior Christ Jesus, even from all
places, from every City, town and village, following him in great multitudes
out of Galile, Mat. 4.25.
Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, from beyond Jordan, and the sea coasts of Tire
and Sidon, and that on foot, leaving their own houses and homes, hungry and
thirsty, their bodies almost famished, and their souls fainting within them,
only to hear the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, and to be
taught the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: of whom says Augustine in this
respect, Taedium accedendi studium audiendi superabat. And no marvel, seeing
this is one of the especial graces, chiefest gifts, and fairest fruits or the
holy Ghost, and spirit of God, which Christ Jesus has bestowed upon his church
and the members thereof. And therefore 1. Cor. 12.8. is first placed wisdom,
and then knowledge, as in the 1. Cor. 14.1. Among all spiritual gists, Paul
prefers prophecy, which cannot be without knowledge, as being an effect
thereof, as without the which, we should blu^der in blindness, grope as it
were at noone day, and finally fall into the dark dungeon of error. As our
Savior unto the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel, You err not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God. First reproouing them of error, and
afterward obraiding against them the cause thereof, even want of knowledge;
whereas contrariwise the having of knowledge is a light unto our feet, and a
lantern unto our paths, whereby the eyes of our souls are opened, the
understanding of our minds is illuminated, and the powers of our hearts are
enlarged, to conceive and perceive those things, that belong both to this life,
and the life to come. If then knowledge be such an excellent thing, with what
study and endeavor, yea and with what pains and importunity ought we to
labor to attain unto it? Even to leave no means, unwrought, no ways
unsought, that we may be possessors of so precious a Jewel, and so inualuable
a treasure. And so to seek after knowledge, that we care not for it alone, and
contemn al other things, as not so to stuff and puff up our selves
therewith; as that we do not as the Apostle forewarneth, Romans 12.3. (...), but
to join with our knowledge, charity; with our science, conscience; with our
speculation, practice; and with our contemplation, (...)
action. This being that sweet coupling and lovely lincke, which the word of
God commands and commends unto us, the one being frivolous and unfruitful
without the other; as knowledge without charity to be nothing else but
madness; as Festus thought of Paul's knowledge, when he objected against him;
that too much learning had made him mad, or vanity, That knowledge puffs up,
but charity edifieth. And charity without knowledge, to be nothing else but a
fond affection, and a devout dotage; but both these combined together like two
twins with two wings equally poised, shall give us a speedy flight up into the
heavenly air of the paradise of God; for the one being seasoned with the
other, will make them both sauorie and sweet in the taste, both of God and
man. So shall there be neither error in our knowledge, nor default in our
Action: which all Christians ought especially to look unto. As hereupon Aug:
he says; Cum cognitio and actio dona sint Dei, and beatum hominem faciant,
sicut in cognitione cauendus est error: sic in action cauenda est nequitia.
Errat autem quisquis putat veritatem se posse cognoscere, cum ad huc nequiter
viuat. De Agone Christi, cap. 13. Aug. de Agone Chri. cap. 13.
And therefore Peter gives the like caveat unto those unto whom he writes in
the conclusion of his latter Epistle, and the two last verses: That seeing they
had the knowledge of the Scriptures, they should beware least they fall not
from the steadfastness of the truth, by being plucked away by the error of the
wicked; but should grow up more and more in grace and knowledge, 2. Pet. 3.17.
But what shall we say to the counterfaite Catholics of the Church of Rome?
among whom, although they brag and boast of their knowledge and charity, it
is nothing else but an Odissea of errors, Odissea errorum Ilias malorum.
and an Ilias of evils, that I may use the proverbs, although profaine, yet
properly applied unto them, whose knowledge is nothing else but ignorance, and
their religion Idolatry, their learning error, their life evil, their
doctrine heresy, and their devotion hypocrisy: who are blind leaders of the
blind, telling the people that Images are laymens books, Canis in precepi.
and teaching them, that ignorance is the mother of deuction, being themselves
like the dog in the manger, and semblable to the Scribes and Pharisees, of
whom our Savior: because they shut up the kingdom of heaven before men,
neither going in themselves nor suffering them that would enter to come in,
Mat. 23.13. And as those Heretics, of whom Aug: Superbi sunt, and non possunt
discere, quia credere nolunt. De Agone Christi, cap. 15. or as he says
afterward in the same book of the Manichees, Tam caeci sunt isti, vt
scripturas manifestas non intelligant, aut tam negligentes salutis suae, vt
omnino non legant, cap. 28. And as for the common sort of them, which are
contemptuous recusants and Non communicants, are they not altogether nusled,
and misled of them only in superstitious ceremonies, without any smacke or
tacke of any sound Christian doctrine? As though the same concerned them not,
persuading them to make more account of a mumbled mass and mattens, then of
the Divine truth of the Gospel. So that of them also may it be said in this
respect, as Aug: in the same book and Chap: of the same Heretics, Sed isti
homines decipiunt eos, qui negligentes sunt in Catholica fide, and ipsam fidem
suam quae in scripturis manifesta est nolunt discere; and quod est grauius and
multum dolendum, cum in Catholica fide negligenter versantur, Haereticis
diligenter aures accommodant: by whose persuasion the simpler sort are so
hardly confirmed in obstinacy and contumacie, that with the deaf Adder they
will stop their ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely; that I may use the words of the Prophet Danid. Great
therefore was the effect of this excellent ointment, whereby they were made
partakers of so heavenly a blessing, an happy and thtise happy estate in
comparison of those miserable Idiots, which dissolutely neglect knowledge of
those wretched castawaies, which stubbornly contemn so gracious a gift; and
finally of those of the accursed crew, which of set purpose withstand and
gamesay the truth of Christ's Gospel against their own consciences. Of which
three sorts of the enemies of knowledge, there are too many in these days,
which is most lamentable in this noone light of the Gospel: And this of
knowledge in general.

But to come to the very words of our Apostle, who says not here, that they
have only a bare and naked knowledge, but an excellent, absolute and perfect
knowledge, even that they know all things; then the which there cannot be a
more bountiful blessing bestowed upon any the children of God in this life,
being the faithful performance of that sweet promise, which God made first by
the Prophets in the old testament, and after in the new testament by Christ
himself. As first that of Esaias, 54.13. rehearsed by our Savior, Ioh. 6.45.
They shall all be taught of God. Again that of Jeremy, 31.33. repeated by the
author of the Hebrews, chapter 10.16. Behold, this is the new covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel. After those days (says the Lord) I will put my
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. I will be their God,
and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying; Know the Lord, for they shall
all know me from the least of them to the greatest, etc. And lastly, not to
heap up too many places to this purpose, that of Joel. 2.28. alleged by
Peter, Act. 2.17. And it shall be in the last days says God, I will power out
of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
Prophecy, etc. As thus the Prophets, so our Savior in the Gospel Ioh. 14.26.
where he sets down both the cause and the effect. As the Apostle in this
place: But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whem the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance which I have toulde you. And the 15.15. Henceforth call I you not
servants, for the servant knows not what his master does; but I have called
you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known
unto you. Again, 16.13. Howbeit when he is come which is the spirit of truth,
he will lead you in all truth. And even our Apostle himself in this selfsame
chap. that which he here affirms with all asseuerance, ver. 27. when he
says, Ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you all things. First, because as Aug. says, Nihil scire est bruti, omnia
scire solius Dei, quaedam vero scire, quaedam nescire hominis. These Christians
being therefore but men, they could not know all things. Again, they being but
Babes, as John terms them oftentimes in this Epistle; that is, new plants in
the garden of the Lord, young scholars in the School of Christ, tender nouices
in the house of God, and late conuerts to the Gospel, such as were freshly
Catechized in the Articles of the faith, and rawly instructed in the first
principles and rudiments of Christian religion; who because they could not
brook strong meats, were feign to be fed with milk as yet, and therefore
could not have such a depth of knowledge, as to understand all things, being
herein not unlike to the Hebrews; of whom the Apostle says, Heb. 5.12. and
6.1. that they were so far from perfection, that they had need be taught the
doctrine of beginnings. And again, how could these men know all things? when
as the very Apostles of our Savior themselves, although they had been Christ's
continual Disciples, and were daily taught of him both publicly and privately,
by the space of three whole years and more, bewraied themselves oftentimes in
the Gospel, to be merely and miserably ignorant in many matters and
mysteries of the common salvation; yea even after they had received this
ointment, that is, were inspired with the holy Ghost. As Mat. 16.6. when as our
Savior giving them a caveat to take heed, and beware of the Leaven of the
Pharisees and Saduces, they ignorantly misunderstood him to have spoken of the
material leven of bread, and not of the spiritual leaven of false doctrine
and heresy. Again, when as they could not understand that plain parable of
the tares, but must needs have our Savior to expound the same unto them,
Matthew. 13.36. Notwithstanding our Savior had told them before, that they
might mark the better, that it was given unto them to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven, but to others it was not given, verse, 11. Again, when
as our Savior telling them apart by the way as they iournied with him, Behold,
we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be fulfilled to the son of man
that are written by the Prophets; for he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked and spitefully entreated and spitte upon; and when they
have scorned him, they will put him to death: but the third day he shall rise
again. They notwithstanding understood none of these things, and this saying
was hid from them; neither perceived they the things which were spoken, Luke.
18.31.32.34. besides many other infirmities, wants, and errors, which were too
long to rehearse, and by which they made our Savior and their Master ashamed
of them, every where mentioned in the gospel: yea and the chiefest among them
even Peter and John, who were accounted pillars, even by Paul's confession, Gal.
2.9. First for Peter, although Aug: call him Aries gregis Dominici, even the
bell-weather of Christ's flock; yet what says the same learned Father of him,
reckening up his negligences and ignorances, if not greater scapes and fowler
faults, saying; Cum in mari titubasset, cum Dominum carnaliter a passione
reuocasset, cum aurem serui gladio praecidisset, cum ipsum Dominum ter
negasset, and cum in simulationem postea superstitiosam lapsus esset. De Agone
Christian. cap. 30. And for John also, although he leaned on Christ's breast, of
which as a learned father says, he squeesed out much matter of profou^d
wisdom and knowledge, and is called the divine, as being the chiefest Divine
of all other next unto our Savior Christ Jesus himself. And therefore
resembled also to an Eagle, for soaring aloft above the rest of the
Evangelists, to the highest mysteries, to the kingdom of heaven. Yet how
evidently did he together with his brother James, declare his ignorant
arrogance, or his arrogant ignorance, when as he asked of Christ, to sit either
on his right hand or on his left, in the kingdom of heaven; neither knowing
what he generally asked, nor understanding particularly, what it is to be on
Christ's left hand, Mat. 20. And afterward, when as he so grossly erred, not
once but twice, even in the midst of his Revelations, in not knowing an Angel
from Christ Jesus himself; and therefore would have worshipped the creature
for the Creator, Apoc. 19.10.22.8. Moreover, the very Angels themselves know
not all things, although they be called Cherubins in the Hebrew, and (...), of
their perfect and absolute knowledge above all other creatures, as it is
manifest, Ephesians. 3.10. where it appears, that the fellowship of the mystery,
which from the beginning of the world had been hid in God, was but now, that is
in Christ's time and not before, made known unto powers and principalities in
heavenly places; yea and Christ himself is said by the Apostles, not to be
seen of Angels, but after a while, even after his manifestation or incarnation
in the flesh, and then justified in the spirit, then seen of Augels, etc. 1.
Tim. 3.16. Furthermore, when as our Savior Christ Jesus himself, as he was
man, knew not all things, as he confesses of himself in the Gospel: That of
that day and hour, speaking of the last day of his second coming to
judgment, knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my Father only,
Matthew. 24.36. and as Mark, has neither the son himself, 13.31. And
therefore says our Savior again, That to know the times and seasons, has
the Father only put in his own power, Act. 1.17. Lastly, how could these men
know all things, when as Paul says, that our knowledge is imperfect, and that
we know but in part now, that is in the world; but that then, that is
hereafter, in the life to come, we shall know even as we are known, 1. Cor:
13.12. And again, the same Apostle before in the same Epistle says, That if
any man think that he knows any thing, 1. Cor. 8.2.
he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know; yea and this modesty, had the
learned and the wisest of all the heathen Philosophers, by the Oracle of
Apollo himself, even Socrates to acknowledge of himself, that this one thing
he knew, that he knew nothing. What then shall we say to all this? Even
briefly, and in a word, thus: That for the knowledge they had, and for all
those things they knew, of which noe doubt they had a great measure, by the
benefit of the anointing which they had received, they did not know the same
of themselves as of their own wit, labor, industry, desert, or dignity, but
that they were endued therewith, by the gift and grace of the holy Ghost; and
that therefore they were humbly, and thankfully to refer and resign all
their understanding unto the spirit of God, by whose blessing they had received
the same; or else thus, all those things which they knew, were neither erroneous
lies, nor false fables, nor humane precepts, nor unwritten verities, nor
doubtful dreams, but the sound and wholesome, sincere, and holy truth of
Christ's Gospel, infused in their souls, by the sweet influence of this
precious ointment, and instilled into their hearts by the heavenly dew of
divine grace. Or again thus, that indeed they perfectly knew all those things,
that were necessary unto their souls health and salvation; that is, Christ
and him crucified, Jesus and the Resurrection, which was so sufficient for
the^, as that they needed no other secular know ledge or carnal wisdom, of
any humane and profane Arts, and sciences whatsoever; for as a learned writer
says, The Apostle writes not here unto these Christians. Adulatorie tanquam
ad elementarios, as flatteringly, to soothe and smoothe them up in their
infancy and ignorance, for he oftentimes terms them babes, not as carnal
or as babes in Christ, but as spiritual; not such as Paul calls the
Corinthians, 1. Epist. 3.1.2. to whom he gave milk to drink, and not meat to
eat, but such as he would have had the Corinthians to be, 1. Cor. 14.20.
not children in malitiousnes, but in understanding, of ripe age, nor yet
vaingloriously to vaunt or boast himself of them being their Doctor, as a
bragging schoolmaster of his good scholars, that profit underneath him,
because afterward verse 27. that they had no need that any should teach them,
for he arrogateth nothing unto himself, but attributes all unto to Christ
Jesus, when as he tells them as it is in my text, that they have known all
things, not by his instruction, but by the unction of him that is holy. And
therefore also in the 27. ver. he says again, that the anointing that they
had received, and dwelled in them, did teach them all things. Neither is this
to be meruailed at, that they should be said of our Apostle to have known all
things, when as they knew but Christ only, and those things that concerned the
common salvation, which to know was all sufficient for them, and would alone
without any supply of other knowledge whatsoever, bring them to eternal life.
For so our Savior, This is life eternal even to know thee to be the only true
God, and him whom thou have sent, Christ Jesus, Ioh. 17.3. And therefore Paul
ingenuously professes no other knowledge, although he did abound in all humane
learning, and that with a protestation, saying: God forbid, that I should
rejoice in any thing, but in Christ and him crucified: for as Christ the only
holy one, is the scope of all the scriptures, both being the complement of the
Law, and the intendiment of the Gospel So to know him, is to know all things,
whatsoever Scripture can teach us, or nature can tell us; wherewith God will
enlighten us, or man can learn us. So that in this respect, are those two old
Prouerbiall verses found true, Hoc est nescire sine Christo plurima scire,
Si Christu^ been scis satis est si caetera nescis.
As for the secular knowledge of other worldly things, it is either superfluous
or superstitious, vanity, or curiosity, such as a Christian man may well be
without, and the want whereof, will not make him the more godly learned: for as
Aug. says, there is Docta ignorantia, Docta ignorantia. Romans 12.3.
a learned ignorance, when as a man is wise unto sobriety, and will not dare
to learn that which God will not vouchsafe to teach, and will not offer to open
his care to hear, that which the holy Ghost will not proffer his mouth to
utter, even the profound mysteries, deep judgments, and secret counsels of
the hidden will of God. Of which, says both the Prophet and the Apostle, His
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, Esaias 40.13. Romans
11.33. Nor again, by labor and industry, to seek to get the sound knowledge
of foolish trifling things, which rather swim in the brain with puffed
vanity, then sincke down into the heart with sound verity: like him in the
Poet, Qui magno conatu magnas nugas egit: such trash and trumperie which Paul
bids Timothy and Tytus to beware, that they give no heed unto them, 1. Tim.
1.4. and 4.7. and 6.25. and 2. Epist. Tim. 2.16. and Titus 3.9. as (...),
aniles ineptias, Profaine fables, vain bablings, old wives tales, endless
genealogies, oppositions of science, falsely so called, foolish questions and
braulings about the Law, which are unprofitable, and breed contentions and
controversy, rather then Godly edifying, which is by faith: Seneca.
Whereof may be said as Seneca of the like, Summa dementia est tam superuacanea
ediscere in tanta temporis egestate. Of which things, although these unto whom
our Apostle writes, seemed to be ignorant; yet was that true in them, which
John here says, that they knew all things, that is, all that concerned the
salvation, edification, and consolation of their souls. According to that of
Solomon, Prou. 28.5. That wicked men understand not judgment, but they that
seek the Lord understand all things, and if any man marvel at this, let him
also marvel, how David of a homely shepherd, Shepherds Prophets.
Elizeus of a rude plowman, and Amos of a rough-hewed heardsman, Moses of a
stuttering stammerer, Jeremy of a tender child, and Daniel of a young
stripling, could become zealous, and learned professors and Prophets, full of
heavenly and divine knowledge. And how Peter and Andrew, James and John of
simple fishermen, Fishermen Apostles.
Matthew of a simple publican, Paul of a poor tentmaker, and all the rest of
the Disciples of Christ, who were (...), as the high priests of the Jews
termed them, might be endued with such rare gifts and graces, and be made the
holy Apostles of our Savior. And finally how Stephen and Philip, of mean
Deacons, the lowest degree belonging to the ministry of the Church, should
become excellent Evangelists, and so powerful in the word and spirit, as that
the one could confute all the learned Rabbis in the Synagogues of Jerusalem,
and the other confound that great Sorcerer Simon Magus in Samaria, whom the
people called the great power of God, Act. 6.9. and 8.9. even as Christ
himself, although deemed of the Jews, a Carpenter, or a Carpenters son, and
brought up homely under his poor parents, until he began to be thirty years
of age, as it is in the Gospel, Luke 3.23. was notwithstanding the word and
wisdom of God his father, in whom were hidden all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, as the Apostle, and therefore preached the Gospel with power
unto the poor people. But how, and why attained he this so great a gift? even
as he himself renders a reason, both of his own absolute sufficiency, and
of his heavenly calling, Luke 4.18. When he first began to preach out of the
Prophet, Esaias, 61.1. when he thus says, That he preached the Gospel unto the
poor, because the spirit of the Lord was upon him, and did anoint him. Even
so they did know all things by the especial grace of the spirit of God, which
had led him in all truth, by the inward inspiration of the holy Ghost, who had
enlightened their hearts from above, and by the divine doctrine of Christ Jesus
our only Rabbi, Doctor, and Master; and by the painful ministry of John
himself, an holy Evangelist and Apostle, an heavenly Prophet, and Divine. The
spirit of God, in showing and setting forth his vigor and virtue, in more
full manner and plentiful measure, in that golden time of the primitive
Church, then in this last and leaden age of the world: yea that I may use
Austins words, in this flood of iniquity, and frost of charity; wherein there
was never more preaching and teaching, and yet never less learning, nor worse
living; insomuch, that I fear me, that may be truly said of most of us, which
Paul sometimes said to some of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.4.4.
That they have not the knowledge of God, I speak it to their shame. And that
I of my self may say with Peter, when our Savior Christ being in his Ship,
bad him cast out his net, to make a draught; that I have labored not one whole
night only with him, but many days and nights, nay many years, and have
caught nothing, no not one soul by the bait of the word, into the net of the
Church of God. For to make a trial of this matter by the fruits and effects
of the Gospel, now so many years publicly and painefully preached amongst
us, what profit and proceeding in the course of Christianity? what grouth and
increase of knowledge in the word of God is there found amongst us? May it not
be said of us, as the Philosopher of the Athenians, That they did degenerate,
decline, The Athenians.
and by degrees descend from better to worse, and from something to nothing at
all. As that at the first, they were (...), wise men; and then they became
(...), who were lovers of wisdom; after (...), iangling Rhetoritians: and
lastly (...), wrangling Sophisters. So we to have been for learning in the
beginning of the preaching of the gospel, Chatechistae, teachers of others, as
every householder ought to be in his own family. Then (...), selfe-conceited
of that little knowledge that we had, as that we cared for no more. Afterward
Catechumeni, such as had need to be taught our selves; and lastly (...), even
stark Idiots, altogether rude and ignorant. And for living: first Martyrs,
such as would not stick to seal the truth with our blood, with the the Saints
of God. Then (...), Zealous, but not so hot as that we could abide the fiery
trial with the Ephesians, who forsook their first love, Apoc. 2.4. Afterward
luke warm, neither hot nor cold with the Laodicians, Apoc. 3.16. Lastly,
Libertines, according to the common course of carnal gospellours. Yea do not
the wisest and chiefest amongst us, that should be presidents and patterns unto
others, do they not as it is in the Greek Proverb, Proverb.
(...)? Having their hand and heart on their halfepennie, in contempt of God and
all Godliness, prefer their own private profit before the spiritual
service of God, making their money their Mammon, and their gold their God,
contrary to the precept of our Savior in the Gospel: Mat. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, and all
other things shall be administered unto you. Herein not unlike the Romans, whom
the Poet scoffingly taunted with that Hysteron (...): O ciues ciues quaerenda
pecunia primum, virtus post nummos: And how do parents and governors bring
up their children, and those that are committed to their charge? not as Gods
darlings, according to the counsel of Paul Ephesians. 6. in the institution and
information of the Lord; but as young worldlings, training them up in
covetousness, how to get and gain; and that unrighteously, que iure quaque
iniuria per fas nefasue, by hook or crook, by right or wrong, they care not
how. Herein likewise semblable to the former profaine people, as the Poet also
complains in his time, when he cries out and says; Hoc monstra^t vetulae
pueris poscentibus assem,
Hoc discunt omnes ante alpha and Beta puellae.


Some because of the impossibility which these words seem to pretend, reading
this last word of my text, not (...) but (...), (...), not (...).
according to diverse copies, because it is so found in the Syriacke, affirm
these words to be understood of the knowledge of men, and not of the knowledge
of things, as that they had the spirit of discretion, even that gift of the
holy Ghost, of discerning of spirits, which Paul mentions among the rest of
the graces of the spirit. 1. Cor. 22.10. As that they could know
Antichristians from Christians, to be such by John's definition which deny
Jesus to be Christ, verse, 22. False Prophets from true, being ravening wolves
in seely sheeps clothing, even by Christ's rule of the fruit and effect of
their works, Mat. 6.15. Dissembling Hypocrites from sincere worshippers of
Esaie and our Saviors warning, even such as honor God with their lips, when
their hearts are far from him. Mat. 15.8. and Esaias. 29.13. And this not only
by the secret instinct, inspiration, and operation of the holy Ghost, but also
by a godly experience which they have gotten and gathered, by having their wits
exercised through long custom, to discern between good and cuill, as the
Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 5.14. which power of the spirit our Savior
Christ declared, when as he called the ruler of the Synagogue, Hypocrite, who
took indignation, that our Savior should heal the people on the Sabbath day,
Luke 13.15. And when he called Herod Antipas a fox, knowing full well his
subtlety in sending for him to show him a sign, as he pretended, but indeed
to put him to death as he intended, Luk 13.32. And lastly, when as he could
discern Judas Ischariot from all the rest of his Disciples to be a thief, a
betraier, and a Devil, Ioh. 6.70. And this gift of the holy Ghost did Peter
give evidence to be in himself, when as he could separate that pair of
hollow-hearted Hypocrites, and half parting dissemblers, Ananias and Saphira,
from all other the sound christians, and faithful believing brethren in their
time, Act. 5. As also in Simon Magus, whose heart he sounded to the bottom,
when as he would have purchased the gift of the holy Ghost for money, telling
him that his heart was not right in the sight of God, but that he was in the
gaul of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, Acts, 8.21.23. This did Paul
likewise show toward Elimas the Sorcerer, in unfolding his hypocrisy before
his face; and saying unto him, O full of all subtlety and mischief, the
child of the Devil, and enemy to all righteousness; will thou not cease to
pervert the straight ways of the Lord? Acts, 13.10. Which gift of discerning
of spirits, was not only found to be in Christ himself and his Apostles, but
also in Moses himself and the Prophets. As in Moses when he knew and
understood, that Eldad and Medad that prophesied in the host of Israel, were
the true prophets of the Lord, whom Iehosua suspected and misdeemed to have
been false prophets, Numb. 11. As also Elizeus, when he knew the Hypocritical
mind of Gebezi, telling him that his heart was with him when he went to Naaman
the Syrian, 2. King. 5.26. And finally in John the Baptist, when as for their
horrible Hypocrisy, he called the Pharisees and Saduces, Generation of Vipers,
and told them what they thought in their hearts, by soothing and smoothing up
themselves, for that they had Abraham to their Father, Mat. 3.9. And not to
these only, but to many other the faithful and elect about this time, was
this exceeding gift communicated, and that necessarily, for the strengthening
and establishing of themselves, being as yet but newborn babes in the house
of God, amid so many vpstart Scismatickes, Heretics and Antichrists, in the
faith of their profession, Two touch stones of the spirit of the word.
that by the two touchstones; the one external of the word, the other internal
of the spirit: of both which they were made partakers; and that in great manner
and measure they might discern and make difference between the false Doctor
and the true teacher of the Gospel, even to try before they trust, and to
touch before they take, to examine before they embrace, and to be sure of the
soundness and synceritie of any doctrine, before they believe and accept it.
According to the counsel and commandment of our Apostle, afterward to these
men, to whom he here writes in his Epistle; that they should in exercising
this grace given unto them, when he says, Dearly beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be good or no: annexing a reason
thereunto of the danger of the time, For many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. A watchword of warning. A token of trial.
And after this watchword of warning in the former verse, he gives them a
token of trial in the next verse: Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God;
Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God, 1. Ioh. 4.1.2. etc. Yea how behoouefull this was, our Savior himself
tells us in the Gospel: That there should arise false Prophets and false
Christ's, and should show great signs and wonders; so that if it were possible
they should deceive the very elect, Mat. 24.24. Luke 17.14. But not to dwell
any longer in this matter, howsoever these words may after a manner be thus
taken, fitly according to the Analogy of faith, yet is the former sense far
more proper, as coming nearest to the meaning of the Apostle, and sentence of
the Scripture, and to the which I my self do in judgment rather incline,
being indeed nothing else but an holy Hyperbole: All things, All, for many.
here taken for many things, as it is usual every where in the Scripture. As
for example, and semblably as in this place: All Iudca all Jerusalem, and all
the Region round about Jordan; went out into the wilderness unto John the
Baptist, not all, and none, least which had been impossible; but many, and all
for the most part, Mat. 3.4. As likewise Luke, in that his definition of the
Gospel; To be a treatise of all things which Jesus began to do and teach:
by all, meaning the especial things, which were worthy to be written of him,
and necessary to be known of us, Act. 1.19. For otherwise, the whole world
could not contain the books that should be written of him, as Ioh. 21.25. And
finally as Paul, That God will have all men to be saved, etc. All, 1. Tim. 2.4
not collectiue, but distributive: Non pro singulis generum, Romans 5.14.18.
but pro generibus singulorum; or else all for many, as the same Apostle. All
men justified, verse, 18. and yet but many, ver. 14. Our Apostle signifying
hereby, that they had a great increase and plentiful measure of knowledge, yea
such and so great, as that they needed not any further instruction, having been
already fully informed in all things necessary unto their Salvation. As the
Lord bethanked, the like may be said of many amongst us in this time, of the
noon light and sunshine of the Gospel, who although they be but hearers of the
word, yet in comparison of the lamentable ignorance of such blind guides
(which have been heretofore in the time of Popery, in whom was required no
more then this, Qui been Can: Con: Le: poterit is praesbiter esse: which must
needs be the cause of the gross superstition, and palpable darkness of former
ages) may be accounted in respect of their learning in the holy Scriptures,
which they have gotten by the blessing of God and their own diligence, through
their continual hearing, reading, conference, meditation, and exercise in the
word; not Disciples but Doctors, not Scholars but teachers, not young nouices,
but perfect professors in the Church of God, being not only sufficient to
render an account of their faith, as Peter requires in every Christian, but
also both apt to Catechize the ignorant, and able to confound the adversary,
as Paul requires in every Pastor. So that now if ever in this last age of the
Church, is as it were the ripest harvest of the Lord, the complement of the
ancient prophesies, and the fulfilling of the former promises. There remains
now no more but this, even the expecting of the coming of the Lord of the
harvest himself, of whom all the elect and the faithful may reap and receive
that reward of their knowledge, which our Savior himself has set down in
the Gospel, even life everlasting, which God the Father grant us, John. 17.
who has promised the same unto us in his word, Christ Jesus give unto us that
has purchased the same for us by his blood, and the holy Ghost bestow upon us,
who has confirmed the same by this unction: To whom, being three persons, and
one immortal, invisible and only wise God, be all praise, honor, glory,
power, dominion and majesty, both now, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A FESTIVAL SERMON ON THE Nativity of Christ.
1. TIM. 3.16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness,
which is God, manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, beleened on in the world, and received up
into glory.
THE Apostle Paul, writing to his scholar Timothy, whether Elder or
Evangelist, Doctor or Pastor, Bishop or Archbishop of Ephesus in the
primitive church; after he had described unto him in most lively, flourishing,
and orient colors, the office both of a Bishop and Deacon, the two most
necessary functions in the Churh of God, established by Christ, with all the
adjuncts, properties, qualities, duties, and complements belonging unto them,
both from the beginning of this chappter unto the 15. verse thereof; and to
what end and purpose? even that Timothy might know how to behave himself in
Paul's absence, in the house of God. Which house of God, because he mentioned
it, he takes occasion to define the same, even to be the Church of God, the
pillour and ground of truth. And taking his hint as it were from the last word
of the definition, in the verse immediately before, which is truth; he takes
the like occasion to define the same truth, and so as it were descending down
from one thing unto another; The parts of this text
first defines what that truth is, although he call it by another name, even
Godliness, and then sets down the parts of it. But before we come either
to the one or to the other, he prefixeth a Preface before. So that this text
might seem to consist of three parts: Preface.
of a Preface in the first words. Without controversy: of a definition of
Godliness or truth in the next, A definition
Great u the mystery of Godliness: and finally of a description, A
description.
or rather an enumeration of the parts thereof, being six in number: Which is
God manifested in the slesh, iustafied in the spirit, etc. So that if you will,
you may call this text a short sum or symbol of our faith, or an half creed
containing 6. Articles, or a small Catechism consisting of 6. parts, or a
breuiarie of christian religion comprehended in 6. principal points, or an
Epitome of the Gospel comprised in 6. Aphorisms of divinity: to conclude, it
may be termed the tree of truth which has 6. branches, The tree of truth.
the first and lowest branch touches the earth, and the highest and top
branche reaches to the heavens, not unlike to a pleasant fountain or
welspring, that deuideth it self into six streams. But of these things
severally as they lie in order in the text.

Without controversy.
It is the common course and custom of the holy ghost, and of the holy
prophets and Apostles, the penclearkes and secretaries of the spirit of God,
through out the whole Scriptures, whenever they mention any matter of weight
or moment, whither it be wonder or miracle, strange in our eyes and hard to be
beleeuede; or oracle and mystery, dark to be conceived, and obscure to be
understood; or an heavy judgment and punishment to be powered upon the wicked;
or a gracious benefit and blessing to be bestowed upon the Godly, or any other
thing that does most nearly concern our souls health and salvation, before
they pronounce the one, or denounce the other; to the comfort and consolation
of the elect, and to the terror and horror of the reprobate; to prefixe a
preface before the same for to rouse up their heavy souls, to waken their
sleepie hearts, to quicken their dull spirits, and to stir up their deaf
ears, heedfully to hear, and reverently to regard that which follows; that
they might make use and take profit, in faithfully believing, and willingly
allowing and approving that which God commends and commands in his word.
As namely that most ordinary preface, both in the old and new testament;
Ecce, Behold, as also that so common among the Prophets, Thus says the Lord:
likewise that so often in the Gospel of our Savior: I say unto you: and
verily I say unto you: and again, verily, verily I say unto you. And finally
that which is so usual with Paul, to keep our selves within the compass of
our Apostle, and of his Epistle; yea this first Epistle to Timothy, It is a
true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, 1.15.3. 1. and 4.9. But
this which is here used, passes all the rest, being an affirmation of the
Apostle with all asseuerance, and a confirmation with all assurance: Signifying
hereby, that the matter which follows, is without all doubt, question, or
controversy; yea as the word it self purporteth in the Greek, (...), Hoc est
certum, compertum, concessum, confessum ab omnibus, as being certain sure,
granted and confessed of al men: and that therefore it is to be attended on
diligently, received carefully, and kept saithfully. Against which if any
object, that this is not only not granted of some, but a so utterly gainsaied,
and not only doubted of, but flatly denied of many; as first of Atheists, who
neither acknowledge God nor Christ. Secondly of the Jews, to whom this
mystery is an offense. Thirdly of the Gentiles, to whom this Godliness is
foolishness. Fourthly Turks and Saracens, to whom this truth is a fable.
Fifthly of Heretics, to whom this doctrine is nothing else but error and
falsehood. As namely, of the Martionites, that deny Christ to be manifested in
the flesh; of the Arrians, that deny him to be justified in the spirit; of the
Saduces, that say there are no Angels nor spirits: and therefore that Christ
could not be seen of Angels. As also some Infidels, who never yet heard of
Christ: and likewise many worldlings, which never as yet believed on Christ.
And lastly of the Apellites, Christolites, and Carpocratians, which gainsay
Christ to have been taken up, and ascended into heaven, but only his Godhead
and Divinity; and if any part of his humanity and manhood, then his soul
only, and not this body, which they affirm to be resolved into the four
Elements: and therefore not this Scripture, nor no part thereof to be without
controversy. It may be answered, that as Paul himself that wrote this, was
the faithful servant of God; and as Timothy to whom this was written, was
likewise a faithful Pastor of the Church; even so that the Apostle does
auerre and avouch this in the person and behalf of all the faithful; the
children of God, the members of Christ, the conuerts to the Gospel, the
numberof the elect, the professors of the truth, the believing brethren, as
otherwise, not regarding and neglecting the crooked and corrupt judgment of the
world, and the contrary opinion of the faithless, which are alients and
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, as being without God in Christ
Jesus, who by reason of their ignorance do dwell in darkness, blunder in
blindness, and grope as it were at noone day, which neither care to learn nor
can believe, because of their disobedience; and therefore casting them off, as
it were in a reprobate sense. For according to the Philosopher, There is no
reasoning with them that deny the principles of Art; so there is no teaching
of them that gainsay the Articles of our faith. But as he also says
concerning the humane sciences, Oportet addiscentem credere; that is, He that
will learn, he must believe. So in the principles or fundamental points of
true religion, it is first requisite and necessary, that a Christian man be
fully resolved, that they are true before he be instructed in them. And so no
doubt are all the good and the godly, the elect and the faithful, thoroughtly
persuaded of the whole Scripture of God, given by divine inspiration, that it
is most certain and true, and every part and parcel thereof; and therefore
do give their assent and consent thereunto, not only with their heart
believing it, but with their mouth confessing it, with boldness professing it,
with zeal protesting it, and finally with their lives witnessing it, becoming
not only belecuers, but also confessors and Martyrs of the same. So that our
Apostle Paul might say safely and soothly, writing unto such in way of preface,
to prepare them to attention and intention, and without all contenrion, and to
put them in mind of that wherein they before had been instructed and informed.
Without contrcuersie, as being a matter above opinion without prejudice, and
past all peradventure, as containing nothing else in it, but demonstrations in
Divinity. And thus much of the Preface or preparatiue of the Apostle. Now of
the matter or mystery it self in the next words.

Great is the mystery of Godliness.
In these words it contained the second part of this text, Mystery of
Godliness
even a short summarie, sound and absolute definition of true religion, and the
doctrine of the Gospel comprised in the whole new Testament, here called of the
Apostle Godliness, as he terms it, in the last words of the former verse
Truth, being both one, as he likewise calls it often by the same name, even
in this Epistle to go no further. As in the chap. following, 4.7. Cast away
profane and old wives fables, and exercise thy self unto Godliness. And
again in the 8. verse next after, Bodily exercise profits little, but
godliness is profitable to all things, etc. And thirdly, Chap. 6.6. Godliness
is great gain, etc. In all which places mark a threefold notable comparison
and opposition. First, between the vanity of profane fables, and the verity
of sincere Godliness, in respect of the matter they both contain. Secondly,
between the profit of the one and of the other, the one little, the other
great; the one to a few things, the other to all things: as also of the
promise, the one of the life present, the other of the world to come, in regard
of the effects that follow them both. But especially in the third place, where
it is: secondly called and accounted great, here a great mystery, there a
great gain; conferring and preferring it before all earthly gain, as being
the chiefest good thing in this world, because it is without contention and
with contentment. As in comparison whereof al wealth here on earth is but
poverty, all lucre loss, all advantage damage, and this in respect of the
reward that belongs unto them both. Being all one indeed with that pure
religion and undefiled before God, even the Father which James describes.
1.17. to consist in visiting the fatherless and widows in their adversity,
and to keep a man's self unspotted of the world; but with this difference,
that James speaks there of the practice, and Paul here of the contemplation;
the one of the use, and the other of the knowledge, he of the doctrine therein
comprised, our Apostle of the life therein commended. And here termed
Godliness, as it is oftentimes in the Scripture for three reasons. As first in
respect of the cause from whence it comes, which is God, from whom every good
and perfect gift proceeds; and therefore this most heavenly grace, much more
of all the rest: for otherwise of our selves, how can we attain unto so divine
a blessing? being all such fools as the Psalmist, 14.1. describes, which say
in their hearts (howsoever otherwise we speak with our mouths) That there is no
God. And those wicked ones, which the same Prophet mentions, which have not
God in all our thoughts. Finally, those ungodly persons which David likewise
inueigheth against, which have no fear of God before our eyes, except the Lord
of his great goodness, power his spirit, plant his fear, root his faith, and
engraft his grace in us. For although we have three sorts of preachers, 3.
sorts of preachers.
which do nothing else but preach and proclaim God unto us. As first Nature,
Nature.
which is the unwritten law of God in our hearts, even our own consciences,
which cannot but confess and acknowledge even by natural instinct only, that
there is a GOD, and that one and alone true God, of which the blessed Apostle
Saint Paul, Romans the 2.15. which was the first and general Preacher unto all
mankind. The second preacher is the whole world, and all the works that are
therein, The world.
which first offer and proffer themselves unto our eyes, to view and see as in
a looking glass, the most mighty maker and creator of them: and secondly unto
our hearts, to give us to understand and pereeiue, that there is some excellent
workman and founder of this goodly Theater, and Royal Exchange: and finally
to teach and tell us, that he that framed and fashioned all these things, was
God himself. Of which second preaching David, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth his handyworke. And of
which Paul, Act. 14.17. when he says, God left not himself without witness.
And again, Romans 1.19. and 20. when he more fully says, as that which may be
known of God, (...), is manifest in his works the invisible things of God,
that is his eternal power and Godhead, being seen and considered by the
creation of the world. The word of God.
The third preacher is the word of God it self, wherein God himself, his
goodness, and glory is preached unto us most plainly, proclaimed lowdly, and
described fully, and that so perfectly, as neither he will require, nor we
desire any more knowledge as concerning him, wherein we may bcholde him most
clearly, better then by the light of nature, which is as it were in the night,
and darkely in comparison, and that more cuidently then in the looking-glass
of his works, which is but of steel, and therefore divine in respect, when as
in this as in a myrrour of Crystal, God is seen openly and face to face, and
especially in the word of the Gospel, the veil of the temple being rent, and
Moses veil being taken away. As our Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.18. Notwithstanding, I
say all which preachers and proclaimers, common criers and public witnesses,
which evidently testify and certify us of God, yet are we so deaf and dull,
that we will not nor cannot hear, except the Lord boar our ears with the
piercer of his spirit, as he did the ears of David, as he confesses of
himself, Psalm. 40.6.

Secondly his Truth is also called here Godliness, Truth.
in respect of the subject matter which it contains, which is indeed nothing
else but God, and that one God in unity of substance, and three in trinity of
persons, and all that is to be known of us concerning him, not concealed in
his secret will, but revealed in his manifest word; even that which our Savior
terms, Matthew. 16.23. (...); that is, the things which are of God, and not of
men: which Peter understood not when he gave ill counsel to our Savior, and
therefore was worthily reproved and called by the name of Satan, because he
sauoured them not. And Paul, 1. Cor. 2.14. (...), the things of the spirit of
God, which carnal or natural man cannot perceive or conceive, because they
are foolishnes unto them; neither can they know or understand them, because
they are spiritually discerned: Again which Christ names (...), even heavenly
things, which are opposite and contrary to (...), earthly things in the same
verse, and finally that which Peter calls (...), these words of eternal
life, Job. 6.68. which may be said to be the science of all sciences, being the
knowledge of the only true God, and of him whom he has sent, Christ Jesus,
being of it self life eternal, Ioh. 17.3. Yea as Aristole terms his
Logic, (...); so may it be called, even not the instrument of all
instruments, but the instruction of all instructions, (...), even the hand and
holdfast of the power, and horn of our salvation.

Thirdly and lastly it is called Godliness, of the end or effect, because it
makes or ought to make us to live a godly life: for as first David says of
the Law, Psalm. 19.9. and of the judgment thereof, that they are true and
righteous altogether; and then Paul, Romans 7.17. that the law is holy, and the
commandments holy, just, and good. So Paul of all Scripture, which is given by
divine inspiration of God; That it is profitable to teach, to improoue, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolutely
perfect to every goodworke, 2. Tim. 3.17. but especially of the Gospel, which
is the grace of God, The Gospel.
that brings Salvation unto all men, and teaches us to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, 2. Tit. 11.22. which neither the golden sentences of Pythagoras, nor the
Ethnicke Ethics of Aristotle, nor the profane Morals of Plutarch, nor the
virtuous Tables of Cebes, nor the studious offices of Tullie, nor the wise
politics of Lipsius, although they show the way of living well, and contain
in them notable and excellent precepts of civil conversation, in all kind of
good manners and behavior, are able to effect, but only this powerful word
of Godliness, which can convert the soul, and make a man on the earth, to be
as an Angel in heaven, before whom all religions and professions which carry
the name of piety and Godliness, are confounded, and fall as Dagon did before
the Ark of the Lord. For as there is but one God, which is, which was, and
which is to come, 1. Apoc. 3. One Jesus Christ, which is yesterday, to day, and
the same also for ever, 12. Heb. 8. and one holy spirit, which is above all,
through all, and in all, 2. Ephesians. 6. In comparison of whom, all other Gods are
but Idols; all other Saviors, are but Seducers; and all other spirits, are but
evil spirits of illusion. Even so is there but one word of God only, which
endures for ever; in respect whereof, all other words are but wind and
vanity; and but one truth of Christ, which is great and always prevails; in
regard whereof, all other verities are but fables and falsehood; and but one
pure and undefiled religion, which al men are bound to confess and profess;
in comparison whereof, all other religions are but ceremonies and
superstitions: and finally, but one sure and sound Godliness, which all
Christians ought only to know and practice; in regard whereof, all other
shows and zeales of Holiness, are but impieties, impurities, and pollutions;
even this Godliness, which our Apostle here mentions, and I my self now
commend unto you, which is neither the abominable Idolatry of the Papists,
nor the absurd Vbiquitie of the Lutherans, nor the confused community of the
Famelists, nor the Phreneticall extacie of the Brownists, nor the fantasy of
the Anabaptists, but only the pure divinity of the Protestants, which embrace
the synceritie of the Gospel.

Great is the Mystery.
As we have declared what this Godliness is, Definition of godliness
so let us now in orderspeake of the definition thereof, as it is here set down
by our Apostle; calling it first a Mystery, in regard of the matter therein
contained: and secondly Great, in way of comparison. First therefore of the
one, and then of the other. This word Mystery in the Original, signifies an
hidden secret, and not that which is hidden only, but which is holy also of
the Grecke (...), which is to teach deep and divine doctrine, from whence
(...) proceeds, and (...), an instiucter or minister of the word of God and
Sacraments; and therefore the ancient Lattin Fathers always translate this
word, Sacramentum tanquam sacrum secretum; whereupon the foolish and unlearned
Papists, took the occasion of that their foul error, in making so many
Sacraments: for wheresoever they found this word Mysterium in the Scripture; or
Sacramentum in the Fathers, straightway they being of a light credit, believed
that thereby was meant a Sacrament: and therefore besides our two current
sacraments which Christ himself instituted, they have coined five other which
are counterfeit, making them al to be in number seven, wherein they show
themselves guilty of high treason against the divine majesty of God, in daring
to be so bold, as presumptuously to counterfeit his sacred seals, and
sacrilegiously to take upon them the person of God himself, in robbing Christ
of his Honor, and making new Sacraments in his Church; and to conclude, in
ignorantly abusing this word, contrary to the true sense and meaning thereof.
For if that were certain that Mysterium should always signify a Sacrament,
Misterium.
that should there be many more Sacraments then they themselves make, since the
same is so often used in the old and new Testament, but especially in the
Gospel, for then should the kingdom of God be a Sacrament, Mar. 4.11. and the
calling of the Gentiles, a Sacrament, Romans 11.20. the preaching of the word, a
Sacrament, Ephesians. 6.19. The iniquity of Antichrist, a Sacrament, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Faith, a Sacrament, 1. Tim. 3.9. The name of the whore of Bablyon, a Sacrament,
Apoc. 17.5. And finally Godliness in this place, a Sacrament. And many more
besides these which we cannot stand to repeat, because in the Greek they are
said to be mysteries, which how absurd and foolish it is, those whom God has
induced with a wise heart of understanding and knowledge, may easily perceive
and discern. And how injurious they are against us in calling us
Sacramentaries, for sincere using and rightly receiving the Sacrament of the
Supper, according to Christ's own institution and instruction, when as they
rather deserve the same name in stamping out by the mint of their own brain,
more and other Sacraments then our Savior ordained in his Gospel; as we
worthily also term them sacrificers, in that they seem daily to offer in
their Idolatrous mass a bloody sacrifice propitiatory, both for the quick
and the dead. But the unskillful and superstitious Papists, make not so
honorable account and holy regard of this word Mystery, and that for want of
judgment in the reading of the Scriptures and the Fathers; for unto them may
it be said in this respect, as our Savior in the Gospel unto the Scribes and
Pharisees in the like, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God:
as on the contrary part, the vulgar sort do profanely and irreligiously
abuse the same, in tearming their vile and illiberall arts, their Mechanical
sciences Manual crafts, by the name of Mysteries, they both running into
extreamities, the one in enhauncing it too high, the other in debasing it too
low, when as indeed to keep the golden mean, we are to deem so high of it,
as to judge it to be some heavenly and supernatural thing: and therefore
according to the phrase of the Scripture, and meaning of the holy ghost, we are
to learn to call any difficult and divine secret by this name, as our Apostle
terms Godliness in this place, signifying hereby not only generally, that
the whole Scripture and the word of God contained both in the old and new
Testament, is a mystery in this sense, and therefore likened of Hierome, not
only to a shallow fourd, wherein a lamb may wade; but also to a deep sea,
wherein an Elephant or Tiger may swim. Whereupon our Savior in respect of
the profunditie thereof, wills us John, 5.39. to search the Scriptures; the
word in the Greek which he there uses, (...), signifying a diligent seeking
and enquiring, being a Metaphore or borrowed speech, taken from Didoppers or
duckers under the water, which flock not aloft, but diue down to the bottom,
to find and fetch any thing up, called in Lattin Vrinatores ab vrino, which is
derived of (...), or else from Miners, which do not pare the ground, but dig
deeply many fadomes into the earth, for the gold, silver, pearls, precious
stones, or other metals and minerals which there lurk and lie hid. As our
Savior calls the Doctrine of the Gospel, the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 13.11. and therefore in another place he tells his Disciples,
that he had many other things to speak unto them, which were as then too
heavy to carry, and too hard to bear away for them, which were not as yet
able and stable pillours of Christ's Church, but weak and young nouices in Gods
house; for there is not only in the Scripture milk fit for babes, which are
inexpert in the word of Righteousness, but also strong meat which belongs to
them which are of age and perfect, which through long custom have their wits
exercised to discern between good and evil, as the Apostle Heb. 5.13.14.
Whereupon Peter also he says of the Epistles of Paul a part of this Scripture,
that there are many things in them that are hard to be understood, which many
pervert even to their own damnation; for as in humane learning and secular
arts and sciences, there are many matters very hard to be known and learned;
as the Axioms of the Logitians, the Principles of the Mathematitians, the
Aphorisms of the Physicians, the Maxims of the Lawyers, the Problemes of the
Philosophers, the Emblemes of the Poets; even so are there in the Divine
knowledge of godliness, many difficult things to be understood; the Apocrypha
of the old Testament, the Apocalips of the new Testament; and as profane
Authors make mention of the leaves of the Sibyls, the Oracles of Apollo, the
riddles of Sphinx, which no block-headed dunces like Dauus, but only pregnant
wits as Oedipus, can expound and declare. So are there in the holy writers,
many dark speeches and hard sentences, as the Proverbs of Solomon, and the
Parables of our Savior, the visions of Esaias, Ezechiel and Daniel, and the
Revelations of Peter, Paul and John; which pass in obscurity Democritus
depths, Heraclitus darkness, Aristophanes clouds, Platoes members, Aristotle's
meteors and Metaphysics, and Scipioes dream; and which no natural man by the
help of reason, but only the spiritual man by the gift of wisdom can
conceive and perceive, as our Apostle before. So that I say not only generally
in regard of the whole Scripture, Godliness.
is Godliness here called a mystery, but also particularly in respect of
these special mysteries, hereafter named and set down in their order; whereof
the chiefest is the first, even the greatest mystery of all others, upon which
all the other depend, as consequences and coherents, every one of them
containing in them, matter of great marvel and wonder, in the eyes and ears of
flesh and blood incredible and impossible, surpassing the reach of humane
reason, and surmounting the mediocritie of man's wit, as shall be showed at
large, when we come severally to discourse of them. And thus much of the former
part of this definition of Godliness; that is, of the Genus of it, which is
Mystery. Now therefore of the other part, which is the difference in the same
definition, being here called not only a mystery, but also a great mystery.

Great.
In this word, our Apostle amplifieth this mystery of godliness in way of
comparison, preferring and extolling it above and before all mysteries; for
even in the chief points of our religion, in the principal articles of our
faith, in the deep mysteries of God, some are greater, more excellent and
heavenly then other some. In which respect our Apostle calls also the
spiritual marriage, between Christ the bridegroom, and the Church his
spouse, a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. So called here great, as truth is said
to be great and strongest, even by the voice of all the people, 3. Esd. 4.14.
As being greater and stronger then wine, then the king, then women: As the
Sun and the Moon are called Great lights, 1. Genesis 16. in comparison of the
rest of the Plannets, and all other fixed stars being greater then any of them
all. As Niniuie is called a great and excellent City, because it was of three
days journey, Jonas, 3.3. As the stone that was laid against Christ's
Sepulcher, a great stone, because it was the greatest that could be gotten,
Mat. 27.60. Mystery great in 3. respects.
This being great in three respects: first, in regard of the cause: secondly,
of the matter: thirdly, of the effect thereof. Great therefore, because the
efficient cause and Author of this mystery is great, even God, who is not an
Idol as the Gods of the Heathen, but great and terrible, Deuteronomy. 7.21. even a
great Lord, feared above all Gods, Psalm. 96.4. and of whom again the Prophet
David says, who is so great a God as our God? Psalm. 76.14. As in respect of
our Savior Christ Jesus, the mouth, word, and wisdom of his father, the
speaker, opener, and vtterer of this mystery, who is called the great prince
Michael, Daniel, 22.1. and a great Prophet by the common opinion of the people,
Luke 7.16. the great high priest by the Apostle, Heb. 4.14. and the great
shepherd of the sheep, 13.20. And in respect of the Apostles, the preachers
and publishers of this mystery, who were the great doctors of the people, and
therefore called Pillours of the Church, 2. Gal. 9. and great Apostles, 2. Cor.
11.5. Yea, and greater then he, then whom there was not a greater borne of
women, even John the Baptist. For even so great does our Savior Christ make
every one of the^, when he says, He that is least in the kingdom of God, is
greater then he, Luke 7.28. For who so great as the Creator and founder of all
the world? who so great as the great Savior and redeemer of al mankind? who
so great as those holy and heavenly Ambassadors of God, unto all the people
and nations of the world? Not Jupiter so great, the father of all the Heathen
Gods, although the Romans call him Optimum Maximum. Nor Diana Jupiters daughter
so great, although the Ephesians cry out never so often; Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. Nor Mercury so great, the interpreter and messenger of the Gods,
although the Grecians name him Trismegistos. And according to the greatness of
this God, so is the greatness of this mystery. Again, it is great in respect
of the matter which it contains, and that not only in regard of quantity,
but also of quality; as first great in quantity, because it contains all
things requisite to be known of God, and necessary to be believed of us,
even the whole duty of man, consisting in two things, in fearing God, and
keeping his commandments, which is the end of all, as Solomon says; and the
sum of all the old Testament, Eccl. 12.13. As also the sum of all the new
Testament, which is comprised likewise in two commandments, in loving God with
all our hearts, etc. and in loving our neighbor as our self; upon which two
things hangs (as our Savior in the Gospel) the whole law and the prophets,
Mat. 22.40. and this in respect of the whole Scripture in general. Which may
be called the great Pandects of Gods holy law, wherein all things are set down
so perfectly and fully concerning our salvation, as that there is nothing
wanting nor superfluous in the same, and therefore nothing to be added thereto,
nor taken there from; insomuch, that it may be said of this book of God, so
called of the Greek, (...), in way of excellency and singularity, as being
the book of all books, as Martialis of Liuie:

Pellibus exiguis arctatur Liuius inge^s, etc. so, Pellibus exiguis arctantur
biblia magna,

Omnia quae tamen haec no^ capit orbis habet. Not as the Poet, that his study
could not hold, but as the Evangelists, that the whole world could not
contain the things that are comprised therein, Ioh. 20.25. And last, which
makes the study of the Scriptures, and profession of divinity to be most
hard, long, and infinite of all other, although to some shallow heads, shuttle
brains, and simple wits, it seems to be a kind of knowledge, that is
plain, easy, and soon learned, contrary to the judgment and prescript of
Esra: in the 1. psalm, being a Preface to all the rest of the Psalms, that
for the necessity, utility, difficulty, and profunditie thereof, we must
meditate therein day and night, not in the book of the Psalms only, but in
the whole law of God; otherwise then a number of vain worldlings do fondly
suppose, who deem peeuishly and peruersly, that the holy Scripture is but a toy
and triflle, and the matter thereof too base, as being too course and gross
for the fine edge of their politic sconces. Such as Galen the physician, who
reading the first book of Moses Genesis, dispraised the same, as wanting
sound and sufficient arguments of proof; saying scoffingly, that Moses the
Author thereof, affirmed much, but confirmed nothing. As also Alphonsus the
tenth king of Spain, who reading in the beginning of Genesis the History of
the Creation, found great fault with the first making of the world, and the
things that are therein, and said blasphemously, that if he had been present at
the Creation, he would have ordained or ordered things in a better course. And
as Cardinal Bembus said unto Sadolet a Bishop most irreligiously, when as he
coming unto him, and finding him diligently studying the Scriptures, and
painefully writing a comment upon the Epistle to the Romans. Lay aside this
trash and trumperie; such vanity becomes not a man of thy gravity. And
finally as Clement the fifth, Pope of Rome, most wickedly and Antichristianly
said, that he might decree any thing against the Epistles of Paul and the old
testament, as being greater then Paul or any other Author of the old
Testament, in the decrees of his Parliament holden at Rome, called Decisiones
Romae, 1. Did. 10. cap. Si Papa. Which common profane opinion and corrupt
judgment, is the cause why so many pregnant and proper wits divert their
minds from the study and profession of Divinity, and why also the multitude
make so vile an account of the word, and the ministers thereof, loathing that
which they ought to love; and contemning them, whom they ought to honor: As
being the cause also of so many superficial divines, lean cleargions, and
speaking preachers, who think they have a sufficient Library, if they have a
bible, Caluins Institutions, and Peter Martyrs Common places in English; and
knowledge and learning enough, if they can Paraphrastically post over in haste
a whole Psalm or Chapter at once, like unto him that with light foot runs
over a quackmire for fear of falling in over head and ears, and can speak
extempory, and that many hours together, neither tying themselves to text nor
time. But if we will believe Austin, we shall find divinity to be a more
deep study, and the Scriptures themselves to be more hard and profound, Tanta
est enim Christianarum profunditas literarum, as he says in his Epistle to
Volusian; vt in eis quotidie proficerem, sieas solas ab ineunte pueritia, vsque
ad decrepitam senectutem, maximo ocio, summo studio, optimo ingenio conarer
addiscere, etc. That is, that such and so great is the depth and profunditie of
Christian knowledge in the holy scriptures, as that a man might daily profit
therein, and increase his knowledge more and more; yea if he should do nothing
else but study them even from his childhood to his old age, having the
greatest leisure, using the most diligence, endued with the sharpest wit, and
helped with the best memory: giving this reason thereof in the words
following; Tam multa, tamque multiplicibus mysteriorum vmbraculis opaca,
intelligenda proficientibus restant. So many and manifold mysteries remain
behind, to be understood of them that have already profited therein, and that
not only in the words, but also in the matter of the Scriptures; such depth of
wisdom lies hid therein, vt annosissimis, acutissimis, flagrantissimis, that
even to the most ancient, most witty, and most studious for their infinite
desire of learning, may be said that which the same Scripture has in another
place, when a man has made an end, then does he begin again: signifying
hereby, that he that is the greatest Rabbi, and profoundest Doctor in the
Universities, is but a scholar, and that of the lowest form in the school of
Christ. And that therefore every wise Christian, be he never so skillful in
the Scriptures, although he be so cunning with the Scribes and Pharisees, as
that be can tell how often every word and every letter is contained in the
Bible, may with sage Solon, although an Heathen, say truly (...); that is,
that he shall never cease to learn, until he leave to live, and this not
only in respect of the whole Scripture in general is this mystery of
Godliness, for the subject matter that it contains, great in quantity as I
have already declared; but also in regard of this special graund mystery of
the manifestation of God in the flesh, and of every one of those particular
branches, which depend and follow upon the same. The which when I severally
consider I must needs cry out and say with the Poet, Ingenium fateor
transcendit copia rerum,
Materia vires exuperante meas.


For as concerning the first; it is so great a mystery, The greatness of the
mystery.
that it not only passes the reach of man's reason, but far surpasses the
capacity and conceit of Angels themselves, to comprehend the depth, length,
breadth, and height thereof, containing many miracles, and comprising many
mysteries in it; and upon which depends the whole sum of our salvation, and
the complete work of our redemption: and after the which in consequence and
coherence, follows all the rest of the Articles of our faith, all the
promises of the Lord, all the mercies of God the Father, all the merits of
Christ Jesus his son, all the fruits and effects of the holy Ghost; and
finally, all the blessings and benefits which are bestowed upon the Church, as
shall be declared more at large hereafter in the due place.

The second, his justifying in the spirit; it contains in it the mystery of
the Hypostaticall union, as in one person to be two natures, the Humanity and
Divinity of our Savior, to be both God and man, whereby he is become our only
mediator; which dark mystery none can understand, but by the gift of
wisdom, nor perceive but with the eyes of faith. The third, seen of Angels,
a mystery no less then the former, that flesh should be beholden of spirits,
man to be admired of angels, principalities to testify of a wretch, and powers
to bear witness of a worm, and no man. The fourth, he preached unto the
Gentiles as incredible a thing, as if a great Monarch of the world, should send
his chief nobles with honorable embassage to bruit beasts, offering and
proffering holy things to dogs, and precious pearls to swine. The fifth,
believed in the world like the other, as impossible a matter for dumb and
deaf blocks, stocks and stones: first to hear, and then to believe, and to
become the children of Abraham. And finally the fixed, received up into glory,
the last miraculous mystery, but not the least mystical miracle: for
ignominy to become glorious, flesh to be made spirit, and earth to be taken up
into heaven. All which, when a man considers, he must needs say, Great art
thou O Lord, and great are thy works, in wonderful wisdom have thou made
them all. But not only is this mystery great in matter in respect of
quantity, as Love is said to be the greatest commandment, Mat. 22. but also
for quality, as charity is said to be the greatest virtue. For first for
whole godliness which contains in it, the great promises and punishments, the
great mercies and judgments of the Great Lord, which he describes out unto
us; the great City of the great King, the great doom of the great day, the
great signs of the great Savior, (...), Magnalia Dei, the great things of the
great God, such as the eye of man has never seen, the care of man never
heard, the heart of man could never conceive, such as faith only apprehends,
hope only takes hold of, the spirit only perceives, and grace only
receives, foretold of the Prophets, fulfilled of our Savior, promised in his
word, performed in the life to come, here in desire, there in deed, of which
now the elect have but only a tacke and taste, but hereafter shall have a full
fruition and plenarie possession: great in joy, great in pleasure, great in
comfort, great in countenance; finally, great every way, and in every
respect. And secondly, for this special mystery and coherents thereof, what
thing greater then the Incarnation of Christ, then the manifestation of God, in
the flesh? and what greater then the justification of Christ's divinity, and
his declaration to be God? what greater then the testimony of elect Angels?
what greater matter then the publishing of the Gospel, the conversion of the
Gentiles, and the ascension of our Savior? Far greater then any mysteries
that were before time, mentioned in the old Testament, then the creation of
the wide world, then the inundation of the earth, then the deliverance of the
Israelites out of Egypt, then the promulgation of the Law, and the return of
the Jews out of the captivity of Babylon; which are all notwithstanding great
miracles, and most marvelous in our cies. And as this mystery is great, first
in respect of the cause, and secondly in respect of the matter, both for
quantity and quality, not only generally, but also particularly, as we have
showed at large: So thirdly is it called great, in respect of the effect
thereof, for that it makes them great which understand and believe this
mystery, which make use and take profit by it. As first generally Godliness,
this mystery made Moses very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of
Pharaos servants, and in the sight of the people, Exodus 11.3. This made David
have a name like the name of the great men, that are in the earth, 1. Chron.
17.8. This also made Daniel of great reputation with the people, Dan. 13.64.
Even as Alexander Pompey and Constantine the great, so called for their great
Arts and atchieuements, but particularly this great mystery of the Gospel,
this manifestation of God in the flesh: for so says our Savior whosoever
shall observe and teach any of the commandments of the Gospel, the same
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.19. And especially the
precept of humility, and therein to follow the president of our Savior, and
be as a little child, Humility.
the same shall be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 18.4. This made John
the Baptist great, as the Angel foretold, that he should be great in the
sight of the Lord, Luke 1.15. and not only great, but the greatest Prophet
that was borne of women. And yet such and so great is the effect of this
mystery, that it makes him that is the least in the kingdom of heaven, to
be greater then he, 7.28. This made Marie great, as she confesses her self
saying, he that is mighty has magnified me; and therefore her soul magnified
the Lord, as it is in her Magnificat, Luke 2. Is this mystery then of
Godliness considered either generally or particularly? Great that we may add
an edge to that which has been spoken, great, in respect of the sovereign
Author thereof, which is God, great, in regard of the subject matter thereof,
the word and will of God; finally great in respect of the soul saving effect
thereof, to be great in the kingdom of heaven. Then if thou would be brought
to God, if thou care for thine own salvation, it thou desire everlasting
bliss; renownce all other false religions, forsake all other vain professions,
make account of no other fond mystery: there is but one way without wandering,
and that is Christ; but one verity without error, and that is the Gospel;
but one life without death, and that is in heaven. This great mystery in this
text is that life, this truth is that verity, and this Godliness is that way,
Haec via sine deuio, haec veritas sine dubio, hac vita sine taedio, as says a
learned Father. To this mystery let all new inventions, unwritten verities and
humane doctrines give place; the Cabala of the Jews, the Alcaron of the Turk,
the obscurities of the Gnostics, the profundities of the Valentinians, the
illuminations of the Catharists, and the traditions of the Catholics; all which
must needs vanish away as the mistie clouds before the sun, and be scattered
as the dust before the wind, and finally be consumed as the rods of the
charmers of Egypt by Aarons Rod: even as all the Oracles of the Heathen
ceased at the coming of Christ, and all the religions were put to silence by
the preaching of the Gospel, and the evil spir its of Satan which possessed
men, were thrown out by the power of the spirit of the holy Ghost -- To this
religion therefore only ought all the faithful christians to give their assent
and consent, which no Tyrant could ever extinguish, were he never so mighty or
malicious, nor heretic confute, were he never so learned or subtle, nor any
enemy convince, were he never so powerful or politic: which may be for a
time yclouded or ecclipsed, but shall never wholly loose her light, and pressed
and depressed for a while, but shall never finally be oppressed; and lastly may
be assailed and assaulted, but never utterly vanquished. To conclude therefore,
leave all other Doctrines and cleave only to this mystery, forsake all other
professions and betake thy self only to this Godliness, cast away all other
falsehoods and hold fast this truth; and let neither the buffetings of Satan,
the baits of the flesh, the pleasures of sin, nor the golden apples of the
world cause thee to let go thy hold, but hold it fast for ever, even to the
end.

God manifested in the flesh.
Thus much of this great mystery of truth or godliness, as it is here
generally defined of the Apostle; now of the particular parcels and branches
thereof in their due order. But first of the maine branche, out of which the
rest do grow and flow, contained in these words. Man having lost his first
perfection, forsaken his former purity, and made himself subject to
corruption; in the beginning breaking Gods commandments, ever after
transgressing the law of the Lord, and never ceasing to sin, in thought,
word and deed, not only our first parents, the Authors of our iniquities,
causers of our infirmities, and original roots of our pollution; but also all
the children of men in their generations, in all times and ages of the world,
as being the spawne of those rebels, the corrupt fruits of such rotten trees,
the bitter water of vnpure fountains, (...), fowls of the same feather,
birds of the same brood, sinners of the same stamp, sinning sons of sinful
parents, according to that proverb of the Prophet; The fathers have eaten
sower grapes, and their childrens teeth are set on edge. For as the Apostle
Paul says out of the Psalmist, There is none righteous, no not one, there is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God, they have all
gone out of the way, they have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one, etc. Romans 3. And as the Prophet Esaias, From the sole
of the foot unto the crown of the head, there is nothing whole therein, but
wounds, swellings, and soars full of corruption, 1.6. And finally as the Lord
God himself, All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are only
evil continually, Genesis 6.5. And therefore man to deserve nothing else but
condemnation, curse and death: as first condemnation, for so the Apostle, By
the offense of one, the fault came on all men unto condemnation, Romans 5.18.
Secondly curse, for as says the same Apostle out of Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the Law, to do them, Gal. 3.10. Thirdly death, for according to the
commination of the law, whosoever shall not perform every jot and tittle of
the law, shall die the death: and the conclusion of our Apostle, The wages of
sin is death, Romans 6. And the last with condemnation, curse and death, not
temporal or for a time, but perpetual and for ever, because man himself was
never able to bear and abide as the Lord himself knew, who sees all his
frailties and infirmities; and yet it being necessary that man having sinned,
man should suffer; for that the sentence of condemnation should not be
reuersed, nor curse of the law revoked, nor the doom of death redeemed, but
that one must needs die for the people, and one for all, and not that man
alone, as being sufficient, because all men had tra^ns gressed; nor a beast
being too base to satisfy, for so great and so many trespasses; nor an
Angel, as being too weak for such a punishment and passion. It pleased God
the Father of his gracious goodness, to send down his only begotten son
out of his own bosom, and it liked also Christ himself the son of God: yea
God of God, light of light, very God of very God, of his own entire love, to
vouchsafe to descend down from the highest heaven upon the earth, and to be
incarnate, incorporate, and compassed about with our claiey mould, to take upon
him our vile and servile nature, and to be manifested unto the world in our
weak, frail and wretched flesh, and to be borne of a silly, simple and
sinful woman, to perform for man all obedience, and to reform his
disobedience, to ransom sin, and redeem his transgression, by his body to
save our souls, and by his own death to purchase our lives, by his own
crucifying to take away our curse, by his own condemnation to obtain a common
salvation, and by his own sacrifice to make a general satisfaction for all
other unto God his father, O magna gratia, magna dignatio. And this is that
great and wonderful mystery which is so notably set out by the Evangelists in
the Gospel, which when we consider, our spirit must needs be ravished, our
senses benumbed, our Wits captiuated, and all our outward and inward parts and
powers to be astonished, that the word should be come fleash John. 1.14. and to
be made of the seed of David, according to the fleash, Romans 1.3. and being in
the form of God, and thinking it noe robbery to be equal with God, should
make himself of no reputation, and take upon him the form of a servant, and
be made like unto men, and be formed in shape of a man, Phil. 2.6.7. which is
such a mystery, that I may use Austin, words in an other matter. Yet fitly
applied to this purpose, Vt altitudine ipsa rerum superbos terreat,
profunditate atte^ tos teneat, veritate magnos pascat, vtilitate paruulos
nutriat: in his 5. lib Genesi ad Lite: Chapit 3. that with the depth thereof,
it terrifieth the arrogant, which think they can conceive all things, with
the hardness thereof, it will make men attentive and studious, which otherwise
would be idle and negligent; and with the truth thereof, will exercise the most
perfect and able, which think all matters easy and plain, and lastly with the
pressire and fruitfulness thereof, will nourish the simplier sort, which like
young sucklinges can hardly brook any strong meats, and not only such a
mystery but such a great mystery, as what could be greater, says the same
Father, that a virgin should conceive a son without the seed of man. What
greater, then that God should be borne of a woman? and what finally greater
then this, that she that confesses herself a lowly handmaid, should become
the mother of her own maker? Where upon Austin says upon the Magnificat,
Misterium incarnationis verbi super omnia constat esse ineffabile. Wherein are
not only many, but also great miracles, as that a virgin should become a
mother, God a man, Great miracles.
and the Creator a Creature, that truth should come out from the Earth, that
Righteousness should look down from Heaven, that majesty should take upon it
Humility, that he that is the Ancient of days; and was for ever before all
days, and created every day, should be borne in a day to deliver us from the
evil of every day, that he by his birth, should bestow upon his mother the
gift of fruitfulnes, and yet not take away from her the virtue of virginity,
that he that in the beginning of the world made the first Ada^, according to
his own Image and similitude, should make himself afterward in the ending of
the world according to our similitude and likeness, descending down unto us
by that which he took of ours, and delivering us by that, which remained in
himself, conceived by the holy Ghost, not of the substance, but by the power
thereof, not by generation, but by benediction, Finally not by propagation, but
by sanctification, and his Mother conceauing him, not by man, but by God; not
by seed, but by the spirit, not by human means, but by the over shadowing
of the most highest. So that as he was borne without Carnal copulation, so was
he brought forth with out mortal corruption. And as he was first borne of his
Father before al worlds without a mother, and did create the world; so
secondly was he borne of his mother in the world without a father, that he
might consecrate by his divine Majesty invisible, by his human birth visible
in them, both wonderful, of the one as impossible to be expressed the Prophet
says, And who shall declare his generation? Esaie. 53. Of the other as
necessary to be known and credible to be believed, The Evangelist; And the
birth of Christ Jesus was after this manner, Math 1. Before he was borne
abiding in the bosom of his father, and yet filling the womb of his mother,
in the time of his birth the everlasting Father in heaven, and yet a Young
infant upon the Earth after birth, a light shining in the world, as John, and
yet dwelling in the light that cannot be attained unto, as Paul; of which his
birth and of the manner and end thereof Austin has these sweet words. Vt
Sponsus processit de thalamo suo, vt gigas exultauit ad currendam viam,
speciosus vt sponsus, fortis vt gigas, amabilis et terribilis, serenus and
seuerus, pulcher bonis, asper malis, that is, he went forth as a bridegroom,
etc. Which manner of his bringing forth, was far more stra^g then any other
birthes of mankind that were before, then that first of Adam, four creations
of man.
who was only formed of the slime of the Earth without man or woman, then the
second, Eve, who was made of a ribbe of man only without any woman, and then
the third of all men in general both by man and woman, according to the
ordinary and common course of nature. This four being by woman alone without
man, a new thing, a strange matter, a wonderful miracle, never the like seen
nor hard of before. Yea such a marvel, as that the report of it made an
infant to skippe in his mothers womb for Joy, the Heavens to speak by a
star to declare the wonder of it, the wise men from the East to come from
far to see and be eyewitnesses of it, the Angels to singe in the Consort, and
to show fourth their gladness after it was made known unto them, The
sheaphards of Bethlem to run in have to behold it, after it was declared
unto them, the ancient father Simeon, to desire to die and depart in peace
after he had seen his salvation. Finally, this made the old Prophetess Anna,
when as by the motion of the spirit this thing was reveled unto her, to leave
her prayer to God, and to fall to praising the Lord Christ, and from fasting, to
come not only to confess him her self, but also to commend him unto other.
And such a mystery, as none was thought worthy to be messenger of the same,
not a holy priest nor a divine Frophet, nor a great Patriarch, but an holy
Angel and Archangel even Gabriell that stands in the presence of God. Whose
countenance being terrible, his garments glorious, and his coming sudden, in
visiting the virgin Marie, he troubled her, and yet his voice being pleasant,
his words sweet, and his tidings gladsome, in saluting her comforted her;
telling her that as she was the beloved virgin of God, and handmaide of God, so
she should be the blessed mother of God, and spouse of God. And such a miracle,
as whereby the word did not perish being turned into fleash, but fleash least
it should perish cleaving to the word; that as man is both soul and body, so
Christ might be both God, and man; not by confusion of nature, but by unity of
person, and this conceived and perceived not with the Eyes of the fleash, but
with the faith of the heart, the only begotten and the first begotten of his
Father, and the first begotten of his brethren lying in a manger, and filling
the whole world, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and thundering in the Clouds;
sucking on earth the pappes of his mother, and yet sitting in Heaven at the
right hand of God his Father; and is finally such a great mystery as that it
compriseth the principal Pillour of our faith, the most certain ground of
truth, the strongest foundation of the Church: wherein we are to consider
first, the unspeakable love of God the father toward us, who would not spare
his own and only son, but freely gave him to save us. And our Savior in the
gospel, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc.
Secondly his own incomparable love in showing himself so kind and courteous
unto mankind as to suffer himself to be cast in his mould, to be clothed with
his fleash, and to be compassed about his infirmities which he himself commen
death, John. 15.13. Saying to his disciples, greater love then this has no man,
etc. Both which their loves our Apostle Paul sets out most lively, Romans
5.8. when he says, God sets out his love toward us, seeing the while we
were yet sinners Christ died for us. And thirdly our Savior Christ's lowly
humility herein likewise appears as Paul also declares the same, as that
he being in form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God,
made himself of no reputation, etc. Phil. 2.6.7. Here then first we are to
know for our instruction the two natures of Christ, secondly the destinction
of both his natures, 2 natures of Christ.
as first his divinity, in that the Apostle calls him God, Three
distinctions.
and then his humanity in affirming him to be manifested in the fleash,
Thirdly the Hipostaticall union and community of of properties in one and the
same person of our Savior, three deep mysteries contained, and couched in
three words in quibus says Beza very briefly duae ponuntur, distinguntur,
vniuntur naturae Christi whereby three sorts of Heresies are confuted. First
the Arrirans that deny the divinity of our Savior Christ secondly the
Marcianits who gain say Christ to have a human and fleashlie body, but only
an heavenly spiritual body, thirdly the Nestorians, who affirm Christ to have
two persons, one of his Humanity, the other of his divinity, and that his
manhood was deified and changed into his godhead. Secondly we are to learn
for our edification, that we may make use and take proffit in our life and
conversation by this mystery, even three things Austin comprehends them
together in one sweet sentence, Ser. 22. 3 things to be learned by this
mystery.
De tempore in these words, omnis Natiuitatis schola est humanitatis officina
patientiae massa, virtutis agonia. First humility in following him in the like
lowliness, in making our selves equal with them of the lower sort, as Paul
exacteth, secondly Patience, whereof he shows himself a president, that we
should follow his steps in constantly bearing and abiding all kind of
adversity and of affliction, as Peter admonishes. And finally virtue, and
especially love, that we should love one another as Christ has loved us, as
our savior himself co^ma^deth. Thus much of these words, as having a general
view of them, but now let us sift the same more narrowly and perticularly
consider them not in way of ample discourse, but in manner of a short survey
as first to declare what manifestation this was, and secondly the form
thereof. For Paul here says, not only that God was manifested, but also
shows how: in the fleash, we read in Prophaine Histories, that the Gods of
the Heathen, as first Jupiter the great Father of these Gods, that he did
metamorphose himself into diverse shapes and forms of sundry Creatures. As
into a Bull when he lay with Europa, into a swanne, when he begat of Leda,
Castor and Pollux; and into Amphritrio, a man when he begatt of Alcmena
Hercules, of which the Poet.

Na^ Deus humana lustra^s sub imagine terras And likewise the other Gods, that
they took upon them the like semblance to the same ends and purposes as
Apollo, when he changed himself into a crow, Bacchus into a goat, Diana into
a catte, Juno into a Cow, Venus into a fish, and Mercury into the bird Ibis
As Ovid contains the^ altogether Metamorph. 5.

Delius in Coruo proles Semeleia capra.
Feel soror Phebi niuea Saturnia vacca
Fisce venus latuit Cyllenius Ibidis alis.
But these are but Poets faininges, being the Painters out of false fables, as
shadows of some other truth, as that these mortal creatures supposed Gods and
Idolles of the Gentles, were in a manner converted into such brute beasts, by
their unclean actions. Again, we find in the holy scriptures, that Satan
transformed him self in to an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.13. and that the
true Angels of God, have oftentimes taken unto them the shapes and forms of
men, in which they have appeared, when they have been sent from Heaven down
into the earth, and whereby they have not only spoken unto men, but also eaten
and drunken with men. Yea we shall read in the old Testament and new in
many places, that the Lord God, himself appears unto his saints and
servants in diverse semblances and fashions, but especially in the form of
fire. As when he appeared unto Moises in the flame of a fiery bush Exo. 3. Unto
the Children of Israel, when he led them through the wilderness in a Pillour
of fire, Exodus 13. and unto the disciples and Apostles, when the Holy Ghost
descended in the shape of fire cloven tounges, whereupon Austin uses these
words, Hoc enim ele mentum est magnum sacramentum De Symb, ad Catech lib. 3.
cap. 9. As also the Lord some times to have showed himself in other forms, as
God the Father in the shape of a man, when he came to Abraham, sitting at the
Oak of Mamre Genesis 18. And God the Holy ghost in the form of a Dove, when he
appeared to John Baptist after Christ's baptism, Math. 3. But none of these
before mentioned did keep those shapes and se^blances which they took or
seemed to take upon them, but forsook them immediately, after they had
performed what they would by that means. But our Savior Christ Jesus, when
he was thus manifested in our flesh, he took it not upon him for a time, but
perpetually, even to be our eternal mediator both God and man world without
end, and to continewe a priest for ever, after the order of Melchesidecke. And
here we are to note, how properly the Apostle writes, when he here sets
down, that God, was manifested in the fleash, and not the Godhead, speaking as
the logitians say in the contract but not in the Abstract, being true in the
one, as appears, but not in the other, as in the Contract because it
contains in it the whole person of Christ, consisting of both natures, but
not in the Abstract, for that it considers the several nature of his
divinity only, which in noe wise can be manifested in the fleash, nor be
confounded with his humanity, unless we will run into Eutiches error, and
think that his manhood was not taken only but also absorpt and consu^pt of his
Godhead, which is a foul Heresy: so that it appears evidently, what manner,
of manifestation this was.

Now therefore only in a word or two, let us speak of the form it self,
into which god is here said to be manifested, and so to pass on to the next
branche of this mystery; because we have dwelt very long in this already
which form is here said to be in the fleash that is in human nature. As that
which was immortal, invisible, incomprehensible and infinite, should take unto
it a kind of nature, which was mortal uisible, comprehensible, and finite, yea
which might be seen, touched, and handled, and like unto us in all respects,
sin only excepted; not by converting the Godhead in to manhood, but by
conioyning the human nature to the divine, uniting them both in one person of
Christ our mediator, even as John, 1.1. witnesses that which we have hard,
that which we have seen which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the word of life, neither took he any other form either of any Creature
upon the earth, or of any power in heaven noe not of any Angel, but of the
seed of Abraham only, Heb. 2.16. And why? because as the Apostle in the same
chapter renders the Reason, for as much as the children were partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself took likewise part with them Verse. 14 Here
then flesh is not taken for the natural vitiousnesse of man's corruption, as it
is often times taken in the scriptures, especially in the Epistle to the
Romans for the unregenerate part of man contrary unto the spirit, for then
should our Savior Christ be subject unto sin, as we are, which were
blasphemy to affirm, but for the whole natural and true essence and
substance of a mortal man, both of reasonable soul and of human fleash
subsisting, and not of body only, least we fall into the Erroneous opinion of
the Apollinarists. And thus much of this maine branche of this great mystery:
now of the next.

Justified in the spirit
As this is an annexio^ unto the words, going before, so is it an amplification
of the former mystery, as if the Apostle Paul had said, although. Christ the
son of God and God himself was manifested in the fleash, as he has set
down more at large Phil. 2. Yet did the (...) most glorious shine and sign of
divine power and Godhead manifestly appear and show fourth it self which here
is called spirit: as the same is expressed more plainly. First by our Apostle
Romans. 1.4. when he says that he was declared mightily to be the son of god,
touching the spirit of sanctification by the resurrection from the dead, as
being one notable and notorious action of his supernatural, virtue. Secondly
by Peter. 1.3.18. by an other semblable act, even the worthy work of his
passion, As that he was put to death according to the fleash, but was quickened
in the spirit. And thirdly John. 1.14. that the word became fleash and dwelt
amongst us and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten
son of the father full of grace and truth. So that to justify in this place
is not to make or pronounce one Righteous or just, which is not so indeed as
this word is taken. Luke. 16.15. in those words of our Savior unto the
Pharisees, Ye are they which Justify your selves before men, but God knows
your hearts, etc. And Luke. 18.14. in that conclusion of the parable and
difinitiue sentence of our savior between the Pharisie and the publican, when
he says that, the one departed ^o^, rather Justified the^ the other. And
finally as it is taken so often in the Epistle to the Romans, where our Apostle
handles that chief point of our Religion even our Justification, but
especially, Chap. 3.28. In those words. Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the law. But this word here
signifies to approve, show forth, or declare a man to be such an one, by
certain signs and sure tokens, by infallible Arguments and evident
demonstrations, such as cannot be refelled or refuted As Psalm. 51. in those
words of the Prophet David, Against thee alone O Lord have I sinned, and done
this evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
clear when thou art judged. And Math. 11.14. where our Savior says. And
wisdom is Justified of her children meaning himself. So likewise is it taken
Luke. 7.20. where the Evangelist declares that the Publicans justified God:
for those things that are exactly perfect and exquisitly absolute without any
want or default, and therefore allowed and liked of all, are said by a common
Phrase of Scripture to be justified. Whereby Paul sets out unto us the
might and majesty of our Savior, not in outward habit and appearance, or in
external pomp or power, but in inward spirit and divine virtue, in mighty
miracles, wonderful works, heavenly doctrine, most glorious, great, and other
incomprehensible effects, by which word and Phrase the Apostle endeauoreth to
take away all kind of weak diffide^ce or distrust, which might any way be
conceived in our hearts by taking offense at the low and base estate of Christ's
our saviors ma^hood, which seemed to be so, vile, abject, and contemptible, as
some supposed him to be only a base and silly man. As likewise by spirit in
this place, is not only meante that mortified and regenerate parts of man,
which is contrary to the fleash, as it is usually taken in the scriptures, and
especially in the Epistle to the Romans, but for what soever was and is in
Christ extraordinary and supernatural above common manhood, and mortality.
As if the Apostle Paul had said, although he was clothed with our fleash,
combred with our frailties, and compassed with our infirmities, yet none of
these, did weake^ the power of his truth, the flower of the glory of his
divinity or once derogate from the honor of his majesty. As that although he
was very man, yet not withstanding he was true God, and although he took upon
him the form of a servant, yet he thought it no robbery to be equal with
his father, Phil. 2.7. for in him remains all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. Col. 2.9. And he was the brightness of the glory, and engraven form
of the substance of God his father, Heb. 1, 3. As it may appear throughout the
whole history of the Gospel, whereby he is described unto us to be mighty
indeed and in word: for so first he approved himself to be God, in his birth,
in that he was borne after the common order and manner of men, his mother being
ouershadowed by the power of the most highest, and himself conceived by the
holy ghost. Secondly at his inauguration and consecraction after his baptism,
when as by the ^iuely voice and divine oracle from heaven he was pronounced and
proclaimed to be the Son and heir apparent of God his father. Thirdly in his
temptation, when ^s he vanquished Satan in a Monomachie or single combat, and
made him void and ^uant from him: Fourthly in curing al kind of sicknesses and
diseases, by taking a way both the cause and the effect. Fifthly in know ^ng
both the thoughts and hearts of men, as ^t appears oftentimes in the Gospel.
Sixt^y in stilling the wind and calming the sea, and in working other strange
signs and wonders. Seauenthly in his Passion, when as the weakness of his
fleash was succou^ed and sustained by the strength of his Godhead. Eighthly in
his Resurection, in that he was able to lay down his life, and to take it to
him again. Ninthly in asce^ding up into Heaven, for as our Savior in the
Gospel John. 3. No man has ascended up into heaven, but he that descended
down from Heaven even the son of man, which also is in Heaven. And tenthly,
in sending down the Holy Ghost his blessed spirit, which proceeded as well
from himself as from God his father; Insomuch that we cannot but confess and
say with Nicodemus the Pharisie that none can do such things as these except
he came from God or except he were God himself; without question, therefore to
be justified in this place is as Athanasius in his book De surrectione carnis
explaineth it. Iustitiam habere n^^ humano more sed diuina puritate that is to
be just and Righteous in himself, and (...) himself, not according to human
quality, but by a divine spirit: for so signifies this Hebrew Phrase, in this
place, and i^ respect of us being allone with that which our Apostle has. 1.
Col. 1.30. that he is b^come our righteousness, redemption sanctification, and
salvation, being the whole and so^^ scope, and hope of their faith which by the
same spirit, do believe and put their tru^^ in him, not resting or relying
upon any other mean or merit what so ever. And of this iustifiyng had not
only our Savior Christ the testimony of his own spirit even the Holy Ghost,
which was a witness unto John the Baptist, when he descended down upon him
invisibly in the form of a dove. Math 3.16. Which heavenly vision was a divine
oracle and siuely voice of God himself, which the Lord caused to appear unto
him, that when he knew not our Savior it might be as an infallible token to
^iscerne him from all other, as he himself ^onfesseth. John 1.33.34. And I
knew ^im not but that he sent me to baptize with water, he said unto me upon
whom thou ^halt see the spirit come down and tarry still ^ne him, that is he
that baptizeth, with the holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record, that ^his is
the son of God. But also the spirit of ^he Saints and servants of God which
gives ^estimony unto themselves and their own ^oules that our Savior is
their Lord and God ^or so says Paul in the person of all the elect and
faithful. 1. Cor. 8.5.6. Though their ^e that are called Gods, whether in
Heaven or in Earth as there be many Gods and many Lords, yet unto us there is
but one God which is the Father of whom are althings, and we in him, and one
Lord Jesus Christ by whom are althinges, and we by him and again, 1. Col.
12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. But to draw
to an End for this point, and to make our use of this matter, we are here
taught that we should labor to justify our selves both before God, and man,
not externally by carnal and earthly things, but internally after an heavenly
and spiritual manner, not with the hypocritical Iewe^ in Esaies days 29.13. To
draw near unto God with their mouth and honor him with their lips, but in
heart to be far from the^ And with the Scribes, and Pharisees in our Savior
Christ's time to be serious obseruers of outward ceremonies and to be far from
inward sincerity Math. 15.8. not superstitiously with the unfaithful Jews,
and Idolatrous Samaritans, to worship they know not what, nor ignorantly they
know not how, nor blindly they know not where: but as the true worshippers to
worship the father in spirit, and in truth for God is a spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in the spirit, and in truth John 4.23.24. not
to declare our selves to be those of these last days and perilous times,
which Paul foretold should be in the world, having ashew of Godliness but
denying the power thereof. 2. Tim. 3.5. not to love one another, in tougne and
in word only, but indeed and in truth, as John exhorts us for such external
shows, and semblances such outward facing and gracing with such deep
dissembling and hollow hearted hyprocrisie, God utterly hates and abhors:
when as we dally with God himself, double with men, and deceive our own
souls as may well be said deceauing and being deceived, making this world as
it were a Theator the Church a stage, themselves as actours and players, in
seeming to be that which they are not, in disguising themselves as it were with
the side Robes, broad Philactaries, and long fringes of the scribes and
Pharisees, vice masking under the visour of virtue, profainenesse lurking under
the couerture of holiness, and falsehood hiding it self under the color of
truth and verity, which is not to follow the steps of our Savior, who
would only as it is here set down, be justified in the spirit, and thus much
of this second branch of this tree of truth now of the third.

Seen of Angels.
After that our Apostle had set down in the words going before that double
heavenly mystery of our Savior Christ, that he was manifested in the fleash,
and justified in the spirit, he does amplify the miracle of that mystery and
the power of God, by a notable circumstance of great weight and moment,
confirming and establishing the same by the witness and testimony of high and
Heavenly powers, as in matters of greatest importance, are requisite to be eye
and ear witnesses, not persons of base and mean estate and credit, but such
as are of worthy estimation, and reputation, not mortal men of the
inhabitances of the earth, who would be astonished at the wonder of so great a
work that Christ should become a man, but eue^ the immortal Angels the host
of heaven, who were excedingly glad and rejoiced to see the same within finite
admiration praising the name of God, being such a new and strange thing unto
them, as they never wished nor thought of before, for although it be to
begra^ted that these Saints and servants of God, which stand in the presence of
God, and behold the face of God, do know many of the secrets of God, as being
indewed with an excellent knowledge in heavenly mysteries, and there fore are
called (...) as seeing and perceauing much, and therefore did no doubt
understand that the world should at length be redeemed and saved, and that
Christ in time should be borne, and finally should suffer and be slain for the
sins of mankind. As we read that the Angel Gabriell did foretell the same
unto the Prophet Daniell 9. Dani. Notwithstanding most sure and certain it is,
that they know not every mystery, and miracle of God, nor all the secrets of
the Lords whole divine counsels, and therefore not every particular
circumstance of time, place, and person belonging to the incarnation, passion,
and resurrection of our savior: neither yet knew they the means, and how
these things should be brought to pass, Insomuch that all be it they saw not
this at the first, yet at the last the Lord vouch safed to reuele the same unto
the^, and not only to make them behoulders thereof, but also messengers and
ambassadors of so glad tidinges, and reioysers of so great a grace bestowed
upon mankind: As was Gabriell not only the foretellour of these happy news
in general terms unto Daniell as is before declared; but also as legate a
latere from the lord God himself, the signifier and certifier, of all the
particular circu^sta^ces belonging to his incarnation unto Joseph, Marie,
Zachary, and the shephards as it may appear in the beginning of the gospel:
as first who should be his forerunner, even John the baptist the son of
Zachary, and Elizabeth. Secondly how he should be conceived, even by the holy
ghost. Thirdly who should be his mother even the virgin marie. Fourthly the
place where he should be borne, even in Bethle^ the least of all the cities of
Judah. Fifthly his name whereby he should be called, eue^ Jesus, because he
should save the people from their sins, with many other specialties set
down at large by the Evangelists, all which when it was performed as the
angel had prophesied, and had been fullfilled as Gabriell had fore showed to
Joseph, Marie, Zacharias, and the sheaphards of Bethelem, not only he himself,
but the Angels of God likewise were rapte and ravished, as it were with joy,
when they saw it brought to pass, which made also an host of heavenly
soldiers to join in consort, and to praise God and say. Glory be to God on
high, on earth peace, and good will toward men. Luke. 2, 13.14. The cause of
this their exceeding gladness being this, not only for the common salvation of
mankind, and general grace that had appeared unto all, but for that the Lord
vouchsafed both to show them that favor, as to make them the spectatours of so
notable a miracle, and to give them that honor, as to take them as witnesses
of so great a mystery, for the strengthening of our faith, enlarging of our
hope, the ascertaning and assuring of our souls, and consciences, in the
undoubted truth thereof: and these as witnesses in the higher degree, as in the
next words, he descends to the testimony of these that are of lower
account even of men: and here note the Propriety of the speech, the pregnancie
of the Phrase, which it pleases ^he blessed spirit of God in holy and
heavenly wisdom here to use, when as the Apostle says, that he was seen of
Angels and not that Angels did see him, signifying hereby, not any virtue in
themselves in this respect, but Gods vouchsafing toward them. Seeing that is
said to appear unto one, which is not in the behoulders power to see it. As
when one has a stone before his eyes, which he looks upon, we say not a
sto^e is seen of him, but he sees a sto^e the like of the sun, the moon
the light, and the rest of the visible creatures of God here in the world the
common and continual objects of our sight, so that not of their own nature
nor by their own power, nor through any ability that was in them, did they
see the lord Christ; but only by Gods gift, grace, and goodness, was the
incarnate word reueiled unto them, and many other mysteries which were before
unknown of them; whereupon Beda says, Quod in natiuitate apparuit Angelis
claritas, quae non a^tea in veritate visa est hominibus: that is* that after
the nativity of our savior, there appeared a clearer brightness in the
angels, then ever indeed appeared before unto men, and that in two respects:
first in regard of the ministry of the Apostles, and secondly in respect of
the knowledge of the people, being far greater then was in the former times
either in the prophets, or in the multitude. And therefore this holy host of
God ever after Christ's manifestation in the flesh, adjoined themselves unto him
as his guard, offered their service unto him as his ministers, always attended
upon him as his servants, from the beginning of his humiliation and
inauguration, until his heavenly exaltation and glorification, being not only
messengers about his nativity, publishers of his birth, and choristers of the
glad tidings thereof: as it is before declared, but also ministers unto him not
at, but after his temptation, least by their help he should seem to have
vanquished Satan, as he might have had legions of Angels at his death and
passion, as he himself said: but he would not, because he would be destitute
of all heavenly aid and human succor, that he might humble himself to the
death of the cross. As he had the same ministering spirits proclaimers of his
resurrection unto Marie Mag dalen and the other women, and to Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, and as finally he the^ had heavenly soldiers his waiters
and attenders at his ascension, doing him homage, and giving him honor, and
showing all seruisable duty toward him in all respects, at all times, and in
all places, being feign of their office, and forward to imploye their
diligence about him, especially the great savior and redeemer of the world,
when as they are glad of a meaner charge, even to be ministering spirits to me^,
which are heirs appointed unto salvation 1. Heb. 14. And here note, what
great account and high regard the blessed a^gels are of in the sight of God,
in causing and chosinge them to be the especial witnesses of his heavenly and
holy mysteries above all other. And therefore find we so often in the
scriptures such honorable mention of them, as that the holy ghost vouchsafes
to name and number them next, and immediately unto God the father, and Christ
Jesus his son, as in that place Luke. 10. He that confesses me before men,
him will I confess before my father and his Angels etc. and 1. Tim. 5.21. I
charge thee before God, and the lord Jesus Christ and the elect angels that
thou observe these things etc. And finally Apocalips. 1.4. grace be with you
and peace from him which was, which is, to come, and from the seven spirits,
which are before his throne. And in diverse other places of the Gospel, where
they are adioined with God or associate with Christ as copartners with them of
their glory, but are ascited and appealed unto, as witnesses of their grace.
The use that we are to make hereof is this, even fully and faithfully to be
leeue that to be true and most true, as the which no adversary in the world
shall ever be of power to convince, no heretic sufficient to gain say, nor
against the which the gates of Hell shall ever be able to prevail, because we
have the sure and certain Testimony of the angels themselves, in confirmation
of the soundness of this doctrine, so that we ought not to misdoute, or
misdeeme the same, with the unbelieving Gentiles and Jews, except we will be as
incredulous as the Saduces themselves, who thought that there were neither
spirits, not Angels, contrary to many and manifest places of the scripture.

Preached unto the Gentiles.
As an earthly King and prince at the first inauguration of his person into
his royal estate and government, does observe this course, first to gather
together the nobles and the peers of the land, and before him to appear and
show themselves, and to require of them their due and duetifull homage,
fealty and allegiance, and then afterward they to accompany him to be
publicly proclaimed, before all the people as right and lawful inheritour to
the croune and kingdom, and then of all his subjects for their part to be so
accepted, accounted, and regarded: and so lastly, to advance himself in to his
seat of honor and chair of estate, there to be most gloriously enthonized,
crowned, and anointed with all princely pomp, and majesty. Even so our
heavenly King of Kings Christ Jesus, in the degrees of the exaltation of his
person, after his manifestation in the flesh, and justification in the spirit,
which was as it were his first inauguration into his spiritual kingdom in the
progress of his proceedinges, was first enterueiwed and contemplated of the
Angels his most noble creatures, powers, and principallities, who not only
showed unto him divine reverence and obedience, but also did unto him heavenly
honor and homage. After which it next follows, that he should in their
presence be publickely preached unto the Gentiles, to all the people, nations,
and languages of the earth; as to his people and subjects, and then to be
believed in the world, that is, entertained with all faith and fealty, and
embraced with all love and loialtie, in all the corners, and quarters of the
world; and so finally to be received up into glory, that is ascended up into
the highest heavens there to sit in the throne of his majesty. These three
things being the three last branches of this tree of truth, which we are to
entreat of in the same order and with the semblable brevity, as we have done
the former parts of this my text. In the first whereof which we have in hand
are to be considered three things, who, what, to whom: for the first it is w
evident who even he of whom we have altogether spoken before the matter of this
mystery of godliness, the sap of this tree of truth, the subject of my
text, the contents of the Gospel, the lords anointed, Gods Christ, God
manifested in the flesh, Christ incarnate, Jesus incorporate on earth, and
consecrate in heanen, God humiliated, and man exalted, God gracing man and man
glorifying God: and what? Even first manifested, secondly justified, and
thirdly seen, and fourthly preached. As great a work of wonder as any of the
rest in all respects, first for the person, so base, so vile, so miserable a
man, the son of man, and a worm and noe man to be proclaimed a sovereign
savior, an heavenly king, an omnipotent God, incredible to be believed,
impossible to be performed in the eyes of fleash and blood, that a woorme
should save al men that the seed of a woman should bruise a serpents head,
that the dew of the birth which was of the womb of the morning, should droune
the great Leuiathan withal his dragons in the red sea: intolerable to be
suffered in policy, for the great states and potentates of the world, for a
poor babe, who was feign to have an Inn for his lodging, a stable for his
chamber, and a cracth or manger for his cradle, to be worshipped of honorable
estates, have offered unto him gould, mirrhe and franken cense, in signs and
signification of his three fould office, that he was a royal king, an holy
Priest, and an anointed prophet, yea for a carpenter, or carpenters son as
he was commonly called, and accounted, to be sovereign monarch of all the
kings, keysars, and conquerours of the earth. And injurious to be borne with
in piety as it should seem, for a base Nazarite and a rude Galelea^, to
deface Moses, and disgrace God, to abrogate the Law, abolish the ordinances,
to frustrate circu^sition and annihilate former ceremonies, as the offended
Jews did object against him. And in stead thereof to ordain two new
sacraments, one of water, an other of wine, and to bring in a new doctrine,
even the Gospel, and for the former prophets appointed by the Lord, to assign
new Apostles of his own making, never hard of before. All these things were
not only marvelous, but also odious and dangerous, in respect of his person,
and therefore a deep point of this mystery of godliness. Secondly in regard
of the preaching it self, Preaching being at this time but a broaching of
folly, and therefore called by Paul according to the common, crooked, and
corrupt Judgment of the world, the foolishness of preaching, being taken for
madness, to cry as John Baptist did in the wilderness and our Savior
himself did in the temple Preachers being called mad men, as that son of the
Prophet was in, Iehues time 2. Kings 9.11. and dru^ckardes, as the Apostles
were said to be druncke with new wine Acts. 2. And bablers, as Paul was termed
of the Athenians Acts. 17. disturbers of states and common wealths, as Elias
was called by Ahab a troubler of Israel. 18.17. as Micheah likewise the same
by Ahab an unhappy Prophet, 1. kin. 22.8. and as Ieremias, a discourager of
the people by the princes of Judea Ierem 21.3. And as Amos a conspiratour by
Amaziah the priest; Amos 10. yea as our Savior Chist Jesus himself of the
high priest and scribes, a peruerter of the people a forbidder to pay tribute
to Caesar and an affecter of a kingdom. Luke. 23.2. As Stephen of the people,
elders, and Scribes a blasphemer, Act. 6.11. And Paul by Tertullus to be a
pestilent fellow, a mouer of sedition among all the Jews, and a chief
maintainer of the sect of the Nazarites Act. 24.8. Again; for the manner of
this preaching contemned and condemned of all men, because it was not only bare
and naked without a sign to countenance and confirm it, and therefore a
scandal to the Jews; but also plain and simple without wisdom of words to
show and setit fourth, and therefore folly to the Grecians, 1. Col. 1.2. And
besides for the men that did preach being homely and rude poor fishermen very
simple, ignorant and unlearned Idiots. Lastly, in respect of the persons that
were preached unto prophaine Panims godless Pagans, Idolatours Gentiles,
superstitious Grecians, to whom to preach, is as it is in the Prove. Surdo
narrare fabulam, even to speak to dead and deaf men, deaf in obstinacy, and
dead in sin, given over to vanity, nusseled in ignorance, blundering in
blindness, and almost cast of into a reprobate sense, even as blocks,
stocks, and stones, like unto the Idols which they worshipped, in whom
neither the plowe of preaching could make any furrow, nor the seed of the
Gospel take any root, because neither the dew of Gods grace could mollify
the soul of their hearts, nor the sunshine of his blessing fructify the
ministry of his word in their souls. Notwithstanding all which, see the
mystery, behold the wonder, how this is brought to pass: for the person,
though a vile woorme, yet a glorious Archangell or Prince of angels, thought
a mean mortal man, yet a mighty and immortal God, though a son borne and a
child given, yet an everlasting father, and the ancient of days. Secondly for
preaching, though folly to men, yet the wisdo^e of God, though an offense both
to the Jews and Gentiles, yet the power of God unto salvation, to the Jews
first, and also to the Gentiles though a stumblinge block, yet a sweet bait,
whereby many souls were caught by the hooks of the Gospel. And for the
preachers though poor fisher men yet powrfull fishers of men, though rude
Galileans, yet honorable Apostles, though not puffed up with human knowledge,
yet inspired with heavenly wisdom. And finally the persons that were preached
unto though Gentiles by generation, yet Israelites, by regeneration: though
children of truth, yet of stones made the sons of Abraha though aliants and
strangers from the common wealth of Israel, yet free denisons and citizens
with the saints. This therefore is the Lords doing to use the words of the
Psalmist and it is marvelous in our eyes, and yet although marvelous and
mistical, found by blessed proof, and happy experience to be performed in us,
which were sometimes Gentiles, but now christians, by the great power and
gracious providence of God. But why was God manifested in the fleash, Justified
in the spirit? preached unto the Gentiles; because otherwise he could not be
believed in the world, so that with out this cause going before, the effect
which answeareth in the next bra^ch, could never have followed: for as the
prophet Esaie: who should believe our report or to who^e is the arm of the
Lord reuieled? and as the apostle Paul; How shall they believe in him, of
whom they have not hard, and how shall they hear without a preacher, so that
faith must needs come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God preached.
Esaie 5.3.1. Romans 10.15.16.17. But who preached not the works of God by the
creation of the world, although they after a sort do make manifest that,
which may be known of God; they visible, showing the invisible things of him,
that is his eternal power and godhead Romans 1.19.20. and albeit as the Prophet
David says The heavens declare the glory of god and the firmament shows
forth his handie works Psalm. 19.1: For these were but dumb teachers, and the
text and intendiment of there teaching was only this, that there was a God that
made the world. But the word of God by the mouth and ministry of man,
speaking preachers which did plainly publish and proclaim, not by ocular
demonstration, as the other, but auricular declaration and oracular
manifestation, and the text and drifte of their preaching being more, and a
greater mystery even God manifested in the fleash, that saved the world. And
these not such preachers as Jacob. who said only that Siloam, should come Genesis
4.9. As Moses, that the Lord would raise up a prophet like unto him Deuteronomy.
18. as Balaam, that a star should rise out of Jacob. etc. Numb. 24. As David,
I will preach the law whereof the Lord etc. As Esaias, that a virgin shall bear
a child and so forth. Esaie. 7. As, Daniell, that the most holy shall be
anointed Dan. 9. For all these were but prophetical Preachers, only such as
saw him a far of such as promised him to come in dwe time. But these both
Evangelical and Apostolical, such as were eie-witnesses, and eare-witnesses
of his coming, such as in presence pointed at him unto the people, or being
past, reached him unto posterity; and how? not obscurely and darkely as
Moses, that had a veil before his face and without co^ceite and
understanding, as unto the Jews who had a veil before their hearts, but after
the veil of the Temple was rent in sunder painefully with diligence, for they
preached in season and out of season; as Paul to Timot. 2.4.2, plainly
without e^loquence as the spirit gave them utterance acts. 2.4. and powerfully
by heavenly influence, for it was not they that spoke, but the holy ghost that
spoke in them, Math. 10.20. As Christ himself preached with power, and not as
the scribes, commanding as it were the hearts of men to yield reverence and
obedience to the Gospel, and converting many souls at once unto Christ: And
finally to conclude, to who^e was he preached by them? even unto the Gentiles,
new preachers delivering an uncouth doctrine to a strange people, to whom they
were sent as Ambassadors to a nation far off, by our savior their Master,
to carry with blessed feet the glad tidinges of the Gospel, and not to one
nation: for their charter and commission was larger, being commanded to teach
all nations baptising them in the name of the father. etc. Being the Apostles
and messengers of God, promising and profering grace and truth to all
languages, degrees, sexes, callinges, and conditions, under the sun, being
those servants which were sent forth by the king, as is signified in the
parable Math, 22. and Luke 14. which made a marriage dinner for his son, to
call those that were bidden, who because the unworthy Jews which were first
invited, neglected dissolutely, and refused stubbornly to come, were commanded
to go out quicly into the high places and streets of the city, and to bring
in the poor, and maimed, the halt, and the blind, and yet there being room,
to go out into the high ways and hedges, even to al outlandish, and foreign
regions, countries, and provinces of the outcast despised Gentiles, poor in
mind for the want of the riches of Gods grace, maimed and halte in their
souls, for lack of the integrity of good life, blind in their hearts, for
want of the light of the truth, to compel them by the force of their
commission, by the power of their preaching, by the efficacy of the word of
the gospel, to come unto the wedding, of Christ Jesus, unto his spouse the
Church, as the guestes of the bridegrom, and friends of the bride, as the
Apostles themselves perfourming that in practice, which our savior by the
purport of the parable did prophecy should come to pass, when as the Jews
being moved with indignation thereat, did forsake them and betake themselves to
the Gentiles did render this reason of this their doing, saying. It was
necessary that first the word of God, should have been spoken unto you, but
seeing you put it from you and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo we turn to the Gentiles Act. 13.4.6. As it was oftentimes before
told unto the Jews even to their teeth. As first by the Baptist. That God
would of the stony hearted Gentiles raise up children unto Abraham, Math. 3.9.
And that the haughty hills, that the lofty minded Jews which bare themselves
bold of their mount Synai where their law was given, of their mount Sion,
where their temple was builded, and where the Lord promised his blessing for
ever more, should be brought to low valleys, that is the humble hearted
Gentiles, that lived in the vallie of the shadow of death, should be exalted,
that the crooked affections should be stre^gthned by the line and leuill of the
gospel, and their rough ways, that is their ^ude and barbarous life, should
be smo^hed by the plainer of the word of God, and finally that all fleash, that
is all men, and all manner of men, of what nation, language, degree, age,
calling and condition whatsoever, should see the salvation of God. And this the
Prophetical Evangelist but of the Evangelical Prophet John out of Esaie.
40.3. And secondly by our Savior Math. 8.11.22. But I say unto you, that ma^ie
shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaach,
and Jacob, in the kingedome of heaven, and the children of the kingdom shall be
cast out into utter darkness. And again Math. 24.43. I say unto you that the
kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation, that
shall bring forth the fruits thereof. And finally by Paul who in the 11. to
the Romans tells the Roman Jews, or Jewish Romans, that the natural olives
meaning the Jews, were cut of, and the vile olives even the Gentiles, were
grafted in their stead; and that the election of the one was the reiection of
the other, the calling of the one, the casting away of the other, the
conversion of the one, the subversion of the other, the ruin of the Jews
being the riches of the world, and their diminishing the riches of the
Gentiles, the one proceeding from the severity, the other from the
bountifulness of God; as the Apostle amplifieth at large in the same chap.
Whereby it is come to pass at this day (to apply it in a word unto ourselves,
because we have been over long in this point) that we which dwelt sometimes
in darkness, blundred in blindness, and groped at noone day, and were the
furthest from the sunshine of the Gospel, have bin made partakers of the
gracious and glorious light thereof. So that of us, that of the Prophet Esaie.
9.3. and the Euang Math. 4.16. The people which satte in darkness and in the
shadow of death, have seen a great light and to them that sit in the region
and shadow of death, a great light is risen up; may seem to be most truly
verified. Our duty to conclude being this, to labor by all means possible,
to keep and continue still amongst us, this lamp and lantern of light,
which Christ the light and life of the world has vouchsafed to bestow upon
us, by his blessed appearance, least that, happily, or rather vnhappelie
happen unto us, which God threatens to the Angel, and the Church of Ephesus
Apo. 2.5. Even a removing of the Candlestick of his Church from us, and an
extingushing of his word from amongst us, and in turning the congregation of
Christ in to the sinagogue, of Antichrist, or the changing of the consolation
of our salvation into the abomination of desolation; but it follows in the
text.

Believed in the world.
Marvel was it, and noe doubt a great marvel that God manifested in the
flesh with the other mysteries appertaining thereunto, should be preached by
such silly ministers in so simple manner, and to such sinful men; yet far more
marvelous is it, that the same preaching should not only take such place as
that it should be received with such regard and reverence, but also be so
harbored in there hearts, that it should be embraced with credence and
confidence; for of all those marueiles which are found to be in the incarnation
of christ, the first is, Deus and homo, That God should become man; the second,
virgo et matter that a virgin should become a mother; and thirdly Fides and
corhumanum that faith and man's heart should make an harmony together. Which
seem to agree, like harp and harrow; this last must needs be the greatest,
because the other two, did make men only to wonder, but this did cause our
savior Christ himself to marvel as is appears in the Gospel Math. 8.10.
where it is said that when he heard the Centurion, declare his faith by his
words, He marueled and said to them that followed verily I say unto you I have
not found so much faith, noe not in Isaraell, for if we througly consider both
what faith is, and the virtue and the excellency thereof, and what man is, and
his frailty and infirmity, we shall easily perceive as great a distance
between them, as is between heaven and earth, yea as great a discordance as
Diapason, nay as great a difference as is between light and darkness, or
the spirit and the flesh, between the which says the Apostle there is (...)
cue^ peacclesse, or trucelesse jar and war, first for says who knows not
that it is the beaue^ly gift of God Romans 4.16. the precious fruit of the
spirit Gal. 5.22. the chiefest cardinal Theological christian virtue. 1.
Cori. 13.13: and therefore cannot be obtained, or attained unto by any mean or
merit of man: the rotten root of whose original corruption cannot bring
forth so fair a blossom nor so sweet a fruit, but rather the contrary,
carnal heathenesh vice of infidilitie. Again who will not say when as the
faint favorers of faith themselves, cannot but confess so much, as Bellarmine
in his preface before his controversies, that faith is the first gift of
grace, even in the matter of Justification, the first motion of a reviving
heart, and the first sense of spiritual life, whereby the mind is stirred up
to hope, the will inflamed to love, the tongue moved to confession, and the hand
prepared to good works; when as contrary wise, we are so far from this, as
that we are destitute of the grace of God, Romans 1. and so far from quickening,
that we are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephe. 2.1. and finally so far
from this spiritual life that we dwell in the shadow of death: Esaias 9.2. Math.
4.16. yea that it is the first ground work and foundation of the spiritual
temple of the holy ghost, upon which the walls of hope are reared up, ouerwhich
the roof of charity is laid, and where unto the battlements of good works
are added as the full complement and beautiful ornament thereof: for so
Austin. 22. De verbis Apostoli: Domus dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur,
diligendo perficitur, when as we one the other side, are nothing else, but the
decayed and desolate ruins of the fall of our first father, forlorn Adam, who
was dislodged and banished out of Paradise; further that it is the first bright
beam of divine light, with which the spiritual sun of righteousness Christ
Jesus, illuminateth our blind hearts, darkened with ignorance, that the morning
spring or dawning of our minds might proceed unto the perfection of the noone
day when as we of our selves, have such a fleshie veil cast before our hearts,
yea such a stark blindness or rather such a blundering blindness, that
though our eyes be wide open with the Sodimites, Syrians and Balaam, yet we
cannot perceive the least peep or appearing of any glimpse, or glimmering
thereof in our mind. Finally who is so ignorant in the scriptures, that has
not there read, that faith is the only present, where with God is pleased, and
appeased with us? for without faith it is impossible to please God, the only
salt that relisheth, and seasoneth all the cogitatio^s of our heart, the
communications of our mouth, and the actions of our hands, from being sinful,
and unsavory in the sight of God: for whatsoever is not faith, is sin, yea
the maine post of our justification, and salvation: for as the Prophet, the
just man must live by his faith, and to conclude in a word; As the adversaries
of faith themselves affirm thereof, that it is the very gate of heaven,
without the which we can neither come to God, nor call upon him, serve him nor
deserve him. As Canisius, in his Catechism. This for the excellency of faith,
in comparison of our own insufficiency, for being partakers thereof; now for
our selves, what we are by nature, in respect of our weakness and disabilitie,
the word of God, describes us out in our coullers. As when the Apostle calls
us, sons of wrath, the children of disobedience, aliants from the covenant
of God, and strangers from the common wealth of Israel. Again when as God
himself anatomiseth us out and says, that all the Imaginations, of the
thoughts of our hearts, are only evil continually Genesis 6.5. as Esaias a sinnfull
Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children,
our head sick, and our heart heavy from top to toe, no whole part,
nothing but wounds swelling, and sores full of corruption, yea that we drink
up iniquity like water, and draw one sin upon another, as it were with cart
ropes, and coards, of vanity, Esaie. 1.4. etc. And as Panle has co^piled out
of holy places, of scripture, that there is none righteous, noe not on, etc.
Romans Describing us in every power of the soul, and part of the body, to be
far from the fear of God, and faith of Christ. Moreover when as our Savior
tells Peter in the Gospel for the confession of his faith, that flesh and
blood has not reueiled that unto him, but his father, which is in heaven; he
signifies our feebleness herein, that we are not capable of so great a gift,
as likewise Paul, that natural and carnal man, cannot conceive those things
that are of God. And finally the same Apostle that we cannot so much as think
a good thought, when as the disciples and Apostles of our Savior himself,
far before us, in all christian perfection, although they never departed from
the side of Christ himself, the founder of faith, and who therefore taught
them his word so long, and wrought so often his miracles before them, to noe
other end but this, even to engender faith in them, that his disciples might
believe on him, as it appears every where in the Gospel: yet oftentimes
were found as our Savior himself terms them, to their blame and rebuke,
sometimes, (...) men of little faith. The feebleness whereof they often
bewraied in their faintness and failing in following their Master Christ,
sometimes hardharted, as whose hearts would not yeald to receive the impression
of faith, and sometimes fools, and sloe of heart, to believe all that the
prophet had spoken, all of them from the highest to the lowest, showing their
weakness and want of faith, in some respect or other. First, Peter when ke
walked on the water sincking with his body into the sea, as he fainted in
faith, through the fear of his heart, when he dissuaded our Savior from
suffering, and when he forsook and for swore his Master. Insomuch, that our
Savior as he himself told him, was feign to pray for him, that his faith
might not finally fail him: James and John when as they affected the primacie
and supremacy above their fellows, and when as they would have had fire and
lightninge to come down from heaven to destroy those cities, that would not
harbor our Savior. Phillip and Andrwe in the miracle of loaves, when they
thought it impossible for our Savior to feed so many with so little. Thomas
when as he would not believe that our Savior was rise^, unless he felt and
handled him; and all the rest of the Apostles, when as they could not cast out
the Devil out of him that was dombe and deaf, when as they consented with the
reprobate Judas, in disdaining that Mary's ointment should be powered upon our
Savior, and finally in flying from their Lord and Master, when he was taken,
and in counting the resurrection of our Savior as a fained thing, so that this
cannot but be a great mystery and marvelous wonder, that should be so
generally accepted of all the world, which was so hard to be received of the
Jews themselves the people of God, who ought by faith, to have expected their
own salvation, and by hope waited for the consolation of Israel, by the
incarnation of their Messiah Christ Jesus, the reconciliation of the word of
the Gospel, and the operation of the spirit of God: insomuch that their
incredulity grew into a common Proverb a mong the Heathen, as it is in the
Poet, Credat Iudaeus Apella, and so difficult to be accepted even of the
Apostles and disciples of our Savior themselves, whose hearts our Savior had
so long wrought and framed to prepare and make them ready to entertain the
same. As though it were easier to grave in stony Marble, then to imprint in
soft wax. And here note the Emphasis of the Antithesis which the holy ghost
hear uses making an oppositio^ between faith and the world, as our Savior
seems to signify in the Gospel, when he says. When the son of man
comes shall he find faith on earth? Luke. 18. The world being as Austin
calls it Muscipula diaboli, the Devils trappe, rather a receptacle of
infidilitie, then an harbor of faith. For as the Apostle. Totus mundo positus
est in maligno, and as John, all that is in the world, as the lusts of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life, is not of the father, but is of
the world Epist. 1. Cap. 2.16. then the which there can be nothing more
contrary to faith. Yea and if the Apostle mean hereby, world by a Senedocche
or Metonomia, as noe doubt he does that are in the world, Continens pro
contento, the children of this world, even the children of darkness, opposite
to the children of the light in the Gospel, that world which John says, which
when the light came into the world, which made it knew it not 1. John. 10.
That world which our Savior says cannot receive the spirit of truth, because
it sees him not, nor knows him 14.17. That world that loves his own, and
not those things which are of God, and out of which our Savior chose his
disciples, and Apostles, taking them out thence, least they should perish with
the world. 15.19, which world for waiwardnesse, and wickedness thereof may be
called, Mundus ab immundicie per Antiphrasin, being indeed inrespect of the
(...) a confusion of sin, and iniquity, rather to be counted a (...) then a
(...) So that this must needs magnify the greatness of this mystery, and
amplify the power of the Gospel, by whose force and efficacy, such a
marvelous effect is accomplished and brought to pass above the reach of man's
reason, beyond the capacity of human understanding, and against the crooked
judgment of the world; and thus much of this fifth point, that we may come to
the conclusion of my text even the top branch of this tree of truth even the
highest degree of exaltation, and glorification of our Savior Christ Jesus.

And received up into glory.
This is the last but not the least, yea the deepest, and profoundest matter
belonging to this mystery of godliness, even the chiefest part of this
text, the greatest thing that could be set down of the Apostle, and the
loftiest degree of our Saviors glorification, and highest parts of his
perfection that he could attain unto, being the corollarie and conclusion, not
only of this excellent sentence of scripture, but also of the whole Chapter:
and finally as the crown and garland, guerdon and reward bestowed on our
Savior Christ Jesus, for all those things which he himself atchiued, or
caused to be performed for us, mentioned in the former words: that is, that
after he had skirmished, vanquished, and triumphed over sin, death, hell, and
the deuell, and all other their co^plices and adherentes, having ascended on
high, and led captivity captive, he sat at the right hand of God his Father,
as in his chair of estate, his seat of honor and throne of majesty, there
to reign and rule for ever. Where by as in the people of the world, through
the obedience of faith there was a great conversion, and alteration: so in the
person of our Savior was there a wonderful chang and diversity as of human
to be come divine, of mortal immortal, of temporal eternal, of vile
glorious, of earthly heavenly, of natural supernatural, of carnal
spiritual, of cursed blessed, of miserable happy, in so much that every hand
is holden up unto him, every knee is bowed down unto him, and every tongue
confesses his name, Phil. 2.10. The word which here our Apostle uses is (...)
which was assumpt or taken up; as first Enoch was Genesis 5.24. and after Elias
was in the fiery chariot: both which were tipes and figures of this assumption
of our Savior, which three are the only example of this kind of assumption
into heaven, and noe other besides, although our bold adversaries the papists
will presume to add a fourth, whereof there is noe mention in the scripture,
even in the assumption of Marie, and in the memory thereof, do celebrate a
sollem festival day in an holy honor of her, not only to make the
assumptions under the Gospel to be equal in number with those of the Law, but
also to make the mother of our Savior to be compared with him in his
aduanceme^t, and highest degree of his glorification: but whatsoever the word
be in this place, it is also found Acts. 1.2. as signifying, both an adjoining
unto other as otherwise the Grecians call it (...) or (...) but also the
preposition (...) purporteth a restoring again or receiving a dignity or
honor, of which he was partaker before, when he thought it no robbery, to be
equal with God his Father, as our Apostle Phil. 2. or else finally as the
Phrase will bear, a recovering again of his fathers favor, as being accepted
again and received into the bosom of God his father, from whence he descended
when he took upon him our flesh. And yet the word being all on with that which
all the Evangelists use (...) his assu^ption being nothing else but a volu^tary
ascentio^, a passion in him in respect of his humanity, and yet an action of
him in regard of his divinity; that as he says of him self, as he had power
to lay down his life and power to take it again unto him even so as he had
power to descend to take upon him our flesh, so likewise had he power to ascend
to resume again unto him self his own glory being caught or rapt up in a
cloud as he was man, and yet taking unto himself the wings of the morning to
fly up into his holy sanctuary as he was God, as a worm in respect of his
incarnation in creeping on the earth, but an eagle in regard of his ascension
in mounting up into heaven. That as a captain conqueror and Consul of Rome,
when he had vanquished any enemy, won any city, or subdued any contrie, was
wont to ride in triumph with a royal Pomp before him, and a great train
behind him, up into the Capitol, the gates whereof were wide open to receive
him. Even so our Savior Christ Jesus, after he had overcome Satan, his grand
enemy, and by death as the Apostle says subdued him that had the power of
death, and with all vanquished the grave and hell, and did triumph over them,
Saying as it is in the Prophet Esaias and Osee and the Apostle Paul. Death is
swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy stinge? O grave where is thy
victory? and so ascended on high and led captivity captive, and made a show
of them openly, having his mighty arms of heavenly souldiars with him. As
the Psalm. 1. discribeth them. The chariotes of the Lord are twenty thowsands
of Angels, and he is in the midst of them, as in his holy place of Sinaie,
and unto whom the gates of the Capitol of heaven stood open, as being glad,
and ready to receive him into glory, as the Prophet David expresses the same
Psalm. 24. When he says in the person of the Lord God. Lift up your heads O
ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting dooers, that the King of glory
may come in. Here then as our head is exalted highly, and advanced unto his
glory, so shall we also his members be partakers of the same honor, for if we
die with him, we shall live with him, if we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him. For as his Father appointed unto him a kingdom, so has he
appointed unto us a kingdom John. 5. As the father has crowned him with
glory and worshipe, Psalm. 8. So will he being the great shephard of the
sheep, give unto us an incorruptible crown of glory, as he sits with his
father in his throne, so will he cause us to sit with him in his throne, when
as our vile bodies shall be made conformable to his glorious body, of mortal
becoming immortal, of corruptible becoming incorruptible, of carnal
spiritual, of natural supernatuall, of earthly Heavenly, finally of temporal
eternal, in the kingdom of heaven, where they shall reap and receive
fullness os joy, and at the right hand of God have full fruition and plenarie
possession of surpassinge Pleasure for ever more. Which God the Father has
prepared of his mercy, and Christ Jesus purchased by his merit for us, those
which have been promised us from the beginning of the wotld, and shall be
performed unto us after the end of the world, in the Celestial Paradise,
where the Sun shines not, nor the Moon gives noe light, and yet where the
Sun sets not, nor the Moon changes not, but where only the glory of God
and the Lamb gives light Ap. 21.24. Where there is pleasure for ever without
pain, victory without skirmish, triumph without war, perpetuity without
time, desire without default, sweenesse without variety, and variety without
sacietie, where there is Joy with out gesture, Knowledge with out discipline,
and conference without speech, where there is rest with out motion, partaking
without envy, and understanding without reasoning, vbi lex veritas, pax
charitas, modus aeternitas as Austin.

FINIS.
THE FRVITS OF HYPOCRISY.
MATTHEW. 23. v. 5. All their works they do, to be seen of men.
THese words which I have read unto you, as also those in the verse
immediately going before, are a confirmation in particular points, of that
reason contained in the last words of the third verse, of which I have spoken
at large heretofore. So that having before said, that these Scribes and
Pharisees, did far otherwise lead their lives, then they did teach and preach;
now he adds for the more certainty and assurance of that which he affirmed
before, that if they had any good thing in them at all in show and in
semblance, that the same was altogether vain and trifeling, false and fained,
because they had noe other thing in their purpose and intent, but palpably to
please men and as it here appears to set out and show forth themselves. These
Scribes therefore and Pharisees did either most manifestly transgress the Law
of God, or else did so notoriously dissemble, that they seemed to be altogether
honest and holy, when they were nothing so nor so, having a foul visage under
a fair visarde, for as all is not gould that glistereth, so all are not
perfect that appear so, nor all good and godly, that give an outward gloss of
integrity, and sanctimonie. For as Tullie says. Frons, vultus, oculi, saepe
mentiuntur, oration vero saepissime, and as the Poet. Fallit enim vitium specie
vertutis and vmbra So that oftentimes counterfaite, in the militant Church here
on earth (such is the deceit of sin, and the fashion of this world) goes
for current, such are the cloakes and colors of hypocrisy; for every
hypocrite is like the Camelion, that can chang himself into every coullour at
command and like to Protheus, who can Metamorphose himself into every form
forth with, and lastly like unto the wethercocke that can turn it self
according to every wind. And here may we behold and see the nature of sin
in general, that it is never single of it self but has always some
companions and copartners conjoined with it; not unlike the serpent Hydra a
monster of many heads and to the beast mentioned in the Apocal. On which the
whore of Babylon is said to sitie having many heads, and many horns. But
more particularly of the sin of Hyprocrisie, who is not commonly alone, but
carries with it diverse other iniquities. And is indeed the mother of advice,
as in this place it has twined and twisted with it Ambition a bird of the same
feather, and a sin of the same stamp. These two being like unto Hipocrates
twins always linked together, and in these Scribes and Pharisees, their
Hypocrisy engendring ambition in them as it appears in this place as also
before in the sixte of this Gospel and the 1. verse. But here more covertly is
the shadow of their works and deeds, which were altogether to outward
ostentation, set as flat opposite against the study and endeavor of
Godliness, and good life, their works being not works indeed, but shows
and semblances of good deeds, shadows, without substance, clouds without
rain, leaves without fruit being wholly fed as it were with the froth and
fogge of vaineglorie, and puff of man's praise: for the sincere work of God
would never be delighted so with the bubbles of vanities, wherewith all deep
dissemblers and hollowharted Hypocrites are carried a way, as it were with full
force and swifte streams. And here is not only reprehended the Ambition in
these Scribes and Pharisees with the which they were much tainted and infected;
But when as our Savior had utterly condemned the breach of the law of God in
their whole life and conversation, least they should object and allege for
their excuse as a buckler or defense their fained holiness, by a Preoccupation
he preventing them answers: that they are but triffles, trashe, and
trumperie, yea and very vanity, of which they do boast and brag, mere
ostentation reigning, and ruling in them; whereas If their holiness were
sincere, they would not seek for the reward and regard of mortal men: for
as the Poet says, Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulcherrima merces: and if they
would needs gape after guerdon; then they should have aimed at the praise of
the Lord God himself, and the price of the kingedome of heaven; for as our
Savior says in the Gospel No man can serve two Masters. So that impossible
it is both to please God, and please men. And therefore Paul he says, that he
could not be the faithful servant of God, if he were (...) a menpleaser, that
is such an one as sought by all meanse possible the praise and commendation of
men. Herein therefore these Scribes and Pharisees approved themselves to be
notable Hypocrites, and notoriously ambitious, when they thus hunted and hauked
after the peoples applause very popularly, although their actions were tipped
and coulered never so much with the show of obedience to the Law of God. For as
the same Apostle 1. Tim. 1.5. The end of the commandment is love out of a
pure heart, and of a good Conscience and faith unfeigned, which love as says the
same Apostle 1. Cor. 13. boasts not it self, nor is not puffed up: which two
metaphores of the Apostle in that place are diligently of us to be observed as
first (...) here only found in the whole new testament, as also of Tullie lib.
1 Ep. 12. Ad Atti. As also of Petrus Alexandrinus, Martyr, but sildome or never
else where, which signifies as much as Petrus Balsamus expounds it as (...)
or is as much as (...), for as Clemens in the third book of his Pedagogie and
Basile in his contracted definitions (...) definition 49. But not as some
interpret the same, in my opinion Perpera^ agit, who think the greek word to
be drawn from the Latin, (...) a Perperam very strangly drawing the
fountain as it were from the River, when as the same is nothing else but a
Metaphore drawn from clawbackes and flatterers, who did nothing but faune and
flatter and fleere in the faces of them with whom they would insinuate
themselves, as did these Scribes and Pharisees by setting to sail as it were
all there good works in the open sight of the people, thereby to win unto
themselves the term and title of holiness, integrity, and innocence of
life. As did also Abimeleke, as it is in the ninth of the Judges, the Son of
Gedeon or Ierubaall, when he by the means of his Mothers brethren, and with
all the famely of his mothers Father, allured the men of Sechem by fair and
flattering words to co^discend unto his ambitious purpose, whereby he usurped
the government over them being but the son of a handmaide and a bramble
indeed, as Ioathan calls him, yet presumptuously boasts himself as much
of his shadow, as either the vine, olive, or fig trees, yea or the tallest
Cedar in Lybanon. So did Job when he to enueigle Abner, took him a side in the
gate, seeming to speak with him peaceably, but minding to murder him as he
did 2: Sam. 3.27. And lastly, so did Absolon, when he used such affability,
adulation, and popular practices, and proceedinges, when as he ambitioussy by
aspiring, affected his fathers crown and kingdom, when as he used these and
such like words unto the people, and did steal away the hearts of all the men
of Israel, doing them obedience, putting forth his hand unto them, and kissing
them saying. O that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man that has
any matter of controversy might come to me, that I might do him justice. Sam.
15. The other is a Metaphore taken from the heathen Sacrifices which the
offerers were wont to puff and blow up artificially, to make them seem fat
and goodly, hereby to get the good name of devout and holy Sacrifices, in
which sense Aristotle uses the same word in the first Chap. of his Ethic. as
the Scribes and Pharisees did puff and blow up their works, to make the^
seem glorious and goodly unto men, seeming to be the Sacrifices of Abell, fat,
and fruitful, and pleasant in the sight of God, but being indeed the
offeringes, of Cain, irksome, lothsom, and stinking, in the nostrels of the
Lord and like unto those woorts, which made pottage for the children of the
Prophets mentioned 2. King. 4. which seemed to be wholesome herbs, but indeed
venomus weeds, like unto a wild vine, and lastly like to Jonas his gourde,
which seemed to be so spreading and sprouting, as that it would shroude and
shadow him from the fainting heat of the sun, but was indeed of noe
continuance, soon grown, and soon gone, soon ripe and soon rotten,
vanishing and withering away in one night Jonas. 4. But how prove we that these
Scribes and Pharisees did all their works to be seen of men? even the same is
euide^te by many and manifest places of the Scripture, so that he that shall
doubt thereof, shall seem to doubt whither it be light at noone day. As our
Savior in the 6. of Math. here and else were testifies, who did not only see
their outward deeds as an eye witness thereof, and being conversant among them,
but did also know their inward hearts, being the searcher of the reins, saying
they gave their alms before men, to be seen and praised of men, and caused a
trumpet to be blown before them, like Hypocrites in their sinagogues and in
the streets. And again, when they stood praying in their sinagogues and in
the corners of the streets to be behoulden of men, using Polulogies and
Battologies that is vain repetions, and much babblings, for which as our
Savior here tells, they had the guerdon and reward they liked and looked
for, that is the vain praise and commendation of the common people. Moreover
when they fasted, they like Hypocrites looked sowerly, and. disfigured their
countenance, that they might seem unto men to fast; even as the Heir is said
to weep at the death of his father. As it is in the Proverb. Haeredis luctus
sub larua, risus est. As it appears in the same chapter. And again by
devouring widows howses under a color of long prayers, as it is in this
Chapter. Further by tithing mint, coming and Annise, and leaving the greater
matters of the law undone, as judgment, Mercy and fidilitie, by making clean
the outside of the cups and platters, but within being full of briberie, and
excess. And therefore are likened of our savior (and that worthily) to whited
tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's
boanes and all filthiness, they appearing outwardly Righteous before men, but
within full of Hypocrisy and iniquity. So that we see these words most fully
confirmed unto us, that horrible vice did reign and rule in those Scribes and
pharisees, and noe marvel, for a learned writer says. Vt quemadmodum, semper
in Cerimoniis, magis sunt operosi Hypocritae, quam qui solidam
rerum-substantiam tenent: Ita factum est, vt qui a vera pietate disciuerant
long plus ostentationis sibi asciuerant quam qui fideles for as Diogenes
Laertius says, as the Grecician horse did therefore deceive the after wise
Trojans, because it came in form of Minerua, and as Lysimachus prevailed more
by his foxes pelt then by his Lions skin, and lastly as Pirrhus was wont to
say, that he won more by his Orators policy then by the power of his army.
Crocodiles never hurting more then when they weep most, Syrenes never harming
more then when they singe sweetest Scrpentes, no where rather lurking then
where the grass is greenest. So the devil never destroys more souls, then
when he takes upon him an Angel of light. So Hypocrites never worse, never
more vile and vicious, then when they put upon them the visoure of virtue. And
lastly so these Scribes, and Pharisees then were indeed ravening woules, when
they did put on sheep clothing. So that it is most true which Solomon says
in the Proverbs The wicked man when he counterfaiteth him self good, then is
worst of all, whereupon Austin says on the 63. Psalm. Simulata aequitas non
est aequitas sed duplex iniquitas, quia iniquitas est and simulatio. Wherefore
and if there be any such among us, men pleasers, vain glorious ambitious, and
such like as these Scribes and Pharisees were, let them remember that all those
woes denounced of our Savior in this Chap. and in many other places of the
Gospel against these Hypocrites, are not denounced in vain. But let them
remember what our Savior also says. That except our righteousness exceed
the righteousnsse of the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, and that which Paul affirms 1. Gal. 11. That those that
are (...) that is me^ pleasers cannot please God, nor be the servants of God.
But much more the Lord will punish the ministers of his word in this wise
offending, whose words without works are (...) wounders and wounds who when
they ought to be light, are darkness, when salt unsavory, and lastly when
they ought to be guides, had need to be guided, and governed themselves, who
as they use not their hands when they do no good indeed, although they do
as Iuglers do, show knackes of Legerdemaine, seeming to do those feats which
they do not, by casting a mist before men's eyes; so that it were noe matter at
all if they were toungtied, and had there lips glued together, since they do
more hurt by their speaking, then they could do by their silence. Non enim
ita in cident animae verba, vt opera, as Chrysostom Hom. 30. in Acts Apost.
Cap. 14: quoniam si habueris, non solum non proderis loquendo, sed etiam plus
oberas vtilius fuerit tacere; quid ita? quia sic mihi proponis opus vt si esset
(...). Insomuch that the people might very well put their Pastor to rebuke,
in replying against him and saying with the Poet. Quid verba audiam cum facta
videam? And again with Tullie in another place in the same sense. Quorsum
persuadere nobis conaris, quod tibi probare non vis? So that we see, that this
untowardness and perversenes of the ministry in not putting in practice that
which they know, makes this blessing of the Gospel oftentimes but half a
blessing, this grace but half a grace, this light noe light at all, and I pray
God they make it not a darkness, yea this blessing noe blessing, this grace
noe grace, this light noe light at all, and I pray God we make it not a curse
in the end, and extreme darkness worse the^ that of Egipte. How often has
the Lord God commanded in the Law by the mouth of Moses his great Prophet,
that his Preistes should be holy as is in the, 19. Exodus Let the preistes which
come unto the Lord be sanctified, least that the Lord forsake them. And when
they come to the Alter of the Holy, let them not bring upon them the offense
least they die again Leuitic. 21. That man in whom there shall be found any
spot or fault, he shall not come to offer any gifts unto God. And therefore the
purging of wounds began first at the Priests Esaias. 1. So likewise in purging
and correcting all sorts of men, first the purgation ought to begin with them
as it is written in the Prophet Ezechiell. First begin with the Sanctuary.
For as the Psalm. says Holiness becomes my house for ever. For when as in
the Sacrifices the Priest had for his share the bracelet that covers the
heart as Origin writes, signifying thereby that he should be a man of
council, who had also allotted unto him the right shoulder and the tongue, in
token that he should be prompt and ready to good works, and eloquence to
declare the Law of God, besides having one his breast a tablet, wherein was
embrodered with letters of gould Vrim and Thummim in token that he should be a
man both perfect in life, and plenteous also in the truth of the Lord, twelve
stones being set in the same tablet, and therein engraue^ the names of the
twelve tribes of the people, that he might evermore have the^ in remembrance,
the skirts and hemmes of his robes being hunge with belles of gould and
pomegranets, in sign that his life should give forth a great sound and good
savor all abroad, and that his voice should ring and be hard a loud among the
People, and therefore also the Lord requires Leuit 21. That noe priest should
be maimed or deformed but whole and sound. Upon which place Theoderite has
these words in his thirty question A sacris arcentur corpore vitiati (says
he) vt per affectiones non sponte susceptas, ea quae a voluntate proficisci
debent pro hiberentur. Oculorum enim occaecatio inopiam cognoscendi significat,
auris amputatio in obedientiam, naris ablatio facultatis discernendi,
priuationem, manus abscissio in agendo socordiam, atque ita in reliquis. Hereby
signifying that he cannot be a perfect minister that faulteth or fails in any
any one of these deuties, not so much standing upon the deformites of the
body, as respecting the gifts of the mind, which he hereby signifies and
insinuates, as also is meante by the unblemished sacrifices, that were
required which also the very Heathen did regard, especially both in their
Priests and offerings, for as Jeremy. Ad Fabiolam says Corporis Vctia ad
animum re^eruntur, Ideoque talibus praeditos corporibus ad rem Diuinam Esse
ineptos. Besides this, how often has our Savior commanded his Disciples in
the Gospel as concerning good life, and godly couersation? How often also has
Paul given the same to Tymothie in charge? As the other Apostles to other
Pastors and Teachers of the word. All which of the Priests in the law, of the
Disciples in the Gospel, do as well concern us as them, as being spoken to
all alike. As that in the Tim. 1.5. (...), That is a pure heart a good
conscience and unfeigned. For as he describes a minister, in the third Chap: of
the same Epist He must be (...), and as the Apostle requires in a Deacon, and
therefore much more in a Bishop: (...), And as he requires in the fourth
Chapter. That he have a good report of those that are without, least they fall
into the rebuke, and snare of the devil, and in the same chapter, That he be
unto them that believe, an example in word, in conversation in love, in spirit,
in says, and in pureness as Peter, in the 1.5.3 (...) that is as tipes,
patterns, presidents and examples unto your flocks, of which the Lord has
made you overseers as Paul again lastly warns us in the same fourth Chapter
last verse: Take heed unto thy self and unto thy doctrine, for in so doing
thou shall save thy self, and those that hear thee, least that preaching unto
other thou thy self become a reprobate 1. Cor. 19. last verse. So that hereby
we are all to learn what is our duty, that take upon us to preach the word of
God unto others, that we our selves first give example of good works, who as
we call others, we our solues may first lead and show the way to others and
be deaf our selves who should give good example, and if we bid others go and
we our selves stand still, and if we pipe and sing to others and we our selves
be not delighted therewith, what do we else but moke God and condeme them? for
as the Poet says, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum, and as another
says Quid didicisse viam prodest quia pergere nolis? Turpior ignaro factus es
ipse sciens. But let such loose and dissolute ministers remember that Agens
Theologia contrary to Aristotle's opinion of felicity as says, Barnarcinus
Ochinus. Tanto mayor est contemplante quantum domina serua, etuiua fides
mortuae anticellit dialogue 2.20. Better is he that has active the hethat has
contemplative Divinity, and let them remember that which Austin says to their
sham evenit indoctum vulgus et. rapit caelum. The common people winning away as
it were by violence the Kingdom of Heaven from them, being like Astronomers
and Starregasers which always are pointing at it, but never possess it, or
set foot in it: and being in the pulpitte as one a stage bearing the parts
and taking upon them the persons of good men, but afterward become their own
men again, when as, Christ says in the eight of John, if ye would abide in
this my saying, then should ye be truly my disciples, which our Savior
speaks to all in general, and therefore much more unto the minister it was
the saying of Prophaine Protagoraes in the Pagane Plato, herein agreing with
mischeivous Machiueli: he is as a mad man that cannot counterfaite Justice,
but contrary wise godly Paul he says. That the wrath of the Lord is reueiled
from Heaven upon all them that hold the truth of God in injustice. Let all
Preachers therefore imitate the patriarch Jacob, in taking unto them both Lea
and Rachel that is both life and learning, manners and knowledge, science and
conscience together that I may use the Allegory of a Jewish Rabbie: who
likneth Action unto Lea and contemplation to Rachel Lea seeming to be deformed
or rather not so well favored in comparison to Rachel, which was most
beautiful; works and deeds more hard and laborious then (...) bare
speculation, when as they do other wise, they shall show themselves like unto
Jacobs wives maids Biltha and Zilpha: Who did bring forth children, which were
free they themselves being bound, and likewise being themselves most sinful
children of God, did make others good and Godly themselves continuing badde and
wicked. But would to God they would call to mind whenever they go about to
reprehende and reprove the sins of the people, that which the Heathen Tullie
has in his third of his Tusculan. Est propruim stultitiae aliorum vitia
cernere and obliuisci suorum. And again in an other place Omni vitio carere
debet is qui in alium paratus est discere. And would they would remember that
which they read of that famous Lawgiuer Licurgus who gave noe laws but those
which he first practiced himself. They may happily deceive the ignorant and
simple people who as Horace says 1. lib. Epist. Vertutem verba esse putant vt
ligna lucum. But beloved, the Lord is not mocked, who is the searcher of the
Hearts, and reins. And is not as Mercury to whom only tongues are offered
and sacrificed, but requires all both inward and outward parts, and powers,
yea holy man perfect and absolute in every good work, whose sacrifice is a
sorrowful soul and a contrite heart, whose worship consists in spirit and
truth, and whose offeringes are the fruits of the spirit even all divine
virtues whatsoever: wherefore Cyprian says very well in this behalf. Vt
Musici cor cum chordis ita ministri men's cum monitionibus conueniret. Which
cannot be when their practice and their Preaching their doctrine and their
deeds, their words and their works agree not together, for as a learned
writer says (...), such lude ministers therefore are like unto midwiues, who
healpe other to bring forth, but do not bring forth them selves, who as
Socrates, says in the person of a Philosopher in Plato his Thettetus
likning himself to a midwife, but in his doing more then a midwife that I may
use his words (...) Even the Ministers of the word of God should show
themselves more then midwiues, in bringing forth also themselves as their
function is a great deal more honorable, in that they are as it were midwiues
not only to weomen but also to men and weomen, and in that they have not a
charge of their bodies but the cure and care of their souls and as Midwiues to
discern the moon calfe from the perfect fruit of weomen so Preachers should
not bring forth moon calves: yea and they may be likned again to the crow
which Noe sent out of the Arc which was black, unclean, delighting to light
and rest on filthy and loathsome places, and feed on carrion carcases, so they
blacked with ill fame, unclean in life and couersation, and desiring the
filthy corruption of the world; the crow being greedy, Ravenous, abhorring
the company of me^; So they coueteous, serving their belly, sequestring them
selves from the true Church by their wicked works; whereas contrariewise good
Preachers irreprehensible in life, doing that which is good, not forsaking the
godly and Godliness, but coming with an Olive branche in their mouth which is
the word of grace, and practicing the same according to their teaching, which
is signified by the green leaves of the same Math. 23. Are altogether like
unto the Dove. It was noe merueile (beloved) that the Aunciente Lawgiuers would
have their Preistes abstain from, a dog and a goat most noisome but
especially from a goat, and why? because as Plutarch answers, making it a
Problem in his third Problem because the people always abhorred the same as
the most luxurious, ill sauouring and infectious beast, as being most commonly
diseased with the Epilepsie or falling sickness, so that they which tasted
and touched the same beast were oftentimes infected with the same disease as
likewise the Lord in Leuitic. Commands his Preistes to abstain from the like
unclean things, by which is signified the purity of life, and integrity of
manners, that ought to be in the Ministers. But let all deep dissemblres and
hollow hearted Hypocrites acknowledge that to be true, as it is most certain
although a Pagane spoke it that Tullie has in one of his Epist. Quam non est
facilis virtus, quam vero difficilis euis diuturna simulatio? Seeing that as
our Savior says in the Gospel. There is nothing hid that shall not be
opened nor nothing secret that shall not be reueiled. In that last Epiphany and
day of manifestation when as every Hypocrite shall be made as naked as Aesops
crow without his visour of virtue cloak of honesty, and color of holiness
by which they have deceived so long the simplier sort, whose senses they do
so be witch captiuate and intoxicate, like unto the Iguis fatuus with the
glimpse thereof carried headlo^g to their destruction by foolishly following the
same they know not whither. Every Physician of the body Hyppocrates was wont
to say (...). That they may say at the last with the Apostle Paul in the
fourth of the second to Timot. When they are departing out of this life, as he
did. I have fought a good fight and have funished my course, I have kept the
faith etc. Yea they ought to be such scholemasters to the unlearned people as
Theodosius the Emperor required to his children, that is as well (...) as
(...). And as this is requisite and necessary especially in ministers, as
coming nearest in calling and condition to these Scribes and Pharisees, whom
we have in hand; even so do these words of which we do now entreat,
concern as well all others of what degree state and place socuer they be in
Church or common wealth, even all of any age, sex, or sort, high or low,
rich, poor, young and old, one with another. So that whosoever shall do any
good works outwardly to be seen of men, thereby to get praise and
commendation of the people, and not for Gods cause with a single heart, a
sincere, conscience, and faith unfeigned, do nothing at all exceed in
righteousness these Scribes and Pharisees, but show themselves to be their
deuelish Disciples, full of Hypocrisy, fraught with ambition, and deep in
dissimulation. As for example the Papists who for their resembla^ce herein may
rightly be called Romish Pharisees whose doctrine as it is nothing else but
heresy so their life is nothing else but the leaue^ of these Jewish Levites,
their holiness Hypocrisy, their devotion dissimulation their Godliness, vain
glory, their Zeal superstition, their prayer (...), their Sacrifices
sacrilege, there chastity uncleanness, their worshipping Idolatry, their
blessings Blasphemy, their pilgrimages pillinges, and powlinges of the
people, their Purgatory Purging of other men's purses, there fasting feasting
their alms deeds all misdeedes. To conclude their whole religion being
nothing else but a mass of sollem ceremonies consisting altogether in shows
and semblances, not soundness, in fantasies not in ueritie, and in
circumstances, not in substance: all this appears to be most true when as
these Scribes and pharisees their works are altogether outward, consisting in
external pomp and pride, in glory, and goodly apparaile infine and costly
linen, and in all glittering gloss and glory that may be in the world even
as the whore of Babilo^ is discribed in the Revelation, in vanity of vestments
in copes and corporasses, albes and amisses, in palles and purples, and such
like trifles, their prayer being nothing else but lipp labor, in murmuring and
muttering many creeds, Paternosters, and Aue Mary's, in blessing and beading,
in kneelinge and knocking, in beating their breasts, in groueling on the
ground, in houlding up their hands, in lifting up their eyes to heaven, like
the proud Pharisie in the Gospel, the same being in the tongue not in truth,
in voice not in spirit, in external crying and calling, in bellowing and
bawling in sorrowing and sighing, in greiues and growning from the face outward
but without remorse of conscience, Heaviness of heart, contrition of mind,
and co^uersio^ of soul: their baptime standing of water, cream, oil, salt,
spittle, sneuill, and such like filthy slauerings, and yet those so necessary,
as they dare be bold to say blockisly and blasphemously; without the which
Salvation cannot be obtained. The Sacrament of the supper they make as it were
a mask or mummerie by their massing, yea they use it as heathenish Sacrifice
by their manifest Idolatry, yea like a play or pageant by their goulden
shows by their bendinges and bowinges, mocking and mowinges, windinges and
turninges, and such like unseemly gesture, by their adoration, elevation, and
exaltation: the shameless shaueling that celebrateth this Sacrifice or rather
commits this sacrilege not without most horrible blasphemy, deals with
the baked God which they call an host, even as a cat does with a mouse, who
after they have dalied with it, da^dled it towsed, and tossed it two and fro
upward and downward, forward and backward, at the last, the jest turning into
earnest, he choppeth it up at one bitte flesh, blood, bones and all. To
conclude their whole religion consists of nothing else, but of rags and
relics, ringing and singing, censing and sancting, shaning and shriuing,
thereby shragging the purses of the poor people, and all this in show of
sanctimonie and sincerity, and being indeed nothnig else but deceit and
dissembling, And lastly in those their goodly deeds of Charity, which carry
the greatest show of good works, when as they build Churches erect
monasteries, found collegies, Hospitalls. Frieries, and nunneries, and other
Religious howses, where by, they endeavor to merit their Salvation, and get
wordly commendation, to be hallowed in heaven of God, and honored in earth of
men, what do they else but show themselves to be Hypocritical and Pharisiecall
dissemblers? and what are those their good deeds any thing else but Splendida
peccata being without faith, seeing that as the Apostle says: what soever is
not of faith is sin, for all their good intent: for although as Austin says
Intentio facit opus bonum, yet must we take therewithal that, which follows
after Sed fides dirigit intentionem. For as the same Apostle says in another
place. Without faith it is impossible to please God. So that for all their
great costs and charges thus vainegloriously bestowed, howsoever perhaps
praise worthy before men, yet without regard and guerdon before God, they may
be likened to the woman which had the bloody flixe mentioned in the Gospel,
who had spent all her substance and bestowed all her goods upon Physicians, for
remedy of her disease, but could not be healed orhealped of any and noe
marvel, seeing that the best works that any regenerat man in the world can
do with the liueliest faith, the strongest hope, with the colourablest
intent, and to the best end that may be, can not purchase any spark of
grace or drop of mercy by deserte, at the hands of God; for as our Savior
says in the Gospel. When we have down all that we can, yet are we
unprofitable servants. What then shall be come of those glorious works of the
Papists, which they bouldly affirm to merit, being died and tincte in the
precious blood of our Savior Christ, and therefore must needs be acceptable
and gracious in the sight of God? even they shall be in account unto the Lord, as
was Iesabell unto Iehu, who although she cleared her eyes and painted her face
with ruddie coullours and other pleasant hewes, thereby to seem fair to
escape the fury of Iehu, yet for all that did he according to the commandment
of God perform the Judgment of the Lord upon her, with out any regard of
her beauty, or any other respect whatsoever. But to leave the Papists and to
come near ourselves here present, if any shall in this congregation use to
frequent divine service and sermons, seeming to be a zealous Professor of the
Religion now set up by public Authority, for fear of incurring the
danger of the Law provided in this behalf, or else to be well esteemed of,
and deemed of his neighbors as an ordinary liver, and ordinary professor
in the town and parish where he dwells, and not for the truths sake, as a
faithful Christian and his conscience cause; verily he is nothing else but a
carnal gospeller, and a time seruer, nothing at all differing in this, from
the dissembling Pharisees and Hypocritical papists in dallying with God, and
making a mock of his word, then the which their can be no wickedness worse,
noe sin more heinous nor noe vice more odious in the sight of God; for as
Tully says in the first of offices, Totius Iustitiae nulia pars capitalior
est, quam ^arum qui tum quum maxim fallunt id agunt vt viri boni esse
videantur. In consideration of which dissembling nature and deceitful mind of
man in general, Seneca he cries out in his Hippolitus, in the person of
Theseus which may also be truly verified of this our dowbling and coulourable
age. Ouita fallax, abditos sensus geris, animisque pulchram turbidis faciem
induis, pudor impudentem calat, audacem quies, pietas nefandum, vera fallaces
produnt, simulantque molles dura. For of what degree estate and order of men in
this time may not that of Homer be truly said? (...) That is as Chytreus
Translateth these words Qui bona dicebant animis and praua struebant Who speak
roses but savor of wormewoode. Their words being sweeter then honey, softer
then butter, smoother then oil, but having war in their hearts; having a
show of godliness and a semblance of zeal in outward profession, and
devotion, but utterly denying the power thereof in their life and conversation.
But let all such in this behalf follow the good and wholesome counsel of a
heathen Philosopher even Plato in his Epist. to Dion (...) For as Tullie says
in his second book Denatura Deorum of the worshippers of the heathen Gods,
much more may it be said of the service of the only true and everlasting God:
Cultus Deorum est optimus, idemque castissimus atque sanctissimus,
Plenissimusque pietatis vt eas semper pura, integra incorrupta and mente and
voce veneremur. And as our savior himself says in the fourth of John, God is
a spirit and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. And
as he says in another place not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingedome of heaven but he that does the will of my father
which is in heaven. And thus much for these words which I have read unto you.

FINIS.

