The Brides Good Morrow.
To a pleasant new Tune.


THe night is passed and joyful day appears
most clear on every side.
With pleasant music we therefore salute you, hand
good morrow Mistress Bride:
From sleep and slumber now awake you out of
your bridegroom stays at home:
Whose fancy favor, and affection still does stand
fired on thee alone:
Dress you in your best at ^ay,
This must be your wedding day,
God almighty send you happy joy:
In health and wealth to keep you still, ^
And if it be his blessed will,
God keep you safe from sorrow and annoy
This day is honor now bronght into thy bosom
and comfort to thy heart:
For God has sent you a friend for to defend you
from sorrow, care and smart:
In health and sickness for thy comfort day and night right,
be in appointed and brought.
Whose love and liking is most constant sure and
then love ye him as ye ought:
Now you have your hearts desire,
And the thing you did require,
God almighty send you happy joy:
In health and wealth to keep you still,
And if it be your blessed will,
God keep you safe from sorrow and annoy.
There is no treasure the which may be compared
unto a faithful friend,
Gold soon decays and worldly consumes,
and wastes in the wind,
But lake once planted in a perfect and pure mind
indureth weal and woe:
The frowns of fortune come they never so unkind
cannot the same overthrowe.
A bit of bread is better cheer,
Where love and friendship does appear,
then dainty dishes stuffed full of strife:
For where the heart is cloyd with care,
Sower is the sweetest fare:
and death far better then so bad a life,
Sweet Brid then may you full well contended stay you,
and in your heart rejoice:
Since God was guider both of your heat and fancy
and maker of your choice.
And he that preferred you to this happy state
will not behold you decay,
Nor see you lack relief or help in any rate,
if you his preceps obey
To those that ask it faithfully,
The Lord will no good thing deny,
this comfort in the Scriptures may you find,
Then let no worldly grief and care,
Vex your heart with foul despair,
which does declare the unbeleeuing mind,
All things are ready and every whit prepared
to bear you company.
Your friends and parents do give their due attendance
together courtously:
The house is breast and garnisht for your sake,
with flowers gallant and green,
A solemn feast your comely cooks do ready make
where all your friends will he seen,
Young men and maids do ready stand,
With sweet Rosemary in their hand,
a perfect token of your virgins life:
To wait upon you they intend,
Unto the Church to make an end:
and God make thee a joyful wedded wife.
FINIS.
Printed by the Assigns of Thomas Symcocke


