A warnyng to Englan^, let London begin: To repent their iniquity, and fly
from their sin.
ISAIE. 1. The Ore knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but
Israel has not known: my people has not understand. Ah, sinful nation, a
people laden with iniquity: a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger: they
are turned backewarde.


OH Endland be vigilant, and repent thee with speed,
And mark well the myrours of thy visitation:
Prepare thee to prayer, for it was never more need,
And lang wish for thy lewd life, with great lame^tation.
When God drowned the world in the days of Noye,
for that sin only (I say) which we daily do frequent:
He sent Noye to preach to them, or he did them destroy,
And gave them six score years, a space for to repent.
Zodome and Gomorra also, were sunk in fire full hot,
Burning all in Brimstone, until they were destroyed:
And yet they were fore warned long* by the prophet Lot,
With Repentance unto them, continually he cried.
But that happy city Niniuie, among all the rest,
They heard Jonas his preaching when he came thither:
Repentyng straight ways, and of GOD they were blessed,
A goodly myrour to LONDON, if they would consider.
O London, London, Jerusalem I may thee call,
for why* thy conversation agrees thereto now:
They would take no warnyng before the plague did fall,
And at this present day O LONDON, no more do thou.
What tokens have been of late, of Gods fearful ire?
The like before was never seen, in no time (I trow)
Thy cheef and beautiful Temple was defaced with tire,
A goodly admonition sure (if thou could it know)
Neither could the Pestilence provoke us to repent,
Nor cruel wars warn us that the end is at hand:
No, we mock at Gods threatnigs like beasts impudent,
No doubt, Gods justice must needs plague the land.
For we will not repent, nor our wicked lives amend,
But continue still in wickedness, procuring Gods curse:
What earnest preachers does the Lord us daily send?
It is but pearls before swyne, for we at wurse and wurse.
If a man rebuke drunkenness, swearyng or blasphemy,
(...) shall in this wise be mocked of one iabell or an other:
(...) is good godly man, (...) toe holy for our company,
(...) ar a precisian I (...) some unspotted brother.
Alas, is this your repentance after so long preaching?
I pray you read the xii. chap. of S. Mathe was gospel:
Christ says, of every idle word we shall give a reconyng,
Then sweaters and blasphemers, shall be punished in hell.
Dear christians, consider our state this present year,
Both with war and other plagues, we are round enclosed:
Let us turn to the Lord our God with tremblyng and fear,
With hearty thanks geuyng for his great mercies offered.
Remember the.x. Lepers, in the.xvii. of Luke certain,
When the Lord had cle^sed them of their sore infirmity:
One poor Samaritane come to Jesus Christ again,
To give him hearty thanks for his great benignity.
So let us give thanks to God in heart both al and some,
And repent our former lives, without any longer delay:
^word ^^^eare lest a grievous plague among us hastily come,
(...) ^^ithout speedye repentance, look for it we may.
Bring forth the fruits of the gospel, I mean a godly life,
Leave your filty hypocrisy which stinketh in Gods sight
Leave your abominable pride, amend both man and wife,
Leave your horrible blasphemy wherein you so delight.
Pray England pray, and London leave thy wicked trade,
Especially Covetousness, Glotonie, and al fylthy lust:
And remember our merciful God who has us all made,
A body that is mor^all, and shall turn to dust.
For our noble queen Elizabeth, let us al harte^^^^
And for her honorable counsel, that God give the
To maintain his glorious Gospel both night (...)
To the advancement of Virtue, all wickedness to (...)
quod William Birch

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, in little Britain: by Alexander Lacie.


