The Pens Excellency or The Secretaries Delight. Wherein as well the abuses which
are offered unto ye worthiness of ye Pen, by unworthy Pen men, are truly
discovered: as ye Dignity of ye Art it self by ye Antiquity, Excellency and
diversity thereof, is briefly demonstrated

Together wih an insertion of sondrie Pieces, or Examples, of all ye usual
Hands of England: as also an addition of certain methodicall observations for
Writing, Making of the Pen, Holding the Pen, etc.

Written by Martin Billingsley Mr in ye Art of Writing

Non satis est been, aliquid facere, nisi etiam fiat venuste. The Greek and
Hebrewe with other Pieces never yet extant are hereunto by the Author exactlie
added.

Are to be sold by Io: Sudbury and George Humble in Popeshead (...)

W. Holle sculp.


2
To the most Excellent Prince Charles etc.
Most Gracious Prince
This humble work of my hands labor, with my hearts love, first devoted to
yor Highness Gracious Regard, and now (with an Addition) for a publiq good,
with yor favorable Patronage, putt forth into the world: Humbly present to
yor Princely patience, Beseeching the height of all perfection, so to bless
yor Highness in all perfections, as may give just cause to ye virtuous in all
Professions, to admire yor Excellence, with all love and service: and make my
happiness, under heaven to be a servant to so gracious a Master.

Your Highness, in all humblenes



The Preface to the READER.
IT is an opinion amongst some, not so erroneous as ignorant, That Coppy-Bookes
of this nature are of no validity. What reason they can allege to strengthen
so fond a conceit, I know not; sure it is some private one, they are so loath
to produce it. For mine own part, I see no reason why these that are graven
should not be as profitable to a Learner, as those that are merely written;
so they be exactly performed according to the natural strain of a true
Artist; each Letter being cut according to its true proportion, and losing not
the life delivered in the Example.

Certain I am, there is no man living can write so exactly, but that even in
the writing of six lines, he himself shall be conscious to himself of some
imperfections: which, by directions to the Grauer (being a good Worke-man and
careful) may be easily helped and made perfect for imitation. Howbeit I deny
not, but that oftentimes the Grauer may wrong the Writer, if he be not very
obseruant in every touch of a Letter: and the amends which he may make him in
the well cutting of some one or two Hands, will not counteruaile the credit
which he shall lose by his ill grauing and unnatural mishaping of some few
Letters in one very Example.

For this Book ensuing, I know there are some (through an envious Curiosity,
rather then a true Judgment) which will herein find many infirmities: yet let
me tell them, it is an easier matter to pry into the imperfections of another,
then it is to amend their own errors: and he that finds the greatest
faults, commonly is the vnablest to amend the least; since Art has no greater
enemy then Ignorance. This is my glory, That I have not played the Thief with
any man, (though it were in my power to have done it,) But quicquid scripsi,
scripsi: whatsoever I have written, I have done it my self: For I would be
much ashamed, that any man should think, I had been brought up in a place of
such scarcity, and under so bad a Master, or that there were in me such a
poverty, that I must needs go a thieuing for my skill. I thank God there is
nothing in it, which I am not able upon an instant to better. And therefore if
any man list to be contentious, let him be contentious; but let him not wrong
him in his doings, who is able to do better then himself: I speak of those
that think themselves excellent and past compare, who indeed (be their names
never so famous) bear about them but the shadow of Art. And howsoever the
spirits of such men are so elevated and raised even beyond themselves, that
they think basely of every man's doings but their own; though their
consciences tell them they are but as empty vessels, which always make the
greatest sound. It shall suffice me, that (I) know what they have in them, and
how far their skill extends; and so rest my self contented, till Time and
Truth (the Tryers of all men's actions) shall distribute to every one according
to his desert. In the mean time, as this little Book has found gracious
acceptance at the hands of him to whom it was first privately intended: So I
hope it will have the approbation of all such as are well disposed, and bear
affection to so excellent, commendable and necessary an Art: assuring them,
that had I had my right, I should have given them better content, and greater
satisfaction of the Penns perfection: As for Carpers and ouer-curious-ey'd men,
I pass not, as knowing my self every way (in the Art I profess) a Worke-man
that needs not to be ashamed.

From my house in Bush-lane near London-stone, December. 22. 1618. M. B.

The Pens Excellency.
Exordium. THe Profession of the Pen at this day being so universal, and the
Professors themselves for the most part so ignorant, and insufficient to
undertake so worthy a function; together with the desire I have (according to
my small talent) to benefit such as are, or would be Practitioners in that
commendable Art of FAIR WRITING; were the only motives that induced me to
manifest unto the view of the world, these few lines hereafter ensuing.
Wherein before I enter into discourse concerning the Art it self, give me
leave cursorily to demonstrate the manifold abuses which are offered unto the
Pen by a number of lame Penmen; who as they do intrude themselves into the
society of Artists, and usurping the name of Penmen, seek detinere Artem in
ignorantia: so by their audacious brags and lying promises, they do shadow and
obscure both the excellency of the Pen, and the dignity of those that are
indeed true Professors thereof.

But I purpose not to heap up all the abuses which they may be conceived to
offer unto the Pen; for that were to lose my self in an endless discourse: I
will only point at a few which I hold to be the chiefest and do belong
principally to matter of Teaching: And those I find to be four.

First, you shall observe that these Botchers, (for they deserve no better
Life, Dexterity, or Art it self; and yet notwithstanding they profess, and in
their Bills (clapped upon every post) promise to perform as much as any
whosoever. For let any man observe their Ly-bills, (for so I may very well
term them) and he shall see how liberal they are in their promises this
way, professing to teach any one (not standing upon the capacity of the pupil)
to write a sufficient hand in a month, and some of them do say, in a
fortnight. Yet, if they did but say so it were tolerable, when as they
themselves, (I dare be bold to affirm it) may go so long to School to
learn a little a, aad yet not attain to the true touch thereof, being fitter
for other Mechanical occupations (wherein some of them, to my knowledge, have
been brought up) then for the Profession of this so curious an Art. Whose
Writings (if they come to the touchstone of Art, which cannot err, and to the
judgment of Artists, who seldom are deceived) will prove lame and
schoole-boy-like. And although in some of their doings, there may seem in the
eyes of the ignorant) to be a show of Art: howbeit tantum absunt a perfectione,
quantum ab ignauia animi magnitudo, They come as far short of those that have
the least skill, as they do of Perfection.

Next, whereas we that are Penmen hold this as a Maxim in the Art of plus
apud nos vera ratio valet, quam vulgi opinio) why, these ignorant Professors
are so reasonlesse in all their works, both of Writing and Teaching, that it
is impossible for those whom they teach, or that imitate their doings, to reap
any benefit by them, Reason being a second Schoolemaister to bring a man to
knowledge in any Art he desires to practice. And certainly (experience tells
me) that in the matter of teaching, nothing is more available to a learner,
then the demonstration of Reason. So that herein appears the second abuse, in
that these men, being not able to yield a reason of that they profess, do
nevertheless (Parrat-like) boast of their skill, and in their papers give out
vaunting speeches, as if so be they were the only fellows that would (as we
say) bear away the bell: whereas if a man take a view of any of their works
or writings, he shall find therein no appearance either of Truth, Reason or
Art: but on the contrary, such weak stuff as he would rather imagine it to be
the scratching of a Hen, then the work of a professed Penman.

Thirdly, (because I would be brief) by these their large (yet lying with
nonelties and strange devises, though they appear in nothing but vain
ostentations, then with the soundness of judgment and exquisiteness of
skill, wherewith Artists are endued. For is it not a common thing amongst them,
as well in their residence about this famous City (which God knows swarms
with them) as in their curriculer Progresses over all places in this kingdom;
to carry about them, yea and to set in open view the writings and Tables of
other men, and affirm they are their own? I appeal to none but to my own
experience herein; howbeit I am persuaded diverse others (and which I know to)
will concur with me in this truth. And what is this, think you, but deceptio
visus, a blinding of the world with shows of what they are not?

Lastly, they do also hinder the commodity of those that go as far beyond

First, by their base and ignominious carriage of themselves in their
accustomary cosening, whereby men take occasion to conceive so ill of others of
the same Profession, that it is almost impossible for any one (do or mean he
never so well,) to have entertainment where they have been before.

And secondly by the multitude of them, which is so great that a man can go
into no corner of this City, but he shall see and hear of a world of squirting
Teachers, not one of them almost worthy to carry a Pen-mans Inck-horne after
him, much less to bear the name of a good Penman.

Diverse other abuses there are which these men offer unto the excellency of the
Pen and Penmen: But lest I should seem prolixe in so slight an argument, I
will here leave them to the censure of the skillful, and to those that to their
cost have made trial of them. Forasmuch as my intent is not so much to detect
the folly of those unworthy Professors (which is palpable enough to every one)
as to entreat of the Art it self, reducing all that I entend to speak in
commendation thereof, unto these three heads*

1 To the Antiquity thereof.
2 To the Excellency 3 To the Diversity
Antiquity of it. Some affirm that the use of this Art was found out in the
very infancy of the world: and that Enoch the seventh Joseph. lib. 1 de
Antiquit.
from Adam had skill therein: For Josephus credibly reports, that one of the
Prophecies which Enoch wrote on pillars of stone, remained even in his time; or
at least some ruin thereof. But others do ascribe those pillars to Seth who
lived before Enoch. Howsoever, if it were but as ancient as the Law, it carries
with it age enough.

As for the Art of Prin^ing, which came up but yesterday (in comparison) and is
now in much request, that can no way blemish the Art of Writing, forasmuch as
Writing is the President by which Printing is effected, and therefore the more
worthy. For as we say in Arithmeticke, Out of the greater the lesser is
deducted: So that, that whence the deduction is made, is greater then the
deduction it self.

I shall not need to argue much upon the Antiquity of this Art, in regard of
the universal knowledge thereof. What worthy and notable acts were heretofore
done by any, either Divine, Moral, Legal or Martial, but were reserved to
after-ages by the means of Writing? And I wonder how we should ever have
attained to any kind of learning, had we not had the scrolls of our learned
forefathers to peruse and look into as also the holy Scriptures, In quibus
sunt omnes thesaurt sapientiae ac scientiae reconditi?

The next thing to be entreated of, is the Excellency of the Art of Writing,

1 Desiderio. First, in the earnest desire that all men for the most part have
to attain unto it: for those things which are rare and delectable, are sought
for and pursued of all men, that is a rule in Nature: Now the Art of Writing is
a most excellent and delectable Art, and therefore of all men much desired.

2 Necessitate Secondly, the Excellency appears in the Necessity thereof: for
it is necessary for all (you know) to write; and those that cannot, find what
a multitude of inconveniences do come upon them for the want of it. And herein
(by the way) suffer me not to give conniuence to that ungrounded An Answer to a
common Objection.
opinion of many, who affirm Writing to be altogether unnecessary for women.
If by it any foul businesses are contracted, and thereby much hurt effected;
Is this to be laid upon the Art it self? Or is not rather the ill disposition
of those to be charged herewith, who make it the instrument, whereby they bring
to pass evil actions? For not the use but the abuse of a thing is it which
makes it odious. If it were otherwise, why then foul imputations may be laid
upon the best virtues, which of themselves are immaculate.

To be brief, the Art of Writing is so excellent, and of such necessary use,
that none ought to be without some knowledge therein, since the excellency of
no Art without it can be made known or manifested. And if any Art be
commendable in a woman, (I speak not of their ordinary works wrought with the
needle, wherein they excel) it is this of Writing; whereby they, commonly
having not the best memories (especially concerning matters of moment) may
commit many worthy and excellent things to Writing, which may occasionally
minister unto them matter of much solace.

Hereby also, the secrets that are and ought to be, between Man and Wife,
Friend and Friend etc. in either of their absences may be confined to their
own priuacy, which (amongst other things) is not the meanest dignity.

Lastly, the practice of this Art is so necessary for women, and consequently
so excellent, that no woman suruiuing her husband, and who has an estate left
her, ought to be without the use thereof, at least in some reasonable manner:
For thereby she comes to a certainty of her estate, without trusting to the
reports of such as are usually employed to look into the same: whereas
otherwise for want of it, she is subject to the manifold deceits now used in
the world, and by that means plungeth her self into a multitude of
inconveniences.

Wherefore their opinion who would bar women from the use of this excellent
faculty of Writing, is utterly lame, and cannot by force of argument be
maintained.

And although the Excellency of this Art (to speak of the curiosity thereof)
be somewhat shadowed by the dullness of some Mechanical spirits, who seldom
have skill in any thing out of their own element, that think Writing to be
only a hand-labour, and so they can write to keep a dirty shop-booke, they
care for no more; never esteeming the commendable manner of fair and orderly
Writing, which ought in all business to be observed, as well in keeping of
Books for Merchants and others, as in all kind of Engrosments, appertaining
to the Law, etc: Yet notwithstanding the splendour and grace of writing shines
most excellently in the scrols of skillful Artists, as in the writing of some
may appear to the^ that have insight.

And what should I say of the Excellency of this Art? Is it not one of the
hands by which not only this, but al other commonwealths are vpholden? The key
which opens a passage to the descrying and finding out of innumerable
treasures? The handmaid to memory? The Register and Recorder of all Arts? And
the very mouth whereby a man familiarly conferreth with his friend, though the
distance of thousands of miles be betwixt them?

Infinite other things might be spoken concerning the Excellency of this Art of
Writing; and where I fail in the setting forth thereof, assist me with your
manifold imaginations.

The third and last thing to be discussed of in commendation of this Art, hands
which are now used among us. For although they all go under the name of
writing; yet they are to be distinguished according to the diversity of them.
Howbeit my purpose is not to clog my discourse with an enumeration of every
idle hand that may be written: for that were absurd, and out of the element of
a Penman. I will only entreat of those which are the principal; and wherein
the most Art, the greatest curiosity, and the rarest dexterity of the Artist
is to be manifested: and they are these which follow, viz.

1 Secretary. 2 Bastard-Secretary, or Text. 3 Roman. 4 Italian. 5 Court. 6
Chancery.
Of each of which I will briefly speak somewhat, only by way of distinction,
in regard I would not willingly weary the Reader with superfluous
circumstances, or detain him long from That which follows.

1 Secretary. For the first, viz: the Secretary, which is so termed (as I
conceive) partly because it is the Secretaries common hand; and partly also,
because it is the only usual hand of England, for dispatching of all manner
of bunes^es for the most part, whatsoever.

I might add hereunto the super-excellency of this hand, in respect of any
other hand; for that the very denomination thereof, imports some things in it
that are not easily to be found out, And true it is, that whosoever does
practice it (according to the true nature of it) shall perceive Secretarius a
secretis.
therein many secret and subtle passages of the hand, which few, but those
that have been well grounded therein by a true Artist, are able to comprehend:
but I affect breuity.

To speak of the kinds of Secretary, is (in these days) no easy matter: for
some have devised many, and those so strange and disguised; that there is
hardly any true strain of a right Secretary in them. For mine own part, I
make distinction betwixt the Set, Facill, and Fast hands, of which three I
shall (God willing) by and by propose some few examples.

2 Bastard secretary The next is Bastard-Secretary, and so named by the best,
because it is gotten of the Secretary, as those that have any skill may
perceive. This is a Hand not so usual as the former; yet of great validity,
and for diverse purposes exceeding graceful; as for Engrossements, Epitaphs for
Tombs, Titles of Books, and many other uses, which would be too tedious for
me here to recite.

3 Roman. The third is Roman, which has his denomination from the place where
(it seems) it was first written, viz: Rome. A hand of great account, and of
much use in this Realm, especially in the Universities: and it is conceived to
be the easiest hand that is written with Pen, and to be taught in the shortest
time: Therefore it is usually taught to women, for as much as they (having not
the patience to take any great pains, besides fantastical and humorsome)
must be taught that which they may instantly learn? otherwise they are
uncertain of their proceedings, because their minds are (upon light occasion)
easily drawn from the first resolution.

4 Italian. The fourth is Italian, a hand in nature not much different from
Roman, but in manner and form, of much incongruity thereunto. This is a hand
which of late is grown very usual, and is much affected by diverse: for
indeed, it is a most excellent and curious hand, and to be written with
singular command of hand; else it will appear but very ragged and vile; and if
the Pen be taken off in conjunction of the letters, it is neither approueable,
nor Pen*man-like, but mere botching which is detestable.

5 Court. The fist is Court hand; so called, for that it is of great use in
those two famous Courts of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas. It is a hand
somewhat difficult to write well, and he that continually writes it, may happily
come to perfection in that; but for other hands (if he could write never so
many) let him never look to write any of them well: for it is able to mar
them all. I am not reasonlesse in this opinion, but able (unto any that please)
to produce the cause.

6 Chancery. The last is Chancery, which every man knows to be written no
where but in the High Court of Chancery, and in other Offices which have
reference thereunto. I am of opinion, that this hand being well written, is far
more graceful then the Court, and equally difficult. It has a kind of
mixture of the Court and Bastard-Secretary in it, which any man of judgment
may easily perceive.

There are two kinds hereof, the Set and Fast; the difference between them is
not little, as they that are Clerks well know.

Thus much, or rather thus little, I thought good to deliver, touching the
Antiquity, Excellency, and Diversity of the Art of Writing.

Now here shall follow certain pecces and Examples of the six several heads
before mentioned; wherein I have endeauored to fit my self with extraordinary
matter for coppies; holding it an absurd thing in a good Penman to make choice
of such fustian stuff, as many do, only to set out their Coppies, and make
the writing to seem graceful to the eye. Also I have labored to be so
perspicuous in the nature of every hand, as that the meanest may imitate me,
and reap some benefit by me.

5
8
9
10
11
14
15
18
22
23
24
26
27
28


Thus from the gate or entrance, I have brought you into the house; where you
have seen sundry ornaments and pieces of Art: and now (if you be not weary) go
with me into one room more, and there take a view of the implements and
tools, with which you must work, if you mean to prove a Penman; and learn
how you are to use and handle them. But before we enter, step aside with me,
and I will give you notice of certain observations, which are necessary to be
known of every one that will practice this Art.

Observations for writing.
EVery one that intends either to be a Teacher of others, or a Practitioner for
himself; ought to know that in the Art of Letters, or Writing, three things
are to be observed, viz.

1 Ratio. 2 Modus. 3 Species.
Generally.
The former whereof, which is Reason, has reference to the understanding, and
does most of all concern the speculatiue part of Writing.

The two latter, viz. the manner and shape (which of every letter throughout
the Alphabet is to be observed) does consist in the carriage of the hand; and
these are the practique parts of Writing.

Particularly.
1 Ratio. First, the Reason of every letter must be found out; as why such a
letter being made thus and thus, seems more graceful then being made so and
so. Likewise, as for every letter, and the least touch with the Pen, a reason
must be given: So it is in the conjunction, knitting or joining together of the
letters; Why the Pen must here be taken off, and why there not taken off? why
the nature of this letter will admit the taking off of the Pen; and why the
nature of that letter does require the contrary. These things must be resolved
to the learner, by Reason; else how shall he understand to write well?

2 Modus. Next, the manner of making every letter must be known too. For if a
Scholar be taught to frame his letters after an ill, corrupt and contrary way:
It cannot be that he should ever write well. And although perchance some do
write sufficient and serviceable hands, that never were taught the true way of
framing their Caracters: Yet notwithstanding what they do, they (as we say) do
by roate, not understanding, or conceiving how they write. For I dare
undertake, that such as have not bin rightly grounded herein, are never able
to know or judge of the goodness or badnes of a letter. Therefore it were to be
wished, that men would refrain from these Botchers that spoil so many and
bring up such a multitude of Scriblers, not fit for any man's employment: and
that they would (not standing upon the pay, as many ignorant persons do) put
their youth to such as are able to teach, and are known to be good Penmen.

3 Species. Lastly, as the reason and the manner of every Letter is to be
observed: so the shape (which gives life and spirit to writing) must be known
also: for therein the very substance of Writing consists.

Herein a man ought to be very wary and circumspect, concerning the carriage
of his Pen: that is, that he do not press upon that part of the letter which
requires a favorable touch; nor be sparing in that part which requires the
contrary: for in either the spirit of the letter is dulled and made blockish,
so that the shape cannot then be good.

It shall not be amiss for the diligent Practitioner, more specially to
observe these few brief Rules concerning Writing, viz.
1 FIrst, to size his Writing, that is, to make the depth and fullness
proportionable. 2 Then to observe the whites, for that is a maine matter. 3
Lastly, to keep an equal distance, as well between letter and letter, as
between word and word.
These three being the chiefest things wherein the grace of writing consists.

In the next place I hold it necessary to set down certain rules for the
making and holding of the Pen, with other things thereunto appertaining.

Observations or rules for the making of the Pen.
AFter you have gotten you a good Penknife well edged and smoothed upon a
hoane, and good second quils, either of Goose or Raven, scraped with the back
of your knife, begin to make your Pen thus:

1 First, holding your quill the right side upwards, cut off about the third
part of it flat along to the end.

2 And turning it on the back side, cut off the very end of it asloape; which
being done, it will be forked.

3 Then, holding it still on the back, make a little cut in the very midst of
the quill.

4 When you have done so, take the end of your knife if it have a pegg, or else
another quill, and make a slit up suddenly, even in the cut you gave before.

5 Which being done turn your quill on the right side again, and begin to cut
a little thought above the slit, on that side which is next your left hand, and
so continue cutting by degrees, till you think you have sufficiently cut that
side. A Caveat.
But herein you must be very wary you cut not off too much of the slit; for
then your pen will be too hard, and if you leave too much also, it will be over
soft.

6 Then even against the place you began to cut the first side, cut the Note
that if your quill (as many have) have teeth, you are to pare it on the back
thinly, to take the^ away
other likewise, till you have made them both of an equal thinness: and then
trying it by lifting up the slit upon the nail of your thumb, you shall see
whether it be too soft or too hard: if either, bring it to a mean by adding
more slit to it, if you see it be too hard; or by taking some away, if you
perceive it to be too soft.

Lastly, herein lies the difficulty, viz. in the nibbing of the Pen: wherein I
observe this rule, that placing it on the nail of my thumb, or middle finger,
Observe that this nibbing of the Pen must be done at once though it seem two
several cuts, otherwise it will not write currantly.
I hold my knife somewhat sloaping, and cut the end of the nibbe, not quite
off, but before my knife come off, I turn him downright and so cut the nibbe
clean away, on both sides alike; contrary to that old vulgar rule, Dextra pars
pennae, etc. Now if my pen be to write full, I cut off so much the more of the
nibbe; if small, so much the less.

Observations for the holding of the Pen.
1 HOld your Pen between your thumb, your forefinger, and your
middle-finger: viz. with the top of your thumb, the bottom or lower part of
your forefinger, and the top or upper part of your middle finger.

2 And let your other two fingers join to the rest a little thought within
them; suffering none of your fingers with which you hold the Pen, to touch
paper: for that is the proper office of the fourth and little fingers, by which
the strength of the others is maintained.

3 Lastly, for the right usage of the Pen, when you can hold it; you shall
observe, that it ought to be held directly upon the full: for that is most
proper, being that the nibbe of the Pen must be cut even, otherwise it is
subject to spatter. Howbeit, I deny not, but in the fetching of any compass,
it must be held a little inclining to the left side: for so the Pen will give
full where it should, and small also where it is required.

A Caveat.
Note, that the Pen must be held very gently in the hand, without griping,
because of two inconveniences which come thereby.

1 The one is, that the command of hand (which otherwise by the easy holding
thereof is to be attained) is hereby utterly lost.

2 The other is, that by this griping, or hard holding of the Pen, a man is
kept from a speedy dispatch of that he goes about to write: both which are
maine enemies to Clerke-like writing.

M. B. his private opinion concerning Pen-manship.
1 FIrst, it is a most absurd and hateful quality, to use any manner of
botching in the Art of Writing; yea, though it be in a letter of the greatest
uncertainty.

2 Again, I am of opinion, that although in the writing of some Hands, (as of
the Set Secretary and some other) it be now and then tolerable to take off
the Pen in conjunction of the letters, for the more formal writing thereof:
yet that in the Facill, but especially in the Fast Secretary, it is so
injurious to the perfection of Clerke-like writing, that I cannot free him that
uses it, from the imputation of a mere Botcher.

3 The like opinion do I retain of those, who must write euerything that is
to be performed in any reasonable fashion, and with credit, with or by a line:
for therein they show themselves rather Carpenters then Writers, and cannot (in
the judgment of Artists) be rightly termed good Penmen.

4 Also (in my judgment) he cannot be reputed a good Penman that is not able
upon an instant, with any Pen, Ink, or Paper, and in the presence of
whomsoever, to manifest some skill: Being that the rare and absolute quality of
the Pen, consists not in the painting, pricking forth, and tedious writing of
six lines privately in a man's Study, with the best implements: but a sweet
command of hand, and a certain conceived presumption.

5 Lastly, to use any strange, borrowed, or enforced tricks and knots, in or
about writing, other then with the celerity of the hand are to be performed, is
rather to set an inglorious gloss upon a simple piece of work, then to give a
comely luster to a perfect pattern; they being as unnatural to Writing as a
surfeit is to a temperate man's body.

FINIS.

