HOMElies set forth by the right reverend father in God, Edmunde Bishop of
London, not only promised before in his book, entitled, A necessary
doctrine, but also now of late adjoined, and added thereunto, to be read within
his diocese of London, of all persons, vycars, and curates, unto their
parishioners, upon sondayes, and holidays.

Anno. M.D.LV.

surrounding the title, decorative border (McKerrow and Ferguson 83): "A
compartment with a small medallion of a man's head at top; pillars at sides;
and a shield below." Initials of the printer, John Cawood, in the shield. I.C.



The Table.
i. Of the creation and fall of Man. ii. Of the misery of all mankind and of
his condempnation to death. iii. Of the redemption of Man. iiii. How the
redemption in Christ is apliable to man. v. Of christen love and Charity. vi.
How dangerous a thing the break of Charity is. vii. Of the Church what it
is, and of the commodity thereof. viii. Of the authority of the Church. ix.
Of the Supremacy. x. Of the Supremacy. xi. Of the true presence of Christ's
body and blud in the sacrament of the Aultare. xii. Of transsubstantiation.
xiii. Of certain Aunswers against some common objections, made against the
sacrament of the Aultare.
The Bishop of London to all persons, and curates, within his dioces of
London.
FOrasmuch as the people of my dioces, being within your several cures, and
charge, do (as in deed of reason they may) look for to have at their pastors
hand, or at the least way, by his provision, and mean, good instruction, and
teachinge, especially how to serve and please God, and how also otherwise to
do their duty, as to any one of them in their degree does appertain. And
forasmuch also as there is not now a days that multitude, and plenteth of
preachers, which in times past has been, and by Gods grace, hereafter shall be.
And fynallye, for that every one of you in your own person, is not able to
discharge the office of preaching, which many good folk do greatly wyshe, and
desire ye could, and would. Therefore desiring to have somethyng done onward,
til God of his goodness provide something better, I have labored with my
chapleyns, and friends, to have these Homelies prynted, that ye may have
somewhat to instruct, and teach your flock withal, requyrynge, and charginge
every one of you, that diligently, upon the sondayes, and holidays, ye read
to your flock, frutefully, and deliberately, one of the said Homelies. And
thus fare you well.

Given at my house in London, the first day of July. M.D.LV.
An Homely, of the creation and fall of man.
THe Prophette, David in his forescore and ninte^th psalm, exhortyng all
people to sing praise to almighti god, to serve hi^ in gladness, and rejoice in
his sight, alleges this as a sufficient cause thereof. Scitote quoniam ipse
est dominus, Psalm, cxix.
ipse fecit nos et non ipsi nos. which is to say. Know you that he is our Lord
it is he that made us, and we made not our selfs. And in deed, who yt
diligently wayeth ye creation of man, can not but therein most highly laud, and
praise almighty god, his creator. For where in the creation of al other visible
things, he did but only command, and will that they should be made, and
incontine^t they were made, in the creatyng of man, he used great solempnitie,
and many notable circumstaunces. First touching man, Genes. i.
he said, let us make man, which words be as it were the words of god the
father, to God the son, and to the holy ghost, spoken after the manner of men,
when they go about some great matter, at what time they take good aduisement or
they begin, and do join with the best, and wysest counselors, that they can
get. This circumstaunce (not being necessary of gods part, as without the
which he might have created man) does most manifestly declare the special
favor, of almighty god toward mankind: but that next circumstaunce, which
does immediately follow this first, is a more surer proof, and declaration of
gods tender love, toward man, when he says. Let us make man to our own
similitude and likeness, Now mark, good people, how much god did for us in our
creation. He made us in very deed like unto himself, and in so doing what
could he have done more for us? A wonderful excellent benefit and comfort is
it unto us, to consider that man was made like unto god. And to understand this
thing the better, you shall know that the similitude, and likeness of man to
god, was not in the body of man (for this you must most certainly believe, yt
the godhed is a spirit, and not a bodily substance) but this similitude and
likeness was in ye soul, which was endued, with most heavenly and godlike
qualities, as understanding, memory, and will, with sundry gifts also of grace.
And here is to be noted by the way, that where almighty god says, Let us make
man to our own similitude, and lykenes, he gives us to understand, yt there
be three parsons in trinity, and yet but one god. For in that he says let us
make man, therein is signified, a plurality, or number of persons: again, in
that he says to our similitude and likeness, and not to our similitudes and
lykenesses, by this is signyfyed the unity also of one nature and substance.
But to proceed further concerning the creation of man, ye shall understand,
Genesis. 2.
that the second chapter of Moses book, called genesis, in special manner does
record the several making, as well of the body of man, by it self, as also
of the soul by it self. And as touching the body, scripture does there say,
that. God fourmed, or shaped it, of ye earth Noting thereby the excellency of
man's body, above the bodies of other living creatures. For we read not of any
other living creature, that god shaped, or fourmed, the body of it, but only
that he made it, and that at the commandment of almighty god, Genesis. i.
the earth brought fourth four foted beasts, and the water, in like manner,
brought fourth fysshes, and fowls. Only of ye body of man scripture witnesses
yt God shaped it. And as concerning ye soul of man, it is written of it, in
the said second chapter of genesis, Genesis. 2.
how yt god brethed it into the body, which.ii. circumstaunces, as they import
a marvelous excellency of man, above other bodily creatures, so they most
clearly declare thexcedyng great goodness of God, toward man. Now when god
had, in such a singular fashion, creted man, he gave him souereigntie over all
the fysshes of the sea, over the fowls of the air, and over the beasts of
the land, yea and made him a King, and Emperor on the earth. And yet not
satisfied with all this, he placed man in Paradyse, that is in a most pleasant
garden, where he had planted all kind of fruit, beautiful to behold, and
delicious to eat, for man to feed upon, only one kind of fruit he charged
him on pain of death, (and that not of the body alone, but of the soul also)
utterly to refrain from, which was the fruit of the tree called in
scripture, the tree of knowledge of good, and evil. And like as in a most
marvelous sort he made Adam the first man, so in as marvelous, and strange
a sort he made Eve the first woman, even of a rybbe taken out of Adams left
side, and her he made parfytte, and furnyshed her with like gifts as he had
done Adame the first man: What can we then think, or deuyse, that God might
have don more for us in our creation, then herein he did: He made the soul
immortal, that is such as should continue for ever without end. He furnished
it with most singular gifts both of nature and of special grace also The body
of man, in the estate of original innocence, had in it health, strength,
cumlines, and other like qualities, in the highest degree of perfection, it had
in it self then, no fond lust, or concupiscens, no pronitie or inclination to
evil, no lothsumnes in doing good, no infirmity or wekenesse, no lack or want
of any quality fyt and decent for it. The body of man was then obediente to
the soul, the soul altogether obedient to God. So that on Gods part, our
maker and creator, there is nothing toward us but all perfection, all great
kyndnes, al fatherly love, and favor, Holy scripture most euydently affyrmeth
yt al creatures were made good in their creation, saying. Vidit deus omnia que
fecerat et erant ualde bona. Gene. i. Genesis. ^.
That is. God saw al things which he had made, and they were very good. Which
thing as it is generally true in all creatures concerning their creation, so is
it in a certain degree of excellencye to be verified in man touching the estate
of his original innocence. Thus we may perceive yt in the creation of man, al
was excellent and parfytte, which ought greatly to inflame us the more to
love and serve almighty God our most loving creator. But for as much as that
blessed estate is lost, and mankind by ye loss thereof, fell into extreme
misery and wretchedness, it is consequently to be well considered of our part,
by what means man was brought from so good and blessed a case, to so evil
and miserable an estate, which point well wayed, is a sufficient ground to
cause us on the other side utterly to detest and abhor al sin. For that
grievous fall of man came of sin. Sin it was, for which God thrust man out
of paradyse, sin it was that caused the flesh to strive against the
spirit, and the spirit, against the flesh, sin it was that brought unto
mankind necessity of bodyly death, and all the infirmities and diseases,
which man in this transitory life sustayneth, sin finally it was, that caused
all the posterity of Adam and Eve to be borne in state of dampnation. But some
perchance are desirous fardar to know, by what means man was first brought
to commytte sin. For the understanding whereof, Genes. 3.
let us have recourse to the iii. chap. of Genesis, where it is written: how
that ye wyly serpent the devil came unto Eve and said unto her: Why has God
given you commandment not to eat of every tree in paradyse? where unto the
woman answered and said: of the fruit which is in paradise we eat, but of
the fruit of that tree yt grows in the myddest of paradyse, GOD has charged
us not to eat or touch it? lest, perchance we dye. Then said the serpente
to the woman: Nay, you shall not dye. For God knows that whatsoever day you
shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be like Gods,
knowing good and evil. The woman therefore saw that the tree was good to eat
of, and beautiful to the eye, and pleasant to behold, and she took of the
fruit thereof and did eat, and gave part to her husband, who also did eat.

Thus through the provocation of the devil, man first fell into sin.
Wherefore as we must always abhor sin and forbear it, because of the
great misery it brought us unto, so should we no les hate, and to the
uttermost of our power, fly the devil and all his suggestions, knowing that
thereby we were first induced to commytte sin. For as this our adversary was
busye at the beginning with our first parents, so is he no les, i. Peter. 5.
but rather more busye with us at this present, as witnesses Saint Peter in
the.v. chapter of his first epistle, saying. Your adversary the devil, as a
roryng lion goes about, seking whom he may devour. This adversary of mankind,
disdaynynge at the great felycytye that Adam and Eve were in, never ceasyd
questionynge, and craftyng with the woman, being the weker and trayler vessel,
until he had made them disobey gods commandment: by which their doing, they
lost the orygynall great innocence which they had at there creation, which
being lost, nether the body would be obedient to ye soul, nor the soul to
god, but al was in man turned vpsidoune: yea thereby they fell also into
necessity of temporal death of body, and (which is worst of all) into the
estate of eternal damnation, and everlasting death, both of body and soul.
But now, because it may paraduenture seem in some man's judgment, that seeing
the thing that Adam and Eve did; was but the eating of an appell, therefore
their faut was not great, nor deserved so grievous punishment, let us consider
the circumstaunces, and we shall sone perceive the offense not light, but very
sore and heinous. First the thing which god commanded man to forbear, was a
thing most easy for him to forbear, and so much was his fault the greater.
Besides this, when a man is told before of great peril and danger that shall
light upon him if he do this or that, in case after such warnyng he offend
therein, his fault is thereby made the greuouser. Thyrdly, the less
inclination a man has to any sin, the more he synneth if he do the same.
Now Adam and Eve, had in them no inclination at al, another to one vice nor to
other. Fourthly, when a man has late received great benefits at his
soueraygns hands, if he incontinently break his express will, the contempt
and disobedience is made thereby the greater. The thing that Adam and Eve did
eat, was in deed but an appell, yet the eating thereof in that case, was an
high disobedience against god, and the corrupting of all mankind, for as much
as they two were the very route, whereof all men must rise, and the route being
once naught, how can the tree or branches, cummynge of that route, be good?
Therefore S. Paul in his Epistle to ye Romans in the.v. chapter thereof
says. Roma. 5.
By the offense of one man, sin came upon all men, to condempnacion, and in
the same chapter immediately after, he says to like purpose, through the
disobedience of one man, many became sinners. And within a little after he
says. Sin came into this world by one man, and through sin came death,
and so death passed to al me^. Thus have you hard first the loving kyndnes of
God to man, in that he created him in so worthy a manner, next ye have hard
the myschyfe that comes to mankind by sin, and thirdly what an extreme
enemy also the devil is unto us. In an other homily hereafter, ye shall hear
of the exceeding great mercy of god, in delivering mankind by a marvelous manner,
out of the estate of this dampnatio^. Wherefore to conclude for this present
time, this shall be to exhort you, that you fail not daily and howrelye to give
most hearty thanks to almighty God, for that he of his mere goodness created
you, and created you, not without sense, as the stones, not without reason as
the brute beasts, but has given you all notable qualities and powers that
other corporal creatures have, and besides, has perticularlye planted in you
reason and understanding, and sundry goodly qualities of body and soul,
several to the nature of man only, and not common to man, and other erthly
creatures. This is furthermore also to exhort you, that remembryng what
miserye came to mankind by sin, and by such a sin, as in some men's
judgment might seem to be but very small, it is to wit, by eating of an
appel, you will be circumspecte in avoiding of al kind of sin, and
disobedience, be the thing in his own nature never so small a thing, which
is by God him self, or by such as we owe obedience unto, commanded. Fynallye
and last of al, this is to exhort you, to consider dilygently that we have a
deadly ennemy, which is ye devil, who desires our destruction, and does most
craftily and busely travail by all means with us, to work the same, of whose
most subtle and wilye traynes, we must principally take heed of, which
grant unto us all, the blessed trinity, the father, the Son, and the holy
ghost, to whom be all honor and glory world without end. Amen.

Io. Harpesfeld sacrae theologiae professor Arch. London.
An homely of the misery of all mankind, and of his condempnation to
everlasting death, by his own sin.
THe holy ghost, in writing the holy scripture, is in nothing more dilligent,
then to pull down man's vain glory, and pride, which of all vices, is most
universally graffed in mankind, even from the first infection of our first
father Adam. And therefore, we read in many places of scripture, many notable
lessons against this old rooted vice, to teach us ye most co^me^dable virtue
of humility, how to know our selves, and to remember, what we be, of our
selves. In the book of Genesis, almighty God gives us all, a title and name
in our great graunde father Adam, which ought to admonish us al, to consider
what we be, whereof we be, from whence we came, and whyther we shall, saying
thus. In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo, Gene 3.
donec reuertaris in terram de qua su^ptus es: quia puluis es, et in puluerem
reuerteris. That is to say, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy
bread, until thou retournest into the earth, out of which thou waste taken:
for dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return, Here (as it were in a
glass) we may learn to know ourselves, that we be but ground, earth, and
dust, and that to ground, earth, and duste, we shall return again, which
name and title of earth, and duste, appointed, and assigned by God, to all
mankind, the holy Patriarche Abraham, did well remember: and therefore he
calls him self by that name, when he makes his earnest prayer for Sodom
and Gomorre, saying in the.xviii. of Genesis. Cum sim puluis et cuius, Gene. 18
that is to say, seeing I am dust and ashes. Judith. 3. and. 9. Job. 13. Hiere.
6. and.25.
And we read that Judith, Hester, Job, Hieremye, with other holy men and
women, in the old testament, did use sack clothe, and did cast duste, and
ashes upon their heads, when they bewailed their synnefull living. They
called and cried to God for help, and mercy, with such a ceremony of sack
clothe, duste, and ashes, that thereby they might declare to the hole world,
what an humble, and lowlye estimation, they had of them selves, and how well
they remembered their name, and title aforesaid, their vile, corrupt, frail
nature, duste, earth, and ashes. The book of wisdom also, willing to pull
down our proud stomakes, Sapience. 7.
moves us diligently, to remember our mortal, and earthely generation, which
we have al of him, that was first made: and that all men, as well kings, as
subjects, do come into this world, and do goo out of the same in like
sort, that is, as of our selves, full miserable, as we may daily see. And
almyghtye God commanded his Prophet Esaias, to make a proclamation, Esai. 11.
and to cry to the hole world: that all flesh is grass, and that all the
glory of man, is as the flower of ye feilde, the grass is wythered, and the
flower does fall away, for the wind of our Lord blows upon it The people
surely is grass, which dries up, and the flower fades away, but the word
of our Lord abides for ever. According whereunto, the holy prophet Job,
having in him self great experience of miserable and synnefull estate of man,
does open the same to the world in these words. Homo natus de muliere, Job.
14.
breui viuens tempore, repletur multis miserijs, qui quasi flos egreditur, et
conteritur, et fugit velut vmbra, et nu^que in eodem statu permanet et dignum
ducis super huiuscemodi aperire oculos tuos, et adducere eum tecum in iudicium?
quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine? That is to say Man
being borne of a woman, living a short time, is full of manyfolde miseries,
he spryngeth up like a flower, and fades again, vanyshynge away (as it were a
shadow, and never contineweth in one state. And do thou judge it mete (O
Lord to open thine eyes upon such a one, and to bring him to judgment with
thee? who can make him clean that is conceived of an unclean seed? In deed
all men of their euylnes and natural prones, were so universally given to
sin, that God (as the scripture testifyeth) repented yt ever he made man. And
by sin, Gene. 5. and. 7.
his indignation was so much provoked against the world, that he drowned all
the world with Noes fludde (except Noe him self and his little householde.) It
is not without great cause, that the scripture of God, does so many times
call all men here in this world earth, saying. (O thou earth, thou earth,
thou earth, hear the word of our Lord. Hiere. 22.
) Hiere. xxij. This, our right name, vocation, and title: earth, earth,
earth, pronounced by the prophet, shows what we be in deed, by what soever
other style, title, or dignitye me^ do call us. Thus, he plainly names us,
who knows best, both what we be, and what we ought of right to be called.
And thus he describes us, speaking by his faithful Apostle S. Paul to the
Romans the.iii. Roma. 3.
Chapter, saying. All men, Jews and Gentiles, are under sin: there is none
ryghteous, no, not one: there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God, they are all goone out of the way, they are all
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one, their throat is an
open sepulcher, with their tongues, they have used craft and deceyte, the
poison of serpents is under their lyppes, their mouth is full of cursynge and
bitterness, their feet are swifte to shed blood, destruction and wretchedness
are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known, there is no
fear of God before their eyes. And in an other place, that is to wit, Gala. 3.
Galathians.iij. S Paul writes thus: ( God has wrapped all nations in
unbelief, Roma. 11
that he might have mercy on all The scripture concludes all under sin,
Gala. 3.
that the promise by the faith in Jesus Christ, should be given unto them
that believe. S. Paul in many places, paynteth us out in our colors, calling
us the children of the wrath of God, when we be borne: saying also, that we
cannot think a good thought of our selves, much less, we can say well, or do
well, of our selves. And the wyseman says, in the book of Proverbs, Pro. 24.
the just man falls seven times a day. The most tried and approved man
Job, feared all his works: S. John the Baptiste, being sanctified in his
mothers womb, Luce. i.
and praised before he was borne, called an aungel, and great before the Lord,
replenyshed even from his birth, with the holy ghost, the preparer of the way
for our savior Christ, to be more then a Prophet, and the greatest that ever
was borne of a woman: yet he plainly grants, that he had need to be washed
of Christ: he worthily extolleth and glorifieth his lord, and master Christ,
and humbles him self, as unworthy to unbuckle his shoes, and gives all
honor and glory to God. So does saint Paul, both often, and euydently
confess him self, what he was of him self, ever geuynge (as a most
faithful servant ought to do) all praise to his master and savior.
John.i. and.2.
So does blessed saint John the evangelist, in the name of him self, and of
all other holy men, be they never so just, make this open confession: If we
say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us:
If we knowledge our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous: If we say, we have not
sinned, we make him a lier, and his word is not in us. Wherefore, the
wysema^, Eccles. 7
in the book called Ecclesiastes, openly declares, that there is not one
just man upon the earth, Psalm. 2.
that does good, and synneth not. And saint David is ashamed of his sin,
but not to confess his sin. How often, how earnestlye, and how lamentablye
does he desire Gods great mercy, for his great offenses, and that God should
not enter in to judgment with him? And again, how well wayeth this holy man
his sins, when he confesses, that they be so many in number, and so hid,
and hard to understand, that it is in manner impossible, Psalm. 19
to know, utter, or number them? Wherefore, he, having an earnest, and deep
contemplation, and consyderation of his sins, and yet not coming to the
bottom of them, makes supplication to God, to forgive him his priuye,
secret, hid sins: to the knowledge of the which, he cannot attain. He
wayeth ryghtlye his sins, from the original root, and spring head,
perceyuinge inclinations, prouocations, styrringes, stinginges, buddes,
branches, Psalm, 2.
dregs, infections, tastes, felinges, and sentes of them, to co^tinewe in him
still. Wherefore he says: Mark, and behold, I was conceived in sins: He
says not sin, but in the plurel number, sins: for as much, as out of
one, as fountain, spryngeth all the rest.

And our savior Christ says, Math. 9
there is none good but God, and that we can do nothing that is good, without
him, or no man can come to the father, but by him. He commands us all to
say, that we be unprofitable servants, when we have done all that we can
do. He prefers the penitente Publicane, before the proudeholye, and
gloryouse Pharysey: He calls him self a physician, not to them that be hole,
but to them that be sick, and have need of his salve, for their sore. He
teaches us in our prayers, to reacknowledge our selves sinners, and to ask
forgeuenes, and deliverance from all euyls, at our heavenly fathers hand. He
declares that the sins of our own hearts, do defyle our own selves. He
teaches that an evil word, or thought, deserves condempnation, affyrmynge,
that we shall give an account, for every idle word: He says, he came not to
save, but the sheep that were utterly lost, and cast away. Therefore, few of
the proud, just, learned, wise, perfect, and holy Phariseis, were saved by
him, because they justified them selves, by their counterfeyte holiness, before
men. Wherefore good people, let us beware of such Hypocrisy, vaineglorye, and
justifying of our selves. Let us look upon our feet, and then down our
Pecockes feathers, down proud heart, down vain claye, frail, and brittle
vessels. Of our selves, we be crabbe trees, that can bring forth no Aples, we
be of our selves, of such earth, as can bring forth but weeds, nettels,
brambles, briars, cocle, and darnell. Our fruytes be declared in the fyfte
chapter to the Galathians. We have neither faith, Charity, hope, patience,
chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of God: and therefore, these
virtues be called there, the fruytes of the holy ghost, and not the fruytes of
man. Let us therefore, acknowledge our selves before God, (as we be in deed)
miserable and wretched sinners. And let us earnestly repent, and humble our
selves hartelye, to cry to God for mercy. Let us all confess with mouth,
and heart, that we be full of imperfections. Let us know our own works, of
what imperfection they be, and then we shall not stand folyshely, and
arrogantly, in our own conceytes. For truly, there is imperfections, in our
best works: we do not love God, so much as we are bound to do, with all
our heart, mind, and power: we do not fear God so much as we ought to do:
we do not pray to God, but with great and many imperfections. We give,
forgive, believe, love, and hope vnperfectlye: we speak, think, and do,
vnperfectlye, we fight against the devil, the world, and the flesh,
vnperfectlye. Luke. 5.
Let us therefore, not be ashamed to confess plainly, our state of
imperfection: yea, let us not be ashamed to confess imperfection, even in all
our works: Let none of us be ashamed, to say with holy S. Peter: I am a
sinful man. Let us all say with the holy prophet Dauyd: Psalm. 160.
We have sinned with our fathers, we have done amysse, and dealte wyckedlye.
Let us all make confession with the prodigal son to our father, Luce. 15.
and say with him: We have sinned against heaven, and before thee (O father)
we are not worthy to be called thy sons. Let us all say with holy
Baruch: Baruch. 2.
O Lord our God, to us is worthily ascribed shame and confusion, and to thee,
ryghteousnes. We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have behaved our selves
ungodly, in all thy ryghteousnes Let us all say with the holy prophet
Danyell: O Lord, righteousness belongs to thee, unto us belongs confusion.
We have sinned, Daniel. 9
we have been naughty, we have offended, we have fled from the, we have gone
back from all thy precepts, and judgments.

So we learn of all good men, in holy scripture, to humble our selves, and to
exalte, extol, praise, magnifye, and glorifye God.

Thus ye have heard, how evil we be of our selves, how of our selves, and by
our selves, we have no goodness, help, nor salvation: but contrarywyse, sin,
dampnation, and death everlasting: which, if we depely weyghe, and
consider, we shall the better understand, the great mercy of God, and how our
salvation comes only by Christ: for in our selves, as of our selves, we
find nothing, whereby we may be delivered from this miserable captiuitye,
into the which we were cast through the envy of the devil, by
transgression of Gods commandment, in our first parent Adam. We are al
become unclean: but we al of our selves, are not hable to cle^se our selves,
nor to make one an other of us clean. We are by nature, the children of Gods
wrath: we are not hable of our selves, to make us the children and
inheritours of Gods glory. We are sheep that run astray: we cannot without
gods grace, i. Peter. 2.
and help, come again to the sheep fold: so great is our imperfection and
weakness. In our selves therefore, may not we glory, which of our selves are
nothing but synnefull, neither may we brag of our works that we do,
which all be so imperfect and vnpure, that they are not of them selves, hable
to stand before the ryghteous throne of GOD, as the holy Prophet David
says: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no man that
lives, shall be found ryghtuous in thy syghte. To God therefore, must we
fly, or else shall we never find peace, rest, and quyetnes of conscience, in
our hearts. For he is the father of mercyes, and God of all consolation, he is
the Lord, with whom is plenteouse redemption. Psalm. 129.
He is the God, which of his own mercy saves us, and sets out his
charity, and exceadyng love toward us, in that of his own voluntary goodness,
when we were peryshed, he saved us, and provided an everlasting kyngedome for
us. And all these heavenly treasures are given us, of his mere mercy, freelye.
And for whose sake? Truly, for Jesus Christ's sake, that pure, and undefiled
Lamb of God. He is that dearly beloved son, for whose sake, God is fullye
pacifyed, satysfyed, and set at one with man. He is the Lamb of God, i. Peter.
2
which takes away the sins of the world, of whom it may be truly
spoken, that he did all things well, and in his mouth was found no craft,
nor subteltye. Likewise he may say: the prince of the world came, and in me
he has nothing. He may say also: which of you shall reprove me of any
fault: He is that high and everlasting priest, which has offered him self
to God, when he instituted the sacrament of the Altar, and once for all, in a
bloudye sacrifyce, done upon the cross, with which oblation, he has made
perfect for evermore, them that are sanctified. He is the mediatoure, 1.
John. 3
between God and man, which paid our ransom to God, with his own blood,
and with that, has cleansed us from sin. He is the Physician, which heals
all our diseases. He is that savior, Math. 1
which saves the people from al their sins. To be short, he is that
flowing, and most plenteous fountain, of whose fulness, all we have received.
For in him are all the treasures of the wisdom, and knowledge of God hydden.
And in him, and by him, have we from God the father, al good things,
perteyning either to the body, or to the soul. O how much then, are we
bound to this our heavenly father, for these, his great mercyes, which he
has so plenteously declared unto us, in Christ Jesus our Lord, and
savior: What thanks, worthy, and sufficient, can we give to him? Let us all
with one accord, burste out with joyful voices, ever praysynge, and
magnifyenge this Lord of mercy, for his tender kyndenes showed to us, in his
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let us now learn to know our selves, our frayltie, and weakness, without
any ostentation, or boastynge of our own good deeds, and merits. Let us
also knowledge the exceadynge mercy of God, toward us, and confess, that as
of our selves comes all evil, and dampnation, so likewise of him, comes
all goodness and salvation, as God him self says by the Prophet Oze: Oze. 13
O Israel, thy destruction comes of thy self, but in me only is thy help
and comfort. If we thus humbly submyt our selves in the syghte of God, we
may be sure, that in the time of his visitacio^, he will lift us up, unto the
kyngedome of his dearly beloved son, Christ Jesus our Lord: to whom with
the father, and the holy gooste, be all honor and glory, for ever. Amen.

Io. Harpesfeld sacrae theologiae professor. Arch. London.
An Homelye of the redemption of man.
IT was declared unto you, good christen people, in ye last homelye, how our
first parents Ada^ and Eve, were by the synguler goodness, and especial
favor of almyghtye God, created right worthy creatures, and in the estate
of parfytte innocencye. It was also showed how thorough disobedience to their
creator, they brought them selves, and all mankind, into the estate of
everlasting damnation. Now shall you consequentlye hear, of the delyueraunce
of man, out of that dampnable estate, that is, of our redemption. For the
understanding whereof, you must perfytlye bear in mind, that the whole
nature of man, both in body and soul, was thorough orygynall sin, greatelye
defiled. For the soul (which is the chief part of man) lost thereby the
especial gifts of grace, with which it was endued in the creation, and
besides that, it was also maimed in the gifts of nature, as in memory,
intelligence, will, and other like. And the body (which is the inferior part)
it also was by the means of orygynall sin, brought to the necessary estate
of mortality, so that it must needs die, and was through that sin of our
said first parents, made weke, and brought to be subject, to so^drye kinds
of infirmities, and syckenes: and another could God, of his justice, receive
man again to favor, and state of eternal life (being thus in body and
soul, by his own defaulte defiled) unless he were first made pure, and clean,
again nether man was able to help him self herein, no, nor yet any angel
at al. Wherefore, almighty God (whose mercy excedeth all his works) pytienge
the wretched case that mankind was in, did appoint, even from the beginning,
his only son, the second person in trinity, to be the savior of the
world, and to restore man again, to perfect clennes, both in body, and soul,
and that, by the way of very justice, in making a full amends, and payinge a
sufficient ransom for sin. And this son of God (according to the will
of his father,) did take upon him the nature of man, ioyninge to his
everlasting Godheade, the whole, and perfyte nature of manhood, not making
that nature of man, which he took, a new of nothing, as he did heaven and
earth, nor yet making it, of a clod of earth, as he did ye body of Adam, but
he took the nature of man, of the very substance of the vyrgyn Mary his
mother, that like as Adam and Eve, brought them selves, and all their
posterity, through sin, into the estate of eternal dampnatio^: so Christ,
taking upon him, the very self same nature, being descended from Adam and
Eve, unto. the Vyrgin Mary, and of her being taken, and joined in him to the
godhead, in unity of person, should by his innocence, and through death,
wyllyngly suffered in that his most innocent body, not only him self, become
immortal man, and have glory everlasting, but make so many also, partakers of
like blessedness, as should enjoy the merits of his passion. Wherefore, it is a
very pernicious error, to think that christ took not his flesh, of the
very flesh of the blessed Vyrgyn Mary his mother. How could his death have
done me good, if it were not of the same nature that I am of? Heb. ii.
and therefore S. Paul in his second chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews
says. Qui sanctificat, et qui sanctificantur, ex vno omnes, that is. He that
sanctyfyeth, and they which are sanctified, are all of one: and within a little
after he says farther, Debuit per omnia fratribus assimulari, vt misericors
fieret, et fidelis pontifex, ad deum, vt repropitiaret delicta populi, that is,
Christ must in all points, become like to his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and fruteful Bishop to Godward, to procure mercy for the sins of
the people. If Christ took not the flesh of ye Virgin Marye, how is that
promise fulfilled, which God made immediately after the fall of our first
pare^tes, when he thrust them out of paradise, at which time, he said unto the
serpente (as it is written in ye third chapter of Genesis.) I will set enmity
betwixt the, and the woman's sede, Gene. 3.
and it shall tread down thy hedde: Lo, how mercifully God deals with
mankind, He promised that one should be borne of the sede and stock of Eve,
which should vanquyshe our ghostly enemy the devil. Now in that he calls
him the sede of the woman, he most plainly declares, that he must needs have
in him the self same nature that the woman had. Again God making the second
promise of the same sede, to come of the stock of Abraham the patriarch, said
unto Abraham, (as is wytnessed in the.xxii. of Genesys) In thy sede shall all
the nations of the world be blessed, Genes. 22
and many hundred years after yt, he promyssed likewise to King Dauyd, that,
that sede should come of him to. Which promyses of almighty God, were not to be
verified in Christ, if he took not ye substance of his flesh, of the Virgin
Mary his mother. But here it may seem strange to some, yt almighty god (seeing
he intended from ye beginning, to se^d his son into ye world, to be
incarnate for man's redemption) did defer the sendinge of him so long, that
is, the space of four thousand years or theraboute. To whom it is to be
answered, that the long taryinge of Christ, before he was incarnate, came not
of lack of good will in god, toward us, but of vnredines, and lack of good
disposition, to receive him on our parts. For if Christ should have commen
in the beginning of the world, men would have thought, that if God had
suffered them to use their own natural powers, they would have attained
salvation well enough, without any other help on Gods part. Again, though
after long experience, and travail of man, following the only light of
nature, it was euydente, that he neded a special aid from God, to the
attaynynge of everlasting life, yet the world might have demed, that in case
God of his goodness, had given unto manne some special light, and knowledge of
his will and pleasure, that then vndoughtedlye, without farther help, he
following such special light, and knowledge, might be able well inoughe to
attain to everlasting life. Therefore, to take all such excuses away, and
that we should plainelye understand, that after we once fell into sin,
neither the light of nature in us, neither the knowledge of the will of God, by
special revelation opened unto us, was able to help us, god suffered mankind
to travel, first by the light of nature, secondly by the law of Moses, and
yet man ran still farther, and farther, into damnation. Whereby it appears,
that though knowledge of the truth be necessary, to the attayninge of
everlasting life, yet such knowledge (be it never so great) being in a man
corrupted with sin, is to feeble and to weak to purge him of sin. For
purgation and clensing of sin, comes by some other means, besides ye
knowledge of the truth: and therefore S. Paul in the first chapter of his
epistle to the Romans, most plainly affirms, that in the time of ye law of
nature, men knew enough of God, but yet, not withstanding their knoledge, they
fell into abominable idolatry. The words of S. Paul, in that place are
these. So much as may be known of god, is manifest in the^ (that is to say, in
those which lived under the law of nature, from Adam unto Moses) For his
invisible things, even his eternal power, and godhed, were seen of the^, being
understood by the works of the creation of the world, so that they are
without excuse, because, that when they knew God, they glorified him not as god
nether were thankeful, but becamful of vanity in their imaginacions. And as ye
light which men had by the laws of nature, was not of force, to keep them
from sin, so nether the law of Moses, being opened from god him self by
special revelation, could suffice to ride man from sin (as S. Paul in the
second chapter of his foresaid epistle testifies saying) Behold thou art a
Jew, Roma. 2
and thou do rest in the law, and do glory in god, and do know his will
and pleasure, and being instructed in the law, thou do allow that is best,
and do trust that thou art a guide of the blind, a light to the^ which are
in darkness, an instructour of the folyshe, a master of the ignorante, and
that thou know by the law the form of sciens and truth: but yet thou that
teach other, teach not thy self, thou yt prechest against aduoutri, art
an aduoutrer thy self, thou that dooest defye Idols, commyttest sacrilege thy
self, thou that do glory in the law, through transgressing of the law,
do dyshoner God, for the name of God, through you, is blasphemed amongst
the gentyles.

Thus it is euydente, by the doctrine of Saint Paul, that another by the
common law of nature, nether by the special knowledge of the law of Moises,
man was able to avoid eternal da^pnation, but that he neded, besides such
knowledge, of some other help that is, of amends, to be made for his sins,
and thereby, to be reduced into the favor of god again, and to have
abundance of grace given unto him, by which grace he should both in his
knowledge be ye better established, and be able also, according to knowledge of
ye truth, to walk in the truth. For this amends to be made, the second person
in trinity, being god immortal, became mortal man, and was made in all parts
like unto one of us (sin only excepted) and he did unite unto his godhead,
the body and soul of man, in unity of person, in such a marvelous sort, that
as in us, the body being of one nature, and the soul being of an other nature,
do make yet but one person, so in him the nature of God, and the whole perfect
nature of man, do make but one person. Of this incomprehensible union of ye
godhed, and manhed in Christ, John. 1.
S. Ihon speaks in the first chapter of his gospel, saying. Verbum caro
factum est, et habitauit in nobis, the word, (that is the son of God) Was
made flesh,) (that is man) and dwelt amongst us. he dwelt here on the earth,
(as scripture declares,) above.xxxiij. years, and when he had fulfilled al
things, according to the sayings of the holy prophets, which were to be
fulfilled of him before his passion, then he suffered death willingly, yea, the
death of the cross, by such pain, (wrongefullye procured of the devil
against him) to ransom mankind out of captivity, which it sustained under
the devil most justly: and that this ransom should be perfyt, he suffered
sundry sorts of most spytefull wrongs, and intolerable pains, and
torments, in his most pure, and innocent body, as buffeting, bindinge,
scourgyng, plattynge on his head, a crown of thorn, hanginge on the cross,
pearcing of his hands and fete with nails, opening of his side with a
spear, and shedynge of his most precious blood, which passion of his, as
it is a most parfyt myrrour, and glass for us, therein to behold the
exceeding great love of god toward us, which spared not his only son, but
for us all gave him to dye, so it is a sufficient occasion, to bring all men
in extreme hatred of the devil, and sin: from danger of whom, mankind
could not be rydde, but only by so paynefull a death, of the son of God.
What can we look for at gods hands, if we sin from hence forth, but wrath
and vengeance, seeing he has once delivered us from sin, by so merciful a
means? All that our sauyoure Christ suffered, he wyllingely suffered for our
sins, him self having never deserved any whyt of pain, as who never
sinned. And yet his passion, though it be in it self a sufficient ransom,
for the sins of the whole world, yet it takes not place in all men: not for
insufficiency in it self, but for defaute in them, that should condignely
receive the merits thereof. For this you must know, that God requires in us
certain things, to be accomplished by our own will, and consent, without the
which, we can not be saved, no more, than if Christ had never dyed for us.
What things these are, shall be hereafter declared unto you. In the mean
season, lift up your hearts, and open them awyde, to receive in, unto them, a
great love toward God, who so nobylye created us, and when we, through our
own defaute, were fallen into the estate of endless misery, and wretchedness, so
mercyfully redeemed us, by the passion, and death of his only son our savior
Christ. Remember that sin, and naught else, brought us first out of Gods
favor, and that to take away sin, the son of God was incarnate, and
suffered most paynefull death on the cross, and therefore hereafter, flee
you all kind of sin, and fight incessantly, against your ghostly enemy the
devil, who being vanquished by Christ, is not able now to overthrow us, if we,
in the right faith of Christ, valiantly withstand him, which to do, grant
unto us, the blessed trinity, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, to
whom be all honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor. Arch. London.
An Homely declaryng how the redemption in Christ is appliable to us.
ALthough the death and passion of our savior christ, be in value a sufficient
ransom for the sins of the whole world, yet in effect it takes not place
in ye whole world. For neither Turk, Jew, nor infidel, wanting belief in
Christ, can take good by the death and passion of Christ, the scripture most
manifestly affyrming in the.xvi. Mar. 16.
chapter of S. Mark, that Whosoever does not believe shall be dampened. Again,
evil life, brings to the evil liver, eternal death, believe he never so
well. As S. Paul witnesses, in the.v. chapter of his Epistle to the
Galathians, Gala. 3.
where he says: Walk after the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the
flesh. For the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary
to the flesh. These are contrary one to another, so that you do not what ye
would: But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the law. The
deeds of the flesh are manifest which are these aduoutry, fornication,
uncleanness, wa^tonnes, ydolatry, wytchcrafte, hatred, variau^ce, contencion,
wrath, strife, sedition, sects, envy, murder, dronkennes, glotony, and such
like, of which I tell you before (as I have told you in time past) that they
which commit such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven Thus you
perceive that to ye enjoying of the death, and passion of Christ, these two
points are requisite of our behalf, the one, to believe rightly, the other, to
live vpryghtlye, which two points, no man is able otherwise to know (except
it be by special revelation from God) but only by the catholic church,
which catholyke church, our savior Christ has appointed, to be the only
scoole, for all men to come and repair unto, to learn such truth, as is mete
for them to know, for the attayning of everlasting life. This catholic church,
and no other company, has ye true understanding of scripture, and the
knowledge of all things necessary to salvation. To this church, Christ makes
promis, in ye.xvi. of John, Ioh. 16.
saying: When that spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you al truth. To
this church also he makes that other promis, written in the.xxviii. of
Matthew, where he says: Math. 28.
Behold I am with you, to the end of the world. This Catholyke church, thus
governed by the holy Ghost, and assisted always, of Christ him self, never
yet failed, from the time of the Apostles, hitherto, ne shall fayl, to ye
worlds end, nether can it be deceived in any necessary truth, according as
Christ promyseth in the.xvi. of Mathewe, Math. 16.
saying. That hell gates shall not prevail against the church. where, by hell
gates he means error, as if he had said, that the catholyke church shall
never be overcome with error. For this cause S. Paul in the third chapter
of his first epistle to Timothe, Timoth. 1.
calls the catholic church, the pillar and ground of truth. This catholic
church, must in all ages needs be an open known church, and such a company,
as among which, the truth is openly preached, else Christ would not have
said, (as it is written in the.v. of Mathewe) A city that is set on a hyl,
Math 5
can not be hyd, nether do men light a candel, and put it under a bushel but on
a candelstycke, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. Wherefore
they do great injury to Christ, which say, that the catholyke church is an
unknown church, seeing it is that city, which our savior there meant, and
that candell, of which he there speaks. So many as deuyde them selves from
this open known Church of Christ, and refuse the doctrine thereof, though
they be never so diligent in readyng of scripture, yet shall they never truly
understand scripture, but run continually farther and farther into error,
and ignorance, eue^ as a man that is once out of his way, the farther, and
faster he goes forth, the more he loses his labor. 2. Peter 1
Saint Peter therefore in the first Chapter of his second epistle, gives us a
most certain and sure rule, which if we follow, we shall not fail, ryghtly to
understand scripture: his rule is this. We have (says he) A right sure word
of prophecy, whereunto if ye take heed, as unto a light yt shines in a dark
place, you do well, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your
hearts. So that you first know this, that no prophecy in ye scripture has
any private interpretation. For ye scripture came never by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost. Here you se, how
saint Peter wills every man, first of all, to know, that scripture must be
understood after the general meaning of Christ's church, and not after the
private interpretation of any several man, or company: And in the third
chapter of the same Epistle, 2. Peter. 3
he says further, that in S. Paul's epistles, are many things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, do peruerte, as
they do also the other scriptures, to their own destruction: ye therefore
beloved (seeing you be warned before hand) beware, least ye, with other men, be
also plucked a way through the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
steadfastness. Lo here S. Peter tells the very cause, why men mysvnderstand
scripture, which is lack of knoweledge, and lack of constancy, when men
either through ignorance, or thoroughe inconstancy, swerue from the catholyke
meaning, and follow pryuate interpretation. Such men, he says, do peruerte
the scriptures to their own destruction. Saint Paul also writing to Tymothe,
and willing him to be earnest in the study of scripture, 1. Timo 9
gives him withal this foresaid rule, saying in the very end of his first
epistle: O Timothy, keep sure that, which is committed to thy custody, and
avoid new fangled terms, and bosting of science, falsely so called, which
science while some did profess, they have erred from the faith. The thing,
which S. Paul says was committed to Timothies custody, was the truth of the
catholyke faith, which he says, some fell from, by reasone of new fangled
terms, and by reason also, that they took upon them knowledge, being in deed
ignoraunte. And in the third chapter of his second epistle to Timothy, 2.
Timothei. 3
he farther says. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned which
also were committed unto the. S. Ireneus also (a blessed martyr, and very nyghe
to the time of the Apostles, a man of great learning, and no less virtue, and
such a one, as by the consent of all men, had the perfyt knowledge and
understanding of scryptures) in his third book against Valentyne the arche
heretyke, and in the fowrth chapter of the same book says, Ireneus in his
third book against Valentine, chap. 4.
touching the catholyke church in this manner. We must not seek ye truth among
other, seeing we may easily take it of the church, for as much as the Apostels
have fully left with it (as in a rych tresury) all truth, yt who so lists,
may thence take the drinks of life, for this is the enter to life. All other
are thieves, and robbers, wherefore them must we avoid: and that doctrine that
the church teaches, we must love, and with great diligence embrace the
tradition of the truth. For what and if a controversy should happen to rise
upon never so small a question ought not men in that case to have recourse to
the most ancient churches, in which the Apostles were conuersaunt, and there
learn the truth in that controversy? ye, what and if the Apostles had left
behind them no writing at all, must we then not have followed the order of
tradition, delivered by them to such as they committid the churches unto? to
which tradition many barbarous nations, believing in Christ, do give credit,
with out any other writing, then that which is in their hearts written. All this
writes Ireneus, and within a little after he says. If to these barbarous
nations, any man should preach in their own language, these inventions of
heretics, by and by they would stop their ears, and fly as far as they
could from him and not once here his blasphemous talk, thus says S. Ireneus.
Now if christen people at this present, would follow this trade, which this
blessed martyr here speaks of, the^ should no man run into heresy, but al
me^ should cleue fast unto ye wholesome doctrine of the catholic church, and
abhor and detest, whatsoever any precher would utter unto the^, contrary to
the same. For whosoever preaches any doctrine, not agreeable to ye general
received doctrine in the open known church, he it is, and such as be like to
him, of who^ our savior bids us to beware, saying in ye.vii. of Mathewe.
Beware of false prophets, Math. 7
which come to you in shepes clothing but inwardly they are rauenynge wolves.
Our savior calls them wolves, for yt they devour ye souls, of so many as
give credit unto the^, he says fardar of them, that they come in lambs
skins, because they pretend the word of God, and therewith bleare the eyes of
poor simple men, and make them believe, that it is as they say, where in deed,
whatsoever is taught contrary to that, that al christendom openly teaches,
and from time to time has taught, is false, and cannot possible be true,
unless we would say, yt christ him self were not true. For he promyseth yt him
self will be for ever with ye church, and yt the holy ghost, shall for ever
govern the same. Forasmuch than, as there is no other schole on the earth, for
men to learn their duty, toward God, and the world, but the catholyke
church: nor no other doctrine, auayleable to eternal life, but that which
the catholyke church teaches, therefore all christian people are required, to
make a solemn vow at their baptism, to believe the catholyke church. And he
that so does, is in an assured trade of salvation, if in his conversation, he
follow the same, but contrarywyse, he that believes it not, is in a most
certain estate of everlasting dampnation. Wherefore, that you may know,
what the catholyke church does in all points believe, there shall be hereafter
particularly, set forth unto you, the several matters, requisite to be believed,
and practiced of all Christen people, that no man, may have just cause
hereafter, to pretend ignorance, but all men being sufficiently instructed,
may, by following such doctrine, attain to everlasting life, which send
unto us all, the blessed trinity, the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
to whom be all honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor. Arch. London.
An Homely of Christian love, or Charity.
FOrasmuch as the pithe, and sum, of all things, which be contained, either
in the law, or in the prophets, does stand, and consist, in the love of God,
and in the love of our neighbor, as our savior Christ does plainly
testifye, in the.xxii. Chapter of saint Mathewe, Math. 22.
saying, One of the Pharisees being a doctoure of the law, te^pting, did ask
him, and say, master, what is the great commandment in ye law? Jesus,
answering, said unto him. Thou shalt love thy Lord God, with all thy heart,
with al thy soul, and with all thy hole mind, this is (says he) the
greatest, and first commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou
shalt love thy neighbor, as thy self, and of these two commandments all the law does hang, and the Prophets. And forasmuch also, as we can not
love God well, except we do love our neighbor, in a due order ne yet love
our neighbor well, except we do love God, in that due order, that we
ought to do, (Saint Ihon the Evangelist so testifyeng, and declarynge, John.
3. and 4.
in the third and fourth Chapiters of his first canonical Epistle.) And
finally, forasmuch as he that loves not after this sort, is (by the
testimonye of the said saint John, in the said third Chapter) judged to be
in death, therefore it is right expediente, and necessary, to have always
this love, which now in our vulgar tongue, and common talk, is often named,
by the name of Charity, but very megerly, and coldely practiced, and set
fourth in deed, as it should be. And of truth, if we would judge
vpryghtly, and well, we ought to say, that of all things that be good, to be
taught unto Christen people, there is nothing more necessary to be spoken of,
and daily called upon, then charity: as well for that all manner of works of
righteousness, be contained in it, as also, that the decay thereof, is the
ruin of the world, the banyshement of virtue, and the cause of all vice. And
forasmuch, as almost every man makes, and frames to him self a charity,
after his own appetyte, and how detestable so ever his life be, both unto
God, and man, yet he persuades with him self still, that he has charity:
Therefore you shall hear now a true, and plain descripcion of charity, not
of men's ymagination, but of the very words, and example of our savior
Jesus Christ. In which description, every man (as it were in a glass) may
consider him self, and see plainly, without error, whether he be in the true
Charity or not.

charity is to love God, with all our heart, withal our life, with all our
powers, and with all our strength. With all our heart, that is to say, that our
hearts, mind, and study, be set to believe his word, to trust in him, and
to love him above all other things, which we do love best in heaven or in
earth. With all our life, that is to say, that our chief joy, and delight,
be set upon him, and his honor, and our hole life given unto the service
of him, above all things: with him to live, and with him to dye, yea, and to
forsake all other things, rather then him. For he that loves his father or
mother, son, or daughter, house or la^d, more then me (says Christ) is not
worthy to have me. With all our powers, that is to say, that with our hands,
and feet, with our eyes, and ears, our mouths and tongues, and with all
other parts and powers, both of body and of soul, we should be given to the
keeping, and fulfyllynge of his commandments. This is the first, and the
principal part of charity, but it is not the whole. For charity, is also to
love every man, good, and evil, friend, and fooe: And what soever cause be
given to the contrary, yet nevertheless, to bear good will, and heart unto
every man, to use our selves well unto the^, as well in words, and
countenance, as in all our outeward acts, and deeds. For so Christ him self
taught, and so also he performed in deed. And of this love that we ought to
have amongst our selves, each to other, he instructs us thus. (Matthew. v.)
You have hard it taught in times paste? Thou shalt love thy friend, and hate
thy fooe: but I tell you, love your enemies, speak well of them that diffame
you, and do speak evil of you: do well to them that hate you, pray for the^
that vex and persecute you, that you may be the children of your father, that
is in heaven. For he makes the sun to rise both upon the evil, and good,
and sends rain to the just, and to the unjust. For if you love them that
love you, what reward shall you have? Do not the publicans likewise? And if
you speak well only of them, that be your brethren, and derely beloved
friends, what great matter is that? do not the heathen the same also? These
be the very words of our savior Christ him self, touching the love of our
neighbor. And forasmuch as the Phariseis (with their most pestilent
traditions, false interpretacions, and gloses) had corrupted, and almooste
clerelye stopped up, this pure well, of Gods lively word, teaching that this
love, and charity, pertayned only to a man's friends, and that it was
sufficient for a man to love them which do love him, and to hate his fooes:
therefore Christ did open this well again, purged it, and scoured it, by
gyuynge unto his godly law of Charity, a true and clear interpretation,
which is this: that we ought to love every man, both friend, and fooe: adding
thereto, what commodity we shall have thereby, and what in commodity by dooynge
the contrary. What thing can we wysshe so good for us, as the heavenly
father, to repute, and take us, for his children? And this shall we be sure of
(says Christ,) if we love every man, without exception. And if we do
otherwise (says he,) we be no better tha^ Phariseis, Publicans, and heathen
persons, and shall have our reward with them: that is, to be excluded from
the number of gods elect children, and from his everlasting inheritance in
heaven. Thus of true Charity, Christ taught, that every man is bound to love
God above al things, and to love every man, friend, and fooe.

And thus likewise, he did use him self, exhorting his adversaries, rebukynge
the faults of his adversaries, and when he could not amend them, yet he
prayed for them. First he loved God his father, above al things, so much,
that he sought not his own glory, and will, but the glory, and will of his
father: John. 5.
I seek not (said he. John. v.) mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me: Nor he refused not to dye, to satysfye his fathers will, Math. 26.
saying. Math. xxvi. If it may be, let this cup of death goo from me, if not,
thy will be done, and not mine. He loved also not only his friends, but also
his enemies, which in their hearts did bear exceeding great hatred, against
him, and in their tongues spoke all evil of him, and in their acts, and
deeds, pursued him with al their might, and power, eue^ unto death. Yet all this
notwythstandynge, he withdrewe not his favor from them, but still loved them,
preached unto them, of love rebuked their false doctrine, their wicked living,
and did good unto them, patiently accepting what soever they spoke, or did,
against him. When they gave him evil words, he gave none evil again, when
they did stryke him, he did not smite again: And when he suffered death, he
did not slay them, nor threaten them, but prayed for the^, and referred all
things to his fathers will. And as a sheep that is led unto the shambles to be
slain, Esai. 53. Act. 8.
and as a lamb that is shorn of his flese, did make no noise, nor resistance:
even so went he unto his death, without any repugnaunce, or opening of his
mouth, to say any evil. Thus have I described unto you, what charity is,
as well by the doctrine, as by the example of Christ him self. Whereby also,
every man may without error, know him self, what state and condition he
stands in: whether he be in charity, (and so the child of the father in
heaven) or not. For, although almost every man persuades him self to be in
Charity, yet let him examyne none other man, but his own heart, his life, and
conversation, and he shall not be deceived, but truly decerne, and judge,
whether he be in perfyte charity, or not. For he that follows not his own
appetite, and will, but gives him self earnestly to God, to do all his will,
and commandments, he may be sure, that he loves God, above all things,
and else suerlye he loves him not, what so ever he pretend: John. 14.
As Christ said: If ye love me, keep you my commandments. For he that
knows my commandments, and does keep them, he it is (says Christ) that
loves me. And again he says: He that loves me, will keep my word, and my
father will love him, and we will both come to him, and dwell with him. And he
that loves me not, will not keep my words. And likewise, he that bears
good heart and mind, and uses well his tongue, and deeds unto every man,
friend, and fooe, he may know thereby, that he has charity. And then he is
sure also, that almighty God takes him for his dear beloved son, as Saint
Ihon says, in the third Chapter of his first canonical Epistle. Hereby,
manifestlye are known, the children of God, from the children of the devil.
For who so ever does not love his brother, belongs not unto God. But the
perverse nature of man, corrupt with sin, and destitute of Gods word, and
grace, thinks it against all reason, that a man should love his enemy, and
has many persuasions, which induces him to the contrary. Against all
which reasons, we ought as well to set the teaching, as the living of our
savior Christ, who loving us (when we were his enemies) does teach us to
love our enemies. He did patiently take for us many reproaches, suffered
beatynge, and most cruel death. Therefore we be no members of him, if we will
not follow him. For as S. Peter says, i. Peter. 2.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow him.
Furthermore we must consider, that to love our friends, is no more but that
which thieves, adulterers, homicides, and all wicked persons do: in so much
that Jews, Turks, Infidels, and all brute beasts, do love them that be
their friends, of whom they have their living, or any other benefytes. But to
love our enemies, is the proper condition only of them, that be the children
of God, the disciples and folowers of Christ. Notwithstanding, man's froward
and corrupt nature, wayeth over depely many times, the offense and displeasure
done unto him by enemies, and thinks it a burden intolerable, to be bound
to love them, that hate him. But the burden should be easy enough, if (on
the other side) every man would consider, what dyspleasure he has done to his
enemy again, and what pleasure he has received of his enemy. And if we
find no egall recompense, neither in receiving pleasures of our enemy, nor in
rendryng dyspleasure unto him again: then let us ponder the displeasures,
which we have done against almighty God: How often, and how grievously, we
have offended him. Whereof, if we will have of God forgyuenes, there is none
other remedy, but to forgive the offenses done unto us, which be very small
in comparison of our offenses done against God. And if we consider that be,
which has offended us, deserves not to be forgyuen of us, let us consider
again, that we much less deserve to be forgyuen of God. And although our
enemy deserve not to be forgyuen for his own sake, yet we ought to forgive
him, for gods love, considering how great, and manifest benefytes we have
received of him, without our deserts, and that Christ has deserved of us,
that for his sake, we should forgive them their trespasses, committed against
us.

But here may rise a necessary question, to be dyssolued. If charity require to
think, speak, and do well unto every man, both good and evil, how can
magystrates execute justice upon malefactors, with charity? How can they
cast evil men into prison, take away their goods, and sometime their lives,
according to laws: if Charity will not suffer them so to do? Hereunto is a
plain and brief answer, that plages and punishementes be not euel of
themselves, if they be well taken of innocents: and to an evil man, they are
both good and necessary: and may be executed according to charity, and with
charity should be executed. For declaracion whereof, you shall understand,
that charity has two offices, the one contrary to the other: and yet both
necessary to be used, upon men of contrary sort, and dysposition. The one
office of Charity, is, to cheryshe good, and innocent men. Not to oppress
them, with false accusations, but to encourage them, with rewards to do well,
and persevere in well dooynge: defending them with the sword, from their
adversaries. And the office of Bishops, and pastors, is to laud good men, for
well doing, that they may persevere therein, and to rebuke and correct, by the
word of God, the offenses, and crimes of all evil disposed persons.

The other office is, to rebuke, correct, and punysh, vice, without
acceptance of parsons, and this is to be used, against them only, that be
evil men, and malefactors. And it is as well the office of charity, to
rebuke, punyshe, and correct them, that be evil, as it is to cheryshe, and
reward them that be good, and innocent. Saint Paul so declares, writing to
the Romans, and saying, the high powers are ordained of GOD, Roma. 13.
not to be dreadefull to them that do well, but unto malefactors, to draw
the swoorde, to take vengeance of him that commytteth the sin. And saint
Paul byddeth Tymothye constantlye, i. Timo. 5
and vehementlye, to rebuke sin, by the word of GOD: So that both offices
should be dylygently executed, to impugn the kingdom of the devil: the
preacher with the word, and the Gouernoure with the swoorde. Else they love
neither God, nor them whom they govern, if for lack of correction, they
wylfully suffer God to be offended, and them whom they govern to perish. For
as every loving father corrects his natural son, when he does amysse, or
else he loves him not: So all governors of Realms, Countries, Towns, and
houses, should louynglye correct them, who be offenders under their
governance.

And cheryshe them who do live innocently: if they have any respect, either
unto God, and their office, or love unto them, of whom they have governance.

And such rebukes, and punyshementes, of them that do offend, must be done
in due time, least by delay, the offender fall headlinges into all manner of
myschiefe, and not only be evil theimselues, but also do hurt unto many
men, drawing other by their evil example, to sin, and outrage, after them.
As one thief may both rob many men, and also make many thieves, and one
sediciouse person may allure many, and noye a hole town or country. And such
evil persons, that be so great offenders of god, and the common wealth,
charity requires to be cut of, from the body of the common weal, lest they
corrupt other good, and honest persons: like as a good surgeon cutteth away a
putrifyed, and festred member, for the love he has to ye hole body, least it
infecte other members, adioynynge to it. Thus it is declared unto you, what
true charity, or christian love is, so plainly, that no man need to be
deceived. Which love whosoever keeps, both toward God (whom he is bound
to love above al things) and also toward his neighbor, as well friend as
fooe, it shall surely keep him from all offense of God, and just offense of
man. Therefore bear well away this one short lesson, that by true christian
charity, God ought to be loved, above all things, and all men ought to be
loved, good and evil, friend, and foo, and to al such we ought (as we may)
do good: those that be good, of love we ought to encorage, and cherysh,
because they be good: And those that be evil, of love, we ought to procure unto
them their correction, and dew punyshement, that they may thereby, either be
brought to goodness, or at the lest, that god, and the common welthe may be the
less hurt, and offended, hating always, the vice, or offense, but loving
the person always, as the creature of God, and as one who by nature is joined
in kynred unto us. And if we thus direct our life, by christian love and
Charity, then Christ doothe promise, and assure us, that he loves us, and
that we be the Children of our heavenly father, and reconciled to his favor,
being very members of Christ, and that after the short time, of this present
and mortal life, we shall have with him, eternal life, in his everlasting
kingdom of heaven: Therefore to him, with the father, and the holy Ghost, be al
honor and glory, now and ever Amen.

E. B.
An Homely declaryng how dangerous a thing, the breach of Charity is
Our Savior Christ in ye.v. of Matthew, sets forth an universal doctrine,
Math. 5.
that is, a doctrine, apperteyning indifferently to al Christen me^, and there
he declares, how great perfection of life, ought to be in one of us, saying
in this manner. Nisi abundauerit iustitia uestra plus quam Scribarum, and
Pharisaeorum, non intrabitis in regnum coelorum. That is to say: Except your
righteousness excede the righteousness of the Scribes, and the Phariseis, ye
cannot enter into the kyngedome of heaven. For the right understanding of
which words, it is to be noted, that righteousness in this text, does
signifye all kind of virtue, and goodness, and that by the Scribes, and
Phariseis, Christ does here mean, certain companies, which were among the
Jews, and did live according to the letter of Moses law, so vpryghtly, in
the face of the world, that they were commenly taken for parfyt men.
Oecumenius, Oecumenius upon the fifte of Mathevve.
an ancient father of ye greek church, does so declare the foresaid words.
Wherefore, when our savior requires of us, that we, in righteousness, should
pass the Scribes and Phariseis, he means, that we Christen folk should not
only outwardely, seem good in the sight of the world, (as did the Scribes,
and the Phariseis,) but inwardlye also in our hearts, should be likewise good,
in the sight of almyghtye God, which they were not. And because no fault is
more greuouse, then the breach of Christen Love, and Charity, therefore
immediately after the foresaid general sentence, he instructs us, before all
other things, in our duty, touching Charity, saying: Dictum est antiquis,
non occides, qui autem occiderit, reas erit iudicii, Ego autem dico nobis, quia
omnis qui irascitur fratrisuo, reus erit iudicio. That is to say: It was said
to them of old time, Thou shalt not sleye whosoever does sley, shall be in
danger of judgment. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his
brother, shall be in danger of judgment. Behold, good Christian people, how
perfect a charity Christ requires in us. For to us he makes the least
breach of Charity, as dangerous, as in old time, was the greatest breach
to the Jews. The greateste breach of Charity, is murdre, and the punyshmente
thereof amongst the Jews, was judgment. The least breach of Charity, is
anger, and yet the punyshme^t appointed for it to us Christians, by our
sauyoure him self, is likewise judgment. How great difference of life then,
I pray you, must be between us, now living under the new law, and them that
of old time, lived under the old law, that is under ye law of Moses, when
as, the self same pain that was then prescrybed unto them, for the highest
degree of uncharitableness, is now dew to us, for the lowest degree thereof?
How is it that men flatter themselves, with the pleasant name of Christian
liberty, and think that, because Christ says in the xi. of Matthew. Mathe.
11.
Iugum meum suaue est, et onus meum leave. That is to say. My yoke is sweet,
and my burden light, that therefore such streytnes of life, and paynefull
travel is not required of us, as was before time of the Jews? True it is in
deed, that Christen men are not at this present, bound to be cyrcumcysed, or
to offer up unto almyghtye GOD, calves, oxen, sheep, and Gotes, or to goo
thryse a year to Jerusalem, or to forbear swynes flesh, or to keep other
like observations of Moses law, but as touching the ten commandments,
and all moral Precepts contained in the old testamente, we Christians are
bound to the observation of them, and of all other things, belongyng to the
estate of the new testamente, and so bound, as that in perfourmance, and
fulfyllynge of them, we must be much more perfyt, and more exact, then ever
was the Jews in obeyng Moses law. Nether is the yoke of Christ called
sweet, nor his burden light, for any ease or remission, that we may take in
our condition, but for two other consyderations, of which the one is, the
abundance of grace, given now in the time of the new testamente, far
exceeding, the measure of grace given to the Jews, following Moses law: the
other is, the greatness of reward, promised to us, above the Jews, as
witnesses among many other aunciente fathers, Oecumenius also, Oecumenius
upon the fifte of Mathevve.
who writing upon the v. of Matthew, says after this sort. Quoniam infantia
in virilem iam transierit etatem, et copiosa hominibus data sit gratia, et
maxima proposita sunt premia (neque enim iam possessio terrae terrenorum, quam
bonorum, aut prolis faecunditas aut longa vita, seu victoria contrahostes
promittitur, sed regnum caeloru^, adoptio et victoria contra daemones) merito
magna exiguntur certamina. That is to say. Forasmuch as now, infancy is
passed into man's age, and grace is plenteouslye given to men, and most
greatest rewards are promised (for now nether possession of earth, and
earthlye gooddes, nor long life, nor fecundite of children, nor victory
against our mortal enemies, is promised, but the kingdom of heaven,
adoption to God, and victory against deuels) therefore of good reason, great
fyghtes are required of us. Thus says Oecumenius, concludynge that we christen
men must more painfully, and manfully, fight against our ghostly enemy, then
did the Jews, because we receive more grace then they received, and have
promise made to us of greater rewards, the^ they had made to them. For these
two causes, we christen men must think the yoke of Christ, sweet, and his
burden easy, be the things which are required of us, never so hard to do, as
this is one, that we may not break charity, so much as in the lowest degree
that can be, that is in anger: which word, in the foresaid place of Matthew,
does sygnify, a violation, or breach of charity, not uttered or showed forth
by any sign, but only conceived secretlye in the heart, and there lyenge hyd,
from knowledge of man, but open, and manifest to the eye of almighty God, who
seyth eue^ the inward thoughts of the heart: this breach of charity,
though it feme to many a small fault, yet Christ declares it to be a
greuouse fault, and makes it in the pain, equal with murder, committed of
old time by the Jews. Now if Christen men, having conceived anger in their
hearts, do not by and by suppress the same, but proceade to a fardar breach
of charity, that is, to utter their anger by any sign or token, than is this
there faut greater then the other, and the punyshemente due for the same,
greater also, according to the words of Christ, who in the.v. Math. 5.
of Matthew says. Qui aute^ dixerit Racha, reus erit concilio, (that is to
say. He that says to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of counsel. Where,
by Racha, we must understand an outewarde sign, uttered by the mouth with
breach of charity, and yet such a sign as does sygnifye, no express or
particular reproach as, to thou our brother, or to tushe at him. And by council
we must understand a greater punyshement, then was judgment. After this our
savior proceeds to the third degree of uncharitableness, which is in word
to call our neighbor, by any evil name, as to call him fool. Of this third
degree, Christ says. Qui autem dixerit fratri suo fatue, Math. 5.
reus erit gehennae ignis, that is to say. He that calls his brother fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire.

Behold Chrystian people, your life in this lesson, as in a glass, and you
shall see what danger you stand in. Who is there almoost amongst us, but yt
uncharitably calls his neighbor fool, or some like evil name? yea who is
there in manner that does not far pass this degree of uncharitableness? And yet
our savior names no mo degrees, partly, because the pain of this third
degree being hell fire, no greater pain could be named, for such as should
pass the same degree: partly, because the Chrystyan man should at the least be
so wary, and circumspecte, in keeping of brotherly love, and charity, yt
though he did, perchance so far forgette himself, as to call his brother
fool uncharitably, yet fardar than so, he should not so much as think,
throughout his whole life. It is written of one Solon an infidel, Cicero in
his oration for sext Roscius, Amer inus.
but yet a very politic man, how when he made laws for the government of ye
famous city of Athe^s, he in all his laws, appointed no punishment for a
parricide, that is for such a one, as should kill his father or mother: and
when he was demanded, why he provided not for that case, he answered, yt he
verily, thought and believed, that no one being brought up in Athens, under
his laws, would at any time attempt such an heinous sin. Even so may we
say of our savior, that he speaks but of those foresaid three degrees of
uncharitableness, for that it is not lykely, christen men, being traded in
Christ's most parfyt religion, would at any time proceed in the violatyng of
charity, fardar then so. But here may be moved a question whether our savior
has so forbidden us to be angry, to say Racha, or thou fool, one to an
other, that in no wise any man may so do, but thereby he falls in danger of
judgment, of council, or of hell fire. For answer to this question, it is to
be noted, that our savior in this place, forbids us all kind of
uncharitableness, and nothing else. Forasmuch then, as in ye third of Mathewe.
Math. 3,
S. Ihon Baptist calls the scrybes and pharisees, adders broad, and S. Paul
calls the Galathians fools, Gala. 2.
and men without understanding, in the second chapter of his epistle written
to them: Luc, 24,
yea Christ himself in the.xxiiii. of Luke calls his dear beloved apostles,
fools, and sloo of belefe, and the thing which they did, cannot be judged
uncharitable, therefore we must say, that when such as have authority, upon
a good and Godly zeal, rebuke trespassours, and offenders, thereby to make
them ashamed of there evil doings, and the rather to leave the same, that this
kind of rebuking is laweful, and in no wise meant in the foresaid talk of
Christ. But the only thing that is there forbidden, is the breach of
charity, when one man means no good at all, to an other, but for the only
satisfyeng of his uncharitable heart, wysheth him hurt in his heart, or
vtteryng his secret uncharitable mind, does thou him, or tushe at him, or
finally speaks contumelious words, expressly unto him, calling him, fool,
idiot or by other like opprobrious names: Wherefore to conclude, saying you
now know what parfytte love and charity, our savior Christ does require to
be in us, let all accustomed rancor and malice from henceforthe be utterly
banyshed from amongst us, that we dwelling in charity, may dwell in God, and
have here in this life, GOD dwell in us, and in the world to come, dwell in
heaven with him for ever, which grant unto us, the blessed trinity, the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all honor and glory world
without end. Amen

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professor. Arch. London,
An Homely of the church, what it is, and of the commodity thereof.
Whosoever (good people) will call to his remembrance, ye inestimable goodness
of almightye God, and his inestimable mercy, toward us nothing deserving the
same: if there be any spotte of heavenly grace, in that person, he shall be
ashamed of his own unthankfulness, and disobediens, and be compelled to fall
down in body, and soul, before our Lord, to ask pardon for his
transgression. Of the which goodness, and mercy of God, you have a sufficient,
and most evident declaration, in these godly, and devout homelies, that are
set fourth to you, of the creation, and redemption of man: Nevertheless, for
your further instruction, and ghostlye comfort in this behalf, I have thought
good to let you understand, an other hye benefyte, given to us, by our
savior, and redemer, Jesus Christ, that we, having perfyt knowledge of God,
may evermore praise, and magnifye him, according to our most bounden duetye.
And this hye, and heavenly benefyte, is the holy catholyke church, which
our dear, and dreadful Savior, both before, and after his paynefull death,
did ordeyne, and appoint, to be for ever to us, a most loving, and tender
mother, a perpetual preservation for our soul health, and a pyllar of truth, in all our doubtful dangers. Which church, forsomuche as it has been latelye
assaulted, by sundry sects, and heresies, and so sore shaken, that many (more
is the pytie) has separate them selves from the same, and wylfully have run
a straye, being led, and carried with every wave, and wind of new learning,
I purpose, by Gods grace, to open shortly to you, what this church is,
what manner of church it is, and what commodity we have by it.

First, the church is a convocation of all people throughout the whole world,
professynge one faith of God, and one use of all the holy sacraments: which
church, because it is purchased, and sanctified, by the death of our Sauyoure
Jesus Christ, it is most derely beloved to God the father, and is called in
holy Scripture, by most hie, and excellent names, as Corpus Christi Sponsa
Christi, Regnum coelorum. etc. that is to say: The body mystical of Christ,
the spouse of Christ, the kyngedome of heaven. For S. Paul, speaking of
Christ, faith: Ephesians. 4.
That he has appointed sundry officers, to maintain the holy ones, into the
work of ministration, to the edifieng of the body of Christ. And king
Solomon, taught by the holy ghost, did forsee the dignity, and beutye of this
holy church, and said in the name of GOD therebye.

Vna est columba mea, perfecta mea. That is to say: One is my dooue, Cantic. 4.
and my perfyt one. With many other such loving words: as my sister, my spouse
etc. And saint Paul byddeth husbands to love there wives, Ephesians, 5
even as Christ loved the church, Likewise in the holy Gospel, our savior
Christ, does compare the church, to sundry things, under the name of the
kingdom of heaven, Math. 20
as unto a king, which made a marriage for his son: sometimes to ten
Vyrgynes, Math. 25
and many such other: by all which names, and callyngs, we may learn that the
church is a high and excellent thing, and dearly beloved to almighty God, who
for his church sake, did give his only son, to most vile death, and for ye
which also he has prepared the kingdom of heaven.

Now, forasmuch as we read of an other church in the holy scripture, which
is called Ecclesia malignantium, Psalm. 25,
The church of the malingnant and noughtye people. And yet of late, a great
number of scismaticall persons, being in very deed members of this malygnant
church, have usurped to the^ selves the name of the true church: I intend to
give you sufficient instruction, to dyscerne and know the true church of
Christ, from all heretical and scysmaticall congregations. First this holy
and true church of Christ, is called in our Creed, as it is in deed, the
catholyke church. That is to say, the universal church, because it is not
lurkyng in any corner, or any one country, but is in all countries dyspersed:
neither is this catholyke church, hid from us, or invisible, or unknown: but
we may easily dyscerne, and know the same. For christ does call it, Ciuitatem
supra montem. A city upon an hill. Math. 5.
And in the Gospel of Saint Mathewe also, teaching the order of brotherly
reconciliation, he says. If thy brother trespass against the, go and tell
him his fault, between him, and the alone, but if he hear not the, Math. 18
yet take with the one or two: if he hear not them, than tell the church. Oh
Lord, how shall he tell ye church, if it be not known, as the evil do
contend Likewise Saint Paul speaking, to the preystes, and elders at Ephesus,
Actu, 20.
does warn the^ to take heed to them selves, and to all the flock, among
whom the holy ghost (says he) has placed you to rule the church of God.
Thus plainly the scripture declares that the catholyke church, is and ought
to be, manyfestly known, yet lest you should any thing doubt of the
understanding of these scryptures, hear I beseech you, how plainly, Saint
Augustyne, does write hereof. Sicut per uerba dei nouimus, ubi sit pla^tatus
paradisus: sic per uerba Christi, ubi sit ecclesia, didicimus. Contra Petil.
lib, 2. Cap. 13.


As by the words of God we know where paradyse was planted, so by the words
of Christ, we have learned, where the church is. Mark here (good people) that
Saint Austen, in this place, does write, against an heretic, being one of the
donatyste sect: who denying the catholyke church, did ascrybe the faith, of
christ, and al salvation, to them selves only, being a small part of Aphrica,
like as all scismatical congregations, in this late time, have done: some
saying in germany, here is Christ, here is the church: some in. Heluetia, here
is christ, here is the church: other in Bohem, here is Christ, here is the
church: and we in England, here is christ, and here is the church. Whereof
every one dyssentyng, from an other, and that in matters of great weight, does
declare, that the spyryte of God, which is the spirit of truth, and unity,
promised by Christ, to the catholyke church, does not lead nor govern such
sects: neither ought they to maintain, and set forth, false doctrine, to the
people, under the name of the church, yet saint Austen in ye same place,
addyth his, or rather gods threatnyng, Ibidem.
saying, Ab isto uniuerso, ad partem, quamlibet, quisquis separat hominem, ille
diaboli filius, and homicida conuincitur. Whosoever does separate one man, from
this whole, to any part: he is proved to be the son of the devil, and a
very manqueller. Alas than in what heavy case, are those, that have separate
from the catholyke church, not one man only, but many thousands? surely in
heavy and miserable case: unless, they do speadelye and in due time repent,
and do penance. Moreover to know more manyfestly, the catholyke church, of
Christ, we ought to consider what Saint Paul writes, of the foundation
thereof. For all scismatycall congregations, though they ground them selves,
apparently, upon the holy scripture, yet have they there profession,
severally, taken, of some noughty man, as saint Augustyne says They are called
every one by proper names, August de. uitilitate. cred. Cap. 7.
which they dare not deny. But the catholyke church though heretykes have
named it papysticall, yet received it never any other name, but catholyke, and
chrystian: but al me^ that read, may se how gloriously, some have vsyd the name
of Marchion. Ebion, Arrianus, Manicheus. Pelagius. Donatus. and in our time
likewise the name of Luther, Zwinglius, Carolstadius, with thousands such
other: which heretical fashion S. Paul does rebuke, in his epistle to the
Corinthyans, who were even in like case: and bostyng upon men said, Ego Pauli,
Ego apollo. I hold of Paul, 1 Cor 3
and I of Apollo. But the holy apostle rebukes them saying. As long as there
is among you, envying and strife, or sects, are you not carnal? So that
every christen man, and woman, may plainly se by the scripture, that these
having such division, and sundry sects among them selves, are by S. Paul,
accounted altogether carnal, and far unworthy to use the name of the church,
which is the only, and chaste spouse, of Christ. Ephesians. 2
But of the catholyke church, saint Paul says: Now therefore, ye are not
strangers, and foreyners: but you are citisens with the saynctes, and of the
household of God, and are builded upon the foundation of the Apostles, and
prophets, Jesus Christ him self being the head corner stone. And further,
because saint Paul through the holy Ghost in him, did forsee, that all
heretykes would callenge to them selfs the authority of the Apostles, and
prophets, and that they would with out authority or knowledge, wraste their
writings, every one to there own sense: therefore this holy apostle, Ephesians, 4
in the same epistle, tellyth us the order which Christ has appointed to be
observed in his church: for he says, that Christ ascending into heaven, did
give gifts to men, and that he made some apostles, some prophets, some
Euangelystes, some shepardes, and teachers, declarynge thereby, that in the
catholyke church, there are orders, and officers, some hyer, some lower, whom
the rest ought both diligently to hear, and humbly to obey. So did the same S.
Paul, 1 Timot 4 Tit. 1
before his death, apoint Timothe, to the office of a Bishop, and also Tite
he did leave in Creta, that he should ordeyne prestes in every city, which
preistes, and Bishops should not be dysdained, or little regarded (as in this
time of many they are) but they should (dooyng there duty) have double
honor, and faithfully govern the church, Actuo, 20 Tit. 2
as saint Paul says. And writing to Tite, he byddeth him exhort, and rebuke,
with all feruentnes of commau^dyng, by these places of the holy scripture, you
may easily see, and understand: that in the catholyke church, there are and
ought to be degres and orders, and that whosoever does break, contemn, or
deny the same, he denies and forsakes the very truth, and ordinance of
Christ, and his Apostles.

Now further, we ought to consider, that as S. Paul did ordeyne Timothe, and
Tyte, yea and other bishops, and Preistes, in his time, so they by his
commandment, did in their time, ordeyne other, delyueringe also to them, the
doctrine which they have received of Paul, and by contynuall discurse of
time, every one has delivered the faith, that they from the Apostles have
received, and so even from Christ, to this present day, one faith has ever
stand steadfast. Which though it has sundry times been assayde, and sore
pynched, yet ever has it prevailed at the last, and had the upper hand,
according to Christ's promise, Math. 16
neither ought any man less to credyt the catholic church, because there are
in the same, diverse evil, and wicked sinners. For Christ him self, Math 13
does compare the church to a net, cast into the sea, which takes both
good and bad fyshes, but at the end, the good shall be reserved, and the evil
cast away. Was not twelve chosen by Christ, yet one of them, he calls a
devil? Does not Christ also say, Math 23.
that Scribes and Phariseis, do sit in Moses chair, nevertheless, he would
the people should obey their lessons? Even so, though some members of Christ's
catholyke church, do not live according to their vocatyon, yet ought no man
therefore the less to regard the faith and doctrine of the same church.
These things, good people, though they are sufficient, to declare the holy
Church, what it is, and how it may be known, yet I beseech you most
diligently, to note, and carye away one rule, which shall never deceive you,
but is a sure trial of the catholyke church, and the faith thereof. This rule
is not mine, but taken out of a learned, ancient, and right godly father in
Christ's Church. He says There are three means to try a church, Vincentius
Lirenensis.
or doctrine, the first is antiquity, the second, is universality, the
third, is unity. By the first, we are taught, that a true doctrine must be
known, by that it is not lately spronge up, or risen, but comes from Christ,
and his apostles, and has continued still in the church. By the second, we
may understand, that a true faith, or doctrine of the church is that only,
which vnyuersallye, in all countries has been taught, and believed. By the
third we ought to learn, that a true doctrine, or faith of the church, does
always agree, and is always one. Now those three things well noted, may
instruct and teach any Christen man, to know the catholyke church, which
ever since the Apostles time, and in all countries, with one consent (in all
things concerning our faith) has showed her self the worthy spouse of Christ.
Contrary wise, false doctrine, and heresye, ever has done, and shall do to
the worlds end, lately arise, and lurk in private corners, and never agree
with itself. Which things I might easelye at large prove, and open to you, by
plain and manifest demonstration. But because in the next homely, I intend
to speak of the authority of the church, and also of the commodity, and
profit that we have by the same, here I will make an end, Roma. 12
besechyng all you (good and godly people) to give your bodies, and souls, an
humble and holy sacryfyce to almyghtye God, prayinge evermore, that we may be
altogether lyuelye members, of our sauyoure Jesus Christ, and of his catholyke
church here upon earth, and after this life, partakers of the joyful
kyngedome of heaven, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
father, and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory world without end.
Amen.

H. Pendilton sacrae theologiae professoris.
An Homely, of the authority of the church, declarynge what commodity and
profit we have thereby.
Likewise, as in the last homelye, it was declared to you (good christen
people) what the church is, and how it may be known: so now ye shall
learn, the authority of the same catholyke church, and the commodity, or
profyt that ensues to us all, being members of the same church. First, when
our savior Jesus Christ, did send forth the twelve apostles to preach, who
were, and are, the chief, and pryncipall pyllers of this catholyke church, he
did give to them great power, and authority, as saint Mathewe bears wytnes,
Math. 10
saying: Jesus did call together the twelve disciples, and gave to them power
over unclean spirits, that they should cast them out, and should heal all
manner of diseases, and infirmities. And sondrye times we do read in the holy
Gospel, that our Savior Christ does speak to his Apostles, after this
manner. Qui uos audit, me audit, and qui uos spernit, me spernit. That is to
say: He that hears you, Mathe. 10.
hears me and he that dispiseth you, does despise me. Meaning, John. 13.
and willing thereby, that all the world should know and confess, the
authority of the catholyke church, which Christ him self did buyld in, and
upon these his holy Apostles. And to the same purpose he said to them, Iam non
dicam uos seruos, sed amicos etc That is to say Now I will no more call you
servants, John. 15
but friends: for all things that I have herd of my father, I have declared to
you. John. 20
And again he says: As my father sent me, even so I send you. By these, and
many such other places, we may see, that our loving savior, did give great
authority to his Apostles. But now it is expediente, and needful, to
declare, in what special points this aucthorytie does consyste, and that the
same aucthorytie was not only given to the Apostles of Christ, but also to
their successors, in the catholyke church, ever to endure. Which
authority, though it be great, and manyfolde, yet these are the chefest
parts thereof, that hereafter do follow. First, almyghtye God, has given
power, The church has the true sense of the scripture, and is judge thereof.
and authority, to the catholic church, to have the true sense, and
understanding, of the holy Scripture, yea, and to approve also, or reprove al
writing, as Scripture, or no Scripture. Which thing, good christen people,
you may well understand to be most true, if ye call to remembrance, who is
the guide, and governor of the church, that is to wit, the holy Ghost: as
Christ did promise, saying. Ego rogabo patrem et alium paracletum dabit
vobis, vt maneat vobiscum ineternum, John. 14.
that is to say, I will ask my father, and he will give to you an other
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. And after that our Lord and
savior had risen from death, he did breathe upon his Apostles, and said
Accipite spiritum sanctum Take you the holy ghost and also, John. 20.
after his ascension into heaven, according to his merciful promise, he did
send down the holy Ghost upon his Apostles, Act. ii.
as saint Luke writes. Now that the holy ghost was not given to the
Apostles only, but also to the catholyke church, to the worlds end, it is
manifest: forasmuch as Christ did promise the conforter, vt maneat vobiscum
inaeternum. That he should abide (says he) with you for ever. Now we are
most certain, John. 14
that the Apostles of Christ did suffer death, for the faith of Christ, and
that within few years, after they thus had received the holy ghost.
Nevertheless, Christ sending furthe his Apostles to preach, and baptyze, said
to the^: Math. 28.
Ecce ego vobiscu^ sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consu^matione seculi. That is,
Behold, I am with you at al times, even to the end of the world. Wherefore we
may plainly see, that the holy ghost being promised to the Apostles, to
abide for ever, and to the very end of the world, was promised and given to
them, and to their successors in ye church, where he does, and shall abide
for ever. Now forasmuch, as the holy ghost is the governor and ruler of the
catholyke church, we ought there only, and in no other corner, to search the
true understanding, and dyscernynge of the scryptures. And for this cause, the
aucient fathers (were they never so godly, and so well learned) yet would they
never presume upon their own judgments, but ever referred them selves, to
the understanding, and interpretacion of the catholyke church before them.
Therefore the godly learned, and ancient father Ireneus, Ireneus li. 3 capi. 4
writing against schismatic heresies, says thus. Quid enim si qui de
aliqua modica, questione disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret, in antiquissimas
recurrere, Ecclesias. etc. that is to say, but what and if there were
contencion concerning some small question, were it not necessary to return to
the most ancient churches, and immediately after, he says: Quid autem si
neque apostoli quidem scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem
sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt hijs, quibus committebant Ecclesias? What
(says this holy father) if the Apostles had left to us no scripture at all,
had it not been necessary to follow the order of that tradition, which they
delivered to those, to whom they did bequethe the church? Alas (good people)
how far are many in these days gone from this old, and ancient rule?
this blessed martyr, here exhorts, or, rather commands, that if any small
dyscorde, (though it be in a matter of little importance) do chance, that we
would not, according to our fantasy, judge therein, but though we have no
scripture for the same, yet (says he) we ought to follow, keep, and observe
the tradition of the aunciente churches. Where as in these late days, the
impudente procedars, have taught the zely people, that every man should, and
may be a judge of controuersyes, and that we ought to observe no tradition,
nor ceremonye, other than we find in the holy scripture. Of such, the same
holy Ireneus does speak thus, after many other notable lessons to the same
purpose. Omnes autem hij decidunt a veritate, Ireneus li. 4 Cap. 43.
et heritici quidem alienum ignem afferentes ad altar dei, id est, alienas
doctrinas, a celesti igne conburentur. etc. All these (says he) do fall from
the truth: and the heretykes truly, bringing strange fire to the altar of
God, that is to say, strange doctrine, shall be brent with the heavenly fire.
With such like threatenings in the same place, to those that disobey the
authority of the church. Likewise saint Augustyne speaking of the baptysme
of children, and how that sacrament, can profit them, seeing many die before
they know the effect of the same: affyrmeth, that the faith of those that
bring the child to christenynge, shall profit the child that is brought:
but for his probacion, August. de. li. arb. lib. 3. Cap. 23.
he brings this. Hoc commendat ecclesie saluberrima authoritas. This thing
the most wholesome aucthoritye of the church doethe commend. And even with
like reverence, the same saint Augustyne, does many times submytte all his
judgments, Epist. 7. In proemio Li. 3. De. Tri.
and works to the catholyke church. And finally to declare his judgment,
concerning the aucthoritye of the catholyke church. He says thus. Ego vero
Eua^gelio no^ crederem nisi me catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret authoritas, yt
is to say, Truly, August. contra epist. Manich. Capi. 3
I would not believe the Gospel, onles that the aucthoritye of the catholyke
church did move me thereto. And we ought here to consider, that after the
ascension of our savior Christ, for the space of certain years, there was
no gospel at all written: but all things, concerning the faithful
christians, were ruled, and governed by the dyscyples of Christ, being than,
the heads of the church. Afterward, we read that diverse of the dyscyples of
Christ, did write Gospelles: as saint Bartylmew, Nicodemus, and an other
Gospel was called Euangelium Nazareorum. But the authorite of the church, did
only admit those four evangelists: which now the whole church does
retain. Which thing might well seem marvelous, seeing that both saint
Bartylmew, and Nicodemus, were present, and did see the works of Christ, and
also did here his doctrine, where as saint Luke did learn his gospel of
saint Paul, and other, and so likewise did S. mark but hereby it does
most plainly appear, that the catholic church only, has this hye
aucthorite, to dyscerne scriptures, and that scriptures allowed by the church
should not be refused of any particulare persons. Now therefore, seeing that
the catholyke church, both has delivered, to us the scripture, and in all
ages and times, has been taken of all Godly learned men, for the true judge
thereof. I exhort, and beseech all you (good christen people), that in all
doutes, opinions, and controversies, ye would resort to the holy church, and
there learn what the same catholyke church has believed, and taught, from time
to time, concerning doutes, or controversies, and if with lowly and meke
hearts ye will so do, surely the holy ghost will instruct you, he will
comfort you, and he will lead you, into al truth. But if in such case, ye
will fly from the catholic church, and ask counsel of your selves, or of any
that does swerve from the said church, than for so much as the holy ghost is
not your guide, you shall fall from ignorance to error, and from doutyng, and
dysputyng, to plain heresy, and so from one, to another, to the utter
confusion, An other aucthoriti of the church.
of both body and soul. Yet beside this great authority of the church,
whereof you have heard, there is an other given by God, of most hye
excellencye, that is, power to forgive, and pardon, the penitent sinner, and to
punish, and correct, the obstinate or froward sinner: which power and
aucthorite, Leuit. 13.
as it was fygured in the preesthood of the old law, as in Judging of
leprose persons, and in punyshynge to death, those that did not obey the
priest: eue^ so is it given by our savior Christ in very deed, Deuteronomy. 17.
in the gospel, to his Apostles, and to all their successors. For after that
our savior had risen from death: he came among his Apostles, and brethed
upon them, and said Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum dimiseritis peccata,
John. 20.
dimittuntur eis, et quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt. (That is,) take you the
holy ghost, whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgyuen to them, and
whose sins you do retain, they are retained. Which aucthorite, by plain
words given by Christ, though some has, or do, contemn, and set at
naught, Ciril in John Lib. 12. capi. 20.
yet saint Cyrill byddeth them cease to merueyle, that Christ should give,
such power, for he says, Certe absurdum non est, peccata remitti posse ab
illis, qui spiritum sanctum in seipsis habeant. Surely, (says he) it is no
absurdyte, yt sins are forgyue^ by the^ which have ye holy ghost in the^.
Now if you will mark, that not the priest only, but also the holy Ghost
does work, in remitting, and pardonyng sins, than I trust you will see,
and grant, this authority of Christ's catholic church, which thing every
christen man does confess daily in his creed, saying, not only I believe the
holy catholyke church, the communion of saynctes, but addyth also, the
remyssion of sins, to be in ye same catholic church. i. Timo. 1.
Do not we read that saint Paul did use this authority, when he did
excommunicate Hymeneus and Alexander? did not the holy Bishop saint Ambrose,
use this authority in every point, upon the emperor Theodosius? Theodorit
Lib. 5. hist. Eccle. ca. 18
Which holy bishop perceiving the emperor had greuouslye offended, did not
spare to excommunicate him: yea and though he offered him self obedientlye to
be received, yet was it after long penance, that he was absolved, this holy
bishop did use the authority given to him by God, and this christen
emperor, knowing, the same, did with all humility obey. If the bishopes and
preistes in time past, and also the layitee, had learned and practsied there
duetyes and vocations, by this example, surely the church of Christ should
not have come to such great disordre as we see, neither should vice and
wyckednes, so freely have been vsyd: but because this matter, is largely and
lernedly, set fourth in the sacrament of penance, I will cease to speak any
more hereof, and now it remains to declare, what commodity and profytte we
have by this catholyke church, our lord and master christ in the gospel, of
saint John, John. 15.
does compare him self to the vine tree, and all us to the branches: and
says. Manete in me, et ego in vobis. Abide you in me, (that is to say, in
the faith of my church.) And I will abide in you. Oh mercyful Lord, what
comfort, and commoditye is this, for a christen man, to have Christ to abide
with him? And farther he says. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you,
ask what you will, and it shall be granted to you. Here are we sure, yt if we
abide in christ's catholic church, and embrace the faith, and doctrine
thereof, both Christ him self by grace, will abide in us, and also our
prayers, shall evermore be heard. And without all doubt, there is no abiding
in Christ, unless we abide in the unity of his catholyke church. For as saynct
Cipriane says: Ciprianus de simpli. prelat.
Non potest habere deum patrem qui non nouit Ecclesiam matrem: He cannot have
God his father, yt knows not the church to be his mother: But a child of
God, knowi^g ye church to be his mother, and lyinge in the bosom thereof, may
be sure that Christ the spouse of the church, Gene. 7.8.
will never forgette his needful requests. And as no lively creature, was
saved from death, but such only as were in the arcke of Noe, Genesis 7, 8.
so is there none saved from dampnation, but those that are in the unity of
Christ's church. And therefore, to give us warning, the holy doctoure
Saint Augustyne, speaks in this manner most plainly. Quisquis ergo ab hac
catholica ecclesia fuerit seperatus qua^ tu^ libet laudabiliter se uiuere
existimet, August. epist 152.
hoc folo scelere quod a Christi Vnitate disiunctus est no^ habebit uitam,
sedir a dei manet super cu^ That is in englysh, Whosoever therefore shall be
seperatid from this catholic church, although he think himself to live never
so worthily, yet for this only crime yt he is separated from ye unity of
Christ, he shall not have life, but ye wrath of god abides, upon him. But what
need is it, to allege saint Augustine, or any other ancient father herein,
seeing almighty God by his prophet Esaias, has set furthe to us a little picture
of his church, Esai. 5.
under the name of a vyneyarde, and the house of Israel? There may we see,
that thing that we by experience do know. For almighty God, in that parable
declares by his Prophet, how much he had done for the house of Israel, a
figure of Christ's church, in that he had planted them in a batsome, and
fruitful country, and had given to them good governors, and orders, wherein
they might have lived, and pleased him, but forasmuch as they did wylfullye
break the laws of God, and his ordinance, he threatened them saying: Auferam
sepem eius, et erit in direptionem. etc. Ibidem.
I will (says our Lord) take away the hedge of my vyneyarde, that it may
peryshe. Even so has our savior Christ dealed with us, ye people of his
church. For where as by his preciouse death and passion, he did purchase us,
and left us in the custodye of his catholyke church, as is before said,
leaving also to us, laws to observe, and sacraments, wherewith we should be
preserved. And we naughty people, have despised al his most godly, and wholesome
decrees, and ordinances, he has of his justice, and according to his
promise, even in our time punished us: and has suffered the wicked, to pluck
down the pale or hedge of his vineyarde: I mean all good order, as well in
the church, as in the common wealth, and that for the space of many years
paste. Now here christen people, though you do not consider the plage of
sundry sins, that has in this late scysme, possessed many men's souls,
yet do not dyssemble, nor forgette the miserye, that we all have suffered
outewardelye, since we were separate from the church of Christ: alas, what
Christen blood within this Realm, even by our own countreimen, has been
shed? Oh Lord, how many poor wydowes without comfort have been left? How
many fatherless children without soccoure? I leave here to speak, of the
vnshameles breaking of the dead men's testamentes, and their most godly
intentes, and ordinances: Abbais, are poulled down: Collegis, and Chantrees
are overthrown: churches are robbed, and poor Christ, (that is to say,) the
hungry, and needful people, famyshe, and cry out therefore. All these
surely, with many mo, have come upon us, because we have been out of the house
of God. Wherefore, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, let us all together
lament, and be sorry for our going astraye, let us come, and fall down before
God our father, and confess our transgression, and humblye desire, Luce. 15.
that we may be received into his house, which is the church, though we
should all the days of our lives, be but hyrelynges. Quia melior est dies
vnus in atrijs tuis super milia. Psalm 83.
One day (Oh Lord) is better spente in thy house than a thousand otherwise.

Fynallye if we contynew obedyente children, in the bosom of our mother, the
holy church: we shall be fed with lively faith, out of which will
spring in us, much holiness of life, and quietness of conscience: and if at
any time through our frailnes, we happen to fall, we have ready, to raise us
up again, the holy Sacraments: through the comfortable help whereof, we be
made strong: and so day by day more able to proceed in all kind of virtue:
and thus having upon earth our mother, the holy church, which is the
spouse of Jesus Christ the Son of God, we may be bold to call upon GOD our
father: and be assured, that he will hear us, as his dearebeloued children,
and give us the inheritance of heaven, which is prepared for us, through our
savior Jesus Christ. To who^e with the father, and ye holy ghost, be honor,
praise and glory, world without end. Amen.

H. Pendilton sacrae theologiae professoris.
An Homelye of the Primacy, or supreme power, of the highest governor of the
militant Church.
AS in every natural, and polytyke body, so in the church milita^t, (which is
a mystical body) superiority, and inferiority, must needs be amongst ye
members thereof, or else it cannot endure. And for this cause specially, our
Savior Christ, when he was here conuersaunte, on the Earth, did, himself,
appoynte his Apostles, and Disciples, and there successors, to have the
ouersyght, cure, and high government of his church, to the worlds end. And
to the intent, that no man should contempne their authority, he does say in
the thyrtenth of Saint Ihon, Amen, Amen, Dico vobis, qui accipit si quem
misero, John. 13
me accipit. Qui autem me accipit, accipit eum qui me misit That is to say:
Verily Verily, I say unto you, who that receives him whom I send, receives
me And he that receives me, receives him that sent me. And in the tenth of
Luke he says, Qui uos audit me audit, and qui uos spernit, me spernit. Qui
autem me spernit, spernit eum qui misit me. Luce. 10.
That is to say: He that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth you
dispiseth me, and he that dispiseth me, dispiseth him that sent me. Of the
Apostles also and their successors, and of their charge over Christ's flock,
does Saint Paul speak, in the fourth chapter to the Ephesyans, saying.
Ephesians. 4.


Ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos, quosdam autem Prophetas, alios uero
Euangelistas, alios autem pastores, et doctores, ad consummationem sanctorum,
in opus ministerii, in edificationem Corporis Christi, donec occurramus omnes
in unitatem fidei, and agnitionis filii dei, in uirum perfectum, in mensuram
etatis plenitudinis Christi, ut iam non simus paruuli fluctuantes, neque
circuferamur omniuento doctrine, in nequitia hominum, in astutia ad
circumuentionem erroris. That is to say:

He (meaning Christ) has given or appointed some to be Apostles, some,
Prophets some Evangelists, some pastores, and teachers, to the perfytynge, or
consummating, of the holyons, to do the work of the mynistery, to edyfye the
body of Christ, until we all come together, in one unity of faith, and
knowledge of the son of God, unto the estate of a perfect man, after ye
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, that from henceforth, we should not
be as babes, waueryng, neither should we be carried about with every blaste of
doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in the wylynes of them, who go about to
deceive us

This place of Saint Paul most playnelye sets before our eyes, the
authority, and government which our savior has appointed, to continue to
the end of the world, in his church, and how ye Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Preachers, and teachers, are given of Christ, to his people, to
govern them. And therewith al Saint Paul, in the said place, shows to what
end, such government, and authority is instituted, it is to wit, for the
spiritual edifieng of the hole body, in the faith, and for the defense of the
hole body, from the poison of heresye. And in deed no one thing can so much
suppress heresye, as if the Authority, and government Ecclesiastical, be
accordingly thereunto esteemed, and obeyed, as witnesses Saint Ciprian, the
blessed Martyr, in his first book, and third Epistle saying. Neque aliunde
hereses obortae sunt, Ciprian. Lib. i. epistle, ^3.
aut nata sunt scismata, quam inde, quod sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur. Nec
unus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and ad tempus iudex, uice Christi
cogitatur, cui si secundum magisteria diuina, obtemperaret fraternitas
uniuersa, nemo aduersus sacerdotum collegia quicquam moueret. That is to say:
Neither other where, or by other means, are heresies sprung up, and scismes
risen, than hereof, yt obedience is not given to the priest of God. Nor one is
considered, or thought, to be in ye church, for the time, the priest, and for
the time the judge, in Christ's stead, vntowhich one, if the hole fraternity
did (according to the heavenly commandments) obey, no man would stir, or
move any thing against the Colleges or companies of preistes. Hereby you may
perceive, that saint Cypryans conclusion, or judgment is, that the government
Ecclesiastical, and especially of one, to be taken, and reputed as Christ's
vicar, is the best mean, to let and suppress heresies, and that such one
governor, is to be obeyed, of all christen people, which thing may be proved
very plainly, and evidently, by the holy scryptures themselves. For the
scryptures do witness, that our savior appointed S. Peter, to this high
rowme, and charge, over his hole flock, and no one of the Apostles else. In
the.xxi. Joan. 21
of S. John it is written, how, our savior, after his resurrection, appearing
at ye sea of Tiberias, to certain of his Apostles, amongst whom was Peter, did
first take bread, and fyshe, and gave unto them, And when they had refresshed
them selves, he said unto Peter. Simon Ioannis diligis me plus hiis? Dicit ei,
Etiam domine it is scis, quia amo te. Dicit ei. Pasce agnos meos. Dicit ei
iterum, Simon Ioannis diligis me? Ait illi. Etiam domine tu scis quia amo te
Dicit ei Pasce agnos meos Dicit ei tertio. Simon Ioannis amas me? Contristatus
est Petrus, quia dixit ei tertio, amas me? and dixit ei. Domine tu omnia nosti,
tu scis, quia amo te. Dicitei, Pasce oues meas. That is to say: Simon the
son of Ioannes, doeste thou love me more then these do? He answered unto
him: Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. He said unto him: Feed my
lambs. Then he spoke to him again, and said: Simon the son of Ioannes,
doeste thou love me? He answered: yea Lord, thou knoweste that I love thee.
He said unto him again: Feed my lambs. Then spoke he unto him the third
time, and said: Simon the son of Ioannes, do thou love me? Peter was
sorry, because Christ said unto him now the third time, do thou love me,
and he answered and said: Lord thou knoweste all things, thou know that
I love thee. He said unto him feed my sheep. This process of Scripture, has
in it, many circumstaunces to be noted. The first is, that (other Apostles
being than present, and amongst them, even he of whom Christ did ever make
very much of, that is to say, S. John) yet our Savior Christ, did dyrecte his
speech, and talk, but to Peter only, signifienge the matter, whereof he did
speak, to appertain to Peter chieflye, and pryncipallye, and not in so
special a sort, to any one of the apostles else. Another, and second
circumstaunce to be here considered, is that our savior, did ask Peter
most earnestly, whether he loved him, more than did the other apostles. And
the third cyrcumstaunce is, in that Christ did commytte both his lambs, and
his sheep, unto him. These cyrcumstaunces (I say) and other such like, well
considered, do convince, and clearelye prove, that the high charge, over all
the church militant, was especially committed, to Peter.

And to this purpose, makes, and serves, an other talk, of our savior, unto
S. Peter, written in the.xvi. of Matthew, where ye text is in this manner. Venit
autem Jesus in parts, Caesareae Philippi, Math. 16.
and interrogabat discipulos suos dicens. Quem dicunt homines esse filium
hominis? At illi dixeru^t: Alij Ioannem Baptistam, alij autem Heliam, alij uero
Hieremiam, aut unum ex prophetis. Dicit illis Jesus, uos autem quem me esse
dicitis? Respondens Simon Petrus dixit. Tu es Chrictus filius Dei uiui.
Respondens autem Jesus dixit ei. Beatus es Simon Bariona, quia caro and sanguis
non reuelauit tibi, sed pater meus qui in coelis est. Et ego dico tibi, quia tu
es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae inferi
non praeualebunt aduersus eam. Et tibi dabo claues regni coelorum. Et
quodcunque ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in coelis, and quodcunque
solueris super terram erit solutum and in coelis. That is to say: Jesus came
into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, and he asked his disciples, saying: Whom
do men say the son of man to be? And they answered, some John Baptiste,
some Helias, some Hieremias, or one of the prophets. Jesus said unto them. But
who say you that I am? Then Simon Peter made answer, and said: Thou art
Christ the son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said: Blessed art
thou Simon, the son of Ioanna, for flesh and blood has not this reueiled,
and opened unto the, but my father which is in heaven. And I say unto the,
that thou art Peter, or a rock, and on this rock I will build my church, and
hell gates shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee, ye keys of
ye kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, shall be bound
also in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall lose upon ye earth, shall be loosed
also in heaven. These words of Christ were spoken long before yt Christ gave
yt other commandment to Peter, to feed his flock, and that thing, which
is performed in the other words, is here promised, in these words. In the
other words our savior does presently, put him in authority, saying.
Feed my Lambs, feed my sheep. In these words, he does but promise the
said authority unto him, saying. Unto thee will I give the keys of the
kyngedome of heaven, and what so ever thou loosest, or byndest in earth, shall
be loosed or bound in heaven. The like of this, did our savior never speak
to any one of the Apostles else, severally, but only generally. For generally
to Peter, and to the rest, being al together, (saving Thomas, who was absent,)
Christ said the words which are written in the.xx. John. 20.
of John, it is to wit, Receive you the holy ghost, whose sins ye remyt,
they are remytted, and whose sins ye retain, Math. 18.
they are retained. And in the.xviii. of Matthew, Christ says unto the twelve.
What so ever things you shall bind upon the earth, shall be bound also in
heaven, and whatsoever you shall lose upon ye earth, shall be losed also in heaven
If our savior Christ had not intended to give unto Peter a special
authority, above the rest, what need was there to speak this, seuerallye,
unto Peter, seeing he had spoken it generally to them all before? And what thing
meant he else, when, in ye presence of all the twelve, he promised to give unto
Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, saving a special priuilige, or
prerogatyue to Peter? Our Savior through his heavenly wisdom, perceiving,
that it is most necessary, one to be over a hole multitude, specially being a
multitude congregated of so infinite a number of people, and of so sundry
nations, as is the catholyke church, did appoynte S. Peter, to that office,
and Peter having received such charge at Christ's hands, did incontinentely
practyse and exercise the same: and all the rest of the Apostles did give place
unto him. Act. i.
And therefore in the first of the Acts it is written, how that after
Christ's ascension, incontinently S. Peter rose up in the myddest of the
faithful, and moved them to goo to the election of one, that should succeed in
Judas rowme, which office he undoubtedly would not have taken upon him, but
that our savior Christ had Authorized him in such sort, as is before
declared. In the.ii. Acts. 2.
of the Acts it is written how that in the presence of all the Apostles, S.
Peter took upon him to speak in all their names to the people on whitsonday
in the morning, streighte after that they had received the holy Ghost, in the
likeness of cloue^ tunges. In the third of ye Acts, it is written, Acts. 3.
how yt S. Peter healed a lame man, which was lame from his mothers womb, and
that when the people wondered at so strange a miracle, the said Peter made an
oration unto them.

Act. 4.5.6.
In the fourth of the Acts, and in the fyfte, and syxt there is the like, and
in many other places of the same book. All which places of scripture ought
to persuade every godly heart, to think that our savior did give unto
saint Peter, that authority, above all the rest of the Apostles, upon his
hoole church, for an unity, and good order, to be kept in the same. And yet
for your better contentation herein, you shall here the authorities of the
Aunciente fathers in this behalf.

Origene, Origenes
a greek writer, which was within two hundred years after Christ, in his
exposition, made upon the.vi. Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle, to the Romans,
writes thus. Petro cum summa rerum de pascendis ouibus traderetur, et super
ipsum tanquam super terram fundaretur ecclesia, nullius confessio uirtutis
alterius, nisi charitatis exigitur. (That is to say,) when the highest
authority, or feedinge of christ's sheep, was committed unto Peter, and the
church was builded upon him, as upon a sure ground, there was required, or
exacted of him, the profession of none other virtue save only of charity.

Ciprianus.
The blessed martyr, saint Cipriane, in many places, affyrmeth the same, and
amongst other, in his Epistle written. Ad Iubatanum. says, Manifestum est,
vbi, et per quos, remissio peccatorum dari possit: Nam dominus primum Petro,
super quem edificauit ecclesia suam, et vnde vnitatis originem instituit, et
ostendit, potestatem istam dedit: That is to say. It is manifest where, and by
whom, remission of sins may be given, for our Lord first unto Peter
(upon whom he builded his church, and from whom he did ordeyne, and show,
the beginning of the unity, to proceed) did give that power, or authority.
And in the same Epistle, (within a while after) he says. Ecclesiam, que vna
est, fundauit super vnum, that is to say, He did found his church, which is
but one, upon one.

Saint Basyll, Basilius.
in his book against Tauonius writes thus Per hanc vocem intelligimus Ionae
filium, qui fuit ex Bethsaida, Andreae fratrem, qui ex piscatore, in
Apostolatus ministerium vocatus est Qui quoniam fide praestabat, ecclesiae in
se aedificationem suscepit. That is to say, by this voice, we understand the
son of Jonas, which was of Bethsaida, the brother of Andrewe, which son of
Jonas was called from a fysher, to the ministerye of the Apostleshyp and
because he excelled in faith, he had the church builded upon him.

Saint Ambrose in his fourth sermon says. Ambrosius
Petrus denique pro soliditate deuotionis, ecclesiarum petra dicitur, sicut ait
dominus. Tu es petrus, et super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Petra
enim dicitur, quod primus in nationibus fidei fundamenta posuerit, et tanquam
saxum immobile, totius operis Christiani compagem molemque contineat (That is
to say,) Finally, or for a conclusion, Peter, for the soundenes, or
substancialnes of his devotion, is called the rock of the churches, as our
Lord says Thou art Peter, or of a rock, and upon this rock will I build
my church. In deed he is called a rock, because he was the first that did
lay the foundation of faith amongst the gentiles, and as a stone, or a
rock, that cannot be moved, he does contain or keep, the frame, and weight
of the hole christen work.

Augustinus
S. Augustine has the like in his six and twenty sermon, de sanctis, and in
his.xvi. sermon de tempore, but most notably in his.124. sermon de tempore,
where he makes a large process of saint Peter, and emo^gest other things,
speaking of Peter's denial of his master, he writes thus of him. Totius
corporis morbum in ipso capite curat ecclesie, et in ipso vertice componit
membrorum omnium sanitatem, That is to say, He (meaning Christ) does cure in
the very head of the church (meaning Peter) the disease, of the hole body,
and in the very crown, or top of the head, he frames the health of all the
members. Here ommyttynge infynite, other authorities of the aunciente fathers,
touching the primacye, or highest authority ecclesiastical, to have been
given unto saint Peter of our savior Christ him self, I exhort you in
consideration, partly of these testimonies, some whereof are taken out of the
very scripture, sum out of the aunciente and famous doctors of the church,
and partly, and most especially, in consyderation of the consent of the hole
catholic church herein, nothing to doubt in this matter, but yt the holy
Apostle S. Peter was Christ's vicar on earth, and had higher, and more
authority general, then any one of the Apostles else, and that the special
purpose, why that Christ would have such authority to be in one man, was,
and is, for the preservation of unity in his church, which church, is but
one, and thus much for this time, shall now suffice you. In the next homely,
you shall hear further of this matter.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professoris. et Archidiaconi London.
An other Homelye of the Prymacye.
Act. 8.
IT is written in the.viii. chapter of the acts, how Simon Magus, did offer
unto Saint Petermony, to give him power, that on whom soever he should lay
his hands, the same parson might thereby, receive the holy Ghost. But being for
this his most wicked request, grievously reproved, and fearyng withal, to
continue any longer, in those parties, that is to say, in Samaria, so nighe
thappostles, he, the said Simon Magus fled to Rome, and there by his
enchauntementes, Justinius Martyr.
did greatly delude the people, as Iustynus the Martyr, a very ancient
writer, in his second Apology, directed, or sent, to the Emperor Antonius,
does playnelye testify: Ireneus Ireneus.
also in his first book Contra hereses. does record the same. And the said
Simon Magus, did so delude and blind the people, that they did esteem him for a
God, and did set up his image, in the City, with this inscription, Simoni deo
sancto That is to say To Simon the holy God. But it was not long, after those
prankes, played by Simon Magus, thus seducyng the inhabita^tes there, but God
sent his great Apostle saynct Peter thither, (that is to say, to Rome) who
both did confound the said Simon Magus, and did also convert a great number
of the people there, unto the faith of Christ, as is at large, set fourth in
the.xiiii. chapter, and second book of Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica
Eusebij
Ecclesiastical historye. Now this Apostle sayncte Peter, by the will, and
providence of God, being brought to Rome, did there continue, bishop of that
Sea.xxv. years, and there also did suffer a glorious martyrdom, in the last
year of the reygne of cruel Nero Themperoure, which things Sayncte Hierom
in the very beginning of his work, Hieronimus
De Ecclesiasticis scriptoribus does wytnes in this manner. Simon Peter, the
son of Ioannes, of the province of Galile, and of ye town of Bethsaida, the
brother of Andrewe the Apostle, after his byshopricke in Antioche and after his
preaching in Po^tus, Galatia, Cappadotia, Asia, and Bithinia, to the Jews
which were dyspersed abroad in sondrye contries, came to Rome, to over throw
Simon Magus, and there did keep his sea, five and twenty years, until the last
year, (it is to wit the.xiiij. year) of the reign of Nero, by whom he was
crucified, and so crowned with a crown of martyrdom, his head being turned
down to the ground, and his feet upward, because he said, or accounted him
self unworthy, to be crucyfyed in such form, and manner, as his master
Christ was.

Ambrosius
S. Ambrose in his.lxx. sermon speaking of ye martyrdom of saint Peter, and
saint Paul, at Rome, says thus. I think it not done without a great cause,
that in one day, in one place, and under on persecutoure, they both did
suffer. In one day, for that they should come to Christ together. In one
place, that neither of them both, should be destitute of Rome, and under one
persecutoure, that like cruelty should slaye them both. The day was for their
merit, the place for their glory, the persecutour, for their virtue. And in
what place I pray you did they suffer martyrdom? Even in Rome, which is the
head, and chyefe city, of the world, to the intent that where the head of
superstition was, there should rest the head of holiness, and where the princes
of the heathen did dwell, there the princes of the church should lie.

Thus says saint Ambrose, whereunto agrees Egesippus, Egesippus
an ancient writer, in his third book, of the destruction of Jerusalem, and
likewise, Dionisius Dionisius
the bishop of Corinthe, Corinth.
and Caius also which lived in ye days of zepherinus, Sepherinus
the Bishop of Rome, as more at large appears, in the.xxv. Chapter, of the
foresaid second book of Eusebius, Eusebius
Ecclesiastical hystory. Now that we have in the homely, going next before
this, declared, that our savior did appoint Saint Peter to a greater, and
higher office, then he did any other of his Apostles, and have in this homely
entreated, of the abode of saint Peter, and martyrdom at Rome, we will
consequentlye prove, that the Bishops of Rome, have always, in the catholyke
church, been esteemed, judged, and taken, for saint Peter's successors, even
in that his special, and highest office, and that to him, and the^, by the will
of God, does appertain the government of Christ's hole flock, on earth.
And first I will begin with the aunciente Author, Ireneus, Ireneus 3. Lib.
aduersus hereses.
who in the third Chapter of his third book, against heresies, does say,
that the church of Rome, is the greatest, the eldest, and the best known, of
all churches, and that it was founded, by the most glorious Apostles, Peter,
and Paul, and that through the succession of the bishops of Rome, from saint
Peter, until his time, the truth was deryued, from hand to hand, and that
it might there easily be found, and had. And hereupon he says further these
words. Ad hanc enim ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitate^, necesse est
omnem conuenire ecclesiam, hoc est eos qui sunt vbique fideles. That is to
say. For unto this church (meaning, and poyntynge the sea of Rome) for the
more mighty principalty of it, al ye hole church of Christ, yt is to say, all
the faithful, where soever they be, must assemble, or repair unto.

Augustinus
And saint Augustyne, agreably hereunto, does, in his.162. Epistle, say: that
in the church of Rome, the primacy of the Apostolic Sea, did ever florishe.
And the same saint Augustyne, wrytinge against one Petilianus, which did
blaspheme the sea of Rome (as heretykes do now a days) does more over write
in this manner. If all the bishops of the world, were such men, as thou
dooest most falsely report them to be, what has the sea of Rome hurted the,
where Peter did sit, and now Anastasius sytteth? or what has the sea of
Jerusalem hurted the, where James did sit, and now at this present, Ioannes
does sit, with whom we are in the catholic unity joined, and from whom ye
have divided your selves, in your wicked rage, or fury, why do thou call the
Apostolic sea, the sea of pestilence? If thou do it for the men's sake, who^
thou think to preach the law, and not to fulfill the law, did our savior
I pray the, any such injury to the sea or chair of the scribes, and
Phariseis, of whom he says. They say, but they do not? etc.

Moreover, the holy Martyr, saint Cipriane in the third Epistle, Ciprianus.
of his first book, speaking against certain, which did disobey, and
contempne, Cornelius, the bishop of Rome, writes in this manner. Neque enim
aliunde hereses oborte sunt, aut nata sunt scismata, quam inde quod sacerdoti
dei no^ obtemperatur, nec vnus in ecclesia ad te^pus sacerdos, et ad tempus
iudex, vice Christi iudicatur: Cui si secundum magisteria diuina obtemperaret
fraternitas vniuersa, nemo aduersus sacerdotum collegium, quicquam moueret.
That is to say. Of none other cause are heresies spronge up, or scismes risen,
than of this, that the priest of GOD (meaning Cornelius; the bishop of
Rome,) is not obeyed, and one is not taken in the church, to be the high
priest for the time, and for the time in Christ's stead a judge, or Christ's
vicar, unto whom if the hole fraternitye were, according to Gods
commandments, obediente, no man would any thing move, or stir against the
college, or company of priests.

Saint Augustyne also writing against the Epistle of a Maniche, which
Epistle is entitled, Augustinus.
or called, Fundamentum, gives to the sea of Rome, a meruaylous prerogatyue,
and does build his faith, amongst other things, upon the succession, of
the Bishops of Rome, who after saint Peter did follow orderly, even to his
time, which was.300. years after Christ. And he writes in this manner. Multa
sunt, que me in ecclesie gremio iustissime tenent: Tenet me consensio
populoru^, atque gentiu^, tenet authoritas miraculis inchoata, spe nutrita,
charitate aucta, vetustate firmata, tenet ab ipsa sede petri Apostoli, cui
pascendas oues suas post resurrectione^ suam dominus commendauit, vsque ad
presentem episcopatum, successio sacerdotum. That is to say, there are many
things, which of very good reason, do keep me, in the laws of the catholyke
church. The consent of so many people, and nations, or cuntries, does keep
me: the authority of the church, begone with miracles, nourysshed with hope,
increased with charity, and confyrmed with antiquitye, does keep me: the
succession also of bysshoppes, from saint Peter the Apostles seat, or time (to
whom our Lord did after his resurrection, commyt his sheep to be fed) unto
this present Bishopric (meaning Rome) does keep me in the catholyke church.

Saint Hierom also in his Epistle to Damasus, does set fourth very notably,
Hieronimus.
the primacye, and supremitye, of the bishop of Rome, as being saint Peter's
successors, and amongst other things, he says thus. Si quis cathedrae
Petri iungitur meus est. That is to say. If any man be joined to Peter's
chair, or hold of Peter's seat (meaning the sea of Rome) he is mine, and I
receive and join with him.

Ambrosius
Saint Ambrose also in his third book, of the sacraments, and in the first
Chapter, does say thus. Ecclesia Romana hanc consuetudinem non habet, cuius
tipum in omnibus sequimur. That is to say, the church of Rome (whose form,
or trade, we do follow in all points) has no such custom Other like
autorities of the ancient fathers, for the primacye, and supremacy of the Sea
of Rome, there are, and yt infinite: But what need many autorities, either of
scripture, or of the fathers, in this behalf, seeing very experience, has this
thousand years, proved, that such, as dysobeyed the sea of Rome, did fall sone
after into abhomynable heresy, and thereupon into division amongst them
selves, and consequently, to destruction, or else, in process of time, were
glad, and feign, to return to their dew obedience again. If you be
desyrouse to have example in this matter, look but on those countries, and
those parsons, that now be in captivity under the great Turk, who in time
paste, agreeing with the sea of Rome, did floryshe in christen religion, and
all welthe, look also upon Germany, and take example thereby, how they
prospered among them selves, since they declyned from the obedyence of the
sea of Rome. And it is a world, to see how those, whom they took for their
greatest doctors, have abused, seduced, and mocked them, even in this matter
of the primacye, for where as Luther, especially, and above all other,
Lutherus.
was their ryngleader in this matter: yet when he was amongst learned men, and
should talk of this matter, with them, he was so driven to the wall, that
openly in writing, to be showed at this day, he did in a book of his,
entitled. Resolutio Lutheriana super propositione sua. 13. de potestate Papae,
confess and say plainly, as hereafter does follow.

Primum, quod me mouet To. pontificem esse alijs omnibus, quos saltem nouerimus
se pontifices gerere, superiorem, est ipsa voluntas dei, quam in ipso facto
uidemus. Neque enim sine voluntate dei, in hanc monarchiam unqua^ venire
potuisset To. pontifex. At voluntas dei, quo quo modo rota fuerit, cu^
reuerentia suscipienda est, Ideoque non licet temere. To. pontifici in suo pris
matu resistere. Hec autem ratio tanta est, vt si etiam nulla scriptura, nulla
alla causa esset, haec tamen satis esset ad compescendam temeritatem
resistentium, et hac sola ratione gloriosissimus martyr Ciprianus, per multas
epistolas co^fidentissime gloriatur contra omnes episcoporu^ quoru^ cumque
aduersarios, sicut. 3. Re legimus, quod dece^ tribus Israel discesseru^t a
Roboa^, filio Salomonis, et tamen quia voluntate dei, sine autoritate factum
est, ratum apud deum fuit. Nam et apud theologos omnes, voluntas signi, quam
vocant operationem dei, non minus quam alia figna voluntatis dei, vt praecepta,
prohibit. etc. metuenda est. Ideo non uideo, quomodo sint excusati ascismatis
reatu, qui huic voluntati contrauenientes, sese a To. pontificis autoritate
subtrahunt. Ecce hec est una prima mihi insuperabilis ratio, quae me subijcit
To. pontifici et primatu^ eius co^fiteri cogit. That is to say The first thing,
which moves me to think, or believe, the Romayne Bishop to be superior to
all other, whom at the least wise we do know to account them selves for
Bysshoppes, is the very will of God, which we do see, even in the very fact,
or matter. For in deed without the will of God, ye Romayne Bishop, could
not at any time have commen to this monarchy, or supreme rule, and the will of
God, by what mean so ever it be known, is to be received, or taken with
reverence, and therefore it is not lawefull, folyshly, or hedely to make
resistance unto the said Romayne Bysshope, in his Bysshoppryke. And this reason
is so great, or of such force, that although no scripture, nor no other
cause were, yet this were sufficient enough to bridle, or keep under, the
temeritie, or madness, of them, yt make resistance. And by this reason alone,
the most glorious Martyr Cyprian, in many Epystles does most boldly glory, or
rejoice, against all the adversaries of any of the Bysshoppes, according as we
do read in the third book of the kings. Where allthough the x. tribes of
Israel, did depart from Roboam, the son of Solomon, yet because it was done
by the will of God, it was without other authority firm, and stable. For also
amongst all the deuynes, the will of the sign, which they do call the
workyng of God, is to be feared no less, the^ other signs of the will of God,
as precepts and things forbidden etc. And therefore I do not se how they be
excused from the offense, or sin, of scysme, who doing, or coming against
this will, do withdraw, or pull them selves, from the Authority of the
Roman Bishop.

Thus much says Luther himself, and so shall you find it, if ye read his
said work, in the place aforesaid: and the thing so being, you may se, what a
holy father that merchant was, to deceive the people as he did, and to bring
them to that wonderful calamity, that the third or fourth generation (if ye
world so long do continue) shall feel, and smarte for it, as other also
shall, that be in the same case. And now to return to our own country of
England, this may be truly spoken, that of all realms christen, there is none
that has (besides the general duty) so special cause to favor that see of
Rome, as England has. For from that see, came the faith into this Island, Beda.
Eccles. hist. Angl li. i,
in the days of king Lucius, about an hundredth and fyftye years after
Christ. And vi. C. year after Christ, when the Saxons were spread over the hole
realm, and were infidells, there were sent most notable, and godly preachers,
hither into England: who converted and turned many thousands, to the faith.
And what benefits we have in our days received of that see of Rome, all men
do perceive, and feale in them selves, and do thank god therefore, or else
the devil has wonderfullye blinded and seduced them. Now on the other side,
what miseries have be feign amongst us, since our disobedience against the sea
of Rome, and since the time, that temporal princes did take upon them, that
office, which is spiritual, and not belongyng to the regal power, but greatly
distant, and different from the same, I need not in words to declare, forasmuch
as you have felt the smart thereof in deed, and to this day are not quyte of
Gods plage for the same. Wherefore to conclude in this matter, this shall be to
exhort you, and in Gods name to require you, to esteem the primacy, and
supremitie of the sea of Rome, as an authority instituted by Christ, for the
quyetnes of the christen people, and for the preservation of chrystendome, in
one catholyke, true faith, and for the defense of it, against all heresy, and
whereby quyeting your selves, to serve God, in the catholic truth, you shall
sonest appease his wrath, and purchase his favor, and grace, in this life, and
hereafter obtain the everlasting life, which send unto you all, the father,
the son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be al honor, and glory, world without
end Amen.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professoris, et Archidiaconi London,
An homely declarynge that in the blessed Sacrament of the aultare, is the very
body, and blood of our Savior Christ.
AFter that men are once graft in Christ, and be made partakers of his death,
and passion, among other their duties, one of the chief is, diligently to
prepare them selves to the worthy receauynge of ye blessed Sacrament of the
aultare, whereunto are two things on our parts requisite (as says saint
Basell, Basil in his rules.
and good reason confirms) the one, fear, the other, faith. The fear which
men must have, when they prepare them selves to come to this sacrament, ought
to be grounded upon that terrible saying of saint Paul, in the.xi. chapter of
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says: 1. Cor. 11.
that whosoever does participate thereof unworthily, does eat and drink his
own dampnation. The faith, which we must have in our hearts, when we come to
Gods board, is to be builded likewise, upon the undoubted aucthorities of
scripture, which declare most plainly unto us, what meat it is, that we
there eat. For the parfyt understanding whereof, let us consider, that our
savior Christ, being here on earth, did first make a solemn promise of a
meat, which him self would give unto us, and afterward in deed, he did
give the same, according to his promise. In the promise making he said (as
it is written in the.vi. chapter of S. John's Gospel.) The bread, John. 6.
or food that I will give unto you, is my flesh, which flesh I will give
for the life of the world: and in the same chapter he also says. My flesh is
verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. And as he then promised, so he
afterward performed, even the very last night that ever he companyed with
his Apostles, before his death, at which time, he took bread into his hands,
and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said: Take
eat, this is my body, which shall be given for you. If we compare the words
spoken by Christ, when he made the promise of a meat, to be by him given unto
us, with those other words, which he uttered in geuyng of ye same, we need not
doubt of the things which he gave. In the promysse making, he said: that he
would give us his flesh, in the perfourmynge of the promise, he gives the
same, saying, take eat, this is my body. Again, in the promise making, he
affyrmeth, that the flesh, which he would give us to feed on, should be the
selfsame flesh, that should be given for the life of the world, and in the
performaunce of his promise, he said, that the thing which he gave, was his
body, which should be given to death for us. Now the circumstaunces being
well considered, which our savior used in the institution of this most blessed
Sacrament, shall greatly co^fyrme al godly hearts, in the true belefe of the
same. The time was the night before he suffered death, to signify unto us,
that this meat, being differred to the last day, that ever our Savior was
conuersaunt with his Apostles, must needs be his very body, and blood in deed,
and such a meat as no other can be in any wise comparable unto it. Again, in
that our savior did eat of the paschal lamb with his Apostles, immediately
before he did institute this sacrament, it most plainly declares unto us,
that this sacrament is a marvelous worthy mysterye, and that very thing,
which the eating of the paschal lamb, in the old law did prefigurate, for
which cause, when this was instituted, that was abrogated Nether is it with
out a meruelouse consideration, that Christ at that heavenly banquet, would of
purpose, another have the blessed Vyrgyn Mary his mother, present with him, nor
any other of his dyscyples, save only the.xii. Apostles, whom he appointed
to be the head ministers of al his mysteries here on the earth, and specially
to be the ministers of this most blessed sacrament, and the instructours of al
other, touching the same. Now what meneth it, that our Savior was not content
to offer them this sacrament only, but with the offering thereof, he said also
unto them. Take eat, take and drink? Do me^ use, to offer to other, meat and
drink, for any other purpose, but only that they should eat and drink
thereof? but because it was his body, and his blood, therefore he first
byddeth them take, and not fear to eat and drink the same.

Besides this, it is to be well noted, that ye three Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, do all three agree in the manner of the institution of this
sacrament, they writing all three their gospeles at so^dry times, Chrisosto. and
Theophilact.
as Matthew eight year after the ascencion of our savior Christ. Mark.x.
years. Luke xv. years. And where in doubtefull speeches of our savior
Christ, some one or other of ye Evangelists, evermore opens plainly the
very meaning of the speches, yet touching these words, this is my body, no one
of them, makes any declaration upon the same, but they all leave them to be
taken of us, as they sound, and (as of most plain words) they make no
exposition or interpretation of them at al. Which point must be well
considered. And therefore note, that where Christ said. It is impossible for a
rych man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, (because ye meaning of these
words may be diversely taken, Mark. 10.
thereof) S. Mark in his tenth chapyter declares the very meaning of them,
saying: It is hard for them that trust in there substance to be saved. Again
Christ at another time said to the Jews, loose you this temple, and in three
days shall I buyld it again. And for that the sense of these words is
doughtfull S. John there expounds them and says, that Christ by the
te^plement his body, which should be by the Jews put to death, and by him the
third day should be raised from death to life. In the.vii. of Ihon, John 7.
our savior says: He that believes in me, as the scripture says, there
shall, ryuers of quick water flow out of him. And because this saing is
obscure, S. John to make it open, says, that he spoke those words, of the
spirit, which they that believed in him should receive. In the.xii. chapyter of
S. Ihon, our savior says in this manner. If I belyfte up from the earth,
John. 12.
I will draw al things unto my self. And S. John by and by gives us the
exposition, saying, that hereby he signyfyed, what kind of death he should
suffer. Many other like places are there in the new testamente, the matter of
which places, is not so high, nor so needful to be ryghtly understood, as
ye meaning of these words, this is my body, and yet of these words, no one
Evangelist makes any exposition, because the words are plainly, and symply
to be taken as they were spoken. Besides all this, we have in S. Paul in the.xi
Chapter of his first Epistle, to the Corinthians, a goodly, and a large
process touching this Sacrament, and yet in that whole process, no matter to
instruct us otherwise, to believe of it, than that there is in it the very
body and blood of our savior Christ. For first he utters the words of
our savior even as ye Evangelists do, as that he said this is my body, and he
makes no declaration upon ye same. Secondly where none of the Evangelists make
mention, of any pain due to the unworthy receauer. S Paul affirms that the
unworthy receiving of this Sacrament brings judgment, and dampnation.
Thirdly, he tells, that for the unworthy receiving hereof, God plageth cities,
and countries, with sundry grievous plages, as with infirmity, with syckenes,
and with death also. Forthely, he gives us counsel diligently to examine and
try our selfs, before we come to gods board. If the very body and blood of
our savior Christ, be not in deed in the sacrament of the aultare, why should
our savior so speak as he spoke in the promysse made thereof? why did he, as
he did in the instituting thereof? why did none of the Eua^gelists so declare
christ's words? why did sayncte Paul so terribly pronounce of the unworthy
receauynge of it, and so ernestly warn us, of due preparation to be made
therefore? It is then most undoubtedly to be of all christen people believed,
that in the Sacrament of the aultare, there is the very body and blood, of
our savior Christ, worthy of all honor and glory, the self same in
substance, that is in heaven: which thing for Christ to bring to pass, is a
thing most easy, he being God almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and for him
to do, is most semely, that as he gave that body, to death to redeem us, so
he should give the same in this heavenly bankitte, to feed us, that he might
be all in all. The body of our savior Christ to be in very deed in heaven, in
the visible form of a man, and in the Sacrament of the Aultare, inuisibly
under the visible fourmes of bread and wine, nether is impossible to his
power, that made all things of naught, nether unseemly for his exceadyng
great love toward us, who so loved us, that for us, he did not refuse to
suffer death, and that the death of the cross: neither yet is it against his
will, who of his only mercy, so promised, and with his omnipotent word, so
instituted it, another is it finally vnfytte for his wisdom, seeing he has so
ordained, that every natural mother, nourysheth her children, with the
substance of her own body. And why then should christen men refuse to believe
it? why do we not rather embrace it, and give God most hartye thanks for it,
being the greatest jewel, that ever was among mortal men: why do we not
prepare our selves worthily to receive it, and as in all other points of the
christen religion, so in the belefe of it, give credit to faith, and bring
reason, and our senses, in subjection under faith, but suffer our ghostly enemy
by carnal reasons, to bring us away into heresy, and quyte and clean to pull
the right faith out of our hearts? Let us all, good people, from hence forth
be constau^t in the truth, and as all the catholyke church believes, and has
always believed, let us undoubtedly persuade our selves, that in the blessed
sacrament of the Aultare, there is under the fourmes of bread and wine, the
self same body of our savior Christ in substance, which was borne of the
Vyrgin Mary, and suffered death on ye cross for us, to who^ with the father and
the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end Amen.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professoris, et Archidiaconi London.
And Homelye of Transubstantiation.
THere are in the sacrament of the aultare, ii. things specially to be
considered, the one is, the body and blood of our savior Christ, there really
contained, ye other is the fourmes of bread and wine, under which the said
body and blud are contained. Of the first part ye hard in the last homely.
Touching ye second, the general belefe of the catholyke Church (if there were
nothing else) ought, and may be a sufficient ground, for every godly man, to
build his conscience upon, which church, does believe, that there is no
substance of material bread, and wine remaining: but only the fourmes of
bread and wine, and the substance of Christ's body and blood, there so
contained. And yet, because some have vainly, and curiously, of late years
talked of this second part, and have put many fond doutes, and scruples into
peoples heads, concerning the same, ye shall now at large, and fully (I
trust) be instructed therein. And first this is to be noted, that God has from
the beginning of the world, many times appeared to man, some times in one
sort, Gene. xviii.
and somtymes in an other. In the.xviii. Chapter of Genesis it is written how
God, and two Aungelles with him, did appear unto Abraham, in the likeness of
men, and how Abraham feasted them. How vain a matter were it, (I pray you)
for us here buselye to reason, how God or Angel, could appear like man?
and whether they had true bodies or no? and whether they did eat in deed or
no? and if they had not true bodies in deed, how the appearaunce of bodies
could be, where the substance of bodies was not? In the third chapter of the
book called Exodus, we read, that God appeared to Moses in the lykenes of
flamynge fire, Exodus 3.
and that out of a bushe. In the.v. of Iosue it is recorded, how one suddenly
appeared unto Iosue like a man, Iosue. 5.
having a sword drawn in his hand. What can any manne say, how God
should appear in a flame of fire, or what substance of a sword was, in that
which appeared to Iosue? Hereby it is easy to understand how dangerous a
thing it is, to go about by man's wit or reason, to discuss ye manner of ye
works of almighty God. Who seyth not, that by the mean of such presumptuous
curiosity, men have of late fallen into most detestable errors, touching the
most blessed Sacrament of the aultare, and have most spytefully rayled
against the same, and with most vile terms have gested thereof, and finallye,
most vily have used the most precious body and blood of our savior Christ
in the same? In which doing, how can they look for any favor at the hands of
their heavenly father, seeing in such dispituous manner, they entreat the Body
and blood of our savior Christ his son? But now to proceed forth, touching
ye declaration of the second thing, to be considered in the blessed Sacrament
of the aultare: Ye must know that the presence of our savior Christ in this
sacrament of the altar, is not to ye intent, that Christ should be
conuersaunt with us here in this Sacrament, in such sort and manner, as he was
with his Apostles when he lived here on earth, that is to say: in the visible
shape and form of a man, but his presence in the Sacrament, is to the intent
to be to us an heavenly fode, and therefore he is present in the sacrament,
under the fourmes of bread and wine so that our outward eyes and senses, are
certifyed with the outward fourmes, and sensyble qualityes, and the whole man
with all, receaueth the very bodi and blood of our savior Christ. S. Augustine
(as is written in a book called Sententie prosperi) does say, Auguste in
Sente^tie Prosperi.
that christen men do honor under the forms of bread and wine, which they
see with their bodily eyes, the body and blood of our Savior Christ, which
they do not see. Eusebius Emissenus.
Eusebius Emissenus also, an ancient father of the Greek church, speaking of
the foresaid two parts contained in the Sacrament of the altar, says in
this manner. This is the thing which by al means we intend to prove, that the
Sacrifice of the church does consist, and is made of two parts, that is, of
the visible fourmes of ye eleme^tes, and of the invisible body and blood of
our Savior Christ. S Ciprian in his treatise entitled, Cipriane de coena
domini,
De coena domini, does most playnelye say, that the bread which our Lord did
give to his disciples, was by the omnipote^cie of god made flesh, and was
changed in nature, but not in form. Eusebius Emissenus in a sermon of the
bodi of Christ.
The forenamed Eusebius in a sermon of his made of the body of Christ, does
farther say: that Christ the invisible priest does turn visible creatures by
his word, through his secret power, into the substance of his body and blud.
Now for to signify this change, or turning of bread and wine, into the
substance of Christ's body and blood, the catholyke church uses this word,
Tra^ssubstanciatio^, which is as much to say, as the chau^ging of one
substance into another: Nether is it to be counted unfit, that there should in
the Sacrament of the aultare, be the form of bread, and yet not the
substance of bread, seeing God is the doer and worker thereof, Exo. 20:
to whom nothing is impossible. We read in the nynetenth Chapter of Exodus,
how yt when God came down from heaven unto Mount Sinai, there was heard a
sound of a trumpet, and yet material trumpet was there none. vii. chapter of
the fourth of the kings.
In the fourth book of the Kings, and the.vii. chapter, God caused a sou^de
to be heard in the tents of the Sirians, as if it had been of horses, charets,
and of a great army, and yet was there another horse, charet, nor army. In
the third chapter of Daniel, it is recorded, how the three children were in
the myddest of the flaming furnes, and yet felt no heat, so that there was
the substance of fire, and yet it did not bourne, which to nature is
impossible, but to GOD is an easy matter. In the.xvii. of Mathewe we read,
Math. 17.
how that Christ was transfygurated, and that his face did shine as the
Son, and that his apparel was made as white as snow. In the.xxiiii. of Luke,
Ln. 34.
Christ appeared to two of his dysciples going to Emaus, like a stranger. In all these foresaid examples, we see as strange a work as is
transubstantiation, and yet no man douteth of them because God is the worker,
nor any man asks how this, or that could be, but beleuethe it, and so
ought we to do, concerning the change of the substance, of bread and
wine, into the substance of Christ's body and blood, and not ask how it
may be. The blessed martyr Justinius, affyrmeth that this question, how,
Justinius martyr.
is a token of unbelief, and S. Ciril, writing upon the.vi. Chapter of S.
John, blames the Capernaites, Ciril upon the Vi. of S. John.
because they did ask how Christ was able to give the^ his flesh to eat.
The words of saint Cyryll be these. They ask not without great impiety how
can this man give us his flesh, and they remember not that nothing is
impossible to God, but let us (says he) have firm faith in the mysteries,
and let us never in so high matters, either think, or ask this, how. When
God is the worker, let us not ask how, but let us leave the knowledge of his
work to him self. Chrysostom upon John the Vi.
S. Chrysostom likewise upon the said.vi. Chapter says, that when this
question, how any thing is done, commyth into our minds, then with all, there
comes unbelief also But because in scripture the thing that we receive, when
we come to the sacrament, is called bread, therefore men have fansied with
the^ selves, that there must be the substance of material bread, deceauing
themselves, by mystakyng, the signification of this word, bread. For though
in our common speech we use to signify by this word, bread, that one kind of
material substance which is made of corn or grain, yet in scripture, it
signifies all kind of fode, whether it be the fode of the body, or the fode
of the soul, and so does also the latyne word, Panis, else when we desire
god in our Pater noster, to give us our daily bread, we should make an
vnperfytte petition, which yet is a most perfyt petition, John. 6.
whereby we ask of our heavenly father, all necessary fode. In the.vi. of Ihon,
Manna is called bread, and yet was it made of no kind of corn, or grain,
and in the same chapter Christ is called bread, because he is the fode of
the soul, and there likewise, the flesh of Christ in the sacrament, is called
bread, and not there only, but in S. Paul's Epistle also to the Corinthians,
for that it is the fode, whereon we feed, when we receive the sacrament. Again
it is a commen trade in scripture, to call things by the name of that thing
which they once were, as Adam is called earth, because he was made of Earth,
Math. 11
and Christ says, the blind see, the lame walk, ye deaf hear, the dumme,
speak, meaning by the blind, lame, deaf, and dumme, such as before had been
so, but then were otherwise. Thyrdlye, for that the form of bread does
remain, it is in that respect too, called bread. For these causes, good
faithful hearts, are nothing grieved with the calling of it bread in the
scripture, but groundynge them selfs upon the words of our savior
Christ, when he said, this is my body, and knowing that it to be both
bread, and his body also at once is impossyble, they undoubtedly believe, that
by the power of GOD, the substance of bread, is turned into the substance of
Christ's body, and so must all men believe, that will be lively members of the
catholyke church, and in that there belefe, they must honor the body and
blood of our savior Christ, in the sacrament of the Aultare, as always
christen people have used to do.

Saint Austin in his exposition made upon the.99. Psalm S. Augustine upon
the.99. Psalm.
says: that it is sin, not to honor the body of Christ, meaning in the
Sacrament of the Aultare. And (as it is before in this Homily alleged) he
also says in the name of all men. We do honor under the fourmes of bread
and wine, which we se, the body and blood of Christ, which we do not see.
Wherefore, good christen people, knowing now what is the right belefe,
touching the Sacrament of the aultare, embrace, and follow the same, and
cleave fast to the catholyke church, the spouse of Christ, that you may be
true members of Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, and glory world without end. Amen.

Io. Harpesfelde, sacrae theologiae professoris et Archidiaconi London.
An Homily wherein is answer made to certain common objections, against the
presence of Christ's body, and blood in the sacrament of the Aultare.
MEte it were, dearly beloved in our savior Christ, that we all should so
fully, and wholly, cleave to the faith of Christ's catholic church, yt no
appearau^ce of reason to ye co^trari thereof, should cause us once to doubt or
stagger, in any part part of the same. For such a kind of faith, does God
require of us, and for such kind of faith, good christen people, are in
scripture called Abraha^s children: Roma. 4
which Abraham (as it is written in the fourth to the Romans) contrary to
hope, believed in hope, that he should be the father of many nations, according
to that, which was spoken. So shall thy sede be. And he fainted not in the
faith, nor yet considered his own bodi, which was now dead even when he was
almost an hundred year old: nether yet that Sara was paste child bearing,
he staggered not at the promise of god, through unbelief, but was strong in the
faith, and gave honor to god, fully certified yt what he had promised, the same
he was able to make good. If we then will be the children of Abraham, we must
not faint in faith, nor consider gods words after the course of nature. Saint
Paul in the.x. 2. Corin. x.
chapter of his second epistle to the Corinthians, gives us an example in
him self, how we should always bring reason in subjection to faith,
sayng. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty in God, to
overthrow strong holds, to destroy counselles, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and to bring in captiuitye
unto the service of Christ, all understanding: What (think you) is the cause
why the Jews believe not on Christ? Verily first, because he was borne of a
Vyrgyn, which is contrary to the course of nature. Secondly likewise, he was in
unity of person, God and man, which how it may be, no man's wit is able, by
natural power, to conceive: thyrdly, because he being God and man, suffered the
death of the cross, which for God to be content to do, seems to natural
reason a thing most absurd, but good christen folk geuyng place to faith,
do most undoubtedly believe on Christ, God and man crucified, according to yt, S.
Paul writes in his first Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
i. Corin. 1.
saying: We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumblyng block, to the
gentels, a folishnes, but to so many of ye jews and ge^tels as ar called,
Christ the power, and wisdom of God. And agreably here unto, he says also
in the next Chapter following. My talk, and my preaching was not in ye
persuasible words of man's wisdom, but in showing of power, and of the
spyryte, that your faith should not rest in the wisdom of man, but in the
power of God. This general advise and counsel of S. Paul, may and ought so to
stay us in the faith of the catholyke church, that nether carnal reasons,
grounded upon the feeble intelligence of man's natural wit, nether the deceatfull
judgment of our senses, should make us once to doubt, of any one truth in
Christ's religion, were it never so contrary to the course of nature, never so
far above our capacities, and never so absurd to the appearaunce of our
outward senses. But forasmuch, as through the iniquity of these later evil
years, diverse have had sondrye fond dowtes and scruples, put into their
heads, especyally, against the presence of Christ's body and blood, in the
Sacrament of the aultare, and through such dowtes have swarued from the true
belefe therein, therefore here shall follow aunsweres, and solutyons, to such
dowtes as have been most commen, that from henceforthe no man shall need to be
seduced by them, or other like.

to his Apostles the sacrament, did say unto them. Do this in remembrance of
me. Upon which words some have concluded, that the body of our savior
Christ, cannot be in the sacrament. But let us duly way ye words, Aunsvvere.
and meaning of the same, and we shall most plainly perceive their error,
and mysvnderstandyng. Saint Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
1. Corin. xi.
and in the.xi. chapter of the same Epistle, entreating of the institution of
the Sacrament of the aultare, and there opening the true sense of that
commandment of Christ, says in this manner. As often as you eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, you shall show forth the Lords death until he
come. So then the remembrance which our savior there requires of us, is
the remembrance of his death, which is past, and not present, and therefore
after most proper manner of speech, may well be remembered. Now this
remembrance, can in no wise possibly be so lively, and so effectually work in
our hearts, as when we most certainly believe, that in the sacrament of the
aultare, is verily the self same body in substance, which died for us, and
therefore the Prophet David, foreseyng in spirit, this so excellent a memory,
says in his.cx. Psalm. Psalm. 110.
Our merciful gracious Lord, has made a memory of all his merueylous works,
and by and by, declaring in what manner he makes that memory, he adds those
words, he has given a food to such as fear him. This fode (which ye
Prophet says, that Christ should leave in remembrance of al his marvelous
works, that is, of his incarnation, his passion, his ascension, and glory in
heaven, and other like works) most chiefly is to be verifyed of the body and
blood of our savior Christ, in the sacrament of the aultare. Besides this,
the body and blood of our savior Christ (as it is in the sacrament, under the
fourmes of bread and wine) may in that respect also very well be a
remembrance of it self, as it honge on the cross, in the vysyble form of a
mortal man, and as it is now in heaven, in ye form of an immortal man.
Farthermore, when our savior said. Do this in the remembrance of me, he meant
they should do the whole ministratio^, which he then did in remembrance of
him, which whole ministration, cannot be accordynglye, done otherwise, but
that there must needs be present, the very body and blood of our savior
Christ.

Math. 26.
When he said: Poor men ye shall have always with you, but me shall ye not
always have with you. Some have upon these words concluded, that the body
and blood of our savior Christ, cannot be in the sacrament of the altar for
then (say they) Christ should be always with us. whereof him self says the
contrary. But if those me^ so concluding, Aunsvvere
would no more, but confer saint Mark, and saint Matthew together, touching
the foresaid words of Christ, and by yt the one Evangelist says, would
sincerely judge what the other meant, they should sone perceue this their
objection, to be of no force or strength at al, to prove, that they thereby goo
about to prove. For saint Mark in his.xiiij. Mar. 14.
Chapter, first tells the story of the woman, which came to Christ, and
brought with her an Alabaster box of most precious ointment, and poured the
ointme^t on his head, next he tells how certain of the dysciples did murmr,
and grudge at that fact of the woman, and said: What means this loss, and
waste of oyntement? Might it not have been sold for more then three.C. pence,
and given to the poor? Thyrdely he tells, how our savior being offended
with the dysciples, for their murmuring against the woman, and how withal he
allowyng and commending her fact, did say in this manner. Let her alone: Why
are ye greuouse unto her? she has done a good deed: for always shall you have
poor men amongst you, and when ye shall please, you may bestow your charity
on them, but me shall ye not have always amongst you. This woman has
bestowed on me that she had, and she has prevented to anoint my body, against
it shall be buried. By this process of S. Mark, it is euydent, that our
savior in all that his talk, had a respect to the charity, which that woman
then showed upon him, when she poured the precious ointment on his head, the
like whereof, he says, no man should be able to show on him in time to come,
meaning, that when he should once rise from death to life, and have an
immortal body, that then he would not look to receive the like at any
man's hands, but that then men might at their pleasure bestow on the poor,
who always are in the world in the mortal estate, and may by charity of
good folk, be releued and comforted. In such sort in deed, our savior is not
now amongst us, but the being of his body and blood in the Sacrament of the
altar is after another sort. For in the Sacrament he is, to feed us with his
body and blood, and not vysybly to show him self unto us, as he the^ did to
his apostles, nor to have ointment poured on him, as he then had. 1. Corin. ^.
and spiritual drink) partelye of Christ's words in the.vi. of Ihon John. 6.
(where he says that. It is the spirit which gives life, and that the flesh
profyteth nothing) partly upon the common manner of speaking, used of the
Catholyke church, which calls the Body and blood of our Savior Christ,
in the sacrament of ye altar, a spiritual meat and a spiritual drink. For
answer Aunsvvere.
to which objection, it is first to be understood, that one self thing may
be both spiritual, and yet nevertheless of a corporal substance to.

As for example, the body of man after the resurrection, shall (as S. Paul
wytnessheth in the.xv. chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians) be
spiritual, i. Corin. 15.
and yet it shall be then the same in substance, that it is now. Again, Manna
a meat which God sent to the children of Israel in wyldernes, is both in
Scripture, and of the catholyke church also, called a spiritual meat, and the
water likewise which god gave them out of a rock, is called a spiritual
drink, and yet as well Manna, as the water, were of a bodily substance. In
the.vi. to the Galathians, Galath. 6.
saint Paul calls mortal men, living then on the earth, spiritual.
Wherefore spiritual, is not so to be taken always, as to exclude corporal,
but that thing whatsoever it be, may be called spiritual, wherein is a work
wrought by god, above nature. For as god is a spirit, so are his supernatural
works called spiritual, and the things also, on, and in whom, such works
are wrought, are named spiritual things: and therefore Manna, though it were
of a bodily substance, yet for that it came miraculouslye from above, by the
only power of God, and not of nature, is, and may well be called, a spiritual
meat. And the drink which issued out of the rock, albeit it was
insubstaunce very water, yet for that God by his omnipotency, made it suddenly
to issue out of a rock, it is named a spiritual drink. Our bodies likewise
after the resurrection, shall have in them immediately of God, above ye power of
nature, immortality, incorruptibilitie, with other like supernatural qualities,
and for that cause, they shall after the resurrection, be spiritual bodies.
Now then what necessity is there, that because the body of our savior Christ
in the Sacrament of the Altar, is a spiritual meat, therefore it should not
be also the corporal substance of his body? When the catholyke church does
say, that the body of Christ in the Sacrament, is a spiritual body, it
means, that it is there only thoroughe the almightye power of God, and not
by the power, or manoure of nature. Likewise, when the catholyke church
says, that the body of Christ is to be received there spiritually, it
means not that therefore the very body of Christ is not there to be received
really and in very deed. For this word, spiritually, does signifye only the
manner of the receauyng, and does not importe the substance of the thing so
received. Besides this, the catholic church, beleuynge that in the Sacrament
of the aultare, is always reallye the body and blood of our savior Christ,
does yet put a difference in the manner of receauyng thereof, and uses to say,
that when good men receive the sacrament, that they receive the body and
blood of Christ, both sacramentally, and spiritually to, but when evil men
receive it, that they receive the body of Christ sacramentally only, and not
spiritually, because they come unto it unworthily, and therefore do they
procure thereby, to them selves dampnation. But now to open fardar the very
meaning of those words of Christ. It is the spirit that gives life, the
flesh profits nothing, you shall understand, that these words are taken of
the catholyke church, in two most godly senses, the one is, to mean by the
spirit, the godhed, and by the flesh the nature of man, as if he had said, it
is the godhed that causes my flesh to be able to give life, nether is my
flesh the flesh of a bare man, for then it being eaten could not profyt you,
but my flesh is united in unity of person to the godhed, so that it is
thereby able to bring life to the worthy eater thereof. Thus does Cyryll
Cirill.
upon the.vi, of Saint John expound these words. And to like purpose saint
Augustyne Augustine.
says upon the.vi. of Ihon, that as knowledge being separated from charity,
makes men proud, but being joined with charytye does edyfye: even so man's
flesh not united to the Godhed, and being eaten, does not profytte, but the
flesh of Christ, which is in him, in unity of person, inseperably united to
the godhed, being worthelye received, must needs hyghly profyt. The other sense
of those words, to mean by the spirit, a spiritual understanding of Christ's
promise, made in Capernaum when he said, John. 6.
the food that I will give unto you is my flesh, which words be then
understood spiritually, when they be taken, to mean that thing which passes
the power of nature to do and man's wit by natural reason to comprehend:
likewise by the flesh, is to be meant a fleshely understanding of the said
promysse, as to understand without faith in Christ's deity, as the
Capernaites did, which took Christ but for a bare man, and so conceived no
otherwise of the eating of his flesh, then of commen meat bought in ye
shambles. This sense has S. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
writing upon the.vi. of John, and S. Augustyne writing upon the same Chapter.
Answer.
and lack of knowledge of the first institution of ye creed. For in the
primatyue church, when men of all ages did suddenly turn from gentility, to the
christian religion, and yet then were not by and by, upon such there turn,
admitted to any sacrament, but first were instructed in artycles, necessary
for them to believe, before they were baptized, this common creed was taught
them, and they were for that time called Catechumini, that is younglynges in
Christ's religion, and begynners admytted, but to the first principles of the
chrystian faith, during which time they were not suffered, so much as to be
present at the mass, but after the gospel, were quyte excluded from the same,
as by the undoubted wrytynges of the ancient fathers in christ's church, may
most evidently appear: So that this reason is fo^d and to no purpose to say,
that because it is not in the commen creed expressly set fourth, that in the
sacrament of the altar, is the very body and blood of our savior christ,
therefore no christian man is bound to believe it so to be. S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom.
and S. Augustyne Augustine
having occasion many times in their sermones made by them, to speak of this
Sacrament, for as much as among their audience were as well yonglynges, not yet
baptized, as other faithful, already christened did use often to say. Quod
fideles noru^t, yt is, which ye faithful, or they yt be al ready baptized know
or such like thing, and would not then expreslye declare the truth, touching
the sacrament of the aultare, for that it was not the manner to reueyle such
mysteries to those yonglinges: but to them was in general, as sufficient for
salvation, prescribed in that common creed, that they should believe the
catholic church: which not only was sufficient tha^ for the^, beleuynge the
other articles of there creed, but is sufficient at this present also for us,
co^firminge our selves in all points to the common belefe of the catholyke
church, which is the surest pyller that men may lene unto, be they learned, or
unlearned, and such a pyller, as who that most strongly cleueth to, is in most
assured state of everlasting life. There are other objections objection.
upon.iii. particular artycles of our creed which are, that Christ is
ascended, and sytteth at the right hand of God the father, and from thense
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Which articles yet being rightly
understood, Aunsvvere.
should rather confyrme us in the true catholyke belefe, of the presence of
christ's body in the sacrament of the aultare. For as it is above nature for a
man's body to ascend, and above the worthynes of man's nature, to sit at the
right hand of God the father, that is, to be of equal power, and glory with
God the father, and finally, as it is above the authority of man's nature, to
give sentence of eternal death, and life, upon all mankind, and yet every
good manne steadfastly believes al these supernatural powers in Christ,
touching his manhed, because he is both God and man, and to god nothing is
impossible, even so should we with like belefe, knowing that Christ is
omnipotent, credit al other things done, or spoken by Christ, and be most
certain, that how so ever they seem in appearaunce to our reason, yet in very
deed they agree, and stand right well with those foresaid.iii. articles of our
creed, and that though we cannot by our wits conceive, how Christ is
ascended, and is nevertheless in the Sacrament also, yet they must needs be both
believed, because gods word does affirm them both, and ye catholyke church
does believe them both, which church has always taught that Christ is in
heaven, in the visyble form of a man, and in the sacrament, under the visible
fourmes of bread and wine, his wisdom so ordeyning, that with our hearts we
should behold his glory, as he sytteth in heaven, at the right hand of the
father, and wythall should feed on his very body in the sacrament, to receive
the more grace, and thereupon so to be governed with his spirit, that hereafter
we also might be partakers of the like glory in heaven.

And albeit these solutions might sufffise, and instruct sufficientlye the
unlearned people, to answer, both to these, and all other common objections,
made against the Sacrament of the Aultare, troublynge much the heads of the
simple people, by their folly, in crediting evil, and pernicious
scholemaysters, to their destruction, where giving credit to the catholic
church, they might avoid all danger, and merit a great deal, yet to open
further the falshed, and noughtines of the heretic teachers, in our time, and
how glad, and willinge they are to abuse the simplicity of the unlearned
people, ye shall have here added, some moo objections, and solutions given to
them, to this end that if the said simple people have been infected with the
said objections, or such like, they may be well satisfied in their conscience,
and thereupon adhere unto the catholyke faith, maynteyned, and observed in the
catholic church, out of which, there is no salvation. done only to the
fourmes, and qualities sensible, which in deed are subject to passibilite,
and corruption, but in no wise, to the incorruptible body and blood, of our
savior Christ, under them contained. Do we not read, I pray you in the
fourth of Matthew, how that our savior suffered the devil, to take him, and
carye him up into the pinnacle of the temple, and afterward to the top of an
high mountain, and yet who does not know that he suffered no vilany thereby
at all? The son beams also many times, do shine on things impure, and
unclean, yet are they no whyt thereby defiled. The body of man is with a
greater union joined to the soul, then are the fourmes of bread and wine, to
the body and blood of our savior Christ, in the Sacrament of the altar,
and yet we know that mortification, putrefaction, and other such like things
chauncynge to our body, the soul has in it no such passion, for that it is
immortal. The very Godhed of our savior Christ, was in unity of person,
united to his manhod, and yet none of the passions, pains, or griefs, which
he sustained in his manhod, brought violence, alteration, or change to his
godhed. For the godhed is in alterable, and vnpassible. The simplicity of
Christen people, in the primatyue church, was such, that they beleuynge
most certainly, the body and blood of our savior Christ to be in the
sacrament of the altar, under the fourmes of bread and wine, did without al
curious talk of the fourmes, and accidents, bend the^ selves to be present
at mass, wherein the mighty work of consecration is wrought by god, and
wherein our savior Christ also is, in fourmes of bread and wine, offered up to
the heavenly father, by the priest, for the sooner obteinyng of mercy, and
favor toward us, and the said people being at mass, they with most
fervent devotion, did pray, and did honor, the blessed sacrament of the
altar, the body and blood of our savior Christ: and besides this, they did
oftentimes, with fear and trembling, prepare them selves to the worthy
receyte thereof, and by such their godly behavior, they did purchase to them
selves great abundaunce of grace, where we by the contrary, and most
unchristian behauour, provoke gods wrath daily, more and more, upon our
selves, and ye whole realm. For nothing sooner styrreth God to auengeaunce,
then the presumption of such as will curiously enter into his hydden secrettes,
and therevpo^ do contempne all that, which by their feeble wits, they are
not able to understand.

John. vi.
where he says. Qui manducat meam carnem et bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam
eternam. That is to say. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has everlasting life. Upon these words they gather, that if in the
sacrament of the altar, be really the body and blood of our savior Christ,
then who so receueth the sacrament, must needs enjoy everlasting life. But the
scripture witnesses, that Judas received it, and saint Paul in the.xi. 1.
Corin. xi
of his first Epistle to the Corinthians says, that. Who so receueth the
sacrament unworthily, receaueth it to his dampnation.

Qui credit in me habit vitam eternam. That is to say. He yt believes in me,
has everlasting life. And in the first Epistle of S. John, 1. John. 4
and the fourth chapter it is written. Quisquis confessus fuerit quoniam Jesus
est filius dei, deus in eo manet et ipse in deo. That is to say. Who soever
shall confess, that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and he in
God. There have been, and are thousands which believe in Christ, and that
Christ is the very son of God, and yet shall not for all that be saved, but
either for lack of true belefe, in other articles of the christian religion,
or for lack of good life, shall be dampened. This condition than is to be added
to the forsayde sentences, if in such belief a man dye, and therewith is
faithful, in the necessary articles, and out of state of all deadely sin, he
shall tha^ with out any doubt inherit the kyngedome of heaven. So in this
present objection, we must make a limitation, and say, that who so eats,
and drynketh worthily. etc. To the co^fyrmacion hereof. August sermon.xi. De
verbis domini.
Saint Augustine says, in his eleue^th sermon. De verbis domini. Profecto
est quidam modus manducandi illam carnem quomodo qui manducauerit, in Christo
manet, et Christus in eo. Non ergo quocumque modo quisqua^ manducauerit carnem
Christi, et biberit sanguinem Christi, manet in Christo, et in illo Christus,
sed certo quodam modo: quem modum vtique ipse videbat quando ista dicebat. That
is to say. Verily, there is a certain manner of eating that flesh, after
which manner, he that shall have eaten it, does dwell in Christ, and Christ
in him. Wherefore, note in what manner soever a man does eat Christ flesh,
and drinks his blood, he dwells in Christ, and Christ in him, but he
that eats, and drinks after a certain special manner, to which manner
Christ had respect, when he spoke the foresaid words. Idem contra. Cresco.
gramaticum. li. i. Capi. 24.
The same saint Augustine in his first book. Contra Chrescouium gramaticu^
and the.xxiiii. Chapter says thus. Quid de ipso corpore et sa^guine domini,
vnico sacrificio pro salute nostra, guamuis ipse dominus dicat Nisi
manducaueritis carne^ filij hominis. etc. non ne ide^ apostolus docet etiam hoc
perniciosum male vtentibus fieri? That is to say. What of the very body, and
blood of our savior, the only sacrifyce for our salvation? though there of
our Lord does say, unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man. etc. does
not ye same Apostle (meaning Paul) teach that it also is pernicious to them,
that do use it not duly, and ryghtfully?

John. 10.15.
(John.x. and.xv.) does say, I am a door, I am a vine, i. Corin. 10.
and saint Paul. (Pri. ad. Corin. x.) uses such like speech, which
speech of Christ, and of saint Paul, in those places, does not import, that
Christ in every deed, by that saying was a door, or a vine, or such like, but
speaking after that figuratyfe speech, or manner, he did mean that he was a
figure of a door, of a vine, and such like, and that he had the property, of
a door, of a vine, and so forth. Semblably (say they) when Christ at his
last supper (taking bread, and blessing it) did say. This is my body. And
taking the cup, and giving thanks, did say, this is my blood of the new
testamente, etc. his speech so pronounced, and uttered, did not import, that
Christ thereby does make of the bread and wine, his body, and blood, but
either he meant, that the bread and wine was signs, and tokens of his body,
and blood, or else that they should be fygures of his body, and blood, and not
his very body, and blood in deed, and consequently therefore, they say, that
in the sacrament of the altar, there is neither the body, neither the blood
of Christ, but bare material bread, and wine, being only signs, tokens, and
fygures of Christ's body and blood there. For solucio^ of this objection,
Aunsvvere.
this may be said, that it is truth, that Christ, and saint Paul in the
places before alleged, do so say, as is deduced in the beginning of this
argument, or objection, and truth it is also, that the speech of Christ, I
am a door, I am a vine etc. does not importe that Christ, by that speaking
was in very deed a door, or a vine, but that he was a figure of a door, and
of a vine, and had the propertye of the door, and of the vine. But when it is
said that the semblable is of Christ's words, This is my body, this is my
blood, that is neither true, nor does follow, either by the rules of reason,
or of scripture: for concerning reason, either must we reason, and say, that
Christ always in his speaking did use fygures, metaphores, and tropes,
(which to say, is most false, as it appears in the.xvi. of S. John John. 16
), either else we must say, that Christ did but only sometimes speak in
fygures, and not so always, which being true, and therefore to be granted,
it follows not in reason, that though Christ in the.x. and.xv. of saint
John. etc. did speak fyguratiflye, John x. and.16.
that therefore, here in these words of Christ, this is my body, this is my
blood, he did also speak fyguratiflye, wherefore, let these sely souls, that
have been seduced by this kind of arguments, ask their teachers, whether
they can maintain, and defend this their own argument, with so feeble a
consequent, or no. And if they can not, then tell the^ yt they be very
varlettes in deed: and as for the rule of scriptures, that is of the
circumstau^ce of ye letter, and of other places of scripture, co^ferred with the
same, to gather thereof yt very meaning of the thing, an example, whereof we
have. John. 2. and.16.
Johan. ii. and.xvi. And here the unlearned are to be taught, that although
in the prophets, and the histories of the old testamente, tropes, and fygures
are received, and allowed, forasmuch as by such tropes, and fygures, the
thing spoken, is more vehemently declared, and set forth, yet (as the excellent
prelate, and notable great clerk, the Lord bishop of winchester, now most
worthy Lord chaunceler of England, in his learned book of confutacio^ of
heresies, against the sacrament of the altar, does prude^tly advertise us, and
clerly affirm) in ye doctrine, and precepts of the now milita^t church, al
things of our religion, and faith, ought to be taken symply, and plainly. And
in very deed, if in the sacrament of ye altar were not ye true body of Christ,
but a figure, and a signification only of it, tha^ ye sacraments of ye new
testament should have nothing more, but rather less, the^ ye sacraments of ye
old testament had, which is against ye catholyke doctrine of the church, and
against al good reason. This cup is the new testament, in my blood. And
seeing these words must needs, as they say be taken fyguratiuely, inasmuch as
the very material cup it self, was neither the new testamente, ne yet the
blood of Christ, therefore likewise, these words also which Christ, taki^g
bread into his hands, blessi^g it, saying. This is my body, must needs be
taken figuratively. For answer whereunto, we may say, Aunsvvere
as we did say before, to the same objection, yt this argument is naught, and
very evil framed, for though we did admit a figure to be herein ye cup, yet
it follows not thereby, yt we must needs take ye other speech, touchi^g ye body
to be fyguratyue also, especially for yt in ye one speech, it is to wit,
touching ye body, all the circu^sta^ces of the text, and course of scripture,
do enforce us to take ye speech, properlye wherein ye other speech touching
the cup, all the circumstances of the text, and course of scripture does
importe the contrary.

For answer Aunsvvere.
whereunto may be said, that in deed it is true, that Christ has but one
true natural body, and where they say, that one true natural body, can not
be, but in one place, it is also true, after one, and the self same manner of
being, but after diverse manners of being, one body, may be sundry where, yea,
and at one time to, it is to wit, in heaven, in the visyble form, and manner
of man, and in the sacrament of the altar, under the form, and manner of
bread and wine, and in eueryche of them, really, and truly to, in those
respects, God being therein the doer, who is omnipotent.

Answer.
whereunto, is to be said, that this objection proceeds of a great
ignorance, for he that makes this objection, takes that ye priest saying
mass, and pronouncing the words of co^secracion, does make God, where in
very deed, the priest goes about no such things, and if he did, neither he,
ne yet god him self can make God, but the truth is that the priest being the
minister of God, and god being there the worker with his word, by the priest
pronounced, there is caused the very body of Christ to be there present, where it
was not there before, and yet no new body there made, but yt body there present
which long ago was borne of the Vyrgyn Mary the, same (I say) in substance is
there present only, under the forms of bread, and wine.

An other objection objection,
there is, and that is this S. Luke, in the.xvii. chapter of the acts, does
testifye that S. Paul, being at athens, and in mars street, before the
council there, did say, amongst other words, that God does not dwell in
temples made with hands, whereupon the unlearned, vnlernedly does gather, that
seeing the material temple is made with hands, and the sacrament of the altar
is in ye said material temple, it follows (say they) that the body and blood
of Christ, can not be in it, because God does not dwell in temples made with
hands, And this objection has been so much liked, and commended among the
proceeding preachers abusing ye ignorant, yt they thought it inevitable, and
therefore abusing the said people they caused it to be set up, and painted for
a gaye show in the temples.

For answer Aunsvvere.
whereunto, this is to be told you, yt there is a great difference between
being, and dwelling in a place, for a great many of you, (I doubt not) have
been both in the cheap side, in Paul's church yard, yea and Paul's church
to, where ye have not, with most due reverence, used, and behaved your selves,
and yet I am sure that ye dwell not there. In deed, God is properlye said to
dwell in heaven, because he there does show, and manifest his great glory, and
in the hearts of just, and good people, he is also said to dwell by grace, but
as for other places, he is in them being, but not dwelling. And as concerning
the being of God in the sacrament of the aultare, forasmuch as there is the
very substance of christ's natural, and true body, and blood, taken of the
Vyrgyn Mary, and that the divinity is, in unity of person, inseperably
united, and joined to the said body and blood, therefore we must say and
believe, that the godhed of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar, with his
humanity, in a very special sort, and does not thereby dwell in the said
sacrament, and so this objection is not worth a good button, for all the
bragges that has been made of it.

Other fond, and folysh objections, there are, which are not worthy to be
answered unto, and therefore are not needful to be touched, exhortyng you
therefore in Christ, fyrmely, and steadfastly, to believe the doctrine of the
catholyke church herein, and so shall you avoid danger, please God, profit
your self, and (lyuinge well) come at the last to joy everlasting, which
grant unto us the father, the son, and the holy ghost, to whom be honor and
glory for ever AMEN.

Domine saluos fac regem, et reginam et omnes, qui eis been uolunt.
Imprinted at London in Poules churcheyarde, at the sign of the holy Ghost, by
Ihon Cawodde, Prynter to the King and Queens Majesty's.

Cum priuilegio Regiae maiestatis.


