A most worthy and famous work, both pleasant and profitable, conteynyng the
long and cruel Wars between the Goths, and the valyant Romayne Emperors,
for the possession of Italy.

With the vvounderful chances that happened to both nations: written in the
Italian tongue, And newly Translated into English, By A.G.

Imprinted at London, by VVyllyam-Hovv, for George Bucke.

To the right honorable Sir William Sicill Knighte principal Secretary to
the Queens Majesty and Master of her highness Court of wards and liueries,
Arthur Golding wishes continuance of health, with increase of honor.
LIke as vines to the intent the better to prosver and preserve their fruit to
the use and pleasure of man, require the stay of trees that be stronger then
themselves: Even so it behooves them that mind to put forth any work to the
behoof and commodity of others, to shroude themselves under the favor of
some such person, for whose sake their doing may be the better liked and
accepted of all men.

The which thing this my rude and unpolished translation of the historye of
Leonard Aretine right well perceauyng, at such time as being fully finished and
ended it was now ready to set foot out of doors and to commit it self to the
wide world, beholding it self spoiled of his Romayne garment and turned into a
plain English cote, began to be somewhat abashed and to look about him for
some favorable patron under whose protection it might adventure to go
abroad. But to who^ rather ought it to present it self then to him under whose
roof it has been harbroughed and fostered from the infancy, until such
time as it came to his full grouth. And therefore although the want of fine
pennyng and eloquent indityng of the hystorye in our language, enforce me to
confess it unworthy to trouble your honor being otherwise busyed in most
weyghtye affairs of this Realm: yet notwythstandyng partly in co^syderation
of my duty, but more upon confydence of your clemencye, I have taken
boldness to dedicate the same unto you: so much the rather, in as much as the
work entreats of serious and weyghtye matters.

Wherein if it may please your honor so to accept my doing, as that this my
simple Translation may under your favorable protection be bold to show it
self abroad, I shall not only think my travel abundauntly recompensed, but
also account it for a further encouragemente, to give the adventure upon some
greater matter hereafter.

Finished at your house in ye Strond the second of April, 1563. By your
honors at commandment Arthur Goldyng.

TO THE READER
Forasmuch as this work of Leonard Aretine entreats of the repulsyng of the
Goths out of Italy by the Captains of themperoure of Constantinople,
touching lightly by the way the cause of their arrival in the same country,
It seems expedient to make further rehearsal of ye cause of their first
entrance with in the bounds of ye Roman Empire, and of their success in
the same through which they grew so strong in process of tyms, that they not
only beareft it of diverse provinces and members pertaining thereto, but also
gatte into their hands Italy it self with ye Islands adjoining, making
themselves Lords and Masters of Rome sometime sovereign lady and Empress of
the world. In declaration whereof yt matter it self will somewhat minister
occasion to speak of the Erules and of Odoacer out of whose hands the Goths
wrested ye dominion and possession of Italy, and synally of the two politic
martial and fortunate Captains Belisarius and Narses who after eyghtene
years wars, recovered the same again to the Empire. The which things I
will ou^^ run as bryefely as the matter will permytte. The Goths therefore
by the assertion and consent of allowable Authors, enhabyted sometime beyond
the river Istre or Danow in the Country called in old time Dacia now named
Valachia. So that the Ostrogothes or Easternegothes borderyng upon the coaste
of Nowcalled Mare maiore
Pontus Eurinus, (of whom this present hystorye entreats) are accompated for
the Gettes and Triballes: and the Viu^gothes or westerngothes enhabytyng more
into the fyrme and main land toward the head of Danow and Germany, are
accounted for the Daces or D^ues. Now about the year of our Lord God. 373.
In the (...) of Valens Emperor of the East, a certain people of Now called
Tartarie.
Scythia named Hunnes assembling them selves in great number, under the
conducte of their Captain Cadaris invaded the Easterngothes and brought them
in subjection. The westerngothes strycken with fear at the sudden misfortune
of their neighbors, abandonyng their natyue Country sent Ambassadors to the
Emperor Valens, proferyng to receive the Christen faith, and to set themselves
as a wall and bulwark to the Romayne Empire against the assaults of the ^uell
Hunnes and other Barbarous nations, so that he would suffer them to pass the
river Danow and give them Mysia to enhabyte. Upon this condition their
request was granted, and they received both Christen Religion and also
governors of the Emperor.

Through the misgoueruement and extorcion of who^ they were so vexed, that they
made insurrection against ye Empire, subdued Mysia and Thrace overcame
the emperor in battle and burnt him in a cotage where he had hidden himself, and
finally besieged Constantinople. Nevertheless afterward as well appeased and
pacified by the virtuous and upright government, as vanquished and subdued by
the force and puissance of Theodosius (who succeeded Valens) they submitted
themselves again to ye Roman Empire, and served in the wars at
commandment by the space of.xxxv. years, until such time as Stillico
(traitorously practisyng the confusion of Honorius son of the said
Theodosius, to the intent to have made his own son Eucherius Emperor) by
puttyng them out of wages, and defrauding them of their pensions, compelled
them to rebel again. Whereupon taking weapon in hand, they invaded Pannonie,
and there making one Alaricus a noble and valianie gentleman King, wasted all
Pannonie, Thrace, and Sclauonie, with all the countries borderyng upon Italye,
and finally after great slaughter both given and received, spolyed al Italy
with fire and sword, sacked Rome, and conquered Spain, where they also settled
themselves, and within few years after grew to such wealth authority and
puissance, that the younger Valentinian Emperor of Rome (of whom mention
shall be made in the beginning of this work) enteryng in leage with their King
Theodoriche, used his aid against Attila King of the Hunnes. For the Hunnes
like good bloudhoundes followyng freshly the pursuit of their foresaid victory
against the Easterngothes partly moved of envy toward the state of the
Romayne Empire, and partly solicited thereto by the traitor Ruffine whom
Theodosius had left as governor and protector of his other son Arcadius
Emperor of the East,) associatyng unto them the said Easterngothes, the
Gepides, the Erules, and other Barbarous people to the number of five thousand
men, under the conducte of Attila (worthily surnamed the scourge of God)
afflicted the dominions and provinces of the Romayne Empire, and in especially
wasted and spoiled Italye, razyng her Cytyes to the ground, and bearyng down
all things before the like a most vyolente and horrible tempeste. Aftrer
whose return into Pannonie, the seat of their kingdom, Attila immediately
dyed, Whereupon ensued dyscord between the Hunnes and the Easterngothes, in
which the Goths drawing to their part: the Gepides, prevailed, and drove the
Hunnes out of Pannonie back again into Tartarie from whence they first came.
Howbeit they left their name still behind them to the Country, the which
after them is called Hungarye unto this day.

About the same time that the Goths had driven the Hunnes out of Hungary,
it fortuned that one Aspar a noble man of great power and authority
proclaimed his son Ardaburis Ceaser against Leo then Emperor of
Constantinople. In somuche that Leo was feign to assemble a power and encounter
with him with in the City. In the which conflicte Aspar and Ardaburis being
overcome were yielded to the Emperor and put both to death. The Goths taking
occasion of advantage upon this ciuyll war, wasted all Sclauonie and never
rested until such time as Leo had granted them Hungarye (from whence they had
utterly expulsed the sons of Attila) together with Misia to have and hold
freely without tribute or subjection to the Empire. Upon which condition
truce was taken, and for better obseruyng thereof.

Theodenur king of the Goths gave his son Theodorich in Hostage unto Leo. It
was not long after but that there fell grudge and consequently war between
Theodenur and his brother Valanur wherein Valanur was slain. By means whereof
it came to pass that Theodenur enjoyed quietly the whole and entier possession
of all Dacis, Masia, and both the Pannonies. Leo therefore fearyng the power and
puissance of Theodenur, delivered him his son Theoderich. Theodenur in
recompense of that good turn, turned the truce yt was taken between them into
continual peace, and so the Goths ceased to molest the Empire. In the mean
season after much alteration and vsurpyng by Tirantes, Augustulus a very
child the son of Orestes a sage and wise Senator of Rome, being by favor
of the Citizens of Rauenna proclaimed emperor of the Weste, to the intent to
refreshe and ease the Empire of the long continued trouble that it had suffered
many years (...), by the counsel of his father Orestes, took peart with the
Vandales in Affricke, who had always since their first coming, been evil
neighbors to the Empire. But whiles all was cauime and quiet on the south,
behold an hedeous and horrible tempeste rises up against him out of the
North. The Erules and Turinges the miserable relics of the army of Attila,
(who after that the said Attila was dead and his sons driven away, being
vanguished by ye Easterngothes and compelled backs again toward Tartarie with ye
Hunnes, had a while held themselves in quiet about ye mouth of the River
Danow) allured with the former spoil of Italy (to whose utter undoing well nigh
all the wars that were made in those days did tend,) came back again and
conqueryng it siewe Orestes and deposed Augustulus, in whom the honorable and
renouned name of Augustus dexied the.517. year after that Octauius Ceaser
(...) that (...) and title of honor given unto him of the Senate and people of
Rome. By means whereof it came to pass, that Italy and Rome became afterward
the common pray of Barbarous kings, so ye he that could make hymslef
strongest enjoyed the possission thereof. For Odoacer and his Erules had
scarcely yet fully settled themselves, when ye Easterngothes (who after the
decease of Theodenur were now under ye government of his sone Theoderich)
envying ye prosperity of yt Erules, and therewith calling to remembrance how
their own countryme^ the westerngothes had already conquered Spain, ye
Vandales Affricke, the Frenchmen, and Burgonions Gallia, ye Sarons Britain,
and other nations other pleasant and fertile countries, earnestly besought and
required their king, to lead them into Italye to the intent as well to
advance the fame and renoune of their Cheuairie, as also to place themselves
in ye conntrye which as it was the head and sovereign of all others, so had it
also the report to be the most pleasant, welthie, and fertile of all the Regions
of Europe. Theoderich albeit he were in manner constrained by his subjects to
do the thing that they requested, yet as one myndfull of the great benefits
that his ancestors had received of ye Emperors of Constantinople, and of the
honorable enter tainement that he himself had had at such time as he lay in
hostage in the Emperors Court, he advertised the Emperor Zeno thereof,
proreuing y^ he would do nothing without his consent. Zeno who at that time
stood in fear of Theoderich and the Goths, (as one that for doubt least he
should grow to strong for him in that part of Europe, was fully determined
before, to have proffered that voyage unto him though no such question had been
moved) gladly condescended to his petition and for the more honor created him
Co^full. Herevppon Theoderich and his countrymen with their wives and children
removed into Italye. Of whose good success and of the good success of his
posterity in that country, together with their expulsing or rather subduing
by the Imperialls, for as much as this History of Leonard Aretine does at
large entreat I will not be tedious in repeating the same. Howbeit it is to be
understood that after the battle of Nuceria where Teias last king of the
Goths was slain, although some departed away with such things as they had
according to covenant yet the greater part of them tarried still: ye which
degenerating into ye name of Italians, lost both their empire and own name for
ever the lxxi. year after their first coming into ye country under Theodorich,
being ye year of grace CCCCC L.IIII. Now as concerning the two noble and
valiant captains Belisarius and Narses the Conquerours and subduers of them,
it is to be doubted whether the miserable misfortune of the one by more to be
lamented, or the unadvisedness and follye of the other (if I may term the
thing according to desert) be to be blamed. For Belifarius after that he had
recovered Affricke from the Vandales, vanquisshed the Persians, fought
porsperously against the Medes, abated the power and pulled down the high
courages of the Goths openinge a way of conquest to his successor, and
atcheued so many hault enterprises and Marciall exploytes that the glorious
fame of his doings did sprede his renown over all the world and made his
name immortal, in so much that he was accounted as a perfect and
incomparable Mirror for all Captains to behold, and a verrye master of
Cheualrye, whom neither ambytion the common corrupter of noble hearts, nor the
licentyous lybertye of the Camp, nor the instigatyons of mighty Princes could
withdraw from his allegeans and promise made to the Emperor Justinian. Was in
the eude in his old days upon light suspicion without proof, by the same
Emperor for whom he had so often put his life in peril: to whom he had
acquired so much honor, whose favor he had esteemed more then to raygne
himself as an Emperor, deprived of both his eyes, and constrained to beg
his bread miserably from door to door, an unworthy reward for so many good
deeds and so much good service done to the Empire. And Narses the subduer of
the Goths and reducer of Italy to the Empire when he had governed it quietlye
many years together to bys great honor and admyration, at the last (like a
shrewd cow which when she has given a good quantity of milk overthrows
the payle with her heel and spyllethe the same) provoked only by the
presumptuous words of a vain and envious woman, weued such a web (according
to his own words) as neither she nor the Emperor were able to wear out, no
nor he himself to unweave again after he had ones put it into the loome,
though he did the best he could to have stayed it, so hard and difficult a
matter is it to stop a mischief of the course, when it ones has gotten the
reins in the neck, and has set foot forward to run the race. For the
Lombardes being by him in the ecstasy of his fumyshe rage called out of
Pannonie (which by that tyms was become the common receptacle of the enemies of
the Empire) not only within short time after his decease brought Italye in
subjection to them, but also syns that day hitherto (which thing neither the
Goths, Hsines Vandales, Erules, nor any other of the barbarous nations with
their manyfolde and terrible assaults were able to compass and bring to
effect) have held a portion thereof as a perpetual possession and
inheritance to themselves, which retains their name unto this day. But
forasmuch as these things were done somewhat after the subduing of the Goths,
and do little or nothing pertain to the present purpose of this History I
will not stand any longer upon them, but remit the to the reading of mine
Author.

The preface of Leonard Aretine, unto his books of the wars in Italye
against the Goths.
Although it had been a far greater pleasure toine, to have written of the
prosperous and flourishing estate of Italy, then of the slaughters and
destruction of it: yet notwythstanding forasmuch as the time requires
otherwise, we also will change with the time and follow the mutabilitie of
fortune reportinge in these books the inuastons of the Goths, and the wars
through the which almost all Italy was brought to utter (...). S^^ly a
sorrowful matter, but yet for the knowledge of things done in those days,
necessary to be entreated of. For I cannot think but that when Xenophon of
Athens that excellent Clerk, did write of the beseging and famishing of Athens
and of the throwing down of the walls of it, he was sorry in his heart that
he had occasyon so to do. And yet he wrate it, because he thought it expedient
that the rememberance of such things should not perish. Neither does our Liuy
deserve les praise when he reherceth ye taking and burning of Rome by the
Frenchmen, then when he sets out ye famous triumph of Paulus Emylius over
the Mare^^^es, or the name conquestes of Scip^s Affricanus. For it is the duty
of an history to put in writing all adue^tures as well unfortunate as
fortunate. And therefore a man may wyshe ye best, but he must write be it good
or bad as occasie^ offers. I assure you as I was inditinge these matters,
albeit many things did grieve me, for thentier love yt I bear to my native
country, yet not wythstandyng this reason I had to comfortine, yt although
Italy suffered at yt time most extreme miseries. yet at the length she not
only gate thupper hand and expulsed those foreign nations but also has
remained from yt day to this most welthy and puissant both by sea and land, and
that from that time forth her Cities have flourished in riches and aucthorie
most abundantly, and do florishe still at this hour, thonour and dominion of
the^ now stretching it self far of on al sides, so that the things that have
happened unto her, seem not so much to be lamented as to be rejoiced at, like
unto Hercules whose great exploits made him more famous then ever he should
have been if he had not attempted those dangerous enterprises. I will not
speak of the great Civility, good Nurture, Courtesye, and trad of all
Liberal arts and learning, of ye which Italy shows it self to be a natural
mother and a very nourice, for I will let ye comendations of her alon until
another time. As concerning ye wars yt we now must entreat of, there
remained no mention of the^ among ye Latin writers only there went a report
from man to man and that very sle^der and obscure, yt Belisarius and Narses
captains of ye emperor Justinian drove yt Goths out of Italy, but where or in
what sort, or by what means, there was no inkling at al left in writing. We
came by ye knowledge of the^ out of yt grek Chroncles. Wherefore as I had don by
many other things before, so also I endenored to bring again to light these
things being wellny blurred and blotted out of memory. And yt so much ye
rather, because yt other stories for ye most part do concern thaffaires and
doings of strangers, but this co^cer neth wholly our own matters. Wherein it
may be worth a man's labor to search and peruse ye state of Italye in those
days what Cities, and what kind of people were in it what towns and cities
were beseged, which were won and brought in subiectio, and in what places
battles were fought. For to know all these things it is a great praise, and
not to know the^ it is a foul shame. For it is a toke^ that a man loves his
country, not to be ignorant in thoriginall and procedings thereof, or
whatsoever else has fortuned unto it in times past. Furthermore yt knowledge
of Histories does greatly delight the mind because all we men do of nature
couit to know things, and also it brings great profit for as much as it
contameth ye examples of like affairs to what end they came, and gives
experiens in many things, through the which old men are accounted wiser then
yongme^, because they have seen ino things in their lives time, and by
experiens not only of their own but also of other men's perilles, are made more
ware, and therefore are able to give better judgment and are wont to be led by
better counsel. For when they read of the riches and Empires of ye greatest
kings and ye puissantest nations and percayue how sone they com to decay, they
understand by and by what a folly it is to boast and be proud for those things,
which no man is able to assure himself that they shall continue with him until
night. Thus does an Historye make us both more wise and more modest in our
dooinges. And therefore right reverend father I determined to dedicate these
Books unto you, as well to thentent you might understand my entier love and
affection to wards you, as also that you might be as a Judge of my work and
travel, the which I shall think very well bestowed if so myse and well learned a
man as you are, do allow them and take them in good worth. Whereupon I will
take occasion to go in hand with the process of mine Historye. Farrewell.

The first Book of Leonard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
The dispotition of Agustulus, the division of the lands through Italy, the
cause of the coming of the Goths thither, and of their encounter with
Odoacers Captains.

IR the time that Zene was Emperor of Rome, the Goths under the leading of
Theodorich, determined to invade Italy, lately before soore afflicted with
diverse rodes and invasions of barbarous people, and at that time oppressed with
the tyranny of Odoacer: of the which things I purpose to entreat, repeatyng
somewhat deper the state of those times, to the intent it may be known from
whence the Goths first came, and what hope moved them to invade the Empire.

After the death of the younger Valentinian, The death of Valentinian.
who (as it is well enough known) was slain at Rome of his own Subjects,
the Empire of the West began to waver, and to be as it were without life or
soul.

Now, there were at the same time in Italy, great armies of forreyners raised
latelye before by Valentinian for fears of Attila, and afterward associated
by the Romans against the Vandales. These forreyners perceiving the
empoueryshemente and weakness of the Empire, and therevppon taking courage,
conspired together, and demanded to have the third part of the lands
through all Italye divided among them.

The name of the Empire remained at that time in one Augustulus, who being but
a very child, was goucrned by his father Orestes a Senator of Rome.
Therefore at such time as the men of war demanded a partition of the
lands, and that Orestes being a wise and sage person wythstoode their
request, the Souldyours slew him, and fourth with following their Captain
Odoacer, camme to Rome and deposed Augustulus. Augustulus is deposed and
Odoacer vius peth.
By means whereof having now the law in their own hand, they divided the
third part of the lands among them Odoacer having by this means gotten the
Soueraygnytye, in his own name and in the name of the army ruled the Cytyes
at his own lust and pleasure.

Zeno also Governor of the East Empire lying at Constantynople, began to
dread soore the power of Theodorich. The cause of the commvng of the Goths
into Italy.
For the Goths that inhabited the upper coaste of Thracia, had already
begone to vere and disquiett the Countries borderynge upon them. And it was
none other like, but that they would make some insurrection against the Romain
Empire. Whervppon to the intent to deliver himself and the countries there
aboutes from fear of the Goths. He persuaded Theodorich to pass into Italy,
and to deliver the cities there out of the hands of the wrongful withholders
of them. Induced with these persuation Theordorich remouyng out of Thrace, and
leadyng with him the Goths with their wives and children and all that ever they
had through Syrmium and Illyricum, went toward Italy: where at his first
entrance, the Captains of Odoacer camme against him with their armies. The
first battle betwixt them was fought not far from the City of Aquileia,
upon the river Fontius. In the which conflict after a long and sharp
encounter, the Goths gate the victory, and put the Captains of Odoacer to
flight.

The.ij. Chapter.
Theodorich king of the Goths besieges Odoacer in Rauenna, the matter is
ended by composition, each of them lies in wait to destroy other, Theodorich
preventing Odoacer kylleth him at a banquet, by means whereof he obteyneth the
soueraignitie of Italy, of the acts of Theodorich and of his death.

AFter this, when the Goths had won the cities there aboutes, Odoacer is
besseged.
and vanquysshed the power of their enemies in other places also, at length
they besieged Odoacer in the City of Rauenna. The siege held the Goths tack
longer then they thought it would have done at the first, and that happened
by reason of the situation of the place. For neither can Rauenna be easlye
besieged upon that side that is toward the sea, because it stands hard
upon the shore, neither upon that side that is toward the land, because it
has a diche cut from the river Po, and is enuyroned with certain standing
waters and marisses. By means whereof, the Goths lay well nigh full three
years at the siege thereof and could not win it. But yet in the mean season,
they won all the towns nere about, saving Cesena, the which also was kept
with a strong garrison of Odoacers.

At the last as well the Assaylaunts as the Defendauntes being weryed,
Composition, between Odoacer and Theodorich.
the matter was decided by composition, that Theodorich and Odoacer should be
Comperes and Fellows in Empire. After that things were thus set at a stay,
Throdorich and his Goths entered into Raucuna, neither was there any part of
all Italy that was not content to receive him.

But this copertuershyppe in the Empire lasted not long. For when as the one
bare grudge in his heart prenelye against the other, Theodorich preuentyng
Odoacer badde him to a Banquet and there killed him, The death, of Odoacer.
and so with his Goths bare all the swaye alone in Italy. How (...) it, to
say the truth, his government was not very intolerable, albeit he retained
for his people ye third part of the lands, in such sort as Odoacer had lately
before divided them. The raygne and acts of Theodorich.
For he suffered the cities to be governed by their own laws and by their
own citizins.

Appoyntyng Rauenna to be the Sea of his kingdom, where he also planted him
self. Thyrtye and seven years raygned Theodorich in Italye: neither sat he
still Idellye like a cowarde all the while. For he both anticred Sicill with
all the Ilclandes about it unto his kingdom, and also subdued Dalmatia.
Moreover, during the said time of his raygne, he led an huge host over the
Alps and the river Rhone into France against the French men.

Thus did this King many noble acts, and his name was famous and renowned,
saving that in his latter days, he was noted of crucirye and outrage, for
puttyng to death of Symmachus and Boethius Senators of the city of Rome,
Symmachus. Boetins.
with certain other noble men, only upon suspicion that they sought to set
the city at libertic.

The.iij. Chapter.
Amulusuentha the daughter of Theodorich with her son Athalaricke succeed in
the kingdom, the severity of the Queen in executing of instice, the
vvilfulnesse of the Goths in the education of their king, the untimely death
of the said Athalarick the great friendship of the Queen tovvard Theodatus, and
the ingratitude of him toward her again, the emperor Justinian sends
Belisarius against the Goths, and he conguereth all Sicill.

THeodorich being deceased with out issue male, his daughter Amulusuentha, as
then a Widow, with her son Athalaricke succeeded in the kingdom. This
Athalaricke was but a child to speak of, and therefore all the whole care of
the government lay in the Queens neck. Who having great regard of her infant,
An example of the good education of a Prince.
immediately did put him forth to be brought up in learning and good nurture.
For she gave him learned men to be is teachers, and appointed certain Lords
of the Goths, men ancient, of great gravity and good bringyng up to be
continually about him. And she here self looked very straightlye to the
government of the Empire, prohibiting the Goths as well to do wrong as to
take wrong, and also repealyng diverse acts of her father Theodorich, Justice
and clemency in a woman.
reducyng them to a moore gentleness and clementie. Amongst the which this
was one, that she restored to the sons of Boethius and Symmachus their fathers
goods and inheritance, which Theodorich had lately before confiscate:
affirming that they were wrongfully condemned through false accusations,
whereto the king unadvisedly had given light credit. Furthermore, she compelled
her cosyn german, Justice without parcilaitie
Theodatus (who having great possessions in Thuscane had taken many fermes and
manners violently from his neighbors like a tyrant) to make restituition of the
harms he had done, with a sharp rebuke for his great misbehauiour. This
severity of the Queen, made many of the Goths to become her enemies. And
therefore, tertayne of the chief ^^ them conspiring together, determined to
bring up her son contrary to her disposition, maugre her power. Whereupon
they came unto her saying, it lyked not the Goths that their king should
live in subjection under tutors and teachers, or that he should be kept in awe
of his elders, they said it was meet for a King of such pusaunce as he should
be to set his mind upon cheualrye and feats of arms, and to exercise
himself among lusty young gentlemen, rather than to learn to wait upon a
master, or to sit glummyng among a sort of old Doctards. For by this means
both the body and the mind of their King should be effeminated: But through
the other he should increase as well in strength and courage, as also in conning
and experience. For he was not made king to thentent to instruct his people in
learning, but to enlarge his dominion by knighthod and cheualry. The Queen
albeit she were not ignorant to what end and purpose all this drift was driven,
yet not withstanding because she would not seem to be utterly against their
requests; she co^descended unto the^. The young prince being delivered to the
company of as youthful as himself, win a little while after, Licentious liberty
corruption of youth
fell to a more lasciuius trade of living folowig altogether ye lust of ye
flesh and such other kinds of filthy pleasures. And against his mother he
became so stoberne and self willed through thenticement of ill cou^ sell that
he disdeined to go unto her or speak to her. The Queen when she saw her self
by such policies assaulted of her adversary and bereft of her kingdom, Eu^ill
counsel ^he confusion of counselors
being a woman of a stout courage, could no longer bear with their doings,
but sent certain of her officers privily, and put to death three of the
chiefest of the Goths, which were the ryngleaders and counsaylers of her
son unto all noughtinesse. And so having reconciled him unto her, she took
upon her the government again. But Athalaricke being fallen into diverse
surffetts and diseases through the disorder of his former lascivious living,
The death of Athalaricke.
deceased in the.xviij. year of his age, when he had reigned with his mother x.
years after the death of Theodorich. The Queen aftre the decease of her son,
thinking that she should be the better able to wade through the weightye
affairs of the realm, if so be she had some partaker and assistent, Theodotus
is made king.
took her cousin Theodatus (of whom I made mention before) to be her pertner
in the kingdom. This Theodatus was excellently well learned both in Latyne and
in Greek, and had given himself much to the readyng of Plato and other
philosophy. Nevertheless, being of nature feeble and unconstant he was
distayned with many vices. An example of excedyng ingratitude.
Through which where as the queen of her mere bounty and good will, had
raised him from a subject to the state of a king, he forthwyth requited her
with the greatest ingratitude and treachery that could be. For he conspired
secretly with her enemies, and took and sent her as a banyshed person, into
the Ilelande in the lake of Vulsin. And ere it was long after, he suffered her
to be killed by the kynsfolke and children of them, whom she had put to death
in the time of the obstinat rebellion of her son against here. This so great
untruth and treacherye of Theodatus, did greatly disquiet many of the Goths,
lamenting the unworthy mischaunce of the Queen, and to see the posterity of
Theodorich so wickedly destroyed, in so much that it wanted but little, but that
the Goths had made insurrection against him.

Whereof as soon as the Emperor Justinian had intelligence (for after Zeno,
The cause of the vvarres be tvvene the Emperor and the Goths.
Anastasius, and Iustine, the Empire descended unto him) thinking that the time
now served to set Italy at liberty, he applied all his whole mind and study
how to compass and bring the same to effect. Hereunto his prosperous success
since he was Empereour provoked him: in as much as lately before by his captain
Belisarius, he had vanquished the Vandales and wrested Afric out of their
hands. And therefore he thought it was not to be abidden, that (contrary to the
honor of the Romain Empire) Italy should be held in subjection by the
barbarous. The effect of them perours ambassade van to Theodatus
Induced with these reasons, he sent Ambassadors to Theodatus, requiring him
to surrender up Italy and Sicill, in recompense whereof he proffered him other
dignities and promotio^s: the which offer if he refused, then he denounced open
war against him. Upon the refusal of these offers made by Theodatus, the
Emperor entending to make no further delay, Belisarius is appovnted in to
Italy and Mundus into Dalmatiz.
commanded Belisarius to pass into Italy with his army. Howebeit whiles he
was making preparation he pretended as though he would have sent his navy into
Affricke, and not into Sicill. About the same time also he commanded another
of his captains called Mundus to invade Dalmatia with another power: to the
intent that the Goths being assailed on all sides at once, might the easlyer
be oppressed.

Mu^dus entering into Dalmatia won Salons and set all the country on an uproar.
Belisarius having rigged his ships and embarked his Souldyours, Belisarins
viage into Sicill and of his doing there.
sailed toward Sicill. He had of footmen a sufficient number, all tall men and
pyked Soldiers, and his Horsemen were conveyed with him by water also.

Captains of his footmen were Constantine, Bessas, and Herodian: captains of
his horsemen were Valentine, Innocent and Magnus: and lieutenaunt general and
sovereign of them all was Belisarius. Who following the commaundment of the
emperor his master whereas he pretended to sail toward Cartharge, arrived by
the way in Sicill, A politic Captine.
and there going a land as it had been to refreshe him self and his
souldyours, when he espied time and occasion for his purpose, suddenly he
assailed the city Catina and won it. Then showing him self with his army
abroad, and disclosing his prepensed purpose, within few days after, he
received Now called Saragoza
Syracuse by composition. After this it is a wonder to see how victory ran on
his side, and how the Cities of their own accord yielded and called him to
them. The cause hereof was the hatred that the Siciliands bare to the Goths,
and the authority of the Empire or Rome, together with the presence of
Belisarius. Whom (for as much as he had delivered Affricke from the
Vandalians) they hoped should do the like by the Goths thorough Sicil and
Italy. Moreover, the Goths had made no preparation in Sicil, because they
looked not for any war there. By means whereof it came to pass, that as
many of the Goths as were in Sicill, being amazed at the sudden invasion of
Belisarius, and the hasty reuoltyng of the cities, thought more of runnyng
away then of making resistance. Only the city of Now called. Palerno. The
siege of Panormus and the vvynnyng thereof.
Panormus (by reason there was a strong garrison of the Goths in it) abode the
fiege, and endured it to the uttermost. The which city being very defensible
and well fortified toward the land, and therevppon setting light by any thing
that thenemie could work against it, at the last by a nauye sent into the
haven was won by the sea. For the haven extended hard to the walls of the
town: And Belisariushad marked how that in diverse places, the tops of the
mastes reached a great hight above the walls of the city. Wherefore he set
Archers and slyngers in the topcastles of the ships, who with arrows and
darts did so beat their enemies underneath them on all sides, that the walls
were left naked without defendaunts: so that their companey went without
danger to the foot of the wall, The good success of Belisarius.
and brake it down. Thorough which distress their enemies being
discomforted, yielded up the town. This was the last City of all Sicill that
came in subjection. When Belisarius had recoueredPanormus he returned to
Syracuse, and there making sumptuous and royal pageants, threw Gold and
Silver among the poople. For it was the last day of his Consulshyppe the
which was given him in honor of the victory that he gate of the Vandalians.
And Fortune was so favorable unto hy, that besides all his former victories,
even the very last day of his Consulshyppe she closed up with the recouerye
of all Sicill. Thus went the world in Sicill.

The.iiij. Chapter.
Of the doings of Mundus in Dalmatia against the Goths, of the death of the
said Mundus and his son Maurice, and how one Grippa a noble man of the
Goths recouereth all that Mundus had conquered before.

IN Dalmatia both parts raised great powers and made toward the City of
Saions. The doings of Mundus in Dalmatia,
Now when they were comme near unto the town, and that the w^^rd was whote on
both varries, it longth there was a battle sought, not prepurposed but by
chance upon these daine without knowledge before of any of both parts. The
rause the^reof was this. The captain Mundus had a son called Maurice a
goodly young gentleman and a tall man of his hands. When having the leadyng of a
troop of Horsemen, rode to view the Camp of the Goths. Now by chance the
Gothish horsemen met with him, and as soon as the one part had espied the
othere, there was no tarience but straight to the skirmishe. So they encountered
for a time very stersly, and many of the stoutest of the Goths were slain,
and at the last Maurice also was killed.

Both the Camps heavyng of the skirmishe, made soede to rescow their
companies. Sudden battle between the Goths and the Imperialls
Whiles that Mundus was on his way, tidings was brought him of the loss of his
son. Then the man being of nature fierce and warlyke, ran in a rage like a
mad man upon his enemies. By that (...) was at the hosts of the Goths come
thither, and the encounter was with the whole power of either part, the battle
was very bloody and cruel. At length the Goths being discomfited with meat
slaughter and loss of their people were put to flight. But Mundus whiles he
vnsaciably followed the slughter of the Goths, Se the end of ourragious furye.
and for anger and sorrow of the loss of his son pursued the chase to far,
was recountered of his dispersed enemies and slaintand so the fatheer through
the outrageous reuengement of his son, in thend did seek his own confusion.
After this battle both armies departed a sundre. For the Goths being
vanquished durst not abide in those quarters, and the Emperors soldiers
being dismayed with the loss of their Captain, left Salons and retired back
again. I think it not good to suppress with silens a thing that many authors
have made mencio^ of. They say there were certain old verses of Sibill in the
which it was prophesied, A prophecy of Sybill.
that when Affricke should be recovered by the Romans, then should Mundus
(which word as it is here a man's name: so also it signifies the world) and
his issue should neryshe. This prophecy of Sybill made many men affrayed,
doutyng least heaven and earth with all mankind should utterly have decayed.
But after the time that Afric in the former wars was recovered by the
pussau^ce of Belisarius, then it appeared how that Sibill prophesied of the
destruction of this Captain and his son. So depely are all prophesies
wrapped in doutfull circumstaunces. After the death of this Captain and the
departure of his army, the Goths began to grow the monger in those parts.
For Grippa one of the noble men of the Goths, The Goths recover all that
Mundus had conquered
imediatly thervppon raising a new power recovered Salons and all that ever
M^udus had gotten before i^ those places. In so much that the Goths were far
of greater power then their enemies in those borders. And therwithall Theodatus
the king taking stoutly upon him thought himself able to match or rather to
overcome the emperor in battle.

The.v. Chapter
The Emperor sends a new Lieutenaunt into Dalmatia, named Constantian, who
recouereth all Dalmatia and Lyburnia.

WHEN Justinian heard of the things that were done in Dalmatia, he made one of
his Courtyers named Constantian Lieutenant of the wars there. Constantian
made lieutenant of Dalmatia.
And therewythall wrote to Belisarius that he should without further delay
pass into Italy. Constantian therefore having repaired his army and
throughlye furnyshed his nauye of all things, after that he had tarried a
while about the doing thereof at Dyrrachin^, removed from thence and sailed
to Rhagusium. There were at Rhagusium certain skowtwatches set there by
Gryppa, who seeing ye navy of Co^stantian passing along the shoreside,
beautiful to behold both for the buylding and number of the ships, by and
by returned unto Grippa, and where as ye thing was great of it self, they
reported it to be far greater then it was in deed. The solaine fear of Grippa
at the arrival of Constnatian.
At the which tidinges Grippa was at his wits end and wist not in the world
what to do. For he thought it both perilous and also great folly to encounter
against so great a power: and to enclose him self within Salons he durst not,
because he had the Citizins more then half in a gelousie of treason, and the
walls of the town were in diverse places decayed and fallen down for lack of
reparation. Moreover, considering that his enemies were to strong for him on ye
sea, he was afraid he should soon be brought to scarcetie of bietualls. Being
distressed with these cares, Counsel the refuge of cares
at length (which is the refuge in such extremities) he fell to counsel.
According to the same he conueryghed all his host a good way out of Salons,
and encamped in a place convenient. In the mean time Constantian arrived with
(...) his (...) at Lysne, there having intelligence what was done, he sailed to
the next shore, and there setting his men a land sent CCCCC of them before, to
take the straight and narrow passages in the night season, which are within a
little way of Salons. The which thing being executed, he him self the next
morning brought all his army to the city, Constantian gets Dalmatia and
Lyburnia.
and without any trouble recovered the same. When Grippa had understanding
thereof, he tarried not past two or three days there, but that he determined to
depart thence, and so he returned to Rauenna by water, leauyng up utterly to
the enemy both Dalmatia and Lyburnie, Dalmatia, Lyburnia, and Illy ricu^, are
now called all by one name of Sclauony.
the which immediately without any resistance came into the hands of Constantian.

The.vj. Chapter.
Belisarius arriueth in Italy, and after long siege vvynneth Naples.

BElisarius upon the receipt of the Emperors ietters, The arrival of
Belisarius in Italy,
when he should pass into Italy, leaving garrisons of soldiers at Syracuse
and Panormus, went with the residue of his army to Messana: and there wasted
over unto Regium. From thence he led his arune by land through the Brutians
and Lucanes, commanding his navy to coast him by the shore of the neither sea
as nere the land as might be. As he went forward, the inhabitants of those
countries revolted to him thick and threfold. When he had after this sort
certain days continued his journey, Belisarius comes to Naples.
at length he stayed about Naples, the which city was kept with a great and
strong garrison of the Goths.

There he commanded his ships to lie at anchour in the haven, but yet without
the shot of artillery, and he himself in the mean time bringing his army nere
unto the town, viewed the situation of the city and the nature of ye place
upon the land. It was not long after but that he took by composition a strong
bulwark standing in the Suburbs. Therevppon as he was about to plant his
siege, the Neapolitans sent their Orators unto him, among whom was one
Stephan a man of much wisdom and authorittie in the city.

He spoke these words in effect: that Belisarius did not well to make war
upon the Neapolitans, The words of the Neapolitan ambassador to Belis.
which never had done him any wrong in all his life. They inhabited a city
kept by the garrisons of Theodatus and the Goths, by means whereof he could
not hope for any thing at their hands being under the jurisdiction and
subjection of other men. But if so be it he might be so bold to say his mind,
he did unadvisedly to longer there in dayne. For had he once gotten Rome, he
should strayghte ways obtain Naples. But if he were set beside Rome, he
were not able to keep Naples though he had it.

Wherefore it had been (...) for hint to have gone first of all to Rome
against the Goths that were there, and not to have stayed at Naples, the which
should fall as an overplus to the lot of the Conqueror which way so ever the
world went. The answer of Belisarius to them bassadour.
Belisarius replied thereunto, that whether he did advisedly or unadvisedly in
tariyng about Naples, was no part of their charge to determine, for he asked
not their counsel therein: but rather to take thought for those things that
perteined to them selves, namely whether it were better for them to procure
their own saufegarde and liberty by receyuynge the Emperors army, or by
continuyng in bondage under the barbarous Goths worthily to be besieged and
utterly destroyed. For he was fully purposed not to depart thence until he had
the city at his pleasure, his desire was to obtain the town rather without
their destruction then we it. This was his saying openly. And secretly he
persuaded suaded Stephan to exhort his Citizens rather to seek them p^^^urs
good will and favor, Good counsel if it had been taken.
then his indignation displeasure. Thoratours at their return into the city,
reported the (...) of Belisarius. And when th^^ came to consultation as
concerning the same, Srephen being demanded his opinion in the case, said he
thought it is ^^^ngerous a matter for the ^^^p^^^ranes, to turn the brunt of
so great a war upon themselves, and therefore he wisshed them by some
composition or (...). This counsel was furthered also by one ^nnochus a Syrian
dorne, who had continued long time at Naples as in the way of traffic and
merchandise, a man of great wealth and of much credit among the Neapolitanes,
he by persuading the like that Stephan had done, had moved many to be of his
opiniont the people also and the commo^s of the city were deu^rous of the
same. In so much that shoutes were openly heard trying ^ut to have the gates
set open and Belisarius let (...). There were (...) Goths in garrison, who
albeit that it grieved them (...) for as much as they durite not withstand the
will of the people, (...) themselves together. Pastor and (...) friends of the
Goths, The craftye dealing of Asclepiodotus and Pastor.
and therefore ^^rye to see the present estate of the city altered, when they
saw how the people were bent, durst not openly gainsay meyr oesyres, out
wrought by an overthwart means to break ^^^^^^ment. And therevppon allowyng
and praising openly all that was determined in the assemblye, as though it hat
lyked them very well, they co^^^selled to knitte up the matter stronglye with
many bands and couenaunts, Fair words make fools feign and wise men to
sometimes.
reouirynge an oath for performinge of the same. The articies that they had
d^^^sed were such as they thought Belisarius would not have consented unto,
in esperialtye seeing he should be sworne^ to the performaunce of them.
Therefore in as much as they seemed to speak these things of good will to the
people, they obtained to have the decree made according to their own devise.
And therevpoon all things were penned and fair words engroced. Stephan (...)
with the Book from the City to Belisarius. Who after he had perused the
same agreed to every article, and effered to be sworn for the keeping of the^.
Stephan (...) thereof into the city. The malice of Pastor and Asclepiodotus
brusteth out.
Whereas the people greatly retoysing began to (...) to the gates, saying that
Belisarius should be let in. Pastor and Asclepiodotus seeing this, when they
perceived that their first crafts took n^ place, called together the Goths
and citizens of Naples such as were of their own faction. Declaring unto them
that it was a folly to lose the town at the pleasure of the unskillful
multitude.

For what man (...) that could not understand (...) if Belisarius were in any
hope at all of winning the city, he would never have consented to tharticles
that were sent unto him. But now because he was out of all hope, he had
granted to those things which he would not stand to, to thentent to make them
traitors at their vttermoste peril. For if he bare them so much good will as
he pretended, he would not have there tarried to surprise the^ by subteltie, but
would have kept on his way to try the matter by battle against Theodatus and
his Goths.

By alledgynge these and such other things, they both persuaded the Citizens
to make resistance, and also encouraged the Goths to stand to the defense of
the City. Besides this they arened the Jews, of the which there was a great
multitude in Naples, and caused them to take their part. By means whereof the
rest of the citizins were put in fear, and all the communicatio^ ano
couenaunts (...) Belisarius were broken. Belisarius therefore after that time
addressed himself to the siege. Oftentimes when he attempted to win it by
assault, he was put to the repulse with great loss and peril of his
soldiers. For the walies of Naples are partly environed with the sea, and
partly do stand upon high and steep places, so that it is a very hard matter
to scale them. The conduit pypes by which water ran into the city, albeit
they were all broken by Belisarius: yet not withstanding it sented to be no
great discommoditie to them that were besieged, because they had many Wells
in the town, so that they could want no water. But most of all hurted them the
hope of help to come, for as much as they had sent their Ambassadors to Rome
for aid against their enemies. Now as Belisarius was in manner paste hope, and
thought to have broken up his siege, Fortune wonderfully opened the way of
conquest unto him. There was a water chanel cut deep into the ground by which
water was wont to be conveyed into the city. This at the beginning of the
siege had Belisarius broken (as he had done other before). A certain soldier
of Clandiople by chance entering into the same, went in it hard to the walls
of the city. Good fortune of Belisarius.
There was at the place where it went under the wall a stone not laid by
man's hand but of nature, through the which there was a hole bored to let,
the water into the city, But the hole was not so wide that a man might enter
in at it. The which when the soldier had well viewed, he perceived that if the
hole in the stone were made wyder, they might have passage into the City.

And therevppon he made Belisarius priuye to all that he had seen. The
Captain greatly reioysyng thereat, and promisynge great rewards, bade the
souldyer choose some of his fellows to help him, and to open the stone more,
not by diggynge and heawynge least the noise of the strykynge should be wray
them, but by fyling and scrapyng and that very softly. Look as the Captain
commanded so the souidyer did. To be short, through the continual and
diligent paynestakyng of the souldyer it was brought to that point, that a man
in harness with his sword and his target in his hand might easly go through.
When the matter stood in this case, Belisarius perceiving he should be
master of the City when he list himself, the clementie and mercy of
Belisarius.
and loathe that his souldyers should sack it, called out Stephan unto him
again, and put him in remembrance of the miserable chances that are wont
to happen unto Cities that are taken perforce, as the slaughter of men, the
rauyshyng of women at every Varlettes pleasure, the burning of houses, the
sackyng and reuing of all places, and all other kinds of mischiefs.

Wherefore he willed the Neapolitans to have respect unto them selves, and not
to abide the uttermost at their peril, for as yet they had time to repent them
of their folly, Stephan hearing these things, at his return declared the
same to his citizens with sighs and tears. But they despising his words had
him in derison for his labor.

Belisarius therefore executynge his prepensed purpose, The mean whereby
Belisarius won Naples.
when he had fully determined to take the city, provided for the same in this
manner. As Soon as ever it began to be dark, he chose out four hundred
soldiers, commaundynge every one of them to put on his harness and to take
his swords and his target in his hand, and being so armed in a readiness, to
keep themselves close without noise, until they had knowledge what they should
do. He appointed leaders of them Magnus and Ennas stout men, in whose
puissaunce he did put much confidence. When it was now past mydnyght, night,
(...) the matter so the leaders, and showing them the place commands them to
leadche soldiers through the channel by torchelyght. And as soon as they were
gotten into the city, he taught them what they should do, wyllyng them to
take some part of the wall, and to give token thereof by the sound of a
trumpet. He him self had prepared before hand a great sort of ladders to scale
the walls with, commaundyng all his army to be ready in their harnes, whereof he
had the nymblest and best practiced about his own person. Shame surmounteth
dread of danger.
Whiles he was thus about his matters, many of the soldiers that were with
Magnus retired back for fear of the danger, and could not be made to go
forward, neither by fair means nor by foul. Whom Belisarius sent away with
great rebuke, supplying their rooms with two hundred of them that he had about
him. Upon the which reproach even they that before refused to go, followed. The
soldiers wont a long and a blind way in the channel. For it ended not at the
wall, but led further into the city, being vaulted ever aloft with Brick In
so much that ye soldiers wist not where they were, until they espied the sky
at the end of the vault. Then they perceived themselves to be in the mids of
the city, out of the which place it was a hard matter for them to escape,
because they had ylfauoured clymburg up upon the high walls wherewe it was
endosed round about. Nevertheless at length when one had helped up another and
all were come out, Naples is caten.
they went to the walls there having slain the watchemen took two towers, and
from thens gave a sign by sownding atrumpet, and making a great shoute. By
and by Belisarius made toward the same places, and rering up ladders commanded
his souldyers to scale yt town. In the same place happened much trouble and
much taryens, by reason the ladders (being made (...) not able to reach the
top of the wall. By means whereof they were driven of necessity, to bind
two ladders one at thend of another, and so to get up. This was done on the
northside of the town, and at the same instaum was a sharp encounter at the
other side of yt town that is toward the sea. For in the same place fought a
multitude of Jews, lewd and desperate perfo^s, such as hoped for no favor nor
mercy if yt city were taken. The desparate fighting of the jews.
And therefore they stood stoutly at defens, giving no place of entrance to
thenemie. Another part of the host had set fire on ye East gate, and made have
to break into the city. In the mean feason the day began to break, and the
soldiers ye had scaled up by ladders, had broken open a gate to let in tharmy,
and there withal the other company russhed in at the East gate yt was before set
on fire. Then was there running through the city, and all places were defiled
with slaughter and rauysshynge.

But inesverially those souldyers played the Butchers, whose brothers or
kinsfolk had been slain in the former conflictes by the Neapolitans a boute
the City. For they after that ye town was taken, used the victory very
cruelly, sparing no age young nor old man nor woman. And the Jews, which
defended that part of the Town that is toward the sea, when all the rest of
the town was taken, stood never the lose styfly at their defens, neither gave
they over before that the soldiers ronnyng about the City, assailed them
behynd. Then was enterans made on that part of the Citic also, and every place
was repleneshed with slaughter and sacking. The elementie and gentle using of
the victory by Belisarius.
But Belisarius himself after the taken of Naples, used the victory very
gently. For after that weapon was ones Laid out of hand, he suffered not any
Citizen to be either flayne or taken prisoner, and he restored the women to
their husbands and parents vnrauished and undefiled at all.

Toward the Goths also which were there in garrison, he showed no manner of
cruelty. As for Pastor and Asclepiodotus the Authors and causes of so great
mischiefs, not Belisarius, Evil counsel worst to the geuers thereof
but the people of the town themselves did justice upon. Who the next day
after the taking of the city, ran to their houses and finding Asclepindotus
at home killed him and drew him thorought the city. But they could not find
Pastor. For he even in the very tumult of the taking of the city, either
wilfully slew him self, or else dyed for bespaire and sorrow of mind. Yet
notwithstaindinge the people bearing a deadly hatred against him, never left
sekyng him, until such time as they saw his dead carcas with their eyes.
Neither could they be satisfied, but that they tare his body in pieces every
member from other. And Belisarius did bear with their outrageous dealing, for
the evil which they had committed, upon whom such cruelty was ertended. (...)
this means both taken and saved.

The.vij. Chapter.
The Goths kill Theodatus and set Up Virigis to be their King, Vitigis makes
an oration to the Senate and people of Rome, and leads away the chief of
them with him for pledges, he marryeth the daughter of Amulusuentha and
enteteth in league with the French men. Belisarius comes to Rome, which is
yielded to him by the Citizens, he for^fieth and victaileth the city and
gets certain towns from the Goths.

THE Goths that dwelte at Rome and other places thereaboutes, hearing of those
things that were done at Naples, were stryken with great fear and mistruste
in them selves. For they believed undoubtedly that Belisarius would come against
them. Wherefore encouraging one another, and calling forth the rest that were
men of war of their own nation, they encamped themselves between the cities
of Anania and Taracina. There when (...) men of war of the Goths were
assembled together, findyng great fault with the former misgouernent and
present cowardnesse of Theodatus, The election of Vitigis with the deposition
and death of Theodatus
finally they made insurrection against him in the camp, and set up Vitigis to
be their king. This Vitigis was not borne of the blood royal, but he had
always been known for a stout Captain and a good man of war, and through
his valiant behavior he had purchased much honor and authority. Theodatus
when he hard thereof, stale privily away and fled toward Rauenna with all the
speed he could make. But the new king sending of his guard immediately after him,
ouertooke him by yt way and killed him. After this Vitigis came to Rome, and
there making an oration to the Senate and the people, put the^ in remembrance
of the benefits of Theodorich, The oration of Vitigis to the Romans.
exhorting the^ not to work any novelties. For he told them that the Goths
had a great power in Italye, and that those things which had lately hapened
chasiced not through the imbecillitie and weakness of their nation, but because
that the Goths could not find in their hearts to love and obey Theodatus. But
now considering they agreed all in one will and drew all by one line, clean
contrary effects must needs follow. And therefore no man should be able to
attempt any alteration hereafter in Italy, but that he should be met with to
his cost. Al these things he did discourse before Liberius bishop of Rome. And
for beeause he was but a new found king, he caused the bishop and the people
toswere to be true unto him. For the more assurance whereof, he chose many of
the Senators and people of Rome, whom he led with him as pledges,
committing the charge of the city to one of his noble men called Luderis, with
whom he left four thousand chosen souldyers to keep Rome withal. He him
self with the residue of his army made toward Rauenna. When he came thither,
to my intent the moore to establishe his estate, Vitigis merieth.
he took in marriage the daughter of Amulusuentha nece unto the late
Theodorich, whom Theodatus had kept in ward like a prisoner. And so by aliyng
him self with the blood royal, he advanced the honor and dignity of his
crown. This dene, he ceased not to muster the Goths through all his realm,
and to furnysh them thoroughly with horse and harness, and vigilantly to
provide for all kind of munitions and artilerie for the wars.

But as Vitigis was about to assemble the Goths that were about the river Po
and the city Pauie and other places in Lu^bardy of which there was great power
and an huge number, a stop was cast in his way, namely the fear of the
French nation. For at that time they had extended their dominion even unto the
Alps, and on this side the Alps the Goths possessed al. These two nations
were scarce friends out to another, but rather more men half enemies through
privy harthurnyng among them selves. Furthermore it was well known, Vitigis
enters in league with the Frenchmen.
that the emperor had lately solicited the French men to make war against the
Goths. For the which causes Vitigis sending his Anthassadours into France
endeavored to rid himself of that fear, the which he at length obtained by
entering in league and frendshippe with them. While Vitigis was laying for these
things before hand, in the mean season Belisarius having refreshed and
furnished his army, determined to go to Rome. Whereupon leaving Herodian with
a garrison at Naples, and another garrison likewise at Cume, he with the
residue marched toward Rome. His journey lay by the way that leads from Rome
into Latium. The Romans hearing of Belisarius approach, were nothing
discontended therewith. It chanced so that one Fidelis of Millaine (who in the
time of Athalericke had been (...) of the kings house) departing from Rome met
with Belisarius, and counseled him to bring his host with all speed nere to
ye city, The Romans become imperialles.
for he told him that the Romans were not minded to shut their gates against
ye emperors army. And in deed by all men's talk it was to be seen that the
people were of the same mind with in the city. With the which things the
Goths being sore dismayed that were left there in garrison, determined fully
to go all away: saving the Captayn Luderis: who standing upon his reputation,
had rather to have died then to abandon the town committed to his charge. The
Romans gave yt Goths free passage weout interruption. And so it fortuned that
at yt very same day and hour that the Goths went out of Rome at the gate of
Flaminius, Belisarius entered in at ye gate Celimontana, otherwise called
Asinaria. After ye Belisanus had been received into ye town with great joy and
gladness of all estates, he (...) and the people, and afterward used great
diligence in repairing the walls and fortifiyng of the city. Belisarius
fortifieth and vic tayleth Rome
For he not only mended the walls and builded bulworks in places convenient,
but also cast up trenches and rampyres abcute them. And moreover conueryghed
thither great store of grain by water, the which he caused to be laid up in
common gratters. The Romans although they wondered at the wisdom of their
captain, yet that lyked not this his so (...) diligence in fortistyng of the
city. For so noble a captain as he as being enticed (...) Rome with the
emperors army, ought not to think of being besieged, but of besieging
others. Howbeit to say the truth Belisarius weying with himself his own
weakness and the great power of the Goths, did already in his mind forese
what was like to ensue. And yet was he not altogether idle in ye mean season,
but by his petie captains Constanting and Belisarius some time he recovered
Narma, Spolet, Belisarius goetteth three towns from the Goths.
and Peruse by composion. Also there was a battle fought against the Goths
not far from the ettie of Now called Perugio.
Peruse. For Vitigis immediately upon intelligence of the reuolting of ye
Perusians, sent Vuilas and Pyssa with an army into Thuscance to the intent as
well to keep still in due obedience such as had not revolted, as also to subdue
again such as had forsaken their allegeaunce.

The.viij. Chapter.
A battle is fought at Perusa between the Goths and the imperialles to the
loss of the Goths. Vitigis marchynge tovvarde Rome staveth at the river Anio,
where the next day encountryng with Belisarius the puts him to flyghte and
so proceeds to the fiege of Rome with (...) hundred tousande men.

THere was at Peruse Consiantine one of Belisarius captains, and he had
assembled thither all his men of w^rre saving a fowe soul diers that he had
left in garrison at Spolet. A patten between the Goths and the ijmperialls
Now at such time as the Gothishe army approached and was come almost hard to
the walls of Peruse, Constantine with his men in order of battle ready to
sight, issued out of the City and set upon the Goths. Great was then counter
with much force and puissans on both sides. The Goths were greatly furthered
by their multitude, and the soldiers of Constantine by the advantage of the
place, and thassistens of the City at hand. After long fyghtinge, the Goths
at length were overcome and put to flight, great slaughter was made of them and
many were taken prisoners, among who^ Vuilas and Pyssa the Captains were
taken and sent to Rome unto Belisarius. Vitigis therefore having besides the
Loss of his towns received moreover this flaughter, thought it was not to
make any further delay, but with all the power of the Goths that he was able
to raise, set forward to ye wars. when he removed from Rauenna toward Rome,
Vitigis marches tovvard Rome with 200000. fouldyers.
he had in his host.CC.M. fyghting men, of which ye most part were armed in
Almain riuetts. With this so huge host he marched toward Rome in such
terrible manner, and with such speed, that it was to be doubted least that
Belisarius would not have abydden his coming. And therefore he made not any
stay either at Spolet, Peruse, or Narma, but kept on his way still toward
Rome. Belisarius when he perceived so great a brunt of wars turned upon his
neck, commanded Constantine and Bessas to return to him out of hand, with
such power as they had about them. Constantine obyed his commaundeinent and
came with his army forthwyth out of Thuscane to Rome. But it was somewhat
later ere that Bessas did set out of Narma, in so much that he was entangled
with the first foreriders of the Goths. For Vitigis way lay hard under Narma.
Whether as soon as ye Currours were come, Bessas issued out of the city and
skirmished with them, and he put many of their troops to flight and slew diverse
of the^. Nevertheless by reason of resort of mo and mo still to ye res cow, he
was compelled to withdraw himself again into the city. From whence he made
have to Rome and bare ridinges that ye Goths were at hand and within kenning.
The Goths passing by Narma went through the country of ye Sabines into the
fields of Rome. When they came nere the town they stayed at the riuere Anio.
For beisarius had fortified the bridge on both sides ye water with bulwarks and
enclosures, and had set a garriso^ of soldiers to keep it. By means whereof ye
Goths at their first coming being not able to get over, The shameful flight
of the soldiers of Belisarius.
encamped themselves beyond the river Anio. But ye next night following they ye
were set to keep the bridge, being dismayed at ye number and fercenesse of the
barbarous people, forsook the towers and bulwarks of the (...) away went into
Ca^panie for feart least Belisarius should punish the^ for their labor.
Belisarius was minded to have pitched his camp by the river Anio directly
against y^ camp of the Goths, to thentent to have detained them the longer in
ye same place. And therefore yt next day he went thither with a M. horsemen to
view the costery and the Deameanour of his enemies and also to chose a meet
ground to encampe in. An encounter unlooked for.
As he was going thither, when he came almost at the (...) contrary to his
expestation he met with the Gothyshe horse men. For the Goths but even a
lytrie while before, pereceiuing ye bulwarks of the bridge to be abandoned,
had broken open the gates and the barryers, and had passed ever the River in
great number. Whose sudden approach upon Belisarius other wise then he
looked for, conu^rayned him whether he would or no to put himself in the
encounter.

At the beginning Belisarius (...) nothing but thoffice of a Captain,
encouraging and commanding his soul diers and shewinge what every man should
do. But when he saw his men ouerlayed and like to go by the (...) of the
staff, then was he (...) compelled to leave the office the Captain, and to
play the stout soldier. For he was feign to put himself into the forefront
of the battle, and there to lay his hands about him stoutlye and valia^tly as
other of his soldiers. The which days surely he was in great danger upon such
occasion. He had a goodly horse, upon which he was comma^ly wont to ride, of
color bay with a white list from his foreheade down to the nostrelles, as he
fought upon the same horse among the formest in the battle, certain runnagats
knowing him, cried out to strike the Vale. (For so do the Goths term a bay
horse in their language,) and there was none other noise over all the fyeld but
to strike ye Vale, By means whereon it came to pass, that all the brunt of
the battle was turned upon Belisarius. Danger the vvhetstone of courage.
And undoubtedly if a puisant band of his very sanulier friends had not
clustered about him and styked notably to him, yea and with their own bodies
and their own armor, kept of a then saud strokes and a thousand weapons
both from the horse and from BElisarius himself also, it had never been
possible for him to have escaped. But as at ye time he was valiantlye defended,
both by his own prowess fighting most expertly and commingly, and also by the
help of his friends and familiars, who with incredible love clynged fast about
him. In this place many of Belisarius very friends were flain, and
inespecially one Maxentius a man of singular actiuity who fyghting about
Belisarius, after that he had showed many proses of his manhood and prowess,
and slain many of the Goths, at the last being very sore wounded fell down
dead. At the length such as were about Belisarius making prease upon their
enemies, put the^ to open flight, and pursued them hard to the bridge. But the
footmen ye stod at the bridge recountred Belisarius and his men, and easly put
them back. The horsemen seeing ye, turned again and assailed the^ behind, by
means whereof they were of necessity compelled to wtdraw themselves for their
own saufgard unto a higher ground. Belisarius is compelled to tlye.
There also then cou^ter of horsemen being renewed, and the number of the enemies
still increasing, after ye many had berie slain on both parts, at length they
were forced to sty toward Rome upon the spur. They tonne dewarde the gate
that is commonly called Pm^cian. The Goths chaced Belisarius hard to the gate
inso much ye some were stricken from the wall. There was also much a do in the
same place. For the Romans that kept the walls, for fear of their enemies so
nere at hand, durst not open the gate. Neither was Belisarius him self
known, albeit he called alowd unto them, because the Sun was then down, and
he fore dissiguret (...) and swette. Belisarius puts the Goths to flight.
Therefore when they had cast themselves in a ring before the gate and could
not be let in, and that menemy was hardat their backs, Belisarius encouraging
his men, gave a new charge up on his enemies, and putting the^rs night drove
them far from the gate. So when he had dispersed his enemies, he was then
perfectly known, and led his soldiers into the city, The feyght of this day
was very sore and (...). For it began anene after the son rising, and it
ended not until it was dark night. Belisarius by the judgment of al me^ was
demed the best warrior that day that was on his side. And among the Goths,
Vssidius. When Belisarius was returned into the City, he commanded as well
his own souldyers as the Town semen to keep warche on the walls that night.

Distriburinge the gaces to his Captains every one, one to keep. Geuyng them
charge that if any alarm were given, no man should styree out of the place
where be was appointed. A larmes geven to the City of Rome. in the night.
The same night many Alarmes were given and diverse of them false. For it was
cried through the City that thenemye was entered in at the gate of Ianiculu^,
and thereupon weapon was fearfully taken in hand. And the noise could not be
stynted, until such time as messengers coming from thence, brought word that
all was quiet and no enemy seen or heard of there. At the gate Salaria was
another Alarm, and that not without some cause. For the Goths coming to the
gate in the night, called to the Romans that stood upon the walls, and there
one of them named Bachius a man well known in Rome whom Vitigis had sent
thither for the same purpose, The words of Bachius to the Romans.
spoke unto them saying How is it with you ye Ramaines are ye not ashamed of
your follye? to commit your seiues to the ruicion of a few Grekyshe men,
mariners, and plaiers, of enteriudes, and good for nothing else, despising ye
power of the Goths, which even at their very first coming have put them to
flighte and beseiged them? Surely the Goths have not de served that ye should
work so great trcason against them. But repent and amend, for this is thonely
way for you to escape, if you will open the gate for the Goths to enter in,
not against you but against those Greeks. But if ye be so mad to persist in
your folly, look assuredlye for such war at the Goths hands, as, will be to
whote for you to abide. This our king Vitigis commanded to be told unto you.
The Romans made none answer at all to his words. But as soon as it was
reported that ye Goths were there, there was ronning thither from all parts of
the city. The Goths having tarried a little while, returned to their kings
tent which was between the city and the river. And thus paued over ye (...)
night. The next day the Goths seeing no body come for the guiue them batter in
the field, adressed themselves to the siege. Thorder whereof was this.

The.ix. Chapter.
Thorder of the seige of Rome, the pollitique proision of Belisarius for the
defense of the same, what engines the Goths made for to assault the same, and
of their going to the assault.

THey pitched their denter in (...) places about the city, The siege of Rome.
from the way of fiaminius, unto the ways that leads to Preuesie, This camp
beseged five gates of the city. Afterward they unbattelled the.vii. camp on
the further fyde of the bridge Militius. This last Camp besoiged the gate of
Aurelius and cut of the ways that lead over the River Tyber. They fortified
their camps with diches and trenches and turrettes of timber. And as well on
the onesive as on the other of the Tybeer they made havoc of all ye came in
their way. Belisarius o the coutrary part pprouided in this wise for the
defense of the city. The gate called Pinciana which was directly against the
greater camp of the Goths, together with the nextegate unto it on ye right hand
called Salaria, and whatsoever was on that part of the walls therabouts,
Belisarius took unto himself tokepe. The gate toward Preueste he committed to
Bessas. The gate of Flamiuius which is on the left hand of the Pincian gate,
he delivered to Co^stan^^nand at every other of the gates he set a keeper. The
Goths going about the City brake all the Conduittes. The conduius about the
City.
There were of them in all fourtene made of wonderful work, by the which
water was conveyed into the City. By the breaking of these, the Romans were
not so greatelye afflycted with scarcetye of water, as with want of cornemylles.

For the conduit that ran down no the top of Ianiculum, through the forth
erside of Tiber into the city, running swiftly down the stepe hill, did virue
many mylles. The like commodity of grinding was also ministered by other of the
conduits in diverse places. The which being then broken, brought great distress
upon them that were be seiged. A provision for grinding of corn.
Against this displeasure Belisarius provided this remedy. Two lighters with a
space between them for a whele to go in, were fastened together with strong
rafters of timber, upon the which the milles were set and so driven with the
swiftnes and violence of the stream, and the lighters were stayed with Cables
streyned hard and made fast on both sides of the River. These lyghters he
placed hard by the firsie bridge that leads over Tiber. After those he set
other lyghters on a row. And least the enemy might hurt the lighters by
casting down fire or other stuff from alofte, there were cheynes of iron
drawn by the bridge to receive all such gere, and men set on both sides to
take the same and carry it away. Thus was good prouison made to supply the want
of milles, for those lighters suffyced to grynd as much as they would. As for
the want of water, that did the river Tiber supplye. Belisarius had on diverse
places of the walls devises many engines to strike and put back thenemy
withal. Engines for to assault the town. The battle Ram.
On the otherside the Goths provided great store of artillery and engines for
the winning of the City. The angins were these. Fyru^e four battle Rams
which were made after this fashion. Four posts of timber of like high
equallye distant are set square one ageinste another. These pyllers are
fastened with eight over ways four at the top and four at ye foot, so
that it stands as it were a pretye square house. The same is couerd above
with leather to the intent that such as are within it should not be hurt from
the walls. Aloft is laid a beam (...) at (...) whereof hangs down another
beam as it were to the middell of ye pillars fastened with plates of iron, ye
which has a great square head of stelelike unto an anuild. The whole engine is
driven upon four wheles fastened in the feet of pillars. When it is removed
from place to place there are not fewer then L. souldyers within it to drive it
forward. Who after the time they have brought it nere unto the walls, do with
a cewrtayne wynch wey up the foresaid beam that lies overthwart, The great
force of the battle Ram.
and when it is aloft do let it fall with all the whole swaye that it has.
Then the head of ye beam being let down, partlye with violence and partly
with weight falling upon ye wall, does batter and break in pieces all that ever
it lights upon. Moreover the Goths made Turretes of Timber of like heigh
with the walls, the which went upon five wheles a piece. Also they prepared a
great number of skaling ladders, together with an immumerable sort of
faggottes of shrubbes and straw to fill up the dyches. When all things were
in sufficient readiness, Vitigis commanded all his men to be in armor by the
break of the next day, whom he divided into companyes, appoyntynge what he
would have every man to do The Goths were very glad of it and wonderful
desirous of thassault, Thassault of Rome.
some carrying faggotts, some bearing skalyng Ladders and other some dryuyng
the engines toward the walls. Belisarius stood upon the vamure before the
gate with the tallest men that he could chose out in all his host,
Thvnskilfulnesse of the Goths.
geuynge all the rest of his retinewe charge, not to styre out of their
places before he gave them warning. The Turrettes (which I toolde you that
the Goths had prepared) were drawn with Oxen and set before the rest of
the other engynes.

The which thing when Belisarius beheld, he laughed at the simplicity of the
Goths, that they should think naked Oxen able to draw an engine against
armed enemies. And thereupon he commanded all his men to dyscharge their
arrows at them, the which being done and thoxen forthwyth slain, the engine
stood still and could be removed no further. Such as carried skalinge ladders
and faggottes to fill up the dyches, being repulsed with the number of weapons
coming from the vamure, could neither fill the diches, nor get unto the
walls, nor yet bring the battle Rams nere. Nevertheless the battle of the
Goths abode by it, and castinge their sheldes over their heads, sometime with
plain force came hard to their enemies, howbeit they were never able to win
the vamure. Thencounter was with arrows, darts, Iauelings pykes and all other
kind of artillery.

The.x. Chapter.
The manner of the assault, the description of the tumble of the Emperor Adrian
and the delacing of the same, the repulse of the Goths, the murmuringe of the
Romans against Belisarius, whereupon he aduertiseth the emperor of his
peril and necessity,

While these things were in doing at the Pincian and Salaria gates, The
continuance of the assault.
Rome was assaulted in three other place. For Vitigis setting part of his
army tokepe Belisarius occupied, went himself with a number of soldiers to
the gate that leads to preneste. And at the same instant another company of
the Goths assaulted the gate of Aurelius. Another sort of them endeavored to
brust in at the gate that is on ye tope of Ianiculum. Thus was Rome assaulted
in four places at ones at the gates Pinciana and Salaria which Belisarius
himself kept, at the gate prenestine where Bessas stood, and at the gates of
Aurelius and Ianiculum. But the Goths that assaulted Ianiculum were easlye put
back. For the place is stepe and uneasy to come unto, insomuch that a man
could not well get to the wall though there were no body to let him. And
therefore must their enterprise needs be to none effect, the place being
defended by Paul one of Belisarius captains wioth a puissant band of
soldiers. At the gate of Aurelius was some what more danger. The way was
vaulted over that leads to the church of Saynct Peter thappostle.
Thassaulting of Adrians Pyle.
The Goths hydynge themselves in the said Porche, astone as they espied time
for their purpose, brake sodaynely out of their ambushe, and in all haste made
toward Adryans Pyle to win it. And they did so much with their Ladders, that
at the first brunte they took the uttermost wall which encloseth the Pile
and was four square. This Pyle was the sepuichre of the Emperor Adrian
builded of most excellent and costly work manshippe. The description of
Adrians tumble.
The first circuyt was made fowre-square, all of white Marble of the Island
Paros, garnyshed throughoute with most exquysite works and portraytures. In
the mids of this square ryseth up as if were a tower of a very great
heyghth, and of such a breadeth that a man were searse able to throw a stone
directelye from the one side to the other of the foore that was on the top.
It has a bridge leadynge from thence over the Tyber into the City. For the
City endethe at the River Tyber, and this is on the furthersyde of the River.
Yet notwythstandynge because it had a bridge stretchynge hard to the walls of
the Cyfye, and was (as it were) a certain Tower or bulwark, Belisarius
provided before hand to have it well marmed and kept with his own soldiers,
committing the charge thereof to Constantine. Constantine therefore when as a
little before he saw his enemies passinge over the River Tiber in botes, to
assault that part of the City which is between the field of Mars and the gate
of Aurelius, fearing the lowness of ye walls, (for they were not very strong
and defensible theraboutes nere unto the River) ran thither from Adrians pyle
with a band of soldiers, leaving but a few behind him for the defense of the
pyle. The Goths hereupon (as we said before) having by means of thabsence of
the Captain gotten the outer ciccuit, endeavored also to win the pyle it
self. The soldiers that were above, to thentent the more to endomage and
repulse their enemies, The defacing of an excellent piece of work
committed an evil act. There were in the top of the pyle on every side,
upon the battlementes great images of men, horses, and chariottes, conning ly
devised and excellentlye wroughte. Some of these the soldiers tumbled down
whole upon their enemies, other some they brake in pieces to throw at the^,
And so whether it were through the rudenes or through the lewdnes of the
soldiers, within few hours were destroyed the excellent innentions of ye
conning est workmen in all the world, which cost so many years in making, and
which were the greatest ornaments and the very heautie of the tumber. Adrians
pyle is rescovved.
Constantyue having in the mean while repulsed the euemy from the river,
hearing in what ieoperdie the pile was, rescowed it by the bridge, and assailed
his enemies from beneth, wherewith his own soldiers were greatly recomforted
and encouraged. By this means the Pyle at length was saved, and the enemy
repulsed. At the gate toward preneste also (where Vitigis and the Goths that
he brought with him gave the assault) was great danger. For not far from the
said gate was a place called Vinariu^. The same was double walled, with a good
space between the two walls. The ground be twene the^ was very plain and
level, and the walls some what weak. Rome in danger to be taken by assault.
Vitigis therefore and the Goths giving assault to the vttermoste wall, albeit
that there was vuleant and manful defense made against them, yet they wanne
it by sure force. Then Bessas (to whose charge that part was committed)
mistrustinge that he was not able to continue long against so greats power of
his enemies, sent word in all haste to Belisarius in what peril he stood,
desyring him to come to his rescow with all the speed he could make. Belisarius
somewhat moved with the matter. Left sufficient defense behind him at the gate
Salaria, and himself with a band of his best souldyers ran tho row the
City to the same place. At his coming thither thencounter was renewed a
fresh, and the soldiers began to take heart at the presence of their
Captain, The Goths had undermined the wall, and a great company of them
enteryng in at the breach stood betweite the two walls. By means whereof the
feyghte was very sharp and cruel in the same place. In fine thassaulte came
to this end, that the Goths were constrained to retire out at the same gappe
where they came in, with great slaughter and loss of their people. The
repulse of the goths at the first assault.
As soon as they were gotten out, their enemies pursewynge hard upon the,
chaced them away, and set all their engines on fire. The like chance happened
unto them at the Gate Salaria. For the souldyers breaking out upon them,
burnt up all their Turrets and other engynes. Thus was Rome in one day both
earnestlye assaulted in many places at ones, and valeantlye defended. There
were stayn at these assaults about three thou sand Goths, but yet the syege
endured still.

The Romans albeit then had Belisarius in great admiracion for his prowess,
The Romans murmur against Belisarius.
yet they murmured against him in that against so great a puisians of ye
Goths, he had with so small a handful in coparison styered up se great wars
and cast the City of Rome into such extreme peril and imminent danger.
Belisarius vvriteth to the Emperor.
The which thing Belisarius perceiving (for it was ^st done in huther muther)
although he had duiers other times before advertised ye Emperor Justinian
thereof. Yet notiwhtstanding being as then greatly moved with the matter, he
wrote more earnestly unto him, declaring the besetgement of the City of Rome,
with the huge multitude of his enemies and the little handful of his own men.
For he said he had been feign to diminishe his army that he brought forth
with him, by leaving garrisonsof soldiers at Panormus and Syxacuse in Sicill:
and by manninge of Naples Cume, and other places in Italye, as need required
for their defense and saufgard (...) so that he had no mo then v. thousand
remaining about him, and yet he was beseged with an host of.CC.M. The Romans
unacquainted with such perils, would not endure the hasard of ye siege. As for
his own part, he had once vowed to spend his life in she Emperor Justinians
service; the end whereof he passed not greatly whether it came sone or late.
Howbeit he said there was respect to be had how much the same should redound
to the honur or dishonor of the Empire of Rome.

The.xi. Chapter.
The Emperor sends new succors in to Italy, Afinarius and Vligisalus
Captains of the Goths besege Salons in Dalmatia. Vitigis vvinneth Portua, and
causes all the Romans to be put to death whom he held at Rauenna as
hostages. Belisarius puts all unable folk for the wars out of the city
for consuming of victalls, and banisheth the pope upon suspicion of treason.

THe Emperor Justinian was us rye sore moved at the receipte of these letters:
The Emperor sends new succors into Italye.
and thereupon commanded that certain souldyers which had been put in a
readynesse before should immediately sail into Italy, entending with all speed
to levy a greater power. Valerian and Martia^ were appointed Captains of
those souldyers which he had already prepared and which had wyntered all the
dead time of that year in Aetoly and Acarname. The news hereof beyngs brought
to Rome, put the Romans in good comfort lokynge for their arrival as soon as
the time of the year would serve. While these things were a dooynge at Rome, The
Goths besege Salo^s in Dalmatia.
Asinarius and Vligisalus Captains of the Goths (whom Vitigis had sent with
an host of men into Dalmatia, appoyntynge to them moreover for their more
strength a nauye of ships), besyeged Salons both by sea and land For
Constantian perceiving him self to weak to match so huge a power as his
enemies had, fortifyed the City thoroughly before hand and abode the syege.
During the which, sometime yssewinge out of the town, he did great harm to
the Goths both by sea and by land. In this mean time, Rome began to be
more hardly distressed by the seyge. For Vitigis after the time that he had
taken so dishonorable repulse at the foresaid assault, being therewith
somewhat quickened, ceased not to seek and search all means possible to be
devised, whereby he might anoye his beseeged enemies. There was a haven by the
Sea side standinge on the right hand of the Kyuer Tyber, and adjoining to the
same a City enuyroned with a strong wall. In the which place were wont to
be set a land all such things as were brought by water: Vitigis vvynneth
Portua,
and from thence again either by land or by water were conneyed to Rome.

Vitigis therefore sending thither sudden ly a great number of his soldiers,
assailed the said city of Portua unawares and won it ere the townsmen could
put themselves in a readiness to make resystens aganst so great a power of the
Goths. By taking of this town strayt ways ensued great distress at Rome,
when their vent of fetching in of corn and victiaulls was ones stopped. For
the Goths leaving a garrison of soldiers there, The cruel commandment of
Vitigis against the Romayne hostage
did keep both the town and the mouth of Tiber suffering nothing to be
conveyed in. It was not long after but that Vitigis sent commandment to
Rauenna, that all the Citizens of Rome, which (as is declared) he led from thens
and kept for hostages should be put to death. Many of them were of the nobility
and many of the commonaltie (surely worthy personages) all the which tasted of
one cup saving a few who having incling of the matter before, escaped by
flighte. Among the which number were Ceruentinus. and Reparatus the brother of
Vigilins, that was afterward pope. For they having warning thereof, fled into
France and saved their lives. the rest were all put to death. In the time that
the Romans moorned and lamented for the siaughter of their eitizens at
Rauenna, there came another sorrow in the neck of it. For Belisarius fearinge
least grain should fail and ware searce, made proclamacion that the citizens
should send away their wives and children, with al the other multitude that was
unmeet and unable for the wars compelling his men of war also to do the
like which had either Lemans or lackeys with in the town. There were as yet
two ways left them to pass out at. One leading to Ostia by the left side of
the river Tiber, and another through the fields clean contrary from those
places that were beseged by thenemy. For the Goths (as we have said) did not
enuiron the whole City with their syege, but only from the gate of Aurelius
to the gate that goes to Preneste. Beyond those bounds they durst not behold
to be over busye, or to stray over far. For if they adue^tured over far
from their Camp, they lightly ran in danger of coming short home, they
could not stir any great way unless they went in great companyes. By means
whereof it came to pass, that men might at all times go and come saufely by
the way of Appius and the way of Ostia. The Romans therefore sent forth
their wives and children and all their other people that were unmeet for the
wars. Whereof sum abode in Campanie, some at Naples and some in Sicill as
every man thought most for his commoditye and behoof. At Rome Belisarius gave
streyghte commandment and looked narrowlye to it, Belisarius deuideth corn
by the pole.
that the corn was divided by the poll, to the intent ye no waste nor spoil
should be made of it. The same time Belisarius bannished the town Liberius the
pope upon suspicion of secret conspiratie with the Goths. A pope banished
upon suspicion of trcoson.
And anon after was Vigilius consecrated high bishop and enstalled in his
steed. Other of the nobility of Rome also were bannished upon like
presumption, of the which number was one Marimus, whose great graundfather
after the death of Valentinian had usurped the name and dignity of the Empire.

The.xij. Chapter.
The aid that the Emperor sent into Italy comes to Rome, Belisarius after
practicing his fouldiers in ikyrmishes, encountereth with the Goths in a
main battle, and is overcome with great slaughter.

While these things were a doing, New succor comes to Rome.
Martine and Valerian (whom Justinian had sent forth as I showed before) came
unto Rome, bringing with them a thousand and fix hundred horsemen, the which
for the most part with all Hunnes. Belisarius being recomforted by the
coming of these Souldyers, determined to order his wars after another sort
then he had done before. For he was not minded to stand still with in the City
keeping of the walls, Belis. practices his Souldyers in Skytmisshes.
but every day sent out his light horse men and skirmyshed with his enemies in
open fyelde. By means whereof it came to pass, that both parts were
wonderfullye enflamed, and nothing was left vnatrempted. For Belisarius
being a most expert captain in fcats of arms, taught his horsemen what they
should do, showing them how far they should go, and where and when they should
stay. One while he sent out his horsemen suddenly at the gates Salaria and
Pinciana, and disquietted the Goths that encamped theraboutes. Another while
he would issue out at Aurelius gate and be doing with the Goths that lay
between Adrians tumbe and the bridge Miluius. In these conflictes the fouldiers
of Belisarius began to preualle. Not that they were able to match the whole
power of their enemies horsemen, but because they seemed to be to good for them
being equally matched as many to as many, or some what mo in number then they
them selves were, and to be of more conning and audacitie in their feighting.
His horsemen being thus by little and little practiced, began to set light by the
horsemen of their enemies. And the besieged began to take courage and
confidence unto them. To be short, it came to that point, that they would not
any more skyrnisshe, but feight it out in the plain field with hand strokes.

For the Captains and the Souldyers had lain so sore at Belisarius, and had so
often and so carnestly entreated him, that he determined to try some greater
encounter. A battle between the Goths and Belisarius.


And thereupon he disposed his army in this wise. First he commanded one band
to issue out at the gate of Aurelius and to stand in battle raye before
Adrianus tumbe against their enemies. The charge of this band he committed to
Valentine Lieutenant of the horsemen, giving him besides his horsemen a
certain of the old expert footmen, and of the people of Rome, which of their
own fre will requested the thing at his hand. He would not have these footmen
stand with the horsemen, but willed them to take the hills which rise over the
playnes on the left hand of Ianiculum. And he gave Valentine commandment to
make a show as though he would ener give an onset upon the enemy, but in
any wise not to encounter with them unless he were compelled. For his mind
was no moore but to deteyne that part of the Goths that encamped in that
place, still there, to the intent they should not succor their felowed all the
gate Saiaria where he determined to feyght. Then made he two other battles, one
at the gate Saleria, and another at the gate Pinciana. And in them both he
placed the horsemen in the forewarde, and the footmen in the rereward,
commaundynge each battle to issue out at their several gates and to march
toward their enemies. Vitigis king of the Goths having intelligence by
certain runnagates that he should have battle the next morrow, caused the
Goths to arm them selves by the break of the day. In orderyng of his
battelles, he set his footmen in the mids, and on each side of them his
horsemen, as it were in wings. In this order he proceeded against Belisarius
and gave him battle. The Souldyers on both sides encountered together very
fyercely. And the Captains following after them, Belisarius on the one side
and Vitigis on the other, encouraged their parties. At the beginning of the
battle, the Soldiers of Belisarius were far to strong for their enemies,
and many of the Goths were slain. The battle was fought hard by their
camp, by means whereof the Goths abounding in multitude, sent ever fresh
and fresh in steed of them that were overthrown. In this sort the conflict
lasted until it was noone, neither party getting advantage of other. Howbeit
the Souldyers of Belisarius fought more cherefullye. The Goths held it out
only with sufferaunce. In the mean time the battle that stood at the
Sepulcher of Adrian, encountered with their enemies. For the people of Rome
descendynge from the hills gave charge upon the Goths.

And Valentine perceiving his people entangled with their enemies, marched
forewarde with the Host whereof he was Captain, from the rumbe of Adrian, and
assailed his enemies also. By (...) whereof the Goths were not able to endure
long against them, in especially for as much as they were abasthed at the
great number that came down from the hills, so that being not able to recover
again to their Camp, they were feign to fly further of. Now, the Romans
that came from the higher grounds fell by and by to ryflynge of their enemies
Tents. By means whereof neither they them selves pursued their enemies, nor
yet the Souldyers, It is ill fishing before the net.
but suffered them to go where they woulds. For the Souldyers perceiving them
to fall to ryflynge, to the entente they would not lose their part of the
Pray, left the pursuit of their enemies, and returned to spoil their Tents
also. And so the Goths being let slip, when they saw that no (...) them
stayed in the next mountains. From thence beholding their tents to be pulled
down and earyed away, when they perceived how their enemies kept neither any
order nor warrelyke discipline, they encouraged one another and gave a new
charge upon them. Whom (by reason they were laden and skattered in gatherynge
of the spoil) they easly overcame, and so both faued their tents and also
recovered their pray. By that time Fortune began to change her copy about
the kings camp also. For the Gothishe footmen resorting in great number out
of the next camp, east them selves upon Belisarius horsemen, and keueryng
them selves with their shieldes in manner of a vaulte, preased so sore upon the
forefront of their battle, that they compelled them to lose ground. The
which thing when their horsemen that stood on the right wynge perceived,
they a^o auayied Belisarius horsemen on the side. Who being not able to abide
the brunte and force of them any long time, Belis. and hysmen put to fleyght.
af length retired to the main battle of their footmen. The which being not
of strength sufficient to withstand the violence of the enemy, was with great
slaughter like wise put to flight. How be it, there were two Peticaptaynes
named Principius and Taruunt, whose man hode and audacitie was well approved in
that place to their great commendation and immortal fame. The valiauntnes of
Principius and Tarnunt.
For at such time as all the rest fled, they two keeping their standings, put
them selves against the whole power of the Goths, and kept them occupied, to
thentent that their company might have space to recover the city, so long
until Principius being pitifullye mangled all his body over, after long
seyghtyng fell down, and about him two and fourtye of his retinewe: and
Taruuntes being of like valiantues and courage, when he ha^ lost much blood at
his wounds, and that his strength began to fail, was carried out of ye
battle to the Pincian gate by his brother whether he would or no, and there
fell down dead.

After whose departure the Souldyers ran full flight toward the City. The
peril of the^ that were overcome.
The Romans standing upon the walls did shut yt gatesagainst them, for
fear least their enemies should have entered in with them. by means whereof
agreat forte of the souldyers were shut out who getting over the Vaumure,
stood with their backs to the wales and their faces toward their enemies,
having no way to save their lives but one, which was to be defended by them
that stood upon the walls. For the most part of them having either broken
their wapons in the battle, or else thrown them a way in the chase, had not
where with to defend them felues Howbeit those that were upon the battelmentes
defended them with stones. This battle being begone at the Camp of the
Goths at the last ended hard at the gates and walls of the Town. There
were slain of Belisarius men a great number, and those of the valiantest and
best practiced.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Of diverse skyrmishes duringe the continuance of the syege, the Goths enuiron
the City with another Camp whereupon grows scarcetye, and anon after
enseweth the plague. Belisarius by his pollicye caused scarcetye in the
Gothyshe camp likewise, into the which the plague spredeth it self also.

AFter this barrel Belisarius absteyned certain days from feyghtyng, The
syndged child dreadeth fire.
and was content to defend the walls only. At the length, when he had well
hartened his fouldiers, he began to lead them forth again. But he durst not
any more encounter with his whole power. Only he perseuered to make light
skyrmisshes as he had benn wont to do before. Of the which some were very
notable specially such as were against those Goths that encamped on the
hither side of the bridge Miluius oueragainst the gate of Aurelius. Skyrmisshes
about the bridge Miluius.
For in the same place is a plain ground very fytte for horsemen to
skyrmisshe in, and in the same plain stands a theater builded in old time
for masters of fence to play at weapons in. About the same theater were many
whote skyrmisshes. Because that either the fouldiers of Belisarius did take and
use it for a camp, or else the Goths preventing them laid ambusshes in the
same. Moreover, both at the gate Salaria, and the gate Pinciana, day by day
was skyrmishyng, almost every day. The Goths therefore considering how the
siege was like to continue long, thought there was no hope of wynnyng of the
City any other way then by famine. For albeit that the taking away of yt
haven might seem to have been a great anoyance: yet not withstandyng (as man's
wit is imaginatiue specially in extremity) the hoyes and such other ships
of bur then as were wont to arrive at Portna, arrived at Autium, Adversity
^^keth men wise.
and there vnloding their corn and other necessaries sent them from thence to
Rome by land. The Goths therefore desirous to cut of this commodity from
the Romans also, pytched the eight Camp about the City between the way
that leads into Latium, and the way of Appius. For there are in the same
place two conduytes, the which crossyng each other do stretch as it were into
two arms, and leauyng a certain space betwixt them do mete a gain a good
way of. They are from the City about five miles. The ground between the
said arms the Goths took and enclosed with a Wall of stone laid with lome.
And so by that means they had a strong and well fortified camp, wherein they
placed seven thousand horsemen, who infestyng both the upper mast and the
nether coast, The great peril that Rome stood in.
stopped up the way into Latium, the way of Appius, and the way to Ostia
cuttynge of all liberty of conueying in of corn. Through this, they that were
besseged stood in worse case then ever they did, and it was none other like but
that Rome should be famished. Yet not wythstandynge as long as there was
corn in the fields, the Souldyers would steal out of the town in the night
time, and fetch in corn, the which they sold very dear to the Citizens, and
so relieved the necessity for a while. But when that this shift once failed,
then all things lay in utter despair. Now was the Sun at the highest and
the days at the longest, and the plage began to reign in the town, so that
diverse dyed, A plage.
not only of the common people, but also of Belisarius Soldiers. They were
brought to a great distress, and to before afterdeale, and therefore the
Romans refortyng to Belisarius, bewailed their heavy misfortune, A pitous
complaynt.
in that they had brought themselves to such extremity by keeping their faith
and allegeans toward the Emperor upon his promise. For their Citizens had
been miserablye murdered at Rauenna by their enemy, their city dishenorably
besieged by yt Goths, all things without yt walls wasted and spoiled, and
within the walls oppressed with intolerable famine and penury of all things.
Wherefore they besoughte him to lead them forth against their enemy, for it
were better for them to dye like men with their weapons in their hads then to
pine away for hunger and to abide so great and so dishonorable calamities. When
Belisarius heard them make their moan in this sort, he gave them scarce so
gentle answer as the case required. A rough answer.
He said they were missaduised and led by rasshenes according to the nature
of common people, which are wont to be led by rage rather then ruled by
reason. They knew well enough that he was wont to be always ruled by Counsel
and to do his matters by discretion, and not by wylfullnes. He looked for an
army of men from the Emperor, the which being ones come, if they were then
so willing to feyghte as they made themselves to be, he might be able to
warrant them victory without fail. The said army did bring with them an
infinite deal of corn and therefore he wylled them to depart and to let
them alone with the order of the wars.

The Romans with these words either recomforted or rather put in fear he
began to imagine and devise with himself, the wise practice and policy of
Belisarius.
by what means he might bring scarceness of corn among the Goths. For the
performance whereof he practiced this policy. He sent Constantin and Traiane
with a thousand horsemen unto Taracine, and Martine and Seuthis with five
hundred unto Tibur: and he placed another band at Alba. Unto all these he gave
commandment that to the vttermoste of their power they should stop all
victuallers from the Gothishe Camp, and help to saufro^duct them that were
willing to go to Rome. And to thentent that the Camp which lay at the
Conduyt should not anoy them, he caused a bulwark to be fortified at the
church of s. Paul, and appointed a troop of horse men toward in the same
place, to thentent to defend the ways (as far as they could) from
thinuasions of ye Goths. Reuere^s ba^ to religion.
The church of S. Paul is without the gate toward Ostia, quite and clean
another way from the church of S. Peter, both of them standing without the
town and each of them having a porch from the gate of the City to the
Church. These two temples of the Apostles The Goths in all the time of their
siege did never violate. The priests contynuinge in them did their divine
service freely without interruption or trouble, as they had been accustomed to
do in foretymes. Constantine and Traiane therefore going to Taracine, when they
had brought Antonia the wife of Belisarius at Naples and there left her,
Antonia the wife of Belisarius.
returned back again and spoiled all the towns in those quarters, which
ministered relyefe and succor to the Goths, and within short space they
brought to pass, that nothing at al was conveyed to the Goths out of those
places. Martine and Senthis also going to Tibur when they had repaired the
walls of that town which were decayed, did daily molest and disquiet the
Goths out of that place. By some means or other, and would not fuffer any
grain to be carried to their camp, The same thing did they in like wife yt
were sent to Alba. By means whereof wtin very short space, Scarcetie and
pestilence in the Gothishe Camp.
it came to pass yt the Goths which were yt be fyegers, were put to as much
distress as they that were besyeged. And besides the scarcetye of corn, the
pestilence also had sprede it self into the camp of the Goths.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
A new suppliment of soldiers comes from the emperor, for the saufe convey
whereof unto Rome Belisarius pollitiquely provides to the great slaughter of
the Goths, who thereupon enter in communication of peace, so that a truce is
taken whiles Ambassadors may go and come from the emperor to whom the
determination of all their controversies is referred.

WHile these things were in doing, A nevve supplement of soldiers.
Iustinia^ sent another host of me^ into Italy. They were of Thracian horsemen
eight hundred, of whom John the son of his brother Vitalian had the leadinge:
and a thousand and three hundred mustered in other places, under the conducte
of Alexander Maxcent and Zeno. Moreover three thousand footmen which came by
water led by Paul and Conon. Also there were at Naples five hundred footmen
prepared by Procopius of Cesarea. All these bands assemblyng themselves
together, determined to go to Rome, they brought with them great plenty and
store of victuals. The horsemen marched by the sea coast, and the footmen were
conveyed by water. In the same flete was brought great abundaunce of corn,
and much corn was also carried by land in wagons. Belisarius having knowledge
of their coming, A subtle pollicye.
for fear least the Goths should meet with them and interrupt them,
invented this policy. He commanded the gate of Flaminius (which he had
dammed up from the beginning of the syege,) to be opened in the night time and
the bagage taken away wherewythall it was stopped. The which being done he sent
certain of his souldyers thither the next morning by the break of the day
ready harnessed and well appointed, byddyng them put themselves in array and
so kept them close without noise. Then he sent Traiane and Diogenes with a
thousand horsemen out at the Pincian gate, commaundynge them to run to the
camp of their enemies with as much noise as they could, and when their
enemies were issued out upon them, to retire back again, and not to stay
before they came to the Gate where they went forth. These thinbeynge in all
poynctes thus accomplished, whiles they were feyghtynge at the Pincian Gate,
Belisarius suddenly issuyng out at the gate of Flaminius with the rest of his
army, made straight to the camp of the Goths, where he found all things
unprovided and in manner emptye on that side, as they that mistrusted no harm
at all from the gate of Flaminius, because that it had been long closed up. a
great slaughter of the Goths.
So that it wanted little but that he had won their Camp. Then tourning him
self toward the Pincian gate, and there gettyng his enemies in the mids
between his two hoosts, he by assayling them on the backs, and those that were
fled, by retournyng fiersly upon them before, struck them with an incredible
slaughter. And upon this Battle there fell such a terrible fear among
them, that they doubled their watch in their Camp, and took care for
nothing so much, as how to defend themselves from the policies of
Belisarius. The enemy being by this means troubled and put in fear, the
Emperors army without any let came unto Ostia. Communication of peace
The Goths therefore being weryed and vexed with many displeasures, and
besides that, understanding how a fresh crewe of Souldyers were come to the
aid of Belisarius, began to consu^te of breaking up their siege. For by that
time a great part of their camp was dimished either by the plage or else by
the sword, and many had been feign to forsake the Camp, either for their
wounds or else for that they were sick. Vitigis therefore s^^dyng
Commissioners, unto Rome (after that many things had been alleged, and
answered on both sides to and fro, as concerning the equitye of their case,)
at length agreed to refer the determination of their controuersyes to the
Emperor Justinian, and he to decide the matter as he should think good.

Here upon Ambassadors were sent to him, Truce taken for a time.
and a truce taken for thee months until they niyghte return again, and
for the better observing of the truce, and performaunce of couenauntes,
pledges were given and taken one both fydes. When things were thus seta at
stay, the army and victuals that were meet at Ostia, came to Rome both by
land and by water.

Thus ends the first Book.

The second book of Lenard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
There rises occasion of grudge between the Goths and the imperialls which
grows to altercation, so that in the end the truce is broken. Datius Bishop
of Millaine enformeth Belisarius of the good wills of the Millainers toward
the Emperor and it remised with great thanks Belisarius is put in danger of
his life by one of his Peticaptaines, whom he would have punnished for his
misbehauiour the Goths going about to steal the City and to win it by
treason are twice detected.

Whiles things stood thus at a stay, and that the wars ceased by reason of
the truce that was taken, (Belisarius yet nevertheless in the mean time kepinge
Rome, ano (...) Goths their Camp and b^stiles) suddenly there fortuned
complaints and altercation for breaking of the truce contrary to promise,
Causes of altercation.
upon this occasion. There was (as I told you before) a garrison of Goths at
the City Portua. Now the souldyers of the said garrison, when victuals failed
them, forsook the town. They were not so sone gonne out of it, but ye Paul
Captain of the Isautiens, remaining with the nauyc at Ostia, entered into it.
And within a while after, the souldyers of Belisarius received another Cyty in
Tuskye nere unto the sea side called Centumcelles being likewise left up by
the Goths. Moreover the Goths abandoned up the City Alba among the marses
after the same sort, and the souldyers of Belisarius took it. When Vitigis
knew that his enemies had taken those Cities, he sent commissioners to Rome,
to complain of violatyng the Truce contrary to the articles of agreement. In
that Portua, Centumcelles, and Alba towns of the Goths, contrary to all
equitye and conscience, were taken from them for the Goths had not given them
up, but such as were there in garryson were comme to him at his
commandment, and should have shortly returned into the same again that
which they did they thought they might the freelyer have done it by reason of
the Truce. And therefore of reason, restitution ought to be made. Belisarius
made answer to the commissioners in this wise. Return (quod he) to the King
your Master, and tell him that as for those things that he alleges as
concerning the calling of his garrysons from their charges, to send them
thither again, are but feyned matters.

For it was easy to be seen for what consyderation the Goths forsook those
Cytyes.

He confessed that it was not lawful for him by the truce, to take them
perforce or to sceale the^, but to enter upon such as had no owners, nor any
body to keep possession, that he said was not forbidden. Upon this matter
rose preuye grudge and hartburnyng, the Goths seeking means to requite
Belisarius with the like. For those three cities being taken, did Belisarius
great pleasure and service for the wars. Winter drew on a pace. And
Belisarius having men of war good store, determined to send forth his horsemen
to winter in the country. Whervppon besides those that went into other places.
He sent MM. into the Country of the Picents. Over who^ he made captain John
Vitalian geuinge him instructions what he would have him to do. There were in
the same country the wives and children of the Goths, for the husbands and
fathers were al come to the siege of Rome as many as were able to bear armor.
If the truce co^ntinued, he bad he should not stir, but if the Goths should
happen to work any thing contrary to the articles of the Truce, then he
wylled him to make havoc and spoil, and to take as many towns as he could.
If any town made resistens he commanded him to besyege it, and not to pass
from it until he had won it. For he thought it should not be for his ease
to proceed onward, and leave the Towns of his enemies behind him. With these
words and instructions Belisarius sent John among the Picentes with an army.
The very same time Datius Bishop of Myllaine, Datius bisshoppe of Millaine.
and with him certain of the head Cityzens came to Belisarius declarynge unto
him, that the City of Myllaine should be at the Emperors commandment, if
he would send never so slender a garryson thither. For they were of power
suffycient of theymselues to drive the Goths not only out of Myllaine, but
also out of all Lumbardye, if so be it that the Emperor would but only
bear the name of it. Belisarius entertaynynge them curtuously, and geuyng
them most hearty thanks with gentle and honorable words wylled them to put
no doubt in the matter, A so dayne danger.
affyrmynge that when time served he would fullfyll their requests. Duringe
this time that all things thus prospered and followed their desires, there
happened an horrible danger, the which in one moment had almost turned all
things up side down. There was one Presidius a citizien of Rome who being
wont to dwell at Rauenna, in the beginning of this war stale away from
thence, and came to Rome. In his journey the souldyers of Constantyne which
lay at Spolet, had taken from him a sword curiouflye wroughte and costlye
vernyshed. The man being robbed and takyngs the dyspleasure in ill part, had
made complaint thereof to Belisarius with request to have his good restored
again. And Belisarius had given commandment that it should be so. But by
means of the war and of the syege which afterward ensewed, the souldyers
being otherwise occupied and the Captain busyed about weightier matters, the
thing was delayed. At the length in this time (as I said) whiles all things
were in joyful estate, as Belisarius rod through the town. Presidius
caughte his Horse by the bridle, and with a loud and complaining voice, in the
audyence of a great number, asked him if it were meet that a Cytyzen of Rome
(who abandoning all that ever he had to the enemy had fled away naked) should
also be robbed by his soldiers of that little ye he had carried away with him,
and be thus wrongfully and iniurlously dealt withal. He said he had oftentimes
put up his complaynt unto him of the wrong and violence that had been
offered, and could have no redress, and yet they that had robbed him, had his
good within the Cyty, and did wear it daily before his face. These words did
stir the patience of Belisarius very sore.

And therefore affoone as he came home he caused Constantine to be called before
him (for they were his soldiers that had taken away the sword) and gave him
a great rebuke for neglectyng of his commandment so oftentimes in delyuerynge
of the sword. Marry (quod Constantine) I will rather throw it into the Tyber,
then I will restore it to that Varlet. This was very lewdly and presumptuously
answered. Then said Belisarius unto him, art not thou under me? Yes said he,
for as much as it is the Emperors pleasure. But yet for all that, in this one
thing I will never be ruled by you whiles I live. When Belisarius hard him say
so, he was more angrye with him then before, and called for the Serieauntes.
Constantine knowing that it should be to his cost that the Serieauntes were
sent for, drew out his Dagger that hung at his thigh and like a Bedlem runnyng
at Belisarius, and dabbed him in a little beneath the stomach. Out of dout if
such as stood by, had not spedely stepped unto him, and wrong the Dagger out of
his hand, and delivered him to the officers, Belisarius had surely died forit,
and his death had drawn all things with it to utter ruin, and the Goths had
the same day been made lords of all. But God of his infinite goodness would not
suffer so great a mischaunce to happen. And after at the commandment of
Belisarius, Constantine was put to death. Within a while after, Treason twice
detected.
the Goths attempted to have raken Rome by stealth, first by a way that they
found out in one of the channells of the conduites in the night time, and
afterward by stealing over the river in botes nere unto the field of Mars.
But they missed of their purpose in both places. For in the channel their own
lyghts bewrayed their covert workyng, by meaues whereof the channel was
stopped, and they enclosed from gettyng out. And at the field of Mars their
treason was detected, and so their attempt was made frustrat. The treason was
deuisedin this wise. Two rascal Varletts that dwelte by S. Peter's church (the
Goths as is showed before, never offered harm or displeasure to that place,
but in honor of thapostle preserved bethe the buyldynges thereof and those that
dwelled in them unhurt) had secret conference with Vitigis of betraying ye city.
And to bring their purpose to effect, they devised this policy. Beneath the
field of Mars in one place, the walls were vexye weak and sore decayed for
lack of looking to, by reason (as I think) they ye had been before times,
trusted altogether to the defens of the River. Vitigis therefore caused lyghters
and barges and all kind of botes to be put in a readiness at the bridge
Miluius. For had he once set any convenient number of his soldiers, over on
the other side of the river, he thought it would be an ensie matter, after the
landing of the first, to convey over still mo and mo in the same vessels. He
douted nothing so much as that the watchmen that warded on that side should
escrie him and bewray his denise. For the auryding of which dout, he corrupted
the two Remains for a piece of money, to further this attempt. To whom he
delivered a sieping powder willing them to give it the watchmen with wine, to
thentent that when they had drunk the same, they might fall into a dead sleep.
After these conueances were thus devised, and agreed upon, the one of them
being stryken with repentance, disclosed the whole matter to Belisarius, and
there upon the other being taken with the slepie medicine about him, that
the King had given him, was put to the torture and compelled to utter all
the order of the matter.

The which done, Belisarius caused his noe and ears to be cut of, and setting
him upon an Ass, sent him out at the Pincian gate to the Gothish Camp, to
the intent that Vitigis might perceive how that his close workyng was detected,
and his serret practices browght to light.

The.ij. Chapter.
Upon the disconerrie of the treason the truce ceaceth, John Vitalian vvynneth
diverse towns from the Goths. and amongst other Arminine, upon the taking
vvherof they break up their liege before Rome.

WHen Belisarius had so only discovered these their crafty packinges, The
truce broken between the Goths and Belisarius.
he thought it not mete to observe the truce any longer with them. Wheruppon he
wrare to John that he should execute his commission. He with his two thousand
horsemen scouring the country of ye Picents through, took the wives and
children of the Goths prisoners, and forraged and spoiled all the whole
country from the one end to the other. Morcouer encounteryng with Vglitheus
uncle of Vitigis by the fathers side, coming against him with an army of the
Goths, he vanquished him and stew the captain himself with a great part of his
host, and so like a co^queror ranged over al ye whole country. When he had
won many towns and that he was about to besiege Auriuu^, it was not unknown
unto him what a slender garrison was with in the town, but yet the place was of
it self very strong and defensible. And therefore thinkyng it folly to spend
the time in vain about the besieging thereof, he kept on his journey
forward. The same opinion also had he of the besieging of Vrbine. For the
city being well fortified and strong of it self, sented of necessity to ask a
long time in ye siege thereof, and he had put al his hope in spedie celeritie.
He took Fauum and Pisauru^, and then brought his army against Arimine in hope
to get in, because he had heard say that the men of Arimine could not well
agree with the Goths. When he had ones brought his host to this town, the
cast such a terror upon the Goths thereby, that they durst not abide
thereaboutes, but removed unto Rauenna, and the towuesmen set open their gates
to let him in. By this means John took Arimine, leaving behind two strong
cities manned by the Goths, namely Auximum and Vrhine. All the which doings
were clean contrary to Belisarius commandments. Howbeit he thought it
better to be sure of Arimine, then to spend his time vaynly in lying still
about Auximum and Vrbine.

Whereunto he was the rather persnaded, because that Arimine a town so nere
neighbor unto Rauenna being taken, it was not lykelye that the Goths would
tarry any long time after at the siege of Rome, but rather make have to come
away to the defense of Rauenna, and the places thereaboutes. The which thing
came so to pass in deed. For as soon as the Goths understood that Arimine
was taken, they determined to break up their siege before Rome, and to depart
thence. Vitigis therefore within a few days after set fire on his tents, The
Goths break up their siege before Rome.
and with all the whole power of the Goths, dislodged. In his retyring he
suffered great loss. For when the one half of his army was passed the
bridge, Belisarius commanded his men to et upon them that were behind,
among whom he made such a slaughter, that a great number of them that
escaped his hands, for haste in getting over the bridge were thrown down on
both sides and drowned. This siege of the city of Rome endured a whole year
and nine days, taking his beginning about the.xiiij. or.xv. day of March.
Now I will pursue the acts of either parts, and what provision was made on
both sides after the breaking up of the siege.

The.iii. Chapter.
Vitigis besieginge Arimine is by the diligence and industry of John
disapoynted of an assault that he determined to have given to the town, and
repulsed with great loss.

VItigis albeit he made seed toward Rauenna, yet not withstqanding he coueted
to keep the cities of Hetruria and of other Provinces in their accustomed
obedience. And therefore he placed at Clasium a thousand horsemen, as many at
Vrbiuetus, five hundred at Tudert, four thousand at Auxiuum, at Vrsine.ij.
thousand, five hundred at Cesena, and as many at Mountferrat. Vitigis goes to
besege Arimine.
And he himself with the rest of his army went to besiege Arimine. Belisarius
after the departure of the Goths, commanded Martine and Ildiger with a
thousand horsemen to make have to Arimine, and to bring John and his horsemen
that were with him from thence, placing fotemen there in their steds. The
which thing he did to the intent he would not have that band (wherein were
the best horsemen of the host) besieged by the enemy. For if so be it that
Arimine were manned with footmen, he thought that the Goths would not
bestow their labor in besieging of it. And if they should besiege it, he
thought the footmen should be better able to endure out the siege then
horsemen, for as much as it is a difficulte matter to keep horses in a siege,
and footmen might easly be conveyed to Arimine at all times by water from
Aucon, which newly before had yielded it self unto him.

Herevppon Ildiger and martine forstowing no time, did fetch a wyndlasse far
from their enemies and came unto ARimine. For the Goths by reason of the huge
multitude of their army, were compelled to take more leisure in their journey,
whereas the other being light harnessed, out went them a great way. When
they were come to Arimine and had declared the mind and commandment of
Belisarius, The vvvlfulnesse of John Vitalian.
John would neither obey himself, nor yet suffer his cosyn Damian with his
horsemen which were about four hundred, to be ruled by them. And therefore
Ildiger and Martine departing from Arimine, led away with them all the
horsemen that Belisarius had delivered unto John at his setting forth
leaving behind them none but the footmen and those horsemen that John and
Damian had of their own. Immediatlye herevppon Vitigis came and besyeged the
Town. At his first coming thither, he framed a tower of like heyghth with
the walls, the which was not drawn with Oxen as the other was before at
Rome, but driven by souldyers that were within the engyne. The Goths therefore
set the same against that part of the wall, where they might with most
ease approache, entendynge the next day to have won the Town by assault.
But John the same night went out with his souldyers, The diligence and
industry of John in preuentyng the purpose of his enemies.
and caused them to cut a brood and a deep Dyche on that side castyng up
all the earth that came out of it on that browe of the Dyche that was next
the wall. And so one nyghtes work disappoynted the long prepensed labor of
the enemy, cuttynge of all possibilitye of bringing the engyne to the wall.

Yet for all that Vititgis was minded to fill up the dyche, commaundyng all his
army to prepare Fagotts and straw with such other baggage for the same
purpose. And to the intent the tower should not the night followyng be set on
fire by the enemy, he determined to draw it back again to the Camp. As the
Goths were about it, John issued out with his souldyers, and set upon them
being busye about the work. There was a great and cruel combat about the
Turret, and many of the Goths were slain. How be it, after long feyghtyng
they drew it back again out of danger, but with such a staughter and so
great loss of their best men of war, that they were utterly in despair of
winning the town by force, determinyng to subdue it by famine.

The iiij. Chapter.
Belisarius ends Mundilas with a power to receive Millaine, who in his
way at the City of Pauie by a mischaunce loses a noble man of his company
called Fidelis. Millane and certain other Cities of Lombardye yield unto
Mundilas. Vraias the Nephew of Virigis goes into Lumbardye against the
imperialles. Belisarius receives diverse towns in Italye by composition.
Vitigis sends a crevve of souldyers to Auxioum for the more strengthenynge
thereof, the which making a rode against the inhabiters of Aucon, through
the follye of Conon Captain thereof make a greater slaughter and put the
town in danger of taking.

THe very self same time, Belisarius granted an aid of souldyers to the
Ambassadors of Millain that came before unto Rome. He appointed Mundilas one
of his familiar friends a very stout and valiant man to be chieftaine of the
said army. In the same band was also Fidelis of Millaine whom we declared to
have been Steward of the kings house. All these being conveyed to Geane by
ship, went from thence to Millaine on foot. And to thentent they would not
be hyndered of their passage over Po, they carried Bots with them in Wagons, to
ferrie over the river withal. Marching therefore in this sort as I have told,
when they had passed over the river Po, and were come to the City Ticiuum
which is now called Pauie, the Goths issued out of the town and set upon
them. For by reason that town had a strong castle in it, the Goths had
bestowed many and precious things in the same, and had manned it with a great
garrison. The skyrmyshe was no sooner fought, but that the Goths were driven
into the City.

And so Mundilas passed with his army over the bridge that was hard by the
town. In the same place was Fidelis of Millain stain. For he went into a
certain church to make his prayers, and the residue of his company being all
gone, last of all he came out alone, and as he would have taken his horseback,
be ouerethrewe. The which thing his enemies that stood vppen the Wall
perceyuyng, russhed out upon him and slew him, The death of Fidelis of
Millaine.
before that Mundilas and the souldyers wyste of it.

The death of this man was great sorrow both to the Captain and to the
souldyers. For he was a noble man in his country, and of much power, and such
a one as with his presence might greatly have furthered the war that was in
hand. Mundilas therefore and the rest of his company keepynge on their journey
toward Millaine, Millaine and other cities of Lumbardy be come Imperial
were received into the City. Therevppon, Come, Bergome, Nouaria, with the
rest of the cities in those borders, following thensample of Millaine, of their
own accord received Mundu^as and his souldyers. When Vitigis had knowledge of
those things that had happened about Millaine, he sent Vraias his brothers
son with a great army into those costs, to shentent he should both cause
such to keep their allegians to the Goths as had not yet revolted, and also
(if he could) recover such as had already yielded.

Furthermore, he wrate to Thewdeberre King of France (with whom not long
before he had entered in leage) desyring him to mimister aid unto Vraias. In
this state or rather in this expectation were the matters of Lunthardie.
Belisarius at such time as corns began to ware type, setting out of Rome,
marched with his army toward his enemies. The Goths that were left in
garrison at Tudert and Cluse, hearing that Belisarius was making toward them
for as muthe as they thought themselves over weak to encounter against him,
forthewyth sent messengers unto him and yielded up their Towns by composition.
While these things were in doing, Vitigis sent another army unto Auximum.
For he was utterly determined to reteyne and keep still that City. With this
army he sent a new deputye to have the charge of the Town and the men of
war, named Varinius. Who adioining his new sold yers and the old crewe
together, purposed to attempt the winnyng of Aucon his next neighbor city,
which was manned with a garryson of Belisarius. And therevppon he went with all
his whole power against the inhabiters of Auton.

That Town in those days was walled only on that side, that stood upon
the hill, the lower places situated on the plain grounds albeit they were
replenished with buildings, yet were they not enclosed with any wall.
Therefore at such time as the Goths approached. Conon captain of the town and
souldyers of Aucon, fearing least the suburbs and the inhabiters thereof
should be wasted and destroyed by thenemye, came down from the upper part of
the town with all his whole crewe, The fool has dinesse of Conon.
and set himself against his enemy. But in that case Conon was to far
ouermatched For he having scarce a thousand soul diers, encountered with his
enemies being four thousand. And therefore he did quickly abye his foolyshe
hardynesse. For being not able to stand against so many, he was at length
vanquisshed, and being put to flyghte lost the most part of his men, and
the City it self was with much a do hardly saved from taking. For when the
soldiers retired full flight toward the town, the townsmen for doubt least
their enemies should enter in among the souldyers, fearfully closed up
their gates. By means whereof there was a great slaughter made of them even
hard under the wall. And the Captain Conon himself was driven to so narrow
an erigent, that he had none other way to save his life, but to be drawn up
the wall by a line. The Goths rerynge up skalynge Ladders, endeavored to win the City. Othersome setting fire on the houses that we spoke of before,
burnte up all that was without the walls.

The.v. Chapter.
Narses an Eunuche the Emperors Chamberlain comes into Italy with a new
power and meets with Belisarius about Aucon, where in consultinge what is to
be done after diverse opinions of the other captains Narses persuades to go and
rescow John Vatalian besieged in arimine the which Belisarius very
pollitiquelye brings to pass. Through flattery and euall instigation ryseth
emuiation and discord between Narses and Belisarius Belisarius going with
Narses to the liege of Vrbine is of him forsaken and yet through good fortune
wins the town.

NOT long after that these things were done at Aucon, The coming of Narses
into Italy.
Narses came into Italye with a new host of men. This Narses was an Enuche, a
man that stood much in the Emperors favor, and one that bare great rule
and authority about him, For no man might command in the Emperors court,
but he only. Moreover he was threasurer of the Empire (which is the office
of greattest honor and trust) and one of his priuye counsel, by whom the
Emperor was in manner altogether ruled.

He brought with him into Italye five thousand souldyers. The notablest
among whom, was Iustine, Captain of the Illirien souldyers, and another,
Narses a Persian borne. Also there were in his retinew MM. of Therules of whom
were captains Isandre and Phauotheus. The meeting of Belisarius and Na^^^.
In ye mean time Belisarius hearing in what danger the men of Aucon stood
was come among the Picents: and so was Narses in likewise. The captayns and
their armies met both together about the town. There as they were consultinge
concerning the war that they had in hand, and were deuisinge what was most
requisite to be done next of all out of hand, there appeared many doubts and
dangers in the matter. For if they should go and besyege Aurimum, John and
those that were besyeged with him in Arimine should be left in apparent icoper
die, inespecially consydering that food failed them. Again if they should go
to Arimine, they should leave behynd them at Aurimum a great garrison of the
Goths, to the prejudice of their army and damage of the country.

In giving of their verdittes many of them that were chief officers of the
camp spoke much against the rashenesse of John, Opinions of thofficers against
John.
in that he had shut up himself in Arimine contrary to the commandment of
Belisarius, and that of a proud an covetous stomach, he had run upon his
own head, without regard of his Captain or of his charge. A friend is tried
at need.
When Narses perceived that, fearing least by ye means John should be
abandoned whom he loved most entierly, he spoke his mind to this effect.
Thoration of Narses.
My Masters (quod he) when men consult as concerning the publyke utility, in
my opinion they ought to have an especial eye thereto, for it own self, and
not to hinder it either for malice or for love. Certainly all other things set
a side, when I way with myself the thing whereof we do co^sult, me thinks I
spy this difference in the matter. If we delay the siege of Auximu^, there is
no let but that with in few days after we may attempt the same when we
list. But if we make any taryance in rescowyng the soldiers that are at
Arimine, we cannot afterward help them when we would. For ere many days to
an end hunger will so pinch them, that they shall be compelled to yield
themselves to their enemies. And therefore what indifferent Judge doubts, but
that most speed ought to be made thither where tariance procures
vnreconerable danger. But John (ye will say) deserves not to be succored
because he despised his captains command meant, and through his own
wilfulness cast himself into that danger. Admit that all these things are
true ye are reported of John. What then? shall we for the hatred we bear to
John, wilfully suffer the destruction of so noble and worthy a City as
Arimine is, and of the innocent soldiers besieged in the same? I beseech the O
noble and puissant Captain Belisarius, if John have offended thee, wylt thou
wreke his trespass upon the emperor? who thereby should lose both his town and
his soldiers, to the great preindice of the public weal? again what shall
men think, or what shall men say of us and our armies if we sit ring still
like a sort of cowards and beholding it with open eyes, shall suffer our
companions in arms to peryshe, and our besyeged City to be taken by the
enemy, in manner hard under our noses? My opinion is therefore that without
any further protracting of time, we lead our armies to Arimine, to succor our
men that are in danger. And afterward (if it shall seem expedient) to besege
Now called Ozimo,
Auximu^ and other of our enemis holds. To further thopinion of Narses with al,
yt very same time came letters from John unto Belisarius, aduertising him yt
the soldiers coustrained by famine, had fallen to composition with their enemies,
to yield wtin seven days, onles they were restowed in the mean while.
Hereupon, the opinion of Narses was confirmed by the assent of all the whole
counsel. When it was ones fullye condiscended that succor should be ministered
unto John with all speed possible, The pollitique prouisi^ of belisariu^ for the
rescowinge of Arimine.
Belisarius provided for the same in this wise. First he commanded Aratus to
abide in the same place where they then were, with a thousand horsemen willing
him in any wise not to remove from thence, nor by any means to attempt
fortune for any occasyon, but only to defend his camp if the enemy
adventured upon him. After that, he furnyshed his ships and embarked his
souldyers, commyttyng the charge of them to Herodian and Vliarius. But yt rule
of the whole flete he would should be at the discretion of Ildiger, commanding
him forthwt to direct his course toward Arimine. Another part of his army he
betoke to Martine, bidding him coast the ships and keep with them as nere as he
could by the shore.

And as soon as they approached their enemies so that they came wtin kenning then
of set purpose to kindle many fires in their Camp, to the intent to make the
enemy believe yt they were a greater army then they were in deed. Whiles these
kept by the sea coast, he himself went a contrary way by the City Saluia (The
same was sometime a fair city but it had been destroyed and beaten down to
the ground by the Goths that came first into Italye under Alaricus, Saluia.
so that nothing remained thereof more then the ruins.) Belisarius therefore
passinge by this town, marched by the mountains eschewynge the playner way
that leads to Arimine, by the fyeldes of the Fauenses and Pisauriens. For
seeing that his enemies had a far greatter army about Arimine then he had,
and that he had left a strong garryson of them behind at Auximum, he
thought it more for his behoof to use wisdom and policy against the
Goths, then to feight with them in open field. Marching therefore the way
before mentioned, when he came unto the hills that rise against Arimine, (as
must needs be lightly in so great an army) he found certain of hs enemies
ranging abroad. The which being either slain or else taken prisoners, some of
them with their faces sore mangled he let go again. Who returningt to the
Camp of the Goths, brought tidings that Belisarius was at hand with his
whole power, for the confirmation whereof they showed their faces newlye
wounded. It was about noone when this news was brought to the camp. And
thereupon proclamacion was made to harness, and that every man should fall in
order of battle under his antesygne. The Captains having put their men in
array, waited for the coming of Belisarius, lookyng continually toward the
mountains from whence he was reported to come. But Belisarius had about
midday encamped himself in the mountains, a good way of from Ariminie, and
came not down to his enemies that day. By means whereof the Goths having
stood gapyng for them all day to no purpose, at length about the Sun setting
brake their array and returned into their tents. Howbeit, when night came,
espying a great sort of fires on the sea coast, clean contrary to that way
that Belisarius was reported to come, (they were the fires that Martyne and his
army made) they were in great fear all that night, in so much that there was
not any of them that either took any sleep or put of his harness. As soon
as it was day, when they beheld the navy also ready decked and furnysshed
making sail toward Arimine, The Goths break up their lege before Arimine.
for fear least they should be entrapped by two hosts at ones, the one from
the land, the other from the water, they by and by brake up their siege, and
without any order fled to Rauenna. First of all arrived Ildeger with his flete
at Arimine, and going on land spoiled the tents of the Goths. Anon after
came Martine and Belisarius with their armies. When Belisarius beheld John and
his souldyers that had been beseged, how pale and lean they looked with
hunger, turning him self to John as it were to taunte him for his rashenesse,
he said: ye are much beholdynge to Ildiger, and worthy to thank him for his
pains. John answered proudlye and arrogantlye again, Occasion of discord
among thimperialles.
that there was no cause why he should thank Ildiger or any man else save
only Narses. As who should say, he desired to have it known, that
Belisarius would smallye have regarded his delyueraunce, if Narses had not
compelled him. These words troubled Belisarius, and they were the beginning
of discord.

For after that time, John standing in fear of Belisarius, cleaued unto
Narses. See what mischief flattrye works.
The residue also of his friends styrred up Narses with evil counsel against
him. Vouching that it was not for his honor being Threasurour of Thempyre, and
one of the Emperors privy counsel, to be led by thaduise of Belisarius,
specially seeing that he him self, had an army far passing tharmye of
Belisarius, both in number and strength of souldyers, and also in policy of
Captains, and therefore he ought to seek the glory of the recovery of Italy
from the Goths, to him self and not to Belisarius. These flattering
persuasions set Narses in such a pride, that he ever after enramped by him
self, and would not follow Belisarins advise in nothing.

But consulted by him self as touching these wars and all other affairs
that were in hand. Nevertheless they went both together to the siege of
Vrbine, but yet not in one camp. For Belisarius say on the raw side of the
town and Narses on the West. At such time as Belisarius was purposed to have
assaulted the town, and had prepared engines for the same, Narses laughyng him
to skorne for his labor, within a day or twain after he came thither brake
up his siege and returned with his army to Arimine, leauyng Belisarius and
his company in worse case, then if he had not come there at all. For the enemy
perceiuinge part of the army to dislodge, began to take a stout courage,
smally regarding that part that remained still behynd. Nevertheless Belisarius
began to rere up ordinance toward that gate of the town where the ground
was most level, The good for tune of Belisarius.
and to give the adventure to win it by assault. Whiles he was putting these
things in a readynesse by a marvelous good fortune it happened that the
foutaine (the townsmen of Vrbine having no mo but that one only) dried up of
the own accord. Wherthrough it came to pass that the town for fear was
yielded, upon condition that the Goths and the Citizens of Vrbine should
become subjects to the Emperor Justinian, in as free and ample manner as
other Italyans that were Imperial.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of the great dearth that was through all Italy, and how the Goths befoge
Millaine and win it through the discord of Belisarius and Narses. Whereof the
Emperor being advertised by Belisarius calls Narses out of Italy. Whereupon
Belisarius having absolute authority again proceeds with the wars, and
besegeth Auximum, the sytuation and strength whereof is here declared.

WHen Vrbine was thus yielded unto him for as much as it seemed not as yet
expedient tattempte the fiege of Auximum, Belisarius led his host against the
Vrbeuetanes The winning of that town was some what difficult, because it stood
upon a rock so stepe on all sides, that men could not well come to assault
it.

The only hope was to win it by famine. For Italy was as it were so women to
the hard bones with continual war, and trodden underfoot with many armies,
that there was not one city in all the country, but it suffered scarsitie and
penury: Great darth through out all Italy.
the which penury Vrbeuetus also being at length oppressed, came in subjection
to Belisarius. Narses lyinge at Arimine sent John with an army of men to win
Cesena. At the which town, as he was scalyng of the walls, he was repulsed
with many wounds, and loft a great sort of his company. In the same assault
was slain Phauotheus captain of the Exules. Whereupon John desisting from
Cesena, went to Forum Cornelij, the which was yielded unto him by composition.
The same ^yme Mundilas and those that were with him at Millaine, began to be
wrapped in great distres. For Teudebert the French king (as is before
specified) being by Vitigis called upon for aid by virtue of the leage that
was between them, Millane besieged by the Goths.
had sent to Vraias ten thousand Burgonians upon confidence of the which
multitude he encamped himself not far from Millain, suffering neither corn nor
any other kind of sustenance to be conveyed thither. Mundilas had of
necessity been driven before to disperse his soldiers into Come, Bergome, and
Nouaria, so that he had no great number of horsemen about him. How be it the
hardest of the matter was not the defense of the city, for the Citizens of
Millain with one accord knitte themselves together in the defense thereof. But
the fear was least victualle should fail in so populous a City, if so be it
the barbarous Goths should be suffered to continue long in those borders.
Belisarius therefore having intelligence thereof, sent Martine and Vliarius
thither with a great power, to thentent that Mundilas and they ioynyng
together, might remove the Goths further of. When they came at the river Po,
which is from Millain but one days journey, they durst not pass over for fear
of their enemies, but lyngered many days in the same place, frustrating day by
day the hope of Mundilas and them that were besieged with him. For where as they
made promise to have passed the river and come unto Millaine, they performed no
part thereof. Daily both hope and sustenance failed those that were besiged. At
ye last after long lyngering Martine and Vliarius confessing the truth
advertised Belisarius ye they alone were not able to pass over ye river
against so great a power of their enemies, onles they would wylfully run in
open danger of their lives. Wherefore if he thought it good, he should cause
John and Iustine which were with their armies not far from Bonome to join with
them. Belisarius hereupon imediatly wrate unto John and Iustine commaundinge
them to join with Martyne, and to make all the speed they could to relieve
their fellows being besieged and in utter peril of their lives. They sent
him word again that they would nothing do without the commandment of
Narses. Therevppon Belisarius wrate again unto Narses. Who albeit he gave his
consent that the army should go thither, yet not withstanding, for as much as
it was a thing done by Belisarius, he went about it very slowly and
negligently as men are wont to do in other men's businesses. By this means the
matter was so long delayed, that at last they were utterly deceived. In the
mean time Millaine was every day sorer afflicted then other, intolerable
hungre welnye pyned them away, and the city wauing between hope and fear,
abode such miseries and anguish as almost no menwere able to abide again.
Millane is loss through the discord of Narses and Belisarius.
At y^ length being brought to utter extremity Mu^dilas and his soldiers fell
to composition to abandon up the town so they might escape with their lives.
After whose departure the Goths enteryng into the city, spared neither young
nor old. For they slew in every place not only such as were able to bear
armor, but also thold men and young boys. The women were given in servitude to
the Burgonions, A notable cruelty.
and the city rased to the ground. Reparatus a citizen of Rome being taken in
the town by the Goths, was hewn in small gobbetts and thrown to dogs.
Thus was one of the goodlyest and most populous cities of all Italy (through
the discord of Narses and Belisarius) put to utter destruction. In this ruin
and over throw of ye city, were slain of ye Millainers about.xxx. M. When
Belisarius had tidings of it, he took great sorrow forth same, and wrate unto
the emperor Justinian, the beginning and proceeding of all the whole matter.
Justinian being certruce or the truth, was much offended thereat, but yet
punisshed not any man for it. Only he called home Narses out of Italy, Narses
is called out of Italy.
committing the whole charge and authority of the war unto Belisarius.
Hereupon Narses with part of his army returned into Greece, and Belisarius with
all the rest abode still in Italy. Who now having no man to overthwart him in
his determinatio^s concerning the war. Although that his chief care rested
upon Vitigis and Rauenna, yet he minded is take two towns mo from she Goths,
before he proceeded with his army against Vitigis and Rauenna. The towns that
he desired were Auximum and Fesules: both of them very strongly situate, and
both of them thoroughly manned by the Gothishe garrisons.

For neither would he leave at his back Auximu^ having in it three thousand of
chosen soldiers, which were able to do much displeasure and hinderance to
his adherents: nor yet Fesules because that as long as y^ Goths held that
city, he thought othing should be in rest through Hetruria. Hereupon he divided
his army into three parts, of the which he took one with him to besiege Auximum,
another he sent by Iustine and Cyprian against Fesules, and the third he betoke
to Martine and John Vitalian, commanding them to encampe abouts the river Po,
and to deteyne Vraias with his host as long as they could in those borders, to
thentent they should narcome to raise any of the siges among ye Thuskans and
Picents. And if they were not able to keep him still there, then to solow him
in the tail. Martiue and John therefore setting forth into Lumbardye with that
part of the army that we spoke of before, wanne the city Dert one situate by
the ciuer Po, and from thence did their endeavor to trouble Vraias and yt
Goths. Cyprian and Justin with another army going unto Fesules, albeit the
besteging of that city were very difficil for ye nature and roughnes of the
place, yet not withstandyng they brought their camp as nere as they could, and
besieged it from a higher ground, where the way lay more plain to the town.
Belisarius himself with the puyssantest company of all, Belis. besieges
Auximu^.
beset Auximum. Vitigis had placed in Auximum the best that he couldpyke out
among the Goths, and was very circumspent in fortifiyng of that town.
Coniecturing that which was most true, namely that Belisarius would never
proceed to the befieging of Rauenna, onles he had first subdued Auximum. When
Belisarius had well viewed the situation and nature of the place, he was past
all hopeof winning Auximum by force. For the city stands upon somewhat a high
ground, and besides that there were within to defend it, a puyssant band of
chosen men of war, able to gene battle even in thopen field. So he had none
other hope, but only to tame them by famine, for as much as there was a great
number enclosed wtin the city. And therefore Belisarius omitting assault,
pitched his camp round about the hill on every side, narrowly watching that
nothing should be conveyed in to them. But like as that large compass of his
camp was good to proibit the portage of things in, so was it unprofitable
against sudden invasions of the enemy. For they that were wtin, might at their
pleasure make sudden assaults upon what part of the Camp they lysted out of
the town above. And the souldyes of Belisarius lay so far one from another,
that they could not readily help at need. By this means it came to pass
that the enemy continually infested the camp, and diverse skyrmysshes were
therevppon fought. Moreover; there was a certain moist ground not far from
the city, where there grew much grass. This field was as it were the place
of their daily exercises, when either the besiegers or the besieged resorted
thither for forage: and sometime their courages were so kyndeled on both
sides, that almost all the whole Camp ran thither to feyght. In these
encounters the Souldyers of Belisarius prevailed in multitude, and the Goths
by the situation of the place, both parts being equal in manhod and
prowess. The like conflictes were also at Fesules, for there were many
sudden alarmes given, and welnye daily skyrmysshes between the bestegers and
the besieged.

The besiegers had none other hope of atteynynge their desire, then by keepynge
the besieged from sustenaunce, and famisshinge them for want of food. For
there was no hope to win so strong Cities as those were by force. And
therefore by taking up standynges in places convenient about the towns, they
cut of all carryages and conueyaunce of things in.

The.vii. Chapter.
Of towns that were besieged by the Imperialles, how the French men coming
into Italy after that they had put two armies to flight the one of the Goths
to other of the Imperials both in one day, returned home again, and how
Fesules was yielded to the Imperialles.

While the war was in this state and that Auximum among the Picentes, and
Fesules among the Hetrurians were narowly besieged, The cause of the sudden
coming of the frenchmen into Italy.
there happened a strange chance about the river Po. For the frenchmen with
their Captain Thewdebert, having passed over the Alps, came in great number
into Lumbardye. The cause of their coming (as afterward was known) was this.
Because that when they peerceyued how war was made in Lumbardy, they being a
warlike people and in manner savage, were offended that such a country being
their next neighbor, should fall as a reward to them yt could get the upper
hand, and that they themselves sytting still like cowards the mean while,
should accept such to be their neighbors, whom the fortune of victory
appointed to them. This was the occasion why they passed the Alps. The same
time Vraias being often written to by Vitigis, had passed the River Po and was
marchinge with his army toward Rauenna. Martin and John likewise newlye sent
thither by Belisarius, preuentinge Vraias, had encamped themselves not far
from the same place, to the intent (if they could) to have stopped him of his
passage. Their camp was distant from the camp of Vraias about (...), miles.
In the mean season, the Frenchmen suddenly came into those quarters. Vraias
and the Goths by reason of the leage that was lately taken betwixt them,
supposed they had come to their aid, like as they had doo^e before in the
wars about Miliaine. These frenchmen ye passed over the Alps at that time with
Thendebert, The number and armor of the frchchme^
were to the number of four score thousand, whereof very few were horsemen and
those atten\ded always upon the kings person, all the residue being footmen.
Their armor was not in pikes nor in bows, but to keuer their bodies with, they
bare a tergat and a skull, and to strike the enemy wtall, a sword and a byll.
In the battle they used most commonly their bills, the which struck with such
force, ye neither head piece nor tergat was able to hold out the blow, but that
they cut through, nor anyman was of power able to wtstand the violence of ye
stripe. These therefore as friends of the Goths, being suffered to pass over
the river Ticinus at the bridge by Pauie, did afterward much hurt and
displeasure to thinhabiters of Pauie, and of a savage cruelty slew the wines
and children of the Goths as they found them abrod in the country, anon after
passing over Po, when they approached nere Vraias camp, The Goths and the
imperials turned both out of their camps by the french men.
whether it were of set purpose, or through rashenes, they fell a quareling and
consequently a feighting with the Goths. Thend of the fray was, that the Goths
being put to the worse forsook their camp, and flying not far from the camp
of our men, caused the soldiers of Belisarius to wonder sore what they should
mean. For they had hard no thing of the coming of the Frenchmen, and
therefore they thought verily ye Belisarius had been come by some priuis and
unknown way, to destroy Vraias. Herevppon arming themselves in have, when they
had gone a little foreward, sodeinly they met with the frenchmen, and being not
able to retire without battle, were enforced to feight, in the which they were
soon overcome, and for as much as they durst not repair for heir camp, they
had none other way to save themselves but by flight. The Frenchmen getting the
upper hand bothof ye Goths and tharmy of Belisarius in one day, obtained the
camps of them both also, and rested in them finding good store of victuals in
each of them. Vraias fied to Rauenna, and the soldiers of Belisarius through
ye fields of ye Placentines and Parmenses gate over ye mountain Appennine and
went into Hetruria. This sudden coming of the Frenchmen troubled both Vitigis
and Belisarius. The thing that Belisarius feared most, was least the Frenchmen
should come into Hetruria and oppress his army that besieged Fesules. For
through ye fields of the Placentines and Parmenses, it is but a short and a
ready way into Hetruria. The Frenchmen retourns again into France.
But ye french me^ when they had tarried a while about Po, and could find
neither wine nor other necessaries (the country being left bare by means of
the long continuance of the war) so that they had nothing to feed on but
Beof, nor nothing to drink but the water of the river, within short space
they fell into diverse diseases.

Of the which forasmuch as they dyed in great number, they determined to retire
back, and so they went home again into France, ye very same way that they
came out over the Alps.

This was the end of the Frenchmens voyage into Italy. The Goths that were
beseged wtin Fesules, Fefules is yielded the Imperialles.
being sore constreined with hunger, when they saw that rescow was often promised
and yet none came, at length yielded up the town to Iustine and Ciprian by
composition. When they had received the town and placed a garrison therein,
they went with all the rest of their army unto Auximum. For Vitigis had promised
to come with all his whole power to raise the sege before Auximum. And forasmuch
as Vraias was then with him, it was none other like but he would have done so
in deed. By reason whereof Belisarius was compelled to gather all his power
about him out of other places, to thentent that after his long continued
syege, he would not be set beside his purpose. But when this often promised
succor came not, and yet they stiffly held their own to thutter-most,
Belisarius determined to cout-pell them to yield by some extremitys maugre
their hearts for the compassing whereof he invented this policy.

The.viii. Chapter.
How after that Belisarius had corrupted the water of a certain well nere
unto Auximum the tovvnesmen yielded themselves and the town unto him by
composition. The besy eginge of Rauenna by Belisarius and of his vvonderfull
good fortune, and his wise dealing there at such time as the French
Ambassadors came thither, in so much that he caused the offers of the
Frenchemen to be rejected and a Truce to be taken for further communication to
be bad with the Emperor for a small peace and agreement. During the which
Truce the storehouses and garners of corn in Rauenna are set on fire no man
can tell how.

Within a stones cast of the Walls of Auximum, on the north side of the town
there was a well with a very fresh spring the which Belisarius purposed to take
from them, because he perceived that the townsmen had none other place to
fetch waler at but only there. To bring this matter to effect he commanded
his army to be in armor by the dauninge of the next day, and to give an
approach to the walls. The Goths thinkinge they had prepared them to thassault,
placed themselves orderly upon the battle ments. Belisarius in the mean time
sent five men conninge in such feats. with mattockes and axes, well pauished with
the bucklars and tergattes of a great number that were sent with them for their
defense, to undermine the well and to cut down the timber work. Who as soon
as they came there did get them under the shed that covered the well, and being
saufe out of danger from the walls, began to dig down the Mason work.
But when the Goths perceiuinge that all their endcuour was about heuing down
the well, they issued out of the town and assailed them very fierflye. An
encounter aboutbreaking down of a well.
The fraye was hard under the walls in a place of advantage and easy to the
Goths coming down to the defense of the well, but very untoward and un
indifferent for the soldiers of Belisarius to make assault in. In this
coflicte were many slain, In this were slain of Belisarius soldiers
but most of Belisarius soldiers, for the Goths darting from aloft, might
easly endomage their enemies. Howbeit Belisarius was ever at hand calling still
upon his men and encouraging them with a loud voice and would not suffer them to
give back, but ever put fresh men in the places of such as were wounded or
slain. This encounter being begone by the sun rising, lasted until noone.
At the last his soldiers pearsing stout ly upon the Goths, compelled them to
recoyle into the town. Then they returned back and called away those that
were digging down yt well, supposinge that they had dispatched their work.
But they had done little or nothing to the purpose in mining down of the Mason
work. The cause thereof was by reason that ye well being made in old time, was
wrought so close and so sure, that it had been an easier matter to cut a
piece out of a whole quarrie then to have dygged down any part of the wall
of it. When it was perceived how that all that they had done, and all their
feyghtynge was but lost labor, Belisarius caused the rest of the water to be
infected with the Iuceof venomous herbs, with stynkinge Carions of dead
cattle, and with a kind of stone called Asnest so long until he had
utterly marred it, that it was not to be occupied any more, so that the Goths
finding scarceiye of water by the mystre of this well, had much a do to
relyeue them selves with that little and corruped water that they had in
filthy puddles within the town.

After this Belisarius never sought to disquiet them any more, either by
skermishyng or by any other means, but satte still peaceablye to behold the
end of the matter. At length mention was made of yeldyng and the Goths
requested that they might depart to Rauenna with bag and baggage.
Belisarius hearing their demaundes, was in doubt what he were best to do.

For he thought, that to let go so many good men of war and thereby to
augment the strength of his enemies ye were at Rauenna, should be nothing to yt
profit of yt weal public: Again to sit spending of ye time in vain about
Auximu^, he thought perilous and prejudicial, inespecially seeing it was
reported yt ye fee^chme^ were coming to thaid of ye Goths. But most of al
stoud in contention with him his own soldiers, who in reco^pens of their
miseries and calamities endured at their long continued siege, looked of duty
to have the spoil of the town, and would not in any wise suffer themselves
to be defrauded thereof by any composition or agreement Finally when on the one
side the Goths were sore pinched with penury and scarcetie of things
necessary, Auximum yielded to Belisarius.
and on the other side Belisarius in manner forced by the importunity of the
time, at length through Belisarius great travel the matter was concluded,
that the one half of all that was in the town should be given to his
soldiers for their share, and the Goths should keep the other half still,
provided that the Goths which were within the town of Auximum, should serve
Belisarius in his wars, in like case and estate with other of his souldyers.
After this sort were things knytte up and the Town surrendered according
to the composition. When Belisarius had thus gotten Auximu^ into his hand, he
assembled all his power together, Belisarius goes to besege Rauenna.
myndyng to proceed against Vitigis and Rauenna. As soon as he came thither, by
and by he sent Maximus one of his captains with part of his army to watch and
keep the banckes of the River Po, to thentent that nothing should be
conveyed into Rauenna that way.

For one of the mouths of that river falls into the Sea not far from
Rauenna, from whence there is a certain dych cut out of the whole ground,
wherein the river is conveyed to the Town. Belisarius therefore myndinge first
and formest to disappoint them of this commodity, gave Maximus charge to keep
the hythersyde of the River with that band that he had delivered unto him.
Vitalis also coming out of Dalmatia at the commandment of Belisarius, The
wonderful good foretune of Belisarius.
had committed unto him the keeping of the furtherside with another band. There
happened the same time a wounderfull ch^unce, and such a strange thing as has
not lightly been heard of. For as a great number of ships and galeyes were
coming out of France laden with corn and victualles making sail toward
Rauenna, the River fell so low, that many of the ships stood still for want of
water to bear them. Whereby it came to pass ye they were all taken by the
soldiers of Belisarius. This was yt first token of good luck wherwt fortune
began to further the procedynges of Belisarius. For it could not be
reme^bered that ever any such thing had happened before. By this means was
allibertye of caryinge in and out by the river Po cut of from Rauenna. As for
by sea nothing could be conveyed in by reason that the enemes of yt Goths were
every where lords of the sea.

Again on the land Belisarius with his army keept them so short, that he
would not suffer ought to be carried that way. While Rauenna was thus
straightlye besyeged, there came Ambassadors out of France to Vitigis, French
Ambassadors to Vitigis.
offering that the Frenchemen should come into Italy and raise the syege, and
doubtless to siea Belisarius with all his army, if so be yt that the Goths
would be content to admit them as coparteners of their Empire. This stout
brag made by the french Ambassadurs, did set the hearers hearts in a pride. For
they promised to bring fyus hundred thousand men of war, whose coming (if he
were in his right wits) Belisarius would never abide. For if he did, they
threatened to suetch him and all his company with their holberdes. These high
words did partlye puff up Vitigis and his Goths with pride, and partly made
them afraid. For if the Frenchmen came into Italy, it was not to be doubted
that they should get the upper hand, but it was a difficulte matter to be
believed, that they would keep touch and play the good fellows in parting of
the Empire.

And therefore if the Frenchmen should come they mistrusted least they would be
as much to their confusion as to the confusion of their enemies. Belisarius
sends commissioners to Vitigis.
This doubt of theirs Belisarius helped to increase. For he being a sage
Captain and pollitique in all affairs, as soon as he knew of the coming of
the French Ambassadors, sent his commyssioners also to Rauenna, both to offer
the Goths peace and atonement with the Emperor, and also to wythdrawe them
from societye with the Frenchemen, by putting them in remembrance of their
former unfaithful dealing. The Goths when they had heard the French
Ambassadors and Belisarius Commyssioners what could be alleged on both
sides, taking deliberation what was best to be done, after long debating of
and on, preferred thattonement with the Emperor. By this means the French
Ambassade was dismissed without the thing that they came for, and often treaties
were had with Belisarius concerning the same, and diverse commissioners and
messengers went to and fro for conclusion thereof. Truce between the Goths and
the imperialls
Finallye this was the end of the matters debated. That the determynation of
all controversies should be referred to the discretion of the Emperor
Justinian. Herevppon Ambassadors were sent to him and a Truce was taken
between the besyegers and the beseged. In the mean while it fortuned that the
common storehouses at Rauenna and all the corn in them was burned up, The
storehouses are set on fire.
ye mischaunce brought the Goths in great distress, considering their own
corn was burnt up, and Belisarius would not suffer any more to be brought in,
the which (he said) he did upon this consideration, to the intent the Goths
should be agreeable to more indifferent articles of atonement. Howebeit
Vitigis was in a merueylous mistrust, because it could not be learned by what
means the fire came. Some thought they were set a sterwt lightnig, other
supposed it to be done by some malicious persons, and othersome mistrusted that
Belisarius should be the doer of it. The Queen also was suspected for yt
matter. Who forasmuch as she was forced to marry with Vitigis against her will,
was therefore demed to bear hatred and malice toward him in her heart. This
burning of the grain did greatly trouble Vitigis and the Goths, and brought
them in manner to utter despair. For if the fire came by lyghtninge, they
might think that God and the heavens were against them. Or if it were done
of a set purpose, they wist not whom they might trust. So were they like
within a while to be quyte wtoute corn, and without all hope of coming by
any more, because ye Belisarius after the burninge of the storehouses, looked
more straitlye to theyut that none should be conveyed in.

The.ix. Chapter.
Diverse of the Goths become Imperial, The Emperor sends his Ambassadors
with articlles of peace to Rauenna the which of the Goths are twell lyked and
ioyfullye received. But Belisarius perceiving that more advantage is to be
gotten otherwise wilnot subscribe unto them, by means whereof rises a
suspicion that Belisarius will make himself Emperor, the which the Goths
being glad of, to further the same, proferre their submission and obedience
unto him, and he accepts it promising to take his oath at Rauenua for
performaunce of their demands whereupon he is received royally in to the town,
and dismissern the most part of the Gothish soldiers, through whose departure
having made himself strong, hov^^^^^ refuses to usurp as long as the emperor
instinian lives. The goths in Pauie create a new king who makes profer of
submissio^ upon like condition the which Belisarius utterly rejects, and
ca^ieth vitigis prisoner to Constantinople with diverse of his noble men and all
his Threasures, The reuolting of certain Goths to Belisarius.


About this time many of yt Goths that inhabited the Alps, sent word to
Belisarius that they would yield theymselues unto him.

There are upon the Alps many castles, the which in old time were kept by the
Goths placed there to dwell.

For Thalpes do disseuer Italy from France, rising of a wonderful hight very
hard to clymb unto or to pass over, the which passages it was expedient to the
well kept. And therefore Theodorich king of the Goths did hoth place a
puyssaunt company of his country men with their wives and children in those
wast grounds, and also builded them casteles and holds. Sisigis one of ye
Gotish nobility, who had certain Castles in Thalpes, was the first of all that
of his frewyll received the souldyers sent into those coasts by Belisarius,
persuading other Castles to do the like. The same time Vraias was in Lumbardy,
musteryng of souldyers to carye with him to Rauenna. He had already raised an
army of four thousand men. Of the which the most part were inhabiters of
Thalpes.

Who hearing that Sisigis was revolted to their enemies, and that the Castles
wherein they had their wives and children were assailed, they compelled Vraias
first and formest to lead them thither. Whereupon he took his journey with all the power that he had raised, into Thalpes, and there besieged Sisigis and the
souldyers of Belisarius. When news of this gere came to John Vitalian and
Martine, who the same time had their camp in Lumbardye, they also without
further tariance marched toward Thalpes, and took certain Castles in their
way. In the same were taken many of the wives and children of them that served
under Vraias. When the fathers, husbands, and kinsfolk of them had knowledge
thereof, they forsook Vraias camp and fled to their enemies, to the intent to
recover them again.

Vraias being thus forsaken of his own souldyers, returned with a few into
Lumbardy, and never set his mind any more either about musterynge of other
soldiers, or succouringe such as were besieged. So Vitigis and the Goths that
were at Rauenna, being for saken of their own people and destitute of all hope
of comfort, were still beseiged and suffered every day more distress then
other. While the Goths stood in this estate, thambassadours returned from
the emperor, Dominicus and Marimus both of the Senate. The answer of the
Emperor to the demands of the Goths.
They brought Justinians answer to those demands that Vitigis and the Goths
had made as concerning the concord and agreement. The su^me of the Emperors
decree was this. That Vitigis should hold still all that he had beyond the
river Po, and surrender all that he had on thyssyde. That he should deliver to
the Emperor the one half of his threasure, and keep the other half for him self
and that all the Goths inhabityng on the hither side of the River Po, should
become subjects to thempyre of Rome. When the Ambassadors had first conferred
with Belisarius, they entered into Rauenna and declared their commission, the
which things both Vitigis and the noble men of the Goths were glad to here,
and consented thereto with all their hearts. A crafty and sut tell kind of
dealing.
But Belisarius was very sorry to see it. For it spyted him to the heart, that
when he might fully have had the victory of the Goths, it should be taken
out of his hand. And therefore anon after when the commissioners returned,
and requested him to subscribe the articles he would not put to his hand. The
which thing brought the Goths in a merueylous maze, fearing to be deceived
under a counterfeit pretense of peace. In so much that they began to say
openly, they would dee nothing as concerning the peace, without the consent of
Belisarius. Thambassadours themselves and such as were chief officers in the
Camp, were greatly displeased with Belisarius doing, and thought he did not
well in disobeyng themperours commandment.

And therevppon bred a suspicion, as though Belisarius went about tomake him
self emperor, and were utterly minded to wtdrawe his obediens from Justinian.
This suspicion was almost in every man's head at that time with the which
opinion the Goths being induced, sent princly unto him, exhorting him to take
yt west Empire upon him himself, and not to acquire it to another. For if he
would so do, they said that the Goths would be contented to become his
subjects, and to obey him with all their hearts, and that he should inyntly
enjoy the kingdom of the Italians and the Goths, together with ^u incomparable
puissa^s. These things were wrought privily by the Gotishe nobility. Vitigis
perceyuinge that such profers were made, sent his messengers also unto
Belisarius encouraging him unto the same. Belisarius ponderyng these things
with himself, and considering they might be greatly for his behoof, if they
were handeled wisely, sent away into sundry places with their bands, John
Vitalian, Bessas, and Aratus, men of much authority in his camp, but in no
wise his friends, pretendynge an excuse as though so great armies could not
well be victualled together in one place, and that they should find more
plenty and abundaunce of victual and forage in other places.

This excuse was pretended, but in deed they were sent away to the ^^tent
that with their presence they should not interrupt him of his doings.
Afterward he him self sommoning before him all the officers of his camp,
when he had sufficientlye debated with them as concerning the distress that
the Goths were brought unto, what would you say (quod he) if we should by
this war atteyne at their hands, not only those things wherewyth the
Empereur see meth to be contented, but also greater things.

Every man for him self commended that greater things should be atteyned if
it might be. When he hard them say so, without further disclosinge of the
matter, he dismissed the counsel. And therevppon he sent one of his company to
Rauenna, aduertising the Goths that he was contented to do as they had
counseled him, exhorting them to make speed in the matter. The Goths as they
ye were already oppressed with famine, without any delay sent their
commissioners fully authorized by the prince and the common consent of them all
unto Belisarius. These persons when they came into the camp spoke nothing
before the souldyers, but talking with Belisarius alone, told him that they
were come to receive his faithful promise and oath for thaccomplishment of the
matter before debated. There were two kind of promises propounded by them,
where unto they required him to be sworn. The One was that he should govern
them with justice and equity, maineteyne and supporte the customs and laws
of the Goths, and not be offended against any of them for ought that had been
done in times past, with diverse other things of like purport.

The other was that he should from hence forth proclaim himself king of
Italy and of the Goths. If he would agree to these articles and be sworn to
the performance of them, they would set open their gates and receive him and
all his army into Rauenna. Belisarius swear to all the other demaundes according
as the commissioners had requested, but concerning the taking of the kingdom
upon him, he said he would take his oath before Vitigis and his noble men
when he was come to Rauenna. The commisioners mistrusting not but that he
would have been king in deed, delayed the taking of his oath in that behalf,
as though he should have performed the same before the noble men immediately
upon his coming to Rauenna. But Belisarius purposed nothing less. the cause
why Belisa. would not take upon him to be emperor.
For Justinian when he made him Lieutenaunt general of the wars, had bound
him with a great oath, that he should not take upon him nor usurp the
kingdom or Empire, as long as he were alive, nor yet suffer himself to be
accounted or called by the name of tyrant, King or Emperor. This his oath he
was determined to keep unviolated, The yelding of Rauenna to Belisarius.
and did but daly with the Goths in that behalf. Upon this composition the
Goths very desirouslye called Belisarius into the town.

And he with his army in royal order, and with his ships trymly decked,
bryngyng in them abundaunce of all kind of victualles, entered into Rauenna to
the great reioycement of the Goths and their army. Now because there were a
great number of men of war of the Goths within the town, Belisarius
minding to abate their power, within a few days after his coming thither,
licensed all such to depart home, as dwelled on this side the ryuet Po. They
being wearyed with their long continued warfate, were very willing to
return home to their friends. And so the multitude that was at Rauenna being
diminished, the army of Belisarius wared the stronger, and were even as Lords
of the town. As things fell out in this wise the nobility of the Goths
that dwelled in any part of all Italy, either came them selves, or else sent
their commissioners unto Belisarius to Rauenna.

But when Belisarius began to make delays in the taking upon him of the
kingdom, men began to marvel what he should mean, and also to cast doutes
of his doings. Belisarius is sent for out of Italy.
The which suspicion was augmented upon the sudden sendynge of Justinian
unto Belisarius commaundyng him to return home.

For the same went and certain had made report to the Emperor, that Belisarius
went about to make himself king of Italy, and had already taken it upon him.
For fear whereof Iustiman sent for him immediately out of Italy. The Goths
perceiving that, could not at the first by any means persuade them selves,
that he would return to the emperor Justinian. But when they saw preparacion
made for the same, and all things put in a readiness toward his journey, then
they knew well enough that Belisarius had won them in by a train and had
qvtterly deceived them. But what remedy? For he had both the town and their
noble men in his hand, so that they could not so much as bewail their
misfortune one to another, but that he must needs be priuye to it. When the
Goths that dwelt on the furthersyde of Po, heard tydinges hereof, they
assembled themselves together at Pauye, and there bewaylyng one to another the
common misfortune of their nation, and the deceitfullnesse of Belisarius, at
length would have made Vraias their King. Vraias refuses to be made king of
the Goths.
The which thing he would not in any wise suffer them to do, excusing him
self by this reason, that for as much as he was Vitigis brothers son, he
might not seem to have done either like a kynsman or like an honest man if he
should take ye kingdom upon him whiles Vitigis were alive. Through this
allowable excuse alleged for himself, he was the occasion that Ildouade a man
of great authority and power among the Goths, Ildouade is made king of the
Goths.
and which had been ruler of Veron a long time before, was created king.
Ildouade therefore being sent for out of Veron unto Pauye, was there invested
in his purple Robes of estate, and proclaimed king of the Goths, to the
intent he should studys and take care for the saufgard of his country men.
Being in this sort made king, he sent ambassadors by and by to Raue^na unto
Belisarius, The effect of the ambassade sent by Ildouade to Belisarius.
giving them charge to put him in remembrance of his promise lately made for
the taking upon him of the kingdom of Italy and of the Goths, not letting to
reprove him openly of breakinge his faithful promise, through which cautel
the Goths were deceived. Wherefore if he would yet accomplish his promise in
proclaiming him self king, and show the same in his doings, Ildouade offered
him self to come to Rauenna, and to lay of his robes of estate at his feet.
But if he had rather be themperours slave then to be Emperor himself, he
ought not to be discontented though Ildouade and the Goths that remained
endeavored to provide for the saufgard of their weal public. This was the
sum of their ambassade.

Belisarius answered openly thereunto, An example of a faithful subject and of
an invincible mind.
that as long as the Emperor Justinian lived, he would never take upon him to
be king. With this answer the Ambassadors returned to Ildouade unto Pauie.
And Belisarius having decked his Navy, sailed toward Constantinople with
Vitigis and diverse other noble men of the Goths, and all the kings Threasure,
the fyfth year after the war was begone in Italy. (*)

The third book of Lenard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against the
Goths.
The first Chapter.
Thentertainement that Belisarius and his prisoners had at Constantinople. A
commendation of Belisarius good government, by comparison between him and the
Captains that succeeded him.

WHen Belisarius was come to Constantinople ye Emperor Justinian welcomed him
with great joy, and having him in great reputation and honor, put out of mind
all mistrust that he had co!ceyued of his doings before. The Goths whom he
had brought with him were entertained very gently and courteously, and men
wondered to behold them: the which might seem to have chanced not without
good cause. For there was Vitigis king of the Goths that of late had besyeged
Rome with such a multitude, What they were whom Belisarius brought prisoners
to Constantinople.
and his wife Amulusuentha, thenece of Theoderich sometime king of the Goths
who first brought them into Italy, and there gave them possessions. Furthermore
there were the two sons of Ildouade then King of the Goths, whem Belisarius
fynding in the Court of Vitigis at Rauenna, would not suffer to depart, but
brought them away with him into Grecs. There were other noble men of the Goths
also, whom al men beheld, wondering at the puissans of Belisarius, that had
atcheued so great exploytes, and extolling him with praises to the sky, in
that he had lately before subdued Aphrycke, and now Italy, under the dominion
of Justinian. And thus went the world in Greece. In Italye after the departure
of Belisarius, the order of things by the commandment of the Emperor was
committed to the discretion of John, of Bessas, and of Vitalis. Constantian
also was come out of Dalmatia, and was added to the number of the Governors.
It was soon seen what difference there was between ye government of these men
and of Belisa. The praise of belisarius.
For (to omit his skilfulnesse in feats of war and cheularie wherein he far
surmounted all the Captains of his time) there was in him a singular humamtie
and gentleness, through the which he exhibited himself as well to the poor, as
to the rich. There was no manner of person, but might have easy and fre access
to is presens: and besides that, he was wondrous bountiful and liberal. Unto
his soldiers that had lost their horses, weapons and armor (so it were not
cowardly) forthwith he gave new again. Of the husbandmen he had so great
regard, that in leading of his army, he would not suffer any of them to be
hurt or endomaged. His soldiers durst not be so bold as to touch the
Apples hangyng on the trees.

Through this his straightness in obserning the law of arms, he obtryned
that his camp was more plentifully served, then the marketts in any city. So
free and without peril was the conueyance of all things that were to be sold.
His uprightness toward such Cytyes as were in society and leage with him,
no man is able to report as it deserved. Men might hear of the great good
tournes that he did for them, but not that he vexed or molested any of them.

But as for them that succeeded him, they were nothing like him, neythey in
humanity, neither in prowess, neither yet in vyryght dealing. For both they
them selves were Pyllers and Pollers, and also they suffered their Souldyers to
fall into all kind of licentiousness and disorder, being proud to their
partakers, and easy enough to be entreated toward their enemies, by means
whereof within short space matters began to go clean backward, and to slide
into open and manifest ruin, as I shall sheweyou hereafter.

The.ij. Chapter.
The diligence of Ildouade king of the Goths, the great misgouernaunce of
the Imperial Captains, by means whereof then be brought low and the
Goths incresed ion strength and courage. The death of Vraias, the death of
Ildouade, the electtion and death of Ataticus, and the election of Totilas.

ILdouade being newly created king of the Goths (as I declared before) after
the departure of Belisarius, went in hand with his matters very diligently. For
he gave commandment that all the Goths and all the Italians that favored the
Gothyshe part, should at a day appointed meet all rogyther ready furnished
with armor at Pauye. His army at yt beginning was very stender, but it
continually increased and every day was in better hope and comfort then
other. The iniursous dealing of the Empeperours Collectours causes great
alteration.
The covetousness and wrongful dealing of their adversaries did not a little
help the Gothish part. For the collectours of Justinian under the color of
forfeytures and arrerages, began to vex the people of Italy marvelous
bytterlye, and to compel them to the payment of sums that were never due.
For by calling an account of all things that the Italians had taken charge of
in the time of Theoderich first king of the Goths, or of any other of the
Kings that succeeded him, together with the account of all such offices as
any Italyan had borne during the said time, and moreover by making
inquisition for the money lately promyfed by the Cytyes to the Goths, the
which they challenged to the Emperor as due by the name of forfeyture, they
brought every man priuatelye and all the Cytyes generallye in such adespayre,
that they wyshed ye Goths to be loroes of all again and therevppon many, of
their own free will revolted to Ildouade, helpinge to augarent the number and
strength of his army. The look grudge was also in themperours army. For look
with what greadines the money that was never due was tracted of the Italians,
with like pinching were the soldiers restrained of their due deserved wages.
There Is was no regard had of any thing but one, which was to satisfye the
Emperors insatiable covetousness, by gathering of money and spendinge none
again. And therefore as well the souldyers as the Italyans, being constrained
with so great wrongs, sought to bring the Empire to decay. By means whereof
Ildouade daily growing strong, brought under his obeisance all the Cytyes
beyond the River Po, and all the Cytyes perteynynge to the estate of Venice,
and his armpe was fullye furnished with number both of Italians and Goths,
Through the which within a while he was so encouraged, that he was not a
frayde to lead his army into open feld, and to try the fortune of battle. A
battle between ildouade and the imperialles.
This encounter was fought not far from Now called Trenizo.
Taruisium against Vitalis one of the Emperors Captains. In the which
Ildouade getting thupper hand made such aslaughter of Vitalis army ye whiles
the captanie himself with a few sled away, all the rest were either slain or
taken prisoners by the Goths.

Through this victory being so great and so notable, it is a wonder to see how
the goths were entouraged, and how much the power of their adversaries was
abated. In so much ye not only beyond the River Po, and under the dominion of
Venice, but also all such as on this side the Po, held of the Gothyshe part,
were thoroughly strengthened and the name of Ildouade grew famous even in the
Emperor Justinians Court, and among foreign nations also.

It was not long after but that he pursued to yt death Vraias a man of much
authority and estimation among the Goths upon presumption ye he should
conspire with his enemies This cause was pretended. The death of Vraias.
Howbeit sum were of opinion that he took prytch against Vraias by cause
that latly before, there had been alterration between his wife and the Queen.
But surely I cannot think that Ildouade being a grave and wise man would be so
far ouersene as to be induced with brablinge matters of women, to kill such
a man as was Vraias. I believe rather that the cause why Ildouade did put him
to death, was that he feared his power and authority. For it is mamifest that
the Goths in general are of nature very mistrustfull, and scarce
sufficientlye fasthfull toward their kings. Many of the Goths dissalowed the
death of Vraias, and openly detested it as a heinous and wicked act. By means
whereof it came to pass, that Ildouade himself was stayne by one of his own
guard whiles he sat at his meat. The death of Ildouade.
In his stead was Ataricus created King: but he reigned not long. For with in
five months after his election, he was slain by his own subjects for his
evil behavior and misgouernement. The death of Ataricus.
Thus having killed two of their kings wtin two years space, they offered the
kingdom with one consent unto Totilas. Totilas created king.
This man before he was made king had borne great aucthority at Now called
Treuizo.
Tarui fiuer, which is a city of the Venetians and his father was brother to
Ildouade late King.

The.iii. Chapter.
A larger declaration of the election and creation of Totilas mentioned
brieflye in the Chapter before. The Emperors Captains through their
insaciable gredines of pray stryuing for the booty before they had gotten it
lose the Citis Veron which was delivered into their hands, and betray their
own company.

AFter that Ildouade (as I showed before) was slain, Totilas dreading to be in
danger because he waws so nere of his kin, sent privily to Rauenna and made
compact with themperours captains to turn unto them with such as he had rule
of and to yield up ye town of Taruisium into their hands. A day was limited for
performans of ye matter. But ere ever ye day came, the Goths repenting ye they
had rejoiced in yt death of Ildouade, and that they had made Ataxicus their
king, a man nether of wisdom nor courage able to defend ye Goths against so
great strength of their enemies, began to incline to To tilas the nere kinsman
of Ildouade, and to wish that he were their king. In co^ clusto^ they
dispatched Ataricus out of the way, and made Totilas king in ded. Justinian
having intelligence of these things ye had happened in Italy, found great fault
with thunskilfulnes and cowardnes of his captains, yt in all the time ye their
enemies were so at dissension among themselves, and among so many alterations
and chaunges, they having so great opportunity for ye spe^ding of their matters,
had done nothing at all. The captains moved we this dishonorable rebuke,
assembled together at Rauenna. There when it came to consultation as concerning
the war, it was thought best, first and formest to send an army against ye
city. Veron. For they had been secretly put in hope of thobteining of ye town.
The captains were in number xi: of who^ the chief were Constantian and
Alexander lately sent thither by them perour for the collection ofhis money.
Therefore setting forth with a great army, when they approached near to Veron,
they determined to put in trial the hope that was lately genen them. For
there was one Martine a noble man of that Country that had a Castle not far
from Veron: who (for as much as in his heart he was unperiall) had allured the
keeper of one of the gates to let in yt emperors army. The matter being in this
wise closely agreed upon, when the captains came thither with their army,
they sent before one Artauades an Armenian with a number of pycked soldiers to
take the gate, and there to awaite the coming of the rest of the host. No
part of promise was left unperformed in that place. For in the dead of the
night when the souldyers came to the gate, the traitor set it wide all open
and let them into the City. They entering in and having also taken the
walls above the same, gave notyce thereof to the rest of the army. The Goths
perceiving their enemies within the town, fled out at another gate. Note the
covetousness of thimperialles and what came of it.
The captains hearing that their men had taken the town, marched forward.
But ere ever they came there, they fell at altercation for the spoil by ye
way, and stayed five miles from the City. In ye mean while the day brake.
Now there is a castle above the city of Veron which has a very great
prospect, both into the town, and also far into the country. The Goths
which were fled into this hold, perceli^^g few of their enemies to be within
the City, and the army to abide still without making no approach toward the
walls, suddenly issued out of the Castle, and aduenturyng through the city,
recovered to the gate where their enemies came in and shut it. The souldygers
that were entered by night, were partly oppressed, and partly flying to the
walls made resistens from above. Anon after, the captains coming thither
and finding the gate shut. although ye soldiers wtin called to the^ for help,
desiring them not to abandon them in that sort, yet notwithstanding they
retired back again out of hand. Some of the soldiers leaped down the walls
and saved themselves: among which number was Artauades the Armenian their
guide. The rest were either slain or else taken prisoners. By this means
through the misgouernement and covetousness of the Captains striving among
theymselues for the pra^e before they had gotten it, when they should have made
most speed for ye winning of the same, the matter quailed about Veron.

The iiij. Chapter.
f Totilas by his policy overcomes the Imperials being of greater force and
number then his army was, in the which victory he shows great clemency.

AFter this the Captains of Justinian (for because their attempt fell out so
ylfaueredly and dishonorable at Veron) began to fall at debate among
theymselues, every man putting the fault in other, and thereupon departing out
of those quarters, they passed over the river Po, and marched toward Pleasans.
At that time was Totilas at Pauy who hearing of the coming of his enemies,
raised as mam men of war as be could with all speed possible. In the mean
time the captains having passed beyond Pleasans, had enca^ped themselves by
the side of the river Po. Totilas albeit he were far ouermatched, yet he
determined to go against them with such power as he had and to try thaduenture
of battle. So when both the camps approached nere together, and that
thencounter waws fully resolved upon by both parties, Totilas in the night
time seut certain of his horsemen before, commaundyng them to get over the
River almost twenty furlonges above the camp of their enemies, and as soon as
the battle was joined, to retire and assail the enemy behind with as much
noise and hurlyburlye as they could. He himself (when he saw his time)
marched toward his enemies. Theemperours captains did ye like. There was in
thoste of Tetilas a Gother called Vlarus mounted on a good courser and rychely
armed: who aduauncing himself before the battle, A combat hand to hand.
chale^ged to seight with any man hand to hand. Against this man offered
himself to the combat Artauades the Armenian of whom mention was made in the
entering into Veron. So in the sight of both tharmes, they fetched their races
and ran one at another with their spears in the rest. Artauades thruste the
Gothe through the right side with his spear so that he fell down dead. And he
himself being driven by mischaunce upon the spear of the dead man sticking in
the ground through the only force and violence of his own horse, ran himself
upon the poynet of it, in so much that it wounded him through his Curet, of
the which wound he dyed within three days after. The two battelles in the
mean time encountered very fierslye, and eeuery man showed his conning what he
was able to do with his weapon. When the battle was at the whotest, and that
both parts were most intentife to their feyghtinge, victory as yet enclining to
neither side, ye souldyers of Totilas which had passed the river came and set
upon Themperours Captains behind. The Imperialls are vanquished by Totilas.
Whereupon arose a great noise, and many being beaten down, first they brake
the array of the Emperors army, and anon after put them to open flight. For
after the time their battelles were once opened, their enemies pressed so sore
upon them both before and behind, ye they were sone disper peled. Many were
slain by the Goths in ye chase, and many escaped by bypathes and unknown
ways. But the greatest number was of the^ ye were taken prisoners Moreover
(which never happened before) al yt sta^dards, ba^ners and antesiges, The great
and dishonorable loss in this battle.
of themperours army were taken in ye battle, and being brought unto Totilas,
made his victory more famous and renoumed, in ye he having scars half so many
men in his army as his enemies, had wittingly and willingly encountered with a
greater power then his own, of whom thorough his marciall pollitie he had
gotten the victory. Having thus gotten the vppeer hand, he used the victory
very courteously vexing none of ye prisoners but se^ding diverse away without
ra^some The which his gentleness did gractly augme^t his honor and renoume.
The gentleness of Totilas after his victory,
The captains of Iustinia^ ye escaped, fled first unto Pleasans, and from
thence went every man a sundry way, busying themselves as much as might be in
raising a new army of men.

The.v. Chapter.
Iustine one of themperours captains in be seged within Florens, and
rescovved by the other imperial captains, who in the pursuit of their enemies
through an untrue report cast in sudden fear are with great flaughter put to
flight. Totilas recouereth diverse towns in Lombardie, raises the vvalls of
Beneuent and besieges Naples, A comparison be tvvene the good government of
Totilas and the misgouernaunceof the Imperial Captains.

WIthin a while after this victory, Totilas now conceuing greater things in
his mind, sent an army to Hetruria whereof he made captayns three of the
worthiest men of all the Goths, Beldas, Rodericke, and Vliaris. There was in
Hetruria a captain called Iustine, one of those yt had been at the foresaid
battle. Who after the discomfiture had never ceased leuing of a new power, The
beseging of Florens and the raising of the same.
and fortifiyng of the towns never theles tharmie of Totilas came suddenly
upon him, and besieged him wtin ye walls of Florens. Iustine feared nothing so
much as scarcety of victualles. For nothing couled be conveyed in, and that
which was within already, was like to be so^^e spent. Whereupon be sent to
the rest of the Captains at Rauenna and advertised them in what peril his
estate shood; requesting them of succor. Being moved with this message, Bessas,
Ciprian and John Vitalian came into Hetruria with their armies when the Goths
had understanding of their approach, by and by they brake up their slege and
dislodged their camp, not staying any where, until they came to a place
called Muciall whythe is a days ioumey from Florens.

As soon as tharmy of conseverats was entered into Florens, the Captains
thought it good to leave a few behynd them for defense of the town, and they
themselves with all the rest of tharmie to marthe against thenemie. While they
were on their way, it seemed good ye some one of the Captains should go
quickly before to assasse thenemy, and to stay him from going away, and the
rest with all speed should follow after. When lottes were cast, the charge of
going before fell unto John, who with his men in good order of battle, made
haste toward the enemies. Now the enemies being afraid at the coming of the
host, forsake the place where they had emcamped themselves first, and gate
them to a hill thereby both stepe and hard to clyurbe unto. Yet for all that
John made no curtesye at the matter when he came to place, but directed his
battle against the hill, and with a noble courage endeavored to get up by
plain force. His enemies stood carnestly at defense, as they that might cassye
make resistens from the higher ground. In this place whiles John strove to get
up, feightinge valiantly among the formest, one of his companions was strike^
through with a pycke and flayne hard by his side. An untrue report cause of a
shameful discomfiture.


Whereupon forthwith rose an untrue rumor (which was lightly believed) that
John was slain, and therwithall his men began to run away. The brute hereof
being reported to them that came with the rest of tharmye behynd, together
with the fearful flight of such as were at the battle, made them also most
shamefully to run away. Neither was there any measure of their flight, but
scatteryng themselves here some and they brake their array and forsook their
standard. By means whereof the Captains themselves were faint to take them
to flight also without compulsion of any enemy. After this time they came no
more together again, but every man kept by himself one in one town and
another in another, as they had recovered unto out of the chase. Yet for all
that, the Goths returned not to the syege of Florens, partly for fear of the
great power of their enemy, the which although it were dispersed, yet was it
still within the compass of Hetruria, and partlye because the winter drew
nere. This was the end of the seven years since Belisarius began the wars
first. The next year following, Totilas recouereth towns in Lumbardy
as soon as the time of the year served to encampe in the field. Totilas
levied an army and came into Lumbardye, and there besieged Cesen, and Petra
the which town is now a days commonly called by a corrupt name Bretines, as
for all the rest of the towns of that country, for the most part either he
had won them by force, or else taken them by composition, when he had thus
compassed his matters in that country, he passed from thence with his army
into Hetruria. There finding al things whoter for him then he looked for, he
determined fullye not to spend his time in waste about them. And therefore
passing over the river Tyber which bowndeth Hetruria, he took his journey
through the Vmbres, the Sabities, and the Marses into ampany, Totilas raseth
the wales of Beneuent.
in the which place he won the City of Beneuent, and rased down the walls
of it to the ground. For he was loath that so strong and defensible a City
should belefte for his enemies, (if they should happen to comme into these
borders, to make they, Bulwark and fortress of. The syege of Naples.
The which done he besyeged Naples, having first entreated them gentlye
with many words, that they would rather accept his frendshyppe, then procure
his displeasure. But his words were to no purpose. For there was in garrison
Conon one of Justinians Captains with a band of not so few as a thousand
soldiers, who would suffer nothing to be done in counsel, without his
cousent. The which thing when Totilas understood, he planted his siege not
far from the City. Howbeit he assaulted it not, but sat still in quiet. In
the mean while he sent part of his army abroad, and recovered Cume with
certain other towns in those borders, by the which he gate a great mass of
money, Besides this there happened certain noble women of Rome to be taken in
those places. An example of clementie and magnanimity.


All the which Totilas caused to be berys courteouslye entreated without
restraint of their liberty, and sent the^ home again to their husbands and
parents with an honorable company to saufconduit the^. And forasmuch as in
those borders was not any Captain or any power to withstand the doings of
Totilas, he sent este one part of his army and este another, so long until
he had brought under his obeysans Appulia, Lucauie, and Calabre with all their
towns. By means whereof if came to pass, that there hwas not any more monye
paid out of those countries to Justinians Captains and soldiers, See what
want of good government does in war.
nor any man that would obey the Captains, or fet one foot out of doors to
go with them, For the souldyers iurkynge within the walled towns robbed and
pylled as well their friends as their foes, and through their extortion evil
rule made havoc of al things. And the Captains for the same cause keeping
themselves within ye walls, did no more but only defend the towns from the
enemy. For they parted the Cytyes among them, so that John had the charge of
Rome, Bessas the charge of Spolet, Cypryan the charge of Perusia, Iustine the
rule of Florens, and Constantian the keeping of Raucinia. In the mean time
Naples began to be every day in worse case then other, by means of the
siege. For Totilas having sent for his flete had keepte them so short, that
nothing could be conveyed in neither by water nor by land. Whereby it was to
be perceived, that unless some body rescowed it, that City was like at length
to come in subjection to the enemy.

The.vi. Chapter.
A nevve Lieuetenant is sent tovvarde Italy whose covvardoesse in protracting
of the time does not a little endomage the imperialls. Demetrius deuiseth
produently for the rescovving of Maples, which for want of courage in
executinge the same tourneth to his own destruction.

Justinian hearing of this, A new lieuetenant sent into italy.
and being disquieted for the miserable estate of Italye and the dishonor of
the Empire. Sent one Marimius (receyuer of his revenues) into Italye, to amend
and repair thyriges amiss, geuynge him a nauye of ships and an army of
Thracians and Armenians. Captain of the Thracians was Herodian, and Captain
of the Armenians was Phases. Besides these, he had also in his ships no
small number of the Hunnes. The covvardnes of Marimius.
Marimius departing from Constantinople, came into Epyre. There in
deliberatynge upon the affairs of Italye, hanging in doubt between hope and
fear, through his flouthfullnesse and cowardyse, he lost the time. For this
Maximine was a good gentyllman, of a mylde nature, meet for matters of peace,
but altogyther vnskyllfull of warrelyke exploytes, and therefore fearful,
finding delays and casting doubts in every triste. Now thaffaires of Italy
at ye time, required quick speed both in consultinge and in workinge.
Justinian saw so small hope of any good doing in Marimine, he sent one
Demetrius (because that lately before he had served under Belisarius in the
wars in Italy, with another navy into Sicil. This Dometrius when he was
arrived in Sicill, hearing of the syege of Naples, and of the dyftresse that
they were put unto that were within, determined to succor them, The prudent
policy of demetrius if he had follovved it.
and that without further delay. Now for as much as he thought himself not
able to do it by plain force, by cause that neither his ships nor his army
were sufficient thereunto, he dettysed this pollicye. He gate together all the
ships that he could comme by in Sicill, and made of them a great flete as
to the show, the which he fraughted with corn, and so made sail toward
Naples. This thing did both greatly comfort the bespeged, and also put
the Goths in great fear. For they had heard say he was coming with a
great number of ships, and they thought verylye he had brought a great
power of men in them. And surely if he had gonne dyrectlye (...) Naples at the
(...), all things had happened to good success and the besyeged City had
out of all doubt been saved. For his enemies were so dysmayed at the
multitude of his ships that they durst not have made any countenance of
resistens. Howbeit he knowing his own weakness, durst not arryue at Naples,
but went to Rome, to thentent there to furnyshe his nauye with men, and so to
sail stronglye unto Naples.

But the soldiers that were at Rome would not take shippynge for him. For by
reason they had been vanquisshed by the Goths in two fought battelles, they
stood in fear of them beyond all measure. Being therefore destitute of
this hope, Demetrius was compelled to go against his enemies with those ships
only, that he brought with him from Constantinople. Occasion let slyppe vvil
not be cavvght again.
Totilas kept continuallye ready furnysshed certain swyfte Pyuesses in the
haven of Naples, and always took diligent bheede to the flete of Demetrius,
wherefore when he heard that Demetrius was set out of Rome toward Naples, and
that he was arrived at the next shore, sodaynelye he set upon him with his
Pynesses through the which sudden unlooked for assault, the shypmen and
souldyers were stryken in such a fear, that they took them to flyghte.

The Goths pursewinge them with their swyfte Pynesses, made a great flaughter
and took all Demetrius ships with their freight and men. For none escaped of
that flete except it were such as at the beginning had leapt into botes and
hidden themselves, among whom was Demetrius Captain of the said flete:

The.vii. Chapter.
Demetrius saylinge again to the rescovvynge of Naples is taken prysonner,
whereupon Naples is yielded to Totilas who benaueth himself very
courteouslye and frendlye both to the town smen and to the Emperors
souldyers, but tovvarde his own men extends much severity in keeping
warlike discipline.

AFTER this Marimine sailed out of Epyre into Sicill with a greatter nauye, A
covvardly carpet knight.
and a greatter furniture of men. And when he was arrived at Syracuse, through
his accustomed cowardyse in delayinge and driving of, he lost the time again.
Neither regardinge the neceuine, nor the (...) of such as were besyeged. At
the length when Justinian had sent straighte charge unto him, not without
threats, that he should proceed, yet could not all that cause him to sail
against his enemies, but he delivered the charge of his fleet to Demetrius
Herodian and Phases, and he himself abode still in Sicill.

It was now the dead of the winter when they began to set forth. A
tempest.


And when they came within a little of Naples sodaynely the flete was taken
with a vehement tempest, in so much that neither ores nor any conning in the
world could save them but that they were driven a land perforce upon the
shore where their enemies were encamped. Demetrius is taken prisoner.
The Goths perceyuinge that, ran thither and without any a do took the
ships If any made resistens they slew them, the (...). Of the which number
Demetrius was one. Whom Totilas commanded to be brought fettered in chains
unto the walls of Naples, where calling Conon Captain of the Town and the
souldyers with the Cytyzens of Naples, Demetrius by the Kings commandment
made an oration, perswadynge them not to look for any more help. For
considering that those two fletes with all their men and furniture were
lost, there remained not any hope for them to trust unto. They that were
besyeged being sore pyned with hunger, when they saw Demetrius taken and all
hope of comfort cut of, fell to weepynge and lamentation, not knowing what
to do or which way to turn them in so much that all the City was in a
wonderful trouble and disquietnesse for fear. When Totilas rerceiued that, he
called them and spoke unto them as they stood upon the walls in this wise.
Ye men of Naples, we have not goone about to besyege your City, for any
anger or dyspleasure that we bear against you, but to thentent that by
settinge you free from the bondage of our enemy, we might recompense you for
the troubles that you have suffeted in the time of these wars at our onemyes
hands, for keepynge your allegeans to the Goths. For you only of all the
Italians utterly against your wills came in subjection of our enemies,
compelled thereto by violence and slaughter, and well nigh by the utter
destruction of your City. And therefore me thynkes I am asshamed that we have
besyeged you, but that necessitye constrained us because our enemies were
amongst you. Wherefore assure your selves, rather of a good turn and of
frendshyppe at our hand then of any punishment. Moreover for your sakes we
will not be any thing strayghte laced toward our onemyes that are in the
Town with you. For if so be it they will render it up, they shall have fre
liberty and leave to chose, whether they will serve us in our wars in like
estate and case as other of our own souldyers, or else depart whyther they
list themselves with bag and baggage. This our promise we are contented to
consyrme with an other. Both the Neapolitanes and the Emperors souldyers
commended Totilas his words. Nevertheless to thentent their yeldynge might
seem the more honnest and reasonable, they desired a Truce for thyrtye days,
if perchance any body would rescowe them within that time. Totilas
answered that he was contented to give them not thyrtye, by thryse thyrtye
days respyte. Naples is yielded to rotilas.
The besyeged wonderynge at so great liberty, and playnelye perceyuinge that
there was no hope of help, within few days after set open their gates, The
courteous and trendlye behavior of Totilas tovvard the neapolitaner.
and received Totilas and his army into the Town. When the was comme into
Naples, he entreated not any man otherwise then well neither was he grievous to
any person but rather used such humanity and courtesye as would not have
been thought to have been in a barbarous Gothe.

For where as many through hunger were brought so bare and so weak, that
they were not able to totre on their legs, and were fallen sick, to the
intent they should not cast theymselues away with ouerlayinge their stomachs
by feedyng to greadely, he looked carefullye and diligently unto them, that
not only the Citizens of Naples. But also the souldyers had every day
twyse, a small pyttans allowed them by wayghte, streyghtelye observing that
they should not have more any where else and that every day by little and
little their meals should be increased. To Conon and the men of war which
were minded to depart, he appointed ships to convey them. And where as by
means of contrary wyndes they could not depart within the day limited unto
them, yet not with standing he gave them free liberty. And furthermore when
as the wind commued dyll against them, and that they determined to go away
byland, he lent them horses and beasts for their cariages, allowing them
moreouere victuals and money to spend by the way, and also sent of the Goths
with them to saufconduyt the^. The severity of Totilas tovvard malefactors.
Thus Totilas used gentleness toward strangers, but among his own men he
kept so straight order, that he suffered no offense to escape vnponished the
ponyshmente of stealers, quarrellers, and rauishers of women was death, and the
forfeityng of all their goods, to the use of them against whom the dyspleasure
was done. By means whereof wheresoever the Goths encamped, or passed in and
out through any of the Cities or countries that were in leage with them, there
was no harm done to any of them. Licencious liberty pernicious to men of
war.
But the case stood far otherwise in those days with the Captains of
Justinian. For the Captains themselves could not hold their hands from doing
wrong, and the souldyers through their evil ensample fallen is all kind of
licentiousness, absteined from nothing that was evil. Neither was there any
thing more miserable in those days, then the people of Italy that were under
thempyre, being without their walls spoiled by the enemy, and within their
walls by their own men of war. For the Captains having taken the strong
holds for their own safeguard, passed not what became of the poor commons.
Through this injurious dealyng, despair so increased day by day more and
more, that the Emperor was feign to determyne with himself to send
Belisarius thither again. For all the other Captains were so far from
recoueryng that which was lost, that it was not like they should any long
time be able to keep that which they had.

The.viij. Chapter.
Belisarius being sent again into Italy, in his way does rescovve Hydrunt
besieged by the Cothes. the miserable estate of Italy at that time, Totilas
receaueth Tibut and besieges Auximum, Vitalis is forsaken of his own
soldiers. Belisarius sends succor to Auximum, and repayreth Pysanrum
Totilas besieges Asculum and Firmum.

FOr these considerations Belisarius was chosen again to take the charge of
the wars in Italy, Belisarius diligence in chosyng of his soldiers.
and yet the wars were scarcely finyshed the which all this mean time he
had made against the Medes. Therefore when he saw there was no remedy but to
muster new soldiers, (for he had lest his old army at the river
Euphrates,) he went about al Thrace, where through his lyberall spendyng he
gathered to the number of four thousand without commission, the which he
embarked speoely, and rakyng with him vitalles the Lieuetennant of Illiricum
which came newly to him out of Italy, sailed forward, and having cut over
the Ionian sea, arrived at Salons. In the time of this journey, he raised a
siege about Hidrunt a Town of Calabre. The rescovvig of Hidrunte now called
Otronto.
For they that were besieged being compelled thereto by the Goths for want of
victuals, had compounded to yield up the town by a certain day, if they
were not rescowed in ye mean time. Whereof Belisarius having knowledge,
commanded Valentine to sail thither, and to carry with him come and other
necessaryes, and to bring away the souldyers that had been long besieged
there, puttyng new in their romes. This was an easy matter to bring to
effect. In greatest calm for a storm provide.
For the Goths after the truce taken, looked but slyghtly to them, not so much
as mistrusting that any body would come to succor them. By means whereof when
(...) upon the^ vnlookes for, they trembled for fear and were feign to break
up their siege and get them further of. Valentyne enteryng into the town, took
the old soldiers out of the hold, and placed new in their steades, leauyng
them dictualls for a whole year. The which done he returned with those ships
that he brought with him, unto the reast of the flete at Salons. After his
return Belisarius sailed to Pole, Belisarius arrival in Italy.
where having tarried a while to practice his young soldiers that he had
mustered in Thrace at length with his whole nauye he sailed to Rauenna. At his
coming thi\ther, he found all things in worse case through Italy the^ he
thought they had been. For his enemies seemed to have the better end of the
staff every where, and to stand in best hope and possibilitye. Contrariwise
his friends and adhearentes weere euerywhere through all Italy discouraged and
brought in despair. The misery of Italy through misgouernement,
The cities and people of the country because they were (...) and molested by
ye men of war, and the men of war because the emperor was behind hand with
their wages for a long time and paid none, became stubborn and froward,
refusing either to be ruled by the captains, or to set onefote out of doors to
ye wars. And to say the truth they were brought to a very small number. As for
ye coming of Belisarius, it did rather increase their despair then any whit
comfort them. A Captain is able to do no thing without men and monye.
For albeit he were a notable captain, and out of all doubt in those days
perelesse, yea and in deed a very Master of Cheualrie, yet notwithstanding
forasmuch as he brought but a slender company with him (for he had but four
thousand and those were al unpracticed and freshwater soldiers and had no
money to deal amongst them, when he preached unto them at Rauenna declaryng
the cause of his coming and exhortyng them to go forward with the wars,
neither the Townsmen nor yet the men of war were (...) gave any token of
comfort and good hope. Insomuche that it repented Belisarius himself that he
was come into Italy. Totilas receaueth Tibur.
In the mean time there rose a dissension between the townsmen and the
soldiers of Tibur, by means whereof Totilas being called to the aid of the
one part received the whole town. The City of Tibur is nere ^^yghboure unto
Rome, Tibur xvi miles from Rome.
being distant from thence no further then syrtene miles. The taking whereof
was a great eye sore and noyous to the Romans, as whereby they were (...) of
all things in Latium. He besieges Auximum.
After thus Totilas having perfect intelligence of the coming of Belisarius,
went with his army into the country of the Picentes, and encamped about
Auximum. The unfaithfulness ofthe Illirian soldiers tovvarde their captain.
The very same season had Belisarius sent Vitalis with a convenient crewe of
Illirians into the country about Bononie.

After the ^yme he had won a (...) town thereaboutes, and had been received
into Bononie, the Illirians without any cause why or wherefore for soke him, and
assemblyng themselves together went their ways home. For ye which deed they
afterward alleged this excuse unto the emperor, that whiles they were scruing
him in his wars in Italy, the Collectors of his tributes, did sell their ly
uelond in their Country, and cast their wives and children out of house and
home, by means whereof they were compelled to return thither to defend their
own. When Totilas heard of this sudden departure of the Illirians he sent
out an army of Goths, in hope to have taken Vitales and the reast of his
company tardie. But they preuentyng him, had recovered unto Rauenna.
Belisarius knowing that they which were besieged at Auximum were sore
oppressed, sent to their aid a thousand horsemen over whom he made three
Captains Teremunt, Ricilas, and Sabinian, whee entering into the town priutly
by night, the next duye following made a skyrmyshe with the Goths, by who^
Ricils one of the Captains was slain. The reast within a fowe days after
determined to depart. For they saw that by their tarying there, they did but
help to spend their friends victuals and necessaryes, and could do their
enemies no harm. Hereuppon stealyng out of the town by night, when they had
gone about three miles on their way, they fell into an ambushe of their
(...), by whom being be set on all sides and so put to fryght, they louste two
hundred of their company together with their apparel, armor, and all other
stuff and the beasts that carried them. The refidue after long and weary
travel reconered unto Arimin. Fanum and Pysanrum are Cities standing upon the
coaste of thadriatike sea, and are situate beetwene Auximum and Arimine. These
towns at ye beginning of these wars, has Viligis (...), and beaten down the
walls of them mydway to the ground. Belisarius repaireth Pisanrum, and
manneth in now called Pezaro
Of these two Belisarius determined to repair Pysaurum, and to place a Thrope
of horsemen in the same, for the accomplishment whereof, he sent workmen
thither secretly, to take just measure of the gates, the which he caused to
be framed at Rauenna with locks, henges, bars, and all other iron work
belongyng unto them, and caused them to be conveyed by water to Pysaurum,
writing to the Captains and horsemen of Arimine, that they should suddenly
take ye town and hang up the gates, and mende up the walls of rough work,
and cleanse the dyches. As for all kind of vyand he peouided that it was sent
them by Sea. The horsemen of Arimine therefore when they had taken Pisaurum,
did all things according to Belisarius commandment. Totilas perce auyng
that, went thither with a great power to interrupte them of their work.

But (...) them in scowring the (...), in castyng of the tronches, in making of
Ra^^pyres, in fortefiyng the town, and in repayring the walls and the
bulwarks, that the king wondered to see so many things so wyttely devised and
pollitiquely brought to pass in so few days And therefore when he had tarried
a while there aboutes, forasmuch as he saw he could do no good, he returned
into his camp before Alximu^, never ye nearer of his purpose. Howbeit Totilas
and the Goths perceauyng that Belisarius showed not himself abroad in the
open fields with themperours army in no part of Italy, but only kept himself
within the walled towns and defended them, they determined not to sit
altogether about Auximum only but to make war against other Cities also.
Totilas besieges Asculum and Firmum.
Hereuppon Totilas went with an army and besieged Asculum and Firmum among the
Picentes.

Belisarius (...) such as were besieged that called upon him daily for help,
(for he had not so great a power that he durst venture abroad against ye
Goths) was in great perpleritie, and took it very greuousty that his name
should be so dishonored, At the length he sent John Vitalian to The Emperor to
inform him of the state of Italy, by who^ he addrefied his letters also, the
tenor whereof contained this in effect.

The.ix. Chapter.
The Copy of Belisarius letters to the emperor the good success of Totilas,
the valiant Demeanor of Sisifride the traiterous murtheryng of Ciprian and the
manliness of his soldiers.

Most noble and puyssant Emperor your Majesty has sent me into Italy
slenderly furnyshed of men, Belisarius letters to the emperor
horses, and monye, the which thing I declared unto you before my (...)
besuching your highness to have redressed the matter. In the which suit albeit
I could not prenafle: yet notwithstanding it was my duty to be obedient to
your edmaundement. Whereby I was constrained to come forth with a few
Thracians and Illirians, the same being freshwater soldiers and altogether
unskillful of the wars, not knowing so much as how to hold their weapons in
their hands. And as for the old soldiers that I found in Italy, by reason
they had been vanquished in diuerese battles before by the Goths, they are
so afraid of them, that they dare scarce once look upon them. Bespdes this,
forasmuch as they have been long time defrauded of their wages, they at not
able to furnyshe themselves again with horse and armor lost and broken in
the former wars, neither will they consent to go forth with them. And yet to
say the truth, there is not so great a number of them, that they can
encounter against the power of the enemy, without their own manyfeste perrill
and danger. For the greater part of them that were wont to fight under your
highness banner in Italy, provoked by the aforesaid dyspleasures, have of
their own accord revolted to your enemy. Furthermore you may not accontpte
hereafter, that you are like to have any revenues here, toward the payment of
your soldiers, considering that the enemy has recoucred yt greater part of
Italy, and that which remains is so empouerished and afflicted by ye wars,
that it is not by any means able to yield you tributes. Wherefore if the
presence of Belisarius be sufficient to recover Italy, you have done as much as
may be done in that behalf for I am here in Italy. But if you purpose to
overcome your enemies in deed your Majesty must make other provision. For a
Captain (be he never so valiante, pollitique and fortunate,) is able to do
nothing, if he have not where with to accomplish his (...). And therefore it is
requisite that you send me hither an army of mine own practiced soldiers,
together with a great multitude of the Hunnes and other Barbarous people.
Morecouer you must of necessity provide that we may have always stoore of
monye. for without that, there is no good to be done in wars. Thus much did
Belisarius write to themperoure at that time. John going to Justinian with
these instructions, and having tarried there a certain time, had a very slow
and could suit for he could bring nothing to effect. The success of Totilas.
In the mean while forasmuch as no man rescowed Asculum and Firmu^ ye were
besieged by Totilas, he took the^ by composition. From thence he departed out
of the Picentes into Vinbria and besieged Asessum and Spolet. Captain of
Spolet was Herodian and Captain of Asessum was Sisifride. Herodian although
his piece were strong and defensible, yet notwithstanding he took truce for a
few days, within the which because no rescue came, yeldyng the town and the
hold at the day appointed, he himself with his soldiers revolted to Totilas.
But Sisifride behaved himself more valiantlye: The valiant and faithful demean
nor of Sisifride.
for albeit his piece were nothing so strong as the others, yet could he never
abide to here any word of composition, but like a stout warrior, issued out
valiantly diuerese times upon the Goths, and fought sundry skyrmishes with
them to his great praise and commendation. Howbeit at the length fighting
manfully he was slain by his enemies. The Citizens of Assisis being destitute
of the help of that worthy Captain, within few days after yielded themselves
and their town unto Totilas. From thence Totilas led his army against
Perusium. The traiterous murdering of Ciprian and the ma^fulnesse of his
fouldiers.
Captain thereof was Ciprian of whom mention is made before among the Captains
of Justinian. Totilas pereceauyng ye he could not win him, neither by fair
means nor by foul, corrupted one of his esquires called Vliarus for a piece
of money, by whose falsehod and treachery he kyiled him. Nevertheless after
the death of Ciprian, the soldiers punished the treason upon Vliarus head, and
manfully defended the City still.

The.x. Chapter.
Totilas besegeth Rome, and Belisarius prepares to rescovve the same. The
misfortune of thimperialls at Portua, Pelagius a Decon of Rome goes to Totilas
to entreat for his Citizens and cannot be heard.

TOtilas therefore minding not to linger about it any longer, brake up his
siege there, and made toward Rome. When he came thither, Totilas besegeth Rome.
he planted his siege about the same in places convenient, but yet he troubled
not the husbandmen. For all the time of this wars he never suffered any of
the Tylmen and husbandmen to be hurt or hyndred by his men of war. There was
in garrison at Rome Bessas one of the Emperors Captains, and Conon which not
long Since had been Captain of Naples. Also Belisarius had sent thither,
Artasyras a Persian, and Barbation a Thracian with a convenient number of
souldyers, to look to the saufe kepinge of the City with the other Captains.
The Goths being thus settled about Rome, Artasyras and Barbation issued out
with their retinew and fought with them. At the first they put them to
flyghte, but through followynge the chase to far, they were at length
intrapped by their enemies, and with the loss of the more part of their men
hardlye and narrowlye escaped themselves into the Cycye. From that time forward
hope daily decayinge, first came derth and afterward famyne among them.
For nothing could be conneyed into them by land, by reason the Goths had
besette them round about. nor yet by water forasmuch as the nauye that
Totilas had of late builded at Naples, and then sent abroad, so scoured the
Seas that no ship of burden could pass for them. Besides this the very
same time arose within the City of Rome great presumptions of treason. For
the which Cethegus chyefe President of the Senate of Rome, being bannisshed
the City fledded to Centmucelles. While these things were a dooynge at Rome,
another army of the Goths by the commandment of Totilas besyeged Pleasans.
The same is a great City by the River Po, and all only of the Cytyes of
that Country, continued in faythefull obedyence to the Empire. When Belisarius
beheld these things, Belisarius deuiseth to succor Rome.
he was very sorrowefull and full of care for the peril of the City of Rome,
in as much as he was not able to remedy it from Rauenna where he was, because
that with that small and flender company which he had about him, it was not
for him to depart from thence, consydring his enemies held all the Countries
between him and Rome, so that he could not go thither by land, whereupon he
devised to succor them another way. For the performance whereof leaving
Iustine with a band of souldyers at Rauenna, he himself went to Now called
Durazo.
Dirrachium in Dalmatia, entendynge there to awayte the coming of a new army
from the Emperor. In the mean time Rome was strayghtly besyeged in such
sort that all things were worse and worse, and like to fall to utter decay
and ruin. Valentine and Phocas being sent before by Belisarius, held the
Town of Portua, and from thence did greatly moleste and endomage the enemy
with continual rodes almost day by days. After they had done thus a
certain space with good success, and by means thereof greatly reliued them
that were besyeged, The evil fortune of the imperialles.
at length fallinge into an ambushe and being environed of their enemies they
were slain, and but a very few of their souldyers escaped, the which had
much a do to recover the town of Portua. This slaughter of the Captains and
the souldyers drew with it a greater discommoditie, One mischief in another.
neck.
for it was the loss of a great deal of corn by such a means Vigilius the
Bishop of Rome lyuinge at that time in Sicill, hearing that the people of
Rome were fore afflicted with famyne, had shypped a great deal of Corn and
sent it toward Rome. The Goths having knowledge thereof, when the ships
approached conveyed themselves before into the haven, and hiding them behind
the Towers and buyldynges lay ready for them in Ambushe. The souldyers that
were with in the town for as much as lately be fore they had lost their
Captains, and their companyons for the most part were slain, they being so
few left, durst not adventure out against their enemies, but as well as
they could from the walls and bulwarks with shakinge their garments, with
wagginge their hands and with crying out a loud to them made tokens to the
shyppemen that there was treason in the haven, warning them to beware and not
to arrive there, But the shyppemen (as they that had not heard any thing of
the unfortunate battle and the loss of the Captains) took those signs and
tokens that were made, as fignes and tookens of gladness and encouragement to
come with more speed. Whervppon making the more haste, with a fresh gale of
wind they entered into the haven. Where they were all taken by the Goths
breaking out of the ambushe, to the great discomforte and despair of the
people of Rome, which hunge wholly upon the only hope of that borne. In so
much that now the Town was oppressed with intolerable famayne. And the
Goths therevppon preased the more boldly upon them. An example of employng
spiritual goods.
There was at the same time in Rome a certain Deacon called Pelagius, who in
this distress of famine, had showed very many and notable works of mercy
upon the people of Rome, by laying out his monye and relieuing the want and
endinesse of every man. For the which almose deeds (whereas his name was
greatly renoumed in times past, now it was far more renoumed then before;
The romans came unto this man humbly besieching him ye for the saufgard of the
people of Rome, he would vouchsafe to go of Ambassade to Totilas and entreat
him to grant them a truce for a few days within the which unless rescowe
came, the City should be given up unto him. Pelagius forasmuch as he saw
there was none other remedy, obeyed the peoples request, and with his
instructions went to Totilas into his camp. Prosperity makes men forget
themselves.
Totilas coniecturinge the effect of his errand (for he had learned by the
rennegates the utter necessity and distress that the besieged were brought
unto) entertained Pelagius very honorably at his coming. Howbeit before he
had begone to declare his message, he himself preuentyng him, with a long
and bitter oration, inueihed against the Romans, casting them in the teth
with the benefits of Theoderich and the Goths toward them, and reprouynge
them of their untruth toward the Goths. In thend he concluded that there
was no way either of communication or composition, onles they would beat down
their walls, and wholly submit them selves and all that they had bodles and
goods to the will and discretion of the Goths to be dealte withal in such
wise as should please the conquierours. Pelagius hearing him talk so bytterly
and disdaynefully and thynkinge in himself that it botted not to stand in
contention with him, said thus unto him. Forasmuch as thou Totilas have not
vouchesaued to here an Ambassador tell his message, but by preuen tynge him
haste abridged him of the liberty of speaking, God the refuge in extremities.
we will fly unto God who of his Justice is wont to abate the courages of men,
when they grow over proud and stately. When he had said those words, he
returned by and by into the City. The Romans seeing him come again without
speding of his purpose, were in such an agony that they wist not what to do
nor which way to turn them. For on the oneside they were afflicted with
intolerable famine, and on thotherside stood before their eyes the outrageous
cruelty of Totilas and of the goths, whose most cruel hands rather then they
would fall into, they fullye determined to starve themselves for hunger. By
means whereof the people of Rome suffered and abode such things, as it is a
misery even to rehearse them.

The.xi. Chapter.
John Vitalian comes with a nevve power from the emperor, whereupon advise
is taken for the succouring of Rome, according to the which Belisarius goes
to Portua by water commaundinge John to mete him there by land. But he
through the prosperousa snccesse that he has against the Goths comes not
there at all. By means whereof Belisarius is feign to devise another way for
the succouring of the City the which by his industry taking good effect
against thenemy is by the folly of his own men interrupted to his own great
sorrovve and appairing of his health through rage of anger and sudden fear,
and to the utter preiud ice of Rome. For Totilas anon after takes and sacketh
it the which done he makes an oratyon to his souldyers.

IN the mean time Justinian sent John with an army unto Belisarius. The return
of john with answer from the emperor.
They were not any great number that he set forth at ye time, but he prepared
to send a greater power out of hand. For the which occasion he had sent his
Chamberlain Narses unto ye Erulians and other barbarous nations inhabiting
about the river of Danow, of the which some were already come into Thrace.
Debating in counsel for the rescovving of rome.
When tharmies were assembled to Dirrhachisi, and that consultation was had as
concerning the war, it was agreed by one confent first of all to rescow the
romans. But how that might be done there was diversity of opinions. John
persuaded to march with all ye whole power together through Calabre and appulia
and so to go to Rome. For if they went all in one company they might be the
better able to get the upper hand whereas if tharmie should be divided and some
should go by fea anbd some by land, none of both parts should be able to
match the enemy. Belisarius said he could well allow the same opinion, if the
people of Rome stood not at such an exigent. But now considering their estate,
it was nedeful to make all speed ye might be. It was a long journey to go
through Calabre and Appulia, and if their enemies should mete them they might
cast many letts in their way, whereas by the sea if the wind served, their
navy might wtin five days arrive in the Roman haven, and by their being
so nere at hand, put the Romans in certain hope and comfort. For he had
heard of thunfortunate mischaunce of his captains, and knew of the loss of
the corn that was sent out of Sicill, whereupon he considered in his mind the
despair and disstresse ye the Romans were in. This opinion was allowed in
the counsel, and thereupon Belisarius setting forth from Dirrhachiu^ arrived at
Hidrunt. The Goths which were besieging of that town being stricken with fear
at the presence of Belisarius, brake up their siege and flying from his sight
retired to Brunduse, the which is about two days journey from Hidrunt. By and
by they sent unto Totilas aduertising him of Belisarius coming, believing that
he would have iourneyed by land. When Totilas heard that, forthwith he put
himself and his army in a readiness to go meet him. But when he
understood that Belisarius went by sea, he addressed himself whollye to
withstand him about the City of Rome, inespecially making provision that
nothing might be conveyed into the City to them that were besieged, by the
River Tiber. For the accomplishement whereof he devised this practice. He chose
a place about eleue^ miles of from Rome where the River Tiber is narrowest,
and there he laid over long beams from thoneside to the other in manner of a
bridge at each end whereof he builded a Tower of Timber, and drew a long pron
chain by the brydges side, at the ends whereof he made two bastiles the
which and the aforesaid towers he manned with soul diers to defend the bridge.
Belisarius comes to Pottua for the rescovving of Rome.
In ye mean while was Belisarius come to the Romayne haven. And having set
his men a land, tarried for John and tharmie that was with him. The Rmaines
knowing of his coming, endured all their extremityes with better courage
upon hope of rescowe. John after the departure of Belisarius, having cut over
the narowe seas, had invaded the Goths looking for nothing less, and having
put them to flyghte, The good success of John against the Goths.
with great slaughter pursewed them, and at the first assault won Brunduse.
Then having reconciled the people of Calabre and brought them again to favor
the emperor, with many fair promises made unto the^, he departed from Brunduse,
and after v. remouings came to Canusiu^, the which town he also brought in
subjection. Not far from Canusiu^ is ye vilage of Cannas, Cannas.
where the notable battle was fought between Hanniball and the Romans. In
this place one Tullian the son of Venant a man of great name and authority
among ye Lucans came to John delcaring to him that the Lucanes and Brutians
had taken part with his enemies not of their own accord, but compelled by the
displeasures done to them by the Imperialles. Wherefore if the Emperor
would entreat them friendly and gently, the people would willingly return
under his obedience. John loading him with commendations and thanks promised
him great rewards, and afterward used his help to his great commodity and
furtheraunce. AT such time as Totilas hard of John's approach, he sent a crewe of
his horsemen to Capua, commanding the^ to keep themselves close within the
walls, and to make no show at all to their enemies until they were past, and
then to follow the tail of their host. What was to be done afterward he
willed them to cast ye care bpo^ him. This thing so greatly troubled, John,
that for fear he should be entrapped by his enemies, he left of his journey
toward Belisarius, and turned himself toward the Brutians and Lucanes. There
was among the Brutians a certain Gothe, called Richemond set there by
Totilas with an army to keep ye country in obedience, and to keep the entrance
between Scilla and Charibdis. Him did John suddenly assail, and at the first
brunt put him to flight, and after great slaughter received the rest ye were
left together with their Captain by composition. Hereupon all the Brutians and
Lucanes revolted from the Goths to the emperor. Whiles John occupied himself in
this sort, Belisarius looked daily for him and was wonderful sorry for his long
tariens, greatly blaminge John's cowardice, that he had not sought against the
horsemen that were at Capua, inespecially seeing that he himself had so notable
a band of Horsemen of the Hunnes.

Whereby he (...) have come through maugre his enemies heads, and ^^eded not
to have turned back again so shamefully. These and such other things did
Belisarius find fault with. But it booted him not to complain, for John had
taken up his standing in Appulia, and there determined to abide mynding nothing
less then to go to Rome. Belisarius therefore fearyng least the besieged
should think themselves abandoned, and through despair should chance to
miscarry determined to succor them by ye Tiber, for his power was not so great
that he was abie to encounter with his enemies upon the land: and therefore he
trusted rather to his policy and to the river for the succoryng of ye town.
Upon this thought he bestyrde him and gate two hundred of those kind of
ships which the Greeks call Dromades, Belisarius provision for the rescovvyng
of Rome.
these ships have walls of timber on every fyde with loopes in places
connemente to let out arrows and other weapons at the enemies (...) the
bridge and other things that were set to stop him upon the river, he made
this deuysethe set two ships upon the stream fastened surely together with
bars and crows of iron, upon the same he builded a tower of timber somewhat
higher then the towers that were builded at the ends of the bridge by his
enemies. When these things were in a readiness, he caused the Dromades to be
fraughted with corn and other sustenance to be conveyed to Rome, mannyng them
with the stoutest and valiantest soldiers that he had. Co^maundyng all the
residue to go on fente by the rivers side, and to draw the ships with the
tower. With his navy furnished and decked in this wise he set forward against
his enemies. Herhymselfe enteryng into one of the Dromades sailed formest, and
the rest followed him in order, his footmen also went by him upon the river
bancke. Furthermore he sent to Rome unto Bessas, that he should issue out at
the very same time and hepe the enemies as much occupied as he could. But
Bessas did neither that nor yet any thing else that was to any purpose during
all that siege. Belisarius navy being decked in such sort as I have told
you, went up the stream. Neither did the Goths mete them in any place, but
kept themselves quietly within their bulwarks. When the ships came nere ye
bridge there they found a trope of their enemies and one bastile set at the
tone end of the chain, the which Belisarius soldiers won at ye first
assault, and so taking away the chain proceeded to the bridge. There began a
curste fraye, the Goths endeuoryng to defend the bridge, and the soldiers of
Belisarius to win it. For ye Goths yssuyng from both yt towers at each end
of ye bridge, fought very valiantly. Again the soldiers driuyng the ships
harder to the bridge, did beat the Goths and would not susser them to stand
upon it. In the mean while Belisarius caused the ships wherein the tower of
timber was, to be brought as nere the tower of his enemies as could be. And
when they came hard to it he commanded the vessels of brimstone (which he
had hanged in the top of his tower for the same purpose before) to be set on
fire, and to be cast down upon the tower of his enemies, the which being
done, the fire lighting upon the tower of his enemies, burned it up and all the
Goths that were within it. There were not less then two hundred that perished
in yt fire among whom was the Captain of the hold himself, such a man of his
hands as was not among all the Goths again. Hereuppon the soldiers assayling
the reast of the Goths more boldly and fiersly, compelled them to give back,
whereby they won ye bridge, ye which forthwith they purposed to have heaven
down, and with their whole flete to have sayied to Rome. For there remained
not now any let in their ways, but that they might have gone to the City and
have conveyed in the corn and all other necessaryes, to the great renoune and
commendation of Belisarius, who had devised such a navy. Man purposes and
God dysposeth.
But fortune (as it should seem) had determined other wise. For sodaynely there
happened a wonderful mischau^ce (not by means of the enemy, but by his own
men) which perverted al his devises. The Goths held the City Ostia which
stands on the left hand of Tyher by the sea side over against the which
stands the City Portua on the right hand of the river. When Belisarius set
forth with his navy, he had left his wife and al his household furniture in
the said town of Portua, and had appointed as ruler thereof one Isaac a
valiant gentleman and a trusty with a convenient Crew of soldiers, commaundyng
and heartily belieching him, that he would not for any chance or occasion,
depart out of the town but keep himself within it and defendest only: Now at
such time as Belisarius had set his enemies tower on fire (as we have delcared
before) by and by ran certain to the town of Portua, and whereas the
victory was notable of it self, they reported it far greater then it was in
deed. At the which tydinges Isaac leapyng for joy and eraltyng himself in his
own conceit, like a mad bedlem quite forgettyng what Belisarius had said unto
him, commanded his men to arm themselves, and in this sudden heat and
extasye wafting over his men to invade his enemies that kept their standing on
the other side of the river, ran upon them not far from the town of Ostia:
Through his sudden assault at the first encounter he put them to styght.
Howbeit anon after, his enemies gatheryng themselves together and encouraging
one another, returned estsones upon him and having slain a great sort of his
soldiers, to cool his firye madness, took him prisoner. Immeviatly hereupon
certain horsemen brought word to Belisarius that his enemies had taken Isaat
praysoner. With ye which tidings Belisarius being stryken to the heart,
demanded not one word of ye messa^ger where or in what sort, but
misconstruing that his enemies had taken Portua, and been Lords of his wife
and all that ever be had, he was suddenly strycken with such an inward sorrow,
ye he was not able to speak. And thereupon turnyng back again, he retired
with his nauye and his soldiers in all haste that might be, utterly
determynyng either to recover ye town while the matter was but newly begone,
and his enemies had yet scarcely settled themselves, or else to die in ye
battle. By this means ye victory which he had as good as gotten stypped out
of his hands. But when he came to Portua and saw ye town safe and himself
deceived through light credit and mistaking of ye message, he took so great
sorrow for it, ye he fell sick and was feign to keep his bed and besides
that, he was taken with a sore and dangerous fever, which held him long time
ere he could be ryd of it. The vvorthie reward of willful rashenesse.
Isaac the author of all this mischief was by the commandment of Totilas put
to death in prison, in reuengement of the death of Rodericke Captain of the
garryson, which had dyed of a wound taken in the foresaid batsel. For by this
time had Totilas quyte changed that gentleness which he had pretended in the
beginning of his reign, into statelynesse and cruelty. Verily either because
his prosperous succeste made him forget himself, or else because his
gentleness being but feined at the beginning, could not continne. I assure you
he would speak so bitterly of ye people of Rome, yt the very terror thereof was
an occasion that they endured the famyne more obstinately then they would have
done, because every man was afraid of his outrageous cruelty. The miserable
estate of Rome.
Therefore as long as ever there was any hope of help at Belisarius hand, the
people of Rome beyond their power and (to say the truth) beyond ye bonds of
manhood and nature, endured the famyn. For to omit other things, even the
flesh of horses, asses, and mules were deyntye delicates at that time in Rome,
they thought they had sped well that could get either dogs or myce or such
other unclean beasts to feed on: Othersome were glad to eat all kind of
herbs, even such as the brute beasts would not have touched, and diverse
lived by roots and barks of trees. But when they saw there was no hope of
help, then turnyng to tears and lamentation, some fordyd themselves, and some
stealyng out in yt night attempted to deceive the watch of their enemies. Many
also starued for hunger and want of food within their own houses, and never
came out of their doors. While the City stood in this lamentable and piteous
estate, Rome is betrayed.
four Isaurien soldiers conspyred to betray it to the enemy these soldiers
warded at the gate Celimontana, commonly called Asmaria, who after the time
they were fully resolved upon the matter, did let the^ selves down the wall by
a line, and went straight unto. Totilas promyfyng to betraye yt City into his
hands. Totilas encouragyng them with promise of great rewards, sent certain
of his men with the^ to view the place and to consider whyther the thing they
had promised, were possible to be done or no. The Isaurians leadyng the^ to the
walls went up again in their fight by the same line that they flided down.
And so when the experience of the matter had given sufficient credit, Totilas
at yt night appointed to the acco^plyshment of the myschiefe, commanded his
host to be ready in armor about him by one of the clock after mydnyghte.
The which being done, he sent certain of his men before to get up by the
line, and hy himself followyng closely after with the reast of his army,
stayed a little from the gate. They that were sent by Totilas, were according
to couenante beetwene him and the traitors, drawn up the walls, from whence
they proceeded forthwith to the gate and with axes cut it open. Totilas having
by this means entered into Rome, kept his army still about him at the gate,
not sufferyng any of his men to run into the City, but kept them together
with him until it was day, Suddenly there sprang a noise about that part of
the town, that the enemy was gotten within the walls, and thereupon ensued a
wonderful fear every man beginning to fly, Such as fled went out at those
gates that were farthest from the place where ye enemy entered. Many also both
of the nobility and of the commonalty took sanctuarye in the Churches. The
sackyng of Rome.
As Soon as it was day the enemies ran through all the City, and without any
respect slew as many as came in their way.

Totilas marching from Lateran where he had stood al night, went through the
City to Saint Peter's as it had been to perform his vow, accompanied with
traynes of most cruel and bloody butchers, which with their naked swords
bathed in blood, slew all that ever came in their way without regard of any
person. Having in this sort swept through the mydoest of the City from the
one end to the other, when he came into the Vaticane unto the portche of Saint
Peter's, Pelagius makes supplication for his Citizens.
Pelagius of whom we read mention before, fearing to approach into prefence,
ravished in yt apparel accustomed in solemn ceremonies, and boldyng the
Testamente of Christ in his hand, kneled humblye down on his knees, and said:
O king I besicche thee spare thy humble suppliantes. At that word Totilas
dysdaynfully cast a proud look upon him, saying: come thou now to me
Pelagius to make supplication? Yea even now (quod Pelagius) since it is the
will of God to make thee Lord and Master over me. And therefore my sovereign
Lord have mercy upon thy servant. Therwithall yt wrath of Totilas was
assuaged, insomuche that he made proclamation yt from thence forth there should
not any person be stricke^ with yt sword but that there should be respect from
slaughter and bloodshed. Moreover he gave commandment, that no gentlewoman
were she maid, married, wife or wydowe, should be defiled, yt which he caused
to be observed with great severity. Only the goods of the Romans he gave
for a pray to his soldiers, gcuyng straight charge that no man should be so
bold as to touch their bodies. Then myndyng to pull down the courages of the
Goths, putted up with pride for this victory, he somoned them together the
next day and made this oration unto them. The Oration of totilas to his men of
war.
Is there any of you my companions in arms (quod he) that be holdyng so great
alterations as have chanced within these few years, dreadeth not the frayltye
of man's estate? And is not able to conjecture whereupon and wherefore all
these alterations and chaunges have happened? I will not speak of Rome,
sometime the Lady of the whole world, which now is fallen into your hands.
For she has suffered many myschau^ces which were done so long a go that they
are not now to be recounted, and this is not the first ruin that has
happened unto her. Wherefore I had rather put you in remembrance of our own
affairs. What thing was there of grater power and strength before these
wars, then the nation of the Goths through out all Italy? It sent into the
field two hundred thousand fyghtyng men, thoroughly furnyshed with armor,
weapons, artillerye, horses, victualles, gold and fyluer. It hold in
possession all Italye, Sicill, Corsica, Sardinia, and Dalmatia. Who would have
believed it had been possible for seven thousand Greeks (for there came no mo
into Italy at the first) to have subverted so great a power? And what shall we
say of the same Greeks: when they had in manner brought all in subjection to
them: and held all as Lords and conquerers? would any man have thought that
you being but a few and brought almost to beggerye, should have recovered
Italy out of the hands of them being twentye thousand men, considering that at
that time ye were not able to make above four thousand horsemen? and had not a
town left you in all Italy, more then Pauye Veron, and Now called Treuizo.
Taruisium? would any man have thought that ever ye should have taken Rome
the head of the world? the which Vitigis was not able to subdue with his two
hundred thousand me in a whole years besiegement? Surely countryme^ these
things are very great and not a little to be wondered at.

Howbeit if we list to consider and mark them, the causes of these
alterations are most manifest and apparent. For as long as the Goths executed.
Justice and used equitye, so long their power flourished, their estate
prospered, their matters went forward, and whatsoever they took in hand had
good success. But as soon as they were once led away through covetousness,
then bred there preuye grudge among them, the^ rose there inward debate, then
one sought to cut another throat, then sprang up secret treason, through yt
which they brought themselves to utter ruin and decay. Again when these
contagious maladies were passed out of you into yt captains of Justinian,
through your amendment you easily overcame the^. Wherefore if you wey and
consider these things well, ye have no cause at al to be proud of this
victory, but rather ought to dread God and to fear the mutabilitie of
fortune. For ye must understand that all Empire and power is easily forgone,
unless they be maintained by Justice policy, and paynestakinge. Yea my
companions in arms, know ye this and believe it for a certainetie, that the
greatest part of your labor is yet behind. For it is a harder matter to keep
things gotten, then to get them, For as much as in gettinge often times the
cowardnes of the possessour furthereth a man more then his own prowess. But
to keep things gotten, no man is able without his own prowess and policy.
Thus much spoke Totilas at that time and the Goths did greatly commend the
wyfedome of their King.

The.xii. Chapter.
The bitter words of Totilas to the Romans, and thacquital of a noble woman
accused of treason. Totilas fendeth Ambassadors with letters to the Emperor,
at whose return he defaceth Rome and leaves it utterly desolate.

AFter this he called the Romans before him and greatly reproved their
vnthankefullnesse and misdemeanour. The talk of Totilas to the Romans.
In as much as they being in subjection under Odoacer, and delivered from his
tyranny by means of Theoderich and the Goths, at whose hands they had
received so great benefits as they theyin selves could scarce have wyshed,
through the which they had been greatly enriched and had lived many years in
great tranquillitle, right happys if they could have seen when they were
well, now in the end without arm wrong or displeasure offered to them, had
contrary to their oath and allegeans revolted to the Greeks, men of all other
most vain and without either manhood or prowess. Who immediately upon their
arrival being besieged by Vitigis, durst never show their heads in the open
field, but lurking within walls and there staruing themselves for hunger,
aboode all the dishonor that might be. Who after the time they were made
lords of the Cities, not through their own man hoode, but through treason and
deceyte, filled all places with tollgatherers, Pollers, and Promooters: who
with marvelous crueltye compelled the Cities and people of Italye to the
payment of those tributes, which had been forgeuen them and clearly released
many years before by Theoderich and the other Kings of the Goths. Who to
satisfy the insatiable covetousness of the Emperor their Master, called as
well the people as the magistrates, to a straight account of sUch things, as
they had taken charge of under the said kings. Tell me therefore ye Romans
(quod he) whether ye ever suffered any harm by the Gothishe Kings? And tell
me again if ever these Greklings did you any good? And not rather more
displeasure to you being their friends, then to us their enemies? A vicious and
wicked kind of people, able to serve to no purpose, but to forginge of
leasinges? whereas on the contrary part the Goths were borne and brought up
among you in Italye, and yet you have set more by strangers and aliens then
by your own countryemen and acquaintance, so much are ye degenerated out of
kind, hating whom ye ought to love, desyring new things and lothing your own
quietness, like restie iades which through over long standinge in and to much
pampering become coltishe and full of evil touches. Wherefore seeing you have
done these things both contrary to your duty and allegiance, and contrary
to your own profit, look as you have hitherto been worthelye punnished, so
shall you also be hereafter. With these words he dismissed the Romans void
of all good hope. A noble woman accused for defacing the kings images.
About the same time was pleaded the case of a noble woman called Iustiniana.
It was laid to her charg ye she had caused yt images of king Theoderich to be
broken and defaced in reuengeme^t of her husband Boethius and of her father
father Symmachus whom Theoderich had put to death. The enditement for defacing
of yt Images was supposed to be true. Howebeit she was thought to be to be
held excused, in as much as her Just sorrow provoked her thereunto, for because
it was manifest lie known that those worthy personages, were wrongfully put to
death. In consideration whereof. Totilas acquitted the woman, and preferued her
from the violence of the Goths. Afterward he purposed to send an. Ambassade
to Justinian. An Ambassad sent from rotilas to them perour.
The Ambassadors were the forenamed Pelagius, and one Theodore an Orator of
Rome. These men did Totilas bind with a great oath, to do his messege
faithfullye, and to return to him into Italye with as much fpede as might
be. The effect of their commission was, to declare unto the emperor yt if he would
admit him and the goths into the rather of his friends he would save the city
of Rome, and would moreover aid him with a strong power like a faithful friend in
all his voyages and wars. But if he would rather continue wars against
them, he would make Rome even with the ground. For be minded not to trouble
himself with the keeping of it while he should be occupied about other wars,
nor yet to leave it up to his enemies.

Furthermore he wrate a letter to Justinian, The tenor of Totilas letter to
the emperor.
the tenor whereof was this. What has been done about the City of Rome I
think you know well enough. The accasion why we send Ambassadors unto you
is this. We covet to be at atonement with you, and you with us, like as were
our noble predecessors Anastasius the Emperor of Rome and Theoderich King
of the Goths. Whose mutual concord and agreement both caused great
tranquillitye and quietness of those times, and also greatly benesited
themselves. If therefore you can find in your heart to do as they did, I
will worthelye accept you for my parent, and you shall have me and my Goths
at commandment to help you in all your wars. But if you be otherwise
minded, you shall understand by our Ambassadors what shall be the sequel.
With this message the Ambassadors sailed into Greece, during whose going and
coming Totilas aboode still at Rome. Belisarius lay all the while at Portua,
brought to deaths door with sick nesse and sorrow. In the mean time John
persisted in his doings, and altered many things among the Lucanes and
Brutians. By means whereof Totilas also was compelled to send among the
Lucanes and to renew the war. It was not long after but that he was
certifyed of the Emperors answer. Themperours answer to the demands of
Totilas,
For at such time as the Ambassadors coming before Justinian had first
delivered the kings letters, and afterward declared their Commission, making
intercession and supplication for saving the City of Rome then standing in so
great ieoperdie, they could get none other answer at themperours hand but
that Belisarius was in Italy, to whose will and discretion he had committed the
affairs of that country. When Totilas heard that perceiving it was don for
none other purpose then to disappoynt him of his desire, and more over taking
displeasure at John's deinges which had made war upon him sytting still in
quiet and abiding for the return of his Ambassadors sent to entreat for
peace, The utter sacking and desolation of Rome.
he took counsel to raze the City of Rome. Whereupon rising up with marvelous
crueltye in sundry places he beat the walls down to the ground, to the
mountenance of the third part of the Circuit of the whole City. That done he
set the Capitol on fire. All was on a light fire about the market, about
Subura, and about ye holy street. The hill Quirnialis smoked, the hill Auentiue
glistered with flames and the noise of the fallinge of the houses was heard
every where. While the City was thus burninge, thin habitantes with their
wives and children, were thrown out of their native soil, having not so much
liberty as to bewail their own miseries. All the people and the common sort
he dispersed through the towns of Campanie. But he kept still about him the
Senators and noble men for hostages. After this he departed out of Rome with
all his whole army, leaving it utterly disolate, in so much that there
remained not any man or woman in it. *

Thus ends the thytde Book.

The fourth book of Leonard Aretine, concerning the wars in Italy against
the Goths.
The first Chapter,
Totilas chaseth John Vitalian from place to place, Belisarius repaireth Rome
and gives notable and blody repulses to the Goths attemptyng to let him of
his purpose and pronideth for the saufe keeping of the same.

WHen Totilas departed from rome, he set a crew of soldiers against the city
Portua in a place called Algidone, to the intent that Belisarius soldiers
should not work any thing in his absence, The shamful flight of john Vitalian.
and with the rest of his army he went against John into Calabre. As soon as
John heard of his coming, he abandoned up al unto him and tanne his way
like a coward, not stayinge in any place until he had recovered to Hydrunt
which is the furthest town of all Calabrie. By means whereof when Totilas
came in those quarters, he quickelye recovered the Lucanes, Brutians, and
Calabrians whollye saving Hydrunt. The same scason Spolet revolted from the
Goths.

There was nothing keept of it but only the Castle, for Totilas had before
time overthrown the walls of the Town. The author of this renolting was one
Martian of Constantinople, who being one of the kepers, conspyred with eyghtene
of the souldyers, and having slain the Captain of the piece, yielded it up
to Belisarius. The repairing of tarent
About the same time almost was Tarent repaired, whereas before, it had been
forsaken and left desolate. It was repaired by the Calabrians and other people
that were driven out of their own dwellynges by the wars. They were not able
to build it of like bigness as it had been in times paste. But taking one piece
of it buttynge upon the haven enclosed on both sides with the sea, they
easily fortified the access unto it from the main land. Totilas having
brought under his subjection all the towns of Lucanye and Calabrie sanynge
Hydrunt, determined to depart thence, and therevppon leaning a garryson of
souldyers at the City Atheruse, with the rest of his army marched toward
Rauenna, In the mean while Belisarius being recovered of his long contynewed
Agew, took in hand a bold adventure, and (as many a man would have
thought) a rash, the which notwythstandynge in the end proved a courageous
and laudable enterprise. He determined to take upon the sudden and to
fortifye the City of Rome lyinge at that time waste and desolate. The repai^^g
of Rome by Belisarius.
Whervppon keeping this purpose secret to himself, he left a few Souldyers at
Portua for defense of the town, and with all the power he could make beside,
(no man either of his own or of his enemies mistrustinge whereaboutes he went)
took the City of Rome and with a wonderful celeritie went in hand with
repayringe and fortifyinge it again. And because the walls in diverse places
were beaten down to the hard ground, he filled up part of them with
roughe work, and cut deep dyches before the walls, and cast up a Rampyre
the which he fensed with Trunkes of trees fastened in the ground by the roots
wound one with in another, with the sharps ends upward. And for the more
strength of the wall newelye repaired he builded towers and bulwarks of
timber. The which things through the earnest labor and willyngnes of his
souldyers, he furnyshed it in three and twentye days. And ships came
contynuallye from Portua laden with corn and other victualles.

The Citizens of Rome whereof there stayed a great number in the towns nere
aboutes, hearing that their City was repaired, were wonderful desirous to
return into their native Country, and that inespeciallye because there was
plentye of corn there, with scarcetie whereof they were pinched in other
places. As soneas Totilas had word of this, forthwyth all other matters set
a part, he made haste toward Rome. Belisarius was notable to hang up the
gates of the City before his enemies were come. For he had not so good store
of Carpenters to repair them in so short time. The Goths the first day of
their coming encamped themselves not far from the City against the gate
Salaria, The next morning by the rising of the sun, with great noise and
hurly burlye they marched to the assault. The Goths assault Rome and are
repulsed.
Belisarius placed all his tallest and hardyest men at ye gate the rest he set
upon the walls and in the bulwarks, commaundynge them to beat their enemies
down. The encounter was behement and whote on both parts. For the Goths
came thither of set purpose to have won the Town at the first pushe. But
when they saw better defense made then they looked for, they were in such a
furye and such a rage, that they ran desperately upon their enemies like
mad men, and stryuinge unadvisedly to get up, were beaten down and
killed without merrye. It was wonder to see how earnestlye and desperatlye it
was fought on both sides that day. For the assault began in the morning
and ended not until night. After that it waxed darcke the Goths retired into
their Tents. But the souldyers of Belisarius partelye kept their standing
upon the walls and bulwarks as they had been placed by him, and partelye
warded at the Gates. And to the intent the enemy should not sodaynely comme
upon them in the night and take them unawares, he caused a great sort of
Busshes and Brambles to be laid before the Gates. The next day the Goths
approached to the City in like sort as they had done before, and Belisarius
and his men made like resistens. But when the assault waxed to long, the
souldyers that kept their standing at the Gate, issued out boldelye and
encounteryng with the Goths hand to hand, at length put them to flyghte on
that fyde and with many wounds drove them far from the Gate. And so was
that assault ended. Afterward when they had bestowed many days in
healinge their wounds and repayrynge their armor, the Goths advanced again
to the affanlte of the City.

Belisarius having before well hearted and encouraged his soldiers, A notable
repulse given to the Goths by Belisarius.
leaving nevertheless a convenient number upon the walls and in the Towers,
led the^ out at the gate. There was a what and an eager battle fought hard at
the gate, in the which when as Totilas his standerdbearer was stricke^ stark
dead from his horse with a spear, and the standerd overthrown, there was much
preasyng about it from both sides. The Goths striuyng to save their standerd
least they should be dyshonored, and ye soldiers of Belisarius endeavoring to
obtain the honor of wynnyng the same. At last the skyrmishe grew to this
issue, that the Goths recovered their standard, and the soldiers of
Belisarius had the body of the standardbearer, saving his lift hand which the
Goths did cut of for spyght that their enemies should not have it, because
there was a ring of gold upon it. This done, Totilas perceauyng that his
attempt was in vain, blewe to yt retreit and the next day after went his
way unto Tybur. For as I told you before he held that City, and having
maruelously fortified the castle thereof used it as a Camp against the
Romans. The Romans to the intent they would not be molested by their
sudden inuations from that side, brake all the brydges on the river Anio. This
river Anio spryngeth among the Heruices, and ronnyng down from the hills
cutteth the plain between Tybur and Rome. It has very stepe bakes, and the
channel is so deep of water that it cannot be passed. And therefore there were
brydges made upon it from all the pryncipall ways, as from the gates Salaria,
Nomentana, and Tiburtyne. These brydges being at that time cut of, there could
no rodes be made against the City of Rome on that side.

the.ii. Chapter.
After the departure of the Goths from Rome. Totilas in the next spring goes
to the syege of Peruse, during whose being there, John Vitalian attempteth
many things in Ca^pane to the great prejudice of the Goth^^, vvherevvith
Totilas being displeased goes with such speed against him that he overcame
him before he heard of his coming. The Emperor sends another band of men
into Italye at vvholse coming. Belisarius sailing tovvarde Tarent is driven by
tempeste to land at Croton where for want of forage compelled to send his
horsemen into the Country, through the negligence of the Captains loses
them. By means whereof he is fayneto sail away into Sicill, during the
which his absence Totilas besieges Ruscie.

AFTER the departure of the Goths Belisarius caused the gates and the iron
work of them to be framed quietly, and when he had done, as though he had
conquered the City again by force, he sent the keys of it into Greece to the
Emperor Justinian. And thus ended the twelueth year of this war. The next
year following as soon as the spryng came, Totilas set out of Tibur and marched
toward Peruse. The same Town was even then already besieged by another
company of the Goths. And when corn began to wax scarce and other
victualles to sail, Totilas went thither to the intent to keep the town
strayghter, and to take away al hope of succor from the besteged. While
Totilas was occupied about the siege of Peruse, The doyngs of John in Cmapane.
John taking a vantage of his being there and perceauyng that the Senators and
noble men of Rome which Totilas had led prisoners with him were left in the
towns of Campane under the keeping of his soldiers, thought to win himself
a name by delivering them out of their enemies hands. Where upon he removed
out of Calabrie with a trope of thosen horsemen, never dyscontinuing his
iournye night nor day until he came into Campane. Totilas mistrusting as much,
had appointed a strong band of the Goths thither. When they came unto Minturne
they stayed and sent certain of their horsemen before to see what was done in
the towns. Now it fortuned that the Gothyshe horsemen which were fente
before, chanced to light upon John and his horsemen, between who^ there was a
sharp encounter. In the which John gettyng the upper hand slew many of them
and wounded many, and put the reaste to flight. Through this discomsiture they
that a bode behind at Minturne were so discouraged, ye they fled also. By
means whereof John had leisure to lead away whom he lysted at his pleasure. For
ye towns of Campaine were unwalled the Goths having lately before beaten them
down. So that John took all the Romanye prisoners that he found in every
town and delivered them out of ye hands of the Goths, conueying them quyte
away, all saving Clementine and Orestes of the which the one would not go
away with him, because he feared the Emperor whom he had offended, and the
other making excuse that he wanted horses, tarried in doubt whither he might go
or no. Howbeit there were not Many Senators found in Campaine, but very many
of their wynes and daughters. For the men for the most part the same night
that the City was taken, followed the men of war and fled with them to
Portua. When Totilas understood of these things that John had done, he was
greatly moved, determinyng to be revenged upon him. And thereupon leaving part
of his army at ye siege of Peruse, The great celeritie of Totilas.
he himself with the residue, made haste by great iourneyes through ye countries
of ye Picentes Marses, and Peligues, into Appulia, and never ceased, until, by
crossyng the ways at length he found Iohnin Calabrie where suddenly setting
upon him, he put him and al his army to flight and took his tents.
Notwythstandyng as it chanced, the Goths made no great slaughter, by reason
it was night when they assailed ye camp. By means whereof ye soldiers did
easily escape and hide themselves in the next mountains. John and Arnulphe
captain of ye Erulians who also served in ye wars with John, recovered out
of ye chase unto Hidrunt, and the soldiers afterward some one way and some
another resorted thither unto the^. This victory of Totilas did greatly
renoune his name. For it was thought to be a notable matter, for a king to have
come from yt walls of Peruse into Calabrie, and ye in so short space as a
light iournying man could scarcely have done, himself being not carried in a
horselytter or a charity, but even with as much pain as the common soldier,
on horse back laden with his harness as other were. Not long after that
battle, another band of soldiers sent from Justinian began to approach
unto Hydrunt.

For the Emperor being moved with often letters from Belisarius, The Emperor
se^deth a new power into Italy.
declaryng ye state of the wars and requesting aid, determined to send a new
power into Italy, and had written to Belisarius that he should hye him into
Calabrie to receive his soldiers and to make war against his enemies there.
Captains of this new army were Valerian leader of the Armenians, and Vere
leader of the Erulians. Belisarius upon the receipt of the Emperors letters
and commandment, leauyng the reaste of his army at Rome and at Portua under
ye charge and government of his Lieuetennant Conon, with nine hundred chosen
soldiers, (whereof seven hundred were horsemen and two hundred fotemen) took
shippyng and made sail to ward Calabre. It was his mind to have landed his
army at Tatent, the which is two days journey dystant from Hydrunt, and in
the same place to have assembled all the reast of his power about him. But by
means of contrary winds he was compelled to land his men in the haven of
Croton. For the violence of the tempest was such, that he could sail neither
backward nor forward. Therefore when he had landed his army at Croton,
forasmuch as there was not plentye of forage in those quarters, he was
constrained to separate his horsemen from his fotemen. For he himself and his
wife abode with his forteme^ at Croton, to the intent to call John with the
reast of his power unto him, and commanded his horsemen to go further into the
country and to stay themselves in the borders of the Turnies. For in so doing
they should easily come by all things necessary for themselves and for their
horses, and should also be out of all danger, forasmuch as the mountains of
Luranie shotyng into the country of the Brutians, do make two valleys, with
narrow enterances into them. And not far from one of the valleys stands
on the sea coast a Castle of the Turnies called Ruscie, a little above the
which is the lowns somewhat further from the water, situate on a high ground,
called Ruscian. the same town did John keep with a strong garryson of
soldiers. Belisarius therefore sent his soldiers into those borders, and made
Captains over them one Phases a Spanyard a noble man of war, and Barbation a
Thracian, co^maundyng them in any wise to keep well the entrances of ye
valleys. Skirmish between the imperial and Gothishe horsemen.
When these horsemen were come into those quarters, by chance they met with ye
horsemen of their enemies, who^ Totilas had sent to attempt ye town which (as
I told you before) was kept by John's me^ of war. After it came to ye
encounter the souldyers of Belisarius albeit they were fewer in number, yet they
easily uercame their enemies and stewe above two hundred of the^. Afterward
those ye abode still in that place, forasmuch as they were the victours, and far
from the sight of their captain, kept neither order nor array. But straying
far from their standarde they passed not to keep either watch or ward, or to
send any skowtes abroad, or to have any skowtes among the^, nor yet to keep ye
streightes at the entrance of the valley where they might easily have kept out
their enemy. Belisarius loses his horse men through neglegenceof the
captains,
Whereof when Totilas had understanding he went thither with three thousand
horsemen and set upon the^ ere they mystrusted any such thing. For he was
passed those narrow streightes and the entrances of the valleye, before that
Belisarius horsemen heard of his coming. Hereuppon began a great slaughter
and discomfiture to be made of them. Phases and Barbation were the Captains.
Of the which Phases with his troop of horsemen setting himself against
Totilas, did maruells in Arms, howbeit at the length he and all his men were
stayne. Barbation with no mo out two companions only escaped by flyghte, the
reast were either stayne or taken prisoners.

Some there were that taking themselves to flyghte at the first beginning,
escaped to Belisarius and carried him tidings of that great slaughter. When
Belisarius had lost his horsemen, misstrustyng that his enemies would come
against him, he took shypping in haste and greatly dismaide with sorrow,
abandonyng himself to the winds arrived the same day at Messaua in Sicill
the which is from Croton about fourscore miles. Totilas besieges Ruscian,
Totilas having dyspatched these matters and thereby disposed ye power of his
enemies, determined to besiege ye town of Ruscian. For in that town were three
hundred horsemen placed there by John, and an hundred foteme^ sent lately
thither by Belisarius. More over there were a great number of Italians both
horsemen and foteme^, which if they should be besieged, it was none other like
but ye they should want victualles ere it were long. In hope where of Totilas
besieged the town.

The.iii. Chapter.
Conon Captain of Rome in slain of his own soldiers. Fortune afflicts
the Imperials, Totilas receaueth Ruscie and puts Colaser Captain thereof to
death. Antonia the wife of Belisarius entreats the Emperor tht her
housbande is called home out of Italy.

ABout this time, Conon Captain of Rome for his covetousness is slain of his
ovvnsouldiers
the soldiers that Belisarius left at Rome, flewe their Captain Cono^ in a
rage because that by encroching the corn privily into his hand, he daily
raised the price of the market. Upon the which fact they sent their messengers
to ye Emperor for pardon of their trespass asserteining him that onelsse he
would grant it, and moreover pay them their wages that was behind. they would
deliver Rome unto Totilas. For fear whereof the Emperor granted them their
whole request. They that were besieged at ye town Ruscian, being dystressed
with scarcetieof corn, fell to communicatio^ with Totilas, and took a truce for
a few days, promising to yield up the town unless they were rescowed in ye
mean time. Hereupon was preparation made by John, to rescowe them, and by
Totilas to prohibit him. In the mean season Belisarius was come out of
Sicill, unto Hydrunt and had received Valerian with the soldiers sent from the
Emperor, by means whereof he had a sufficient power. Neither wanted he ships
to convey them into the rescowe of his accomplices. The perverse sentune of the
imperialls.
Therefore when al things were in a readiness he embarked his souldyers and
sailed toward Ruscie. They that were besyeged seeing the nauye a far of, (for
the City stands upon a high ground and has a large prospent into the sea)
were so glad of it that they wholde not render the town at the day appointed.
It was not long after but that there rose such a tempeste that it desposed the
nauye into sundry places. The which afterward meryng all at Croton, set out
again from thence and made sail to Ruscie. When the ships approached nere
the land, Totilas commanded his men to arm them, and set themselves in amy
upon the shore willing them with their darts and arrows to prohibit the
nauye from arrival. When the Greeks saw that, they were so sore afraid of
the danger, that after they had houered a while their aboutes making pretense
to arrive, at length despairyng to do that they came for, they turned their
ships and went their ways. Afterward as they were consultyng what was to be
done for the safegarde of the^ that were besyeged, it was determined that John
and Valerian with ye horsemen and the reast of the army should go into the
country of Picene, and there keep as great a stir as they could, to the
intent that Totilas should be compelled to break up his siege to succor his
own: And that Belisarius should with his nauye sail unto Rome, to appease the
mutiny among the souldyers that we spoke of before, and to carry corn
thither to victual the town. According to this determination, John went by and
by through Appulia and the Country of the Marses to the Picentes by land.
Valerian chose rather to go by water? And so having embarked his soldiers he
arrived at Aucona, and joined himself with John. Yet notiwhtstanding for all
this Totilas dyssolued not his syege, but snding two thousand horsemen among
the Picentes to defend ye towns against John and Valerian, he himself with the
reast of his army continued his syege about Ruscian. The besyeged when
victualles utterly failed the^, and that there remained ho hope of rescowe,
sent one Deofer an Italian and Godilas a Thracian to Totilas, desyryng pardon
and safetye of their lives. These men contrary to their expectation found.
Totilas gentle and easy to be entreated. For he imputed ye breach of the truce
to no man but one with the punnishment of whom he said he would be satiffied,
and was conte^med to parden all the residue. If they would serve him they
should keep still all that ever they had, and if they had rather go some where
else they should depart every man with one garment. By this means he
received the town, The punishmment of Colaser for breaking of promise.
and after that he had caused Colaser Captain of the garryson to be whipped
and mangled, (who was the occasion that the town was not yielded according to
counenant), he commanded him to be put to death. With the rest he keept
touch according to his promise. A great number of the men of war (to the
intent to save that they had) abode still with Totilas. Othersome leaving their
horse harness and all that they had besides, went with one garment unto
Croton. The goods of the townsmen Totilas gave for a pray to his souldyers,
commaundynge their bodies to go at lybertye. The wife of Belisarius goes to
constantinople.
About this time Antonia the wife of Belisarius went to Constantinople to sue
to Thoodora the Empress to entreat that her husband might be called home out
of Italy. But when the found that Theodora was deceased a little before, she
went to the emperor her solfe and with much suit earnestly entreated him that
her husband might becalled out of Italye. The which request she easily
obtained, so mu^he the rather because the Emperor stood in great fear of
wars in Parthia. Belisarius is called out of Italye.
Thus Belisarius being called out of Italy returned into Greece almost five year
after he came thither last, not having had altogyther so good fortune in this
his latter viage as he had in his first.

At his departure from Rome he left three thousand of chosen souldyers there
in garryson under yt governance of his Liuetenant Diogenes a man of much
wisdom and knowledge in feats of arms. Anon after his departing yt Goths
took by assault Peruse, which they had so long time beseged.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Totilas besegeth Rome now the thv^de ti^^e, great suit is made to them perour
for rescowing the Iame, Diogenes captain thereof provides pollitiquelly and
circum spectly for the saufty of it, nevertheless it is betrayed and taken.
Diogenes flies to cent mucels, Paul another of themperours captains saves
him self and his vallantlye, being be^^eged by the goths in the Pyle of
A^^ian, Totil^^ ^^^^^oreth by all (...) to repair and frequent Rome again,
and afterward sommentth centmucelles which takes truce with him to yield by a
certain day.

TOtilas hauting set at a slay the affairs of C^^^brie and Appulia, totilas
besegeth Rome the third time.
determined to turn batke again and besege Rome. It made him the bolder that
Belisarius was gone, together with the prosperous suscesse of the Goths in all
their doyngs through Italye, and the evil fortune of the Greeks. Whereupon
assemblyng a great power from all parts, when al things were in a readiness,
he came to Rome and besyeged it. There were in garryson in the Town three
thousand chosen Souldyers with their Captain Diogenes a man of singular
actiuitie, who by watchyng, workyng, and preventing in places convenient
defended the City stoutly. In so much that the syege was prolonged, and the
Goths had none other hope to win it but by famyshement. Suit made to the
emperor for rescowig the e^^ye of Rome.
During the syege about the City, Vigilius the Bishop of Rome being as
then at Constantinople, and with him many worthy men of Italy, made earnest
suit to Justinian that he would send. Belisarius again into Italy we an
inestimable power to raise the siege before Rome, otherwise they deciared that
all was like to fall to utter ruin. The same thing also requested Goding one
that had been Confull and w^^ sent thither from the people of Rome as an
Ambassador. Justinian made them answer that he would provide well enough for
thaffairrs of Italy. Howbeit through his delaying and driving of from day to
day he did nothing in effect. At yt length when he saw the^ earnestlyin hand we
him from time to time and ye he could not be rid of the^, he denou^ced Liberius
one of the nobility of Rome Captain general of the wars in Italy, and at
the beginning was very whate in the furniture thereof. But within a while when
other cares came in his head he began to wax cold again. And so with vain
hope some time making preparation and sometime making delays the time passed
away. Rome in the mean while was strayghtly besyeged. For the Goths hanynge
won the Eytye Portua keept them so short that nothing could be conveyed in
by the Tyber unto them that were besyeged. And to the intent Rome should not
be relened from any place, they had gotten into their hands well nigh all the
towns about it. the foresight and provision of Diogenes for the sauig of Rome.
But the foresyght and prouisiou of the Lieutenaunt and his fouldyers was
woulderfull. For they foreseyage these things a good while before, had caused
all the dayde ^^ames witha^ the City (where th^^e stood no buyldinge (...) be
sowed with come. By ^^^anes (...) hereof it can^^ to pusse that by that time
their old co^ne was spent, new came up within the walls; where through they
endured the fyege a long time. Rome is betrayed.
Yea and by all likely hood they had faued the City had not the treason of
(...) perverted the^. (...) the gate that ^^adeth to Ostia, (...) ye g^^ to
(...) Church of Sayncte Paul, there was a ward of Isa^rien (...). They after
long (...) of the ^^^ge, grudging (...) themselves that they were (...) of
many years wages, in ^^ps of great tow^des at Totilas hand, (...) him
bargainyng to (...) him the ga?e. Where they warded, appoyntyng the time and
the mean how to do it. When the night prefired was comme, Totilas devised
this cautele. He set two Barges upon the Kyuer Tyber with Trumpe^^o^es at
them, commanding them to towe up the stream and to get as ne^^ the wall
as they could, and when they came there to blow their trumpettes as terrybly
as they could. He himself with his army (...) softlye without noise, and
stayed a lytele Raye from the gate before (...) All things happened according
to l^y^ desire. For the (...) when they had rowed to the place apponited, with
the teerible and fo^ayne noise of their trumpeites, stralie the Romans in such
a fear that they believed their enemies had been there.

In so much that they flocked thythes from all parts of the City, and they
that watched in other places left their standinges, and came runnynge thither
fearfully.

Now whiles every man resorted to that place, Rome is taken.
and took no heed to the rest, the traitors being left alone brake open
their gate and let Totilas with his army into the City, whervppon immediately
ensewed flaughter as well of the Romans as of the fouldyers. There was not
than any care taken how to make resistens, but how to run away. They fled
by such gates as werr furthest fro the enemy. Diogenes the Captain for as
much as be saw there was (...) other remedy yffued out of Rome with part
of his souldyers and took his way toward Centmucelles. Totiles presupposinge
as much before (for all the rest of the towns were lost and there was no mo
left them to fly unto but only that) laid an ambushe for him by the way, into
ye which Diogenes falling lost a great part of his soldiers and himself being
sore wounded had much a do to escape with his life. The valiant doings of
captain Paul.
There was at Rome among other Captains one Paul of Silicia, captain of a
trope of horsemen. He in this most troublesome night after he had skirmished
with his enemis in diverse places of the City in the taking thereof, at length
recovered himself with his horsemen unto Adrians Tumbe. As Soon as it was day
light the Goths swarming about the City (at what time that the Capitol
Esquilie and al ye rest of ye city was taken) there was hard feyghting still at
Adrians tumbe. For Paul had.CCCC. horsemen with the which he valiantlye
defended the Tumbe and the bridge adioynynge thereto. In so much that he stew
many of the Goths in the skyrmishe upon the bridge, and drove the rest a
good way of. The which Totilas beholding caused his men to retire, I wylnot
(quod he) bye the destruction of these me^ with the bloodshed of any of my
people I will dispatch the^ sitting still and never trouble my self for the
matter, considering that neither they nor their horses have wherwt to sustain
their lives until to morrow. Thus having called his men from the skirmishe, and
set a strong watch against the tumbe and the bridge, he commanded ye no man
should molest ordisquiet them yt were beseged. Paul and his hand of horsemen
having fasted all that day and the night following without meat or drink, the
next day began to consult what was best to be done. There were ye gave
rounsel to endure the siege with horsfleshe. But this devise seemed horrible for
the lothsomnes of ye vnacoustomed feding. Hope to escape by flight there was
none, the Goths befetting the^ on all sides round about ready at receipt to
cut the^ of. So there remained no shift but to yield, and that seemed both
perilous and dishonorable, The words of Paul to his soldiers.
And therefore Paul taking upon him to speak said in this wife. My fellows and
companions in arms which way so ever we turn us, ye see we are driven to an
utter exigent. For there is no way to escape by flight, the euemies enuironing
us round about with their army, and taking so good head to us. And to yield our
selves to them, besides the disshonor and cowardnes of the fact, we are like
to be horribly tormemed and renti^ pieces. For ye cruelty of these bar barous
people is not wont to be contented with any simple hind of death. As to a bids
the fiege and to feed upon horse flesh, let the^ do it that ^^ke to be
rescowed. I cannot see what reason ought to per snade us unto so great
sufferance which are utterly destit^^ of any sUch hope unless that like a sore
of fain thar^e^ boys for fear of death we had rather pine ourselves with sorrow
than have our flesh cut with a sword. And I assure you either to yield to
thene^^te or to statue for hunger, I count it the property of them that have
neither heart nor broud in the^. But unto us which are (...) of our hands, and
acquainted with feighting, an honorable death is rather to be embraced then a
shameful life.

And therefore let us in such wise dye, that we may has our felues in ye blood
of our enemies and not die unrevenged. Let not our enemy laugh at our
destruction but weep. Neither let us hold up our throtes to be cut by them, but
let us with our weapons cut theirs. For what can the respit of a few years
profit us? sytheus that if we should escape alive now, yet are we sure we
shall die ere it be long after. Glory may lengthen men's li^^es, but nature
cannot. Aduanuee yourselues forth with me therefore to an honorable death, the
which our enemies as well as our countrymen may wonder at and extol with
eternal praises to the sky. The horsemen encoraged with these words vowed
them selves to death. And there upon embracyng and kysfyng one another they
prepared themselves to the battle full heent and determined to spend their
lives manfully. Their purpose was to run upon the Goths that warded next
unto them, and to bestow their lives in the slaughter of their enemies.
Fortune faue reth the courageous,


When Totilas saw them thus bent to try the uttermost, for fear least the
desperate endouour of them should do the Goths more displeasure, then
otherwise so small a number were able to do, he fent an herault to them
offering them choice whether they would depart with their lives leanyng their
Horse and armor behynd them, or else retaynyng all still serve him in his
wars in like estate with other of his Souioyers. When the horsemen heard that
they were very glad, and at the first chose to leave all that ever they had
and to go to Constantinople. But afterward considering ye long journey, and
the dangers that might happen by the way, they returned their minds and
chose to abide all with Totilas, saving their Captain Paul and Mundus an
Isaurien. These t^^ (...) as much as they had wife and children at home,
Totilas shows himself earnest in reparing and peopling of Rome.
desired to depart. And Totilas helping them liberally with viand and other
necessaries sent them again to Constantinople: Furthermore be commanded ye no
man should be so hardy as to offer any wrong to any of the other soldiers in
garrison that had taken sanctuary in yt church. Toward the City of Rome he
neither extended any cruelty, nor went about to make it desolate as he had
done before. But made a search for the Citizens thereof in the towns of Campanie
and in other places, and reduced them home again. Furthermore he made in Rome
tourneies and iustes and such other primelye passimes as are wont to be done in
fortunate and quiet Cities with great cost and solemnity, to the intent the
Citizens should conceive good hope, and have a desire to the City. The houses
also which had been overthrown or consumed with fire in the former desolation of
the town, he went about to needifie and repair. Finally he showed now as
great a defyre of replemshinge Rome as he had done before of wasting and
leauyng it defolate. This so great mutabilitie and alteration of his mind,
fomme believed to have risen upon a vow that he had made to the Apostles Peter
and Paul, whose temples he might seem to have destroyed when he destroyed ye
city. Othersome imputed it altogether to the profit and commodity of the
wars. And diverse do report that when Totilas latelye before desired the
French Kings daughter in marriage, answer was made him that he was not King
of Italye when he had subuarted the City of Rome. The which Taunt (men say)
altered his mind to the repayrynge of the City. But what so ever was the
cause of it, he endenored to repair and build again the Gytye of Rome. After
this he prepared to make a vyage into Sicill.

For the furniture whereof he builded him a great flete of Galleyes, and made a
great number of hoyes and hulkes while he was making preparation for yt same,
he determined to besiege both by water and by land Centmucelles which one
City was not yet comme under his subjection. Captain of that piece was
Diogenes who (as to before mentioned) escaped lately from Rome. He had gathered
to him a good strong company of men of war.

Therefore at such time as the Gothyshe army came thither and had encamped
themselves nere unto the walls of the town. Totilas sommoneth cent mucelles.
Totilas sendyng an afficer of Arms to him, sommoned him either to come and
feyght it out with his power against ye goths, or else to yield up ye town unto
hi^. For it was not for him to look for any help at Iustimans hand considering
he never releued Rome all the while it was besieged, onles perchance he thought
the emperor did set more by Centmucells then by Rome. Diogenes replied thereunto
saying, that as for to fight with him he was not minded at that time, and as
for to yield up the town saving his honor and fidelity he could not, before
he had sent to know the Emperors pleasure, and to desire help. Whereupon
forasmuch as he seemed to speak that which was honest and reasonable they fell
to composition, that unless the Emperor after warnyng given, did resrowe the
town by himself or by his deputy, Diogenes should surrender it at a certain
day. And Totilas should not in the mean season by any means moleste or
dysquiet him. For the assurance of these Articles Hostages were delivered, and
upon this agreement Totilas brake up his siege.

The.v. Chapter.
Totilas making war in Sicill besieges Siracuse, a new Lieuetennaunt is sent
from the Emperor into Italy.

WHen all things were now in a readiness that were to be prepared. Totilas
makes war in Sicill.
Totilas turned himself to the wars in Sicill, commaundyng that his ships
should be ready at hand in the narrow seas of Sicill. He himself went by land
unto Rhegium, purposyng to have won the town by force. Captains of the
town were Teremund and Imere placed there by Belisarius not long before. Who
diverse and sundry times repulsed the Goths to their great loss, attemptyng
to win yt town by assault. By means whereof Lotilas despayring to get it by
violence, determined with long continuance of his siege to subdue them by
famyshment. And therefore leauyng a number of the Goths about it, he conveyed
all the reast of his army by water to win Tarent, the which he easily
obtained. From thence wafting over into Sicil, after yt he had either by force
of Arms or else by composition gotten into his hand certain of yt lesser
towns, The syege of Siracuse.
at length he besieged Siracuse both by sea and by land. By that time the
Goths which (as ye heard before) were sent among the Picentes against John and
Valerian, having associated great aid unto them and gotten the upper hand in
diverse conslyctes, took the City Arimine. And in another encounter not far
from Rau^nna, they slews Vere Captain of the Elurians with all his host.
Moreover Teremund and Imere which were besieged in the town of Rhegium, for
want of victuals were feign to yield themselves and the town to the Goths.
All these things being declared to the Emperor at one instant, namely the
sakyng of Rhegium, Tarent, and Arimine, and the passing of Totilas into Sicill,
made him utterly astonyed to hear of so many misfortunes at once. And there
upon he denounced one Germa^ his cousin Germine by yt fathers side captain of
yt wars in Italy against ye Goths commanding great preparation to be made
for yt same. A new Lieuetennant sent into Italy from them perour,
When yt fame hereof was blown into Italy, it greatly abashed yt enemy and
reco^forted his friends. For this Germa^ was a man of a hualt courage, and of no
less wisdom and pollicye, wonderful lyberall, and very well-beloved both
with the people and with the souldyers. Besides this he had after the death of
Vitigis taken to wife Mathasuta the nece of King Theoderych, the which thing
won him the hearts of the Goths: and therefore as the fame of him was great,
so was he greatly looked and longed for in Italy.

The.vi. Chapter.
Diogenes dalayeth with Totilas in deliueryng up of Centmucelles according to
composition. The new Lieuetennant of Italy, dies in kys way whose sons are
commanded to prosecute their fathers charge.

WHon German was now in Illiricke, The Selauines
the nation of the Sclauines having passed yt river of Danow, invaded the
provinces of the Empire of Rome. A kind of people cruel and outragius beyond
all measure, who turnyng themselves toward Macedonie and Thrace, put Justinian
in such a fear, that he commanded German to stay his journey into Italy.
Through this taryans the Goths had leisure to do what they list in Italy and
Sicill. The answer of Diogenes to Toulas for Centmucelles
In the mean season came the day appointed that Diogenes should have
delivered Centmucelles, whereupon Totilas sendyng unto him required him to
perform his promise. Diogenes alleged that Germane was newly created Captain
of the wars in Italye. By reason whereof he said the state of things was
wholly altered, so that it lay not in his power to yield yt town, seeing yt
Lord and proper owner of it was on his journey and would with in two or three
days be in Italy. Totilas was be sieging Siracuse in Sicill, and the Gothishe
men of war skowring through the whole country, made havoc of althynges. In
Italy Rauenna, Auchon, Hydrunt, and Centmucelles with certayue other towns
remained still imperial. The Goths held all the reast. One only hope stayed
them, namely the coming of German, the which also failed them. For whereas he
was sore longed for in Italye, he was taken with a disease, and to the great
sorrow of all ye were belonging to him dyed in Illiricke. The death of Germane.
German had two sons whom he led with him into Italy. Them did the Emperor
command to proceed with their fathers enterprise, ioyuly together with their
kynsemen John Vitalian the Captain so well known in Italy. For John had married
the daughter of German. John therefore and the sons of Germa^ taking the
charge of the army upon them, came unto Salons. And forasmuch as winter was at
hand they determined to abide that season there, and in the beginning of the
next spring to pass over to Rauenna. About the same time well nigh, Liberius
being sent from the emperor with a nauye entered into Siracuse, mawgre the
Goths that kept their station in the haven to prohibyte their arrival.
Howbeit for doubt of scarcety of victuals which so great a number was soon
like to cause in a City besieged, he purposed to go his way again: and
therefore with in a few days after his coming he took shippyng again and
departing from Syracuse arryed at Panorme.

The, vi. Chapter
Narses is sent again Lieuerennant into Italye with a great power and
great treasure, Totilas sends a nauye into Greece to infeste those countries,
and besyegeth Aucon in Italye. The Captains of Totilas are overcome on the sea
by the Imperialls and Aucon is rescovve. The Goths receive another overthrow
upon the land, after the which certain Gothishe Captains become imperial.
Narses marches with an inestimable power to Rauenna and from thence tovvarde
Rome in the which iurney he vanquysheth a Captain of the Goths and kills
him at Arimine. He encountereth with Totilas who in the same conflicte is
slain and Teias created king of Goths in his stead.

IN the mean while the Emperor alteryng his purpose, Narses is made
themperours Lieuetennant in Italy.
made his Eunuch Narses Lieuetennant general of the wars in Italy, making him
large promyses of men and money. Also he wrote to John that he should not pass
into Italy, but tarry still at Salons and there abide the coming of Narses.
Narses therefore taking the charge courageously upon him, endeavored to levy a
great power from all places. To the performance whereof greatly aualyed his
favor and authority. For he was one of the Emperors preuis Counsel and ruled
him in manner as he list, and he had great friendship and Aliance with the
Kings and the great Princes of the Barbarous nations. Narses is stayed by the
Hunnes.
When his furniture was in a full readiness, and that he had commanded his
men of war to mete him all in Illiricke, as he was outward on his journey,
and was come to Philippople in Thrace, he was of necessitye constrained to
stay and abide a time in the same place. For the Hunnes enteryng with a great
army into Macedonie and Thrace, made spoil of all things, and had closed his
way that he could not pass. At the length when one part of the Hunnes was
gone to Thessalonicke and the other to Constantinople, Narses went from thence
and kept on his journey. By this ting Totilas (hearing of the great preparature
of his enemies) was returned into Italy. Leaving for Lieuetennantes of the
wars in Sicil four of his captains, and he himself made provision in Italy
for all things that seemed nedeful and requisite. Totilas se^deth a nauye into
Greece.
And to the intent to vaunt his power to the Greeks (as who should say he was
as well ablete invade them as they had been to have invaded hi^, he sent a
great flete into Gexce, co^maundyng them to make as much havoc and spoil of
all things as they could according to the same commandment this nauye,
spoiled first Corsyra and the Isles adioynyng thereunto, and afterward
aduenturyng upon the main land, wasted and spoiled with fire and sword all
the coast of Cypous, Acarnauia and Aetolia. And so keeping still the seas, did
cut of many Greek ships by ye way as they were sailing toward Italy and
Illirium, insomuch ye no ship could stir abroad for them. The bosyegi^g of
Aucon.
While these things were a doing in Greece. Totilas sendyng a fresh crewe of
soldiers into the Country of the Picentes, commanded that Aucon should be
besieged both by sea and land. He made three Captains of this enterprise:
Scipuar Vdilas and Gothidil, to whom he gave a flete of seven and fortye
Galleyes. When Aucon was thus besyeged, there were so whote assaults given
both by sea and by land, that it stood in great perrill. Wherefore Valerian
who had the rule of Rauenna, forasmuch as he thought himself to weak to
rescowe them that were besyeged, he wrote to John Vitalia^ lying at Salons,
requessting him to join with him and so to rescowe them together. John Albeit
the Emperor had given him commandment that he should not pass into
Italye before the coming of Narses, yet notwythstandyng forasmuch as he
thought it against his honor to lie still and look on while his companions
were in such ieoperdye, he chose out the best men in all his host and
embarkyng them in eyghtene ships, set out of Salons and sailed toward
Rauenna. As he was in his way Valerian met him with twelve galleyes well
decked and furnished to fight. When ye Captains had commoned between
themselves, and by the advice of such as were about them had determined as
seemed best, they sailed with their whole nauye toget her against their
enemies. And when they came nere unto Aucon, they drew to the shore at a place
which the inhabiters do call Duasse. Battle on the sea between the Goths and
the imperialls
The which thing as soon as the Gothyshe Captains peerceaued, they also
addressyng themselves to the encounter furnished their navy with the best
soldiers ye they could chose, and when they had put themselves in a
readiness, launched forth and set themselves in good order against their
enemies. The Gothyshe ships were in number seven and forty, and the Greeks
were thirtye, Captains whereof were John and Valerian, and Captains of the
Gothishe navy were Vdilas and Gothidill: for Scipuar abode with the reast of
the army to keep the Camp. Therefore after that the Cap\taynes of either
part had encouraged their men, and with warlyke orations inflamed their minds
with hope of victory, with eager stomachs they joined battle. At the very
first beginning the encounter was fierce, meting with stem to stem and each
endeuoryng to ouermatche other, and the matter was handled with great courage
on both parts. For there was not any one in all that great company which had
not his hands full. Insomuch that the matter was tried with darts, Iauelyngs,
pykes, and swords as if it had been a battle upon the land. Howbeit in
continuance the Gothyshe navy began to go by the worse. Conning and
expenence preuayleth against force.
For albeit they were good men of their hands and stowte warryours, yt
forasmuch as they wanted experience in sea matters, they troubled themselves.
For in some places they clustered so together, that one had not come to stir
by another, and other some again to eschew that fault, disseuered themselves
so far from the help of their company, that their enemies had them always at
advantage. Whereas on the contrary part the Greeks were greatly furthered through
their connyng the good order of their Sea men there was no array broken. A man
could not have seen among them any throngyng, nor scatteryng, but ye they were
ever nere at hand to help their company and to be helped of them. And
therefore as reason was, at length they gatte the upper hand. The Goths are
vanquished and Aucon rescovved
Some of the Gothyshe ships were sunk yt their men of war mariners and
al. Many being won by fine force were with incredible slaughter taken. The
which when the Goths beheld, by and by they took them to flight. There were
no mo but ten of their ships that escaped to land unperished. The reast were
either taken or else drowned, there was made a great slaughter of the men in
the battle and in the chase. They that escaped to land, did forthwith set
their ships on fire, to the intent their enemies should not obtain them,
and returned into their Camp. Where they were stricken with such a fear, that
they determined to break up their siege. Whereupon in all haste they forsook
their Camp and fled unto Auximum. John and Valerian enteryng into the haven of
Auco^ with their victorious nauye to the great comfort and incredible
reioycement of the Townsmen, made have to ryfflyng of the enemies Camp. The
which they findyng forsaken, caused all the victuals and artillery that they
found there to be conveyed into the city. Fortune turns against he Goths.
They themselves within few days after departed, Valerian unto Rauenna and
John unto Salons. This battle did sore discourage the hearts of ye Goths, and
was as it were a preparatiue of a greater ruin ye was toward them. For Totilas
being not a little disquietted with this loss pulled back a great part of his
army out of Sicill. By means whereof Artaunaes the Emperors Captain
subrogated in ye rome of Liberius having received his nauye of him, began to
grow ye stronger in Sicill.

Insomuche that he not only delivered his confederates from ye besiegemente,
but also besieged the Goths in diverse places in their own towns. The Goths
receive another discomfi. ture.
Moreover ere it was long after, an other navy of Greeks coming unlooked for
to the rescowe of the Crotoniens long time besieged by the Goths, raised ye
siege and discomfited their enemies with great bloodshed and saughter. The
Goths being dispersed fled some to Tarent, and some withdrewe themselves into
the next mountain called Scyllaum, the which overthrow together with yt
former slaughter, did much more discourage the hearts of the Goths, In
especially forasmuch as there went a great brute through out all Italy of
Narses coming and of his preparation for ye wars, what great furniture he
brought with him, and that there began already to spring up certain rebellions
against Totilas. Forone Reguaris a noble man among the Goths Captain of
Tarent, Renoltyng to the part of the imperialles.
and Morras captain of Acheruse, revolted to the Emperor with their towns
and soldiers whereof they had charge. The power of Narses.
Furthermore tydinges was brought of another insurrection against the Goths
in Sardinia. While things were in this estate in Italy, Narfes assemblynge his
power in the winter season, addressed himself to his Journey: he had such an
army of men, as scarce all the Captains being put all together, brought
with them into Italye during the whole time of this war. For the Emperor
gave him so largs allowaunce of monnye, and he himself was so bountefull and
lyberall in bestowing and distributing of the same, ye he levied a great power
not only in Thrace and Grace, Albuine king of Lombardes.
but also out of diverse other places. For he had entertained a boue five M.
Lombardes notable me^ of war by ye consent of Albuine their King, and, MMM. of
the Erulians. Cumades a Persian,
Furthermore there came unto him a great number of the Hunnes.

Also there was one Cumades a Perstan that had been trained up in the Roman
wars, who with a valiant band of Persians resorted unto him. Moreover there
came to him a warlyke young gentleman called Assuades with five hundred
feyghtynge men of the Sepides: and John surnamed Phagas with an host of the
Greeks and Thracians. Besides this, John Vitalian, and the sons of German
served him with their armies. Narses therefore having this so great an host,
as soon as the spring time approached, passed out of Illiricum through
Dalmatia and Liburnia and so coastynge about the elbowe of the Sea came by
land into Italye, not stayinge any where until he was among the Venetians.
There were two ways by the which he might handsomelye pass from the
Venetians. The one by the Adriaticke Sea, the other through the main Land,
both which seemed to have many lettes. For by the Seas side the River
Athesis makes great Lakes which fall into the Sea in many Chanelles, and
the river Po being divided into many streams, does in diverse places
interrupte the Journey, with many quamyers and mooryshe ground as, so that an
Army can not well be led that way without great trouble. Teias afterward
king of the goths.
Again in the way by the main Land one of the Goths called Teias placed at
Veron with an Army by Totilas, had intercepted his passage over the Ryuers of
Athesis and Po. These two streams runnynge down from the Alps which deuyde
Italy from France and Germanye, do fall into the Adriatycke sea. And
therefore they that will pass from Venice, must needs pass over them either
by the Seas side where as be Lakes and meres falling by diverse Chancelles into
the Sea, and where the mowthes of Po do overthwart them between Rauenna and
Clodius diches: or else they must pass the same rivers in the main land,
where they be great and undivided, and where they may easly be stopped of their
passage, if there be any body to withstand them. Wherefore seeing ye Teias was at
Veron the which is a city standing upon the River Athesis, and had a power
sufficient to let him of his passage Narses left the way through the maine
land, and chose to go by the coast of the Adriaticke sea, both because it was
without impeachment of enemies, and besides that, was nearer way then the other.
Narses coming to Rauenna.
And so marchig by Clodius diches and the felds of Adria, and passing over the
Rivers whersoeuer they crossed his way, some where with brydges and somewhere
with botes, at length he came with all his army unto Rauenna. There Captain
Valerian and Captain Iustine with their bands, joined themselves with Narses.
There were in Italye a great number of old soldiers, who by reason the
Emperor was behind hand with their wages for a long time together were
offended in their hearts, and would not go forth to the wars. Narses paid
them all their wages, whereby he healed their griefs and gave them courage
again.

Having spent nine days in dooinge these things and in refreshing his army
at Rauenna, he removed from thens and marched toward Rome. A conflict at
Arimine.
The same time was one Vsdrilas captain of Arimine as notable a warrior as
was among al ye goths. Who (as soon as the Voward of Narses host was come into
the felds of Arimine) went about to stop them of their passage. The River
that runs by Arimine was risen with rain, upon the which was a bridge so
hard under neath the Town that it was an easy matter to stop the passage.

Vsdrilas therefore yssuynge out of Arimine before that any number of his
enemies had passed the River, set himself at defense on the furthersyde, and
encountered with his enemies even hard under the walls of the town. In the
which conflycte a certain man of Arms of the Erulians feyghtyng with Vsdrilas
hand to hand flewe him, and his soldiers discouraged with the death of their
Captain, retired fearfully into the Town. The head of Vsdrilas was brought
unto Narses, at the which Narses reioycynge and taking it for a tooken of
good luck, that the chyefe of his enemies was slain by his men at the first
conflycte, kept on his way full of good hope and comfort. For albeit he had a
good furtheraunce to the taking of Arimine at the same instant, yet
notwtstanding he would not tarry about it to the intent so great an army should
not beletted about the sege of one town, and therefore he passed by Arimine
and continued on his iourny. Totilas having intelligns of those things ye were
done among ye Venitians, and understanding of the passage of Narses and of his
coming to Raue^na, although almost al his whole power were at that time with
Teias, The death of Totilas.
yet notwithstanding he determined to encounter with Narses, the which he did,
and in the battle was stayn for his labor. As many of the Goths as escaped
from the field, fled over the river Po and assembled together at Pauie and
there abouts. In the which place as they consulted of making a new governor
of their people, Teias is created king of the goths,
Teias was preferred by the judgment of all men and chosen king of the Goths.
After that he was thus in stalled in the fiege roial, by and by he took to his
use the threasures that Totilas had laid up at Pauie, diligently going in hand
to repair his power, to raise a new army, to give and distribute horse and
armor, and to do all other things vigilantlye, and moreover to send to the
Frenchmen to allure them to take his part in the wars.

The.viii. Chapter.
Narses continuinge his journey receives Narma and Peruse, and wins Rome by
assault, whereupon the goths extend a marvelous crueltye against the Roman
prysonners.

NARSES hearing thereof, commanded Valerian to fie as it were in garrison with
his band about the River Po, to the intent the Goths should not straye to
far abroad at their pleasure without fear and he himself with the rest of
his army marched to Rome. In his way Narma was yielded up to him and he
granted the men of Spolet certain of his soldiers for their defense until
they might repair their walls which Totilas had beaten down. Also he sent
to Peruse to sommon that Town, there were in Peruse two Captains Melegidius
and Vlithus. Who being at variance between theymselues drew soundrye ways.
For Melegidius coueted to yield up the City. Melegidius and Vlithus
Captains of the Goths.
But Vlithus being gyltye of the treason and the murder latelye committed
against Cyprian, strove against it, for fear to be punnished according to
his deserts. By means where of there rose contention, in the which Vlithus
was slain, and Peruse was yielded up to Narses by Melegidius. After this
Narses proceedynge to Rome besyeged it. The City of Rome at that time stood
in this estate. The Cityzens being afflycted with the former calamytyes
resorted not in any great number into the City. Ye should have seen whole
streets emtye and neither man nor woman dwell lynge in them, and the houses
either fallen down or else bourned.

For Totilas not able to repair it again specially the Cytyzens being so
sore wasted and in manner destroyed.

The Goths therefore distrusting their own weakness that they were not
sufficient to defend the whole City, had chose^ a piece of ground not very
big nere unto Adrians tumbe, the which they strongly fortified with a diche
and a rampyre and joined it to the wall of the rest of the City. Into the
which place they conveyed all their munitions and artillery using it as a fort
or a hold. Nevertheless they did not utterly abandon up the city, but defended
it as well as they could. Narses therefore determining to win the city,
assaulted it in diverse places at ones, And the Goths resorting to the same
places stood at defense from yt walls. While these things were a doing, Narses
takes Rome,
another company of the souldyers of Narses stealing about to the further
side and finding no body there, rered up their ladders and skailed the
walls. The noise that was made therevppon bewraied that the City was taken,
and the Goths leaving their defense, some fled to the town of Portua and some
wythdrew themselves to the forte at Adrians tumbe. The cruelty of the goths
toward the Romans.
By this means Narses gate Rome, and after he had a while besyeged the hold,
he took it by composition. There were in Campanie many Senators and Senators
children, whom Totilas for the great authority and favor that their
ancestors had, would not suffer to return into the City. Besides them,
there were diverse of the nobility which the Goths had sent thither upon
mistrust. All the which, with their, children and kynsfocke the goths did put
to death. Moreover Totilas had chosen CCC. yongme^ as it had been to scrue him
in yt wars, but in very deed to keep the^ for pledges, and therefore he sent
them on a vyage beyond the River Po. The which like wise after that Rome was
come into yt hands of Narses, were put in death every chone by the Goths.

The ix. Chapter,
The falsehoode and treason of a gothishe Captain named Regnaris. Narses
recouereth Portua. Teias king of the goths and the said Narses encampe one
against another by a Ryuers side the warter runnynge betwyxte them without
any battle until after long time Teias having through treason lost hy^
ships and by means thereof being destitute of victualle and artillerye to
keep that ground any longer remoueth to a hill not far from the same
place, where being in manner besyeged by Narses, he sets his men in battle
raye and geuynge ferce assault upon his enemies after a whole days
feyghtynge and many a noble deed of prowess by him done he is at last
slain and the battle cease for that night the which begynueth again the
next morning, contynewinge all the day likewise until it be darcke night.
Whereupon they send commissioners unto Narses for peace which upon
reasonable condytions is granted and the wars in Italye are brought to a
fynall end and quietness.

ABOUT the same time Regnaris Captain of Tarent when he heard that Teias was
made King and that the Frenchemen would comme to his aid, The falsehou and
treason of Regnaris.
repented him that he had reuoulted to the Emperor, and determined to turn
to the Goths again. Now to the entente he would recover again his
hostages, he ymagined this subteltye. He sent to Macurius Captain of Hydrunt,
desiring hynt of aid against an army of the Goths which he falselye
alleged were coming against him.

Macurius mystrustynge no deceipts sent him fyftye of his Souldyers to Tarent,
whom Regnaris immediatlye cast into prison, and wrat unto Macurius that if he
would have his soldiers, he should deliver him the hostages that he had of
his in keeping. Upon the receipt of this message, Macurius was sore troubled in
his mind, and leauyng a few men behind him for the defense of his piece, went
with the rest of his army against Regnaris. Regnaris making no delay in the
matter, put to death all the Souldyers that he had received, and then yssuynge
out of Tarent to encounter with Macurius was put to the worse, and being
driven to fly with the loss of most of his souldyers when he could not
recover to Tarent for that the ways were forelayed, Narses recouereth Portua.
he gate him to Acheruse. In the mean season Narses sendyng his army to
Portua, besieged the town and at length recovered it. After this he assailed
Centmucelles and in likewise brought it in subjection. Teias also ceased not to
solicit the French nation and to allure them to take his part in the wars,
promysinge them sometime monnye and sometime copertenershyppe of the kingdom
of Italye. But the Frenchemen had already determined not to entermedle
themselves in any such wars. By means whereof the Goths were disappoynted
of their hope. Totilas in the time of his life had gathered together a great
Threasure at Pauye, and had laid up no small mass of monny in the fortress of
Cume, and had made his brother Captain of the same fortress. When Narses had
understanding thereof, he sent part of his army to besyege Cume, and he
himself abiding still at Rome, endeavored to repair the City and to
replenyshe it with people. And to the entente that the Goths that were beyond
the River Po should not rescowe Cume or any other of the places that were
besyeged, he commanded John Vitalian and Philimunt with their bands to abide
in Hetruria, to set (...) against the enemies at the first approach and
curte them of ere they (...) ^^ye further. For Teias when he perceived that
Cume was besyeged, determined fullye to go and rescowe it. Wheroppon sertynge
out of Pauye, by long and ouerthwarre iourneyes he led his host by the
shore of the upper sea and so through the countries of the Picentes and Marses
into Campanye. The which when Narses understood he called John with his band
out of Hetruria. After whose coming he marched forward into Campanye with
his whole power fullye purposing to encounter with Teias. The mountain
Vesuuius.
There is a hill in Campanye called Vesuuius out of the tooppe whereof
oftentimes ryseth up smoke and flames of fire. But in the foot of the same
mountain are springs of sweet water the which do make a brook called Dracon
that runs not far from the City Nuceria. this brook is not very broad,
but it is so deep that neither horseman nor foteman can pass it. Narses and
Teias encamp together parted with a river.
About this river both armies encamped Narses on the hither side and Teias on
the furtherside, the river ronning in the mids betwent the^ both. There was
but one bridge over it, and that had the Goths taken. By means whereof it lay
in their hand to chose whyther they would fight or not fight. The armies abode
in this forte by the space of two months, so that Narses and his me^ which
were desirous to come to hand strokes, could not by any means come to their
enemies, only they came to the rivers side from both Camps and shot arrows
and threw darts one at another. Also there were fought many co^bates and many
chalenges were performed on both sides during the said time, and the Gothyshe
soldiers passing over the bridge did fight with the soldiers of Narses hand
to hand. The sea was well and nere at hand and the Goths had their ships
upon the water which always brought corn and victuals and set it a land nere
unto them, The Goths lose their ships by treason.
from whence it was still conveyed to the Camp. But after the time that their
navy through treason was lost, and that they could have no more victuals
and attillerye brought to the^ by the sea, the Goths were constrained of
necessitye to dyslodge from that place. Whereupon forsaking the bridge and the
ground by the rivers side, they departed to the next hylt which the
inhabitants of the cou^trye do call the mylkie hill. Narses pursuyng them
(forasmuch as he could not assail them by reason of the stepenesse of the
hill,) settled himself about the foot of it. The Goths being to the same
place also as much oppressed with scarcetye as they were before, determined to
put the matter in trial by the sword. A cruel battle between the Goths and
the imperialls.
And thereupon puttyng themselves in array upon the top of the hill, they
descended from about and sodaynely assailed their enemies thynkyng nothing
less, then of any such matter, in so much that they had not any leisure to
order their battles or to encourage their soldiers, but were feign to set
themselves against the enemy according as every man's fortune had appointed
him. And for because the Goths had left their horses and fought on foot,
Narses did set his fotemen also to encounter with them. The battle was cruel
and bloody in all places. For on the one side the Goths fought obstinately as
men in despair, and on the other sydo the soldiers of Narses were ashamed to
give place being so many in number as they were, in especially consyderyng that
but even the other day they had compelled them to forsake their first camp,
and had well me besteged them now in the hill which they had fled to for their
refuge. Both parties being incensed with these persuasiens, fought very
valiantly. The notable prowess and courage of Teias king of the Goths,
I will not pass over with silence the noble Demeanor of Teias King of the
Goths in his battle. For he being endued as it were with an heroical
prowess, would needs put himself into the forefront of the battle among the
formest fyghters. He was easy to be known from the reast by his goodly armor
and his rich apparel. In the lift hand he held a target and in his right
hand he brandished a Iauelyng. Many that encountered against him he struck
stark dead, and yet darts came flying at him from all sides Howbeit he being
of an incredible courage and strength did marnayles in arms. At the length
when his shylde stake full of darts so that he could not handsomely wield it,
standing with his face toward his enemies and calling to his harnessebearer by
name he commanded him with a loud voice to bring him another target. When it
was brought unto him, he let slyppe his old one, to have taken the new in his
hand, in the which change it was his chou^ce to receive his deaths wound by
a dart that was sent at him. By the which albeit he lost much blood, yet
notwithstanding like a most puyssant champion he never gave foot back nor
never turned his face, but standing stoutly toward his enemies, fought it
out as long as he was able to stand on his legs, until at length sebled
with travel and loss of blood he fell down flat upon his face. It was
almost sire of the clock when Teias dyed. The death of Teias.
And yet the Goths were nothing at all dyscouraged with the death of their
King, but held out the battle until it was night never geuyng one foot
back. Fynallye when it was so dark that they could not see, the battle
ceased, being begone at the son rysyng. That night both the armies watched
in their harness, and as soon as the day pered, they fell to fyghtyng a
fresh, contynuing so still unto the son going down to the great slaughter
of both parts. At length the Goths sent unto Narses offering to depart out
of Italye so he would suffer them without impeachemente to carrye such things
as they had away with them. But if he would not grant them this request,
they said they would never leave fightyng, as long as the breathe was in their
bodies. When Narses had heard their demaundes, by the advice of his counsel he
condyscended unto the^, to the intent he would not to the great preiudyce and
loss of his men, seek the advantage of his desperate enemy. In the mean
time about a thousand horsemen fled out of the Camp of the Goths, and by
great iourneyes came unto Pauie and other towns beyond the river Po. The
residue fell to a fynall agreement with Narses, promisyng to depart out of
Italye, carrying nothing more then every man his own, and never after to make
war upon the Romayne Empire, provided always that they themselves should
retain still their freedom and liberty without any bondage or subjection to
the Empire. The which being done according to covenant, Narses received Cume
and al other towns that held with the Goths, and so ended the eyghten the
year of this war.

FINIS

