A Nicke for Neuters.

A most godly and fruitful Sermon, begun and preached at Paul's Cross, the
30. day of October last, and continued and finished in Paul's Church, on
New-yeeres day at night.

By Thomas Burt, Preacher of the Word.

How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him; but
if Baal be God, then follow after him, 1. Kings 18.21. Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON Printed by Simon Stafford. 1604.

To the right Worshipful Sir John Grange, Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace and Quorum, in the County of Middlesex: and to that right
virtuous, the Lady Katherine his wife, all earthly and heavenly true happiness.
IN this dangerous time of Pestilence, raging in this our Mother City, and
places adjacent, it might be said, as sometimes it was of Rome, Paucorum virtus
cuncta Romae patrauit. Your Worship, right worthy Knight, being one of this
paucity, incumbe^t on your office in these places, even alone Moses-like, from
the Morning to the Evening, bearing the burden of the people, in hearing,
deciding, ending their controversies, mayntayning the virtuous, and punishing
the malefactors; and like a broad Fig tree, sustayning the weak and little
shrubs, making shadow to the weary, giving fruit to the hungry, and bearing
your self strongly against all perverse and importune winds of contradictions
and discouragements, yea, sowing virtue, and reaping fame; with grief have
seen, and well do know, that it might be said yet again (notwithstanding
Gods revealed wrath and sharp punishments) as sometimes it was of Rome:
Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque.

Chrysostom. fayeth, If thou see a tree does bear no fruit, the cause is
in the root. The cause of the barren leaves of the peoples trees, and their
vain words, and abominable works, I take it to be want of Religion, and
Neutrality in Religion: I have therefore made choice of this text.

Wherefore I entitle this book, A Nicke for Neuters, because this our age has
brought forth many a prodigious Polypus, and vain ayre-full Camelions. The
divine Angels of our Churches have been vilipended, God has been offended, and
our City grievously punished.

God auert his future further plagues, and turn his Justice into mercy, and
give us grace by repentance to meet with his judgments. The Lord stir up the
heart, and bless with all wisdom, our prudent succeeding Solomon: inspire
with his spirit, and give fit ability and cunning to Bezaleel, and Aholiab, to
promote the work of the Tabernacle. God raise up (especially now) trusty
Chusa, prouide^t Joseph, and just Samuel, bold Elias, plain John the Baptist,
instant Paul, and feeding Peter: and extirpate and explode wicked Achitophel,
covetous Judas, blind Elymas, and paltry Magus, and grant, that the Fig leaves
of authority, parentage, self-love, flattery, dessembling, and fond fancies,
may be pulled off from Madam Psacentia^ and the noble Lady Verona may show her
liniaments, in vninuested and vnobscured nakedness: so that with circumcised
hearts and catechized souls, we may every one bring the Ark of God into our
houses, while we may; that our houses may be blessed, as those houses were
where the Arc was: and that this famous City with the Suburbs, and adjoining
Parishes, now after their late sorrowful sighing of that Hei mihi, quanta de
spe decidi, may (as it was said of Christ) gustare post fella fauos, to the
glory of God, the Church, Common wealth, and our private good, And as by good
desert induced, it is my bounden duty, I beseech the most Highest, to stretch
out his hand of protection, and defend, receive under the couerture of his
wings, and preserve your Worship, and your virtuous Lady, with those toward
Imps, your two gracious sons, and modest courteous daughters: and to send
with this my New-yeeres gift (such as I have to give) which I commend unto you,
many new years, and continual new and true joys, benedictions and graces
temporal, corporal, spiritual, celestial, and eternal, for his Christ's
sake, Amen.

Your Worships in the Lord, Thomas Burt,

Reu. 3. 14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write, These
things says Amen, the faithful and true witness, that beginning of the
creatures of God.

15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest
cold or hot.

16 Therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spue thee out of my mouth:

17 For thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.


TO speak briefly of some, and pretermit other circumstances: The Penman of
this prophecy throughout the whole book of the Revelation is John, that divine
Eagle, Eagle of divineness, one of the Lambs twelve Apostles, The time when,
on the Lords day, Apoc. 1.10. called the first day of the week. 1. Cor. 6.2.

The observation of this seventh day is of divine institution, and so has bin
from the beginning. Acts 20.7. It is natural, moral and perpetual. God
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. The place, in the I Will of Pathmos,
lying in the Aegean sea, whither John was exiled by Domitian, the Roman
Emperor, about the year of our Lord 96. for the Words sake, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, Apoc. 1.9. The Persons to whom, are all the servants
of God, Apoc. 1.1. Although but seven Churches are mentioned, yet under them,
all others are contained.

The true end and use of this book, is to publish to the world all things
herein contained, as they must be orderly fulfilled, even to the end of the
world, Cap. 1.1.

This Book of the Revelation may fitly be divided into three visions, as it
were into three general parts. The first vision, contained in the three first
Chapters. The second, in the next eight Chapters, from the fourth to the
twelfth. And the last vision, contained in all the consequent Chapters, from
the twelfth, to the end.

This Chapter then is part of the first vision, and contains seven Epistles
written to the seven Churches of Asia, wherein the present estate of the
Churches of Asia, is most lively described, and in them the estate of all the
Churches then militant on the face of the earth.

Four things are contained in every one of these Epistles.

First, an Exordium or entrance into the matter. Secondly, a general
proposition. Thirdly, a narratio^. Fourthly, a conclusion.

The Exordium contains two things in every Epistle. First, the person to
whom. Secondly, the person from whom this Epistle is written.

The proposition and conclusion, is in every Epistle one and the same.

The narration put between them both, consists of praise and disprayse,
admonitions, reprehensions, threats and promises.

This text then consists of three parts of this Epistle, written to the
Laodiceans, the last of the seven Churches. First, of Th'exordiu^, noting unto
whom it is written, in these words, And unto the Angel of the Church of the
Laodiceans write. Secondly, of the person from whom it is sent, which is here
described by three Maiesticall titles. First, he is called Amen, observed in
these words, These things says Amen. Secondly, The faithful and true
witness. Thirdly, The beginning of the creatures of God.

The proposition is the same as in the other Epistles, I know thy works.

This Narration contains, First, a reprehension for a crime, which is, to be
neither cold, nor hot. Secondly, A demonstration of the cause of the crime,
which is, worldly riches, and spiritual poverty, in these words, For thou
say, I am rich, etc. Thirdly, The threatening, which is, of punishment,
Therefore because etc. it will come to pass, that I shall spue thee out of my
mouth.

Of the general proposition, I know thy works: I have lately, At Lam beth
before many right reverend and learned, already entreated, as also of the
first part of this Exordium, to whom this Epistle was written.

Now rests (Right Honorable, right Reverend, Worshipful, and beloved, that
I speak of the rest of these parts, taking the words in order as they lie. And
first, of the Maiesticall titles here given to our Savior Christ: Thus says
Amen.

First, he is called Amen.
THis word Amen, is a strange kind of speech in the beginning: for we are wont
to end with the same word that we now begin. So as it may seem by this
beginning, that we make an end, when we do begin: and by this continuing, to
begin again, when we have made an end; as though we had never made an end,
and never begun. Yet in this is no preposterous speaking, if we mark a divine
beginning: for the order of this speech declares the efficacy of his name,
and the effectualnes of the name, the Majesty of the Son of God, whose Name
it is. For as Amen is here in order first, and otherwhere last, it resembles
his nature, as he is called, Isa. 41.4. Primus and nouissimus: The first and
the last. And as Amen begins, and Amen ends: so is he as well called, Reu.
1.8. Alpha, the beginning; as Omega, the ending.

And as Amen is one word in all languages: so is he one and the same in all his
Saints.

Amen, as Aretius notes, is vox approbantis fore: a word, ratifying and
willing a thing to be; so to ratify and say Amen to all, before any thing be
done at all; and with whom all things are done, as soon as he says Amen.
Psalm. 33.9. He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood.

And as Amen is the end, finishing, and last addition to all sayings: so is he
said to be the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.

As the Hebrew word Amen, signifies vero, certo proculdubio: so is he said to
be Amen, two manner of ways.

First, in respect of Gods promise. For 2. Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God,
in him are Yea, and are in him Amen, unto the glory of God, through us: that
is, are sealed sure and firm, confirmed in him, through Gods good will toward
us in Christ lesus. Mat. 3.17. This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Witnessing, that though God was displeased for our sins sake, yet he
is well pleased, and his wrath appeased for his Sons sake. For without him,
we cannot attain to Gods promise. Therefore is he called our peace, Ephesians.
2.14. and our bond, Romans 8.36.

Secondly, in respect of the truth of his natures. For how could be performed
the work of the worlds expiation, unless he had been both God and man? Man,
to be borne under the Law: God, to fulfill the Law. Man, to suffer; and God,
to overcome.

Lo then, how this word Amen expresses his nature, whilst it sets him
forth to be the stability of all his promises. Amen, that is to say, that God;
that verity, that is eternity; that man, that is the seat of mercy; that
nature, that is charity; that power, that is victory; that peace, that is
unity; that life, that is felicity; being eternal, without beginning;
everlasting, without ending; infinite in himself; the first and the last;
venerable in his Saints, as a Bride in her ornaments; amiable in his Church, as
a father in his charge; infallible in his word, as a prepotent performer;
admirable in his works, as an Almighty Redeemer; imperial in the heavens, as a
soueraign Commander; inestimable in the world, as an inexhaustible treasure of
all the gifts and graces of God.

The faithful and true witness.
HEre the latter expounds the former. Christ the faithful and true witness
of God, which declares to us faithfully the true will of God: for in Scripture
God is set forth to be the inco^prehensible mind, and the Son, his divine and
heavenly word: because, as the inward mind is made known by the vocal word,
so the will of God is reueyled by his Son, Mat. 11.27. And in this sense he
is Amen, in respect of us: in the other he is Amen, in respect of God; for that
he performs the word of God, and carries it as an Embassage to us, as here
he comes from heaven, and witnesses to men their unkindness and cold
affection to God: and therefore to furnish himself, assumeth these adiume^ts of
credit, wherewith men ought to be prepared, when by the sway of an oath the
truth in balance ought to be poysed. The first is faith. The second, truth.
The third, knowledge. Faith, for integrity; truth, for equity; knowledge, for
certainty: for that every such witness must know the matter in question,
without doubting, speak that he knows, without lying, and continue
faithful, without corrupting. Adhibenda est fides, ne testimonium violetur;
veritas, ne mendacij arguitur; cognitio, ne ignorantia aberremus. These 3.
properties are derived from the tongue, from the heart, and from the
conscience: he must speak what he knows, know what he thinks, think in
heart what he knows: by means whereof these three parts in man, give due
honor to God: The conscience, by testifying; the heart, by ratifying; the
tongue, by specifying the truth, which is required of three persons. First, of
God. Secondly, of the Judge. Thirdly, of the innocent. For God looks on the
heart: the Judge tries by the tongue: and the innocent hangs on the
conscience. So that here we see three notable assistants to confirm credit.
First, an upright conscience. Secondly, a faithful heart. Thirdly, a true and
sincere tongue: By whose just testimony of the truth, Gods honor is confirmed,
the Judge is informed, and the wrong is reformed.

But if faith, truth, and knowledge be so necessary in a witness of credit;
what manner of persons are they, that for faith, produce falsehood; for truth,
lies; and avouch their own knowledge, contrary to their own conscience: and
so bring a guilty conscience, a false heart, and perjured tongue to the solemn
Judgment seat, where that high God does sit as chief President, and the
Judge, as his authorized Lieutenant, to hear and try, etc. 2. Chro. 19.6.

Whereby it follows, that the false swearing wretch does not only lie to the
Majesty of God, but also in calling him to witness, brings forth the
everliving God, to maintain that his lie is true: and so makes the God of
truth (as far as in him is) to be his stale to betray the truth, his
ascociate in the villainy, his consort in the injury, the color of his
treachery, and countenance of his perjury.

Wherefore, seeing they beguile men under the name of God, and make the blessed
God their cursed means to bring their wickedness to end: as they in the
highest degree abuse the sovereign good, and so commit, of all others, the
most heinous crime: so do they merit, of all others, the most grievous pain.

Lamentable examples whereof have been showed to this wretched world.

Melancton reports, lib. 4. of one Otho, Bishop of Mogunce, that he was, for
wilful perjury, first strooken by thunderdynt from heaven, and afterward
carried by Devils visibly to hell, who yelling out as they went, this audible
cry, Sic luendo, lues, atque ruendo, rues; gave their warnings to such
miserable miscreants, to take heed of GODS all-seeing eye, and seuerest
Judgment.

Eusebius makes mention, lib. 6. cap. 8. of three false varlets, accusing
Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, by false oaths, making several imprecations
against themselves, to confirm their affirmation: the first, that he might
be burnt with fire; the second, that he might be consumed to death; the
third, that he might not see the light (if their testimony were not true)
that the first was consumed with burning; the second, wasted with pyning; and
the third made blind with weeping.

In how deep detestation (think you) does the LORD hate this crime, since
he himself does in the Law, Numb. 5.11. set down the punishment, by an
Oracle from heaven, and inflict it with a miracle from earth, insomuch that, in
women, that forsware their incontinency, those parts that offended, with
swelling and rottenness perished?

For seeing that by perjury, GOD himself is dishonored, truth abiured,
conscience defiled, Judgment deluded, Magistracy abused, the innocent
condemned, the guilty absolved, the righteous wronged, and wrong-doers
advanced; what maruayle, if God be thereby most highly offended, when the
world thereby is in peril to be confounded?

False witness and perjury, is the spear and shield of all injury, the throne
and Crown of all villainy, the stayne and shame of piety, the scumme and some
of fallacy, the founder of iniquity, and confounder of integrity. In whom,
amongst all other ill practices, this is most detestable, they work all their
falsehood, under a color of truth, and compass all their wrongs, under the
mask of doing right, and perform all manner of iniquity, under the vesture of
Christian duty.

Is not an oath the stablisher of all truth, determiner of all strife, the
tryer of all right, the discouerer of all falsehood, the ground of all
judgment, the end of all controversy, the witness of all righteousness
toward men, and of all fear and worship toward God? Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall
fear the Lord God and serve him, and swear by his name, etc. Deuteronomy. 19.15. One
witness shall not rise against a man for any trespass, for any sin, or for
any fault that he offends in, but at the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall the matter be established. Mat. 18.16. That by the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word may be confirmed. Heb. 6.16. An oath for confirmation, is
amongst them an end of all strife. Ier. 4.2. And thou shall swear, The Lord
lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

If so; what trial can be of truth, what invention to find out fraud, what
Sanctuary to succor right, what refuge to rescue wrong, what end of Law, what
use of Justice, what Judgment seat, what Princes throne, what credit in men,
what regard of God, if the reverend and sacred religion of an oath fall to
ground?

Assuredly, these false and forsworn Vipers do more hurt by vayled villainy,
then does the enemy by armed hostility; personated in Synon.

-- Capti dolis, periurique art Synonis,
Quos neque Tydides, neque Larisseus Achilles, etc.
Synons perjured tongue wrought more woe, and shed more blood, then Achilles
percing lance. The one comes into the field, like a man; the other into the
Court, with falsehood, like a Devil: the one, with weapon in hand; the other,
with poison in heart: this strikes his private enemy with the sword; that, the
public Magistrate with deceyt: this man impugneth his mortal foe; that beast
repugneth the sacred laws and judgment seat of God: he, to repel the
conceived injury; this, to overthrow Justice, truth, and equity: so the one
does assault with valor and magnanimity; and the other deceive by sacrilege
and treachery.

But what do I compare them to men at Arms, with their villainy who go (if it
were possible) beyond the devil himself in this wicked witchery?

Medea confesses, that she could by the help of Hecate, Ripis mirantibus,
amnes in fontes redire suos facere, by her incantation, make Rivers run
backwards again into their fountains, turn streams backward, and roots of
trees upwards: a thing very prodigious. But these, by their inchaunting
perjury, can do a great deal more then that: for whereas she could only
inchaunt by her charms, rivers, hills, woods, herbs, stones and trees: these
can bewitch equity, truth, Judgment, knowledge, and authority; and by their
black art turn them so contrary, that they can transform good into ill,
light into darkness, truth into falsehood, equity into injury, verity into
vanity, authority into tyranny; make the defender the destroyer of the world,
and transmute the comfort of men into confusion.

Wherefore, although they both abuse the Name of God; the one by sorcery, the
other by perjury: both defile Gods creatures; the one by coniuring, the other
by abiuring: both work wonders in the eye of the world; one under the visor of
piety, the other by open iniquity: Yet in this, the Coniurer does invoke the
devil, the Periurer, the Name of God; this infecteth the earth, that infesteth
the heavens; this works on corporal bodies, that on spiritual minds; this
on trees and herbs, that on states and Cities: the one opposes his wickedness
against the things of this world, the other his deuilishnesse against the
Throne of God.

No doubt, the very damned Witches are so much the less in their doings
heinous, then the perjured Swayne, as it is more impious to abuse the
inviolable Majesty of GOD, then the subtle Devil; and those heavenly
treasures, then the earthly creatures: For when he has done all this
mischief, he makes the just God his cloak, to cover all his abominations:
So that he infecteth the very heavens with the breath of his mouth; the very
air, with the venom of his tongue; and surmounteth even very hell, with the
malice of his heart.

O earth, earth, earth! corruption, for foulness; carrion, for vileness;
flesh, for fraylenesse, how dare thou say to Gods most sacred Majesty, Cover
my perjury: and to that inviolable Verity, Be a shadow to my lie: and to the
Judge of all righteousness, Be my copesmate in wickedness?

Was there ever sin of such a shameless face, obstinate heart, yron-sinewed
neck, and brazen brow, as to say to the Searcher of the heart, and Tryer of
the reins, Witness my witness to be true, when he lies in his heart? O
incredible impudency! surpassing Tytion in opprobriousnes; Gorgon, in
prodigiousnes; and Cyclops, in contemptuousnes: yea, the Devil himself in
wickedness, according to that saying, Non audet Stygias, Pluto tentare, quod
audet Perturus. The Devil for fear does quaking stand, to see what perjury
takes in hand. Yet though the crime be never so heinous, and the punishment
never so grievous, too too many care no more for false swearing and perjury,
then in manner of a common courtesy.

I rue to think, that, as in duty I am bound to speak; and I would to GOD, I
might be silent with safety: but seeing the burden of duty is laid on my
back, that I must speak against this horrible and rife sin, and so do of
love, hoping for amendment: let the goodness of your minds answer to the
greatness of my desire, as to look rather to your own duties in amending, then
mine in admonishing. I say, that public place, and Courts of reformation,
Westminster Hall, and this your Honorable City, is much dishonored and infamed
with this crime and perjury, though (I confess) the known malefactors have
often received condign punishment, for these sins so offending God and
equity: yet needful is it of a continual care to save lands, lives, goods and
souls, by grave, deep, and discreet scrutiny.

It is said, there are certain, called knights of the Post (I think so called
for the greater part, because they have so much true faith, truth, and
knowledge, as has a post) that as one man would lend another an horse to
relieve his journey; so will they lend another an oath to relieve a cause,
preferring policy before piety, and commodity before equity: they dishonor
God, to favor men, win themselves wealth, with the loss of themselves, and
run into this cursed and capital crime of false witnesse-bearing and
perjury, which is the slaughter of sanctity, massacre of verity, stab of
equity, bane of innocence, murder of authority, and Hagge of all improbity;
helles sacring, heavens unhallowing; Gods defiling, man's forlorning, and the
worlds vntwyning.

Oh, that profane and wicked wretches would be think themselves, first,
before whom they stand: let them but imagine it to be before some man of
great authority, worthy of reverence, full of severity, and pearcing of
judgment. Secondly, that they would persuade themselves, when they are to give
in their testimony, that then was the last period of their life: and therefore
then so to speak, as one that was presently before Gods tribunal seat, then
for the same to give an acount. And lastly, that they would have God before
their eyes, as if he were present, visibly and corporally, (as in truth he is
inuisibly in all places, especially in that place, where God is said to be
amongst the gods.) And therefore to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth (according to their charge) looking to God the Searcher
of all thoughts, that stands there, as witness and Judge, to allow, or
disprooue, to judge, or acquit them: then would they have one eye to God, and
the other to the cause in question; then would they justly respect the truth
in every man's cause, and not make account of any man's person, knowing that God
is Author of truth, and therefore hates lies; and the devil father of lies,
and therefore hates truth; that nature has joined their tongues and hearts
together, because the tongue should express what the heart does think; that
leasings are the most dangerous enemies to quietness, and makers of debate;
that it breaks, and in time takes away all the affiance and trust that
should be between man and man; it impayreth their credit, wounds their
conscience, and ingageth their souls.

O remember this, ye that forget God, and are possessed with whole Legions of
lying devils, that make no conscience of a sacred oath: fear not the
displeasure of men, but fear to transgress the commandments of God: reueyle
not one part, to gall an enemy, nor conceyle an other part, to pleasure a
friend; speak the truth, and the whole truth. Veritat is simulatio,
abnegatio, etc. says Fulgentius. Halt not on both sides, with one part of the
testimony; on one part to pleasure the Playntife, and the other, to please the
Defendant. Cover not Neroes cruelty, (beware of scarlet sins) under Catoes
gravity; nor Herod's butchery, with John Baptists simplicity. Mala conscientia
delictorum, testis, Iudex, carcer, tortur.

Remember, that CHRIST does entitle himself, The faithful and true witness,
in whose heart was never untrue thought, in whose mouth was never guilefull
word, in whose hands was never false deed: for he was the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; the Way, never erring; the Truth, never failing; the Life,
everlasting: true in all his promises, true in all his prophecies, true, in
giving us true liberty. If then you be true by this example in heart, true in
tongue, true in hand, faithful and true witnesses, your thoughts shall yield
comfort to your selves, your tongues praises to your God; your hands, good
deeds to your brethren. But if you lie without fear, you shall dye without
GOD: and when your body is without life, your soul shall be without hope.

And ye, most prudent and learned Judges of the Land, to whom it does
belong; though I may say, Ye grave fathers, as sometimes Bernard did to
Eugenius, consid. lib. 2. Non est meae humilitatis dictare vobis, Vel sic, vel
sic faciendum: In all humility for JESUS CHRIST his sake, I beseech you to
respect of what Religion and honesty the witnesses be, that are produced
before you; for Constantines rule does hold: They cannot be faithful to men,
that are faythlesse to God. You will not suffer them to rob men by the high
way side; much less, to rob God of his honor, the laws of true Justice,
and their neighbors of their rights, lives, lands, and goods. They must not
murder others; and shall they slay their own souls? They may not speak
treason against their Prince; and shall they utter blasphemy against GOD? Why
should any man abuse his own horse or house? for if they please not one, they
may pleasure another. And why should any man be permitted (as far as it may
be prevented) to abuse his own soul? they are not their own, but are bought
with the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus.

I am of opinion, if I see one ready to drown himself, and stay him not, if I
may, if so he does perish, that I am guilty of his death. But Pauca sapienti.
Thanks to God, for your religious care already had upon this point; and God
grant your perseverance, to the glory of God, and furtherance of justice.

And thus much for these words in Christ's second title, The faithful and true
witness.

That beginning of the creatures of God.
CHrist is said to be the Author and Beginner of the creatures of God, two
manner of ways.

First, as it is Ioh. 1.3. All things were made by it, and without it was made
nothing that was made. So that he is beginning without beginning: for he that
gives beginning to all things, must needs have none himself: he that is
before all things, cannot after be made to be: he that created all other,
cannot himself be a creature: he that sustaineth, and gives Being to all, must
needs be himself an eternal and infinite Being, which never began to be, nor
never shall make an end to be. Therefore he is not the beginning amongst
creatures, that is, the first amongst creatures that began to be, but the
beginning, that is, the Beginner and Former of all things whatsoever be.

This Majesty of God in the creation, not a little sets forth the dignity of
the message: for how materially should we regard his pleasure, that is Prince
of all power, who as he made us of naught, so can he bring us to naught; and
can make us heirs of heaven, or firebrands of hell.

Secondly, he is said to be the beginning of the creatures of God, as he is in
this sense, Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, etc.

2. These. 2.13. The Apostle affirms, that God has from the beginning chosen
them to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of
truth, etc.

Whereby we may see, God looked on the countenance of Christ, when he first
made man, that whereas in Adam we all perished, so we should in Christ all be
repaired: and this was his eternal decree from the beginning. Therefore is he
said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning, and Jesus Christ, yesterday and
to day, and the same for ever.

Now, as Christ is said to be the Beginning of the creatures of God, two manner
of ways, so is the creature to be considered two manner of ways: that is, not
only by creation, but by renouation, as it is implied Psa. 51.10. Gal. 6.15.
2. Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.10. Whereby it appears, that man's last renewing is as
great a work of God, and as mighty as the first.

In the first creation, Adam of nothing was made good. In the second, man was
of ill made good. Now to draw one contrary out of another, is of no less
divine power then to make good of nothing: for in ill is a natural hatred and
resistance to be made good, but in nothing is no resistance, Aug. Par sit
vtriusque potestas, and iustos creare, and impios iustificare: yet must the
latter be of more mercy then the first. The first was of the earth, earthy, 1.
Cor. 15.47. And by this creation, not only the earthy, that is to say, the
corruptible nature, which does only savor terrene and earthly things, is made
divine, having in this life the heart made heavenly, with divine faith, the
conscience heavenly, with divine peace, the understanding heavenly, with divine
knowledge, the affections heavenly, with divine love, the life heavenly, with
divine works; but being thus prepared in this life present, shall in the
blessed heavens, of wretched, be made blessed; of maimed, be made perfect; of
stained, be made pure; of caducall, immortal; and of corruptible, eternal.

So in the like manner, in the first was created in the humane body, being,
life, and sense; and in the humane soul, reason, memory and will: But such a
being, as without this last renouation, better not to be, being indeed nothing
else but a perpetual languishing; such a life, as was and is to be dissolved;
such sense, as was and is to be perplexed; such reason, as was and is to be
deceived; such will, as was and is to be disordered; such memory, as has often
failed. But in this second is not only a being, but a happy being; not life
alone, but eternity; not only sense, but iocundity; reason without obscuring,
will without disturbing; and memory without forgetting.

So in the first, the body was drawn out of dust, life out of breath, sense
out of life, mortality out of nature, and misery out of sin. But in this
second, both body and soul are drawn out of hell, life out of death, and
sense out of torment, eternity out of mortality, and felicity out of misery.

Moreover, in the first (as we must thankfully confess) though man was most
royally and magnificently seated, and made Lord of this inferior world, had
Paradise for his Palace, all creatures to serve him, all treasures to enrich
him, all elements to help him, the earth to sustain him, and heaven to conserve
him: yet in this second (my heart does melt to think it: O wonderful thing!)
mortal man is made heir of the immortal God, and succeeds in the
inheritance of his unmeasurable glory, has heaven for his folace, Angels to
help him, Gods spirit to sustain him, his grace to enrich him, Gods Son to
redeem him, God himself to adorn him.

Furthermore, God made man at the first, when he was the^ as the earth is now,
senseless without feeling, and liuelesse without moving; so that if he had no
praise of well doing, he had no blame of ill deserving. But now at the last,
when man had fallen from the God of life, into the power of the king of death;
and in preferring the credit of the lying Devil, before the truth of the
living God, had not only rendered disobedience for duty, and great
ungratefulness for Gods great bounty; but also had sense of feeling, and
torments for ever abiding: then the gracious and bountiful God, to show not
only a patience in suffering, compassion in pitying, a mercy in pardoning;
but also a love in retayning, a bounty in restoring, a magnificence in
enlarging his estate again, does argue his love to have so much the more
exceeded, in how much man's love had the less deserved. Opus sine exemplo,
gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo, says Bernard.

Besides, the first creation was made by the might of Gods Son; but the
second by the death of Gods Son: so God labored to make the first, but Christ
suffered to make the last: so that in the first, man was exalted; but in the
last, God was debased, and that so interchangeably, as that by how much the
Son of God was humbled, in so much was the son of man advanced: for God
came down to earth, and man went up to heaven: God took our humane flesh, and
man his divine spirit: God was made the son of man, and man was made the
son of God: yea God was condemned, and man was acquitted; Christ suffered, and
man was redeemed; he was done to bitter death, and man received to eternal
life; he sustained the pains of hell, and man possessed the joys of heaven;
he was crowned with pricks and thorns, to crown man the King of bliss. Thus
was God depressed to man's misery, and man exalted to Gods glory.

Now, what greater love could God show to man, then to prefer man to the
glory of God? and yet in doing it, by detruding himself to our misery, he does
double the bounty by suffering, which he bestowed in aduauncing: for in giving
his glory, what soever he had, he gave him all: But in suffering our misery, he
freely gave himself and all. Now if we can never satisfy for the greatness of
that glory, what shall we render for this his unmeasureable love?

Thus then to conclude, was the Son of God by the first, our beginning of
life; but in the second he brought us an end of death by the first, mold was
made a man; by the second, sin was made a Saint: the first made man the image
of God; the second, the son of God: by the first, was made a humane soul; by
the second, a divine spirit: by the one, he is made Lord of earth; by the
second, King of heaven: by this he has a world full of creatures; by that he
has an heaven full of joys: so, by the one he is wonderfully created, by the
other inestimably redeemed: whereby the Son of God declared by the first his
unmeasurable greatness, by the last, his incomparable goodness.

Lo, behold here, Beloved, what wonderful great things the Lord has done for
us: we ought (if it were possible) to be answerable in all kindness and
thankfulness to his great love and goodness: which thing, since we cannot
possibly perform, yet, when we have done all that we are able, we must of
necessity confess we have done much less then we ought: how ought we
notwithstanding to contend to do all things to the uttermost of our power, that
by our readiness in doing that which we can, we show our willingness, that we
would do that as we cannot: where, if it be so, we do far less then our duty,
even when we endeavor to do more then our power: what duty do they perform,
who when they should do more then all, perform less then nothing? nay not
only seek not to advance any duty, but shame not to requite so great
goodness with all impiety, by falsehood, fraud, and perjury, seeking only to
anger and most grievously to offend him, which has most egregiously deserved
of the^. But if it be a savage and brutish thing for a man so to behave
himself, as to be (I say) not only unworthy, but vanquished of a good turn;
how monstrous and prodigious a thing is it, to render immeasurable wickedness,
for incomparable goodness, and that especially to Gods eternal Majesty? And
if we should not suffer our goodness to be ouercom by others wickedness, as the
Apostle says, how incredible obstinate are we, if our wickedness cannot be
ouercom by Gods mighty divine goodness? We are to know, blessed Brethren, that
the Lord has not placed us therefore in this world, that we should by savage
ungratefulness become worse then brute beasts, but that as humane creatures, we
should excel in all humanity, and show our great love toward him, for his
great love toward us, acknowledging our gratefulnes for his deseruednes, and
with all our might honor him, that does with all his bou^ties pleasure us.
Wherefore let us learn by the pattern of his vvorthynesse, to be made like to
his goodness, because he has promised us in Christ, that they which are
like unto him in grace, should reign with him in glory.

And thus we are assured of, that, look what is in Christ promised, because he
is God Amen, shall be performed undoubtedly. Which thing that the Lord may
effectually do indeed, let us with all our hearts beseech him to bless us,
that we may with all our hearts serve him, that after this life present, we
may with him eternally enjoy the life to come: which God grant for his Christ
his sake. Amen.

The second part.
Reave. 3. 15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, etc.

16 Therefore, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, etc.

17 For thou say I am rich etc.


THE Lord Jesus, having before premised the description of his dreadful
Majesty, but especially of his infallible knowledge which cannot be deceived;
of his immutable truth, which cannot be changed; of his inviolable faythfulnes,
which cannot be corrupted: Having thus (I say) premitted (as a thunderbolt) the
excellency of his nature, he proceeds to note down the faultiness of their
behavior, giving them to conceive thereby, that it is in vain to make false
semblance with God: For by reason of his infalliblenesse, he will not be
deceived by them; and because of his faithfulness, he will not deceive them. But
as by virtue of his knowledge, he sees what they are: so for his
inuiolablenes, he will use them as they are: assured they may be, whatsoever
he promises, because he is true, he assuredly performs, because he is
faithful.

The Laodicians being thus assured to find reward according to their desert, he
comes to declare; both what they have deserved, and how they shall be
rewarded. Wherein the Lord sets down to them, First, the crime. Secondly,
the cause of the crime. Thirdly, the punishment.

First, the crime is, to be neither hot nor cold. Secondly, the cause, worldly
rich; and spiritual poverty. Thirdly, the punishment, to be vomited out of
the Lords mouth.

The grieuousnes of this crime we shall the more evidently perceive, when we
mark thoroughly, first, who they are that are hot. Secondly, who they are that
are cold. Thirdly, and consequently, a third sort, Neuters, that are neither
hot nor cold.

They are hot in Religion, whom Christ baptizeth cum Spiritu sancto and igni:
for so were the Apostles, Acts 2. when the holy Ghost sat in fiery cloven
toungs on every one of them.

First, in fiery tongues, to make them lucent and ardent. Secondly, in tongues,
to make them prudent and cloquent. Thirdly, these tongues were cloven, to show,
that as every tongue was made many by cleaving: so should they have diversity
of gifts and multiplicity of languages, Romans 12.6. And as one says, Omnium
gentium linguas loquitur Ecclesia. For as in fire there are many notable
qualities perceptable to the senses, as clearenes, beauty, burning, heat,
dryness, and many singular effects answerable thereunto, as to make pure,
adorn, manifest, separate and consume: So this alluding of the holy Ghost unto
fire, puts us in mind, that Gods spirit works like fire, in the Saints, an
illustrious brightness; yet not of the eyes, but of the understanding;
clearenesse, not of color, but of conscience; heat, not of fire, but of zeal;
and a thirst and drynes, not unto moisture, but unto goodness, making men to
shine in the darkness of this world, Phil. 2.5. to be adorned with the beauty of
holiness, as the world with the beauty of heaven, and to be made pure in heart
through faith, Acts 15. as fire does purify gold; to be zealous and fervent in
spirit, as the fire makes men fervent in heat, To. 12. to consume our corrupt
affections as dross with flame, To. 8. to fill us as full with the fruits of
righteousness, as fruit trees are filled with the fruit of the Sun, Phil. 1.11.

So that by means of this sacred fire, the Saints are made with zeal, like S.
Ioh. Bap. burning fyrebrands; through love, like the Apostles, shining lights;
through faith, like the wise virgins, shining lamps; through grace, like the
righteous in heavens kingdom, euer-shining stars. And no marvel; for these
have not only cast off the works of darkness, by mortifying their own flesh,
denying their own selves, subduing their own wills, forgoing their own
delights, and by contemning the glory of the world, the flatterings of
prosperity, and the despites of adversity; but are made infatigable against all
labors, intrepidable against all dangers, invincible against all pleasures,
and inexpugnable against all power; and have moreover, after a most divine and
heavenly manner, put on the armor of light, Romans 13.12. and walk in the light,
using (as Cyprian says) Tanta humilitate in conuersatione, stabilitate in
fide, veritate in verbis, in factis iustitia: such government in manners, and
justice in works, as that their whole lives are nothing else, but spectacles
of piety; their bodies, tabernacles of sanctity; their mouths, oracles of
verity; their hearts, habitacles of charity; and themselves, mirrours and
miracles of all integrity. And they that are such, may rightly be said to be
hot in Religion.

Behold (beloved) how greatly ought we to be inflamed with the love of this
Excellency, as also confounded with the shame of our indignity, that the more
far we are off from the worthiness of the Saints, the more we ought to
endeavor to come near unto the same.

Now, by the contrary to those that are hot, we may easily discern what
these are that are cold: that is, such as have no spark of this heavenly fire,
no heat, nor comfort of the holy Spirit, being without light in darkness;
cold without love, and impure without goodness; and therefore such as the holy
Ghost notes, 1. Cor. 6.11. as are not washed, as are not sanctified, as are
not justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: such
as Ephe. 2.12. are said to be without Christ; such as he denounces, in the
first to the Corinthians, the sixth Chapter, to be Idolaters and adulterers, etc.

Whereby we may gather, three sorts of these Psukroi, key-cold in religion;
Atheists, natural men, and Epicures. The Atheist, the Apostle describes, to
be without God; the natural man, without Christ; the Epicure, without any
spark of the blessed Spirit: because the Atheist wants the light of nature,
To. 1.20, 21. the natural man, the light of grace, 1. Cor. 2.14. the Epicure,
the light of the law, Gal. 3. For the Atheist, because his heart is darkened
says the Apost. To. 1.21. When they knew God glorified him not as God. The
natural man, 1. Cor. 2.11. because he wants the spirit of grace, cannot know
the things that are of God: for as no man knows the things of man, but the
spirit of man that is in him; so the things of God, knows no man, but the
spirit of God. And the Epicure, because he regards not to know God, according
to the law of God, God gives him up to a reprobate mind, to do the things that
are not convenient. Whereby it comes to pass, that the Atheist becomes
irreligious without hope; the natural man, erroneous without truth; and the
Epicure, impious without conscience. The Atheist, in midst of light,
remains still in darkness: the natural man, in time of truth, in error; and
the Epicure, in time of grace, lives still in sin. The Atheist, in stead of
God, honoreth his own will; the natural man, the Idols of his own heart; the
Epicure, his paunch, and his own pleasure.

And thus the Atheist, because he is without light, and without hope, is cold
in Religion: the natural man, because he is without Christ, without grace,
without truth: the Epicure, because he is careless without fear, shameless
without honesty, and senceles without conscience: which are men (to use the
words of Peter and Jude) for all inanity of goodness, as wels without water; for
instability and lightness, as winds without rain; for defilings and
filthiness, spots without clensing; for fruitles barrennes, trees without
fruit; Stars without light, for darkness; flesh without spirit, for
sensualnesse; beasts without reason, for brutishnes; and men without God, for
profaneness.

Then woe be to us, if we be without Religion, and live as miscreants in the
midst of Saints, and to the corruption of nature, do add the contempt of
grace.

But now to come to our Neuters (the thing we seek after) we may easily gather
by the negation of these two, that are in such wise hot, and in such wise
cold, as beforespoken, what he is, that in religion is neither hot nor cold,
and partly, how by partaking of both, he is neither of both: for he that
neither has the comfort of the holy Ghost, in such degree as a Saint, nor is
so chill with the coldness of iniquity, as an Infidel, is Neuter, that is,
neither Saint, nor Infidel: but as betwixt a Horse and an Ass, is procreated
a Mule; betwixt a Lion and a Woolfe, an Hyena: so betwixt this heat, and that
coldness, is engendered a Nullifidian of profaneness, which is neither hot nor
cold: not cold, because he does profess to know God: not hot, because he
does in works deny God, Tit. 1.16. not cold, because he does appear
righteous before men: not hot, because he is full of iniquity before God, Mat.
23.13. not cold, because he does worship God with his lips: not hot, because
he is far from him with his heart, Mat. 15.8. not cold, because he loves in
word and in tongue: not hot, because he does not love in deed and in truth,
1. Ioh. 3.18. so that he is holy in profession, but hollow in conversation; of
a good opinion touching truth, but of an ill example touching life: such a one
indeed, as does hold Religion, but yet without zeal; as will say, he is of the
true Religion, but is not truly religious; as has knowledge, but without love;
as professes the faith, but without works, Iam. 2.14. This is the crew of
that surlike company, that pretend conscience, but without feeling, 1. Tim.
4.2. they are come to that point of insensibility of sin, that they shame not
to sin with delight; such as have a desire, but without all performing. And as
by the negation, the lukewarm Christian is a Neuter; so is he by
participation an Ambodexter. These me^ have their coats made of Linsy wolsey:
these are they that plowe with an Ox and an Ass: these do sow their land
with diverse kind of seeds: these are like the Griffin in the war between the
birds, and the beasts: to the birds, he showed his wings; to the beasts, his
feet, professing aid to both, yet showed himself Neuter to both: having, by
reason of this partaking of both natures, a natural facility to play with
both hands, being ready both to worship Baal, with Achab, and the Lord with
Iehu, 1. Kin. 16. and 29. both to build up the Temple with Zerubbabel, and pull
it down with the Aramites, Ezr. 4. to bless for Israel, and curse for Balak,
Number. 24. to cry Hosanna to day, and Crucifige to morrow, Mat. 20. and 27.
Partim seruiunt Deo, partim Diabolo, says Aug. where God being angry the
devil should have any part, does leave his part, and let the devil take all:
for by reason he has his heavenly heat delayed with worldly coldness, he is not
fervent in any religion, a man indifferent for all religions, ready to partake
any religion, but indeed, a lover of no religion: for that he is always for
his twofold mixtures, mungrell-minded; for want of heat, cold affected;
through warmenes, busy-headed; by negation, hollowhearted; with partaking,
double-handed; by delaying, half addicted; in every mutatio^, soonest changed:
so that as lukewarm water will be soonest ice; so lukewarm men will be
soonest wicked: and as ice will rather dissolve, then admit warmnes, so they as
easily dye, as return to goodness. For which cause, Christ avouches in this
place, not only the misbeleeuing Infidel, but the profane Atheist to be
better, or not so bad, as the lukewarm Neuter; because the Atheist professes
to be as he is, openly wicked; the Neuter, by ill dissimulation, to be good,
whereby that ill does more annoy under color of goodness. The Atheist thinks
not there is a God, because he thinks he is not. The Neuter thinks there is
a God, but regards him not (An erring by darkness of nature, oftentimes being
enlightened, does hunger after grace) The Neuter enlightened already with the
good gifts of grace, through satiety, ofttimes returns to the vomit of
nature: so, whereas the one sort is a committer of wickedness, the other is
besides an abuser of godliness; the one offending through boldness of
ignorance, the other through perverseness of will; those, through frailty of
nature; these, through contempt of grace.

Whereby it is evident, that all lukewarm Christians, are for all profane
behavior, most notable hypocrites, most dissembling Ambo-dexters; in dealing
with men, Neuters; in partaking with neither, Nulli-fidians; in relapsing from
both, counterfets of holiness, to profane virtue, Apostataes from God, full of
all wickedness, for all kind of vice, monsters in nature, Atheists in error,
Epicures in pleasure, Saints in honor, and devils in demeanor.

What wonder then, if the Lord will have no coldness in the^ that profess
him, when as in only warmnes there do muster such an army, and lies hid so
dangerous an Ambuscado of wickedness?

The more shameful that any fault is, the more careful should we be to shun
it. And what can be more heinous, then such a crime? and yet what more common,
then such behavior? It is an old saying, Non omnes Sancti, qui calcant limina
Templi. All that gloweth, is not gold, nor all that seem, are not Saints. We
profess the Kingdom of the Gospel: but for the most part, we embrace the
kingdom of the world; we believe like Christians, and live like Pagans; look
like the Lamb, and speak like the Dragon; the Name of God is in our tou^g,
but the fear of God is not in our hearts: we can serve all turns, change our
selves into all forms, and with a trice become openly Protestants, secretly
Papists; inwardly neither, outwardly both; Saints in face, serpents in heart;
Angels in show, Devils in deed; Gods word swimming in our lips, but detestable
Satan digging in our souls.

There was never better teaching, nor worse following; more talking, and less
practizing: not like Pambo, who, when he had heard one lesson, would learn no
more, before he would practice that* for we will hear any thing, but frame our
selves to follow nothing; find great fault with our former sins, and object,
our forefathers lived in ignorance, (and in truth, they knew very little, but
did very much; they were spare in speech, and noble in acts:) but we, as though
degenerate, or none of their children, nay rather, none of Gods children, the
more good we know, the less good we do; we have filed tongues, but defiled
hearts.

Now, if all the world would set to their hands, to defend us from ruin, yet
how can God suffer that Commonwealth to stand, that shrowdeth such a
multitude of wickedness, under the sacred holiness of his most blessed Name?
Wherefore (dear Citizens) let us repent with Niniue, that we be not cast away
with Laodicea. And thus much touching the crime.

NOw to speak of the cause.

The Lord, in this place, assigns two causes, why the love of Religion is
quayled in the Laodiceans; and they may be assigned as causes this day, why it
also quayleth in us.

First, worldly riches. Secondly, spiritual poverty: the one oftentimes
ensuing the other: for men vnmeasureably rich, are commonly immoderately bent
upon the world; so encumbered with the toil of worldly cares, that they can
scarsly respite themselves one breath or gasp of an heavenly thought; or else,
after the manner of these Loadiceans, having their wealth increased, begin to
conceive so well of themselves, that they think all to be well, whatsoever
they do; and because they have goods inow, think themselves to be good
enough, censuring after the judgment of the world, that God does favor, whom
the world does prosper: and therefore, because they are well, touching the
worlds prosperity, they deem themselves well also, touching Gods favor. For
prosperity is often proud, wealth wanton, and many times, not only wilful, but
also witless too. The rich man is wise in his own conceyt (says Solomon.) As
who would say, he were in deed but a fool.

Lo, how riches can inchaunt the mind, to cause a man to think himself wise,
when he is but foolish; strong, when he is but weak; fenced, when he is
naked; godly, when he is wicked; and to leave the Lord, the Tower and strength
of his defense, to trust in the weak and rotten walls of wealth. For the nature
of man being composed of two contraries, of a mortal body, the earth, Genesis 2.
and an eternal soul, which is from heaven, Eccl. 12. and are as contrary, as
heaven and earth: whilst either of these parties are naturally moved to
conserve the good estate of his own nature, it comes to pass, that both
this base and earthly part draws a man vehemently to be attent upon earthly
things; and contrary, that divine and heavenly part does covet to carry men up
into heaven, from whence he is descended: By means of which repugnancy in man's
nature, it is brought to pass, that man is wonderfully drawn into contrary
and repugnant desires, endeavoring to join things together, which of their own
nature are severed most farthest asunder, wearying himself with infinite
toil, how to join God and the world together; to be partaker of corporal
pleasures, and spiritual joys; and possess both all prosperity of the earth,
and all felicity in heaven. And this is the cause of all Neutrality at this
day: for we would all the sort of us feign be Christians and worldlings too;
worship God and Mammon too; taste the sweetness of heaven and of the earth too:
and so would be Neuters, that is, hot and cold too. In which conflict of
contrary and impossible desires, if that gross and carnal part get the upper
hand (as without the assistance of Gods divine power, it must needs do) both
because of the corruptnes of our nature, as also that the Jewel of the soul
lies wrapped up in the body, as a folded vesture, unknown to the outward man,
that draws away the heart from God, as the Adamant iron, to the veneration of
the world, pulling him, as a bird tied by the leg, when he would fly up into
heaven, down again to the earth, and so to fix his affiance in the
confidence of creatures, which is the cause, why covetous men are called
Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5. and Colossians 3.15.

He calls the covetous man an Idolatrous person, because he ascribes to his
treasure the divine power, which appertains to the divine nature, and as a
reverend Father says, colit Idola, quae finxit: For whereas the eternal
Majesty is only most mighty, wise, bountiful, rich, blessed, and full of all
goodness: even so, says the miser, is my money, that can do all things,
therefore the most mighty; provide all things, therefore most wise; give us all
things, therefore most bountiful; purchase all things, therefore most rich,
cause a man to live in all plenty and abundance, therefore most blessed.

Lo, so greatly does his treasure change his heart, as that it makes him to
change his God, drawing him from the God of heaven, down right to the devil
of hell: for he it is (the devil I mean) whom all antiquity has accounted
to be the god of treasure, whom for the same cause the Greeks called Ploutos,
the Latins Dis, our Savior Mammon, which we call riches, whom this rich man
does acknowledge for his god, and all the world besides acknowledge for a
devil; not only because that gold and silver, which is the riches of the
world, is found deep in the earth, as it were, in the pit of hell, but because
money is as mighty unto mischief, as the devil himself. It can make miracles,
and work wonders, condemn Innocents, vanquish armies, overcome kingdoms;
nay, the nature of riches can alter nature, change the heart, pervert the will,
and turn the reasonable mind into brutish affections, as Chrysostom says,
Diuitiarum sequela, est luxuria, ira intemperans, furor iniustus, arogantia
superba, and all brutish affections. No marvel then, if an other reverend
Father says, Nullu^ est pietatis in illo cord vestigium, in quo sibi auaritia
fecit habitaculum. Whereby we may see, that even as the Son of God came into
the world in poverty, as S. John says, to destroy the works of the devil; so
does the devil come into the world, to destroy the works of God by riches,
turning living creatures into Idols, men into beasts, devils into gods, light
into darkness, and heaven into hell. Rightly therefore says Christ, Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon, seeing it is as impossible, as to serve God and the
devil. Well then may that be allowed, that riches is the same as Pluto is, if
those men that say, I am rich, and boast of the rich devil, become to be
neither cold nor hot to poor Christ.

And this comes not to pass through any iniquity that is in treasure, but
only through the prauity of our own nature, which does pervert these
excellent creatures on to that evil, which were created for our good: for
otherwise, riches are the blessings of God, Pro. 10. crown of the wise, Pro.
14. fountaynes of liberality and bounty, Deuteronomy. 15.

What incredible improbity is it then of our nature, which does through his
insection, abuse these great treasures of the world, which God has ordained to
be blessings to the rich, co^forts to the poor, fortifications against
injuries, munition for defense of equity, fountaynes of liberality, Almenors of
charity, Diadems of wisdom, furnishments of bounty, ornaments of virtue, and
adiuments of life, as to make them bayts of perdition, aliments of pleasure,
ensigns of pride, weapons of revenge, armor unto strife, and finally, the
servants unto all servile uses, and sovereigns of all servile minds?

Wherefore (my beloved Brethren) seeing the use of riches is so dangerous, our
nature so pernicious, the abuse so impious, alas, why should we with such
unmeasureable greediness gape after riches, which not only, as Bernard says,
possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant: are burdens to them that
possess them, defilings to them that love them, and torments to them that lose
them: but chiefly, because they inchaunt and bewitch us to the world,
extinguish and quench our zeal in Religion, and mightily hale us and drive us
away from God, to eternal perdition?

NOw, there is an other sort of riches, which our Savior affirms to be in
deed and truth, poverty, a counterfeit kind of wealth, painted fire, and yet is
in show so good, as nothing can be better; but in proof so ill, as nothing can
be worse: it is taken for the inestimable price of heaven, but is not worth a
despicable mite of the earth: that is, Humane merits, and Iusticiaries works,
which seem to be golden virtues, but are in deed shining sins.

These merit-mongers, our Savior elegantly deciphers under the name of riches,
because, even as worldlings boast of their wealth, so hypocrites of works; as
they say, I am rich, so these say, I am righteous; as they put confidence in
money, so these in merits; as they think to make friends of their Mammon of
iniquity, so these to win favor by their holiness and sanctity; the one
thinks to have all, that is to be had in earth; and the other, to want nothing
that may be purchased in heaven. By reason whereof, in these merits, our
Savior describes three properties.

First, that in the world they go for current goods. Secondly, that they are
most pernicious ills. Thirdly, that in seeming good, they are the more evil,
because the seeming deceyueth, while it annoyeth.

Now, that in the world they go for current goods, he proves by the mouth of
the very owner, who knows best to set his own price upon his own wares, and
he himself says, I am rich, and want nothing, that might seem to purchase
heaven it self. I have kept the Law of God: I have not murdered, stolen,
committed adultery, etc. and if I had offended, yet I have works inow to
satisfy for sin: for satisfaction, as Saint Tho. in Quaest. desatisf. possib.
13. est, cum paena culpae aequatur: and justice, says he, or a just mends, is
but contra passum, that is, whereas on the one side, I have taken pleasure in
offending, I should on the other side contra pati, suffer as much grief in
repe^ting. And I say, the Iusticiaries have always done this; for I never took
so much pleasure in sin, but I have taken as great sorrow in penance; I have
fasted twice a week, etc. yea, I fast when others feast; this body of mine
has bin chastised with whips, when others are pampered with cates; I have
given my goods to the poor, and my lands to build Abbeyes: and, if he be rich,
non qui plus habet, sed qui minus cupit, then I, not only, because I have a
great treasure of good works, but also am satisfied in desire, may be justly
counted to be rich indeed. And thus you see how humane merits go for current
goods.

But whilst they advance their merits to so high a rate, they make the price
of heanen indeed to be but little worth: for as Romans 10. they that go about to
establish their own righteousness, do not submit themselves to the
righteousness of God: for while they are pure in their own eyes, they have no
care at all to be washed from their filthiness, Pro. 30.12. so that they are
without the fou^tain of purity, which is opened to the house of David, Zach.
13.1. and without the white robes of righteousness, washed in the blood of the
Lamb, Reu. 8. and without the clear cristall rivers of grace, that flow from
the sanctuary of God, Ezech. 47. so that albeit they be adorned never so
royally with the beauty of good works, yet are they without that wedding
garment of faith, and true holiness, wherewith the new Jerusalem was trimmed,
as a Bride that came down out of heaven from God, Mat. 22. Reu. 21. and
finally, without all the true treasure, which is the inestimable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. and therefore indeed are extremely poor.

Whereby appears, what a pernicious evil merits are, that whereas it is the
natural work of God to justify sinners, and to save the miserable and damned,
and has therefore ordained the Law, as a glass, to show men the corruption of
themselves, by the pureness of the Law, that knowing their own sinful
nature, they may be schooled to seek to Christ for grace, these men will not
suffer God to perform his own natural work, because they will not suffer
themselves to become sinners, nor acknowledge their own miserable estate:
whereby it comes to pass, that by seeking through merits to fulfill the law,
they grievously transgress against the Law, and in stead of obedience, show
rebellion: for the law going about to prove the^ sinners, To. 3.23. they do
thereby contrary to the law, prove themselves to be Saints; it brings them to
the knowledge of sin, Romans 7.7. they gather out the righteousness of works; it
humbles them to Gods mercy, Gal. 3.23. they pranke themselves in their own
justice: by means whereof, in stead of humility, they gather pride; in stead
of grace, merits; in stead of mercy, wrath; and so consequently, for truth,
error; for life, death; for heaven, hell. And thus, according to that notable
prediction of the Prophet, Psalm. 69. Their own table is made their own snare,
that is, the law, which is the table of al their wisdom and understanding,
Deuteronomy. 4.6. whilst they look to that they falsely have, rather then to that
they truly want, it is made a snare to entangle them in all ignorance and
error.

Can there be a more greater ill devised, then merits are, which do not only
that which is exceeding evil, that is, draw men into perdition, but also do it
by that that is most exceeding good, namely, under endeavoring to serve the law
and will of God? So that it can hardly be defined, whether it be more
egregious for the ill it commits, or for the good it peruerteth. Wherein it
abuses both the good and the ill, with such exquisite skill, as that it
performs notably the duty of both, that is, it does grieve, hurt and
destroy, which is proper unto evil, and yet wins it self nevertheless to
be beloved, desired, and embraced, which is proper unto goodness.

Lo, this is a strange kind of ill indeed, that can both grieve a man, and
make him love his grief; hurt a man, and cause him desire his hurt, and bring
him to embrace all kind of misery, and even then to think himself in the
midst of all kind of felicity; to make him blind in truth, and yet believe
that he does see; poor in works, and yet believe that he is rich; naked of
grace, and yet conceive that he is clothed; wretched in state, and yet be
persuaded that he is blessed: finally, damned, and yet believe that he is saved.

Wherein is declared the fearful judgment of God, as our Savior witnesses,
John 6. That he is come unto judgment, that these that do see the truth, and
will not, shall be made blind, that they cannot: and those that cannot see the
truth, and yet would, might be made able, that they should: For it is a just
punishment of sin, that every one should lose that gift, that he would not use
well when he had it, as Aug. says, lib. 3. de libero arbitrio, Vt cum rectum
facere, cum possit, non vult, amittat posse cum velit. And even this judgment
of God is the reason, that the recusant Iusticiaries of our time, do so stiffly
persist in the obstinacy of their own wills, as they both refuse to hear the
word preached, lest it should instruct them, as also all indifferent writers,
lest they should convince them. What way may a man devise then to persuade
them, seeing they will hear no message out of heaven, but even rake up their
great grand father Pelagius, to tell them this tale out of hell? Ye mad men,
what? do you mean to make your selves mates with Christ? to match man's merits,
with Gods mercy? to couple humane works, with divine grace? and your deserving,
with Christ's redeeming? In thus dealing with your selves, you do but damn
your selves, as ye may behold by me, what desert is due to you; most extreme
wrath, for contemning of grace. Ye may not patch an old garment with new
cloth, nor power new wine into old bottles, but must be either al new, or all
old; all hot, or all cold; all Moses, or all Christ; all works, or all grace:
for in the act of salvation, there can by no means be any botching of new and
old; merits and grace; works and faith; heaven and earth; God and man both
together. Alas, says Gregory, Humana iusticia, diuinae iusticiae comparata,
iniusticia est: quia vt lucerna in tenebris lucere cernitur, etc. For even as a
candle in the dark night does shine with brightness, but in the bright sun, is
shadowed in darkness: so humane righteousness may shine before men, in darkness,
but cannot but be darkened by the shining righteousness of God.

Let us therefore take heed, lest by erroneous opinions, we prefer the
perverseness of our own wills, before the Law of God, which is the pleasure of
his will, lest he make the law (I say, his revealed will) to be a train to
the frowardnes of our own will, to bring us by the consent of our froward
will, unto destruction, according to the just purpose of his will.

And thus have ye heard both the foulness of the cause, and of the crime.

NOw follows to be expressed, The greatness of the pain, which is no
less, then to be vomited out of the Lords mouth.

Whereby if this were only meant, that all Neuters, for their hypocrisy and
dissimulation, should be cast out of favor with the Son of God, it were a
most woeful and importable chastisement, if we consider of his divine nature
rightly, what the Son of God is, that is the same God, that is unto us the
cause of all our being, the fountain of all life, the founder of all joy, and
the mirror of all goodness: for he is the Word eternal, that is, God almighty;
by whom all things are made, in who^ is life, and of whose fullness we receive
whatsoever good we have.

Whereby it must of necessity follovv, that without the favor of this
universal cause, which is all in all, we must needs be annihilated to
nothing; and being nothing, yet remain such a thing notvvithsta^ding, as is
without him; in death, without life; subsisting, without being; desisting,
without dying; in life, never ioying; in death, ever dying.

But now, by this vomiting, is meant more then a bare eiecting out of favor:
for herein is expressed a fearful and violent casting out in anger: For in
this Simile, the Church is compared to the stomach; the lukewarm Neuter, to
the lukewarm water; and their grievous disturbance, to noisome vomitings.

The Church is compared to the stomach, because, as the stomach by altering
and concocting the nourishment received, feeds and preserves the parts of
the body: so the Church, by concocting and disgesting the food of life, does
nourish and preserve the body of Christ, even in such sort, as from out of food
in the stomach, the liver draws blood; the heart, spirit; the brayn, sense;
the sinews, strength; the veins, nourishment; the body, life: so out of the
food of immortality, which is the word of God, that is in the Church, to every
member of Christ, does the heart draw faith; the will, obedience; the
understanding, knowledge; the conscience, comfort; the body, immortality; and
the soul, all felicity: and that also, after so rare and stupendous an order,
that even as the stomach, so does it quicken, by killing; revive, by
destroying; grow wise, by foolishnes; obey, by rebelling against its own
flesh; obtain life, through death; felicity, through misery; and eternity out
of mortality.

The Neuters are compared unto lukewarm water, which to a tasting stomach,
being received, is hurtful; whiles it remains, is grief-ful; and being
eiected, is shameful: because all Neuters are even such in the Church of God,
not only by hindering the work of Gods Spirit in the Church, but also by the
vnquieting and disturbing of the same.

Their great and grievous disturbings are compared to noisome vomitings;
because as that which breeds vomiting, is cast out with hatred, for that it
is enemy to nature; with violence, because it oppresses the stomach; with
shamefulnesse, because the defilings thereof are laid open to the eye; and
finally, so eiected, as never again to be received. So all incorrigible
Neuters, shall by the LORD himself be thrown out of the Church, as filthy
vomitings out of the stomach, and that, with hatred, because they are enemies
unto Christ; and with violence, because they hurt and oppress the Church; and
with shame, because their hypocrisy shall be made known; and finally, cast out
of the Church, never again to be received; because that while they were in the
Church, they could never be amended: where the hatred of eiection does show
the detestation of the crime; the violence, the mightiness of the pain; the
shame, the horror of confusion; and the never receiving, the eternity of
destruction.

Then, if it be such a woeful thing, as it has been declared, for Neuters to
be cast out of favor with the Son of God, what is it (I pray you) thus to
endure the fierceness of his anger? If it be so miserable, to be deprived of
the comfort of his goodness, how importable, to bear the heavy wrath of his
greatness? who is to the wicked, in terror, the God of vengeance; in nature,
consuming fire; in wrath, burning jealousy; his face, lightning; his voice,
thunder; his displeasure, death; his breath, a river of brimstone; his lips,
a flood of indignation; his tongue, a devouring flame; as the Lord does
witness of himself, Deuteronomy. 4. and 32. Es. 30. where the mighty terror of Gods
eternal Majesty is described, to make it known, that as the perverseness of
sinners is incorrigible, so his wrath toward them is implacable; and as
Neuters faults are intolerable, so their punishments are unmeasureable, that so
there may be a proportion of justice between their crime, and his doom; that
even as in this world they would never want sin, so in the world to come, they
should never want pain.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing that the wrath of God, is in this fearful
manner reueyled from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
how carefully are we here to consider of our selves, how near this
reprehe^sion may touch us.

All men, by the censure of Christ, are either hot in Religion, or of
necessity cold, or else only lukewarm; and so, either Saints in piety,
miscreants in iniquity, or Neuters for hypocrisy. What may herein justly be
deemed of us? are we Saints? (I would to God we all were, as no doubt, but the
Lord has his.) Let every man judge himself: if we be Saints, where is then
our works? if miscreants, where is then our comfort? if Neuters, where is then
our conscience, when the Son of God shall come in flaming fire, rendering
recompense unto them that do not know God, and which obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ? Are we baptized with the spirit and with fire? are we
fervent in spirit? lucent in life? ardent in zeal? shining in works? burning
in love? or in the midst of light, remaining in darkness? in the time of
truth, abiding in error? in these days of grace, live still in sin? nay,
are we not cold rather, which every where prefer pleasure before piety, that
we will take no pain, no, not to purchase joy? which esteem of gain so much
above godliness, that we will take no loss, no, not to win heaven, in who^ all
affections grow so cold, in respect of Lady Money, that for her love, men are
brought even universally to be unjust to their own neighbors; unfaithful to
their own friends; unkind to their own kin; unnatural to their own
parents; untrusty to their own Country; untrue to their own Prince; impious
to their own God; merciless to all others; and most miserable to their own
selves. And yet, we are not only thus too cold; but contrariwise, as much too
hot: too cold, because we want zeal; too hot, because we want patience;
too cold, because we want charity; too hot, because we want modesty; too
cold, because we want fidelity; too hot, because we want our wills.

If this be true (beloved) whereof should I first complain? Of our
ungratefulness? or our ungodliness? Our ungratefulness, that whereas God
has made our Country, especially this City, a City of visions, a Sanctuary of
Nations, a Crown and Joy of all Lands, that after so many graces and
kindnesses toward us, we should be toward him, neither new nor old in
profession, hot nor cold in affection, fish nor flesh in Religion, light nor
darkness in conversation: Our ungodliness, to make the Church of God, and house
of Saints, by our defilings, an habitation for Dragons, Reu. 19.

If this be not true, then what argue these daily contentions amongst us; this
manifold cunning and couzenage in all sorts; this general deceyt in all
trades; this common lying in all contracts; this privy receiving of all hands;
this shouldering and countenancing against all right; this extorting and
oppressing on all parts; this immoderate licenciousnes to all lust; and this
defiling of our selves with all vice? Has the Lord therefore given us the
divineness of his truth, goodness of peace, greatness of plenty, sweetness of
health, brightness of honor, that we living in tranquillity, in safety, in
security, should misspend our lives in all licenciousnes and voluptuousnes of
pleasure; after so long preaching of the Gospel, to be a great part counterfets
of holiness, serpents of wiliness, Satan's of wickedness, monsters of
ugliness, and dung-hils of filthiness?

Oh, how often has the Lord admonished us of these monstrous and prodigious
behauiours, by monsters and prodigies of the land? How often has he threatened
by Commets and signs from heaven? And yet we still remain more dead and
senseless then the earth: nay the dead and senseless earth has generally
quaked, yet we have never been abashed; the great and mighty waters have
started back, and changed the course of the streams, yet have not we changed
the course of our lives. The enemies sword has been ready to cut our throats,
yet are not we ready to cut off our sins. The meat has bin plucked, for our
unworthiness, from out of our jaws, yet have not we repented our
disobedience. The Plague of Pestilence has gone over our land; and now the
poison rages in this the head City of the same; yet are not we cured of the
botches, wounds and sores of our impoysoned corruptions.

How has the Land been shaken by deep and secret Treasons, whilst we have
remained less moveable then the rocks!

Why? if the Lord can neither win us by his bounty, nor allure us by his
mercies, nor persuade us by his truth, nor make us heedfull by his warning,
nor fearful by threatening, what shall become of us? Are we better then the
Laodiceans? or will God spare us, that has so grievously punished them? Nay
rather, as God has for their Neutrality cast out them, so will he likewise,
for our hypocrisy, vomit out us.

All these Churches of Asia there mentioned, the many and mighty kingdoms of
Greece, with the late noble Realms of Hungary and Liuonia, may at this day be
spectacles of calamity, to forewarne us, if we be wise; who, because they
trod under foot the eternal verity of the Saints of God, by their filthy
life, are now trodden themselves under foot, by the filthy Turk, and every man
of them by so much the more abused, as he is the more enriched with the
ornaments of grace.

In like manner assure your selves, if we live profanely under the protection of
Gods holy Name, he will take away the Gospel of the Kingdom from us, and give
it to a Nation, that shall bring forth the fruits of it. And the more that his
love has been toward us, the more will his wrath be, to recompense the
greatness of benefits, with the greatness of punishments, if by our coldness we
provoke him thereunto.

Which plagues, that GOD may turn away from us, let us humbly pray him, to
turn our hearts toward him, that we may withal our hearts serve him, and he
with all his goodness bless us; that we passing the time of this our
pilgrimage in his fear, may pass the rest of the time in his joy, to the
praise of the glory and rich grace, which he has toward us in JESUS CHRIST.
To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three Persons and one God, be
ascribed all honor and glory, praise and thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

