The Book of Knowledge: whether a sick person being in peril shall live, or
dye. etc.

depiction of man with stars in the background

VPocras most conning of all Physycions, commanded that the Analogy of all
his works of phesycke, should be laid in his Sepulture under his heed, which
was so done. And where as the Emperor of rome coming by his Tomb saw it
rychely wrought, supposed that great treasour was hid in it. For the people
in those days used much to hyde their money in tombs. And when it was opened
he found the said Analogy, there under his heed, in which all his works
were, he took it away and showed it to no man, but to Anadestus a Physycion.
And in it they found medycynes most wholesome for disseases of man's body, And
first of al was specyfied ye tokens, which follows, that does Pronostyke
whether a sick person being in peril, shall dye or live. etc.

The first token of death.
If a man have swellyng in his face, or pain in his heed without cowghe and
puts his left hand often upon his breast, and is besye in clawynge of his
nosetrylles, betoken death.

Also an experyment to prove life or death.
Put his spettyll upon burning colys, and if it styncke he shall dye, and if
not he shall live.

Another experyment of the same.
Cause the sick person to spytte in a vessel of water, and if it go to the
bottom, he shall live, and if it swymme above he shall dye.

Also the fourth token.
If a man sweet much in any manner dissease, it is good, if he despair not.

Another and the fyfte.
If the sick turn him often to the wall, it is an evil sign.

Another and the syxte.
If the pacient have thyn nosetrylles or the tippe of his nose sharp, or a
sharp look, and holowe temples, hangyng lyppes, and cold ears, and tourneth
his heed where his fete were, it sygnyfieth soon death.*

Another and the seventh.
If the pacyent put his hands often to his heed, and draw his fete up to him
betoken that he shall escape.

Also other tokens of death, which the connyng physycion Galyen set forth as
follows.
He says yt these are tokens of death when the forehed is red, the brows
ha^geth down. The left iye is less and wateryth. The ye typpe of the nose
white, the chyne falls, the fete coleth and the belly decays, is signs of
death.

Also the nynth experyment to know life or death.
Take the pacyentes vryne and a woman milk, that noryssheth a man child, and
meddle them together, and if they go into one, he shall live, and if they
depart he shall dye.

For to know whether ye shall dye within.xij. months or not.
Let a drop of your blood fall in to a dysshe of water. And if it descend
hole into ye bottombe, he shall live that year, and if not, but go abroad not.

Also another manner.
If ye rub also well the forhed of the sick with a tablet, or other such of
copper fro the one ear to the other, and if he sleep after, he shall live, or
else not.

Also of the sharp ague an experyment often prouyd.
Take a curtesy of the pacyentes blood and vryne and meddle it with the milk of
a woman that noryssheth a man child, and if they myx together, he shall live
or else he shall not.

Also another and the leuynth.
If a frantyke man have hard swellynge without disgestion, he shall dye
the.ix. day.

Also anoher and the twelfe.
He that vometeth blood, and have swellynge in any lymme, as toghte as a
trumpet like a egypcian bean, shall dye the.xl. day after.

Also another and the.xiij.
If the iyes be holowe, and ye mouth open when he slepeth, and if he be not
accustomed so, and if his left iye water he shall dye the third day.

Another and the.xiiij.
If the pacyent bydde the Physycion farewell, or stretche forth his fete, and
cast his hands upon his belly, he shall dye the third day.

Another and the.xv.
If the pacyent bydde the physycion farewell and put his hands to his head and
draw up his fere, he shall escape.

Also the proof of a sick man that can not sleep.
Stamp hen bane and mynte and lay it on his forehede playsterwyse, and if he
stepe not soon after he shall dye.

Also another Treatise of Ypocras begins.
WHo that falls sick the first day of the Month, it is to be feryd of him
the second day, the which if he escape, he shall escape till the.xxx. day
And if he fall sick the second day, it is to fear of him the.x. day, and
if he escape that he shall belong sick, notwithstanding he shall escape.

And if he fall sick the third day, he shall be delyueryd without doubt.

And if he fall sick the fourth day, he shall be sore in pain till the.viij.
day and then shall very well escape.

And if he fall sick fyfth day, he shall be sore sick, yet he shall escape.

And if he fall sick the syxte day, he shall seem to be hole, yet he shall
dye some day of the next month.

And if he fall sick the seventh day, he shall be delyueryd without grefe.

And if he fall sick the eight day, he shall be in merely health till the
leuenth day, and then after soon shall dye.

And if he fall sick the nynthe day, he shall escape with meruaylous great
pain And he that falls sick the tenth day, he shall dye without doubt.

And he that falls sick the leuenth day, he shall be delyueryd the next day
And if he fall sick the twelfe day, he shall dye the.xv. day.

And if he fall sick the.xiij. day, he shall be sore vexed till the.xviij.
day, and if he escape, then he shall be delyueryd.

And if he fall sick the.xiiij. day he may escape, if he live till the.xv. day.

And he that takes syckenes ye.xv. day except he recover within.xviij.
days, he shall dye, shortly after.

And if a man fall sick the.xvi. day, he shall be sick till ye.xxviij. day
and escape. And if a man take syckenes the.xvij. day, he shall dye the.x. day.

And if a man take syckenes the.xviij. he shall be delyueryd at length.

And if a man take syckenes ye.xix. day he shall be delivered at length.

And if a person fall sick the.xx. day the pacyent shall dye the next monthe.

And he that fall sick the.xxi. day, and he dye not the.x. after he shall be in
great peril, yet he shall be delivered the next month after. *

If a body fall sick the.xxij. day although he be ingreuous pain till the.x.
day he shall not dye till ye next mo^the. If a person take syckenes.xxiij. day
he shall be delivered though it be with grievous pain the other monthe.

If a person fall sick the.xxiiij. day, he shall dye the next monthe.

If a body fall sick the.xxv. day albeit he shall have some pain, yet he
shall well escape that danger.

If a body fall sick the.xxvi. day, yet he shall well escape.

If a person fall sick the.xxvij. though he be at point of death, he shall be
delivered the next monthe.

If a person fall sick the.xxviij. day, he is threttyn to dye, yet he may
escape.

If a body fall sick the.xxix. day, yet he may be delivered the next monthe
by little and little.

If a person fall sick the.xxx. day it is in doubt if ye pacyent shall dye
or live. And also the.xxxi. day likewise.

Explicit.
Now to know whether a woundyd man shall dye or live.
Stamp pympernell and distempre it with water, and give it him to drink, and
if it go out at the wound, then he shall dye or else not.

Another for the same.
Give him whyce Lettuse to drink with water, and if he perbrake it, he shall
dye, if not he shall live.

*A Pronosticacion set forth, by the said Galien of the danger of
Pestylenciall Impostume, after the party of the body yt it is in, howbeit in
god is al.

Another begins of the spots; called gods marks.
When the Impostome is in the pacientes face so paynfull, that it may not
betwoched, and he leyth his left hand often upon his breast, know that he
shall dye the.xx. day, and specially when he handles his nosetrylles in
beginning of his syckenes, when great Impostumes are in any of both knees, it
is to know he shall not dye till after the viij. day, and then he may
escape, and esspecially if he sweet much at the beginnynge of his knees. when
it chaunseth that little whelkes comes upon ye vain, which is on the nape
of the neck, and upon as it were a manner of powder, know that he shall dye
the.ij. day of his syckenes, and esspeciall token is if he have great thirst
at the beginning of his syckenes, when whelkes are upon his tongue like dogs
fleys, know that he shall dye the same day, and the tokens is ye beginning
of his syckenes, he desires things which are naturallye hot, When little
black whelkes are upon any of his fyngers, that are sore, know that he shall
the next day after dye of that syckenes, and an esspeciall token is if he be
paynfull and heavy in his body. When little white whelkes are in the thombe of
the paryentes left hand like brown beans of color or pale, which are not
sore. Then know that the pacient shall dye the.iiij. day of his syckenes.
Another token is that at on the myddell too of the left feote.

Finis.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer, dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe at charynge
Cross.


