A Brief sum of the whole Bible.

a Chrystian Instruction for all Parsons young and old, to the which is
annexed the ordenarye for all degrees.

Translated out of Doutche into Inglysh by Antony Scoloker.

Romano. xv. What things soever are written, are written for our learning.

The contents of this book.
First.
THe prologue to the reader. A brief sum of the bible. Three things
necessary for a man to know. The.x. commandments of GOD goodly expounded.
The prayer of the Lord, or the pater noster expounded. Instruction of
baptism. Instruction of Christ's supper. Instruction for all estates or
degrees, and first how the spiritual Prelates ought to use them selves
amongst the commen people. How the commen people ought too behave them selves
toward the prelates. How the wordely prelates as Emperor, kings, princes,
lords Iusticers and officers ought too behave them selves in rulynge or
gouernynge of their subjects. How subjects ought to behave them selves
toward the superior powers. How parents, as father and mother ought to
behave them selves in r^linge and bringing up of their children. How children
ought to obey their parents or elders. How the Lord and lady, master and
mastres ought to behave them selves toward their servants. How servants
shall behave them selves toward their lords or ladies, masters or
mastresses. How married men ought to behave them selves toward their wives.
How women ought to live with their husbondes. Of the state of matrimony in
general Of the state of virginity. Of the state of widows. Exhortacion to
the rich of this world. Exhortacion to the poor. Exhortacion to the
hanoycraftes man. Exhortacion to relygious or devout parsones. Exhortacion to
the merchant. Exhortacion to the husbandman. Exhortacion to soldiers or men
of war. Exhortacion to tolners or custumers. Exhortacion to vzurers.
Exhortacion to whoremongers and fornicatours. Exhortacion to dronkardes.
Exhortacion to all sinners generally. Exhortacion to all men in general.
Instruction how men ought to occupy and exercise them selves in their daily
prayers: first, in the morninge when they rise. At night when they go to bed.
When men go to their work. When men are bound toward any. Journey. When
me^ne come home again or at their iourneys end. A prayer for Emperor or
Kings. For all teachers of Gods word. For them that ligh sick. For all women
bound with the lords hands. For all men in general. For the City or town
wherein a man dwells. For all fruits of the earth. Grace before meat. Grace
after meat. Conclusion.
The prologue to the reade^.
FOr as much as all he althe welfare and prosperity of man consists in the
perfect knowledge of god and of him self, Hieronymus.
which knowledge every man may haboundauntly find in the most holy and
sacred scriptures, as in a right clear mirror, and most parfecte glass / in
the which all men ought to delight and exercise the^felues both day and night,
to the amendment of their lives, Psalm. i.
and to the edifiyng of their neighbors, children, household or famylie.

And considering also yt there are many in these latter days (god amend it)
which say that they are good Chrystia^s / and in deed are nothing less.
Apocal. ii
I have the^fore taken upon me after my simple understanding and learning /
with the living God through his most holy spirit might vouchesafe to augme^t
stre^gthen and increase in meat all times) to set fourth and bring to light a
very compendious instruction, to the preferme^te augme^tyng and settinge fourth
of the laud, praise, glory and knowledge of God, and also to the edificacion,
profyt, utility and amendment of all men: and especially to the youth,
which are of a reasonable age and discrecion. Which (as by daily experience
may be seen, through the negligence of their wicked and ungodly parents) do
so miserably and pituously ro^ne astraye, in all manner of disorder, wantonness,
disobedience, asciuiousnes, and in all kind of ungodly living. I say
ungodly parents: Chrysostom* super ^a theum homeli. 49.
For if they feared God in very deed, as faithful Christians ought to do, they
would undoubtedly g^ue their underlings children, Aug. ad patres. Pro. xxii
subjects, household, or family, an other example, instruction and
chastysement (every one in his degree) for to lead a Godly and christian life:
walking in the love and fear of God. But alas, many parents (which is greatly
to be lamented) know not the^ selves (so far is this miserable and wretched
world ro^ne astray, and clean out of course) wherein their true christianity
consists, or wheruppon it is grounded Neither know they any thing at all
what it is to be a Christian. How is it the^ possible that they should
instructet, each, and give good example unto other, when they the^ selves do
not know the most wholesome doctrine, Mat. xii.
works and will of their master and true guide Jesus Christ? John. i.
Thinkinge them selves to be very perfect Christians, when they ones have
received baptism, and do not consider nor know what Jesus said unto
Nicodemus. John. 4^ and.vii.
Except (says he) a man be borne of water and of the spirit he can not come
into the kingdom of God by these words might such Parsons learn to
understand yt we may not oneli put or seek our trust in this that we be only
baptized in water, Tit. ii.
as though we should thereby become very Christians, without having any respect
unto any other thing beside. Roma. vi Col. ii. iii
But we must alter and change our own wicked and sinful conversation with a
penytent and sorrowful heart for our offenses, amending our life and walking in
the fear and love of God, according to the spirit of astedfast fayht,
bringing fourth the fruytes of charity, Ephe. iiii
toward our neighbors with all lowlynes and mekenes according to the voice
of our good and true shephard Jesus Christ, in all long sufferaunce breaking
our fleshly Iustes and desires. Oh but how far are the most part of us,
from this fruitful virtuous and most holy christianity? Mat. xiii
yea I dare well say, if me^ may judge, the tree by the fruits (as christ says
men may) that there is a great multitude which beer the name after christ,
christians, which notwithstanding, do far excede the Jews, Turks, Sarazens
Heathen and Paynims in all kind of abominable wickedness and ungodly living.

For the Sarazens, Turks and Jews, are a great deal more careful and use
much more diligence in obseruinge of the Law of their ydoll and seducer
Mahumeth then we are in the observing of our christen law. The Jews do teach
their Children, as soon as they can speak, to rehearse and declare the law
of Moses even by root or without the book. But we wretched catiues are (truly
to our great rebuke and shame) such neglygente slothful and most wretched
people, that we have our christen relygion in no reputacion or estymacion, yea,
we set in a manner nothing at all by it. Which holy and most christen
religion, nevertheless God the heavenly father through his only beloved son
Jesus christ full of grace and verity has declared publyshed and commanded
unto al men, none excepted, which thing also we christians do promys swear
and advow in our baptism to observe and keep all the days of our life. Now
might men ask what have we sworn? and whereunto have we made our vow and
promis in baptime to the inte^te wemight keep the same, and live as christians
ought to live? I answer, read, search, and reuise this little book,
diligently praying to God for his grace to illuminate thine understanding, and
I hope thou shall be the better all the days of thy life.

a brief sum of the whole Bible.
Of God.
First the holy Wrytinges of the bible teach us yt there is one God almightye,
Deuteronomy. vi. i. Tim. ii. Genesis xvii Exodus xv. Gene. i. Psalm. c. iii and.x. Exodus
iii. Iere. ix. Roma. ix. i. Lozin. xii.
that has neither beginning nor e^ding which of his own goodness did create
al things, of who^ all things proceed, and without whom there is nothing,
which is rightuous and merciful, and which works al things in all after his
will, of whom it may not be demanded wherefore he does this or that.

The creacion of man.
Then that this very God did create Adam the first man after his own Image and
similytude, Esaias. xiv and. liiii. Iere. x. and xviii.
and did ordeyne and appoynte him lord of all the creatures in the earth.

Sin.
Which Adam by the envy of the deuell, Sapi. ii. Roma. v.
disobeying the commandment of his maker, did first sin and brought sin
into this world, such and so great that we which be sprung of him after the
flesh, are subdued unto sin, death, and dampnacio^, brought under the yoke
and tyranny of the deuell. Ephe. ii.


Christ was promised.
And further that Christ Jesus was promised of God the father, Genes. iii xii.
xvii. and xxviii.
to be a savior to this Ada^ Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and the other
fathers, which should deliver them from their sins and tirannye of the
deuell, that with a quycke and living faythwolde believe this promis and trust
of this Jesus Christ, hoping too have this delyueraunce of and by him. And
truly this promise is very often rehearsed in the books of the old testament,
yea, and the old Testament is this promys, as it is called the new, which
teaches that this promys is fulfilled.

The law.
And that in the mean ceason while the fathers looked for salvation and
delyueraunce promised, because ma^s nature is such that he not only can not,
Exodus xx. and. xix.
but also will not confess himself to be a sinner, and specially such a
Sinner that has neade of the sauinge health promised, Romans v.
the Law was given wherthrough men might know sin and that they are
sinners, when they se that they do none of the things that the law bids or
commands them, with so glad and willing a mind as God requires but rather
against their wylles, without affection, and as though they were constrained
with the fear of that hell which the law threateneth saying, cursed be he
that mainteineth not all the words of this law to keep the^. And that this
law was given to the intent that sin and the malice of men's hearts being
thereby the better known, men should the more fervently thryst after the
coming of Christ, Deuteronomy. 27 Gal. iii. i. corin. i.
which should redeame the^ from their sins. As it was figured unto the
Jews, by many ceremonies, hosts and sacrifices, which were ordained of GOD
not to the intent to take away sins, Heb. xii.
but to show and declare that he should be put away by faith in Joan. i.
the salvation promised through Christ, and which now be put away by the
coming of that Christ, which is the very host of the father, that takes
away all sin.

The coming of Christ. Luke. ii.

Last of all by the books of ye new testament, Gal. iiii. Ephe. i. Roma. v.
T^um. ^. Ephe. ii. Roma. v. Joan. i.
we are taught that Christ which was promised and shadowed in the old
Testament, is sent of the father, at such time as he had determined with him
self, at such time (I say) as all wickedness flourished. And that he was sent
not for any man's good works (for they all were sinners) but to the intent that
he would truly show the haboundaunt riches of his grace, Esaias. iiii i. John.
ii ii. peter. i. Hebr. ii.
which he had promised.

The lamb of God.
In the new testament therefore it is most euid entlye declared, that Jesus
Christ the true Lamb and host, is come to the ^arent to reconcile us to the
father, paying on the cross the punishment due unto our sins, and to
deliver us from the bondage of the deliell (unto whom we served through sin)
and to make us the sons of God, sith he has given us the true peace and
tranquillity of conscience, Romans v. John. iii. and. vi.
that we no longer do fear the pains of hell, which fear is put away by
the faith, confidence and assurance, that the father gives us drawing us
unto his son. For that faith is the gift of God, whereby we believe that
Christ is come into this world to save sinners, which is of so great pyth,
that they which have it, desire to perform all the duties of love to all
men, after the example of christ.

The holyghoost.
For faith ones received, i. corin. i. and. v.
God gives his holyghost, wherewith he tokeneth and marketh all that believe,
Ephesi. i.
which is the pledge and erneste, that we shall surely possess everlasting life,
and that gives witness unto our spirit, Romans viii and. v.
and grafteth this faith in us, that we be the sons of God, pouring therewith
yt love in our hearts which Paul describes and sets out to the
corinthians. i, cor. xiii.
By yt faith and confidence in Christ, Galo. v.
wiche by love is mighty in operacion, and that showed it self through the
works of love, stering men thereto, but that Isay we are Justified, yt is, by
yt faith, Christ's father (which is become ours also through that Christ our
brother) H^br. ^^
counts us for rightuous and for his sons, Citn. ii.
imputing not our sins unto us through his grace.

Good works.
To conclude, he came to the intent ye we being cleansed from our wicked and
abominable sin and sanctified unto God the father yt is hallowed unto the use
of ye father to exercise good works, and forsaking ye works of ye fleashe,
should feelye serve in righteousness and holiness al our life long, Luke. i.
Ephe. ii.
through good works which God has ordained to the intent yt we should walk
in them, declaring our selves thereby to be surely casted unto this grace, wyche
works who so ever has not, declares that he has not faith in Christ.

Christ our master:
Unto whom we must come, Mat. xxi. and.xxiii. John. 18. Ephe.v. i. Pet. ii.
Hebr. iiii. i. Tim. ii. Hebr. xii. i. John. ii Roma. vi Ion. xiiii Heb. iiii.
and follow him with a cherefull heart, that he may instruct and teach us, for
he is our master meke and humble of heart he is our example of whom we must
learn ye rule of good living, further he is our priest, hye bishop and only
mediator which now sits on the right hand of GOD ye father, he is our
advocate, and prays eue^ for us, which will undoubtedly obtain what soever
we desire enther of him or of his father in his name, i. Tim. i. Mat. xi.
If we believe that he will do it, for so has he promised. Let us therefore not
doubt although we sometime sin, with a confidence to comme unto him, and with
a lyuinge and vndoubting faith that we shall obtain mercy. For therefore came he
to thyntent to save sinners, neither requires he any thing more of us, i.
Tess. ii.
then to come unto him without fear.

This is yt Christ Jesus, which after he has killed the name of sin with the
breath of his mouth, shall sit in his Majesty and Judge all men geuynge unto
every one ye works of his bodi according to yt he has done, ii. Cor. v. i.
cor. v. Mat. xxv
whether it be good or bad, and yt shall say unto the^ yt shall be on his
rigthand. Come ye blessed children of my father inheret ye the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, i. cor. v.
And unto the^ that shall be on his lift hand, depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the deuell and his angels. ii. Pet. i.
Then shall the end come, and he shall deliver up the kingdom to God the
father.

To the intent that we should know this, by the goodness of God, working by his
holy spirit: are the holy wrytings of the bible given us, Ion. xvii and xx.
Tha^ we should know (I say) and believe yt there is ou^ God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent and yt in beleuyng we should have everlasting life through
his name. i. cor. iii.
An other foundation then this can no man have, and saint Paul desires that
he beholden a cursed that preaches any other faith and salvation the^ only by
Jesus christ, Gal. iii.
yea although it were an angel of heaven. For of him, and through him, Roma. ^^
and for him are all things to whom, with the father and the holyghost, be
honor and glory foreuermore. Amen.

Three things are nedeful and expedient for a man to know to his salvation,
after that he is ones come to lawful or reasonable age and understanding.

First.
A Man must know what he ought to do, and what he ought to leave, to the
intent that he may know which is good and do the same, and that he also may
know which is evil, and leave the same. And this do the.x. commandments of
God teach him, called the law given by Moses.

Secondly.
When a man does ones feel that he of his own strength, and power, is not able
to do or to leave these things without the help of God (for the flesh as it
is written to the Romans, can not fulfill the Law) that he may know where
and by whom he may obtain help, comfort, remedy and grace, for too fulfill
the law. For she must be all fulfilled so that there may not be one Jot or
title unfulfilled. And this theacheth him the holy christen belefe or Creed.
And fynallye, when a man perceyueth his belefe or faith (in which all
depends and consysteth, to be feable and weak, that then he may know where
and by whom he may take his refuge to be helped and strenghtened therein.

And this teaches him the prayer of our lord Jesus Christ.

Concerning the before named first article, Exodus xix
sayncte

Paul to the Romans in the.iii. chap. says on this wise, Roma. iii
By the law (says he) comes but the knowledge of sin. Therefore because
that no man should boaste and baunte him self of his virtue and holiness, but
rather with all humility low lines and mekenes, knowledge and confess with the
publicane, how wretched sinful and myserably he is. I do therefore
particularly declare and set before al me^seyes, the.x. commandments of our
Lord God almighty given unto Moses in two Tables made of stone, Antiqui.
liori. r. ^ha. 6.
whereof ye every table (as Josephus describes) particularly co^teyneth five
commandments, In or by the which two tables (as it were in a clear mirror
or glass) every man may most easily see, feel and perceive the whole estate of
his heart.

THe first commandment of the first table, Iere. v.
teaches fear, love, faith, hope, and sure confidence and trust in God above
all things, and foundeth thus.

I am the Lord thy God which have brought the out of the land of Egypt from
the house of bondage, Exo. xx. a and.liii. e
thou shall have none other Gods in my sight.

That is.

Thou shall ouely pray in spirit, and verity unto god ye creator ruler, and
preserver of all things. Thou shalt love the same Lord God with al thy
heart, Mark. xii Deuteronomy. vi. and xxx.v
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength. Thou shall put
thy trust, faith, hope and confidence in him only. Thou shalt love him above
althinges, Thou shall fear him and serve him only with al thy heart, with al thy
mind etc. Now where as I do hear say, serve him only, ye may not
understand but ye servants are bound to serve their masters, and subjects
heir superior powers and such like, with al due reverence

Against this commandment do.
Al they which put their trust conforte refuge, confidence and most special
succor and hope more in any creatures (how holy soever they be) the^ in God
the father almighty, through his only and derely beloved son Jesus Christ
our lord.

The second commandment teaches an in ward beholding of the invisible
things of God (yt is his everlasting power and God head) by the meditacion,
beholding and consideringe of the visible things, Reg. v. Romans i.
made and created by the infinite power of God, and sounds thus.

Thou shalt make yt no graue^ image nor any symylitude, Exo. xx.^ Leuit. xvi
neither of it that is above in h auen, nor of it that is beneth upon the
earth, nor of it yt is in the water under the earth, worship the^ not, nor
serve them not, for I the lord thy God am a gelous God visitinge ye sin of
ye fathers upon ye children unto the third and fourth generacyo^ of the^ that
hate me, And do mercy upon many thousands, that love me and keep my
commandments.

That is.

The lord God forbids not the making of Images or symylytudes so far
fourth as they beno^ abused. But he does forbid the Idolatry, supersticion
and false relygion which these folyshe, braynles, fra^tyke and mad people have
used and yet in many places (God amend it) do use in runnyng and gadding with
the^ by the streates bearing them on their shulders, roarynge and cryinge like
mad people, and like Turks heathen and in fidels (which know not GOD in
deed) in settinge the^ in their churches, houses and else where, in lighting of
candelstapers and kneling and crouching before them in gylting and arraying of
the^ which velvet, sylke, etc. sufferinge in the mean ceason our even Christen
to perish for cold and for lack of succor. Ion. v.
Sayn^t John also repre^hendeth them saying, Babes keep your selves from
Images or symylitudes.

Likewise the Prophet Esaias says. Ezay. 4 ^
GOD (says he) is gelous, he will give his Power to none other, neither his
honor to the Gods.

Against this commandment do.
All they of whom the Prophet Jeremy writes in diuer^e places, Jeremy. i
and.iii.
they (Isay) which forsake and leave God and run hear and there to Images
and Symylitudes made of stone, wodde gold and silver, for to obtain comfort
help, Sapi. 1 ^
and remedy Neither are they ashamed to speak with him that his without soul,
and to call for health unto him that has no might, and call for life unto the
dead.

THe third commandment teaches to extolle, Le^it. xix eccl. xxiii psalm. 11.
r Hester. 1 r Dan. 2. r Deuteronomy. v. Le^it. 24
laud praise and with all reverence to magnifye the most blessed name of God,
and sounds thus.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. For the lord wall
not hold him unguilty that takes his name in vain. That is.

Thou shall in no wise swear nor curse, Leu. xix. b Math. v. Jacob. v. Psalm.
lxxiiii. cxiiii. ^xv
but thy saying shall be yea, yea, and no, no. Fear and tremble when thou namest
the same. And be not ashamed to confess ye same name before me^, but laud,
praise, bless and call upon ye same most holy name. If you art in danger or
in any need take your refuge to the same name of the almighty God, as to a
most sure ancker.

Against this commandment do all they which for a light matter, eccl. xxiii
leui. xxiiii i. corin. vi
do name the same most holy name of God, Curse, swear and blaspheme by the
same, in sickness or adversity. And they also, which use the same name to
sorcery or witchcraft. And they which attribute, reken or account all honor
unto them selves,

Furthermore all they yt take God to witness in a false matter. And they which
do not steadfastly trust and believe to be true all that which God has spoken
and taught. Or thy which either do hear or se the same most holy name
dispysed and dishonored, Hebr. vi.
and do not withstand the same to the utter must of their power. But to swear
in a just cause to gods honor, and to the proffit of thy neighbor, being
thereto required by the justice or officer, is not forbidden here.

THe fourth Commandment teaches to have a quiet heart in God, Mat. xii. i.
cor. x. Roma. x. ezay. lvii exodus xx.b and.xxiii.b.
ceasing from al bodily labor, and sounds thus.

Remember the Sabbath day that thou sanctifye it. Six days shall thou labor
and do ol thy work, But the seventh day is ye Sabath of ye lord thy god. That
is.

Sease from al bodily labor and travail, and from sin. and do good restyng
in God hearing his word, and seek righteousness before thine eyes all the days
of thy life, sufferinge him to work thy health and salvation through Jesus
Christ, and rest in him.

Six days may thou labor and do al yt thou haste to do But ye seventh
day is ye Sabbath of the lord thy God, in it thou shalt do no manner of
work, neither thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter nor thy servant, neither
thy cattle, neither yet the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six
days the lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is, and
rested the seventh day. Wherefore the lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it.

Christ said, Mat. xii^ and.xii. Ezay. lvi.
it is l^full to do good on the Sabbath day. Therefore the son of man is
lord even of the Sabbath day The lord says by his prophet, keep equity and
do right. etc.

Blessed is the man that does this, and the man's child which keeps the
same.

He that takes head that he vnhalowe not the Sabbath (yt is) if thou keep thy
self yt thou do not evil for to vnhallowe the Sabbath, but to fulfill my
covenant (says the lord (then shall thou be called too the pleasant holy and
glorious Sabbath of the lord. Where thou shall be in honor, so that thou do
not after thine own Imaginacion, neither seek thine own will, nor speak
thine own words, Hebr. xiii.
Let us fear therefore (says Saint Paul) least any manne forsaking the
promise of enteringe this rest, should seem at any time to have been
disapoynted. For to us is declared the Gospel, as well as to the^. But it
profyted not the^ yt they heard the word.

Because they that heard it, coupled it not with faith, For we which have
believed, do enter into this rest etc. That is to sai, into eternal life, which
christ ye lord of ye Sabbath has obtained for us.

Against this commandment do all they which upon the sunday, yea at all
times when they can or may, do not hear gods word, for to be taught and
instructed by the same. And they which only trust upon their own wisdom.
They which attribute their good works (in case they have any) to them selves,
and not to God. Also they which spend and consume their time, upon Sondayes
and other days in slouthfulnes, in drinking drunk in vain talk in dicing
carding, gaming, fighting, dancing and such like wickedness abusing the day
and time, As by experience daily may be seen, at fayrs, assemblies, bankettes
and feasts, Esaias. v.
where as men have great delight in harpes, rebeckes, fiddels, tabrets,
flutes pipes and much drinkinge, but the poor are little remembered or
regarded. And spend and wast thus their time in all disorder and ungodly living,
where as they ought on such days most of al to hear Gods word, to distribute
their alms to ye poor, to visit the sick, to praise and thank god and so
confess and bewail their sins which they all the weke before have
committed.

THe first commandment teaches to be subject and obedient unto our elders,
Deuteronomy. xxi: give. ix. Eccle. iii.
as fathers and mothers and superior powers with all humility and lowlynes,
i. Tit. iii.
always in the fear of god, and sounds thus.

Honor thy father and thy mother, Mat. xv.
that thy days may be long, in the land which the lord thy God has given
the. That is.

Honor thy father and thy mother Eccle. vii
from the whole heart, and forget not the sorrowful travail that thy mother
had with the, remember that thou wast borne through them, and how can you
recompense them the things that they have done for the? Ephe.v. Mat.xv.
Mar.vii.
Saynct Paul says, honor thy father and thy mother. this is the first
commandment that has any promise, that thou may be in good estate, and live
long upon the earth. By this commaundeme^te Christ teaches us not only to
have our f^ther, and mother in reverence, and to obey them, but also to
minister unto their necessity. The children of wisdom are, Eccle. iii.
a congregacyon of the rightuous. and their exercise is obedience and love.

Hear me your father (o my dear children) and do thereafter, that ye may be
safe. For the lord will have the father honored of the children, and look what
a mother commands her children to do, he will have it kept. Who so honors
his father, shall have joy of his own children, And when he makes his prayer
he shall be heard. He that honors his father, shall have a long life, and he
that is obedient for the lords sake, his mother shall have joy of him.

He that fears the lord, honors his father and mother, and does the^
service as it were to the lord him self Honor thy father, in deed, in word,
and in all patience, that thou may have his blessyng. For the blessyng of
the father buyldeth the houses of the children, but the Mothers curse roteth
out the foundacions, He that forsakes his father, shall come to shame, and he
that defieth his mother, is cursed of god. My son perform thy works with
loving mekenes, so shall thou be loved above other, men, and shalt find
favor in the sight of God. Honor the elders that have cure of souls, as
pastoures Curates, Priests, Scolemasters, declarers and preachers of Gods
word, yea thou shalt honor them with double honor, that is, we ought not
only to be obedient unto their doctrine and learning, but we are a so bound to
find them bodily food, sustenaunce and all other necessaries.

The scripture says, Deuteronomy. 25 r Mat. x. a
thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, And
the labourer is worthy of his reward.

Submyt your selves also unto ye higher powers as Emperor, i. cor. ix. b
Kings princes and rulers, Hebr. xiii. Romans xiii a. and. b.
and give such tribute, toll, custom and honor as is due too the^, And in
like case to thy lord or lady, master or mastres, always with the fear of
God.

Against this commandment do. Eccle.iii.
All they which are ashamed of their elders in their poverty and need, or
they which anger them vex them, curse them murmur, grudde, or are rebels
against the^. Furthermore they which slander and blame the ministers of Gods
word.

Item all they which make any tumulte, i. Pei. iii. Leuit. xix Eccl. viii i.
Tim. va ii. Reg. iii Gene. iiii Romans xii.
dissencio^ or debate against the superiors, yea although they were wicked.

They which will not obey their Master and Mastres. They which will not rise
up before a graye head, nor give reverence unto the aged.

The sixth commandment teaches peace, unity and quietness every man whether
it be friend or foo, and sounds thus.

Thou shall do no murder. That is.

Thou shall bear no rancour envy or malice in thy heart, i. Pet. ii.
thou shalt not chyde fight, scorn nor mock with any man.

Thou shall not bakbite neither desire to be avenged. Will and wysh them good
that do evil. Bless them that curse you. Matthew. v
Be not hynderfull to any man in word, thought, or deed, yt you may be
parfecte children of your father which is in heaven. For he makes the Sun
too rise both on the evil and on the good. and sends his rain on the just,
and on the vn^^^^* H^ that loves not his brother, abides in death Whosoever
hates his brother, is a murderer. etc.

Against this commandment do all they which a venge one evil with an other.
i. Pet.iii.
Which are wroth, and angrye with their neighbors, Which threten provoke,
mock, deride or despise their Christian brother. Which vpbrayde their
neybors, casting them their fautes in their tethe. Which forgive not their
Ennemies, and pray not for them. Which chyde, braule, fight and such like.
And he that does all these before named things, does not only against this
commandment, but also al they which do not let, hinder, Lactantius de vero
cultu. libr vi. capi. x^
correct and to their power, punish these beforenamed euels. This conmaundeme^t
is not tra^sgressed by rulers and iusticers in yt they use the swearde Romansxiii
of Justice righfully in punisshing of the wicked and in defending of the good.

The seventh commandment teaches shamefastnes, Esap. i. Math. v. Pro. xxii.
honesty and Chastity, both in words deeds and thoughts, and sounds thus.

Thou shall not commyt adultery. That is.

Keep your five senses from wantonness, Ephe. iiii. Tii. i. iii.
and from the works of all manner of vnclea^nes. A void and eschewal excess
of deyntie meats and drinks eschew also, Ezech. xvi
all Idelnes and the occasions which may provoke too wantonness and
uncleanness. Christ says, Math. v.
ye have heard how it was said to them of old time.

Thou shall not commit adultery, But I say unto you, that: whosoever looks on
a wife, lusting after her, has conmitted adultery with her already in his
heart. And saynct Paul says, i. corin. vi
know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I now take
the members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot? God forbydde. Do
ye not know that he that coupleth him self with an harlot is become on body?
for they (says he) shall be two in one flesh But he that is joined unto the
lord, is one spirit. Fly fornicacion, Every sin that a man does, is
without the body, but he that is a fornicatour, sins against his own body.
Either know ye not that your bodies are the temple of the holighoost? which
dwells in you, whom ye have of God. And how that ye are not your own, for
you are derelye bought. Therefore glorify god in your bodies and spirits which
are gods. Let wedloke he had in price in all points, and let the chamber be
undefiled, for whorekepers and aduouterers God will judge. Hebr. xiii.


Against this commandment do all they which beside lauful matrimony have any
carnal copulacion, or commyt any vncle^nces with unlike creatures against
nature, and against ye law of God. Such as stir, move or provoke other
parsons to lechery and unclennes, with songs, ballettes Riddels, uncomely
language, baudy words, Amos. vi.
gesture, countenance, felinge and gropynge. They which do not a void or
eschew al glotony, dron kennes, outrage, ydelnes and afleshly desiers, for
such vices provoke to al kind of unchaste lyuying. And under this
commandment is aprehended rauisshing of women, whorehunting, baudy places,
stews, dishonest houses in a town or City, Roma. i.
which are dens of thieves and robbers, to the destruction of men's googes,
bodies, and souls. And they which commit these enormyties, and wickednesses
are not only guilty herin, Iosue. vii Genesis xxxi
but also al they which suffer the^, and do not perturbe, let or hinder them
to their power.

The eygth commandment teaches lyberalitie, i. Cor. ix. Pro. xvi.
mildenes and through a broken spirit not too esteem riches, and sounds thus

Thou shall not steal. That is.

Be hindefull to no man, but further, help, counsel, Math. v.
part and distribute gladly of all that which thou have received more of God
then other men, whether it be in woordly goods and temporal substaunces, or
in spiritual gifts, as learning, wisdom and good counsel, yea give to him
that asks, Math. x. Math. vi.
and from him that would borrow, turn not thy face.

Christ says, steal not. Defraude or begile no man. If any man will sue the
at the Law, and take thy coat from the, let him have thy cloak also. Paul
also says, now is there utterly a fault among you, i. Cori. vi
because ye go to law one with an other. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why
rather suffer ye not your selves to be robbed? ^phe. ii ii
yea even your selves do wrong and rob, and that the brethern.

Let him that did steal, steal no more, but let him rather labor with his
hands some good thing, that he may have to give to him that needs.

Against this commandment do all usurers, and they that craf telye defraude,
deceive and begile their neighbor, whether it be privily or apertlye. And they
which do pyll and poll other men of their goods, by false learning process,
weight, measure, coin, ware or marchaundise. Also they which keep a way or
withold the labor of there even Christian, Leuit. xix
or deny the debte which is due. i. Joan. ii
They which do se their neighbor in need, and will not help or succoure him to
their power. They that do not defend the loss of their neighbor to their
power. And in this commandment is comprehended all strife, debate and
variaunce for fylthy lucres sake. Finally, al yt which in any wise may
apparteyne to avarice or covetousness.

THe nynth commandment teaheth always and every whereto be rightuous, Dan.
xiii Psalm. v^i. lxxii. lxxiii. x^vi. Hebr. xii. Pro. xxv.
just true, and upright in words witho^t al doublenes of heart, and sounds
thus.

Thou shall hear no false witness against thy neighbor. That is.

A boyde all lies, and speak always the truth without resp^^t of money,
goods, dif^es, rewards, mede, dread, favor, f^^ndshippe or hatred, always
with stedfastnes. Also f^aring no man, not rega^ding the loss of body or
goods. i. Pet iii.
Judge always rightfully without exce^^ion of parsones. Mar. ^^iii
Refrayning thy ^ong^^ from evil talk, and thy lyppes that they speak no
gile eschewing evil, and doing good. For of every ydell morde yt thou have
spoken, Ephe. iiii
must thou give account at the day of Judgment. Let no filthy communicacio^
proceed out of thy mouth, but yt is good to edify with all. Let al bitterness,
fearsnes, wrath, roaryng and cursed speakying be put away from you. Let no
fylthines, folish talkyng nor testing (which are not co^lye) be ones named
among you, Ephesi. v.
but rather geuying of thanks.

Against this commandment do al they which hide, cover, Math. x.
cloak or do not declare the truth. Or they which falsely do enterprete or
expound Gods most blessed word, turning, wrasting, and wrything the same, to
their in saciable gredenes, avarice, Sapi. i.
and covetousness, and not to ye honor of god, nor to ye edifying, and learning
of their neighbor.

They wych falsely do lie in the law, Eccle. v.
before ye justice or elsewhere. They that speak with two tongues. They that
boast the^ selves in their euel, and other in their wickedness. They that bear
fire in the one hand and water in the other hand, Eccle. ii.
being double of heart, or waueryng with all winds, as traitors are wont to
do.

THe tenth commandment teaches to despise al tra^sytorye things, and not to
covet or desire the thing which is thy neighbors, and sounds thus.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house, nor his wife nor his servant, nor
his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing yt is thy neighbors. That
is.

Let your couersacyon be without covetousness. Luke. xii. H^^r. xiii.
and be content with that ye have already, and covet not that thing which an
other does possess but having food and raiment (not further regardinge
transytorye things) ^eke, Tim. vi.
desire and wysh for the things which continue, Collo. iii.
and endure for evermore. What soever you would ye men should do to you eue^ so
do to the^. Mat. vii.
To love a man's neighbor as him self is a greater thing then al burnt
offynges and sacrifices. Mark. xii
Be not overcome with lust, for the care of this world, i. Tim. vi
and ye deceytfulnes of riches, choke the word. Godlynes is great riches, if a
man be content with yt he has. For we brought nothing into ye world, and it is
a plain case, yt we shall carry nothing out. When we have food and rayme^t let
us therewith be content. They that will be rich fall into temptacion and snares,
and into many noysom lusts, which drown me^ in perdicion, and destruction.

For covetousness is the root of all evil, which whylesome lusted after, they
erred from ye faith, and tangled them selves with many sorrows.

Against this commandment do al they which through an insatiable covetous
heart, not only do steal and rob by force, violence or otherwise, but also
they which with an inward desire would do the same in case it were possible to
the^, or that they could bring it to pass. For our savior Christ says him
self in the Gospel, Math. v.
that not only he which has to do with an other man's wife, is an aduouterer,
But also he wych looks on an other ma^s wife (iustinge after her) has
committed aduouterye with her already in his heart. Thus than is this last
commandment of couetyng and desyringe the full sum and conclusyon of all the other beforenamed commandments. Ecele l.


God says, Deute.vi. These words which I command the this day, shall be in
thine heart, and thou shalt whrit them on thy children, and thou shalt talk
of the^ when thou art at home in thy house, and as thou walk by ye way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou rysest up, and thou shall bind them for a
sign upon thine hand, and they shal^e papers of remembrance, between thine
eyes, Deuteronomy. xii.
and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

Take heed, and here all these words which I command the that it may go
well with the, and with thy children, after the for ever, Deuteronomy. vi.
See thou do yt which is right in the sight of thy lord, that thou may
prosper, ye shall not do after all the things that seem good in thine own
eyes, (...) what soever I command you, Deu. ^xx. vii.
yt do, and put naught thereto nor take ought therfrom. Cursed be he that
maynteyneth not all the words of this law to do the^.

THese beforenamed ten commandments did the Lord God, i. ^eg. vii ^ake. x^
give unto Moses his servant (as we have before declared) in two tables made
of stone. (...). xii
Whereof in the first is comprehended or contained, the first, chefest and most
pryncypal commandment, Deu. iiii.
of the which Christ speaks, sayng, Thou shalt love the lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul and whithe all thy mind. This chief
commandment and sum of the first table, comprehends in it, five other
special commandments, in the which we may know and learn, what we ought
to do, and to leave, in that which concerns or touches God our heavenly
father.

And in the second table is comprysed the second commaun demente, like unto
the first, that is to say, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

That is.

What soever thou woldeste that other men should do to the, Mat. vii.
do even the same unto them. This commandment comprehends also in it, five
other commandments, in the which we may learn to know what we ought to do,
and to leave, in that that concerns or touches our ^uen Christian or
neighbor. So yt in these two commandments are comprehended the whole law
and prophets. Romans xiii
And every man may lightly perceive, that therein, although ye words are
few) are very plainly and perfe^tlye declared, al kind of good works and
commandments, which in any wise might be commanded or given to any man,
both, for to lead a virtuous and Godly life toward God, and also how to
use and behave ourse^ues with our neighbor, both to live, and to dye. And who
soever shall do his uttermost di^^^ (...) ^o the obseruacyon, and (...) the
same, he shall not (...) hour in the which he might sai, what good works
might I do, which might be grateful, pleasant and acceptable unto God?
Neither let no man maruayle although he find not here commanded that we should
do any thing to our own behoufe, but that weshulde do it to the behoufe of
other, that is, First to God and after that to our neighbor. So that although
(in manner of speakinge) a man were blind yet notwitstanding may he easelye
hear, sea and feel that the fulfillyng of the law, does consist in love and
charity. I mean not love, and charity toward our selves, but toward other.
Whereby it may justly be said, He lives best, that lives to other. Again,
he lives worst, ye lives to him self. And therefore may easily be spied how
few there he which live well and virtuously. Romans xiii Psalm. xiii liii. Roma.
iii
To the which the prophet David and. S. Paul justly say, There is not one that
lives as he ought to live, no not one, according as the before named ten
commandments do require.

Here might a man ask.

What remedy then? Is there no man that lives as he ought to do? And it is
written in the law, Cursed be every man, which continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the law, ^^al. iii. deu. xxvii
to do the^. Who the^ can be saved? shall we all be dampened? Hear the saying
of. Roma. xii and.iii.
S. Paul, God (says he) has comprehended al men under sin and that by and
through the law which gives us the knowledge of our sins, to the intent
that he should have mercy on all men, And that through faith in Jesus Christ our
redeamer. By, Act. xiii.
in and through whom, all that the carnal men were not able in the
fulfyllynge of the law, is now al fulfilled and wholly finished for us, through
his precious death. Vanquisshinge, hell, sin, deuell and everlasting death.

Concerning the second article before rehearsed. S. Paul to the Balathians
in the third chapter says. The rightuous lives by faith.

Then of necessite a man must believe if he will be found rightuous before God.
Romans x.
And for as much as the same faith or belefe must come through the hearing of
that which men ought to believe, Give ear, learn and understand in the
instruction folowinge, called Simbolon Apostorum, all that a Christian is
chefely bound to believe. Which is divided into three parts, eue^ like by the
same is acknowledged three parsones, i. John. v. Genesis t.
in one indiuidivle God head or deity.

THe first part of the Christen faith or believe, makes mention of the first
parson of the holy tri^ite, God the heavenly father, and sounds thus

I believe in God the father almighty maker of Heaven and earth. Malac. 2. Ier.
xxxii
That is.

I know, Exo. xd. Hebr. x^l.
think, and believe in my heart, that my God is in heaven about, and in the
earth beneth, and yt there is none other God, and all things he through him and
in him He is the maker and creator of all creatoures what soever is in heaven,
Ephe. i.
and on earth. The lord is my strength, and glory, and is become to me a
father and a savior. Almyghtye is his name. Lord who is like unto the among
the mighty that art so great in thy holiness, Hebr. i.
fearful and laudable, that show wonders and reygnest for ever, and above:
Lord God full of compassion and mercy, Exo. xxx. iiii.
which art not lightly angry, but haboundaunt in mercy and truth, and kepest
mercy in store for thousands, Ephesi. i.
and forgeuest wickedness, trespass and sin He has elect or chosen us too
beehys children through Jesus Christ. And therefore we shall him only worship,
and besides him none other God Also we shall fear him as an almyghtye God,
Deuteronomy. vi. Psalm. ii. xxxiiii. Mat. xii.
And as a merciful father shall we love him, with all our heart with all our
soul with all our power and minds. And upon him must stand all ou^ hope.
Iere. vii. Jacob. i.
For he is the father of light of the which al mankind lives.

Where is there such a God as thou art (o lord) that pardonest wickedness and
forgeuest of fences, and castest al our sins into the bottom of the sea?

Thus good lord.
I do utterly renounce and forsake the fend of hell, all I dolatry interior,
and exterior all witchecraft, mishelefe and al false doctrine which is not
Gods word. I utterly depart, fall and flee from all creatures, which are in
heaven above, or in earth beneth, yea, and my self also as of my self. And do
cleave unto the only invisible and almighty which is without beginning, and
myth out endyng, which has made all that is made, and which rules all after
his godly will and providence.

THe second part of the believe is, Math. i. Esaias. vii.
of the second parson of the holy trinity, God the son, GOD and man Jesus
Christ our savior, and sounds thus.

I believe in Jesus Christ the only son of God the father, our lord which was
conceived by the holyghost, borue of the virgin mary. That is.

I believe and knowledge with my heart, and confess with my mouth, that the
same Jesus christ which the Jews put to death, the very word, and sede which
was promised to our forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is ye very son of
the living God, God and man, without whom, John. 14.
no man comes to God the father, neither can be saved by any thing that
heart can think, or mouth can speak, save only in and through the same
Ie^sus Christ, lord and savior of all christian men. The which to my behoufe,
and necessite, was conceived of the holyghost, above al men's understanding, and
that without the work of man, and without all fleshly power, to the intent
that he of his own mere mercy (for it so pleased him) should cle^se, purify and
make spiritual both my concepcion and the co^cepcion of al me^, with
concepcion is happened in sin. I believe that he is borne to mine use and
behoufe of ye pure and undefiled virgin mary, a son of God being God from the
beginning a son of man, now beco^ man, to the intent that he shul make us the
children of God. Of a virgin, to the intent ye he should purify and cle^se us of
our spots and sins.

Suffered under ponce pylate was crucified, dead buried. Luke xxiiii Mat. 28.
Descended into hell. That is.

I believe that he suffered the most shameful death and torments of the cross,
and that for my transgression, iniquite and sins, destroying thereby all the
torments of everlasting da^pnacion which I have deserved. He suffered death,
Ezay. liii Apoca. v. Ephe. iiii. Roma. i. Act. v. ii. cor. xxv Hcbr. x. Psalm.
eiii. ii. cor. xv.
whereby he vanquished and overcame everlasting death and damnacion, to the
intent yt we, through his death should obtain immortalyte. He was buried, and
descended into hell, to the intent that we (through baptism) should be buried
with him in death, and now walk in a new spiritual life.

The third day he rose again from death. He ascended into heaven. He sits
at ye right hand of god ye father almighty That is.

I believe that he upon the third day (as a vanquisher of hell, deuel and
death) rose again for our rigtuousnes geuyng us an example by the same bys
resurrection, that we also shall rise from death at the day of dome. He
ascended into heaven, leading away captivity captive, Ephe. iiii
to the inte^te yt he should be a true advocate and a faithful medial our,
between God his heavenly father and us wretched sinners. He sits at the
right hand of GOD equal with his father, Philip ii.
rulyng and having power over all things, both in heaven and earth. In whose
name all knees must bow both in heaven. hell and earth.

From thens he shall come to Judge the quick and the dead* That is.

I believe that the self same Jesus Christ at the day of dome or judgment
(which day is only known to him) like as he ascended into heaven, shall come
again to judge the quick and the dead The quick, that are all faithful
Christians, and the dead, that are al wicked, unfaithful and dampened people.
And shall say to the faithful, Mat. 25. and.xx. c. Psalm. vi. b mat. vi. b luke
xi. i. c ezay. xx. f Mat. xvi i. Cor. v.
Come hither ye blessed of my father, inheret the kingdom which is prepared
for you from the beginning of the world but (alas) to the dampened shall he say.
Depart from ye cursed, into the everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Deuell and his angels.

The third part of the belefe or faith, is of God the holyghost the third
parson of ye blessed trinity, sanctifyinge all things and sounds thus.

I believe in the holyghost, The holy catholyke church. The communion of
saynetes. The forgeuenes of sins. That is.

I believe that no man can at tayne or come unto God the father, than only by
the work and mean of the holighost, who with God the father, through Jesus
Christ, is woorkinge and giving life to all thing, without who me nothing is
living nor holy Furthermore I believe that here upon the earth is a Christian
catholyke church or congregation of the faithful, which is nothing else then a
communion of the congregation or assemblinge together of faithful christians
spiritually in one GOD, in one faith and in one baptism. Of the which
congregacyo^ or assembly Christ is the head wych congregacyon also is governed
and daily increased through the holy ghost, through or by the administracio^
of the holy sacraments and mysteries distributed and given to every one by
the hands of the priests administratours and preachers of Gods word.
Furthermore, I also believe that no man can be saved onles he become a
felowme^bre of this congregation, and ye nether Jew, Turk nor heretic ca^ or
may be saved, onles he first be reco^siled and made at one, in and with the same
holy asse^bly or co^gregacio^. Mat. ^vi.
In the which, and no where else, is for geuenes of sins, for she has
received ye power of God to bind and to lose This is ye only spouse of our
lord iesuschrist, which is not adorned with glyttering shining costly, or
tra^sitory things of this world, nether having dominion nor bearing rule in
rychesses, kyndoms, gold, or precious stones, but is abject, despised,
persecuted, oppressed, and troubled, yea, in a manner wholly covered, hid and
disfigured with blood through martirdom of the reprobate and vnfaitful, whose
surest sign or token to know herby is the declaring and professing of ye
gospel, both in word and deed.

The resurrection of the body and the life everlasting. ezech. xxx John. v.
That is.

I believe also that there shall be a general resurrection or rising again of
all men, which ever have been or ever shall be. So yt this corruptibile and
transitory flesh and body, after that it shall be dead, rotten and turned into
earth, shall be restored unto life, which life both of the soul and body, I
believe steadfastly, shall never end.

To the blessed in everlasting joy. Ephe. ii.
And to the dampened in everlasting sorrow. He that sinserely confesses this
(says. S. Ignacius) and believes it, he is happy.

Concerning the third part and article before rehearsed, Luke xxii. ma. xvi. b
Luke xi. b.
Christ in the gospel techeth us saying Pray, that ye fall not into temptacion.
Having respect unto the word of him which can not lie let us pray to GOD
with the father of the possed yongman, saying, Lord strengten and increase our
faith, for without the we can do nothing, so wretched, so corrupt and so frail
is our nature, yea (through her own love so blinded, that that of her own
self, she ca^ not will nor obey the commandment of God, so far is our
mind and inclynacion run astray from the pristine or former innocence, in
the transgressinge of the commandments of God, by our first father Ada^. So
that in case we should be compelled to strive against our ennemies the deuell,
the world and our own flesh (which stands us in hand to do so long as we
are cladde with this mortal body) with our own strength, without the assistence
and help of God, we should by and by eue^ at the first assault, and sound of
the trumpet, cast both our weapon and shylde from us, and wholye
despayringe, leave our courage, fall and yield, Mat. ix.
and suffer our selves to be overcome in such wise yt they should easelye
bear rule and have dominion over us. But the grace of God workyng in us a
perfect faith and hope with the deeds of charity is able enough to work al
thing in us, which other wise we should not be able to fulfill. Now to ye intent
we lose not this faith or belefe, and that the same decrease or diminish not in
us, but rather may increase, augment and wax fruteful, there is nothing
better, Luke xi.
more profitable or necessary, then to pray to God without ceasyng. For our
lord Jesus Christ says himself, Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you, pray, and it shall be given unto you But he that will pray to
God, Marc. ix.
with an ernest heart, must be thus disposed. First a man must know his own
infirmity, and weakness, and confess to have need of help. For (as we read)
the sick has only neade of the Phisician, and him will he gladly help,
like as the blessed virgin mary her self witnesses in her song, Luke. li.
saying he has filled the hungry with all goodness, and has sent the rich
away empty and void. What avails it that thou prayest, when thou do not
know, and feel that thou have need? Is it not to scorn, and mock with God?
Ipocrisy and feigned prayer? Thou will ask, how and in what manner shall we pray
to God for to obtain those things which are necessary for us? Hear
therefore, least perchance thou pray for those things which are not lawful
and mete, in the stead of the^ which are most necessary, and profitable for
the. For thereby it often chances that God does not hear us as. S. James says
be we ask a miss. And as Paul says to the Romans, we ourselves know not
what is most necessary for us to ask. Jacob. iiii


And therefore the most highest doctor and master Jesus Christ (who best
knows what is proffytable and necessary for our health and salvation) has
described and taught us a most sure rule how we should and ought to pray,
setting GOD his heavenly Father as a sure Mark before our eyes, to whom we
should lift up our hearts, and inwardde thoughts, to him (I say) above in the
highest, we that labor and are lade^ with sin, here in this vale of fears.
And he says, when thou wylt pray, thou shall pray thus

Our father which art in heaven, psalm. cxiii
hallowed be thy name. Now is to be noted, as before sufficientlye is
declared, that it is impossible to make an earnest, hearty and perfect prayer,
except a man, first and before all things, confess his own fault and
disease. And therefore I have set a brief lamentacion and confession before
every peticion of the lords prayer, to the intent that the sinful conscience
might thereby be stirred and kindled to make the more fervent, and earnest
prayer unto God, desyring his help. And after that, the content, and
declaracyon of the same right goodly expounded and opened to the honor of God,
and vtilyte and edifycacyon of all men.

First upon that point. Our father which art in heaven.
Confession.
O merciful everlasting god, most loving father, of whom all fatherlye mercy
favor, and goodness comes, and proceeds, both in heaven, and earth. I poor
miserable and wretched creatur, knowledge, and confess before thy fatherly
mercy, that I, like the ryottous son, have despised and not regarded all the
same thy fatherlye love and trust, and have and showed my self dysobedie^te
toward the, and have not given ear to thy most blessed word, and loving
exhortacyons, but have followed the voice of strangers, and have cleaued more
to the doctrine of men, then to thy commandments.

O bountuous loving God, father of us all, who manifoldly show thy
benefyttes, and do distribute and give thy gifts as well to ye wicked, as to
ye good yea, sometime more corporally to the wicked then to the good. I
knowledge and confess before the, that I have not loved other men as my
brethern; nor reuere^ced them, as thy children but in pride have exalted my
self above my brother, despising, hating and envying him, as ye unfaithful
servant did his fellow brethern in the Gospel. And furthermore I confess
(most m^ke and loving father (yt I have first sought help and counsel by
the creatures here beneth upon earth and not by the who art above in the
heavens everlasting and almighty, Mat. 24
and only can and will help, as a good father of us all, I have most of
all set my thoughts yea (alas ye while) my whole heart, mind, trust and all
my desire upon erthely temporal and transitory things, and have not lyfted
the same up unto the which art in heaven, like as I ought to have done, for
the which I cry the mercy.

Prayer and confession.
O loving father, thou have of thine entier goodness created us upon earth, and
for nothing have thou delivered us from ever lastyng death, which we were
gilty and had deserved. O good father we are not worthy to be thy children,
for we have sinned against thy righteousness. Psalm. xv.
Nevertheless by the commandment of thine only son, we do boldly say, our
father. O thou faithful father, what shall we give the again, or wherewith
shall we recompense the for thy great love and goodness which thou, through thy
mercy and synguler goodness, have given us power to be thy children and to beco^
heirs of thy kingdom with thy dear son Jesus Christ? Thou art truly our
faithful, and trusty father, for thou bear us like a most ge^le and kind
father his child in his arms, and thou ledest us with thy rightaude, that we
(although we sometime through weakness do stumble) are not al together broused,
Psalm. xv.
and destroyed of our enemies, zacha. ii.
Thou do preserve and keep us like the apple of thine eyes, and he that
touches us (o father) touches the. O mylde and lyberall father, how richely
have thou endued thy children, Psalm. xxi.
with ye wholesome meat of thy Godly word, for now do the poor sit down,
they eat and are filled, and praise the lord with all them which after the
mocion of the holyghoost, seek the with all their heart. Thou have given that
living water, where with we may quentche and expeliche dry thurst without
ceasynge. O father how lovingly and kyndelye do thou call us, through the
mouth of the prophet Ezay, saying, E^ay. lv.
All they that are thurstie, come to the waters, and ye that have no money make
have, come but that ye may have to eat. Come buy wine, and milk without money
or money worth. Wherefore do ye lay o^t your money for the thing yt fedeth not,
and spend your labor for the thing that satisfies you not? But harken rather
unto me, and ye shall eat of the best, and your soul shall have her pleasure
in plentuousnes. Enclyne your ears, Act. xiii. d i^. Re. v^^ ez^ch. xxx ^iii.
and come unto me take heed, and your soul shall live. For I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, eue^ the sure mercies promised to David. Therefore
most kind father, l. Reg. iiii
we confess, and reverence the like children do their father here upon the
harth. Thou dwell in the heavens with thy Aungelles, who are not troubled
with the flesh but (alas) we dwell upon this earth, in this misery in all
trouble, aduersite and te^ptacion We ought also to be heavenly separed from al
worldely and earthly spots or wrincles and a pure holy temple of thy holy
Majesty. Apo. xxi.
Like you have promised. They shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will
dwell with them to the end of the world.

O most wise father, thou know our weakness and infirmyte, how that in this
heavy burden of the flesh, no man is pure, no man is unguilty (by or through
his own strength) before thy face. esaias. lxiiii
All our rightuousnesses are as the clotes stained with the flower of a woman,
we fall euerychone as ye leaf, for our sins carry us away like the wind.
Tre^o^. ^
To bring forth any thing of our selves, whereby we might become rightuous, we
are not able. All our fathers (which now are gone) have sinned and are fallen
from the, and are become unprofitable, neither was there one yt did good, But
thou lord have made us rightuous, and cle^sed us, so that we are heavenly, and
a kingdom wherein thou sit. And under thy fete, haste thou ye earth to a
fotestole, so that we do altogether lie under thy might and power, with flesh
and blood not seking our own lust and desire, but thy will, not the things
yt are here in this world, but in heaven, eccle. xliii
where thy son Jesus Christ sits on the rightha^de. The heavens and
firmament in their continual course are obedient unto the, and serves us also
continually, giving us light and clearenes into the world to the ease of al
men, as well the wicked as ye good, by the which thy great pity, mercy and
goodness is expressed and declared unto all the world Most gentle father,
grant that we may so diligently serve thy majesty, and all men for thy
take, both wicked and good rightuous and unrighteous. psalm. xviii
And boldlye declare, and pronounce without ceasynge, (like as the heavens do)
thy Godly honor before all men, so that thereby thy mighty name may be praised
and magnified for evermore. Lactanti.
For we are created and made, through thy goodness, to thy honor to know ledge,
confess and serve the.

Hallowed be thy name. For all e^^ates.
Confession.
O heavenly father lord God, whose name is hallowed above all other names
everlastingly, and also called on over me in baptism. I confess before the,
that I (alas ye while) have not magnified and worshipped the same name as I
ought to do. But have arrogantly and presumptuously attributed al honor unto
my self and have exalted and boasted mi self in my works and deeds, and
other thy gifts. Furthermore I have also made thy name a cloak to mine
Idolatry, tyranny, wilines, knavery, also through ypocrisy swearyng cursing
murmuring and vain talking, greatly abusing and dishonouring the same,
wherefore I cry the mercy

Prayer and confession.
Thy name ((...) father) be hallowed and magnified for eu^^more, for unto the
apparteineth al sau de and everlasting praise, but unto us, all shame and
confusion, for all that we are, that are we by and through thy mercy, and all
what we receive, we receive at thy mylde and lyberall hands. So that no man
needs to boaste as though he had it of him self. But thou openest thy hand
and fyllest al creatures with thy blessings. O most gentle father, let us
fall from our selves, wholly abiecting and despayring of our own flesh,
strength, so that we neither trust to our selves nor yet to our good works,
psalm. cxxii
but ye we may fix or set our eyes upon the, like the servant fixes or
sets his eyes upon his master till time ye thou have mercy on us. For if it
were not for thy mercy, were as Sodoma and Gomo^ra. Ther^^e, thy name be
fauctified and blessed from the rysyng of the son unto the going down of the
same. Roma. ix.
Grant (o father) ye our soul without ceasyng and all our strength without
lothsomnes or tediousnes, may laud and praise the in woor de and deed. And
although we did al those things which thou co^maundest us shape in us such a
heart y^ we yet may say that we are unprofitable servants. Luke xvii.
For if we have any thing that good is, it comes from thy grace. O father,
take from us all pride and the love of our selves to the intent that we esteem
our selves no more the^ we ought to do, and yt we exalte not our selves above
other, But that we (thynkyng, and knowing ye thou have given us power and
strength according to thy good will and pleasure) with all humility and
lowlynes, may walk after thy. Godly cou^aunt and will. That we may say with
that princely prophet David. Psalm. c. xiii.
Not unto us (o lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give ye praise, for thou
art only lord both of heaven and earth.

Thy kingdom come. Confession. Psalm. l^xvi.

O lord God, I complain, lament and be wayle my misery unto ye, that I have
been captive (^h wretch that I am) in that strange land of babylon, in the
land of death, geuyng my members to the servitude of sin, to strive against
thy holy kingdom And although I have forsaken ye deuel and all his works in
baptism, yet al ye notwithstanding, I am become (woe unto me) unfaithful,
forsworn and have fled from the, and run to thine ennemie^, Have mercy on me.

Prayer and confession.
Come (o lord) and make thy dwelling with us, and let us be atone with ye, so
that we may remain or contine win the, and thou in us. Lo^^ng father, make
our tree (which is barren and naught) moist, to the intent that with fervent
love, it may, bring forth ripe pleasant and sauery fruit. O most kyude
father, grant that we duly, and justly may sanctifre and make holy thy,
sabbath day, which thou with all diligence have commanded us.

Suffer all fleshly lusts and wicked desires to cease in us. And like as every
creature, both in heaven and earth, does obey the, and suffer them selves to be
ruled and governed of ye. But so (most gentle father( draw and pluck out of
our hearts all such things as seameth good in our sight, to ye intent that
thou may rule us, not after our but after thine own will. For we know that
the ways of man are not his, and that it lies not in man to stir or lead
his ways whether he lysteth. Pro. xvi.
Thus good lord) grant that we patiently and whithe a quiet heart, may suffer
thy hand when it touches us, and suffer us gladly and cherefully to bear all
such things as it shall please the to lay upon us, whether it be good fortune
or evil, aduersite, sickness, shame, stripes, yea, and death also. And su^fer
our own nature so to rest, to be quiet and cease, that she covet, seek and
desire not (through superfluity, and desire of vengaunce) to break or
tra^gresse the holy sabbath day.

Thy will be done in earth it is in heaven. John. xii. Luke xxii.
Prayer and coufession.
O my lord God, to the I make my moan and complaynt that I have followed mine
own will, to thy dishonor and to my shame, and have resisted thy most Godly
will, for the which I am very sorye.

Prayer and confession.
Therefore (o most best father) be not mine but thy will fulfilled. Thy will is
done and fulfilled in heaven amongst the Angels, which without all
difficulte do according to thy will, and tremble and quake at thy becking. The
Sun and Moan keep their course, and never transgress the same. Even so ought
it to be with us also, but we wre^ched sinners are to frail, and in our nature
we find nothing that is after thy Godly will, but against the and thy most
holy Laws, thus does our poysened old Adam kycke and strive, according to his
old kind I grant in deed, that in the in ward man we do find a delight and
pleasure in thy law, but in our fleshly menbres is an other law that is, the
law of the heart. And therefore that we would, we do not, but that thing that
we would not, Romans vii.
we do. Therefore (O most loving and gentle Father) give us thy Law in
wardelye in us, and write the same in our hearts to the intent that we may
fear and love the, and walk in thy commandments. Give us a new heart,
se^dyng thy spirit in wardly in us, that he may kindle us so myth thy love,
that we may love ye with all our heart with all our strength, above all things,
and that we may love our neighbor for thy sake in thankefulnes, for the
unspeakable riches which thou have haboundauntlye poured upon us, even as our
selves. For he that has love, fulfylleth the law, and he that loves not
rests or sticks in the death. We ought of duty to be people according to
thy heart, doing all things according to thy will, Romans xiii
but where is there one such among us? And who can give us a heart to fear the,
and to keep thy commandments at all times, so that it may happen or chance
well unto us and our children? O lord thou only art he. Thus (good lord)
cleanse our hearts, and the hearts of our sede, that we with all our strength,
and with al our soul, may love the and live. Make us whole, the^ are we whole,
Make us blessed, then are we blessed: For thou art our laud and praise. Oh,
how often is our will contrary unto thy will, and against thy laws? she had
many times rather or liver that there were no Law, Psalm. L.
nor no God, nor no truth. Oh, how is our heart and understanding darkened,
so and in such wise that we can not se our selves? therefore) o lord) have
mercy on us according to thy great mercy, and shape or create in us a new
heart, and pour thy perfect spirit in us, so that no more we, but rather thou
live i^ us, and work al our works according unto thy Godly will, to the
intent that thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, in the (...) so that
the (...) and rage against thy (...) either let it be subject (...) the evil
lusts, but let it be one spirit with thy spirit, And let it have a pleasure
and displeasure, in that thing yt thou art pleased and displeased with

Give us this day our daily bread. Luke ix. Deuteronomy. viii
Confession.
I can not deny but must needs knowledge and confess, that I (alas the while,
good father) abhorringe the living bread of my soul, have filled and fed my
soul, with the draffe and chafe of strange and worldly doctrine, like a
swine, wherewith I am become feeble, impotent and withered, for the which I am
sorye, and with all my heart cry the mercy.

Prayer and confession.
Thus loving father and ^^uer of al consolacion* ^^ou that fedest al flesh.
Give (...) bread, psa. cxxxv
I mean that (...), b^ yt which the soul of man is made alive give us that
same at all times, to the intent that we wanting the same, perish not for
hunger. Give us faithful and learned Preachers, that may justly and duly feed
our souls, setting and bearing before us thine only son Jesus Christ,
leaving all fables, Treno. ii.
dreams, vain and false doctrine, to the intent that we thy sheep, be not
slain upon thy holy mount in thy holy tabernacle. O loving father, open our
ears of understanding, to the intent that we may understand, conceive, trust
and steadfastly believe i^ thy holy word, and there by borne a new in a better
life the^ we have led hitherto, may with Jesus Chryst^^s thy ^hildren, be
received of the i^ thy Godly love and favor. Lord of thy cleme^cimekenes and
mercy give us understanding that we may prove the spirits whether they be of
the or of some other, i. Joan. 4
for the wicked and malignaunt spirit can so^time alter and change him self
into an Aungel of light. ii. Cor. xi.
O lord draw us through thy mercy unto thy son Jesus Christ, that we may
justly and perfectly receive him in our hearts, John. vi.
for he is the living bread, which descended from heaven. Give us also (most
gentle father) our bodily foade, after thy Godly will Rain, Sunshine and mete
wether for the fruits of thy feldes indue ceason, to the intent that we taking
sufficiently of the same, may laud, praise and magnify the. O most worthy
father, let us not be sorrowful and careful for those things that we should
eat and drink, or where with we should be cladde Let us cast al our care upon
the for thou carest for us, and thou know before we ask of the, what is
necessary for us, Mat. vi.
yea, many times thou geuest it unto us before we ask it. Give us not to great
abundaunce of riches, least we be thereby occasioned to exalt our selves
against the, and against our neighbors, or that we forget not thy great
goodness and mercy, neither give us so great poverty and need ye we be
constrained to beg bread, or to steal, or provoked too swear, and
blaspheme, thy holy name through impatient suffering.

But give us our daily sustenaunce, nevertheless according to thy Godly will.
We of duty most diligently labor and work, but unto ye, as he that gives
the increase, we shall cast all our care, we are al in thy hand, and there is
none that can resist thy Godly will Thou (good father) geuest unto us, Job. ix.
and have power to take again from us, if thou geuest, then do thou
according unto thy mercy, if thou take, then do thou according unto thy
righteousness.

Forgive us our trespasses as we frogyue them that trespass against us. Eccle.
28 Math. 18 Marc. xi.
Confession.
O heavenly father, I have been hardnecked, stifnecked and stubborn against
those which have offended me, and have not willinglye remitted or forgeuen
the^ their trespasses, but I have much more accounted and esteemed the offense
which they have done against me, then that which I have done against thy
Godly majesty. I have set the sin of my neighbor before, and mine behind,
Luke. vi.
and have much sooner spied a mote in my brothers eye, then a block in mine
own eye. By reason whereof, I have not harteli or duly (as I ought to have
done) desired that thou would forgive me my sins, the which (alas wretch
that I am) are ineffabile and innumerable. Wherefore I cry the mercy.

Prayer and confession.
Meke and gentle father, we are exceeding greatly i^ thy debte and have not, nor
know not wherewith to pay the. We know nothing better, then yt we fall prostrate
before thy fete, and cast up our eyes toward the, and cry the^ (...)
merciful and (...) his full of thy mercy (...) that no man is holy nor saved by
his own works only, Psalm. xxii
except thou have mercy on him and forgive him his sins. Happy are they whose
sins are forgeuen and covered. Happy is that man whose sins are not imputed
or rekened unto him. psalm. xxxi
O merciful father if we go not about to make our selves vngilte, fautles or
inculpable, the^ shall thou forgive us all our sins. And if we through or by
confession, do knowledge or discover our sins, then shall thou thy self
cover them, and cloak or hide our shame. In our spirit (o heavenly father) is
a great deceyt, the which without the brightness of thy Godly light, we can
neither see nor know.

We love our selves, we seek yt is ours, we fear ad^^r (...), we love not yt,
we se^^e not (...) is thine yea not so much as (...) corporal or bodily
things.

Therefore we do se our dampnacion wherein we are, and there is none that can
redeem or deliver us, except we call and cry unto the out of the depth.

O father forgive us our trespasses, through thy great merci like as a louinge
father forgeueth his child for thou have promised it unto us saying, Ezech.
18.
if ye ungodly will turn away from all his sins that he has done and keep
all my commandments and do the thing yt is equal and right doubtless he shall
live and not die for I have no pleasure in ye death of a sinner (says the
Lord) but rather yt he co^uerte and live. ii. Pet. iii
Iere. iii.
Again thou have committed fornicacio^ with many lovers, yet turn again to me
and I will receive the.

O most kind father, think upon thy promises, have mercy on us, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive the^ yt have trespassed against us. O
most loving father, we confess and grant yt it lies not in our power to
forgive our ennemies, Luke vi.
yea, and to love the^ as you co^maundest, so is our nature poisoned and
infected yt it is impossible for us to do it. The love of our selves, which is
yt root of all Sin, seeks always yt which is hers and not yt which is
thine, or yt which is to thy honor, or yt which is proffitable to our
neighbor. Thus (good father) plant in us ye true brotherly love, ye we (as you
have done and taught us) may with all our heart love the^, forgive the^ and pray
for the^. Verily I do know (most louig father) yt if we forgive not our
neighbor thou shall never forgive us our sins.

Furthermore I know that no sacrifice or prayer is acceptable or pleasant
unto the, as long as we reconsyle not our selves with our brother. Therefore
give us grace that we may forgive our devtoures, then shall thou also forgive
us our offenses, for thou art kind and full of mercy And thou art come down
from heaven here upon this earth for sinners that repent and amend their life.

And let us not be led into temptation. Psalm. xii. zacha. 14. i. Pet v.
But deliver us from evil. Amen. Confession.
O my lord God my heavenly father, I have often and many times (alas the while)
geuyng place unto temptacion. Like an unfaithful depute or liuetenaunt who
(through slouthfulnes and negligence, toward his lord) yeldeth and gives
over his castle or bulwark unto the ennemies, Neither have I beue only
satisfied with this miserable wretchedness or fragilitie and sin, but have had
pleasure and delight therein, in such manner that I have willingly stirred, moved
and given my self over and defiled my self like aswine in the muddy and
filthy puddle and mire. And have not endeavored my self to that which is
everlasting, and good. Forgive (o father) and help the feeble and weak,

Prayer and confession.
O most bounteous father, thou which art a kind and loving helper of all
the^ that fear the, and call on the in need, trouble and persecution. Behold
and consider that our life is a strife and continual warrefare here in this
world. Our ennemies cease not, the deuell goes about like a roaringe lion
sekinge whom he may devour. The glorious and flatteting world in like case,
laugheth upon us on every side. And our own flesh, and ghostly or inward
enemy cease never to spur and strive against the spirit and that so
vehemently, that of very necessite we are compelled to call upon the for help
aid and comfort, as to a faith full father, who will not suffer us to be
tempted above our power but shall faithful ye help us at our right side, i.
Cor. iiii.
to the intent we should not be overcome of our ennemies. O comforter and
father of al consolacion comfort us in all our adversity, for thou art a
father of all consolacion and thou shall strength ^^^s and make us alyu^ eue^
in the midst of persecucion. O lord we desire not 06 to be delivered from
the cross nor yet that thou take us from the world before yt our hour come
which thou have appointed.

But deliver and make us fre from evil and suffer us not to perish between
our ennemies, For if thou did not help us, our soul should immediatlye
dwell in hell, and that fearful Image of death should without ceasyng torment
trouble and vex us in everlasting darkness in the snates of hell. O thou
special helper of all weak and troubled creatures, if thou (according unto
thy Judgment) suffer us to fall (for there is no man which has not sinned) yet
lift us up again. And like as a mother list teth up her child that is fallen,
even deliver us from all th^^^ things which might or (...) be hinderfull unto
us. O mo^^^ true father, thou kepest thy covenant and promis at all times and
evermore, We trust in ye that like as thou ones haste delivered us from all
evil, through thy Son Jesus Christ, thou shall preserve and save us through
the effusion and sheddinge of his holy and precious blood, with the which he
has sprinkled and cleansed us of all our sin upon the crossr.

Conclusion of the lords prayer or pater noster.
This prayer we send unto ye o almighty, everlasting God, heavenly Father,
stedfastlye trustinge in thy bottomless mercy, and holy promises. For thine
only son our (...) Jesus Christ, (...) ^^^aunded (...) ^^^^^ge, Ask, Luke.
xi.
and it shall be ^^^e unto you, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And what
soever thou ask believe, and it shall happen unto the What soever thou ask
my father in my name (says Christ) he shall give it the. Therefore (o holy
father) we come unto the, John. 14.
in the name of thine only son, not douting but that thou will hear us,
But, o lord, give us our peticion and request, not according as it shall seine
good in our sight, or according to our will, But when thou shall think it
time, and as thou wylt, and by such means and ways as shall be most agreeable to
thy Godly will.

A brefe instruction of Baptysme.
THere are th^e which be^^^ record in heaven, John. v.
the ^^ther, the W^^^^e and the (...) ghoost, and these three are due (...) Our
lord Jesus Christ said unto his disciples, Mat. xvi
Go ye your way into all the world, and preach ye Gospel unto al creatures.
Who so believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but who so believes not, shall be
dampened. When we then are baptized, we receive a sure witness, that al we which
believe in Christ, are washed and cleansed in the precious blood of that
la^be, Jesus Christ our savior which was put to death. And the dipping in ye
water signifies unto us, that we are mortified of sin, of our own will and
of all fleshlye desire, and after this manner are we buried with Christ in ye
font. And that we are lifted again out of the fo^^e (...) that (...), yt is
(...) ^y^ne which might dr^^ge us to death, in a new spiritual life. And also
yt after this te^porall death, we shall rise again into everlasting life. And
upon this we receive our name, and thus are our names written in the roll of
the christian knights of Christ, under the standarde of the holy cross, as
long as we live.

Prayer.
O most blessed foregoer and guide of the Christen people Jesus Christ who,
submitting and humblyng thy self vouchsauedst to be baptized of John in the
Iordane, and werest not only baptized in water, but also in blood and in the
holyghoost, vouchsafe even so to enclyne, bow and dispose our outward life,
with our inward my^^^ (...) ^^^^ctes and desires in the (...) righteousness, so
that we ^^yng now mortified and dead of the old Ada^ through thy holy witness
of baptysme, by the work, and operacion of the holy ghost, may always have
our holy covenant in remembrance, and before our eyes, that vow or
covenant (I say) which we have taken upon us in baptysme, to the intent that
we may, as faithful campions, striuyng against the world, the deuell and ye
flesh, vanquish and ouercom the^ with all other wych might be noisome or
hinderfull unto us. Ame^.

A brief Instruction of christ's supper, in the which he gives us his flesh,
and blood.
Saynct Paul says to the Corinthians. g. corin. xi. Mat. xxv
That wych I delivered unto you received I of the lord. Mat. xiii Luke. xxi.


For the lord Jesus the same night in the which he was betrayed, took bread
and gave thanks, and brake it, and said, Take ye, and eat ye, this is my
body, which is broken for you. This do in the remembrance of me. After the
same manner also he took the cup when supper was done, and said. This cup
is the new testament in my blood, this do (as often as you drink it) in the
remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat of this bread and drink of
this cup, ye shall show the Lords death until he come.

Wherefore who soever shall eat of this bread, and drike of this cup of ye
lord unworthily, shall be gyltye of the body, and blood of the lord. ^. corin.
xi
But let a man examen him self, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink
of this cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily eats, and drinks
his own damnacion, because he makes no difference of the lords body. This
has the son of God first instituted unto us, to the intent we should do the
same thing after him, even unto the end of the world, and that we outwardly
should keep, hold and exercise our selves in this supper of thankesgeuing,
having always in remembrance his inexplycable love and benefit sshewed
toward us, and left us in a Testament to a corroboracion or stre^thening of
our believe or faith.

Prayer.
O most blessed and holy bloudeshearder for all synneful creatures Jesus (...)
so our (...) senses or understanding, so and in such wise (I say) that we
altogether through one perfect knowledge, in one faith and in one spirit, may
so use this mystery and holy sacrament in the christen communion and receive
the same in such wise, even as thou have instituted it, to the intent that we
may come wortely to thy communion, and that we may there so eat and drink,
and being assembled in fervent charity and brotherly love, may declare thy
bitter death to each other, and have the same always in our remembraunces,
not doubtyng but steadfastly beleuyng and contynuinge thereby unto death, that
thy holy Body and most precious blood has be^e ^ffred ^^es for all ^^pon
^he (...) of (...) ^^^fect att^^^ (...) forgeuenes of all ou^ ^yn^es.

Furthermore give us grace (o lord) that we and all men may rightlye and
justly know to what end and wherefore thou did institute and ordeyne this
new Testament to the intent that we through the same power, with a perfect
believe in the same, may steadfastly continue against our ennemies. Amen.

Finis.
The ordenary (...) Christians to ^ende a uertuous, and Godly life hear in
this vale of mysery.

Translated out of Doutch into Inglish by Anthony Scoloker.

i. Cor. vii. Let every one abide in the calling wherein he is called.

To the christen Reader.
P^^^^ (...), that (...) ^h^ (...) of our great graund m^^^er Eve, ^ Tim. ii.
who after yt she was deceived, and subdued unto ye transgression brought forth
death upon all her posterite) declares that to heal so gread a wound and to
appear beautifully in the eyes of the mighty lord, whose dear son Jesus
Christ said. Father those that thou have given unto me, I will that where I am
they be also with me, John. 17.
that they may see my glory. After the first rudiment of a Christian (the
which is faith) iii. waiting virgins, ought to be attendaunt and serviceable
unto him, that in this vale of mysery intends too lead a perfect life, love
holiness and discrecion. Under the which discrecion, as it may be gathered by
the properte of ye Greek term in that place, sophrosin.
are comprised chastity, teperaunce, modesty and decent shamefastnes, because
all these virtues are always coherent and joined together. And holiness like as
she requires to fly from al vice, so does she require ye exercise of all
virtuous ^orkes, (...) that proce^^^ (...) ^^orow love. (...) may be sanctifi^^
(...) ^ys father. I have (...) them that name. And will ^^^^are it that the
love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Wherefore that
by love, the duty of all men from the lowest to the highest may be known
from the one to the other, Read over this little book, John. xv.
that (walking ^n the dangerous paths of this exyle) thou may know how to
to be trained unto the mansion place prepared unto the rightuous that never
shall have end.

First.
How the spiritual Prelates ought to use them selves toward the comme^
people.
Behold, I send you forth as sheep, among wolves.

Go ye your way, and teach all nations and baptize the^ in the name of the
father, and of the son and of the holy ghoost. mat. r 7. c
And teach the^ to keep al things, what soever I have comma^^^ed you. Col. i.
a.


Ye have not cho^^^ (...) ^ut have chosen you, John. xv. Mat. ^0 b
and ordained you that ye go and bring forth fruit. And ye shall bear me
witness, not only at Jerusalem, John. xv. Act. i. a. and.ii. d.
but also throughout the land of Jury, and Samaria, and to ye vttermust coasts
of the earth. Joan. xxc
Receive ye holyghost. Whose sins soever ye remitt they are remitted and
whose si^nes soever ye reteyne, Mat. x. mat. 18. b
they are retained. Verily I say unto you, what soever ye shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound also i^ heaven, and what soever ye lowse upon earth,
shall be also loused in heaven Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock,
^ct. xx. d.
among the which the Holyghost has set you to be bishopes to feade the
congregation of God, which he h^^^ (...) ^^owne (...) cam^^ (...) is gone
(...) all heavens, Ephe. iiii.
to f^^^ ^a^, i. Cor. xii.
has set some to be apostles, some to be prophets some to be Evangelists
some to be shephardes and teachers wherbithe saynctes might be coupled
together through comme^ service, to ye edifieng of ye body of Christ. i. Tim.
iii Leuit. xxi Ezech. 44 Titu. iii.
A bishop must be blameless. The husband of one wife, sober discrete, manerly
h^rberous, apt to teach, not given to much wine, no fighter, not given to
filthy lucre, but ge^^le abhorring strife abhorryng covetousness, and one that
rules his own house honestly, having obedient children with al honesty. For
if he cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the congregation of
God?

The servant of ye lord ought not to strive, i. Tim. i Gal. vi. a
but to be gentle unto every man apt to teach, are (...) can forbear the (...)
with mekenes inform (...) resist, if God at any time will give the^ repentance
for to know ye truth, and to turn again from the snare of the deuel, which are
holde^ i prison of him at his will.

Preach ye word, 2. Tim. 4.
beferuent, be it in season or out of ceaso^, iproue, rebuke exhort with allong
suffering and doctrine. For ye time will come when they shall not suffer
wholesome doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall they (whose ears itch) get
the^, an heap of teachers and shall turn their ears from the truth and shall be
given unto fables. But watch thou i al things, suffer aduersite, do ye works
of a precher of the gospel, fulfill thine office unto the vttermust. Se ye
thou know ye number of thicatell, Pro. 27. c
and look well to thy flocks. John. 10 Titu. i. b.
A Bishop must cleave fast unto ye true word of doctrine, ye he may be able to
exhort with wholesome learning and to iproue the^ that sai against it. i. Pet. v.
Acto. v. c. Act. xx. d.
The elders which are among you I exhort, which am also an Elder and a witness
of ye affliction in Christ, and partaker of the glory that shall be opened. Feed
Christ's flock which is among you and take ye oversight of them not as though
ye were compelled thereto but willynglye, not for the desire of fylthy lucre,
Titu. ii. a
but of good mide, not as though ye were lords over ye pharisshe^s but ye ye
be an example to ye flock Who soever will be great among you let him be your
mynister, and whosoever will be chief, Mat. xx. d.
let him be your servant. Eue^ like as ye son of man came, not to be served,
but to do service and to give his life to a redemption for many

Go and preach the Gospel, Mat. x.
saying. The kingdom of heaven is at hand, Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, cast out the deuels, Freely ye have received, freely give
again. Matthew. xx ii^i. mat. xxv.
Who is now a faithful servant, who me his Lord has made ruler over his
boushold, that he may give them meat in due ceason? Blessed is that servant
whom his lord (when he comes) shall find, so doing. Uerely I say unto you,
he shall set him over all his goods. But and if the evil seruante shall say i
his heart, Apoe. xvi.
Tush it will be long or my lord come and begin to smite his fellows yea and
to eat and drink with the dro^ken, ye same servants Lord shall come in a
day when he looks not for him, and in an hour ye he is not ware of, and shall
heawe him in pieces and give him his reward with ypocrites, where shall be waylinge
and gnasshing of teth. I have made the a watch man unto the house of Israel,
Ezech. 33.
that where as y^ hear any thing out of my mouth, thou may warn them
in my behalf Se that ye do thus in the fear of the lord, i. para. 19
and faithfully in a perfect heart, in all causes that come unto you from your
brethern (which dwell in their Cities) between blood and blood, between law
and commandment, between statutes and ordenaunces, ye shall inform the^ ye
they sine not against the lord, and so the wrath to come upon you and your
brethren. Luke. x.
Possess neither gold nor silver. For ye labourer is worthy of his reward. Go
not from house to house, And into what soever city you enter, and they receive
you eat such things as are set before you.

How the commen people ought to use and behave them selves to wards the
spiritual prelaces.
Let every man this wise esteem us, ii Cor. iiii. i. Cor. vi. Deui. 39. Iere.
34.
eue^ for the ministers of Christ, and stewardes of the secrets of god. Now is
there no more required of the stewardes, then that they be found faithful.
Eccle. 4.


Humble thy soul under the elder, and bow down thy head to a man of
worship. Ecc. vii. d Deuteronomy. xii. Number. viii b. and. c.
Fear the lord with all thy soul and honor his ministers, love thy maker with
al thy strength, and forsake not his servants. ^. Tim. vc
Fear the lord with all thy soul, and honor his priests. The Elders ye rule
well, are worthy of double honor, most special ye they which labor i the
word and in teachinge. Deuteronomy. xxv
For ye scripture says* Th^^ shall not mosell the mou^^ of the ox yt treads
out ^e corn. i. These. v.
And ye labourer is worthy of his reward We beseke you brethern, yt ye know
them which labor among you, and have the oversight of you in ye Lord and give
you exhortacio^, Heb. xiii.
that ye have the^ the more i^ love, for their words sake and be at peace
with them. Remember them which have ye oversight of you, i. Cor. ix.
which have declared unto you ye word of God. The end of whose conversation
se that you look upon and follow their faith. Obey the^, and submit your
selves unto the^, for they watch for your souls, even as they that must gyu^
accountes therefore. Who goes a warfare at any time upon his own wages? Who
planteth a vinyarde and eats not of ye fruit thereof? Who fedeth a flock, and
eats not of ye milk of ye flock? Romans xv d Galla. vi
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we repe
your bodily things? but if other be partakes of this power on you wherefore
are not we rather? Know ye not yt they which labor i^ ye temple, have their
living of ye temple? Mat. x. a.
And they ye wait at the altar, enjoy the altar Even thus also has ye
lord ordained yt they which preach the Gospel should live of ye Gospel.
Ezechias conmaunded ye people yt dwelt at Jerusalem, ^. Para. zi. a.
yt they should give porcio^s of their goods unto ye priests, ye they might
ye more steadfastly e^dure i^ ye law of ye lord.

If a matter be to hard for ye in judgment between blood, and blood, Dent.
18.
between plee, and plee between stroke and stroke. Thou shall rise and go to ye
priests ye levites and to the judge which shall be at that (...) are of them
and they shall (...) how to judge and thou shall do thereafter, as they say unto
ye. And if any man deal presumptuouslye, so that he harkeneth not unto the
priest (which stands to do service unto the lord thy God) or to the Judge,
the same shall dye.

How the worldly and superior powers, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, Judges,
and rulers ough to live with their subjects.
Hear, (o ye kings) and understand. Sap. vi. a
O learn ye yt be Judges of the ends of ye earth give ear, ye yt rule ye
multitudes, Romans xiii
and delight in much people. For ye power is given you of the lord, and the
strength from the highest, which shall try your works and search out your
Imaginacio^s, how yt ye, being officers of his kingdom, have not executed true
judgment have not kept ye law of righteousness nor walked after ye w^ll of God.

A king shall not have many horses, Deuteronomy. xvii
nether shall he have many wives, nether shall he gather him silver and gold to
much. He shall not lift up his heart above his brethern and shall not turn a
side from the commandments of God, neither to ye righthand nor to the lift
hand. Pro. xx. d
Mercy, and faythfulnes preserve the King, and with loving kyndenes his seat
is holden up. pr^n. xxix
The fear of the king that faithfully judges the pore, shall continue sure
for evermore. Like as a roaryng lion, and an hungrye bear, eue^ so is an
ungodly prince over the poor people. Where the prince is without understanding
there is great oppression and wrong But if he be such one as hates
covetousness, Mich. ii. a
he shall long reygne Hear, Den. xvii Iere. v. a. Psalm. 131
o (...) of ye house of Jacob, (...) of ye house of Israel, shu^^ li^^ y^ know
what were (...) and right but ye hate ye good, and love ye evil, ye pluck of
men's skins, Iere. 23 a and. 21. d zacha. vii. b. and. viii. c
and the flesh from their bones. Keep equity and righteousness, deliver the
oppre^sed from the power of ye viole it, do not grieve nor oppress the
stranger the fatherles nor ye widdowe, Psalm. ii. a ezay. 37. c
and sheade no innocent blood in this place.

Be wise now therefore (o ye kings) be warned ye yt are judges of the earth.
Serve the lord with fear and rejoice before him with reverence. Sap. i. a 3.
Reg. 3. a
Kiss the son lest the lord be angrye, and so ye perish from the right way.
O set your affection upon wisdom. ye that be judges of the earth. Eccle. vii
Job. ix. a. and. c.
Make no labor too be made a Judge, except it so were ye you could mightelt
put down wickedness. Take heed ye (...) what ye do, Luke. xix.
for ye execute (...) the ^^^gement of men, ii. par. xix
but of the lord. And he is with you in judgment. Therefore let the fear of
the lord be with you, and beware and do it, for with the lord our God there is
no unrighteous nor respect of parso^s, nor accepting of gifts. Eccl. 4. b.
In judgment be merciful unto the fatherles as a father, and be in stead of
an husband unto their mother. Pro. ix. a
With true judgment the king sets up the land, but if he be a man that
takes gifts, he turns it vpside down. Dell. xvii
Be no accepter of persons, neither be desirours of gifts, for they make wise
me^ blind and change the words of the rightuous. He ye has respect of
persons, i^ judgment, Pro. ii.
does not well, and why? He will do wrong, yea, even for a piece of bread. A wise
judge will order his people with discrecio^, and where a man of, understanding
bears rule there ^^e^h it well, As ye rudge of the people is himself, Pro.
xxix
eue^ so are his officers, and look what manner of man ye ruler of ye city is,
such are they ye dwell therein. The ungodly takes gifts out of the bosom to
wrast ye ways of judgment. Pro. xxvii Apoc xxiii
Thou shalt not wrast the righ of the pore i^ his cause, keep ye far from
false matters, Deu. xvii Exo. xxiii Susan. 8. Ecc. xx. ^
The innocent and rightuous shall thou not slay, Thou shall take no gifts, for
gifts blind eue^ the^ that are sharp of sight, and wrast the ryghtuous
causes. Leuit. ^4 Ezay, vi c Pro. iii. a Deuteronomy. 17. Ezech. 1^
Cursed is he that wrasteth the right of ye widow, Woe unto them that are
conning men to suppe out wine, and expert to set up dronkennes, These give
sentence with the ungodly for rewards, but condemn the just cause of the
rightuous.

Woe be unto you (o ye judges) that make unrighteous laws, Mat. r3. Ezay. 28.
and deuyse things Wh^^^e be to hard for to keep, where through ye pore are
oppressed on every side, and the innocents of my people, are therwych robbed
of judgment ye widows may be your pray, Eccle. 32. Deu. xvii.
and that ye may rob the fatherles If thou be made a ruler, pride not thy
self there in, but be thou as one of the people.

Let him that rules be diligent. Romans xii.


How subjects shall behave themselves toward their superiors, and temporal
rulers.
The rulers of the people shall thou not blaspheme. Exodus 2r Act. 23. a. pro.
24. a and. xx.
Fear the lord and the king, and keep no company with the slanderous, for
their destruction shall come suddenly.

Pray for kings and rulers.
Warn the people that they i. Tim. ii.
submit the se^^es unto princes, and to the higher ^^ctorite, Titu. 3. a. Romans
5. a 1. pet. 2. a i. pet. ii. b
and to obey the officers. Submit your selves unto all manner ordenaunce of men
for the lords sake, wheter it be unto the king as unto the chief head, Titu.
3. a.
or unto rulers as unto they yt are sent of him for the punishment of evil
doers, but for the praise of the^ that do well.

Let every soul submit him self to the auctorite of ye higher powers. For
there is no power but of God. Romans xiii
The powers yt be are ordained of God, so yt who soever resists ye power,
resists the or denaunce of God. Sapi. vi. 1. pet. a. b
And they yt resist, shall receive to the^ selves da^pnacio^. For rulers are not
to be feared for good works, but for euel. And the ruler bearet not the
sweard for naught. Romans xiii
For he is the mynister of god a taker of vengeance too punish him that does
evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey not only for punishment, but also because
of conscience. For this cause must ye give tribute also. For they are gods
mymisters, which mayntein the same defense, Give to every man therefore his
duty, Romans xiii Mat. 7.
Tribute too whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom is due, fear, to
whom fear belongs, Mat. 22 c Mat. 7. d Romans xiii
Honor to whom honor perteyneth.

Give unto the Emperor that which is the emperous. And give unto God that
which is Gods.

How parents as father and mother ough to rule and bring up their Children in
the fear of the lord.
If thou have sons, bring the^ up i^ nurtour and learning, Ecc. vii. c and.
1^. a
and hold the^ in awe from their youth up. If thou have daughters, keep their
body and show not thy self cherefull toward the^. Mary thy daughter, and
(...) shall thou perform a we (...) matter, but give her to a man of
understanding. Who so loves his child holds him still under correction ye he
may have Joy of him afterward. Eccle. 30
He that teaches his son, shall have Joy of him, and needs not too be
ashamed among his acqua yntaunce. Pro xiii. c Deuteronomy. vi a
Woe so enformeth and teaches his son greueth the ennemy, and before friends
ye may have joy of him. If thou die yet art thou as though you were not dead,
for thou have left one behind the ye is like unto ye. An untamed horse will be
hard, and a wa^to^ child will be wilful. If thou bring up thy child
delicatelye, he shall make the afraid, and if thou play with him, he shall
bring the to heaviness. Laugh not with hi^, least thou weep with him also, and
least thy teth be set on edge at ye last.

If thy daughter be wanton keep her straightli, least she cause thine enemies
laugh ye to scorn and the whole city to give the an evil report, and so
thou befayne to hear thy shame of eueri man. Thou shall not hold thy daughter
to whoredom, ye ye land fall not to whordome, and ware full of wickedites. If thy
daughter be not shametast, hold her strayghtli least she abuse her self
through over much liberty. Beware of all the dishonestie of her eyes

There shall be no whore among the daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy. 23 Number. 25 Mich.
i. b Eccl. 22
neither whorekeper among the sons of Israel. A misnurtered son is the
dishonor of the father, A folish daughter shall be little regarded. And she that
comes to dishoneste, brings her father in heaviness.

A daughter ye is past shame dishonors (...) father and her husband, (...)
rate not your children, (...) of a ^esperate mind He ye spares the rod
hates his son, Collo. iii.
but who so loves him, holds him eueri nurtour, Pro. 13. c Psalm. 23. Heb.
xii. b Psalm. 33 Ephe. i. a
ye fathers provoke not your children unto wrath, but bring the^ up in the
nurtour, and informacion of the lord. Witholde not correction from thy child
for if thou beatest him with ye rod, he shall not die thereof. Pro. 33
and.xiii. c Eccle. 33.
Thou smitest him with the rod, but thou delyuerest his soul from hell Let
the elder man be sober, honest, discrete, sound in the faith, in love, in
patience. Litu. ii. c
Let the old women show them selves as it becomes holiness, that they be no
false accusers, not given to much wine, that they teach honest things, that
they inform the young women to be, sober minded, to love their husbands, to
^^ue their children, to be ^^crete, chaste huswifly, good, obedient unto their
husbands, that the word of God be not euel spoken of. Genesis iii
Let the yongmen like wise be sober.

How youth shall obey their elders, honoring them in the fear of the lord.
Ye children obey your elders in the lord, Ephe vi. a Collo. iii Exodi. xx
for that is right. Honor thy father and thy mother, ye is the first
commandment ye has any promise, that thou may prosper and live long upon
earth. Titu. ii. a i. Pet. ii Ecc. vii. c and. iii. a.
Let the yongme^ be soberminded

Ye younger submit your selves unto the elder.

Honor thy father from thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrowful travail
that thy mother had with the.

Remember that thou wast borne thoro^^ (...), and how caust thou reco^^^^^ the^
the things that they have (...) for ye: Lob. iii a
Hold thy mother in honor all the days of thylife, For thou ought to
remember what, Lob. iiii.
and how great parreles the suffered for the i^ her womb. My son care and be
wise so shall thine heart prosper in the way. Let not thine heart be gelous to
follow sinners but keep the still in the fear of ye lord all the day long. Pro.
xxiiii
Keep no company with wine bibbers and riottours eateres of flesh for such as
be dronkardes and riottoursshal come to poverty, Pro. xxii.
and he that is given to much sleep, shall go with a ragged coat. Give ear
unto thy father that begatte the, and despise not thy mother wha^ she is old.

The lord will have ye father honored of ye children, Eccle. ^
and look what a mother commands her children to do, he will have it kept.
Who so honoreth his father, Exodus r 0 Deuteronomy. v. c
his sins shall be forgeuen him, and he that honors his mother, gathers
treasure together. Who so honoreth his father, shall have joy of his own
children, and when he makes his prayer, he shall be heard. He that fears the
lord, honors his father and mother, and does the^ service, as it were unto
the lord him self, Honor thy father in deed, Give. ii. ^ and. 4 9. Deuteronomy. z 4.
in word and in all Patience, yt thou may have his blessyng for the
blessyng of the father buyldeth up the house of the children, but the mothers
curse, roteth out the foundacions. My son make much of thy father in his age,
and grieve him not as long as he lives. And if his understanding fail, have
patience with him* and despise him (...) ^^^^th, He y^ (...) come to shame, and
(...) his mother, is cursed of God. Pro. xix d
He yt hurts his father, or shuts out his mother, is a shameful, and an
unworthy son. Leuit. xxi
Thou shall rise up before a gray head, and shall give reverence unto the aged.

How the master and mastres ought to use them selfs toward their servants.
He that dilicatelye brings up his servant from a child, Pro. xxix
shall make him his master at length. Where as thy servant works truly,
entreat him not euel, Eccle. 7 c
nor the hyreling yt is faithful unto the. Love a discrete servant as thine
own soul. The fodder, ye whippe and the burden belongs unto the ass,
meat, correction, and work unto the servant. If thou let thy servant
labor, thou shall find rest, but if thou let him go I dell, he shall seek
^^bertie. The yoke, and the whippe bow down the neck, but tame thou ye euel
servant with bands and correction. Set him to work, for yt belongs unto
him, and becomes him well If he be not obedient, bind his fete, but do not
to much unto him i^ aniwise, and without discrecio^ do nothing If thou have a
faithful servant, let him be unto ye as thine own soul, for in blood have
thou gotten him, if y^ entreatest him euel, Collo. iii.
and kepest him hard, he will run a way from ye, ye masters, do unto your
servants yt which is just and equal, and know yt ye also have a master i^
heaven. ye masters, Ephe vi. a Eccle. zz. Collo. iii c
put away your threateninges, and know yt their God, is your God also, neither
is there any respect of persons with him (...) lion in thy^^ own house,
destroying thy household fo^^es, Tobi. iii. Deuteronomy. 24
and oppressing them yt are under the. Who soever works any thing for the,
immediately give him his hyre, and look yt thy hired servants wages remain
not by the over night. Leuit. xix Tob. xiiii Eccl. 2. z. b Eccl. z 4 c Eccle.
5. c
The workemans labor shall not bide with the unto the morning, He the
defraudeth the labourer of his hyre, is a bloudsheader.

How servants ought too be have them selves in the service of their masters
or lords. Dames or mastresses.
Let as many servants, as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of
all honor, yt the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. Se that
they which have believing masters, despise the^ not, for they are Brethern, but
rather do them service, for so much as they are believing and beloved, and
partakers of the benefyte, Col. iii. c. Ephe. vi. T^tu. ii. b i. Pet. ii a
ye servants, be obedient unto your bodily masters in all things not with
eye service as menpleasers, but i^ sin glenes of heart, fearing God. What
soever ye do, do it heartily eue^ as unto ye lord and not unto me^. And be sure,
that of the lord, ye shall receive the reward of the in heritaunce, for ye
serve the lord Christ ye servants be obedient unto your masters, Titu. ii. a
Ephe. i. a. Col. iii. a.
and please the^ i^ al things, not answering the^ again, neither, be ye
pikers, but show al good saythfulnes, that in all things ye may do worship
unto the doctrine of God our savior. ye servants obey your masters with all
fear, not only if they be good and courteous but also though they be froward
For that is grace, if a man for conscien^e tow (...) God endure gre^^ (...).
For what praise is it if wha^ ye be buffeted for your fautes ye take it
pacie^tly. But if when ye do well ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently that is
grace with God.

The duty of married men toward their wives.
Depart not from a discrete and good woman that is fallen unto the for thy
portion in the fear of the lord. Eccle. vii
The gift of her honesty is above gold. If thou have a wife after thine own
mind, Eccl. ix. b
forsake her not and commit not thy self to the hateful. Use thy self to
live joyful ye with thy wife whom thou love all the days of thy life (which
is but vain) that God has given the under the sun all the days of thy
vanity, Mat. vi. Pro. v. c.
for that is the portion in this life of al thy labor and travail ye thou
taken* under ye sun, ye husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the
congregation, Ephe. v. c Bal. ii. c. Titu. z. c. i. Pet. z. a
and gave him self for it to sanctifye it and cleansed it in the fonteyne of
water by the word, to make it unto him self a glorious rgregacion, having no
spot nor wryncle nor any ^uch thing but yt it should be holy and without blame.
So ought me^ also to love their wives, eue^ as their own bodies He yt loves
his wife, Mat. v. d
loves him self. Who so ever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornication) causes her too break matrimony. i. Pet. iii a i. Pet. iiii
And who so ever marieth her yt is deuorsed, breaks wedlock, ye me^ dwell with
your wives according unto knowledge, geui^g honor unto ye wife, as unto ye
weaker vessel, and as unto the^ yt are heirs with you of the grace of life,
that your prayers be not let. If any man make a vow unto the lord or swear an
oath, Number. xxx Deu. xxiii
so that he bind his soul, he shall not break his word, but do all that is
proceaded out of his mouth.

The duty of married women to wards their husbands.
Let the women submit the^ selves unto their husbands, Ephe. v. c Collo iii c
i. pet. iii. a
as unto the lord. For the husband is the wives head, eue^ as Christ also is
ye head of the rgregacion and he is the savior of his body. Therefore as the
congregation is in subjection to Christ, Cor. ix. a
likewise let the wives be in subjection to their husbands in all things. ye
women be subject unto your husbands, that even they which believe not the
word, i. Pet. iii. i. Cor. xi a
may without the word be won by your conuerfacion wha^ they behold your
rue^sacio^ in fear. Whose apparel shall not be outward with broydred hear,
Ephe. v. Collo. iii c ii. Tim. ii
and hanging on of gold, or in putting on of gorgious array but let the inward
man of the heart be incorrupte with a meke, and a quiet spirit which before
God is much set by For after this manner in the old time did the holy women
which trusted in God, tyer them selves, and were obedient unto their
husbands, eue^ as Sara obeyed Abraham and called him lord. Genesis xviii
Let the women array them selves in comely apparel withshamefastnes, and
discrete behavior, not with broydred hear or gold or Pearls or costly array, i.
Tim. ii.
but with such as it becomes women that profess Godlynes through good
works. i Cor. xiiii Ephe. v.
Let your wives keep silence with al subjection. Suffer not a woman to teach
nor to have a^^torytie over the man, but for to be in silence. For Adam was
first formed, Genesis iii.
and then Eve. Adam also was not deceived, but the woman was deceived, and has
brought in ye tra^sgression. Notwithstanding through bearing of children she
shall be saved, if she continue in faith, and in love and in sanctifyinge with
discrecion. Let your wives keep silence in the congregation, for it shall not be
permitted unto the^ to speak, but to be under obedience as the law says, But
if they will learn any thing let the^ axe their husbands at home. Number. xxx
For it becomes not women to speak in the congregation, A man shall be lord
and ruler in his house and the woman shall be subject too her husband. If a
married woman make a vow, and if she have letten go our of her lyppes a bond
over her soul, and her husband hear it, and holds his peace thereat the same
day yt he hears it, the^ her vow, and band wherewith she has bound her
self over her soul, shall stand in effect But if her husband forbid her ye
same day ye he hears it, the^ is ye vow louse ye she has upon her, and the
band also yt she has lette^ go out of her lips over her soul.

Of the state of matrimony i^ general.
In the beginning God created man and woman, Mat. i. a Give. ii. d
for this cause shall a man leave father, and mother, and cleave to his wife.
And they two shall be one flesh, now are they not twain, but one fleash. Let no
man therefore put a sonder that which God, has coupled together. ^ Cor. vii.
To awoyde whoredom, let every man have his own wife, (...) let every woman
have her (...), let the man give unto the wife due benevolence like wise also
ye wife unto the man. The wife has not power over her own body, but the
husband, and likewise the man has not power over his own body, but the wife.
Withdraw not your selves one from an other, Job. vi. d and. vii. a Joel. ii. c.
except it be with ye consent of both for a time that ye may give your selves
unto fasting and prayer, and the^ come together again, least fatha^ t^pt you
for your incontinency. Hebr. xiii.
Let wedlock be had in price in all points, and let the chamber be
undefiled.

For whorekepers and aduouterers God will judge. The lord favors man, and
wife that agree well together.

Happy is the man that has a virtuous wife, Eccle. ^ii and. ci. d. Eccle. xx
vi. d.
for the number of his years shall be double. A woman shall not separate her
self from her husband, but if she separate her self, that she remayn unmarried,
or be reconsiled to her husband. 1. Cor. vii.
A woman that is in subjection to the man, is bound unto the law while the man
lives but if the man dye, Romans vii.
the^ is she loused from the law that concerns the man. If she be with an
other man, while her man lives, she shall be called a wedlock breaker But if
the man be dead, Mat. v. d
the^ is she fre from the law, so that she is no wedlockbreaker if she be with
an other man.

Of the state of virgins.
I say to them that are unmarried and to widows (says. Cor. 7. a
S. Paul) It is good for the^ yt they abide also as Ido. Tim. v. b
But if they can not abstain, let the^ mary, for it is better to mary the^ to
burn. As concerning virgins I have no commandment of the lord, 1. cor. vii^
nevertheless I say my good meaning as I have obtained mercy of the lord to be
faithful. I suppose it is good for the present necessite, for it is good for a
man so to be. Number. xxx
Art thou bound unto a wife, seek not to be loused Art ye loused from a wife,
seek not a wife If a damsel make a vow unto ye lord while she is in her
fathers house, and unmarried, and her vow or ba^d ye she makes over her soul
comes to her fathers ears, and he hold his peace thereto, then all her
vows, and hands that she has bound her self withal over her soul, shall
stand in effect.

Of the state of widows. i. Tim.

She that is a right widow and desolate, puts her trust (...) God, Luke
iii. f. ii. Cor. i.
and continues in prayer, and supplication night and day. But she that lives
in pleasures, is dead even yet alive. A widow must be without blame. Gala. vi.
But if there be any that provides not for his own, and specially for the^ of
his household, the same has denied the faith, 1. Pet. ii.
and is worse then an infydell. Let no widow be chosen under threscore year
old, and such one as was ye wife of one man, and well reported of in good
works if she have brought up children well, 1. Tim. v.
if she have been harberowes, if she have washed the saictes fete, ii. Pet.
iiii
if she have ministered unto the^ which were in adversity, if she were
continually given to all manner of good works. But the younger widows refuse.
For wha^ they have begone to wax wa^ton against Christ they will mary hau^^g
(...) ^npuacion, because (...) broken the first faith (...) this they are ydel,
and learn to run about from house to house. Not only are they ydell, but
also trifling and busy bodies, speaking things which are not comely. Number. xxx
The vow of a widow, and of her ye is deuorsed, all that she binds her self
withal over her soul, shall stand in effect upon her.

Exhortacion to the rich of this world.
If riches increase, set not your heart upon them. Psalm. li
It becomes not a covetous man and a nygarde to be rich, and what should a
nygard do with gold? He that with all his carefulnes heapeth together
vnrightuously, gathers for other folks, Eccl. 23
and an other man shall make good there with his goods. He (...) wicked unto
him self, how should he be good unto other men? How can such one have any
pleasure of his goods? there is nothing worse, then when one disfauoureth him
self, and this is a reward of his wickedness. If he do any good he does it not
knowing thereof and against his will, and at the last he declares his
ungraciousness. Pro. r 7. Eccle. iii.
A nigarde has a wicked eye, he turns away his face and despises his own
soul. A covetous man has never in ough in the porcio^ of wickedness, until ye
time that he wither away, and have lost his own soul. Ecc. 24. b Eccle. iiii
To. iiii. b Luke. xvi.
A wiked eye spares bread, and there is scarsenes upon his table. My son do
good to thy self of that thou have, and give the lord his due offrynges. Do
good unto thy friend before thou dye, and according to thy abylitie (...) out
(...) ^ ough^ (...) self, ^ob. i. ^ ^. Tim. vi
and not (...) Charge the^ which are (...) in this woorlde that they be not
^^^^d, nor trust in the uncertain riches but in that living God (which gives
us aboundauntly all things to enjoy the^) that they do good, Mat. vi d
that they be rich in good works, yt they give, and distribute with good
will, gatheryng up treasure for them selves, a good foundation against that
time to come, To. iiii. b
that they may lay hand on eternally fe. Give alms of thy goods, and turn
never thy face from the pore, for alms delivers from death, and suffers not
the soul to come in darkness. A great confort is alms before the hye God,
unto all them the do it. Let never pride have rule in thy mind, nor i^ thy
word for in pride began all destruction, Happy is the rich that is found
without fa^^e, Give. iii.
and (...) turns not from the right ^ay for gold, Eccle. iiii
neither put^^th hy^ trust in mon^i or treasure. Go to know ye rich men, weep
and howl on your wretchedness that shall come upon you, Tim. vi
your riches are corrupt your garments are moatheate^, your gold and your
silver are cank^ed and the rust of the^ shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped treasure together in your last
days. Leuit. x. c Deuteronomy. 24 Too. iiii. c
Behold the hyer of the laborers which have reaped your own feldes (which
hier is of you kept back by fraud) cries, and ye cries of them which have
reaped, are eatred into the ears of ye lord sabbath. Luke. xv c
ye have lived in pleasure on the earth and in wantonness, ye have condemned
and have killed the Just, Eccle. x. b
and he has not resisted you. There is nothing worse then a couet^us man. What
pridest thou the^, O thou ashes: there is not a more wicked thing the^ to love
money. And why? such one has his soul to sell, yet is he but a fylthy donge
while he lives. Although the phisician show his help never so long, yet in
conclusion it goes after this manner, to day a king, to morrow dead. For when a
man dies, he is the hyere of beasts, serpents and worms. Woe he unto the
proud well thy in Sion too such as think them selves so sure upon the mount
of samaria. Amos. vi. Luke. vi
Which hold the^ selves for the best of the world, and rule that house of
Israel even as they list, behold ^s the border of the land of the Philstines
wider then yours?

ye are taken out for the euel day, ye that sytte in the stole of: wylfulnes,
ye that lyghe upon beds of Iuory and use your wantonness upon your couches,
Job. xxi. Ezay. v b. Reg. v d
ye that eat the best lambs of the flock and the fattest calves of ye
droaue, ye that sing to the lute, and in playing of instruments compare your
selves unto David, ye that drink wine out of gobbletes, and anoynte your
selves with ye best oil, Prouer xi Psalm. 40
but no man is sorry for Ioseps hurt. Who so trusts i^ his riches, shall
perish Blessed is he yt considers the pore, for the lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble. Ma. ix. c Luke. xi. d Eccle. 36
Se that ye gather you not treasure upon earth where rust and mothes corrupt,
and where thieves break through and steal, But gather you treasure together in
heaven where nether rust nor mothes corrupt, Pro xxiiii
and where thieves nether break up nor yet steal. Luke xii. c
For where your treasure is there is your heart also, ye cannot serve God, and
mammon. Make you frindes with the unrighteous mammon, Luke xv. a
that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into the everlasting
tabernacles. All they that will be rich fall into te^ptacion and snares and
into many folish and noisome lusts, Tim. vi b Pro. 33
which drown men in destruction and da^pnacion. For covetousness is the root
of all evil, which whyse some lusted after, they erred from the faith and
tangled them selves with many sorrows.

Exhortacion to the poor, sick and impotent Parsons.
Blessed are the poor i^ spirit, Mat. v. a Luke. vi. Pro. xv
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. All the days of the poor are miserable,
but a quiet heart is a continual feast. Better is a little with the fear of the
lord, the^ great treasure, Psalm. 36. Pro. xix.
Better is the poor that truth Godly, the^ the blasphemer that is but a
fool. A poor man leading a godly life, is better then the rich that goes in
fro ward ways. Pro. 27 a
A small thing yt ye rightuous has is better then great riches of the ungodly
The lord knows the days of the Godly, Psalm. xxx Prou. 15 b Eccl. 28 c i.
Tim. vi
and there in he ritaunce shall endure for evermore. The lord is a defense for
the pore, a defense in ye time of trouble. For the lord forgets not ye
complaynt of the pore. The lord shall deliver you pore from the mighty, and the
wretched and miserable pore sely people, which have no help. The lord will not
forget the pore, the pacient abiding of such as be in trouble shall not perish
for ever. Psalm. xx^.
He shall be favorable to the simple and pore, he shall preserve the souls of
such as be in adversity. He shall deliver their soul? from extorcion and
wrong, and dear shall their blood be in his sight. The prayer of ye pore
goes out of the mouth, and comes unto the ears, Eccle. xxi Exodus v. b
and his vengeance (or defense) shall command that hastily. A simple man which
labors and works, is better then one that is gorgious, and wants bread.

Thou art the poor man's help (o lord) a strength for the nedefall in his
necessytie. Pro. xxii. Eccl. x c d
Thou art a defense unto him against evil wether, Ezay. xxv
and a shadow against the heat.

The pore shall not always be out of remembrance, the pacient abidyng of such as
be in trouble, shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 71 a
The lord shall keep yt sim^le flock by their right, defend the children of
the pore and punish the wrongeous doers. Ezay. xii
The pore sely people covet water, and they can get none, and their tongue is
waxed dry for thrust, I the lord shall hear the^ I the God of Israel will not
for sake the^. Jacob. i a
Has not God chosen ye pore of this world which are rich in faith, and heirs
of the kingdom which he promised to them that love him? Eccl. xi.
The pore yt wants strength and has great poverty, the eye of God looks
upon hi^ to good, sets him up from his low estate and lifts up his head

Exhortacion to the artificer or handicraftes man.
In ye sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, Give. iii.
till thou be turned again unto earth whence yt art taken. Man is borne to
labor, Job. v. a.
like as ye bird for to fly. An ydell hand makes pore, Pro. x. a:
but a quick labouringe had makes rich. Who so gathers in Summer, is wise,
Eccl. zi. c Romans xii.
but he that is slougish in harvest brings him self to confusion. In all thy
works be deligent and quick, so shall there no sickness happen unto the.
Eccle. x. d
Be not proud to do thy work, and despair not in the time of adversity. Pro.
xvi. i
Who so is slouthful and slack in his? about, is the Brother of him that is a
wayster. Slouthfulnes brings sleep, Pro. xix
and an ydell soul shall suffer hungre. The devises of one that is diligent
bring plenteousenes, Pro. xxi a
but he that is unadvised comes unto poverty. ii. Tess. iii
He that labors not shall not eat. A man shall go forth to his work, and
till his land unto ye eueni^g. psalm 103
Thou shall eat the labors of thine own hands, psalm. 127
so shall it go well with the and thou shall be blessed. Thy wife shall be as a
fruteful vi^e upon the walls of thy house. Thy children like the olive
branches round about thy table. To thus shall the man be blessed that fears
the lord. Eccl. v. b. Job. x. b
A laboring man sleapeth swetely, whether it be little or much that he eats,
but the abundance of the rich, will not suffer him to sleap Take not over
great travail and labor to be rich. Pro. xxiiii Iere. xvii Eccle. xix
A labouringe man yt is given unto dronkennes, shall not be rich. Delight not
thou in sleep, Pro. xv.
least thou come unto pouer te, but open thine eyes, and thou shall have bread
enough. All that a man eats and drynketh yea, Eccl. 3^ b
what soever a man enjoys of al his labor, the same is a gift of God.

Exhortacion to Religious or denout parsons.
Jacob f. c This is a pure religion ordey ded of god other religious as f cotes
gyrdles, botes et c. are famed Ipoctisy. Eccle. ii.
Pure devotion and undefiled before God the father is this To visit the
frendles, and widows in their adversity, and to keep him self unspotted of
the world. If any man among you seame devout and refrain not his tongue, but
deceive his own heart, this man's devotion is in vain. The fear of the lord
is the right good, service that preserves, and justifies the heart, and
geuith mirthe and gladness.

Exhortacion to the merchant.
It is nough, it is nough says ye bier, but when he has it, Pro. xx
he does praise it. A false bala^ce is an abhominacio^ unto ye lord, Pro. xi. a.
deal not wrongfully with thy neighbor, Leuit. xix
with metyard, weight or mesure, Wha^ thou sellest ought unto thy neighbor,
Deuteronomy. 23. Leuit. xi
or biest any thing of him deceive nor oppress him not. Thou shall not have in
thy bag two manner of weyghtes, a great and a small. Neither shall thou have in
thy house diverse measures, a great and a small / ye thy life may be long in the
land / which ye lord thy God shall give the: for woe so ever does so, is an
abhominacio^ unto the Lord thy God, God knows both the deceyuer, and him that
is deceived. Job. xii


Exhortacion to the husbaudman.
Who so tylleth his ground shall be filled with bread. Pro. xii
Who so hoordeth up his corn, shall be cursed among the people / but blessyng
shall light upon his head that sells it. Prone. xi
When thou have reaped down thine harvest / and have forgotten a sheafe in the
field thou shalt not turn again to Deuteronomy. 24 Leuit. xix
fech it / but it shall be for the stranger, the fatherles and the widow / that
ye lord thy* God may bless the in all the works of thy hands. In like case
when thou have plucked thine olyue trees and vinyarde, Leuit. xix Deuteronomy. 24
When thou reapest thy land thou shall not reap down the vttermust borders of
it round a bout, nor gather it al clean up. Even so likewise thou shall not
pluck thy vinyarde clean also / nor gather up ye grapes that are fallen down
/ but shall leave the^ for the pore and strangers for I am the lord your God.

Exhortacion to soldiers or meu of war.
When thou go out to battle aginst thine enemies / and seist horses and
charets of the people more the^ thou: Deu. x. a
be not afraid of them. Now / wen ye are come nigh unto the battle, ye
priest shall step forth and speak to ye people, and say unto the^. Deu. xii.
c Number. 14 1. Mat. 4 Deuteronomy. xxv
Hear (o ye people) ye go this day into ye battle against your ennemies, let
not your hait faynte. Fear not, be not a frayed of them, for the lord your
God goes with you, Number. xxi
to fight for you, against your enemies, that he may save you. When thou
comes nygh unto a city too fight against it, thou shall offer the^ peace. But
if they will not deal peaceably with the, Deuteronomy. x. c
and will war with the the^ befege it. Wha^ thou must ligh a long season
before a city against yt which thou make war to take it, thou shall not
destroy ye trees nor heawe the^ down with ye axe for thou may eat of the
fruit, for it is but wood upon ye field and no man, and cannot come and be
bull warkes against the. But the trees that thou know that me^ eat not of,
those shall thou destroy, and rote out, and make bull warkes thereof against the
city that warreth with the till thou have overcome it. Let him that is a fear
de and faynte, turn home again. Mat. iii b i. Ieg. 14.
It is a small matter for many to be overcome with few, yea, there is no
difference too the God that is in heauen-to deliver by a great multitude or by
small company, for the victory of the battle stands not in the multitude of
ye host but the strength comes from heaven, ye Soldiers do no man wrong,
Luke iii. b
and be content with your wages.

Exhortacion to custumers toluers, and publicanes.
ye custumers and tolners, require no more of the people then is appointed you.

Exhortacion to lombardes and vzurers.
If thy brother ware pore and fall in decay beside the, Leuit. 25 Exo. xxv Deuteronomy.
24 Ezech. 18
thou sha^^ receive him as a stranger ^^gest, that he may live by the, and
thou shall take no usury of him, nor more then thou have given, but shall fear
thy God, that thy brother may live beside the. For thou shall not lend him thy
money upon usury, nor deliver him thy meat upon advantage. Let no man take
usury of his brother. Deuteronomy. 24 Ero. xxii Leui. xxv
Thou shall occupye no usury unto thy brother, neither with money nor with food
nor with any manner of thing ye usury may be used withal, that the lord thy
God may bless the in all that thou take in hand. Wha^ one of thy brethern is
waxed pore in any cyt ye within the land which the lord thy GOD shall give
the, Deu. xv a ^. John. 7
thou shalt not harde^ thine heart, nor withdraw thine hand from thy poor
brother, but shall open thine hand unto him and send him according as he has
need. Beware yt there be not a point of belial in thine heart, tho^ (...) think
not ye he shall not give it the again. For if thou lokest not friendly upon thy
brother, Romans x. b
and geuest him nothing them shall he cry over ye unto the lord, and it shall be
counted sin unto ye. But thou shall give him For because of it shall ye load
thy God bless the in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand unto.
The land shall never be without pore, therefore and maund I the and say, yt
thou open thine ha^ de unto thy Brother, which is nedye and poor in thy land.
If thou lend a pore body (says god) thou shalt not lie down to sleep with
his pledge, Deu. xiiii
shall deliver him his pledge again gain when the Sun goes down yt he may
sleep i his own raiment and Bless the so shall the same be rekened unto
righteousness before ye lord thy God. Psalm. xiiii
Lord (says david) who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: Who shall res^ upon thy
holy hyl. Do that swears unto his neighbor and disapointeth him not. He yt
geneth not his money upon, usury, and takes no reward, against, the
innocent. Ezech. 18
If a man do Godly, and do the thing that is equal, and right, be greueth no
body, he gives his detter his pledge again, he parts his meat with the
hungry, he clotheth the naked, he lends nothing upon, usury, he withdraws
his hand from doing among, he ha^deleth faith fulli betwixt man and man. Mat.
ii* Psalm. xiii
This is a rightuous man, he shall surely live, says the lord God. Thou have
received gifts too shed blood. Thou have taken usury, Ezech 2 2
and increase Thou haste oppressed thy neighbors by extorcion, and forgotten
me, says the lord God. He that has pity upon the pore lends unto the
lord, Pro. xix.
and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again.

Exhortacion to Whore moungers, and fornicatours.
The lyppes of an harlot are a dropping honey comb, Pro. v. b. Prouer. 7
and her throat is softer the^ oil. But at the last she is as bitter as
wormewode, and as sharp as a two edged sword. Her fete goo down unto death,
and her steps pearse through unto hell. She regards not ye path of life so
unsteadfast are her ways yt ye cast not know the^. Hear me therefore (O my
son) and depart not from the words of my mouth. keep thy way far from
her, and come not nygh ye doors of her house. That thou morn not at the last
(when thou have spent thy body and goods) and then say. Alas, why hated I
nurtour? Why did my heart despise correction? Wherefore was not I obedient unto
the voice of my teachers and harkened not unto the^ that informed me? Pro. v.
c. Job. 31. a
My son, whi will thou have pleasure i an harlot, and enbrace the bosom of an
other woman? For every man's ways are open in ye sight of the lord and he
pondreth al their goinges. pro. xxx. c
The mouth of an harlot is a deep pyt wherein he falls that the lord is angry
with all A folish retcheles woma^ful of words, and such one as has no
knowledge sits in the doors of her house upon a stool above in the city,
Pro. ix. b.
to call such as go by, and walk straight in their ways. Who so is ignorant
(says she) let him comhither, and to the un wise she says, stolen waters are
sweet, and the bread that is privily eaten, has a good taste. But they
consider not that death is there, and that her gestes go down to hell. He that
loves harlots, Pro. xxix
spe^deth a way all that he has. Turn away thy face from a beautiful woman,
and look not upon the fayrenes of other. Many a man has perisshed through the
beaut ye of women, for through it the desire is kindled as it were a fire. A
whore is a deep grave and a harlot is a narrdow pit. Eccl. ix. x Mar. v. c


She lurketh like a these, and those that be not aware, she brings unto her.
Let us not commit whoredom as some of them did, and fell in one day, three and
twenty thousand.

The will of God in that ye should absteyne from whoredom, ii. Tess 4 Ephe.
iiii. Tob. vi. d Roma. i c
that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence as ye heathen which know not God.
Ephe. iii Mat. xiid
Let no fylthy communication procead out of thy mouth, but that which is good
too edify withal. And grieve not the spirit of God, wherewith you are sealed unto
the day of redemption. Fle whordom, i. Cor. 6. c
All sins that a man does, are without the body. But he that commits
whoredom synneth against his own body. Know ye not that your body is the
Temple of the holyghost? whom ye have of God, and are not your own. Gall. v.
c i. Cor. vib
Aduouterers whoremongers, fornicatours, and unclean parsons, shall not inheret
the kingdom of God. Should I then (says the lord) for all this have mercy
upon the? Iere. v
thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them yt are no Gods. And albeit
they were bound too me in marriage, yet they fell to aduoutery, and haunted
harlots houses. In the desire of uncleanly lust, Ezech 2 2 Iere. ix a
they are hecome like the stoned horse, every man neyeth at his neighbors
wife. Should I not correct this, says the lord? And should I not be avenged of
eueri people that is like unto this

Exhortacion to dronkardes.
Woe be unto the^ that rise up early, to use the^ in dronkennes, Job. xxi b
and yet at night are more superfluous in wine. In whose company are harpes
and lutes tabrettes and pipes. But they regard not ye works of the lord, and
consider not the operacion of his hands.

Woe be unto them that are conning men to sup out wine, Pro. iii. a
and expert to set up drokennes. Where is woe? Where is sorrow? Where is strife?
Where is brawling? where are wounds without cause? Pro. xxiii
Where be read eyes? Is it not among those that be ever at the wine, and seek
only where the best is, and occupy the^ selves to drike out goblets, glasses,
and cups? Look not thou upon the wine how read it is, and what color is in
the glass. It goes down softly, but at ye last it biteth like a serpent, and
styngeth like an Adder. And wha^ a man is drunk, Luke. xi. c Romans xiii
he casts his eyes unto strange women, and does muse upon froward things.
Take heed unto your selves that your hearts be not ouerladen with excess of
eating and with dronkennes. ii. Esdraii
Wine is marvel ous strong, and over comes the^ that drink it / it deceaueth
the mind / and brings both the poor man and the king to dotage and vanity.
Pro. xx
Thus does it with the bondma^ / and with the free / with the poor and rych. It
takes away their understanding / and makes the^ careless and merry, so yt none
of the^ reme^breth any heaviness, debt / or duty. It causes also a man to
think that ye thing which he does is honest and good, and remembers not in
what auctorite he is / and that he ought not to do such things. More over when
men are drinking, they forget all friendship, all brotherlye faythfulnes and
love. But as soon as they are dronken they draw out the sweard and will fight.
And wha^ they are laid down from their wine / and so risen up again, they ca^
not tell what they did.

Wine is a voluptuous thing and Pro. xx. a
dro^kennes causes sedicio^, Ephe. v.b
who so delyteth therein, shall never be wise. Prove. xi Ephe. v.
Be not ye a wine bybbet for wine has destroyed mani a man. O how well content
is a wise man with a little wine? The fire proves the hard iron, even so does
wine prove ye hearts of ye proud, when their be dro^ken. Wine soberly dronken,
quikeneth the life of man. If ye drinkest it mesurably, thou shall be
te^perate. Wine was made from ye beginning to make me^ glad (and not for
dronkennes) wine measurably dro^ken, is a reioycyng for y^ soul and body. But
if it be dronken with exeos, it makes bitterness and sorrow unto the mind.
Dronkennes tilleth ye mind of the folish, with shame, and ruin, diminishes
the strength, and makes wounds. Be not dronken, for therein is exces.

Exhorcacio^ unto al sinners generally
The same soul that sins shall dye. The child shall not bear the fathers
offense, nether shall the father bear the childs offense. But the righteousness
of the rightuous shall be upon him self and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him self also. But if the ungodly will turn away from all his sins
that he has done and keep my commandments, and do the thing that is equal
and right, doutles he shall live and not dye. And I will think no more upon
all his sins that he did before. For I have no pleasure in ye death of a
sinner (says the Lord God) but rather that he convert and live.

A general exhortacion unto al men.
Thou shall reprehende thy brother when he synneth, least his offense come over
all men.

Be ye all of one mind, one suffer with an other, love as brethern, be
pitiful, be courteous. Recompense not evil for evil, nether rebuke for
rebuke, but contrary wise, bless, and know that ye are called thereto, even
that ye should be heirs of the blessyng. For who so lists to live, Give.
xii. Mat. xv
and would feign se good days let him refrayn his tongue from evil, and his
lyppes that they speak no gyle. Let him eschew evil and do good. Let him seek
peace, and ensue it. For the eyes of the lord are over the rightuons, and his
ears are open unto their prays. But the face of the lord beholds them that
do evil.

Finis.
A right Goodly rule how al faithful Christians ought too occuppye; and
exercise them selves in their daily prayers.

Luke. xxii. Math. vi.

Christ teaches us in his Gospel, saying Pray that ye fall not into
temptacion.

How a man shall behave him self in the morning when he ryseth.

When thou rysest in the morning, look that thou with all humblenes of mind
knele down and lyftyng up thy heart thy hands, and thine eyes unto heaven
unto God the father almighty, pray on this manyer.

The prayer for the morning.
O Almighty and most gentse God, we thank the for the sweet flepe and
comfortable rest ye thou have given us this night. And for as much as ye have
commanded by thy hol^ word, that no man should be idle, but always occupied,
in v^ret^ous exercises every man according to his calling. We most humbly
beseech the that thine eyes may a^tend upon us daily doinsh us, in for now
^^^out us, cher she, comfort and govern all our council, ^^u dies, and
labors. In such wise that we may so spend this day according to thy in^ost
blessed will without hur^inge of oureneyghbour, that we may dili^e^tly and
warely ese^ue and avoid althynges that si^ilde displease the, set them always
before our eyes, live in thy fear, and ever work that, that man befound
acceptable before thy divine majesty unto the praise of thy most holy name,
through Jesus Christ our sorde. So be it.

An other prayer for the Morning.
Seeing that thou (O heuely father) art that one and alone almighty god, which
art in every place, b^holdest the councels, deusses and works, yea the verxe
thoughts of all men, and geuest to every one according to their deeds. We
beseech the that (for as much as thou have most gracioussye preserved us this
night) we may not spod this day after our own mind and pleasure (which is
always, evil and ^^^cked) but earnestly look upon, and dylygen^ly follow thy
fatherly will, thine everlasting council, thy healthful word, and pleasure
which is always good perfect and holy, and fulfill the same with good heart,
that thy divine name may always be sanctified, both now and ever for us
miserable sinners, through thy derely beloved son Jesus Christ, our lord and
savior So beyt.

After that thou have prayed on this manner (seeing that we be all sinners) it
shall be expedient (if thou have convenient leisure thereunto) to confess thy
self on this manner unto God the father.

The confession of our sinners unto God the father.
O Almighty God, and heavenly father, maker of heaven and earth, I confess my
self unto the even from the very heart, that I am a miserable wretched and
abhomynable sinner. And have wyckedly trangressed all thy holy commandments,
and the divine precepts of thy Godly will. The sins (alas which I have
committed in my flesh against the) are so great and so excedingly increased,
that they are no less innumerable then ye sands of the sea, And they thrustme
down even as an intolerable burden. In these wicked sines (oh lord God) have
I hitherto walked according to the will of the prince of the world, whiles I
did that was pleasant too the Flesh and evil lusts, through vain
thoughts, the blindness of my heart, the outward presence of Godlynes, and
feigned faith. This came too pass (Ah wretch that I am) because that I did never
earnestly strive against the suggestions of Satan, nor the concupiscences or
desires of the world, nor yet the lusts of my flesh. But filthily obeyed them
a thousand times more, than the admonicions of thy holy spirit. O lord my God.
It came to pass also, that I did set naught by thy Godly counsel despised thy
holy name and feared thy vengeance and heavy displeasure nothing at al. But
what soever I have in this behalf offended thy most Godly majesty, it fore
repents me, and the fault greueth me even unto the very heart. And if it
were not (o most me cifull father) that thou had laid up mercy in the
bowels, blood and wounds of Jesus Christ thy son and our lord, for so many
as unfeignedly repent and truly believe, be their sins never so great and many
I should se none other way but throw my self down headlo^g through
disperacio^, into the bottomless pit of hell. But for as much as thou have set
thy welbe loved son Jesus Christ to be our mediator and mercy stock. And
have promised grace mercy and forgeuenes of sins to as many as ask it i^
his name, through faith in his blood. Therefore in this time of grace and
mercy, I miserable sinner com now unto the, and desire the milord God that ye
will grant me, through ye our lord Jesus Christ, a right, and true faith. And
for his sake forgive me al mi si^nes and make me to walk daili more and more
i^ a new heart and in ye fruits of ye holyghost, that I may vtterli despise al
ye ungodly lusts of this world, and that I may be found continent, pure of
living, temperate, good ryghtuous, honest, dilligent in all goodness, meke
mercyful modest, humble and ready to forgive such as offend me, even from the
very heart. And so live all the days of my life according to thy divine will
and true fear. That I may dye to the world to all sin, and to my self. And
with a good confidence and merry heart, look for the coming of the lord and my
savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the and the holyghost be all honor and
glory for ever, and ever. So be it.

Thou may (if thou wylt) after thy confession say the lords prayer, called
the Pater noster. And so comme^ding thy self unto God, fall to some honest and
virtuous exercise according unto thy calling, but what soever thou do, do
it with pureness of heart, and with synglenes of eye yea so do it, as though God
were present, and looked upon the, as undoubtedly he does.

The prayer too be said when thou go to bed.
O God the almighty lord, by whose order and will, the night and darkness do
now approach, where in we shall give our selves to quiet and sleep. We most
instauntly desire the, that thou graciously receive us into thy tuicion and
keeping, that the prince of darkness do not hurt us with his terrors and
feres. And although we must sleep because of our feebleness, yet let our heart and
mind watcha unto the. God thou before us and show us the way as a pillar of
fire, that we may follow the as well i^ rest, as in business and occupacions of
this life. And grant that we be not found in thy sight, children of night and
darkness, but of day and light through Jesus Christ our lord. So be it.

An other prayer.
THis our mortal body, which through sin daily de cayeth and
diminissheth, must at ye last altogether perish and become earth, whereof it is
come, and made, and the^ shall our vanity, which we through our own
ignorance have made unto our selves, take an end. But most merciful
creator and maker of all things vouchsafe so to break, divide and dissolve
me thy pore creature, who am gathered, knit and made of the, and grant that I
may alwates have in mind thi^ dissolucion, and of whom I am knit together,
having an eye to what place I must go, to the intent that Inot being prepared,
be not brought without nupcial or bridal garment, before thy judgment seat.
For like as when the day is ones past, we give our selves to rest, even so must
we, this life being ended, rest in ye death. Nothing is more like unto life
then the day, and nothing more like unto death the^ ye night. And nothing so
like the grave or sepulcher as the coutch bed or bed stead. Thus good keeper,
and defender from all evil, grant us now lying in impotency and seblenes of
our selves, that thorough the, we may be preserved this night from all the
assaults of the deuell of hell. Amen.

When thou go to thy labor at work.
Prayer.
O Most kind, and gentle heavenly father, thou know, and have also taught
us, how great the weakness of man is, so that no man (without thy Godly help)
can do nothing. Thus vouchsafe to se^d us thy holy spirit, ye he may
strengthen, stir, and move our understanding and reason in all things that we
this day outwardly shall go about and take in hand, or of that we in wardli
shall think or have in mind, too the intent that it may all be done too thy
glory, and to the proffit of our neighbor. So beit.

When a man is bound toward any journey.
THis ourlyfe most merciful lord, is nothing else but a pilgrimage, and
through fare, for we have here no abydyng or dwelling place. We are com from
the, and we must return again unto the, But amongst or between all the
trappes, assaults, pittes and snares, which the deuell has laid out and
spread abroad, for us, blinded in sin, vouchsafe thou, o Lord Jesus Christ, to
lead us with thy right and, for thou art a true, trusty, and sure friend. Open
our eyes, to the intent that we mysse not ye way which you thy self art, but
lead us through and by thy felfe unto thy father to the intent that all we may
be made one with the and him, even like as thou art one with him. O most
mercyful lord like as thou do send thy holy Angels to be defenders of as
mani as serve and please the with a simple innocent and pure heart, by the
which they be led like young children are led of them which are elder, and
stronger than they. And like as thou did vouchsafe too send thine Angel
Baphaell, to be a guide unto the Son of that reverent man Tobi, vouchsafe
even so (O Lord) to send us the same Angel, although we are not so worthy as
the same Tobi was, that he may encourage, and lead us through that way which
is not pleasant unto us but unto the. So be it.

When a man comes home or is at his sourness end.
Thankesgeuing and prayer.
I Thank the, o heavenly father, for thy great grace, and mercy, which thou
have showed unto me in going forth and in returnyng or coming again through
thy holy blessing which thou geuest unto all them that keep thy holy word, and
do there after. Grant us o gracious god here where we have no abiding or
dwelling place, a sure and quiet conscience through thy son Jesus Christ who
is our only rest So be it.

For Kings, Princes and Rulars.
Praper.
O Lord of lords Jesus christ thou art an example and glass mirroure of the^
which govern and bear rule of reaimes, countries and cities, whom they ought
to follow, for thou art the best and the wisest, and therefore can thou not
err nor do any other thing but well. Vouchsafe with the light of thy clearnes
and with the fire of thy love to kindle ye hearts of al such as you through thy
Godly providence have instituted, and ordained to be rulers over the people,
to the intent that they through the as through or by a foregoing light may se
and perceive what is best to be done, and fulfill the same and that they taking
the always for a sure mark of their eye, do not that thing which only
seameth good in their sight, but that which may be too thy honor, to our
proffit and to their health and salvation, to thinte^t also that they may
iustlye, and duly minister, and execute their office geueng unto the^ of the
so that we with the^ and they with us may lead a peaceable, virtuous and quiet
life. So beit,

For all teachers and preachers of the most holy word of God.
Prayer.
O Merciful priest chief Bishop and true good heard JESUS Christ, vouchesafe
through thy holy spirit to strengthen all preachers, and teachers which thou
have called, and sent to be laborers in thy holy harvest, for to break, and
distribute the bread of thy holy word, to the intent that they may boldly, and
earnestly set their souls in the defense of thy holy word, and for their sheep
against all the threateninges, and false prophets, which go about to seduce,
and bring us out of the right way, for their bellyes sake, through their false
doctrine, To the intent that they may so teach, and declare us thy holy laws
and Gospe I that we may be taught and edyfied, and that also thy Godly honor
may daily more, and more be magnyfyed thereby. Amen.

For all them which lie in the ext^e me panges of death, or otherwise.
O Pytifull phisicyan and healer both of soul and body Christ Jesus. Vouchsafe
too cast thine e yes upon thy poor sinful creature. N. who lies here
captive, and bound with sickness turning his weakness too thy glory and to his
health. And vouch safe good lord, to send him pacie^t sufferaunce that he may
sted fastly continue to the end, and that he may with a true and perfect
faith fight manfully against all temptacions of the deuell, when he may no
longer continue. So be it.

For all women bound with the lords bands.
Prayer.
Good truharted lord Jesus Christ, like as thou did confort and deliver thy
disciples, and all elect and chosen men and women, in all their need,
martyrdom, and pains which they suffered of the tyrauntes wrongfully, and
did also cure and heal them of their wondes, pains and smart, thore we
hope of the crown of everlasting life. Eue^ so vouchsafe (thou which art a
helper of all the^ that call on the in trouble and need) to deliver this pore,
weak vessel which is here bound with a fruit after thine own similitude and
lykenes (not withstanding that she has deserved in transgressynge of thy holy
commandment to bring forth her children in paying, and woe) that she may be
made a glad and joyful mother through that new creature with good speed, that
the child may have name and christendom, and that the mother may be purified
to thy honor, and to her health So beit.

For all parsons generally.
Prayer.
O Worthy brydegrome of all Chryste^ souls JESUS Christ, who have a lynguler
respect to thy congregation which thou also promisedst that thou would never
forsake her* Rejoice augment and increase the same, through a spiritual
conversion of many new creatures, of them which as yet do not perfectly know
the, too thintente that all we together, through one God, one sautour, one
faith, one baptism, one spirit, one judgment, and mind, may be made
children of (...) heavenly (...) ^ whereof (...) a co^^^^ (...) the one (...)
Jesus Christ (...), and a^^ictoure of peace love and goodness, mollyfy and soften
our hearts and all our powers that we (wisshyng all goodness the one to the
other) we specially that bear the name of Christians to the intent that al men
may thereby be drawn unto the, and se that we are thy disciples and followers.

For the City or town where in thou dwell.
Prayer.
Except thou (o merciful lord God, almighte) keep the City, the watch men
wake but in vain that keep it Therefore o lord God, send thy holy spirit in
the hearts, of the^ which rule our city or town to the intent that we with
the^, and they with us, may live in thy Godly fear, so that it may go well
with us. And suffer us not good lord, to put out trust any more in worldly
power as money, horse, weapon, artillery gonnes or strong walls, but much
rather in the which art a defender of al the^ that put their whole affiaunce
and trust in the

For all fruits of the earth.
Prayer.
O Good father and geuer of all goodness god almighty we poor sely worms of
the earth, labor and take pains, dyg and delue, till and plow, plant and
sow, and can do no more But thou only may and wylt gene the increase in
due time. Therefore most best, yea, only good father and God vouchsafe
(through thy divine providence) to preserve and keep all the fruits of the
earth, and suffer the same to grow and increase too a perfect grouthe,
although we are not worthy of it, out for thy names sake, too the intent we
may use them to our necessity, and sustinaunce with thankesgeuinge and always
to thy glory. So be it.

A general confession.
O Lord God almighty, father of mercy and God of all confort, Romans iii. Gene.
vi. and.iii.
we thy pore creatures resort unto the knowledging and confessing our selves
before thy glorious majesty, that we al are grievous sinners and can of our
selves do nothing but sin. For all our ymaginacio^s, intentes and thoughts
are inclined, and disposed unto evil from out youth up. Osee. xiii ii. Cor.
ii. Phili. ii. Gene. iii. Ephe. ii. Psalm. lii. John. xv. Eza. lxi. ii Iere. xii.
Our dampnacion comes of our selves, we our selves are not able to think a
good thought It is thou only that do work in us both the will and the deed.
We are but earth and naturally the children of wrath. We of our selves are but
vayn, yea lighter then vanite it self. We can do nothing without the there is
not one of us whole, we are all unclean and all our righteousness is but as a
fylthy cloth. We have no more power to do good of our selves, then a man of
Inde has power to change his skinn^, or the leopard her spots. Now according
to this evil, and corrupt inclinacion of our nature, so have we lived i^
thought word and ^^de. dani^l. ix
We have sy^^ed we have ^^^^ded, we have gone back from thy laid and have not
harkened unto thy word. We have not loved the o lord our god, us all our
heart with all our soul, withal our strength and with all our power. We have
been sore transgressors of thy cominaundementes, we have not put our whole
trust and confidence only in the. We have in our troubles and need not sought
for help only in the. We have not called only upon thy name, but with false
confidence with vain supersticion, and vn^aufull oaths have we blasphemed thy
name. We have prayed and made intercession unto stocks, and stones and made
thy creatures our advocates and mediators, contrary to thy word We have
reposed our trust and affiance in our own deeds and in such works as have
been devised by me^nes fantasies* besides the scripture. We have wandered on
vain pilgrimages offringe up money, candels and tapers too images and relykes,
with such like supersticion. We have been slothful in our business We have
not been fervent and dilligent in doing of our duty, specially on such days
as be appointed for ye preaching of thy word, we have not plied our selves
wholly to learn it, nor occupied our time in prayer and geuyng of thanks unto
the. And as touching ye love that we ought too have unto all men, and women for
thy sake, we have not ben ernest in at al times We have not loved our neighbor
as our selves. We have not done as we would be done unto. We have been
ungentle, vnpacie^t, discourteous, froward, angry and displeased, we have
rejoiced, in our neighbors hurt, and been sorry of his welfare, We have been
led with false doctrine and ^^^ours from the way of thy truth. We have sinned
wc our fathers we have done amys. We have dealt wickedly. Therefore our most
dear father which art in heaven, for as much as we have blasphemed the, and
not sought always the glory of thy name, grant now ye from hense forth thy
name may be sanctified, and hallowed in us, Grant now that thy kingdom may
come, and that in stead of sin and error, you only may reign i^ us,
grant now yt our will may be comfortable unto thine, and that in all
adversity we may be heartily well content too suffer thy will to be done in us.
Grant now, that we be never destitute of our daily food, but that we may
all way be norisshed with thy word in our souls, and have such a competent
living in this life, as is necessary for our bodies Grant now, that we may
even from our heart rotes forgive one an other all manner of trespace, as thou
for Jesus Christ's sake thy son have mercifully forgeuen us. Grant now that
where as the world the deuell and our own flesh does daily tempt and provoke
us to sin, we may through that strength be able to resist all their temtacion.
Grant now that through thy help and grace, we may be delyuereo from all evil,
from all danger and parell of soul and body, from all sin, hell and
damnacion, from all pride, and envy, from al wrath and slouthfulnes, from
covetous unmeasurable and fylthy living. Grant now, that from hence forth we
may be content with such fatherly provision as thou have made for us alredi.
Grant now that we may be temperate in eating, and drinking. And of so honest
and clenly conversation, that we give no man occasion of evil. Grant now that
in stead of our old feigned works we may be occupied with such fruits of thy
holy spirit as thy word makes mention of. Grant now, that according to thy
wholesome monicio^ of thy blessed apostle Peter, and of all the scr^pture beside,
Peter.
we may be faithful, true and obedient unto the king our souereygne lord, and
supreme head immediately under christ. And not only unto all such officers as
be sent of him but also unto al such wholesome laws, and injunctions as by his
auctorite be made for the tranquillity and wealth of us his subjects. Grant
now that we all may increase in the knowledge of the, that our youth may be
brought up in virtue, that children may obey their fathers, and mothers, ye
servants may be true to their masters, that la^d lords may be gentle to
their tenauntes, that husbands may be loving to their wives, and wives
likewise to their husbands, that men may keep their household in the fear and
knowledge of the that idle people may be set to labor, and that all such as
be poor in deed, may be well and lovingly provided for. Grant that for the
love of the, we may feed the ho^gry, give drink to the thursty, clothe the
^^ked, give con^^^^ to (...) that ^ee (...) the^ that (...) pri^^g and (...)
such as (...) (...) now (...) ^^ther that what soeues thou forbiddest, we may
forbear it, and what soever thou ^o^^^^endest, (...) we may every one in his
call you perform the same, and so continue in thy service till our ly^es end,
that all our thoughts, words and deeds may redound unto the glory of the, now
and evermore. Amen.

Thanks be given to God, obedience unto our prince, and love to our neighbors.

The oracion of Job in his most grievous adversity and loss of goods.
N^ked came I out of mi m^chees womb, and naked shall I turn again. The lord
gave, and the lord has taken away, is it has ^leased the lord so is it
done, now blessed be the name of the lord.

Prayer in prosperity.
I Give the thanks, o God almighte which not only have endued me with the
gifts of nature, as reason power and strength, but also have plentifully given
me the substance of this world I knowl^dge o lord that these are thy gifts,
and confess with holy Sainer James that there is no perfet nor good gift but it
comes from the (o father of light) which geuest frelye and castest no man in
the teth. I knowledge with the prophet Agge, that gold is thine and silver is
thine, and to whom it pleases the thou geuest it, to the godly, that they may
be thy disposets and distributours thereof, and to the ungodly, to heap up
their damnacion wythall. Wherefore my most merciful God, I humbly beseke and
desire the to frame in me with thy holy spirit a faithful heart, and ready
hand to distribute these thy good gifts according too thy will, and pleasure,
that I treasure not up here, where thieves may rob and mothes corrupt, but to
treasure in thy heavenly kingdom, where neither thief may steall, nor mothe
defyle, too mine own comfort (whom of thy mercy thou have promised to reward
therefore) too the good example of the humble and meke of thy congregation and
to the glory of thy name. To whom with thy son an^ holyghost, be all
honor and praise world without end.

Amen.
The manner or saying grace after the doctrine of holy scripture.
Grace before meat.
THe eyes of all look unto the O lord, and thou geuest the^ their food in due
ceason, Thou openest thine hand and fyllest every living creature with thy
blessyng.

O our father which art in. etc Grace before meat.
I know (says the Apostle) and am full certified in the lord Jesus, Romans 1 r ^
that there is nothing unclean of it self, but unto him that judges it to be
unclean, to him it is unclean. But if thy brother be grieved over thy meat,
the^ wa^kest thou not now after charit^, (...) not ^^th thy meat him, ^or
(...) ^^ed

O our father w^^ch art in. etc. Grace before meat.
Let not our treasure therefore be evil spoken of. Romans 14
For the kingdom of God is not meat, and drink, but righteousness and peace
and joy in the holyghost.

O our father which art in. etc. Grace before meat.
Meat does not further us unto God. If we eat, i. Cor. 8.
we shall not therefore be the better, If we eat not, we shall not therefore
be the worse. But take heed that this your liberty be not an occasion of
falling to the weak.

Grace before meat.
Meat has God created to be received with thanks, i. Tim.
of which believe and know ye truth. For even cr^^^^re of God is good and
no^^^ng to be refused that is re^^a^ed with thanks geuyng, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

Our father which art in. etc. Receive your meat without grudgyng, Take heed
ye never abuse the same* Give thanks to God for every thing, And alwai praise
his holy name Who so does not, is sore to blame No evil en ensample se that ye
give

Thus does Gods word teach you to live.

What soever ye do in word or deed do al in the name of our lord Jesus Christ
geuyng thanks unto God the father by him.

Grace after meat.
T^^ (...) us (...) openyng (...) for fyllyng (...) full blessing (...) the,
for thy son^^ (...) not only t^^ (...) from abu^^ng o^ (...) ^^so to lend us
thy (...) that we may ever dee t^^^ (...) unto the therefore. Amen.

Grace after meat.
Thanks be unto the, O lord God almighty (most bear father of heaven) for
certifying us ^y thy blessed word, that all kind of meats are clean, and we
beseech the lend us thy grace, that we may always thankfully receive the same,
not only without supersticion or s^rupulosyte of conscience, but also without
greuing (...) our brethern, And s^ to w^^^ in (...) w^y of Godly lo^^ and
(...) with our me^te (...) him, for wh^^ (...) Jesus Christ dyed a^ (...) as
^or us.

Grace after meat.
Thanks be unto the, O God almighty (most de^re father of heaven (for
openyng unto us thy blessed word, which is our treasure, our pearl, yea, and
our riches more precious then either gold or precious stone. And we beseech yt
though corporal meat and drike be no part of thy kingdom, yet order thou us
also in receiving the same, that we never give occasion of slaundring thy
word or offending the weak. Amen.

Grace after meat.
Thanks be unto yt O lord God almighty (most dear father of heaven) for
laying up our salvation only in thy self, and not in any kind of meat. And
we beseech ye guide us so in the ^se thereof that we may follow such (...) make
for peace, and (...) edify one an other (...) togeue unto the weak (...)
occasion of falling from thy word.

Grace after meat.
Thanks be unto the O lord god almight ye most dear father of heaven for
ordeyning thy creatures to be meat food and fuste naunce unto out bodies,
and have sanctified the^ by thy blessed word etc. We beseech the make us so to
to increase in stedfastnes of thy Faith, in perfect knowledge of thy truth,
and in continuance of fervent prayer unto ye, yt to us also they may be
sanctified and holy and ye we may ever both tha^kefully receive the^, and
virtuously use the^, to ye good ensample of other. Ame^.

Blessed is he that exercises Eccl. 50 d
him self in these things. And who so takes such too heart, shall be wise. If
he do these things, he shall be strong in all. For the light of (...) lord
leads him. John. 14.
If ye know there things, Blessed are ye if ye do the^. Luke 11. e Iocob. 4.
John. 2.
The servant that knows his lords will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many strypes But he that fulfylleth ye word of God, abides for ever. These
things are written to ye intent ye we should believe, John xx d
that Jesus Christ is the son of God and ye we through him might have life
everlasting, Which the chefest goodness vouchsafe to give unto al them that
shall either hear or read this present little book.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London, by Robert Stoughton Dwelling within Ludgate at the
singne, of the, Byshoppis Myter.


