THE Epistels and Gospels for every Sunday and Holy day throughout the whole
year. After the use of the Church of England.

1574

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate.

Cum priuilegio.

The Epistles and Gospels for every Sunday and Holy day throughout the whole
year.
The first Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Roma. iii.
OWe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another. For he that loves
another, fulfilleth the law. For these commandments: Thou shall not commit
adultery: Thou shall not kyl: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not bear false
witness: Thou shall not lust, and so forth (if there be any other
commandment) it is all comprehended in this saying, namely: Love thy
neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor: therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law. This also we know the season how that it is time that
we should now awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nerer then when we
believed. The night is passed, the day is come nigh: let us therefore cast away
the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk
honestlye, as it were in the day light: not in eating and drinking, neither in
chambring nor wantonness, neither in strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

The Gospel. Math. xxi.
ANd when they drew nigh to Jerusalem and were come to Bethphage unto mount
Oliuet, then sent Jesus two of his Disciples saying unto them: Go into the
town that lies over against you, and anon you shall find an Ass bound and
her Colt with her, loose them, and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought
unto you, say ye, the Lord has need of them, and straight way he will let them
go. All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold thy king comes unto
thee meek, sytting upon an Ass and a Colt, the foale of the Ass used to the
yoke. The Disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the
Ass and the Colt, and put on them their clothes, and set him thereon. And many
of the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down branches from
the trees and strawed them in the way. Moreover the people that went before,
and they that came after cried, saying: Hosanna to the son of David, blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. And when he
was come to Jerusalem, all the City was moved, saying: Who is this? And the
people said: this is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth, a city of Galile. And Jesus
went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the
Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and the seats of them
that sold Dooues, and said unto them: It is written, my house shall be called
the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

The second Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Roma. xv.
WHat soever things are written aforetyme, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. The
God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one toward
another, after the ensample of Christ Jesus: that ye all agreeing together, may
with one mouth praise God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: Wherefore receive
ye one another, as Christ received us, to the praise of God. And this I say:
that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made unto the fathers, and that the Gentiles might praise
god for his mercy, as it is written: For this cause I will praise thee among the
Gentiles, and singe unto thy name. And again he says: Rejoice ye Gentiles with
his people. And again: praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye
nations together. And again Esaias says: There shall be the root of Iesse,
and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles
trust. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may
be rytch in hope through the power of the holy ghost.

The Gospel. Luke. xxi.
There shall be signs in the sun and in the moon, and in the stars: and in the
earth, the people shall be at their wits end, through despair. The sea and
the water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail the^ for fear, and for looking
after those things which shall come on ye earth. For the powers of heaven shall
move. And then shall they see the Son of man come in a cloud, with power and
great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. And he showed the^ a
similitude: Behold the Figtree, and al other trees: when they shoot forth
their buds, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is then nie at hand.
So likewise ye also (when ye see these things come to pass) be sure that the
kyngedome of God is nigh. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not
pass, till all be fulfyled. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words
shall not pass.

The third Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. i. Cor. iiii.
LEt a man this wise esteem us, even as the ministers of Christ, and Stewardes
of the secrets of God. Furthermore it is required of the Steward that a man
be found faithful: with me it is but a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, either of man's judgment: no I judge not mine own self, for I
know naught by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. It is the Lord that
judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
which will lyghten things that are hyd in darkness, and open the counsayles of
the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

The Gospel. Math. xi,
WHen John being in prison heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
Disciples: and said unto him: Art thou he that shall come, or do we look for
another? Jesus answered and said unto them: Go, and show John again what ye
have heard and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the
leapers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor receive the glad tidinges of the Gospel: and happy is he that is not
offended by me. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people
concerning John: What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed that is
shaken with the wind? Or what went you out to see? A man clothed in soft
rayme^t? Behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in kings houses. But what
went you out for to see? A Prophet? Verily I say unto you, and more then a
prophet. For this is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send my Messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

The fourth Sunday in Aduent.
The Epistle. Phillip. iiii.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Let your softnes be
known to all men, the Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in all
prayer and supplication let your peticions be manifest unto God, with giving of
thanks. And the peace of God (which passes all understanding) keep your
hearts and mynds, through Christ Jesus.

The Gospel. John. i.
THis is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him: what art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him, what then? art thou Helias?
And he said: I am not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered no. Then said
they unto him: what art thou, that we may give an answer bnto the^ that sent
us: What say thou of thy self? He said: I am the voice of a Cryar in the
wilderness: make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias. And
they which were sent, were of the Phariseis, and they asked him, and said unto
him: Why baptisest thou then, if thou be not Christ, nor Helias, neither that
Prophet? John answered the^ saying: I baptize with water, but there stands one
among you whom ye know not, he it is which though he came after me, was before
me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose. These things were done in
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John did baptize.

Christmas day.
The Epistle. Hebrews. i.
GOd in times past, diversely and many ways spoke unto the Fathers by
Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken unto us by his own son,
whom he has made Heir of al things, by whom also he made the world. Which
Son being the bryghtnes of his glory, and the very image of his substance
ruling al things with the word of his power, has by his own person purged our
sins, and sits on the right hand of the majesty on hie: being so much more
excellent then the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent
name the^ they. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time: Thou art my
Son this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be his Father, and he
shall be my Son. And again, when he brings in the first begotten Son
into the world, he says: and let all the Angels of God woorship him. And unto
the Angels he says: he makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame
of fire. But unto the Son he says: thy seat, O God, shall be for ever and
ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. And you Lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the works of thy
hands. They shall perish, but thou endurest: but they all shall wax old as
does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed: But thou art even the same, and thy years shall not fail,

The Gospel. John. i.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the
word. The same was in the beginning with God. Althings were made by it, and
without it was made nothing yt was made. In it was life, and the life was the
light of men: and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. There was sent from God a man, whose name was John. The
same came as a witness, to bear wytnes of the light, that all men through him
might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of the light.
That light was the true light, which lyghtneth every man that comes into the
world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not. He came among his own, and his own received him not. But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to be made the sons of God: even
them that believed on his name, which were borne not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God. And the same word became
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory of it, as the glory of the
only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

Saint Stephens day.
The Epistle. Acts. vii.
ANd Steven being full of the holy Ghost, looked up stedfastelye with his eyes
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand
of God, and said: behold, I see the heavens open, and the son of man
standing on the right hand of God. Then they gave a shoute with a loud voice,
and stopped their ears, and ran upon him al at once, and cast him out of the
City, and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's
frete whose name was Saul. And they stoned Steven, calling on, and saying:
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud
voice: Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had thus spoken,
he fell a sleep.

The Gospel. Math. xxiii.
Behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and some of them
ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your Sinagogs,
and persecute them from city to city, that upon you may come all the righteous
blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abell,
unto the blood of Zacharias the Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar. Verelye I say unto you, all these things shall come
upon this generation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as the Hen gathers her Chicknes under her wings, and
ye would not? Behold your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you,
ye shall not see me hence forth, till ye say: blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord.

Saint John Evangelists day.
The Epistle. i. John i.
THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handeled of the
word of life. And the life appeared, and we have seen, and bear wytnes, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and appeared unto
us. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you that ye also may
have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ. And this we write unto you, that ye may rejoice, and that
your joy may be full. And this is the tidinges which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say
we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
But and if we walk in light, even as he is in light, then have we fellowship
with him and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from al syn. If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If
we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from al unrighteousness. If we say we have not sinned, we make him
a liar, and his word is not in us.

The Gospel. John. xxi.
Jesus said unto Peter, follow thou me. Peter turned about, and saw the Disciple
whom Jesus loved following (which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said
Lord: which is he that betraieth thee?) When Peter therefore saw him, he said to
Jesus: Lord, what shall he here do? Jesus said unto him: if I will have him to
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying
abroad among the Brethren, that that Disciple should not dye. Yet Jesus said
not to him: he shall not die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee. The same Disciple is he which testifies of these things, and wrote
these things and we know that his testimony is true. There are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose the world could not conteyne the books that should be written.

Innocents day.
The Epistle Apoca. xiii.
I Looked and lo, a lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him an.C.
and.xliiij. thousand, having his name and his Fathers name written in their
foreheades. And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and
as the voice of a great thunder. And I heard the voice of Harpes, harpynge with
their Harpes. And they soong as it were a new song before the seat and
before the.iiij. beasts and the elders, and no man could learn the song, but
the hundred forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These
are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These follow
the Lamb wheresoever he goes. These were redeemed from men being the first
fruits unto God and to the Lamb, and in their mouths was found no guyle, for
they are without spot before the throne of God.

The Gospel. Math. ii,
THe Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a sleep, saying: arise and take
the child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there til I bring
thee word. For it will come to pass yt Herod shall seek the Child to destroy
him. So when he awoke, he took the child and his Mother by night, and
departed into Egypt, and was there unto the death of Herod, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet saying: Out of Egypt have
I called my son. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men,
he was exceeding wroth, and sent forth men of war, and slew all the children
that were in Bethelem, and in all the coasts (as many as were two years old
or under) according to the time which he had diligently known out of the wise
men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, where as
he said: In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentacion, weeping and great
mourning, Rachel weping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they were not.

The Sunday after Christmas day.
The Epistle. Gala. iiii.
ANd I say, that the Heir (so long as he is a child) differs not from a
servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under Tutours and Governors, until
the time that the father has appointed. Even so we also, when we were
children, were in bondage under the ordinances of the world, but when the time
was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond unto the law,
to redeem them which were bond unto the law, that we through election might
receive the inheritance that belongs unto the natural sons. Because ye are
sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries
Abba, Father, wherefore now thou art not a servant, but a son: If thou be a
son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.

The Gospel. Math. i.
This is the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the
son of Abraham: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, Jacob begat Judas and
his brethren, Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar, Phares begat Esrom, Esrom
begat Aram, Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon,
Salmon begat Boos of Rahab, Boos begat Obed of Ruth, Obed begat Iesse, Iesse
begat David the king, David the king begat Solomon of her that was the wife of
Vrie, Solomon begat Roboam, Roboam begat Abia, Abia begat Asa, Asa begat
Iosaphat, Iosaphat begat Ioram, Ioram begat Osias, Osias begat Ioatham, Ioatham
begat Achas, Achas begat Ezechias, Ezechias begat Manasses, Manasses begat
Amon, Amon begat Josias, Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren, about the time
that they were carried away to Babilo^. And after they were brought to Babylon,
Ieconias begat Salathiell, Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Zorobabel begat Abiud,
Abiud begat Eliachim, Eliachim begat Azor, Azor begat Sadoc, Sodoc begat Achin,
Achin begat Eliud, Eliud begat Marthan, Marthan begat Jacob, Jacob begat Joseph
the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Jesus, even he that is called Christ.
And so all the generations from Abraham to David, are.xiiij. generations. And
from David unto the captivity of Babylon, are.xiiij. generations. And from the
captivity of Babylon unto Christ are.xiiij. generations.

The birth of Christ was on this wise: when his mother Marye was married to
Joseph (before they came to dwell together) she was found with child by the holy
ghost. Then Joseph her husband (because he was a righteous man, and would not
put her to shame) was minded priuelie to depart from her. But while he thus
thought, behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a sleep saying:
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for
that which is conceived in her comes of the holy ghost. She shall bring forth
a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins.

All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by
the Prophet, saying: Behold a maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a
son, and they shall call his name Emanuel: which (if a man interpret) is as
much to say, as God with us. And Joseph as soon as he awoke out of sleep, did
as the Angel of the Lord had bidden him, and he took his wife unto him, and
knew her not, till she had brought forth her first begotten Son, and called
his name Jesus.

The Circumcision of Christ.
The Epistle. Roma. iiii.
BLessed is that man to whom the Lord will not impute syn. Came this blessedness
then upon the uncircumcision, or upon the circumsicion also? For we say yt
faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it then reckoned, when
he was in the circumcision, or when he was in the uncircumcision? Not in time
of circumcision, but when he was yet uncircumcised. And he received the sign
of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had yet
being uncircumcised, that he should be the Father of all them that believe,
though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them
also: and that he might be the Father of circumcision, not unto them only
which came of the circumcised, but unto them also that walk in the steps of
the faith that was in our father Abraham before the time of circumcision. For
the promise (that he should be heir of the world) happened not to Abraham or
to his sede through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For if they
which are of the law be heirs, the^ is faith but vain, and the promis of none
effect.

The Gospel. Luke. ii.
ANd it fortuned as soon as the Angels were gone away from the Shepheardes into
heaven, they said one to another: let us go even now unto Bethelem, and see
this thing that we hear say is happened, which the Lord has showed unto us. And
they came with have, and found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe laid in a maunger.
And when they had seen it, they published abroad that saying that was told
them of that child. And al they that heard it, wondered at those things which
were told them of the Shepherds. But Mary kept al these sayings, and pondred
them in her heart. And the Shepherds returned, praising and lauding God for all
things that they had heard and seen even as it was told unto them. And when
the eight day was come, that the Child should be circumcised, his name was
called Jesus, which was named of the Angel before he was conceived in the
womb.

The Epiphany.
The Epistle. Ephesians. iii.
FOr this cause I Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, for you Heathen, if you
have heard of the ministration of the grace of God, which is given me to you
ward. For by revelation showed he the mystery unto me, as I wrote before in few
words, whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery
of Christ, which mystery in times past was not opened unto the sons of men,
as it is now declared unto his holy Apostels and Prophets by the spirit: that
the Gentiles should be inheritours also, and of the same body, and partakers
of his promise in Christ, by the means of the Gospel, whereof I am made a
Minister, according to the gift of the grace of God, which is given unto me
after the working of his power. Unto me the least of all Saints is this grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and to make all men see what ye fellowship of the mystery is, which from
the beginning of the world has been hid in God, which made all things through
Jesus Christ: to thentent that now unto the rulers and powers in heavenly
things might be known by the congregation the manifold wisdom of God,
according to the eternal purpose which he wrought in Christ Jesus our Lord: by
whom we have boldness and entrance with the confidence which is by the faith of
him.

The Gospel. Math. ii.
WHen Jesus was borne in Bethelem a City of Iewry, in the time of Herod the
king: behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying: Where is
he that is borne King of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the East,
and are come to worship him. When Herod the king had heard these things, he
was troubled, and all the city of Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered
all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people together, he demanded of them
where Christ should be borne. And they said unto him, at Bethelem in Iewry. For
thus it is written by the Prophet: And thou Bethlem in the land of Iewry art
not the least among ye Princes of Judah: for out of thee there shall come unto
me the Captain that shall govern my people Israel. Then Herod, when he had
privily called the wise men, he enquired of them diligently what time the
star appeared, and he bad them go to Bethlem, and said: go your way thither,
and search diligently for the child. And when ye have found him, bring me word
again, that I may come and woorship him also. When they had heard the king,
they departed, and lo the star which they saw in the East, went before them,
till it came and stood over the place wherein the child was. When they saw the
star, they were exceeding glad, and went into the house, and found the child
with Mary his mother, and fell down flat, and worshipped him, and opened their
treasures and offered unto him gifts: gold, Frankincens and Mirre. And after
they were warned of God in a sleep, yt they should not go again to Herod: they
returned into their own country another way.

The fitst sunday after the Epiphany.
The Epistle. Roma. xii.
I Besche you therefore brethren, by the mercyfulnes of of God that ye make
your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God which is your
reasonable serving of God, and fashion not your selves like unto this world:
but be ye changed in your shape by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what thing that good and acceptable and perfect will of God is. For I
say (through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among you that no
man stand high in his own conceit, more then it becomes him to esteem of
himself: but so judge of himself, that ht be gentell and sober, according as
God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. For as we have many members
in one body, and al members have not one office: so we being many, are one
body, in Christ, and every man among our selves one a nothers members.

The Gospel. Luke. ii.
THe Father and Mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem after the custom of the
feast day. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned home, the
Child Jesus abode still in Jerusalem and his father and mother knew not of it:
but they supposing him to have been in the company, came a days journey and
sought him amongst their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found him
not, they went back again to Jerusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned that
after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the
Doctors, hearing them and posing them. And all that heard him, were astonished at
his understanding and answers. And when they saw him, they merueiled, and his
mother said unto him: Son why have thou thus dealt with us? Behold thy Father
and I have sought thee sorowing. And he said unto them: how happened that ye
sought me? wist you not that I must go about my Fathers busynes? And they
understood not that saying which he spoke unto them. And he went down with
them, and came to Nazareth and was obedient unto them: but his Mother kept all
these sayings together in her heart. And Jesus prospered in wisdom and age,
and in favor with God and men.

The second sunday after the Epiphany.
The Epistle Roma. xii.
Seeing that we have diverse gifts, according to the grace that is given unto
us: if a man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it, that it be agreeing to
the faith. Let him that has an office, wait on his office. Let him that
teaches, take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendance to
his exhortacion. If any man give, let him do it with synglenes. Let him that
rules, do it with cherefulnes. Let love be without dissimulation. Hate that
which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. Be kind one to another with
brotherly love: in giving honor, go one before an other. Be not slouthful in
the busynes which you have in hand. Be fervent in Spirit. Apply your selves to
the time. Rejoice in hope. Be pacient in tribulation. Continue in prayer.
Distribute unto ye necessity of the saints. Be ready to harbor. Bless them
which persecute you: bless I say, and curse not. Be merry with them that are
merry, weep with them that weep. Be of like affection one toward another. Be
not hye minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort.

The Gospel. John. ii.
ANd the third day was there a marriage in Cana, a City of Galile, and the Mother
of Jesus was there. And Jesus was called (and his disciples) unto the marriage.
And when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: they have no wine.
Jesus said unto her: woman, what have I to do with thee: mine hour is not yet
come. His mother said unto the Ministers, whatsoever he says unto you, do it.
And there were standing there.vi. waterpots of stone, after the manner of
purifiying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apece. Jesus said unto
them: fill the waterpots with water. And they filled them up to the brim. And
he said unto them: draw out now, and bear unto the Governor of the feast: and
they bare it When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water turned into wine,
and knew not whence it was (but the ministers which drew the water, knew) he
called the bridegroom, and said unto him every man at the beginning does
setforth good wine, and when men be dronk the^ that which is worse: but thou
have kept the good wine until now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in
Cana of Galile, and showed his glory, and his disciples believed on him.

The third sunday after the Epiphany.
The Epistle. Roma. xii.
BE not wise in your own opinions. Recompense to no man evil for evil.
Provide aforehande things honest, not only before God, but also in the sight
of all men. If it be possible (as much as is in you) live peaceably with all
men. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath.
For it is written, vengeance is mine, I will reward, says the Lord.
Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, For
in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

The Gospel. Math. viii.
WHen he was come down from the mountain, much people followed him. And behold
there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying: Master, if thou will, ye can
make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying: I will,
be thou clean: and immediately his leporsy was cleansed. And Jesus said to him
tell no man, but go and show thy self to the priest, and offer the gift (that
Moises commanded to be offered) for a witness unto them. And when Jesus was
entered into Capernauin, there came unto him a Centurion, and besought him,
saying: Master, my servant lies at home sick of the palsy, and is grievously
payned. And Jesus said: When I come unto him, I will heal him. The Ce^turion
answered and said: Sir, I am not worthy that thou should come under my
roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. For I also am
a man subject to the authority of an other, and have soldiers under me, and I
say to this man, go: and he goes, and to another man, come, and he comes,
and to my servant, do this, and he does it. When Jesus heard these words, he
maruayled, and said to them that followed him: verily I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith in Israel. I say unto you, that many shall come from the
East and West, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven, but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashyng with teeth. And Jesus said unto the Centurion:
go thy way, and as thou beleuest, so be it unto thee, and his servant was
healed in the self same hour.

The fourth sunday after the Epiphany.
The Epistle. Roma. xii.
LEt every soul submit himself unto the aucthority of the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God. The powers that be ar ordained of God, who soever
therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God, but they that resist
shall receive to them selves damnation. For rulers are not fearful to them yt do
good, but to them that do evil. Will thou be without fear of the power? do well
then, and so shall thou be praised of the the same, for he is the minister of
God for thy wealth. But and if thou do that which is evil, the^ fear, for he
bears not the sword for naught: for he is the minister of god, to take
vengeance on the^ that do evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not only for
fear of vengeance, but also because of conscience: and even for this cause
pay ye tribute, for they are Gods ministers serving for that purpose. Give to
every man therefore his duty: Tribute to whom tribute belongs: Custom to whom
custom is due: fear to whom fear belongs: honor to whom honor pertains.

The Gospel. Math. viii.
ANd when he entered into a Ship, his disciples followed him. And behold there
arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much as ye ship was covered with waves
but he was a sleep. And his Disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying:
Master save us, we perish. And he said unto the^: why are ye fearful, O ye
of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there
followed a great calm. But the men marueiled saying: what manner of man is this,
that both winds and sea obey him? And when he was come to the other side, into
the country of the Gergesites, there met with him ij. possessed of Devils, which
came out of the graves, and were out of measure fierce, so that no man might go
by that way. And behold, they cried out saying: O Jesus you son of God, what
have we to do with thee? Art thou come hither to torment us before ye time. And
there was a good wai of from the^ a herd of swine feding. So ye devils besought
him, saying: if thou cast us out, suffer us to go into the herd of swine. And
he said unto them: go your ways. Then went they out, and departed into the
herd of swine. And behold the whole herd of swine was carried headlong into the
sea, and perished in the waters. Then they that kept them, fled and went their
ways into the City and told every thing and what had happened unto the
possessed of the devils. And behold, the whole city came out to mete Jesus and
when they saw him they besought him yt he would depart out of their coasts

The fifth Sunday after the Epiphany.
The Epistle. Philip. ii.
PUt upon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind,
mekenes, long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgeuing one another if
any man have a quarrel against another: as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.
Above all these things put one love, which is the bond of perfectnes. And the
peace of God rule your hearts, to the which peace ye are called in one body:
And see that ye be thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously
with all wisdom. Teach and exhort your own selves in Psalms and Himnes, and
spiritual Songs, synging with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And
whatsoever ye do in word or deed do al in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God the Father by him.

The Gospel. Math. xiii.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in the field:
but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way. But when the blade was sproong up, and had brought forth fruit,
then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and said
unto him: Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? From whence then
has it tares? He said unto them: the envious man has done this. The
servants said unto him: wylt thou then that we go and weed them up? But he
said nay: least while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up also the wheat
with them: let both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of
harvest I will say to the reapers, gather ye first the tares and bynd them
together in sheaues to be brent, but gather the wheat into my barn.

The sunday called Septuagesima.
The Epistle. i. Cor. ix.
Perceive ye not how that they which run in acourse, run all, but one receives
the reward: So run that ye may obtain. Every man that proves masteries,
abstaineth from althings. And they do it to obtain a crown that shall perish,
but we to obtain an everlasting crown. I therefore so run not as at an
uncertain thing, so fight I, not as one that beats the air, but I tame my
body, and bring it into subjection, least by any means it come to pass, that
when I have preached to other, I my self should be cast away.

The Gospel. Math. xx.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a householder, which went out
early in the morning to hyre laborers into his vineyard. And when the
agreement was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his
vineyard. And he went out about the third hour and saw other standing idle in
the market place, and said unto them: go ye also into the vineyard, and
whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way. Again he went
out about the.vi. and.ix. hour, and did likewise. And about the.xi. hour he
went out and found other standing idle and said unto them: Why stand ye here al
day idle? They said unto him: because no man has hired us. He said unto them:
Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receue. So
when even was come, the Lord of ye vineyard said unto his Steward: call the
laborers and give them their hire, beginning at the last until the first. And
when they did come that came about the.ix. hour, they receued every man a
penny. But when the first came also, they supposed that they should have
received more, and they likewise received every man a penny. And when they had
receued it, they murmured against the good man of the house saying: These last
have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal with us which have
borne the burden and heat of the day. But he answered unto one of them and
said: Friend, I do thee no wrong, did thou not agree with me for a penny?
Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto
thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as me lusts with mine own good? Is
thine eye evil because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first
shall be last. For many are called, but few are chosen.

The sunday called Sexagesima.
The Epistle. ii. Cor. xi.
YE suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise: for ye suffer if a man
bring you into bondage, if a man devour, if a man take, if a man exalt him
self, if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning rebuke, as though
we had been weak in this behalf. Howbeit wherein soever any man dare be bold
(I speak foolishly) I dare be bold also. They are Hebrews, even so am I. They
are Israelites, even so am I. They are the seed of Abraham, even so am I. They are the ministers of Christ (I speak like a fool) I am more. In labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more plenteously, in death often.
Of the Jews five times received I.xl. stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten
with rods. I was once stoned. I suffered thrice shipwreck. Night and day have
I ven in the deep sea. In iourneing often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in ieoperdies of mine own nation, in ieoperdies among the Heathen, in
perils in ye city, in perils in wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
among false brethren, in labor and travel, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastinges often, in cold and nakedness, beside the things which
outwardly happen unto me. I am combred daily, and do care for all
congregatio^s. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn
not? If I must needs boast I will boast of the things that concern mine
infirmities. The God and father of our lord Jesus Christ which is blessed for
evermore, knows that I lie not.

The Gospel. Luke. viii.
WHen much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of al
cities, he spoke by a similitude. The sower went out to sow his seed, and as
he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of
the air devoured it up, and some fell on stones, and as soon as it was sprung
up, it withered away, because it lacked moistnes, and some fell among thorns,
and the thorns spra^g up with it and choked it, and some fell on good ground,
and spra^g up and barefruit, an c. fold, and as he said these things he cried:
He yt has ears to hear, let him hear. And his disciples asked him saying:
what manner of similitude is And he said: unto you it is given to know the
secrets of the kingdom of God, but to other by parables, that when they see,
they should not see: and when they hear, they should not understand. The
parable is this: The seed is the word of God, those that are beside the way,
ar they that hear: then comes the devil and takes away the word out of
their hearts, least they should believe and be saved. They on the stones ar
they which when they hear, receive the word with joy, and these have no rotes,
which for a while believe, and in time of temptacion go away. And yt which fell
among thorns are they, which when they have heard, go forth and are choked with
cares and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. That which
fell in the good ground are they, which with a pure and good heart, hear the
word and keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience,

The sunday called Quinquagesima.
The Epistle. 1. Cor. xiii.
THough I speak with toungs of men and of Angels, and have no love, I am even
as sounding brass, or as a tinkling Cimbal. And though I could prophecy and
understand al secrets and al knowledge: yea if I have al faith, so that I could
move mountains out of their places, and yet have no love, I am nothing. And
though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I gave my body even
that I burned, and yet have no love, it profits me nothing. Love suffers
long, and is courteous, love enuieth not, love does not frowardly, swells not,
deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinks
none evil, reioyseth not in iniquity. But reioyseth in the truth suffers al
things, believes al things, hops al things, endures althinges. Though that
prophesying fail, either tounges cease, or knowledge vanish away, yet love
falls never away. For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesying is
imperfect. But when that which is perfect is come, the^ that which is imperfect
shall be done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I imagined as a child. But as soon as I was a man, I put away
childishnes. Now we see in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then shall we
see face to face. Now I know vnperfitly, but then shall I know even as I am
known. Now abides faith hope and love, even these.iii. but the chief of these
is love.

The Gospel. Luke. xvii.
Jesus took unto him the.xii. and said unto them: Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all shall be fulfiled that are written by the Prophets of the
son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked,
and despitefully entreated, and spytted on. And when they have scourged him,
they will put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. And they
understood none of these things. And this saying was hid from them, so that
they perceived not the things which were spoken. And it came to pass, that as
he was come nigh to Hierico, a certain blind man sat by the hie way side
begging. And when he heard the people pass by, he asked what it meant? And they
said unto him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. And he cried saying: Jesus thou
son of David, have mercy on me. And they which went before rebuked him, that
he should hold his peace* But he cried so much the more: thou son of David
have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be brought unto
him. And when he was come near, he asked him saying: what will thou that I do
unto thee? and he said. Lord, that I might receive my sight. And Jesus said
unto him: receive thy sight thy says has saved thee. And immediately he
received his sight, and followed him praising God. And all the people when they
saw it, gave praise unto God.

The first day in Lent called Ashwensday.
The Gospel. Ioell. ii.
TVrne you unto me with all your hearts, with fasting, weeping and mourning:
rent your hearts and not your clothes. Turn you unto the Lord your God for he
is gracious and merciful, long suffering and of great compassion, and ready to
pardon wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn and forgive: and after
his chastening, he shall let your increase remain for meat and drink off
ringes unto the lord your God. Blow out with the trumpet in Sion, proclaim a
fasting, call the congregation, gather the people together: warn the
congregation and gather the Elders, bring the children and Sucklings together.
Let the bridegrom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closes.
Let the Priests serve the Lord between the Porch and the altar, weeping and
saying: be favorable O Lord, be favorable unto thy people, let not thine
heritage be brought to such confusion, least the Heathen by Lords thereof.
Wherefore should they say among the Heathen where is now their God?

The Gospel. Math. ^^.
WHen ye fast be not sad as the Hipocrits are: for they disfigure their faces
that it may appear unto men how that they fast. Verily I say unto you, they
have their reward. But you when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy
face, that it appear not unto men how thou fastest, but unto thy father which
is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
Lay not up for your selves treasure upon earth, where neither rust nor moth does
curupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal, But lay up for you
treasures in heaven: where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where thieves
do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your
hearts be also.

The first Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. ii. Cor. vi.
WE as helpers exhort you, yt ye receive not the grace of God in vain. For he
says I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee. Behold now is yt accepted time, behold now is that day of
salvation. Let us give none occasion of evil that in our office be found no
fault: but in all things let us behave our selves as ye ministers of god, in
much patience in affections, in necessities, in anguishes, in gripes,
inprisonments, in strifes, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, in pureness,
in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness in the holy ghost, in love unfeigned
in the word of truth, in ye power of God: by the armor of righteousness of the
right hand and of the left: by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report: as deceivers and yet true, as unknown and yet known, as dying, and
behold we live, as chastened and not killed, as sorowing and yet always merry, as
poor and yet make many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing althings.

The Gospel. Math. iiii.
THen was Jesus led away of the Spirit into Wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at the
last an hungered. And when the Tempter came to him, he said: If thou be the
son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and
said: it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Then the devil takes him up into the
holy city, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him: If
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down headlong. For it is written, he
shall give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall hold
thee up, least at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. And Jesus said
unto him, it is written again: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Again
the devil takes him up into an exceeding hye mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says unto him: All these
will I give thee, if thou wylt fall down and worship me. Then says Jesus unto
him, avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shall woorship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Then the devil left him: and behold the Angels
came and ministered unto him.

The second Sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. i. Thessa. iiii.
WE beseech you brethren and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more
and more, even as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please
God. For ye know what commandments we gave you by our Lord Jesus Christ. For
this is the will of God, even your holiness: that ye should abstain from
fornication, and that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in
holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence as do the Heathen
which know not God: that no man oppress and defraud his brother in bargayning,
because that the lord is the auenger of all such things as we told you before,
and testified. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. He
therefore that despises, dispiseth not a man, but God, which has sent his
holy spirit among you.

The Gospel. Math. xv.
Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon: and
behold, a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto him,
saying: have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David. My daughter is pyteously
vexed with a devil. But he answered her nothing at all. And his disciples came
and besought him, saying: send her away for she cries after us. But he
answered, and said: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Then came she and worshipped him: saying: Lord help me. He answered and
said: It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs. She
answered and said: Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the croomes which fall from
their masters table. Then Jesus answered, and said unto her: O woman, great
is thy faith, be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her daughter was made
whole, even the same time.

The third sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Ephe. v.
BE you folowers of God as dear chlldren, and walk in love even as Christ
loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
savor to God. As for fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it
not be once named among you, as for it becomes Saints: or filthiness, or
foolish talking, or jesting, which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks.
For this ye know, that no whoremo^ger, either unclean person, or covetous
person (which is a woorshipper of Images) has any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ and of God. Let no man deceue you with vain words: For because of
such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not
ye therefore companions of them. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light
in the Lord: walk as children of light, for the truth of the spirit consists
in all goodness, and righteousness and truth. Accept that which is pleasing unto
the Lord, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather rebuke them. For it is a shame even to name those things which are done
of them in secret: but all things when they are brought forth by the light,
are manifest. For whatsoever is manifest, the same is light, wherefore he says:
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from death, and Christ shall give thee
light.

The Gospel. Luke. xii.
Jesus was casting out a devil that was dum. And when he had cast out the
devil, the dumme spoke, and the people wondered. But some of them said: he
casts out Deuyls through Beelzebub the chief of the devils. And other tempted
him and required of him a sign from heaven. But he knowing their thoughts said
unto them: Every kingdom divided against it self is desolate: and one house
does fall upon another. If Satan also be divided against him self, how shall
his kingdom endure? Because ye say I cast out devils through Beelzebub: if I
by the help of Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whose help do your children cast
them out? therefore shall they be your judges. But if I with the finger of God
cast out devils, no doubt ye kingdom of God is come upon you. When a strong
man armed watches his house, ye things that he possesses are in peace: But
when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from
him all his harnes (wherein he trusted) and deuideth his goods. He yt is not
with me is against me. And he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places
seking rest. And when he finds none, he says, I will return again into my
house whence I came out, And when he comes he fyndeth it swept and garnished.
Then goes he and takes to him seven other spirits worse then him self, and
they enter in and dwell there. And the end of that man is worse then the
beginning. And it fortuned that as he spoke these things, a certain woman of
the company lift up her voice, and said unto him: Happy is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which gave thee suck. But he said, yea happy are they that
hear the word of God and keep it.

The fourth sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Gala. iiii.
TEll me (ye that desire to be under the law) do ye not hear of the law? For
it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by
a freewoman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondwoman, was born after the
flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by promise: which
things are spoken by an Allegorye. For these are two Testaments, the one from
the mount Syna, which gendereth unto bondage, which is Agar: For mount Sina is
Agar in Arabia, and bordereth upon the city which is now called Jerusalem, and
is in bondage with he children. But Jerusalem, which is above is free, which
is the mother of us al. For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear no
children, break forth and cry, thou that trauelest not: For the desolate has
many more children, then she which has an Husband. Brethren we are after Isaac
the children of promise. But as then he that was borne after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: Even so is it now. Nevertheless
what says the Scripture? Put away the bondwoman and her son. For the son
of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the frewoman. So then
brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the freewoman.

The Gospel. John. vi.
Jesus departed over the sea of Galile, which is the sea of Tiberias, and a
great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on
them that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat
with his Disciples. And Easter, a feast of the Jews was nigh. When Jesus then
lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he said unto Philip:
Whence shall we bye bread yt these may eat? This he said to prove him, for he
him self knew what he would do Philip answered him: two hundredth penyworth of
bread are not sufficient for them, that every man may take a little. One of his
disciples (Andrew, Simon Peter's brother) says unto him: There is a Lad here
which has five barley loves and two fishes, but what are they among so many?
And Jesus said: make the perple sit down. There was much grass in ye place:
so ye men sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the bread,
and when he had given thanks he gave it to the disciples, and the Disciples to
them that were set down, and likewise of ye fishes as much as they would. When
they had eaten enough, he said unto his disciples: gather up ye broken meat
which remains, yt nothing be lost. And they gathered it together, and
filled.xij. baskets with the broken meat of the five barley loves: which
broken meat remained unto them yt had eaten. Then those men (when they had
seen the miracle yt Jesus did) said: this is of a truth the same Prophet yt
should come into the world.

The fifth sunday in Lent.
The Epistle. Hebru. ix.
CHrist being an hie priest of good things to come, came by a greater and a
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, yt is to say, not of this
building, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he
entered in once into ye holy place, and found eternal redemption. For if the
blood of Oxen and of Goats, and the ashes of a young Cow, when it was
sprinkled, purifieth the unclean as touching the purifying of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ (which through the eternal spirit,
offered him self without spot to God) purge your conscience from dead works,
for to serve the living God? And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
testament, that through death, which chanced for the redemption of those
transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

The Gospel. John. vii.
WHich of you can rebuke me of sin: If I say the truth, why do ye not believe
me? He that is of God, hears Gods words: Ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of God. The^ answered the Jews and said unto him: say we not well yt
thou art a Samaritan, and have the devil? Jesus answered: I have not the
devil, but I honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own
praise: there is one yt seeks and judges. Verily, verily. I say unto you, if a
man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Then said the Jews unto him:
now know we yt thou have the devil. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets, and thou
say, if a man keep my saying he shall never taste of death. Art thou greater
then our father Abraham which is dead? And the prophets are dead: whom make
thou thy self? Jesus answered: if I honor my self, my honor is nothing, it
is my father that honors me, which you say is your God, and yet ye have not
known him, but I know him: and if I say I know him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you. But I know him and keep his saying. Your father Abraham was glad to
see my day: and he saw it and rejoiced. The^ said ye Jews unto him: thou art
not yet fyfty year old, and have ye seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them: Verily
verily I say unto you: ere Abraham was borne I am. Then took they up stones to
cast at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple.

The sunday next before Easter.
The Epistle. Coll. iii.
LEt the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he was
in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, nevertheless he
made himself of no reputacio^, taking on him the shape of a servant, and
became like unto man, and was found in his apparel as a man. He humbled him
self, and becam obedient to ye death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore
god has also exalted him on hie, and given him a name which is above all
names, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow both of things in heaven,
and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that all tounges should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the praise of God the Father.

The Gospel. Math. xxvi.
ANd it came to pas, when Jesus had finished al these sayings, he said unto his
disciples: ye know that after.ij. days shall be easter, and the son of man
shall be delivered over to be crucified. Then assembled together the chief
priests and the Scribes and the Elders of the people unto the palace of the hye
Priest (which was called Caiphas) and held a counsel that they might take
Jesus by subtelty and kill him. But they said not on the holiday least there be
any vproare among the people. When Jesus was in Bethany in ye house af Simon
the Leper, there came unto him a woman having an Alablaster box of precious
ointme^t, and poured it on his head as he sat at ye board: but when his
disciples saw it, they had indignacion saying, whereto serves this wast? This
ointment might have been well sold and given to the poor. When Jesus understood
yt, he said unto the^: why trouble ye the woman? for she has wrought a good
work upon me. For ye have ye poor always with you, but me ye shall not have
always. And in yt she has cast this ointment on my body, she did it to bury
me: verily I say unto you whersoeuer this gospel shall be preached in all ye
world, there shall also this be told yt she has don for a memorial of her. Then
one of the.xij. which was called Judas Iscarioch went to the chief Priests and
said unto them: What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they
appointed unto him.xxx. pieces of silver. And from that time forth he sought
oportunitye to betray him. The first day of sweet bread, the Disciples came to
Jesus, saying to him: Where wylt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover? And he said go into the City to such a man, and say unto him: the
Master says my time is at hand, I will keep my Easter by thee with my
Disciples. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made
ready the Passover. When the even was come, he sat down with the.xii. And as
they did eat, he said: Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him: Lord is it I? He answered and said: he that dippeth his hand with me in
the dish, the same shall betray me. The son of man truly goes, as it is
written of him: but woe be unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed.
It had been good for that man, if he had not been borne. Then Judas which
betrayed him answered and said: Master is it I? He said unto him: thou have
said, and when they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given
thanks he brake it and gave it to the disciples and said: Take, eat, this is
my body. And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it to them saying: drink
ye al of this: for this is my blood (which is of the new testament) that is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink
hence forth of this fruit of the vine tree, until the day when I shall drink it
new with you in my fathers kingdom. And when they had said grace, they went
out unto mount Oliuet. Then said Jesus unto them: all ye shall be offended
because of me this night. For it is written: I will smite the shepherd and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad, but after I am risen again, I
will go before you into Galile. Peter answered and said unto him: though all
men be offended because of thee, yet will I not be offended. Jesus said unto
him: verily I say unto thee, that in this same night, before the Cock crow thou
shall deny me thrice. Peter said unto him: yea, though I should dye with thee,
yet will I not deny thee: likewise also said al ye disciples. Then came Jesus
with the^ unto a farm place (which is called Gerhsemane) and said unto the
disciples: Sit ye here while I go and pray yonder. And he took with him Peter,
and the two sons of Zebede, and began to wax sorrowful and heavy. Then said
Jesus unto them: My soul is heavy eue^ unto the death. Tarry ye here and watch
with me. And he went a little farther, and fell flat on his face and prayed
saying: O my father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will. And he came unto the disciples, and found the^
a sleep, and said unto Peter: what could ye not watch with me one hour? watch
and pray that ye enter not into temptacion: the spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak. He went away once again and prayed saying: O my father, if this
cup may not pas away from me except I drink of it, thy will be fulfilled: and
he came and found them a sleep again, for their eyes were heavy. And he left
the^ and went again and prayed the third time saying the same words. Then
comes he to his disciples and said unto them, sleep on now and take your
rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going: behold he is at hand that does betray
me. While he yet spoke, lo Judas one of the number of the twelve came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and staves, sent from the chief
Priests and Elders of the people. But he that betrayed him, gave them a token
saying: Whom soever I kiss, the same is he, hold him fast. And forthwith he
came to Jesus and said, hayle Master, and kissed him. And Jesus said unto him:
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they and laid hands on Jesus, and
took him. And behold, one of them that were with Jesus, stretched out his
hand, and drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the hye Priest, and smote of
his ear. Then said Jesus unto him, put up thy sword into the sheath, for all
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Think thou that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall give me even now more then xij. legions of
Angels? But how the^ shall the scriptures be fulfilled? For thus must it be. In
that same hour said Jesus to the multitude: Ye be come out as it were to a
thief with swords and staves for to take me. I sat daily with you teaching in
the temple, and ye took me not. But all this is done that the scriptures of
the Prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and
fled. And they took Jesus, and lead him to Caiphas the hye Priest, where the
Scribes and the Elders were assembled. But Peter followed him a far of unto
the hye Priests palace and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end.
The chief Priests and Elders, and all the counsel sought false witness against
Jesus, to put him to death, but found none: yea, when many false witnesses
came, yet found they none. At the last came.ij. false witnesses, and said: this
fellow said I am able to destroy the temple of God and to build it again in
three days. And the chief priest arose, and said unto him: answerest thou
nothing? Why do these bear witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace. And
the chief priest answered and said unto him. I charge thee by yt living God,
that thou tell us, whether thou be Christ the son of God. Jesus said unto him:
thou have said: Nevertheless I say unto you hereafter shall ye see the son of
man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of the sky.
Then the hie priest rent his clothes, saying: he has spoken blasphemy, what
need we of any more witnesses? Behold now ye have heard his blasphemy, what
think ye? They answered and said, he is worthy to dye, then they spit in his
face, and buffeted him with fistes, and other smote him on the face with the
palm of their hands saying: tell us thou Christ, who is he that smot thee:
Peter sat without in the court, and a Damsel came to him, saying: thou also
wast with Jesus of Galile: but he denied before them all saying: I wot not what
thou say. When he was gone out into the porch another wench saw him and said
unto them that were there: This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And again
he deinied with an oath, saying I do not know ye man. After a while came unto
him they yt stood by, and said unto Peter surely thou art eue^ one of the^ for
thy spech bewraieth thee. The^ began he to curse and to swear, yt he knew not
ye man. And immediately ye Cock crew: and Peter remembered ye word of Jesus which
said unto him before ye cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice: and he went out
and wept bitterly. When the morning was come all the chief priests and Elders of
the people held a counsel against Jesus, to put him to death, and brought him
bound, and delivered him unto Poncius Pilat ye deynty. The^ Judas (which had
betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned, repented him self, and brought
again ye.xxx. plates of silver to ye chief priests and Elders, saying: I
have sinned betraying the innocent blood. And they said: what is that to us?
See thou to that. And he cast down the silver plates in the temple, and
departed and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the silver
plates, and said: It is not lawful for to put them into the treasure, because
it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with the^ a
potters field to bury strangers in. Wherefore the field is called Acheldema,
that is, the field of blood, until this day. Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying: and they took.xxx. silver plates, the
price of him yt was valued, whom they boughte of the children of Israel, and
gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me. Jesus stood before
the deputy, and the deputy asked him saying: art you the king of the Jews?
Jesus said unto him: thou say. And when he was accused of the chief
Priests and Elders he answered nothing. Then said Pilat unto him: hear thou
not how many witnesses they lay against thee? and he answered him to never a
word, in so much yt the deputy merueiled greatly. At that feast the deputy was
wont to deliver unto ye people a prisoner who^ they would desire. He had the^ a
notable prisoner called Barrabas. Therefore when they were gathered together,
Pilat said: whether will ye yt I give lose unto you Barabas or Jesus which is
called Christ. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. When he was
set down to give judgment, his wife sent unto him saying: have thou nothing to
do with that just man. For I have suffered this day may things in my sleep
because of him. But the chief Priests and Elders persuaded the people that they
should ask Barrabas and destroy Jesus. The Deputy answered and said unto them:
whether of the twain will ye that I let loose unto you? They said Barrabas.
Pilate said unto them: what shall I do the^ with Jesus which is called Christ?
They al said unto him: let him be crucified. The Deputy said: what evil has he
done? But they cried the more saying: let him be crucified. When Pilate saw
that he could prevail nothing, but yt more busynes was made, he took water
and washed his hands before the people, saying: I am innocent of the blood of
this just person, ye shall see Then answered all the people and said: His blood
be on us and on our children. Then let he Barrabas loose unto them, and
scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the
deputy took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him all the company,
and they stripped him, and put on him a purple robe, and platted a crown of
thorns, and put it upon his head, and a read in his right hand, and bowed the
knee before him, and mocked him saying: Hayle king of the Jews. And when they
had spyt on him, they took the reed and smote him on the head. And after that
they had mocked him, they took the robe of him again, and put his own raiment
on him, and lead him away to crucify him. And as they came out, they found a
man of Ciren (named Simon) him they compelled to bear his cross. And they
came unto the place which is called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of dead
men's sculs, and gave him viniger mingled with gall to drynk. And when he had
tasted thereof, he would not drink. When they had crucified him, they parted
his garments and did cast lots, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet: They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they
cast lots. And they sat and watched him there, and set up over his head the
cause of his death written: This is Jesus the king of the Jews. Then were
there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and an other on
the leaft. They that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads and saying:
Thou that destroyedst the temple of God, and did build it in three days,
save thy self. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.
Likewise also all the hye Priests mocked him, with the Scribes and Elders, and
said: He saved other, him self he cannot save. If he be the king of Israel,
let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in
God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him: For he said, I am the son
of God. The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth. From the syxt hour was there darkness over all the land, until the
ninth hour. And about the nynth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice saying:
Eloy, Eloy, Lamasabacthani? That is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said: This
man calls for Helias. And straight way one of them ran and took a spoonge,
and when he had filled it full of viniger, he put it on a read, and gave him
drink. Other said: let be, let us see whether Helias will come and deliver him.
Jesus when he cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. And behold,
the veil of the temple did rent in two parts, from the top to the bottom, and
the earth did quake, and the stones rent, and graves did open, and many bodies
of Saints which slept, arose and went out of their graves after his
resurrection, and came into the holy City, and appeared unto many. When the
Centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the earth quake, and
those things that happened, they feared greatly saying: Truly this was the
son of God. And many women were there, beholding him a far of, which followed
Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him. Among which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary
the mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedes children.

The Monday before Easter.
The Epistle. Esaias. lxiii.
WHat is he thus that comes from Edom, with red coulored clothes of Bosra
(which is so costly cloth) and comes in so mightily with all his strength? I
am he that teaches righteousness, and am of power to help. Wherefore then is
thy clothing red, and thy raiment like his that treads the wine press? I
have trodden the press my self alone, and of all people there is not one with
me. Thus will I tread down mine enemies in my wrath, and set my feet upon
them in mine indignation. And their blood shall be sprincle my clothes, and so
will I stayne all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is assigned in my heart,
and the year when my people shall be delivered, is come. I looked about me, and
there was no man to show me any help. I marueiled that no man held me up. Then I
held me by mine own arm, and my feruentnes sustained me. And thus wlll I
tread down the people in my wrath, and bath them in my displeasure, and upon
the earth will I lay their strength. I will declare the goodness of the Lord yea
and the praise of the Lord for all that he has given us for the great good that
he has done for Israel, which he has given them of his own favor, and
according to the multitude of his loving kindness: for he said these no doubt
are my people, and no shrinking children, and so he was their savior. In their
troubles he was also troubled with them, and the Aungel that went forth from
his presence, delivered them. Of very love and kindness that he had unto them,
he redeemed them. He has borne them and carried them up ever since the world
began: but after they provoked him to wrath and vexed his holy mind, he was
their enemy, and fought against them himself. Yet remembered Israel the old
time of Moises and his people, saying: where is he that brought them from the
water of the sea, with them yt fed his sheep? Where is he that has given his
holy spirit among the^? he led the^ by the right hand of Moses with his
glorious arm, dividing ye water before the^ whereby he gat himself an
everlasting name. He led them in the deep as an horse is led in the plain, yt
they should not stumble, as a tame beast goes in the field, and the breath
given of God, gives him rest. Thus O god have thou led thy people, to make thy
self a glorious name with all. Look down then from heaven, and behold the
dwelling place of thy sanctuarye, and thy glory. How is it yt thy gelousy, thy
strength, the multitude of thy mercyes, and thy loving kyndnes will not be
entreated of us: yet art thou our father. For Abraham knows us not, neither
is Israel acquainted with us: but thou Lord art our father and redemer, and thy
name is everlasting. O Lord, wherefore have thou led us out of thy way? wherefore
have thou hardened our hearts yt we fear thee not? Be at one with us again for
thy servants sake, and for the generation of thine heritage. Thy people have
had but a litel of thy Sanctuary in possession: for our enemies have trod down
thy holy place. And we were thine from the beginning, when thou wast not their
Lord, for they have not called upon thy name,

The Gospel. Mark. xiiij.
AFter two days was Easter, and the days of sweet bread. And the hie priests
and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death.
But they said: not in the feast day, least any business arise among the people.
And when he was in Bethany in the house of Simon ye Leper, even as he sat at
meat, there came a woman having an Alabaster box of ointment called Nard, that
was pure and costly, and she broke the box and poured it upon his head. And
there were some yt were not content within themselves and said: what needed this
wast of ointme^t? for it might have been sold for more then three hundredth
pence, and have been given to the poor. And they grudged against her. And
Jesus said: let her alone why trouble ye her? She has done a good work on me,
for ye have poor with you always, and whenever ye will ye may do them good:
but me ye have not always. She has done ye she could, she came aforeha^d to
anoint my body to the burying Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel
shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she has done,
shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her. And Judas Iscarioth one of the
twelve went away unto the hie Priests to betraye him unto them: When they
heard that, they were glad and promised that they would give him money. And he
sought how he might conuenientlye betraye him. And the first day of sweet
bread, (when they offered the passover) his disciples said unto him: where will thou that we go, and prepare that thou may eat the Passover? And he sent
forth two of his Disciples, and said unto them: Go ye into the City, and
there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow him. And whether
soever he goes in, say ye unto the good man of the house: the master says
were is the geaste chamber, where I shall eat ye passover with my disciples?
And he will show you a-great parlor pauid and prepared, there make ready for
us. And his disciples went and found as he had said unto them: and they made
ready the Passover. And when it was euentide, he came with the.xij. And as
they sat at board and did eat, Jesus said verily I say unto you, one of you
(that eats with me) shall betray me. And they began to be sorry and to say to
him one by one: is it I? and an other said: is it I? he answered and said
unto them: it is one of the.xij. even he that dippeth with me in the platter.
The Son of man truly goes as it is written of him. but woe unto that man by
whom the Son of man is betrayed: good were it for that man, if he had never
been borne. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread and when he had given
thanks, he brake it and gave it to them and said: Take, eat this is my body.
And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them and
they all drauke of it. And he said unto them, this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you: I will drink no more
of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the
kingdom of god. And when they had said grace, they went out to the mount
Oliuete. And Jesus said unto them: all ye shall be offended because of me this
night. For it is written, I will smite the shephard and the sheep shall be
scattered: but after that I am risen again I will go into Galile before you
Peter said unto him: and though all men be offended, yet will not I. And Jesus
said unto him: verily I say unto thee, that this day even in this night, before
the Cock crow twice thou shall deny me three times. But he spoke more
vehemently: no if I should dye with thee, I will not deny thee. Likewise also
said they all. And they came into a place which is named Gethsemane, and he
said to his Disciples: sit ye here while I go aside and pray. And he takes
with him Peter, James, and John, and began to wax abashed and to be in an
agony, and said unto them: my soul is heavy even unto the death, tarry ye here
and watch. And he went forth a little and fell down flat on the ground and
prayed, yt if it were possible the hour might pass from him. And he said: Abba
father al things are possible unto thee, take away this cup from me,
nevertheless not as I will, but that thou will be done. And he came and found
them sleeping, and said to Peter: Simon sleep thou? Could not thou watch
one hour? Watch ye and pray, least ye enter into temptacion: the spirit truly
is ready, but the flesh is weak. And again he went aside and prayed, and
spoke the same words. And he returned and found them a sleep again for their
eyes were heavy, neither wist they what to answer him. And he came the third
time and he said unto them sleep hence forth and take your ease, it is enough.
The hour is come: behold the son of man is betrayed into the hands of
sinners. Rise up let us go Lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. And immediately
while he yet spoke, comes Judas (which was one of the twelve) and with him a
great number of people with swords and staves from the hie priests and
Scribes and Elders. And he that betrayed him, had given them a general token
saying: whosoever I do kiss, the same is he, take and lead him away warely.
And as soon as he was come, he goes straight way to him, and says unto him:
Master, master, and kissed him: and they laid their hands on him, and took
him: and one of them that stood by, drew out a sword, and smot a servant of
the hie priest and cut of his ear. And Jesus answered and said unto them: ye
be come out as unto a thief with swords and staves, for to take me: I was
daily with you in the temple teaching and ye took me not: but these things
come to pass that the scripture should be fulfilled. And they al forsook him
and ran away. And there followed him a certain young man clothed in linen upon
the bare, and the young men caught him, and he left his linen garment and fled
from them naked. And they led Jesus away to the hye priest of all, and with him
came all the hye Priests and the Elders and the scribes. And Peter followed him
a great way of (even till he was come into the palace of the hye priest) and he
sat with the servants, and warmed him self at the fire. And the hie Priests
and all the counsel sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death, and
found none: for many bear false wines against him, but their witnesses agreed
not together. And there arose certain and brought false witness against him
saying: we heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and
within three days, I will build an other made without hands. But yet their
witnesses agreed not together. And the hie priest stood up among them, and
asked Jesus saying: aunswerest thou nothing? how is it that these bear witness
against thee? But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the hie
priest asked him, and said unto him: art thou Christ the son of the blessed?
And Jesus said: I am. And ye shall see the son of man sytting on the right
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the hie priest rent
his clothes, and said, what need we any further of witnesses? ye have heard
blasphemy, what think ye? And they all condemned him to be worthy of death.
And some began to spit at him, and to cover his face, and to beat him with
fistes, and to say unto him: arede, and the servants buffeted him on the face.
And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there came one of the wenches of the
hie priest, and when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked on him and
said: wast not thou also with Jesus of Nazareth? and he denied saying: I know
him not, neither wot I what thou say. And he went out into ye porch, and
the cock crew, and a damsel (when she saw him) began again to say to them
that stood by, this is one of them. And he denied it again, and anon after
they yt stood by said again unto Peter: surely thou art one of them, for thou
art of Galile, and thy speech agrees thereto. But he began to curse and to
swear saying: I know not this man of whom ye speak. And again the cock crew,
and Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said unto him: before the cock
crow twice thou shall deny me three times And he began to weep.

The Tuesday before Easter.
The Epistle. Esaias. i.
THe lord God has opened mine ear, therefore can I not say nay, neither with
draw my self: but offer my back unto the smiters, and my cheeks to the
nippers. I turn not my face fro shame and spitting, and the lord God shall
help me. Therefore shall I not be confounded. I have hardened my face like a
flynte stone, for I am sure that I shall not come to confusion. He is at hand
that justifies me, who will then go to law with me? Let us stand one against
another: if there be any that will reason with me, let him come here forth to me.
Behold, the Lord God stands by me, what is he then yt can condemn me? Lo,
they shall be like as an old cloth, ye moth shall eat them up. Therefore who
soever fears the Lord among you, let him hear the voice of his servant.
Whosoever walks in darkness, and no light shines upon him, let him put his trust
in yt name of the Lord, and hold him up by his God: but take heed, ye al kindle
a fire of ye wrath of God, and stir up ye coals: walk on in the glistering of
your own fire, and in the coals that ye have kindeled. This comes unto you
from my hand, namely that ye shall sleep in sorrow.

The Gospel. Mark. xx.
ANd anon in the dawning, the hie Priests held a counsel with the Elders and
the Scribes, and the whole congregation, and bound Jesus and led him away, and
delivered him to Pilate. And Pilate asked him: art thou the king of the Jews?
and he answered and said to him: thou say it. And the hye Priests accused
him of many things. So Pilate asked him again saying: aunswerest thou nothing?
Behold how many things they lay to thy charge. Jesus answered yet nothing, so
that Pilate marueyled. At that feast Pilate did deliver unto them a prisoner,
whom soever they would desire. And there was one that was named Barrabas, which
lay bound with them that made insurrection: he had committed murder. And the
people called unto him, and began to desire him that he would do according as
he had ever done unto them. Pilat answered them saying: will ye that I let loose
unto you the king of the Jews? for he knew that the hie Priests had delivered
him of envy. But the hie priests moved the people that he should rather deliver
Barrabas unto them. Pilate answered again and said to them: what will ye that
I then do unto him, whom ye call the king of the Jews? And they cried again,
crucify him. Pilate said unto them what evil has he don? And they cried the
more ferue^tly, crucify him. And so Pilate wylling to content the people, let
loose Barrabas unto them, and delivered up Jesus (when he had scourged him) for
to be crucified. And the soldiers led him away into the common hall and called
together the whole multitude, and they clothed him with purple, and they
platted a crown of thorns and crowned him with all, and began to salute him:
hail king of the Jews. And they smote him on the head with a read and did
spyt upon him, and bowed their knees and worshipped him. And when they had
mocked him, they took the purple of him, and put his own clothes on him and
led him out to crucify him. And they compelled one yt passed by, called Simon
of Ciren (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the field, to
bear his cross. And they brought him to a place named Golgotha, which if a
man interpret, is the place of dead men's sculs: and they gave him to drink
wine mingled with mir, but he received it not. And when they had crucified him,
they parted his garments, casting lottes upon them what every man should take.
And it was about the third hour, and they crucified him. And the title of his
cause was written: The King of the Jews. And they crucified with him two
thieves. the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And the
scripture was fulfilled, which says: he was counted among the wicked. And
they that went by railed on him wagging their heads and saying: a wretch, thou
that destroiest the temple, and buildest it again in three days save thy
self and come down from the cross. Likewise also mocked him the hie priests
among themselves with the Scribes, and said: he saved other, himself he cannot
save. Let Christ the king of Israel descend now from che cross, that we may
see and believe. And they that were crucified with him, checked him also. And
when the sixth hour was come, darkness arose over all the earth, until the
ninth hour, And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice saying: Eloy,
Eloy, Lamasabathany? which is (if one interpret it) My God my God why have you
forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when they heard that said: behold
he calls for Helias, and one ran and filled a sponge full of viniger, and put
it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying let him alone, let us see whether
Helias will come and take him down. But Jesus cried with a loud voice and gave
up the ghost. And the vale of the temple rent in two pieces, from the top to
the bottom. And when the Centurion (which stood before him) saw that he so
cried and gave up the ghost, he said: truly this man was the Son of God.
There were also women a good way of beholding him: among whom was Mary
Magdalen and Marye the mother of James the little, and of Ioses, and Marye
Salome (which also when he was in Galile had followed him) and many other women
which came up with him to Jerusalem. And now when the even was come, (because
it was the day of preparing that goes before the Sabbath) Joseph of the City
of Aramathia a noble Counsaylour, which also looked for the kingdom of God,
came and went in boldly unto Pilate, and begged of him the body of Jesus. And
Pilate marueyled that he was already dead and called unto him the Centuryon,
and asked of him whether he had been any while dead: And when he knew the
truth of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph, and he bought a lynnen
clothe, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen cloth, and laid him
in the Sepulcher that was he wen out of a rock, and roled a stone before the
door of the Sepulcher. And Marye Magdalene, and Marye Ioses beheld where he
was laid.

The wedensday before Easter.
The Epistle. Hebru. ix.
WHere as is a testament, there must also (of necessity) be the death of him
that makes the testament. For the Testament takes aucthority when men are
dead: for it is yet of no value, as long as he that makes the Testament is
alive: for which cause also neither the first Testament was ordained without
blood. For when Moises had declared all the commandments to all the people,
according to the law he took the blood of Calves and of Goats, with water
and purple wool, and isope, and sprinkled both the Book and all the people,
saying: This is the blood of the Testament which God has appointed unto you.
Moreover he sprinkled the tabernacle with blood also, and all the ministering
vessels. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood, and without
shedding of blood is no remission. It is need then that the similitudes of
heavenly things be purifyed with such things: but that the heavenly things
themselves, be purified with better sacrifices then are made with hands (which
are similitudes of true things) but is entered into very heaven, for to appear
now in the sight of God for us: not to offer himself often as the hie Priest
enters into the holy place every year with strange blood, for then must he
have often suffered since the world began. But now in the end of the world has
he appeared once to put sin to flight by the offering up of himself. And as it
is appointed unto all men that they shall once dye, and then comes the
judgment: Even so Christ was once offered to take away the syns of many, and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear again without sin unto
salvation.

The Gospel. Luke. xxii.
THe feast of sweet bread drew nigh, which is called Easter, and the hye
Priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him, for they feared the
people. Then entered Satan into Judas, whose sir name was Iscarioth (which was
of the number of the twelve) and he went his way and communed with the hie
Priests and officers how he might betray him unto them. And they were glad,
and promised to give him money. And he consented and sought opportunity to
betray him unto them, when the people were away. Then came the day of sweet
bread when of necessity the Passover must be offered. And he sent Peter and
John, saying: go and prepare us the Passover, that we may eat. They said unto
him: where will thou that we prepare? and he said unto them: behold, when ye
enter into the City, there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water,
him follow into the same house that he enters in, and ye shall say unto the
good man of the house: the master says unto thee: where is the gest chamber
where I shall eat the passover with my Disciples? And he shall show a great
parler pauid, there make ready. And they went and found as he had said unto
them and they made ready the Passover. And when the hour was come, he sat
down and the twelve Apostles with him. And he said unto them: I have inwardly
desired to eat this Passover with you before that I suffer. For I say unto
you: henceforth will I not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the
kingdom of God. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and said: Take this,
and divide it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink of the fruit of
this vine until the kingdom of God come. And he took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them saying: This is my body which is
given for you, this do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also when he had
supped, he took the cup saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood
which is shed for you: Yet behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me
on the table. And truly the son of man goes as it is appointed, but woe
unto that man by whom he is betrayed. And they began to enquire among them
selves, which of them it was that should do it. And there was a strife among
them, which of them should seem to be the greatest. And he said unto them ye
kings of nations reign over them, and they that have aucthoryty upon them are
called gracious: but ye shall not so be. But he yt is greatest among you, shall
be as the younger, and he yt is chief, shall be as he that does minister. For
whether is greater he that sits at meat, or he that serves? Is not he that
litteth at meat? But I am among you, as he that ministers. Ye are they which
have bidde^ with me in my temptacions. And I appointed unto you a kingdom, as
my father has appointed to me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom, and sit on seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And ye Lord
said: Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you as it were wheat,
but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. And when thou art
converted, strength thy brethren. And he said unto him: lord I am ready to go
with thee into prison, and to death. And he said: I tell thee Peter, the cock
shall not crow this day til you have denied me thrice yt thou know me. And he
said unto them, when I sent you without wallet, and scrip and shoes, lacked ye
any thing? And they said no. Then said he unto them: but now he that has a
wallet, let him take it up, and likewise his scrip. And he that has no sword,
let him sell his coat and bie one. For I say unto you that yet ye same which
is written, must be performed in me: even among ye wicked was he reputed For
those things which are written of me, have their end. And they said Lord,
behold here are.ii. swords, and he said unto the^ it is enough. And he came out
and went as he was wont, to mount Oliuet, and the disciples followed him. And
when he came to ye place, he said unto them, pray lest ye fall into temptacion.
And he gat him self from them about a stone cast, and kneeled down and prayed
saying: Father if thou will remove this cup from me: Nevertheless not my will
but thine be fulfilled: and there appeared an angel unto him from heaven
co^forting him. And he was in an agony, and prayed the longer, and his sweat
was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground. And when he arose from
prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for heaviness, and
he said unto the^: why sleep ye? Rise and pray, least ye fall into temptation.
While he yet spoke, behold there came a company, and he that was called Judas,
one of ye twelve went before them and preased nigh to Jesus to kiss him. But
Jesus said unto him: Judas, betraiest you the son of man with a kiss? When
they which were about him saw what would follow they said unto him: lord, shall
we smite with the sword? and one of them smote a servant of ye hie priest, and
stroke of his right ear. Jesus answered and said: suffer ye thus far forth.
And when he touched his ear he healed him. Then Jesus said unto the hie
Priests and rulers of the temple and the elders which were come to him: Ye be
come out as unto a thief, with swords and staves. When I was daily with you in
the temple, ye streatched forth no hands against me: but this is even your
very hour and the power of darkness. Then took they him and led him, and
brought him to ye hie Priests house. But Peter followed a far of. And when they
had kinled a fire in the midst of the palace and were set down together, Peter
also sat down among them. But when one of the wenches be held him, as he sat
by the fire (and looked upon him) she said: this same fellow was also with him.
And he denied him, saying: woman I know him not. And after a little while,
another saw him and said: thou art also of them. And Peter said man I am not.
And about the space of an hour after, another affirmed, saying: verily this
fellow was with him also, for he is of Galile And Peter said, man I wot not what
thou say, and immediately while he yet spoke the Cock crew. And ye lord
turned back and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord,
how he had said unto him, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice: and
Peter went out and wept bytterly. And the men yt took Jesus mocked him, and
smot him, and when they had blind folded him, they stroke him on the face, and
asked him saying: arede, who is he yt smot thee? And many other things
dispitfully said they against him. And as soon as it was day, the elders of the
people, and the hie pristes and Scribes came together, and led him into their
counsel saying: art thou very Christ? tell us. And he said unto them: if I
tell you, ye will not believe me, and if I ask you, you will not answer me nor
let me go: hereafter shall the son of man sit on the right hand of the power
of God. Then said they al: art thou then the son of God? He said: ye say that I
am. And they said, what need we any further witness. For we our selves have
heard of his own mouth.

The thursday before Easter.
The Epistle. i. Cor. xi.
THis I warn you of and commend not, that ye come not together after a better
manner, but after a worse For first of al, when ye come together in the
congregation I hear yt there is discention among you, and I partly believe it.
For there must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among you may
be known. When ye come together therefore into one place, the Lords supper
cannot be eaten, for every man begins before to eat his own supper, and one
is hungry, and an other is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in?
despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I
say unto you? shall I praise you? in this I praise ye not. That which I
delivered unto you I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus, the same night
in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it
and said: Take ye and eat this is my body which is broken for you. This do ye
in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took ye cup when supper
was don saying: this cup is ye new testament in my blud, this do as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and
drink of this cup ye shall show ye Lords death til he come Wherefore, whosoever
shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup of ye Lord unworthily, shall be
gilty of ye body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation: because he makes
no difference of the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sick among
you, and many sleep. For if we had judged our selves, we should not have been
judged. But when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should
not be damned with the world: Wherefore my brethren when ye come together to
eat tarry one for another. If any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come
not together unto condemnacion: Other things will I set in order when I come.

The Gospel. Luke. xxii.
THe whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate. And they began to
accuse him saying: we found this fellow perverting the people, and forbidding to
pay tribute to Ceasar, saying that he is Christ a king. And Pilate apposed
him saying, art thou the king of the Jews? He answered him, and said: thou
say it. Then said Pilate to the hie Priests and to the people: I find no
fault in this man. And they were the more fierce, saying: he moves the people,
teaching throughout all Iurye, and began at Galile, even to this place. When
Pilate heard mention of Galile, he asked whether the man were of Galile: and
as soon as he knew that he belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to
Herod, which was also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus, he
was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he
had herd many things of him, and he trusted to have seen some miracles don by
him. Then he questioned with him many words. But he answered him nothing. The hie
Priests and Scribes stood forth and accused him straightly. And Herod with his
men of war despised him. And when he had mocked him, he araied him in white
clothing and sent him again to Pilate. And the same day Pilat and Herod were
made Friends together. For before they were at variaunce. And Pilat called
together the hie Priests, and the rulers, and the people, and said unto them:
ye have brought this man unto me, as one that peruerteth the people, and behold
I examine him before you, and find no fault in this man of those things
whereof ye accuse him, no nor yet Herod. For I sent you unto him, and lo
nothing worthy of death is done unto him: I will therefore chasten him, and let
him loose. For of necessity he must have let one loose to them at that feast.
And all the people cried at once, saying: away with him and deliver us
Barrabas: which for a certain insurrection made in the city, and for a
murder, was cast into prison. Pilate spoke again unto them, willing to let
Jesus loose. But they cried saying: crucify him, crucifye him. He said unto
them the third time: what evil has he done? I find no cause of death in him:
I will therefore chasten him and let him go. And they cried with loud voices,
requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the hie
Priests prevailed. And Pilat gave sentence that it should be as they required,
and he let loose unto them, him that (for insurrection and murder) was cast
into prison, whom they had desired: and he delivered to them Jesus, to do with
him what they would. And as they led him away, they caught one Simon of Ciren
coming out of the field, and on him laid they the Cross, that he might bear
it after Jesus. And there followed him a great company of people, and of women,
which bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turned back unto them and said: ye
daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your children. For behold
the days will come, in the which they shall say: Happy are the barren, and the
wombes that never bare, and the pappes which never gave suck. Then shall they
begin to say to the Mountains, fall on us, and to the hills cover us. For if
they do this in a green tree, what shall be don in the dry? And there were two
evil doers led with him to be slain. And after that they were come to the
place (which is called Caluery) there they crucified him and the evil doers,
one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said Jesus: father
forgive them, for they wot not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and
cast lottes. And the people stood and beheld. And the rulers mocked him with
them, saying he saved other men, let him save him self, if he be vecy Christ
the chosen of God. The soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him
viniger and said: if thou be the king of the Jews save thy self. And a
superscription was written over him, with letters of Greek, and Latin, and
Hebrew. This is the king of the Jews. And one of the evil doers, which were
hanged, rayled on him, saying: If you be Christ, save thy self and us. But the
other answered and rebuked him saying: fear you not God, seeing thou art in
the same damnation? we are righteously punished for we receive according to our
deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus: Lord
remember me when you come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: verily I
say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in paradise. And it was about the
syxt hour, and there was a darkness over all the earth, until the ninth hour,
and the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple did rent, eue^ through the
midst. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said: Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit. And when he thus had said: he gave up the ghost. When
the Centurion saw what had happened, he glorifed God saying: verily this was a
righteous man. And all the people yt came together to that sight, and saw the
things which had happened, smot their breasts and returned. And al his
acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galile stood a far of
beholding these things. And behold, there was a man named Joseph a Counsailer,
and he was a good man and a just, the same had not consented to the counsel
and deed of them, which was of Aramathia a City of the Jews, which also
waited for the kingdom of God: he went unto Pilat, and begged the body of
Jesus, and took it down and wrapped it in a lynnen cloth, and laid it in a
sepulcher that was hewe^ in stone wherein never man before had been laid. And
that day was the preparing of the Sabbath, and the Saboth drew on. The women
that followed after, which had come with him from Galile beheld the sepulcher,
and how his body was laid. And they returned and prepared sweet odours and
ointments, but rested on the Sabbath day, according to the commandments.

Good Friday.
The Epistle. Hebru. x.
THe law which has but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very
fashyon of things them selves, can never with those Sacrifyces, which they
offer year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect. For would
not then those Sacrifices have ceased to have been offered, because that the
offerers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins. Nevertheless,
in those Sacrifices is there mention made of sins every year. For the blood
of Oxen and Goats cannot take away sins. Wherefore when he comes into the
world, he says: Sacrifice and offering thou would not have, but a body have
thou ordained me. Burnt offeringes also for sin have thou not allowed. Then
said I: lo I am here. In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I
should do thy will, O God. Above, when he says: Sacrifice and offering, and
burnt sacrifices, and sin offeringes thou would not have, neither have
thou allowed them (which yet are offered by the law) then said he: Lo, I am
here to do thy will, O God: He takes away the first to establish the latter,
by the which will we are made holy, even by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all. And every Priest is ready daily ministering and offering
often times one manner of oblation, which can never take away syns. But this
man after he had offered one sacrifice for syns, is set down for ever on the
right hand of God and from henceforth tarieth till his foes be made his
footestole. For with one offering has he made perfect for ever them that are
sanctified. The holy Ghost him self also bears us record even when he told
before: This is the Testament that I will make unto them. After those days
(says the Lord) I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I
write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where
remission of these things is, there is no more offering for syns. Seeing
therefore brethren that by the means of the blood of Jesus, we have liberty to
enter into the holy place by the new and living way, which he has prepared for
us, through the veil that is to say by his flesh. And seeing also that we have
an hie priest which is ruler over the house of God, let us draw nigh with a true
heart in a sure faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water: let us keep the profession of our hope
without wavering (for he is faithful that promised) and let us consider one
another, to the intent that we may provoke unto love, and to good works, not
forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves as the manner of some is,
but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more because ye see yt the
day draws nie.

The Gospel. John. xviii.
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the
broke Cedron where was a garden, into the which he then entered with his
disciples. Judas which also betrayed him knew the place: for Jesus often times
resorted thither with his Disciples. Judas then after he had received a band of
men (and ministers of the hye priests and Pharisees) came thither with
lanterns, and fyrebrands, and weapons. And Jesus knowing all things that should
come on him, went forth and said unto them: whom seek ye? They answered him:
Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them: I am he. Judas also which betrayed
him, stood with them. As Soon the^ as he had said unto them: I am he, they went
backward and fell to the ground. Then asked he them again: Whom seek ye? They
said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If ye
seek me therefore, let these go their way, that the saying might be fulfilled
which he spoke: Of them which thou gave me, have I not lost one. Then Simon
Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the hie Priests servant, and cut of
his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. Therefore said Jesus unto Peter,
put up thy sword into thy sheath: shall I not drink of the cup which my father
has given me? Then the company and the captayn, and the ministers of the Jews
took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to Annas first, for he was father
in law to Caiphas, which was the hie priest ye same year. Caiphas was he that
gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for ye
people. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another Disciple, that
disciple was known to the hie priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace
of the hye Priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that
other Disciple (which was known to the hye priest) and spoke to the damosel
that kept the door, and brought in Peter. Then said the damosel that kept the
door unto Peter: art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He said, I am
not. The servants and ministers stood there, which made a fire of coals, for it
was cold, and they warmed them selves. Peter also stood among the^ and warmed
him self. The hie priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him: I spoke openly in the world, I ever taught in the Sinagoge,
and in the temple whither all the Jews have resorted, and in secret have I said
nothing: Why ask thou me? Ask the^ which heard me, what I said unto them.
Behold they can tell what I said. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers
which stood by, smot Jesus on the face, saying: answerest thou the hie priest
so? Jesus answered him: if I have evil spoken, bear wytnes of the evil, but
if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? And Annas sent him bound unto
Caiphas the hye Priest. Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. Then said they
unto him: art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it and said: I am
not. One of the servants of the hye priests (his cosyn whose ear Peter smote
of) said unto him: did not I see thee in the garden with him? Peter therefore
denied again, and immediately the Cock crew. Then led they Jesus from Caiphas
into the hall of judgment. It was in the morning, and they them selves went
not in to the judgment hall, least they should be defiled, but yt they might
eat the Passover. Pilat then went out to them, and said: What accusation
bring you against this man? They answered and said unto him: if he were not an
evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee? Then said Pilat unto
them: take ye him and judge him after your own law. The Jews therefore said
unto him: it is not lawful for us to put any man to death, that the words of
Jesus might be fulfilled which he spoke, signifiyng what death he should dye.
The^ Pilat entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him: Art you the king of the Jews? Jesus answered: say thou that of thy
self, or did other tell it thee of me? Pilat answered: am I a Jew? Thine own
nation and hie priests have delivered thee unto me, what have thou done? Jesus
answered my kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world,
then would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews, but now is my kingdom not from hence. Pilate therefore said unto him:
Art thou a king then? Jesus answered: thou say that I am a king. For this
cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth. And al yt are of the truth hear my voice. Pilate
said unto him: what thing is truth? And when he had said this, he went out
again to the Jews, and said unto them: I find in him no cause at all. Ye have
a custom that I should deliver you one loose at Easter, will ye that I lose
unto you the king of the Jews? Then cried they all again saying: Not him, but
Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a murderer. Then Pilate took Jesus therefore
and scourged him. And the soldiers wound a crown of thorns, and put it on
his head. And they did on him a purple garment, and came unto him and said:
Hail king of ye Jews, and they smote him on the face. Pilat went forth again
and said unto them: behold I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I
find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth, wearing a crown of thorn, and a
robe of purple. And he said unto them: behold ye man. When the Priests
therefore and the ministers saw him, they cried: Crucify him, crucify him.
Pilate said unto them: take ye him and crucify him, for I find no cause in
him. The Jews answered him, we have a law, and by our law he ought to dye,
because he made him self the son of God. When Pilat heard that saying, he
was the more afraid, and went again into the judgment hall, and said unto
Jesus, whence art thou? But Jesus gave him none answer. Then said Pilate unto
him: Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to loose thee? Jesus answered, thou could have no power
at all against me, except it were given thee from above. Therefore he that
delivered me unto thee, has ye more sin. And from thenceforth sought Pilate
means to lose him: but ye Jews cried saying, if thou let him go, thou art not
Cesars friend: for whosoever makes him self a king, is against Caesar. When
Pilat heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down to give
sentence, in a place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrew tou^g
Gabbatha. It was the preparyng day of Easter, about the sixth hour. And he said
unto ye Jews, behold your king. They cried saying: away with him, away with
him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them: shall I crucify your king? The hye
priests answered: we have no king but Caesar. Then delivered he him to them to
be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away, and he bare his cross,
and went forth into a place which is called the place of dead men's sculs, but
in Hebrew Golgotha, where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either
side one, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilat wrote a title, and put it upon ye
cross. The writing was: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. This title read
many of ye Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified, was nere to the city.
And it was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Then said ye hie priests of the
Jews to Pilate, write not king of the Jews, but that he said, I am king of
the Jews. Pilate answered: what I have written, that have I written. Then the
soldiers when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four
parts to every soldiour a part, and also his coat. The coat was without
seame, wrought upon throughout. They said therefore among themselves: let us not
divide it, but cast lottes for it who shall have it, that the scripture might
be fulfilled, saying: They have parted my raiment among them, and for my coat
did they cast lots. And the soldiers did such things in deed. There stood by
the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of
Cleophas and Mary Magdalen. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the
disciple whom he loved, standing, he says unto his mother: woman, behold thy
son. Then said he to the disciple: behold thy mother, and from that hour the
disciple took her for his own. After these things, Jesus knowing that
althings were now performed, that ye scripture might be fulfilled, he says I
thirst. So there stood a vessel by full of vinegar, therefore they filled a
sponge with vinegar and wound it about with isope, and put it to his mouth.
As Soon as Jesus then received of the vinegar, he said: it is finished, and
bowed his head and gave up the ghost. The Jews therefore, because it was the
preparing of the Sabbath, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on
the Sabbath day (for the Saboth day was an hie day) besought Pilat that their
legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down. Then came the
soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified
with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they
brake not his legs: but one of the soldiers with a spare thrust him into the
side, and forth with, there came out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record, and his record is true. And he knows that he says true, that ye
might believe also. For these things were done that the scripture should be
fulfilled: ye shall not break a bone of him. And again another scripture
says: they shall look upon him whom they have pearsed. After this Joseph of
Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews)
besought Pilat yt he might take down the body of Jesus And Pilat gave him
license. He came therefore and took yt body of Jesus, and there came also
Nicodemus (which at ye beginning came to Jesus by night) and brought of myr and
aloes mingled together about an hundredth pound weight. Then took they the
body of Jesus, and wound it in linne^ clothes with ye odours, as the manner of
ye Jews is to bury. And in the place where he was crucified, there was a
garden, and in the garden a new Sepulcher, wherein was never man laid. There laid
they Jesus therefore, because of the preparing of the Sabbath of the Jews, for
the sepulcher was nie at hand.

Easter even.
The Epistle. i. Peter. iii.
IT is better if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, the^ for
evil doing. For as much as Christ has once suffered for syns, the just for the
unjust, to bring us to God, and was killed as partayning to the flesh, but was
quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went and preached to the
spirits that were in prison, which sometime had been disobedient, when the long
suffering of God was once looked for in ye days of Noe while the Arc was a
preparing: wherein a few, that is to say, eight souls were saved by the water,
like as Baptism also now saves us: not the putting away of the fylth of the
flesh, but in that a good conscience co^senteth to God by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, which is on the right hand of God, and is gone in to heaven,
angels, powers and might subdued unto him.

The Gospel. Math. xxvii.
WHen the even was come, there came a rich man of Aramathia named Joseph,
which also was Jesus Disciple. He went unto Pilate and begged the body of
Jesus. Then Pilat commanded the body to be delivered. And when Joseph had
taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linne^ cloth, and laid it in his new
toumbe which he had hewn out, even in the rock, and roled a great stone to the
door of the Sepulcher and departed. And there was Mary Magdalen and the other
Mary sitting over against the Sepulcher. The next day yt follows the day of
preparing, the hie Priests and Phariseis came together unto Pilat saying: Sir,
we remember that this deceiuer said while he was yet alive: after three days I
will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure until the
third day, least his disciples come and steal him away, and the last error
shall be worse then the first. Pilat said unto them: ye have a watch, go your
way, make it as sure as ye can So they went and made the Sepulcher sure with
the watch men, and sealed the stone.

Easter day.
The Epistle. Colo. iiii.
IF ye be risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Chrlst sits on the right hand of God. Set your affection on heavenly things
and not on earthly things. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God, whenever Christ which is our life, shall show him self, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory. Mortify therefore your earthly members,
fornication uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence and covetousness,
which is woorshipping of idols: for which things sake the wrath of God uses
to come on the children of unbelief, among whom ye walked sometime when ye
lived in them.

The Gospel. John. xx.
THe first day of the sabbothes, came Mary Magdalen early (when it was yet
dark) unto the Sepulcher, and saw the stone taken away from the grave. Then
she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved,
and says unto them: they have taken away the Lord out of the grave, and we
cannot tell where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth and that other
disciple, and came unto the Sepulcher. They ran both together, and that other
disciple did out run Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And when he had
stouped down he saw the linen clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then came
Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and saw the linen
clothes lie, and the napkin that was about his head not lying with the linen
clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also that
other Disciple which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and believed. For
as yet they knew not the scripture that he should rise again from death. Then
the Dlsciples went away again to their own home.

The Monday in Easter week.
The Epistle. Acts. x.
PEter opened his mouth, and said: of a truth I perceive that there is no
respect of persons with God: but in all people, he that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that God sent unto
the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord over all
things: which preaching was published throughout al Iewry (and began in Galile,
after the Baptism which John preached) how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the holy ghost and with power. Which Jesus went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him. And we are
witnesses of all things which he did in the land of the Jews and at Jerusalem,
whom they slew and hanged on tree. Him God raised up the third day, and showed
him openly, not to all the people, but to us witnesses (chosen before of God for
the same intent) which did eat and drink with him after he arose from death.
And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testifye that it is he
which was ordained of God to be the judge of the quick and the dead. To him
give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him,
shall receive remission of syns.

The Gospel. Luke. xxiii.
BEhold, two of the Disciples went that same day to a town called Emaus, which
was from Jerusalem about.lx. furlongs, and they talked together of all the
things that had happened. And it chanced while they commoned together and
reasoned, Jesus himself drew nere and went with them. But their eyes were
holden yt they should not know him. And he said unto them, what manner of
communications are these that ye have one to another as ye walk, and are sad?
And the one of them whose name was Cleophas answered and said unto him: art
thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which have
chanced there in these days? He said unto them: what things? And they said
unto him, of Jesus of Nazareth which was a Prophet mighty in deed and word
before God and all the people: and how the hie Priests and our rulers
delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we trusted
that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel. And as touching all these
things, to day is even the third day that they were done: Yea and certain
women of our company made us astonished which came early unto the sepulcher, and
found not his body, and came, saying that they had seen a vision of angels,
which said that he was alive. And certain of them which were with us went to
the sepulcher, and found it even so as the women had said, but him they saw
not. And he said unto them: O fools and flow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? And he began at Moises and all the Prophets, and
interpreted unto them in all scriptures which were written of him. And they
drew nigh unto the town which they went unto. And he made as though he would
have gone further. And they constrained him saying: abide with us, for it
draws toward night, and the day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with
them. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them he took bread and
blessed it, and brake and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they
knew him, and he vanished out of their sight and they said between themselves:
did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and
opened to us the scriptures? And they rose up the same hour, and returned to
Jerusalem, and found the eleue^ gathered together, and them that were with them
saying: the Lord is risen in deed and has appeared unto Simon. And they told
what things were done in the way, and how they knew him in breaking of bread.

The Tuesday in Easter week.
The Epistle. Acts. xiii.
YE men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever
among you fears God to you is this word of salvation sent. For the
inhabiters of Jerusalem and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet
the voices of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning him. And when they found no cause of death in him,
yet desired they Pilate to kill him. And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of him, they took him down from the tree and put him in a Sepulcher.
But God raised him again from death the third day, and he was seen many days
of them which went with him from Galile to Jerusalem, which are witnesses unto
the people. And we declare unto you how that the promis (which was made unto ye
fathers) god has fulfilled unto their children (even unto us) in that he
raised up Jesus again. Even as it is written in the second Psalm: thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee. As concerning that he raised him up from
death, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise: The holy
promises made to David, will I give faithfully unto you. Wherefore he says
also in an other place: Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
For David (after that he had in his time fulfilled the will of God) fell on
sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God
raised again, saw no corruption. Be it known unto you therefore (ye men and
brethren) that through this man is preached unto you forgeuenes of sins, and
that by him all that believe are justified from al things, from which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moises. Beware therefore least that fall on you
which is spoken of in the Prophets: behold ye despisers and wonder, and perish
ye, for I do a work in your days, which ye shall not believe, though a man
declare it unto you.

The Gospel. Luke. xxiiii.
Jesus stood in the midst of his Disciples, and said unto the^: peace be unto
you: It is I, fear not. But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed that
they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them: why are ye troubled, and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is even I
my self. Handle me and see, for a spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me
have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. And
while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them: Have ye
here any meat? And they offered him a piece of broyled fysh, and of a hoony
comb. And he took it, and did eat before them. And he said unto the^: these
are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you. That all must
needs be fulfilled which were written of me in the law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms. Then opened he their wits that they might
understand the scriptures, and said unto them: Thus it is written, and thus it
behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from death the third day, and that
repentance and remission of syns should be preached in his name among all
nations, and must begin at Jerusalem. And ye ar witness of these things.

The first Sunday after Easter.
The Epistle. i. John. v.
ALl that is born of God, overcomes the world. And this is the victory that
ouerco^mmeth the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world
but he that believes yt Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he that
came by water and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is
the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truth. For there are
three which bear record in heaven: the father, the word, and the holy Ghost,
and these three are one. And there are three which bear record in earth, the
spirit, and water, and blood: and these three are one. If we receive the witness
of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God that is
greater which he testified of his son. He that believes on the son of God,
has the witness in himself. He that believes not God, has made him a lier,
because he believes not the record yt God gave his son. And this is the
record, how yt God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his
son. He that has the son, has life: and he that has not ye son of God,
has not life.

The Gospel. John. xx.
THe same day at night which was the first day of the Sabboths when the doers
were shut (where the Disciples were assembled together for fear of the Jews)
came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said unto them: Peace be unto you. And
when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the
disciples glad when they saw the Lord Then said Jesus unto them again: Peace
be unto you As my Father sent me, even so send I you also. And when he had said
these words, he breathed on them and said unto them: receive ye the holy
ghost. Whosoeuers syns ye remit, they are remitted unto them. And whosoeuers
syns ye retain, they are retained.

The second Sunday after Easter.
The Epistle. i. Peter. ii.
THis is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, and
suffer wrong undeserved. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye take it patiently? But and if when ye do well ye suffer wrong and
take it patiently, then is there thank with God. For hereunto verily were ye
called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ensample that we should
follow his steps which did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth,
which when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not: but committed the vengeance to him yt judges righteously, which his own
self bare our sins in his body on the tree, yt we being delivered from syn,
should live unto righteousness. By whose strips ye were healed. For ye were as
sheep going astray, but are now turned unto the shepehard and Bishop of your
souls.

The Gospel. John. x.
CHrist said unto his Disciples: I am the good shephard: a good shephard gives
his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the shepherd
(neither the sheep are his own) sees the Woolfe coming and leaves the sheep
and flees, and the Woolfe catches and scatters the sheep. The hired
servant flees because he is an hired servant and cares not for the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine: as my
father knows me, even so know I also my father. And I give my life for the
sheep, and other sheep I have which are not of this fold: Them also must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.

The third Sunday after Easter.
The Epistle.i. Peter. ii.
DErely beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts which fight against the soul: and see that ye have honest
conversation among the Gentyls, that where as they backbite you as evil doers,
they may see your good works and praise God in the day of visitacion. Submit
your selves therefore to every man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the
king as unto the chief head, either unto rulers as unto them that are sent of
him for the punishment of evil doers, but for the laud of them that do well: for
so is the wl of God that with well doing ye may stop the mouths of folish and
ignorant men: as free, and not as having the liberty for a clock of
maliciousnes, but even as the servants of God. Honor all men, love brotherly
fellowship, fear God, honor the king.

The Gospel. John. xvi.
Jesus said to his disciples: After a while ye shall not see me, and again after
a while ye shall see me, for I go to the Father. Then said some of his disciples
between themselves, what is this that he says unto us: after a while ye shall
not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me, and that I go to the
father. They said therefore what is this that he says: after a wyle. We cannot
tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him, and said unto
them: ye enquire of this between your selves, because I said: after a while ye
shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me: Verily, verily I say
unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but contrariwise the world shall rejoice.
Ye shall sorrow but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she
trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come, but as soon as she is
delivered of the Child, she reme^breth no more the anguish, for joy that a man
is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you
again, and your hearts shall rejoice and your joy shall no man take from you.

The fourth Sunday after Easter.
The Epistle. James. i.
EVery good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights, with who^ is no variablenes, neither shadow of change.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, yt we should be the first
fruits of his creatures, Wherefore (dear brethren) let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For ye wrath of man works not that
which is righteous before God. Wherefore lay apart al filthiness, and superfluity
of maliciousnes, and receive with mekenes the word that is graffed in you,
which is able to save your souls.

The Gospel. John. xvi.
Jesus said unto his disciples: now I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you asks me whether I go. But because I have said such things unto you
your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient
for you that I go away. For if I go not away, the co^forter will not come unto
you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come he will
rebuke the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of syn
because they believe not on me. Of righteousness, because I go to my father, and
ye shall see me no more. Of judgment, because the prince of this world is
judged already. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them away now: how be it when he is come (which is the spirit of truth) he will
lead you into all truth. He shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you. Althinges that
the Father has, are mine: therefore said I unto you, that he shall take of
mine, and show unto you.

The fyft Sunday after Easter.
The Epistle. James. i.
SEe that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves, For if any man hear the word, and declares not the same by his
works, he is like unto a man beholding his bodily face in a glass: For as soon
as he has looked on himself, he goes his way and forgets immediately what
his fashion was. But whosoever looks in the perfect law of liberty and continues
therein (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work) the same
shall be happy in his deed. If any man among you seem to be devout, and
refrayneth not his tongue, but deceyueth his own heart, this man's devotion is
in vain. Pure devotion and undefiled before God the father is this: to visyt
the fatherles and widows in their adversity, and to keep him self unspotted
of the world.

The Gospel. John. xvi.
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, he
will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall
receive yt your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto you by
proverbs. The time will come when I shall no more speak unto you by proverbs:
but I shall show you plainly from my father. At that day shall ye ask in my
name: And I say unto you that I will speak unto my father for you. For ye
father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed yt I came
out from God. I went out from the father, and came into the world. Again I leave
the world and go to the father. His Disciples said unto him: Lo, now thou
talkest plainly, and speak no proverb. Now are we sure that thou know
althings and nedest not that any man should ask thee any question, therefore
believe we that thou cammest from God. Jesus answered the^: now ye do believe.
Behold ye hour draws nie, and is already come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. And yet I am not alone, for
the Father is with me. These words have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might
have peace, for in the world shall ye have tribulacion: but be of good chere I
have overcome the world.

Ascension day.
The Epistle. Acts. i.
IN the former treatise (dear Theophilus) we have spoken of al yt Jesus began
to do and teach, until ye day in which he was taken up, after yt he through the
holy ghost had given commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, to
whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, and that by many tokens
appearing unto them forty days, and speaking of the kingdom of God, and
gathered them together and commanded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof (says he) ye
have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized
with ye holy ghost, after these few days. When they therefore were come together
they asked of him saying: Lord, wilt you at this time restore again the
kingdom of Israel? And he said unto them: it is not for you to know ye times
or the seasons which the Father has put in his own power. But ye shall receive
power after the holy ghost is come upon you. And ye shall be witness unto me,
not only in Jerusalem, but also in all Iewry, and in all Samaria, and even
unto the worlds end. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld,
he was taken up on hye, and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And
while they looked steadfastly up toward heaven as he went, behold two men stood
by the^ in white aparel, which also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasing
up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
come, eue^ as ye have seen him go into heaven.

The Gospel. Mark. xv.
Jesus appeared unto the eleven, as they sat at meat: and cast in their teeth
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen that he was risen again from the dead: and he said unto them: Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures, he yt believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, but he yt believes not, shall be damned. And these tokens
shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall cast out devils, they shall
speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpents, and if they drink any
deadly thing it shall not hurt the^. They shall lay their hand of the sick and
they shall recover. So then when the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received
into heaven, and is on the right hand of God. And they went forth and preached
every where, the Lord working with them and confirming the word with miracles
following.

The Sunday after the Ascencion day.
The Epistle. i. Peter. iiii.
THe end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer.
But above all things have fervent love among your selves, for love shall cover
the multitude of sins. Be ye herberous one to another without grudging. As
every man has receued the gift, even so minister ye same one to another, as
good ministers of ye manifold graces of God. If any man speak, let him talk
as the words of God. If any man minister, let him do it as of the hability
which god ministers to him, yt God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever.

The Gospel. John. xv.
WHen the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the father (even the
spirit of truth, which proceeds of the father) he shall testify of me. And ye
shall bear witness also because ye have been with me from the beginning. These
things have I said unto you, because ye should not be offended. They shall
excommunicate you: Yea, the time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will
think yt he does God service. And such things will they do unto you, because
they have not known ye father, neither yet me. But these things I have told
you, yt when the time is come, ye may remember then that I told you.

VVhitsonday.
The Epistle. Acts. ii.
WHen the fifty days were at an end, they were all with one accord together
in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the
coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat. And
there appeared unto them cloven tou^gs, like as they had been of fire, and it
sat upon each one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and
began to speak with other tounges: even as the same spirit gave them
vtteraunce. Then were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the multitude
came together, and were astonyed, because that every man heard them speak with
his own language. They wondered all and marueled, saying among themselves:
behold, are not al these which speak of Galile? And how hear we every man his
own tou^g wherein we were born? Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and the
inhahiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iewry, and of Capadocia, of Pontus and Asia,
Phrigia and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Libia, which is beside
Siren, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Greeks and Arabians, we
have heard them speak in our own toungs the great works of God.

The Gospel. John. xiiii.
Jesus said unto his disciples: If ye love me, keep my commandments, and I
will pray the father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever: even ye spirit of truth, who^ the world cannot receive,
because the world sees him not, neither knows him. But ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortles, but will
come to you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but ye see me.
For I live, and ye shall live. At that day shall ye know that I am in my
father, and you in me, and I in you. He that has my commandments and keeps
them, the same is he that loves me. And he that loves me, shall be beloved of
my father, and I will love him, and will show mine own self unto him. Judas
says unto him (not Judas Iscarioth:) Lord what is done that thou will show thy
self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto them: if a
man love me, he will keep my sayings, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and dwell with him. He that loves me not, keeps not my
sayings. And the word which ye hear is not mine, but the fathers which sent
me. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. But the
comforter which is the holy ghost whom my Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you althinges, and bring althinges to your rememberaunce whatsoever
I have said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Not as
the world gives, give I unto you. Let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear.
Ye have heard how I said unto you I go and come again unto you. If ye loved
me, ye would verily rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father. For the
Father is greater then I. And now I have showed you before it came, that when
it is come to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter will I not talk many words
unto you. For the Prince of this world comes, and has naught in me. But that
the world may know that I love the Father. And as the Father gave me
commandment, even so do I.

The Monday in whitson week.
The Epistle. Acts. x.
THen Peter opened his mouth and said: of a truth I perceive that there is no
respect of persons with God, but in all people he that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that God sent unto
the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord over
althinges: which preaching was published throughout all Iewry (and began in
Galile, after the baptism which John preached) how God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the holy Ghost and with power. Which Jesus went about doing good,
and healyng all that were oppressed of the devil. For God was with him. And we
are witnesses of althings which he did in the land of the Jews, and at
Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree. Him God raised up the third
day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses
(chosen before of God for the same intent) which did eat and drink with him
after he rose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and
to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick
and the dead. To him give all the Prophets wytnes, that through his name
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of syns. While Peter yet
spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the preaching.
And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as came with
Peter: because that on the Gentiles also was shed out the gift of the holy
ghost. For they heard them speak with tou^gs and magnify God. Then answered
Peter: can any man forbid water that these should be baptized which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry a few days.

The Gospel. John. iii.
SO God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. But he that believes on him, is not condemned. But he that
believes not, is condemned all ready, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten son of God. And this is the condempnacion: that light
is come into the world, and men loved darkness more the^ light, because their
deeds were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved. But he that does the
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are
wrought in God.

The Tuesday sn whitsun week.
The Epistle. Acts. viii.
WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say that Samaria had received
the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. Which when they were come
down, prayed for them that they might receive the holy Ghost. For as yet he was
come on none of them, but they were baptized only in the name of Christ Jesus.
Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost.

The Gospel. John. x.
Verily, verily I say unto you: he that enters not in by the door into the
shepefold, but climeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a murderer.
But he that enters in by the door, is the Shepherd of the sheep: To him the
porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. And when he has sent forth his own sheep, he
goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. A
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the
voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus unto the^, but they understood
not what things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them
again: Verily, verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. Al (even as
many as came before me) ar thieves and murderers, but the sheep did not hear
them. I am the door, by me if any enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in
and out, and find pasture. A thief comes not but for to steal, kill, and
destroy, I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abou^dantly.

Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Apoca. iiii.
AFter this I looked, and behold a door was open in heaven, and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talkyng with me, which said:
Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be fulfilled hereafter.
And immediately I was in the spirit: And behold a seat was set in heaven, and
one sat on ye seat. And he that sat was to look upon like unto a Iaspar stone,
and a Sardine stone. And there was a rain bow about the seat, in sight like
unto an Emerauld. And about the seat were.xxiiii. seats. And upon the
seats.xiiij. elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads
crowns of gold. And out of the seat proceeded lightnings, and thundrings and
voices, and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the seat, which are
the seven spirits of God. And before the seat there was a sea of glass like
unto Crystal, and in the midst of the seat and round about the seat were
four beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a
Lion: and the second beast was like a Calfe: and the third beast had a face as
a man: and the fourth Beast was like a slying Eagle. And the four beasts had
each of the^ six wings about him, and they were full of eyes with in. And they
did not rest day nor night, saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord god almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come. And when those beasts gave glory and honor and
thanks to him that sat on the seat (which lives for ever and ever)
the.xxiiij. Elders fell down before him that sat on the throne and worshipped
him that lives for ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying:
thou art worthy, O Lord (our God) to receive glory, and honor, and power: for
thou have created althings and for thy wyls sake they are and were created.

The Gospel. John. iii.
THere was a man of the Phariseis named Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, ye same
came to Jesus by night and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that thou art a
Teacher come from God: for no man could do such miracles as thou do, except
God were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him: Verily, verily I say unto
thee, except a man be borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus said unto him: how can a man be borne when he is old? Can he enter
into his mothers womb and be born again? Jesus answered: verily, verily I say
unto thee, except a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that which
is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Marvel not thou that I said to thee, ye
must be borne from above. The wind blows where it lusts, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but thou can not tell whence it comes, or whether it
goes: So is every one that is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and
said unto him: how can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him: Art
thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things? Verelye, verelye I say
unto thee: we speak that we know, and testifye that we have seen, and ye
receive not our wytnes. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not:
how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man ascends up
to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man which is
in heaven. And as Moises lift up the Serpent in the wilderness: even so must the
son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes on him, perish not, but have
everlasting life.

The first Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. i. John. iiii.
DEarly beloved, let us love one another, for love comes of God. And every
one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows
not God, for God is love. In this appears the the love of God to us ward,
because that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live
through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be the agreement for our syns. Dearly beloved if God so loved
us, we ought also one to love another. No man has seen God at any time. If we
love one another, god dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us. Hereby
know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his
Spirit. And we have seen and do testyfy that the father sent the son to be ye
savior of the world. Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in
him dwells God, and he in god. And we have known and believed the love that
God has to us. God is love and he that dwells in love, dwells in god, and
God in him. Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should trust in ye day of
judgment. For as he is, even so are we in this world. There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear: for fear has painfulnes. He that
fears, is not perfect in love. We love him, for he loved us first. If a man
say: I love god and yet hate his brother, he is a liar, for how can he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? And
this commandment have we of him that he which loves God, should love his
brother also.

The Gospel. Luke. xvi.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine white, and
fared deliciously every day: And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus,
which lay at his gate full of sores, desyring to be refreshed with the crummes
which fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto him. The dogs came
also and lyked his sores. And it fortuned that the beggar dyed, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died and was buried,
and being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes and saw Abraham a far of
and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said, father Abraham have mercy on
me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the typ of his finger in water, and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said: Son remember
that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, and contrary wise Lazarus
receued pain. But now he is comforted, and thou art punished. Beyond all this
between us and you there is a great space set, so that they which would go from
hence to you cannot, neither may come from thence to us. Then he said: I pray
thee therefore father, send him to my Fathers house (for I have five brethren)
for to warn them, least they come also into this place of torment. Abraham
said unto him: they have Moises and the Prophets, let them hear them. And he
said: nay father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they will
repent. He said unto him, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they believe though one rose from death again.

The second sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. i. John. iii.
Marvel not my brethren, though the world hate you. We know yt we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He yt loves not
his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslear. And
ye know that no manslear has eternal life abiding in him. Hereby perceive we
love, because he gave his life for us, and we ought to give our lives for the
brethren. But who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
My babes, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and verity.
Hereby we know that we are of the verity, and can quiet our hearts before him.
For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows
althings. Dearly beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we trust to
God ward, and whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things which are pleasant in his sight. And this
is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another, as he gave commandment. And he that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and hereby we know that he
abides in us even by the spirit which he has given us.

The Gospel. Luke. xiiii.
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and bad many, and sent his servant at
supper time to say to them that were bidden: come, for althings are now ready.
And they all at once began to make excuse. The first said unto him: I have
bought a farm, and I must needs go and see it. I pray thee have me excused
And another said: I have bought fine yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them. I
pray thee have me excused. And an other said: I have married a wife, and
therefore I cannot come. And the Servant returned and brought his Master
word again thereof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said
unto his servant: go out quickly into the streets and quarters of the city,
and bring in hither the poor and feeble, and the halt and blind. And the
servant said: Lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room.
And the Lord said unto the servant: go out into ye hye ways and hedges, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that
none of these men which were bidden, shall taste of my supper.

The third Sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Peter. v.
SVbmit your selves every man one to another, knyt your selves together in
lowlines of mind. For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you when the time is come. Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for
you. Be sober and watch, for your adversary ye devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith:
knowing that ye same afflictions are appointed unto your brethren that are in
the world. But the God of all grace which has called us unto his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have suffered a little
affliction) make you perfect, settle, strength, and stablish you. To him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel. Luke. xv.
THen resorted unto him all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him. And the
Phariseys and Scribes murmured saying: He receives sinners and eats with
them. But he put forth this parable unto the^ saying: What man among you
having an hundred sheep (if he lose one of the^) does not leave ninety and
nine in the wilderness and goes after that which is lost, until he find it?
And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy. And as soon
as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and neighbors saying unto
them: Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more
then over ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance. Either what
woman having ten groates (if she loose one) does not light a candle and swepe
the house, and seek dilygently til she find it: and when she has found it she
calls her lovers and her neighbors together, saying: Rejoice with me, for I
have found the groat which I lost. Likewise. I say unto you, shall there be joy
in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents.

The fourth sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Roma. viii.
I Suppose that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed upon us. For the fervent desire of the creature abides looking
when the sons of God shall appear, because the creature is subdued to vanity
against the will thereof. but for his will which has subdued the same in hope.
For the same creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we know that every creature
groneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain, even unto this time, not only
it, but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit, mourn in our
selves also and wait for the adopcion (of the children of God) even the
deliverance of our bodies.

The Gospel. Luke. vi.
BE ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not
be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be
forgeuen. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, and pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosoms. For
with the same measure that ye mete withal, shall other men mete to you again.
And he put forth a similitude unto them: Can the blind lead the blind? do they
not both fall into the ditche? The disciple is not above his master. Every man
shall be perfect even as his master is. Why see thou a mote in thy brothers
eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Either how can
thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye,
when thou see not the beam yt is in thine own eye? First, thou hipocrite,
cast out the beam out of thine own eye, the^ shall thou see perfectly to put
out ye mote yt is in thy brothers eye.

The.v. Sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Peter. iii.
BE ye all of one mind, and of one heart. Love as brethren. Be pityful, be
courteous, meek, not rendryng evil for evil, rebuke for rebuke: but
contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are thereunto called, even yt ye should be
heirs of the blessing. For he yt does long after life, and loves to see good
days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lyps that they speak no
guile. Let him eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it. For
the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers. Again, the face of the Lord is over them that do evil. Moreover, who
is he that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good? Yea, happy are ye if
any trouble happen unto you for righteousness sake. Be not ye afraid for any
terror of them, neither be ye troubled, but sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts.

The Gospel. Luke. v.
IT came to pass that (when the people preased upon him to hear the word of
God) he stood by the lake of Genazareth, and saw two shyps stand by the lakes
side, but the fisher men were gone out of them, and were washing their nets.
And he entered into one of ye ships (which pertained to Simon) and prayed him
that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down and taught the
people out of the ship. When he had left speaking, he said unto Simo^: Launch
out into the deep, and let slyp your nets to make a draught. And Simon
answered and said unto him: Master, we have labored all night, and have
taken nothing. Nevertheless at thy commandment I will loose forth the net.
And when they had so done, they enclosed a great multitude of fyshes: But their
net brake, and they beckened to their fellows (which were in the other ship)
that they should come and help them. And they came and filled both the ships
that they soonke again. When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus
knees, saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was astonyed,
and all that were with him, at the draught of Fishes which they had taken, and
so was also James and John the sons of Zebede, which were partners with
Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: fear not, from hence forth you shall catch
men. And they brought the ships to land, and forsook all, and followed him.

The sixth Sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Roma. vi.
KNow ye not that al we which are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to die
with him? We are buried the^ with him by baptism for to dye. That likewise as
Christ was raised from death by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like unto him, even so shall
we be partakers of the holy resurrection. Knowing this, that your old man is
crucified with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not be servant unto sin. For he that is dead, is
justified from syn. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him: knowing that Christ being raised from death, dies no
more. Death has no more power over him. For as touching that he dyed, he dyed
concerning syn once, and as touching that he lives, he lives unto God.
Likewise consider ye also, yt ye ar dead as touching syn, but are alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our lord.

The Gospel. Math. v.
Jesus said unto his disciples: except your righteousness excede the
righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old time. Thou shall not
kill, whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you:
that whosoever is angry with his brother (unadvisedly) shall be in danger of
judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother, Racha: shall be in danger of a
counsel. But whosoever says thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire.
Therefore if thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the altar,
and go thy way first, and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
him, least at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into prison. Verily I say
unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost
farthing.

The.vii. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Roma. vi.
I Speak grossly, because of the infirmity of your flesh. As ye have given your
members servant to uncleanness and to iniquity (from one iniquity to another)
even so now give over your members servant unto righteousness, that ye may be
sanctified, For when ye were servant of syn, ye were void of righteousness.
What frut had you then in those things whereof ye ar now ashamed? for the end of
those things are death. But now are ye delivered from syn, and made the
servants of God, and have your fruit to be sanctified, and the end everlasting
life. For the reward of syn is death, but eternal life is the gift of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel. Mark. viii.
IN those days when there was a very great company and had nothing to eat:
Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said unto them: I have compassion on
the people, because they have been now with me three days, and have nothing to
eat, and if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they shall faint by
the way: for diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him:
where should a man have bread here in ye wilderness, to satisfy these? And he
asked the^: how many loves have ye? They said seven. And he commanded the
people to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves, and when he
had given thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples to set before them. And
they did set them before the people. And they had a few small fishes. And when
he had blessed, he commanded them also to be set before them. And they did
eat, and were suffised. And they took up of the broken meat that was left
seven baskets full. And they yt did eat, were about four thousand. And he
sent them away.

The.viii. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Roma. viii.
BRethren, we are debtors not to the flesh to live after the flesh. For if ye
live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the spirit of God,
they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba
father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the sons of God.
If we be sons, then are we heirs: ye heirs I mean of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be glorified
together with him.

The Gospel. Math. vii.
BEware of false Prophets, which come to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves: Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? even so every good tree brings forth
good fruits, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruits. A good tree can
not bring forth bad fruits, neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruits.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know the^. Not every one yt says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The.ix. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Cor. x.
BRethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were
all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized
under Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spiritual
meat, and did all drink of one spiritual drink. And they drank all of one
spiritual Rock that followed them, which Rock was Christ. But in many of them
had God no delight. For they were overthrown in the wilderness. These are
ensamples to us, that we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted.
And that ye should not be worshippers of images, as were some of them according
as it is written. The people satte down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play. Neither let us be defiled with fornication, as some of them were defiled
with fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let
us tempt Christ as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.
Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the
Destroyer. All these things happened unto them for ensaumples: But are written
to put us in remembrance, whom the ends ot the world are come upon.
Wherefore, let him that thinks he stands take heed least he fall. There
has none other temptacion taken you, but such as followed the nature of man.
But God is faithful, which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength: but shall in the midst of temptacion make away that you may be able
to bear it.

The Gospel. Luke. xvi.
Jesus said to his disciples: There was a certain rich man, which had a
steward, and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods. And
he called him, and said unto him: how is it that I hear this of thee? Give
accoumpts of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. The Steward
said within thy self: what shall I do? for my master takes away from me the
stewardshyp. I cannot dyg, and to beg I am ashamed. I wot what to do, that
when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. So
when he had called all his masters detters together, he said unto the first:
how much owe thou unto my master? And he said: an hundred tons of oil. And
he said unto him take thy byl and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then said
he to another: how much owe thou? and he said an hundred quarters of wheat.
He said unto him: take thy byl and write four score. And the Lord commended
the unjust steward, because he had done wisely. For the children of this world
are in their nation wiser then the children of light. And I say unto you: Make
you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may
receive you into everlasting habitacions.

The.x. Sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Cor. xii.
COncerning spiritual things brethren, I would not have you ignorant. Ye know
that ye were Gentiles, and went your way unto dum Images even as ye were lead.
Wherefore I declare unto you, that no man speaking by the spirit of God,
defieth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit. And there are
differences of administrations, and yet but one Lord. And there are diverse
manners of operations, and yet one God, which works al in all. The gift of the
spirit is given to every man to edefy withal. For to one is given through the
spirit, the utterance of wisdom: To another is given the utterance of
knowledge by the same spirit. To another is given faith by the same spirit. To
another the gift of healyng by the same spirit. To another power to do
miracles. To another prophecy. To another judgment to discern spirits. To
another diverse toungs. To another the interpretacion of tounges, by these all
works the self same spirit, deuidyng to every man a several gift, even as
he will.

The Gospel. Luke. xix.
ANd when he was come near to Jerusalem, he beheld the city; and wept on it
saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto thy peace, eue^
in this thy day, thou would take heed. But now are they hid from thine eyes.
For the days shall come unto thee, yt thy enemies shall cast a bank about
thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side and make thee
even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. And they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou know not ye time of thy
visitation. And he went into the temple and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought saying unto them: It is written, my house is the
house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. And he taught daily in
the temple.

The.xi. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Cor. i.
BRethren, as pertaining to the Gospel, which I preached unto you, which ye
have accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which ye are also saved: I
do you to weete after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it, except ye
have believed in vain. For first of al, I delivered unto you that which I
received, how that Christ died for our syns agreing to the scriptures: And yt
he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
scriptures: And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that he
was seen of mo the^ five hundred brethren at once, of which many remain unto
this day, and many are fallen a sleep. After that appeared he to James, then
to all the Apostels. And last of all he was seen of me, as of one that was
borne out of due time. For I am the least of ye Apostles, which am not worthy
to be called an apostle, because I have persecuted the congregation of God. But
by the grace of God, I am yt I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in
vain. But I labored more abou^dantly then they al, yet not I but the grace of
God which is with me. Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preached, and
so ye have believed.

The Gospel. Luke. xviii.
CHrist told this parable unto certain which trusted in the^ selves that they
were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up into the temple to pray, the
one a Phacisey, and the other a Publican. The Pharisey stood and prayed thus
with him self: God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extorcioners,
unjust, adulterers, or as this Publican. I fast twice in ye weke, I give tithe
of al yt I possess. And the Publican standing a far of, would not lift up his
eyes to heaven, but smot his breast saying: God be merciful to me a sinner. I
tell you this man departed home to his house justified more then ye other. For
every man yt exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he ye humbles himself
shall be exalted.

The.xii. sunday after Trinity.
The Epistle. ii. Corin. iii.
SVch trust have we through Christ to God ward, not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing of our selves, but if we be able unto any
thing, the same comes of God, which has made us able to minister the new
testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. If the ministration of death through the letters
figured in stones was glorious, so yt the children of Israel could not behold
the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance (which glory is done away:)
why shall not the ministration of the spirit be much more glorious? For if ye
ministracion of comdemnation be glorious, much more does the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory.

The Gospel. Mark. vii.
Jesus departed from the coasts of Tire and Sidon and came unto the sea of
Galile through the myddest of the coasts of the ten Cities, and they brought
unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and they
prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside from ye
people, he put his fingers into his ears, and did spit and touched his tongue,
and looked up to heaven and sighed, and said unto him: Ephata, that is to say:
be opened. And straight way his ears were opened and the string of his tongue
was loosed, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them that they should tell
no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deal they
published saying: He has done althings well, he has made both the deaf to
hear, and the dum to speak.

The.xiiii sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Gala. iii.
TO Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not in his seeds as
of many: but in thy sede as of one, which is Christ. This I say, yt the law
which began afterward, beyond four hundred and thirty years, does not
disanul the testament that was confirmed before of God unto Christward, to make
the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance come of the law, it comes
not now of promise. But God gave it to Abraham by promise. Wherefore then
serves the law? the law was added because of transgression (till the seed
came to whom the promise was made) and it was ordained by angels in the hand of
a mediator. A mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one. Is the law
then against the promise of God? God forbid. For if there had been a law given
which could have given life, then do doubt righteousness should have come by
the law. But the Scripture concludes althinges under syn, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.

The Gospel. Luke. x.
HAppy are the eyes which see the things that ye see For I tell you that many
Prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye se, and have not
seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.
And behold, a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him saying: Master, what
shall I do to enherite eternal life? He said unto him: what is written in the
law? How read thou? And he answered and said: Love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said unto him: thou have answered
right. This do, and thou shall live. But he willing to justify himself, said
unto Jesus: and who is my neighbor? Jesus answered and said: A certain man
descended from Jerusalem to Hiericho, and fell among thieves, which robbed him
of his raiment, and wounded him and departed, leaving him half dead. And it
chanced that there came down a certain priest that same way, and when he saw
him, he passed by. And likewise a Leuit, when he went nigh to the place, came
and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain Samaritan as he iourneied,
came unto him, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him,
and bound up his wounds, and poured in oil and wine, and set him on his own
beast, and brought him to a common Inn, and made provision for him. And on the
morrow, when he departed he took out two penre, and gave them to the hoaste and
said unto him: Take cure of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more when I come
again, I will recompense thee. Which now of these three think thou was
neighbor unto him that fell among the thieves? And he said unto him: he that
showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus to him: go and do thou likewise.

The.xiiii. sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Galarh. v.
I Say, walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lust of the flesh, for the
flesh lusts contrary to the spiritr, and the spirit contrary to the flesh:
these are contrary one to another, so that ye cannot do what so ever ye would.
But and if ye be led of the Spirit, then are ye not under the law. The deeds
of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, worshipping of images, witchcrafte, hatred, variaunce, zeal, wrath,
strife, sedicions, sects, enuiynge, murder, dronkennes, gluttonye, and such
like. Of the which I tell you before as I have told you in times past, that
they which commit such things, shall not be inheritours of the kingdom of
God. Contrarily, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faythfulnes, meekenes, temperaunce. Against such there is
no law. They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

The Gospel. Luke. xvii.
ANd it chanced as Jesus went to Jerusalem, that he passed through Samaria and
Galile. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten men that were
Lepers, which stood a far of and put forth their voices, and said: Jesus
Master have mercy on us. When he saw them, he said unto them: go show your
selves unto the Priests. And it came to pass, that as they went they were
cleansed. And one of them, when he saw that he was cleansed, turned back
again, and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his
feet and gave him thanks. And the same was a Samaritane. And Jesus answered,
and said: are there not ten cleansed? but where are those nine? There are not
found that returned again to give God praise, save only this Stranger. And
he said unto him: arise go thy way thy faith has made thee whole.

The.xv. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Gala. iii.
YE see how large a Letter I have written to you with mine own hand. As many as
desire with outward appearaunce to please carnally, the same constrain you to
be circumcised only, least they should suffer persecution for the Cross of
Christ. For they them selves which are circumcised, keep not the law, but
desire to have you circumcised, that they might rejoice in your flesh. God
forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby
ye world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing at al, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.
And as many as walk according unto this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon Israel that partaineth to God. From hence forth, let no man put me to
business: For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren the grace
of our lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen

The Gospel. Math. vi.
NO man can serve two masters: for either he shall hate the one, and love the
other, or else lean to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and
Mamon. Therefore I say unto you: be not careful for your life, what ye shall
eat or drink: or yet for your body, what raiment you shall put on. Is not the
life more worth then meat? and the body more of value then raiment? Behold
the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor carry into
barens: and your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much better then
they? Which of you (by taking careful thought) can add one cubite unto his
stature? And why care ye for raiment? Consider the Lillies of the field how
they grow: they labor not, neither do thy spinne. And yet I say unto you,
that even Solomon in all his roialtye, was not clothed like one of these:
Wherefore, if God so cloth the grass of the field (which though it stand to
day, is to morrow cast into the furnace:) shall he not much more do the same
for you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying: what shall we
eat? or what shall we drink? or where with shall we be clothed? after all
these things do the Gentiles seek. For your heavenly Father knows that ye
have need of all these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto
you. Care not then for the morrow, for to morrow day shall care for it self,
sufficient unto the day, is the travail thereof.

The.xvi. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Ephe. iii.
I Desire that you faint not because of my tribulations that I suffer for your
sakes, which is your praise. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of
our lord Jesus Christ, which is Father of all that is called Father in heaven
and in earth, that he would grant you according to the riches of his glory,
that ye may be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in
love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth,
length, depth and height, and to know the excellent love of the knowledge of
Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fulness, which comes of God. Unto
him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, be praise in the congregation by
Christ Jesus throughout all generations from time to time. Amen.

The Gospel. Luke. vii.
ANd it fortuned that Jesus went into a city called Naim, and many of his
disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nigh to the gate of the
City: behold there was a man carried out which was the only Son of his
mother, and she was a widow, and much people of the City was with her. And when
the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her: weep not. And
he came nie and touched the coffin, and they that bare him stood still. And he
said: young man I say unto thee, arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began
to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on them
all. And they gave the glory unto God, saying: a great Prophet is risen up
among us, and God has visited his people. And this rumor of him went forth
throughout all Iewry and throughout all the regions which lie round about.

The.xvii. sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Ephc. iiii.
I (Which am a prisoner of the Lords) exhort you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowlynes and meekenes, with humblenes
of mind, forbearing one another through love, and be diligent to keep the
unity of the spirit through the bond of peace, being one body and Spirit, even
as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be but one Lord, one
faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above all, and through
all, and in you all.

The Gospel. Luke. xiiii.
IT chanced that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to
eat bread on the Sabbath day: and they watched him. And behold there was a
certain man before him which had the dropsy. And Jesus answered and spoke
unto the Lawiers and Phariseis, saying: is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath
day? And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and let him
go, and answered them saying: which of you shall have an ass or an Ox fallen
into a pyt, and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? And they
could not answer him again to these things. He put forth also a similitude
to the geastes, when he marked how they preased to be in the highest roumes,
and said unto them: When thou art bidden to a wedding of any man, sit not down
in the hiest room, least a more honorable man then thou be bidden of him, and
he (that had him and thee) come and say to thee: give this man room* and thou
begin with shame to take the lowest room. But rather when thou art bidden, go
and sit in the lowest room, that when he that bad thee, comes, he may say
unto thee: friend, sit up higher. Then shall thou have worship in the presence
of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever exalts him self, shall be
brought low, and he that humbles him self, shall be exalted.

The.xviii. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Cor. iii.
I Thank my God always on your behalf for the grace of God which is given
you by Jesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rytche by him in all
vtteraunce, and in all knowledge: by the which things the testimony of Jesus
Christ was confyrmed in you: so that ye are behind in no gift, waiting for the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall also strength you to the end,
that you may be blameles in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel. Math. xvi.
WHen the Phariseis had heard that Jesus did put the Saduces to scilence, they
came together: and one of them (which was a doctor of law) asked him a
question, tempting him and saying: Master, which is the greatest commandment
in the law? Jesus said unto him. Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
greatest commandment: And the second is like unto it. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all the law and the
Prophets. While the Pharisees gathered together, Jesus asked them saying: what
think ye of Christ, whose son is he? They said unto him: the Son of David.
He said unto them: how then does David in spirit call him lord saying: The
Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand till I make thine ennemies thy
footestoole: If David then call him Lord, how is he then his Son? And no man
was able to answer him any thing, neither durst any man (from that day forth)
ask him any mo questions.

The.xix. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Ephe. iiii.
THis I say and testify through the Lord, that ye hence forth walk not as
other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind, while they ar blinded in their
understanding, being far from a godly life, by the means of the ignorance that
is in them, and because of the blindness of their hearts, which being past
repentance, have given the^ selves over unto wanto^nes, to work al manner of
uncleanness, eue^ with gredines. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that
ye have heard of him, and have been taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus (as
concerning the conversation in times past) to lay from you the old man, which
is corrupt, according to the deceiuable lusts. To be renewed also in the spirit
of your mind, and to put on that new man, which after God is shapen in
righteousness and true holiness. Wherefore put away lying, and speak every man
truth unto his neighbor, forasmuch as we are members one of another. Be angry
and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to
the back biter. Let him that stole, steal no more: but let him rather labor
with his hands the thing which is good, that he may give him that needs.
Let not filthy communication proceed out of your mouth. But that which is
good to edefy with all, as often as need is, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers, and grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and fearcenes, and wrath, and roaring,
and cursed speaking, be put away from you, with all malicyousnes. Be ye
courteous one to another, merciful, forgeuing one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgeuen you.

The Gospel. Math. vii.
Jesus entered into a ship and passed over, and came into his own City: And
behold they brought to him a man sick of the Paulsey, lying in a bed. And
when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sick of the Paulsey: Son be
of good chere, thy sins be forgeuen thee. And behold, certain of the Scrybes
said within them selves: this man blasphemeth. And when Jesus saw their
thoughts he said, wherefore think you evil in your hearts? whether is it
easyer to say, thy sins be forgeuen thee, or to say, arise and walk? But
that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins in earth.
Then says he to the sick of the Palsy: Arise, take up thy bed and go unto
thine house. And he arose and departed to his house: But the people that saw
it, marueyled, and gloryfied God, which has given such power unto men.

The.xx. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
The Epistle. Ephe. v.
TAke heed therefore how ye walk circumspectly: not as unwise, but as wise
men redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye not unwise
but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not dronken with wine,
wherein is excess. But be ye filled with the spirit, speaking unto your
selves in Psalms and Himnes, and spiritual songs, synging and making melody
to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all things unto God
the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: submitting your selves one to
another in the fear of God.

The Gospel. Math. xx.
Jesus said to his Disciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a king which made a marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants
to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not come. Again
he sent forth other servants, saying: Tell them which are bidden, behold I
have prepared my dinner, mine Oxen and my fatlinges are killed, and althings ar
ready, come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways:
One to his farm place, another to his marchaundise, and the other ^^oke his
servants, and entreated them shamefully, and slew them. But when the king heard
thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his men of war, and destroyed those
murderers, and brent up their City. Then said he to his servants: The
marriage in deed is prepared, but they which were bidden, were not worthy. Go ye
therefore out into the hye ways, and as many as ye find, bid them to the
Marriage. And the servants went forth into the hye ways, and gathered
together all, as many as they could find, both good and bad. And the weddyng
was furnished with gestes. Then the king came in to see the gestes, and when he
spyed there a man which had not on a wedding garment, he said unto him:
Friend, how cammest thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was
even spechles. Then said the king to the ministers: Take and bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. For many are called, but few be chosen.

The.xxi. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Ephe. vi.
MY brethren, be strong through the Lord, and through the power of his might.
Put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand against all the assaults of
the Devil. For we wrestle not against blood and flesh, but against rule,
against power, against worldly rulers, even governors of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual craftynes in heavenly things. Wherefore take unto you
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and
stand perfect in althinges. Stand therefore and your loins gyrt with the truth,
having on the breast plate of righteousness, and having shoes on you feet, yt ye
may be prepared for the Gospel of peace. Above all take to you the shield of
faith, wherewith ye may quentch all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.
And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
watch thereunto with all instaunce and supplications for all Saints, and for
me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth freely to
utter the secrets of my Gospel (whereof I am a messenger in bonds) that
therein I may speak freely as I ought to speak.

The Gospel. John. iiii.
THere was a certain Ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum, as soon as the
same heard that Jesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, he went unto him, and
besought him that he would come down and heal his son: for he was even at
the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe. The ruler said unto him: Sir, come down or ever that my
son dye. Jesus said unto him: go thy way thy son lives. The man believed
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him. And he went his way, and as he was
going down, the servants met him, and told him saying: thy son lives.
Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto
him: yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. So the father knew that
it was the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him: Thy son lives. And
he believed, and all his household. This is again the second miracle that Jesus
did when he was come out of Iewry into Galile.

The.xxiii. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Phi. i.
I Thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my prayers for
you, and pray with gladness. Because ye are come into the fellowship of the
Gospel, from the first day until now. And am surely certified of this, that
he which has begone a good work in you, shall perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ, as it becomes me that I should so judge of you all, because I
have you in my heart: for so much as ye are all companions of grace with me, even
in my bonds and in the defending and establishing of the gospel: for God is my
record how greatly I long after you all, from the very heart root in Jesus
Christ. And this I pray, that your love may increase yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all understanding, that ye may accept the things that are
most excellent, that ye may be pure, and such as offend no man, until the day
of Christ, being filled with the fruit of righteousness, which comes by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

The Gospel. Math. xviii.
PEter said unto Jesus: Lord, how often shall I forgive my brother, if he sin
against me, til seven times? Jesus says unto him: I say not unto thee until
seven times, but seventy times seven times. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven
likened unto a certain man that was a king, which would take accoumptes of his
servant. And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought unto him which
ought him ten thousand talentes: but forasmuch as he was not able to pay,
his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he
had, and payment to be made. The servant fell down, and besought him saying:
Sir have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Then had the Lord pity on
that servant, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. So the same servant
went out, and found one of his fellows which ought him an hundred pence, and
he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying: pay that thou
owe. And his fellow fell down and besought him, saying: have patience with
me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not, but went and cast him into
prison, till he should pay the debt. So when his fellows saw what was done,
they were very sorye, and came and told unto their Lord all that had
happened. Then the Lord called him, and said unto him: O thou ungracious
servant, I forgave thee all that debt when thou desyredst me: should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pitye on thee? And
his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Iailers, till he should pay
all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto
you, if ye from your hearts forgive not (every one his brother) their
trespasses.

The.xxiii. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Philip. iii.
BRethren, be followers together of me, and look on them which walk even so
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk, of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnation, whose belly is their God, and glory to their shame,
which are worldly minded. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile
body, that he may make it like unto his glorious body, according to the
working, whereby he is able also to subdue all things unto him self.

The Gospel. Math. xxii.
THen the Pharisees went out, and took counsayl how they might tangle him in
his words. And they sent out unto him their disciples with Herodes Servants
saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God
truly, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the outward
appearaunce of men: Tell us therefore how think thou, is it lawful that
tribute be given unto Ceasar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their wickedness,
said: Why tempt ye me you hipocrites? show me the tribute money. And they
took him a penny. And he said unto them: whose is this image and
superscription? They said unto him Ceasars. Then said he unto them: give
therefore unto Ceasar, the things which are Cesars: and unto God those things
which are Gods. When they heard these words, they marueiled and left him, and
went their way.

The.xxiiii. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Colos. i.
WE give thanks to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ always for you in
our prayers, for we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye bear to all Saints, for the hopes sake which is laid up in store for
you in heaven: Of which hope ye heard before by the true word of the Gospel,
which is come unto you, even as it is fruitful, and grows, as it is also
among you, from the day in the which ye heard of it, and had experience in the
grace of God through the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear fellow
servant, which is for you a faithful Minister of Christ, which also declared
unto us your love which ye have in the spirit. For this cause we also, ever
since the day we heard of it, have not ceased to pray for you, and to desire
that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that ye might walk woorthye of the Lord, that in
all things ye may please, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing
in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might through his glorious
power, unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnes, giving thanks unto
the Father which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
Saints in light.

The Gospel. Math. ix.
WHen Jesus spoke unto the people, behold there came a certain Ruler, and
worshipped him saying: My daughter is even now deceased, but come and lay thy
hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did
his Disciples. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blond
twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his vesture. For she said
within herself: If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe.
But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: daughter, be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee safe. And the woman was made whole even the
same time. And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the Minstrels and
people making a noise, he said unto them: get you hence, for the maid is not
dead but sleeps. And they laughed him to scorn. But when the people were put
forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and said damsel arise. And the
damsel arose. And this noise went abroad into all that land.

The.xxv. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Iere. xxiii.
BEhold the time comes, says the Lord, that I will raise up the righteous
branch of David, which King shall bear rule, and he shall prosper with
wisdom, and shall set up equity and righteousness again in earth. In his time
shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. And this is the
name that they shall call him, even the Lord our righteousness: and therefore
behold, the time comes says the Lord, that it shall be no more said, the Lord
lives which brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt: But the
Lord lives which brought forth and lead the seed of the house of Israel out
of the North land, and from all countries where I have scattered them, and they
shall dwell in their own land again.

The Gospel. John. vi.
WHen Jesus lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he said
unto Philip: whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? This he said to
prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip answered him: two
hundredth peniworth of bread are not sufficient for them, that every man may
take a little. One of his disciples (Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother) said unto
him: There is a lad here, which has five barley loaves and two fishes: but what
are they among so many? And Jesus said make the people sit down. There was much
gras in the place. So the men sat down in number about five thousand. And
Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave to the
disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down. And likewise of the
fishes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he said unto his
disciples: Gather up the broken meat which remains, that nothing be lost.
And they gathered it together, and filled twelve baskets with the broken meat
of the five barely loves, which broken meat remained unto them that had eaten.
Then those men (when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said: this is
of a truth the same Prophet that should come into the world.

Saint Andrew the Apostles day.
The Epistle. Roma. x.
IF thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord* and believe in thy
heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be safe. For to believe with
the heart justifies, and to knowledge with the mouth, makes a man safe. For
the scripture says: whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded. There
is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile. For one is Lord of al, which
is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever does call on the name of the
lord, shall be safe. How then shall they call on him, on whom they have not
believed? How shall they believe on him on who^ they have not heard? How shall
they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent?
As it is written: how beautiful are the feet of them which bring tydinges of
peace, and bring tidinges of good things? But they have not al obeyed to the
gospel. For Esaias says: Lord who has believed our sayings? So then faith
comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of God. But I ask: have
they not heard? No doubt their sound went out into al lands, and their words
into the ends of the world. But I demand whether Israel did know or not. First
Moses says: I will provoke you to envy, by the^ that are no people, by a
foolish nation I will anger you. Esaias after that is bold and faith: I am found
of them yt sought me not. I am manifest unto them yt asked not after me, but
against Israel he says: Al day long have I stretched forth my hands to a
people that believes not, but speaks against me.

The Gospel. Math. iiii.
AS Jesus walked by ye sea of Galile, he saw two brethren: Simon which was
called Peter and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were
fisshers) and he says unto the^: follow me, and I will make you to become
fishers of men. And they strait way left their nets and followed him. And when
he was gone forth from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of
Zebede, and John his brother, in the ship with Zebede their father mending
their nets, and he called them. And they immediately left the ship and their
father, and followed him.

Saint Thomas Apostles day.
The Epistle. Ephe. ii.
NOw ye are not strangers nor foreners, but citezens with the saints, and of
the household of God: and are buylt upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone: in whom what
bulding soever is coupeled together, it grows unto an holy temple of the
Lord: in whom also ye are builte together to be an habitacion of God through
the holy Ghost.

The Gospel. John. xx.
THomas one of the twelve, which is called Didimus, was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: we have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them: except I see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe. And after eight days again his Disciples were
within, and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and
stood in the midst and said: peace be unto you. And after that he said to
Thomas: bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and reach thy hand and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithles, but believing. Thomas answered and
said unto him: my Lord and my God, Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou
have seen me, thou have believed: blessed are they that have not seen and yet
have believed. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disiples, which are not written in this book. These are written that ye might
believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and that (in believing) ye might
have life through his name.

The Conuertion of Saint Paul.
The Epistle. Acts. ix.
ANd Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of
the Lord: went unto the high Priest, and desired of him letters to carry to
Damasco to the Sinagoges: that if he found any of this way (were they men or
women) he might bring the^ bound to Jerusalem. And when he iournied, it
fortuned yt as he was come nigh to Damasco, suddenly there shined round about
him a light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and herd a voice saying to
him: Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? And he said: what art thou Lord? And
the Lord said: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick
against the prick. And he both trembling and astonished, said: Lord what wylt
thou have me to do? And the lord said unto him arise and go into the City, and
it shall be told thee what thou must do. The men which iourneyed with him stood
amassed, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth, and
when he opened his eyes, he saw no man. But they led him by the hand, and
brought him into Damasco. And he was three days without sight, and neither did
eat nor drink. And there was a certain disciple at Damasco, named Ananias,
and to him said the Lord in a vision: Ananias, and he said behold, I am here
Lord. And the Lord said unto him: arise and go into the street which is called
straight: and seek in the house of Judas after one called Saul of Tharsus. For
behold he prays, and has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming unto
him, and putting his hands on him, that he might receive his sight. Then
Ananias answered: Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he
has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem: and here he has authority of the hye
Priests to bind all that call on thy name. The Lord said unto him: go thy way,
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles and
kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he
must suffer for my names sake. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the
house, and put his hands on him, and said: Brother Saul, the Lord that
appeared unto thee in ye way as thou ca^mest, has sent me that thou might
receue thy sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost. And immediately there fell
from his eyes as it had been scales, and he received sight, and arose, and was
baptized, and received meat, and was comforted. Then was Saul a certain days
with the Disciples which were at Damasco. And straightway he preached Christ in
the Sinagogs how that he was the son of God. But all that heard him were
amassed and said: Is not this he that spoiled them which called on this name in
Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent that he might bring them bound unto
the hye Priests? But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the
Jews which dwelt at Damasco, affirming that this was very Christ.

The Gospel. Math. xix.
PEter answered and said unto Jesus: Behold, we have forsaken all and followed
thee, what shall we have therefore? Jesus said unto them: Verily I say unto
you, that when the son of man shall sit in ye seat of his Majesty, ye that
have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon.xij. seats, and judge
the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that forsakes house, or brethren,
or systers, or Father or Mother, or wife or children, or lands for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But
many that are first, shall be last, and the last shall be first.

The Purification of the virgin Mary.
The Epistle. Mala. iii.
BEhold I send my Messenger which shall prepare the way before me, and
sodaynlye shall the Lord who^ ye seek come unto his temple, and the messenger
of the covenant whom ye desire. Behold he comes says the Lord of Saboth: Who
shall endure in ye day of his coming, or who shall stand to behold him? For he
is as a trying fire, and as the herb that Fullers scour withal, and he shall
sit trying and purging silver, and shall purify the sons of Leuy, and shall
fine them as gold and silver, and they shall bring offerings unto the Lord of
ryghteousnes, and the Sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem shall be delicious unto
the Lord, as in the old time and in the years that were in the beginning.

The Gospel. Luke ii.
WHen the time of their purification (after the law of Moses) was come, they
brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord (as it is written in the
law of the Lord: Every Manchilde that first opens the Matrix, shall be called
holy to the Lord,) and to offer (as it is said in the law of the Lord) a pair
of Turtle doves, or.ii. young Pigeons. And behold there was a man in Jerusalem,
whose name was Simeon. And the same man was just and godly, and looked for the
consolation of Israel, and the holy ghost, was in him. And an answer had he
received of the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, except he first saw
the Lord Christ. And he came by inspiration into the temple.

Saint Mathies day.
The Epistle. Acts. i.
IN those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples and said: the
number of names that were together, were about an hundred and twenty. Ye men
and brethren, the scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy
ghost, through the mouth of David spoke before of Judas, which was guide to
them that took Jesus. For he was nombred with us, and had obtained fellowship
in this Ministration. And the same has now possessed a plot of ground, with
the reward of iniquity: and when he was hanged, he burst a sunder in the
midst, and his bowels gushed out. And it was known unto all the inhabiters
of Jerusalem: in so much that the same field is called in their mother
tongue, Acheldema, that is to say: the bloody field. For it is written in the
book of Psalms: his habitation be void, and no man be dwelling therein, and
his bishopric let another take. Wherefore, of these men which have companied
with us (all the time that the Lord Jesus had all his conversation among us,
beginning at ye Baptism of John unto ye same day that he was taken up from us)
must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection. And they
appointed two, Joseph which is called Barsabas whose surname was Iustus and
Mathias. And when they prayed they said. Thou Lord which know the hearts of
all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may take the room
of this Ministration and Apostleshyp, from which Judas by transgression fell,
that he might go to his own place. And they gave forth their lots, and the
lot fell on Mathias, and he was coumpted with the eleven Apostles.

The Gospel. Math. xi.
IN that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have hyd these things from the wise and prudent, and
have showed them unto babes: Verily Father, even so was it thy good pleasure.
All things are given unto me of my father. And no man knows the Son, but
the Father, neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom
soever the son will open him. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden,
and I will ease you. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.

The Annunciation of the virgin Mary.
The Epistle. Esaias. vii.
GOd spoke once again unto Ahaz saying: require a token of the lord thy God,
whether it be toward the depth beneath, or toward the heyght above. Then said
Ahaz: I will require none, neither will I tempt the Lord. And he said harken
to, ye of the house of David, is it not enough for you that ye be grievous unto
men, but ye must grieve my God also? And therefore the Lord shall give you a
token: Behold, a vyrgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou his mother
shall call his name Emanuel. Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to
refuse the evil, and choose the good.

The Gospel. Luke. i.
ANd in the syxt month, the Aungel Gabriell was sent from God unto a City of
Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin spoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of
the house of David, and the virgins name was Marye. And the Angel went in unto
her and said: Hayle full of grace, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou
among women. When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salutation that should be. And the Angel said unto
her: fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with God. Behold, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shall call his name Jesus: He
shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest. And the Lord God
shall give unto him the seat of his Father David, and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none end. Then said
Mary to the Angel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angel
answered, and said unto her: The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the highest shall ouershadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be
borne, shall be called the son of God. And behold thy Cousin Elizabeth, she has
also conceived a son in her age and this is the sixth month, which was called
baren for with god nothing shall be impossible. And Mary said behold ye hand maid
of the lord, be it unto me acording to thy word. And the Angel departed from
her.

Saint Marks day.
The Epistle. Ephe. iiii.
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says when he went upon hie, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. That he ascended, what means it, but that he also
descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is even
the same also yt ascended up above al heavens, to fulfill althings. And the very
same made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some shepherds, and
teachers to the edifying of the saints, to the work and administration, even
to the edifying of ye body of Christ, till we al come to the unity of the faith
and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure of the full
perfect age of Christ. That we henceforth should be no more children, wavering
and carried about with every wind of doctrine by ye wilines of me^, through
craftines whereby they lay awayt for us to deceive us. But let us follow the
truth in love, and in althings grow in him which is the head even Christ, in
whom if all the body be coupled and knit together, throughout every joint,
wherewith one ministers to another (according to the operation, as every part
has his measure) he increases the body, unto the edifying of it self through
love.

The Gospel. John. xv.
I Am the true vine, and my father is a husbandman. Every branch that bears
not fruit in me he will take away. And every branch that bears fruit will he
purge that it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye clean through the words
which I have spoken unto you. Bide in me: and I in you. As the brau^ch cannot
bear fruit of it self except it bide in ye vine: no more can ye except ye
abide in me. I am ye vine, ye are ye branches, he that abides in me, and I in
him, ye same brings forth much fruit. For without me ca^ ye do nothing. If a
man bide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered And men
gather the^, and cast them into the fire, and they burn. If ye abide in me, and
my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall be don for you. Herein is
my father glorified, yt ye bear much fruit, and become my disciples: As the
father has loved me even so also have I loved you. Continue you in my love. If
ye keep my commandments, ye shall bide in my love, even as I have kept my
fathers commandments and bide in his love. These things have I spoken unto
you, yt my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.

Saint Phillip and James day.
The Epistle. James. i.
James the servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, sends greting to
the twelve Tribes which are scattered abroad. My brethren, count it for an
exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptacions: knowing this, that the
trying of your faith gendreth patience, and let patience have her perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and sound, lacking nothing. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of him that gives it, even God, which gives to all men
indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given him. But
let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that doubts, is like a wave of
the sea, which is tossed of the winds and carried with violence. Neither let that
man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A waueryng minded man,
is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother which is of low degree, rejoice
when he is exalted. Again let him that is rytch, rejoice when he is made
low: For even as the flower of the grass shall he pass away. For as the
sun rises with heat and the gras withers and his flower falls away, and
the beuty of the fashion of it perysheth: even so shall the rich man perish in
his ways. Happy is the man that endures temptacion For when he is tried, he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him.

The Gospel. John. xiiii.
ANd Jesus said unto his disciples: let not your hearts be troubled, if ye
believe in God, believe also in me. In my Fathers house are many mansions. If it
were not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go
to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you even unto my
self: that where I am there may ye be also. And whither I go, you know, and
the way ye know. Thomas says unto him: Lord we know not whither thou go.
And how is it possible for us to know the way? Jesus said unto him, I am the
way, and the truth and the life. No man comes to the father but by me, if ye
had known me, ye had known my Father also. And now ye know him and have seen
him. Phillip said unto him Lord show us the father, and it suffiseth us. Jesus
says unto him: have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not
known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has seen my Father: and how say
thou then, show us the Father, beleuest not thou that I am in the father, and
the father in me. The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self,
but the father that dwells in me, is he that does the works. Believe me that
I am in the father and the father in me: Or else believe me for the works sake.
Verily, verily I say unto you: he that believes on me, the works that I do the
same shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I go
unto my Father. And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified by the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I
will do it.

Saint Barnabes day the Apostle.
The Epistle. Acts. xi.
TIdinges of these things came unto the ears of the congregation, which was in
Jerusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas that he should go unto Antioch, which
when he came and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all,
that with purpose of heart they would continually cleave unto the Lord. For he
was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith, and much people was
added unto the Lord. The^ departed Barnabas to Tharsus, to seek Saul. And when
he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it chanced that a whole
year they had their conversation with the congregation there, and taught much
people: in so much that the disciples of Antioch were the first that were
called Christians. In those days came Prophets from the City of Jerusalem unto
Antioch. And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the
spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world which came to
pas in the Emperor Claudius days. Then the disciples every man according to
their abilitye, purposed to send succor unto the brethren which dwelt in
Iewry, which thing they also did, and sent it to the Elders, by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul.

The Gospel. John. xv.
THis is my commandment, that ye love together as I have loved you. Greater
love has no man then this, that a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye
are my friends, if ye do what soever I command you. Hence forth call I not you
servant, for the servant knows not what his Lord does. But you have I
called friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father have I opened
to you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, to go
and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that what soever
ye ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.

Saint John Baptistes day.
The Epistle. Esaias. xl.
BE of good chere my people, O ye Prophets comfort my people says your God,
comfort Jerusalem at the heart, and tell her that her trauail is at an end, that
her offenses is pardoned, that she has received of the Lords hand sufficient
correction for all her syns. A voice cried in wilderness, prepare the way of ye
Lord in the wilderness, make straight the path for our God in the desert. Let
all valeies be exalted, and every mountain and hill be laid low. What so is
crooked, let it be made straight, and let the rough be made plain fields.
For the glory of the Lord shall appear, and al flesh shall at once see it: for
why the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. The same voice spoke: Now cry. And
the Prohet answered: what shall I cry? That all flesh is grass, and that all
the goodlynes thereof, is as the flower of the field. The grass is wythered,
the flower falls away: Even so is the people as grass, when the breath of
the Lord blows upon them. Nevertheless, whether the grass wyther, or that the
flower vade away, yet the word of our God endures for ever. Go up unto the
hie hill (O Sion) thou that bryngest good tidinges, lift up thy voice with
power, O thou Preacher Jerusalem. Lift it up without fear, and say unto the
cities of Judah: Behold your God, behold the Lord God shall come with power, and
bear rule with his arm. Behold he brings his treasure with him, and his
works go before him. He shall feed his flock like an Heardman. He shall
gather the Lambs together with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and
shall kindly entreat those that bear young.

The Gospel. Luke. i.
ELizabethes time came that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a
son. And her neighbors and her Cosens heard how the Lord had showed great
mercy upon, and rejoiced with her. And it fortuned that in the eight day they
came to circumcise the child, and called his name Zachary, after the name of
his father. And his mother answered and said: not so, but his name shall be
called John. And they said unto her: There is none in thy kynred that is named
with this name. And they made signs to his father how he would have him
called. And he asked for writing tables, and wrote saying, his name is John.
And they maruayled all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue
also, and he spoke and praised God. And fear came on all them that dwelt nigh
unto him. And al these sayings was noised abrod throughout all the hye country
of Iewry, and they that heard them, laid them up in their hearts, saying: what
manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him. And his
father Zacharias was filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesied saying: Praised
be the Lord God of Israel for he has visited and redeemed his people. And
raised up an horn of salvation unto us in the house of his servant David.
Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the
world began: that we should be saved from our enemies and from the hand of all
yt hate us. That he would deal mercifully with our fathers, and remember his
holy covenant, and he would perform the oath which he swear to our father
Abraham for to give us. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies
might serve him without fear all the days of our life, in such holiness and
righteousness, as are acceptable for him. And thou child shall be called the
Prophet of the highest, for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to
prepare his ways. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people for the
remission of syns. Through the tender mercy of our God whereby the day spring
from an hye has visited us. To give light to them that sat in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace. And the Child
grew and waxed strong in spirit and was in wilderness till the day came, when
he should show himself unto the Israelits

Saint Peter's day the Apostle.
The Epistle. Acts. xii.
AT the same time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of
the congregation. And he killed James the Brother of John with the sword. And
because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further and took Peter also.
Then were the days of sweet bread. And when he had caught him, he put him in
prison also and delivered him to four quarternions of soldiers to be kept,
intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people. And Peter was kept
in prison, but prayer was made with out ceasing, of the congregation unto God
for him. And when Herod would have brought him out unto the people, the same
night slepte Peter between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the kepers
before the door, kept the prison. And behold the Angel of the Lord was there
present, and a light shined in the habitation. And he smot Peter on the side,
and stirred him up, saying arise up quickly. And his chains fell from his
hands. And the Angel said unto him: girde thy self, and bind on thy
sandales. And he so did. And he said unto him: cast thy garment about thee and
follow me. And he came out and followed him, and wist not that it was truth which
was done by the Angel, but thought he had seen a vision. When they were past
the first and second watch, they came unto the iron gate, that leads unto the
city, which opened to them by the own accord, and they went out and passed
through one street and forthwith the Angel departed from him. And when Peter
was come to himself he said: now I know of a suretye that the Lord has sent
his angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod and from all waiting
of the people of the Jews.

The Gospel. Math. xv.
WHen Jesus came into the coasts of the City which is called Cesarea Philippy,
he asked his disciples saying: whom do men say that I the son of man am? They
said: Some say that thou art John Baptist, some Helias, some Ieremias, or one
of the Prophets. He said unto them: but whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter
answered and said: Thou art Christ the son of the living God. And Jesus
answered and said unto him. Happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh
and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And
I say unto thee that thou art Peter: and upon this rock I will build my
congregation. And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will
give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever thou bindest
in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest in earth, shall be
loosed in heaven.

Saint James the Apostle.
The Epistle. Acts. xi.
IN those days came Prophets from the City of Jerusalem unto Antioch: and
there stood up one of them named Agabus and signified by the spirit that there
should be great dearth throughout all the world, which came to pass in the
Emperor Claudius days. Then the disciples every man according to his
abilitye, purposed to send succor unto the brethren which dwelt in Iewry,
which thing they also did and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul. At the same time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex
ceriaine of the congregation And he killed James the brother of John with the
sword. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further and took
Peter also.

The Gospel. Math. xx.
THen came to him the mother of Zebedes children with her sons, worshipping
him, and desiring a certain thing of him: and he said unto her: what will thou?
She said unto him: Grant that these my two Sons may sit, the one on thy
right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom. But Jesus answered and
said: ye wot not what ye ask, are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They
said unto him: we are. He said unto them ye shall drink in deed of my cup, and
be baptized with the baptism yt I am baptized with, but to sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give, but it shall chance unto them that it
is prepared for of my Father And when the.x. heard this they disdayned at the
two brethren. But Jesus called them unto him and said: ye know that the princes
of the nations have dominion over them, and they that are great men exercise
aucthority upon them. It shall not be so among you. But whosoever will be great
among you, let him be your minister: and whosoever will be chief among you,
let him be your servant. Even as the son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his life a redemption for many.

Saint Bartholmewes day the Apostle.
The Epistle. Acts. v.
BY the hands of the Apostels, were many signs and wonders showed among the
people. And they were all together with one accord in Salomons porch. And of
other durst no man join him self to them: nevertheless the people magnified
them. The number of them that believed in the Lord, both of men and women, grew
more and more: insomuch that they brought the sick into the streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that at the least way the shadow of Peter when he
came by might shadow some of them. There came also a multitude out of the
Cytyes round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were
vexed with unclean spirits, and they were healed every one.

The Gospel. Luke xxii.
ANd there was a strife among them which of them should seem to be the
greatest. And he said unto them: the kings of nations reign over them, and
they that have auctority upon them, are called gracious Lords: But ye shall not
so be. But he that is greatest among you shall be as the younger, and he that is
chief, shall be as he that does minister. For whether is greater he that
sits at meat, or he that serves? Is not he yt sits at meat? But I am
among you as he that ministers. Ye are they which have bidden with me in my
temptacio^s. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed
unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on
seats iudgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Saint Mathewes day.
The Epistle. ii. Cor. iiii.
Seeing that we have such an office, even as God has had mercy on us, we go not
out of kind but have cast from us the clokes of vnhonestye, and walk not in
craftines, neither handle we the word of God deceitfully, but open the truth,
and report our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. If our
Gospel be yet hyd, it is hyd among them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the light of
the Gospel of the glory of Christ (which is the image of God) should shine
unto them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and
our selves your servants for Jesus sake. For it is God that commands the
light to shine out of darkness, which has shined in our hearts, for to give the
light of ye knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

The Gospel. Math. ix.
ANd as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sytting at
the receipt of custom, and he said unto him: follow me. And he arose and
followed him. And it came to pas as Jesus sat at meat in his house: behold many
Publicans also and sinners that came, sat down with Jesus and his Disciples.
And when the Phariseis saw it, they said unto his disciples: why eats your
master with Publicans and sinners? But when Jesus heard that, he said unto
them: They that be strong need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Go
ye rather and learn what that means: I will have mercy and not sacrifice:
for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Saint Michael and all Angels day.
The Epistle. Apo. ii.
THere was a great battle in heaven: Michael and his Angels fought with the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought with his Angels, and prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon that old serpent
called the Devil and Sathanas was cast out, which deceives all the world. And
he was cast into the earth, and his angels were cast out also with him. And I
heard a loud voice saying: in heaven is now made salvation and strength, and
the kingdom of one God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. And they
overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimonye,
and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice heavens, and ye
that dwell in them. Woe unto the inhabitours of the earth, and of the sea, for
the Devil is come down unto you, which has great wrath, because he knows
that he has but a short time.

The Gospel. Math. xviii.
AT the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying: Who is the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child unto him, and set him in the mydst
of them, and said: verily I say unto you, except ye turn and become as
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore
humbles himself as this child, that same is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven. And who so ever receives such a child in my name, receueth me: but
who so does offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better
for him that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned
in the depth of the sea. Woe unto the world because of offenses, necessary it is
that offenses come. But woe unto the man by who^ the offenses comes. Wherefore
if thy hand or thy foot hinder thee, cut him of, and cast it from thee. It is
better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather then thou should
(having two hands or two feet) be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye
offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter
into life with one eye, rather then (having two eyes) to be cast into hell fire.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you yt in
heaven their angels do always behold ye face of my father which is in heaven.

Saint Luke the Evangelist.
The Epistle. ii. Timo. iiii.
WAtch thou in althinges, suffer afflictions, do the work thoroughly of an
Evangelist, fulfill thine office unto the uttermost, be sober. For I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. I have fought a
good fight, I have fulfilled my course I have kept the faith. From henceforth
their is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord (that is a
righteous judge) shall give to me at yt day, not to me only, but to all them
that love his coming. Do thy diligence, that thou may come shortly unto me:
For Demas has forsaken me, and loves this present world and is departed unto
Thessalonica. Cresens is gone to Galacia. Titus unto Dalmacia, only Lucas is
with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee, for he is profitable unto me for
the ministration, and Tichicus have I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I left at
Troada with Carpus, when thou come bring with thee, and the books, but
specially the parchment. Alexander the Coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord
reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also. For he has
greatly withstood our words.

The Gospel. Luke. x.
THe Lord appointed other seuentye also, and sent them two and two before him,
into every City and place, whyther he him self would come. Therefore he
said unto them, the harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into the harvest. Go
your ways, behold I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves, bear no wallet,
neither scrip nor shoes and salute no man by the way, into whatsoever house you
enter, first say: peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon him, if not it shall return to you again. And in
the same house tarry still, eating and drinking such as they give, for the
labourer his worthy of his reward.

Simon and Iudes day Apostles.
The Epistle. Jude. i.
IVdas the servant of Jesus Christ, the brother of James to them which are
called and sanctified in God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ. Mercy
unto you, and peace and love be multiplied. Beloved when I gave al diligence to
write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto
you to exhort you that ye should continually labor in the faith, which was
once given unto the Saints. For there are certain ungodly men craftily crept
in, of which it was written before time unto such judgment. They turn the
grace of our God unto wantones and deny God (which is the only Lord) and our
Lord Jesus Christ. My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, for as much
as ye once know this, how that the Lord (after that he had delivered the people
out of Egypt) destroyed the^ which after believed not. The Angels also which
kept not their first state, but left their own habitacio^, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, even as
Sodom and Gomor, and the Cities about them, which in like manner defiled
themselves with fornication, and followed strange flesh, are set forth for an
example, and suffer the pain of eternal fire: likewise these being deceived
by dreams defyle the flesh, despise rulers, and speak evil of them that are
in aucthority.

The Gospel. John. xv.
THis I command you that ye love together. If the world hate you, ye know it
hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his
own, how be it because ye are not of the world but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. Remember the word that I said unto you:
the servant is not greater then his Lord. If they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you, if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But
all these things will they do unto you for my names sake, because they have not
known him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should
have had no sin: but now have they nothing to cloak their sin withal. He
that hates me, hates my Father also. If I had not done among them the works
which none other man did, they should have had no sin. But now have they both
seen and hated, not only me but also my Father. But this happens, that the
saying might be fulfilled that is written in their law. They hated me without a
cause. But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the spirit of truth which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me. And ye shall bear witness also because ye have been with me
from the beginning.

All Saints day.
The Epistle. Apo. vii.
Behold, I John saw another Angel ascend from the rising of the Sun which
had the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four
Angels (to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the Sea) saying: hurt
not the earth, neither the Sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the
Servants of our God in their foreheades. And I heard the number of them which
were sealed, and there were sealed an.C. and.xliiij. thousand of all the
Tribes of the children of Israel. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed.xij.M. Of
the tribe of Ruben were sealed. xij.M. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed.xij.M.
Of the tribe of Asset were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of Neptalim were
sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of
Simeon were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of Leui were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe
of Isachat were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed.xij.M. Of the
tribe of Joseph were sealed.xij.M. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed.xij.M.
After this I beheld and lo, a great multitude (which no man can number) of all
nations and people, and tounges, stood before the seat and before the Lamb,
and clothed with long white garments, and Palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying: salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the
seat of God, and unto the Lamb. And all the Angels stood in the compass of
the seat, and of the elders and the four beasts and fell before the seat on
their faces, and worshipped God saying: Amen. Blessing and glory and wisdom
and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for evermore.
Amen.

The Gospel. Math. v.
Jesus seeing the people, went up into the mountain, and when he was set, his
Disciples came to him, and after that he had opened his mouth he taught them
saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall receive comfort. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the earth. Blessed are they
which hunger and thirst after ryghteousnes, for they shall be satisfied.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall
be called the children of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when
men reuyle you, and persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner of evil
sayings against you for my sake: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely dwelling in little Britain street without
Aldersgate.


