FOr as much as I se that most me^ in their sience be diligent and circumspecte
as crafts men in their occupacions do exquisitly labor and search out the
knowledge not only of workemanshippe and conning: but as well of the order
and preseruinge of the stuff and matter whereof they shall frame and fassion
their work, ye and when it is wrought and finished, to the perfection of their
forecaste or imagination: they do not lightly and negligently regard the same
work, But like as they did before study to bring to pass and to perform
their workemanshippe and take pains in practisynge thereof: Even so will they
study and look for the preseruacion of the same that the thing where with
they have so much labored and broken their wit should not by sloth and
rechelesse lokeing to, be suffered to decay in a short space: I marvel
therefore that you who are of ye most high science or artifice ye as ye say your
selves are not workres only of worldli thiges. But also the workers of the
great work man and makers of the great maker whom ye can make and fassio^ at
your own will and pleasures: will not regard the works ye ye make (which
ought most worthily to be preserved from any despair or corruption (if it
be as you say) but let your gods whom ye have made corrupt, molde, stink,
rotte, must, cleave together bred worms with diverse other mishappes, as some
time to be eaten of a mouse, ratte or munkay and to be borne away of robin
redbrest or philip Sparowe the which would grieve any manes or woman's heart
(who beleuethe in the same great God of your makeinge) and causes many to
forsake ye faith which they had in him and all this is by your own folly and
slender oversight. Wherefore year much worthy disprayse among al other
crafts men. Men se daily how the appothecaries and grossers in their
occupiynges have ways and means to co^serue and preserve diverse things as
fruits rotes and herbs.

They preserve Damasene prunes, cheres, Quinces, peachis, pears, Olives,
Cappars, Orenges walnuttes, melons, Citrones and many other things wherein
they be worthy to be co^mendid and ye contrariwise are worthy to be
disco^mendid, yea rather to be greatly: punished because, ye be no more
studious in ye preserving of your God from filthe and putrifactio^. The which
god you say is not only ye creator of herbs fruits rotes and al other like?
but as well of ye appoticaries and grossers the^ selves and all other, yea and ye
creator and maker of you also. Though you make him whi do ye not therefore find
so^e wais how to keep him swet, but let him perish so vilely how will you
have men to believe in him as in a God when ye your selves set so light by him
that he will not take the pain to keep him sweet and clean from filthiness.

And though ye can make new when the old be rotten and burned or buried, yet
I would not have you so rechels and slouenly about them as ye be all the sort
of you, but to be as net fine and Ielous over them as ye may be, lest the
people (saying your slouenly and sowterly faction about them) regard another
your gods nor you that are the makers of them.

And because ye shall the easlier and sooner attain the knowledge of the
preseruacion of them: I inted in this little work to prescribe to you the
order thereof whereby ye may also avoid and put by the hanous infamy obloquie
and slander which both your gods and you the makers of the^ do daiely
sustain and hear, (I fear me) to your utter exinanicion, and derogation of
all your great power of God making and to thentent that ye may the rather
find the ways to preuente the same I have composed this little book for you to
bear in your hands or in your bosoms as a necessary vtensile concerning
your craft and occupacion, wherein be contained these rules folowinge.

First it is requisite that ye should know whether the wafer maker be an
honest man, and of good conscience, and co^nyng in the feate, or no, for by his
vnco^ninge or covetousness he may be a great cause of the decay of the^. As if
he make the^ of musty wheat, or make his batter to thynne for couetuousnes. Or
if by rechelesnes take not head whether his Irons be hot inoughe or to could,
for so by slackenes of bakynge may they be the souer mustys and hoar mouldyd.

Item ye shall have a close box to put them in and that shall ye set in your
chimneis end to keep them dry til ye shall consecrate them. And this is to be
done in ye winter quarter, or rainy and foggy whether.

Item ye must chose of the fairest roundest and whighteste, or else if neade
be ye may clip them round with a payer of sheres, or pare them with a sharp
knife. The clippinge or paringes whereof, may paruenture be a refreshing to
your clarke or to the boy that healpeth you to say Mass.

Item it shall be neadefull for you when ye be in consecratyng, to blow or breath
as nicely and featly as ye may devise, lest by your much brethinge and
anhelation ye might irroate and enmyst themso much, ye they shall never be
sweet or good after.

Item it behooves not him that has a stinkinge breath or pthisike or aposteme
in his longes or stomach, or has the pokkes to blow or breath so much on the^
as he that has not, for by such stinkinge exhalacions and out breathinges
your gods are so corrupt and infecte, that they be corrupted and infectuous
both to body and soul of them that eat them as their God.

Ite^ ye ought (as near as ye may) to consecreate on a fair clear and su^ny
day for if the air be moist dark or misty they will become the sooner fautie.
And what by corrupt breathynge and whether together, they may be so much
danke and soddy, that they will never be brought to good, and so your labor
conning stuff and all is but lost.

Item it will become you to look to them often, least they ron to far into
putrificacion. Provided always that ye do it in clear whether.

Item remember ye ye torn the^ and remove them; for cleauyng together

Item if it be so ye they be molde of any thing cla^my (as often times they be)
ye shall carry the^ into the church yard or into some garden or upon the leads
of the church, and lay the^ abroad one by one upon a fair cloth to take the
sun and then bestow the^ up again.

Ite^ ye must provide a net of silk or fine threde to leye on them in the time
of driynge and also to wache warely for fear that birds should take any of
them away.

Item ye must consider the wind whither it be great or in what quarter it
blows. For some wyndes be infectuous more then some, as the southe, south
weste, or southest and to take head ye none of them be blowe^ away with the
wind, for they be but light and of small substance.

Item ye must mark well ye nu^bre of the^, ye ye may put into the pixt as many
as ye take out, and so shall ye be sure that ye have lost none of the^ Item you
shall remember ye ye must all ways have an od God, for they may not be even in
number.

Item if they be mold or musty or grene or evil colored, ye shall wype the^ with
a fine cloth upon a fram made of four sticks and ley the^ on it one by one
each one by him self and hold the same frame over a chafingedishe of coals
into ye which coals ye shall cast the powder of brimstone which will make the^
white again but ye must remember to torn them often.

Item it shall be co^uement for you to know how to preserve the^ from mites or
worms which thing ye may well do if it be possible on this wise. Ye shall anoint
or rub the inner side of ye pixt or cup wherein, ye keep the^ with a little
wormwode, tansey or rue, in time of year when ye may have the herbs. And when
ye can not cume by the herbs conveniently, the^ shall ye take a litel of the
powder of mintes and strewe among them, or the powder of coloquintida which
is white and will agree well with the color of the^ and will not suffer any worms
to bread where it is, by the means of the bitterness thereof.

Item ye shall take good head and remember unto whom and what persons these that
be so trimmed ought to be ministered for if ye shall minister them to heal they
and well tasting persons it will be easily espied, and may peraduentre cause
the^ to spit them out again whereof may arise diverse in conueniences wherefore
ye shall all way keep them for sick folk and such as can not sauoure
things well in there mouths (for they will impute it to their evil taste) ye and
it may so prove that they may the sooner recover their health for by ye
bitterness and propriety thereof they being provoked to laxe or vomit may
eiecte and cast out such humors as be the cause of their sickness and so become
hole whcihe thing the common people will repute as a great miracle and give
much glory to your gods therefore.

Item to avoid the mishappes that might betide them by vermyne as mouse, rat,
wesel, munkay or spaniel ye must be circu^specte and take heed on every hand
especially when ye take them out or put them in the box and look that ye leave
none abroad, for often times it has be seen that they have benne devoured by
such mean and with such kind of vermin.

Item ye ought to cast an eye toward your God when ye be in your bisy memento
and after the leuation, for whilse ye wincke and hold your hands before your
nose and eyes, it may chance some robin redbrest (which among all other
birds is most hardy, sauce, pert and homely) to season upon it and fly away
clean therewith which done ye know in what perilous and dangerous case ye
stand in. Wherefore it stands in your hand to be well ware and wise thereof.

Ite^ if ye have any tame sparowe or other thing which is familier with you,
take good head to them or eles leave them at home for the time, for strange
things has happened by such, to the disworshippe of your gods.

Item have in mind that while he lies on the altar, ye set the foot of the
chalice upon the edg of your God, lest the wind by whipynge suddenly get under
him and blow him a way or about the chauncel to your shame and dishonor of
your gods which he defend that dwells in the pixt above, daily sensing in
and out by a stryng between the altar and the roffe, to whom be honor
worship and praise worthy Amen.

If any or al of these will not healpe: then ye must use your old order of
burning, or buriyng of them, wherein I know well ye be expert enough and so well
practiced ye I need not to instruct you there in, or show you any thing thereto
belonginge.

These have I written to you undesired to thend that ye should avoid slannder
and infamy. More shall ye have shortly God willinge, the which I think will be
very necessary for you. And be you assured that as long as I am able to write
say or do: ye shall not fail of healp or aid after the blout sort as ye se I
have showed in this litel treatise, the which I doubt not ye will acept none
other wise the^ I judge in you to do, for sure I am that ye forget me not in
your prayers and beneditions, wherein ye be more besy and devout then I would
ye should be for my part. Nevertheless I trust I speed not the worsse for
them but the better, by defense and goodness of the Lord Jesus Christ, who
sits on the right hand of God the father with the holy ghost and from thence
shall come a very man unite with his godhead, to judge all the world in whose
sight al vile false and stinkyng gods and Idols with their worshippers and
makers shall be co^ founded, And unto him with the father and the holy spirit be
honor and praise for ever and ever and to all that believe only in him eternal
joy through the same Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


