A Warning for Maids:
Or the false dissembling,, cogging,
Cunning, cozening young Man,
Who long did try and use his skill,
To woe a coy young Maid to his will
And when he had obtained her love,
To her he very false did prove.
To a dainty new tune, called, No, no, not I.
depiction of a man doffing his hat to a woman

ALl in a May morning in the merry month of May
into the green Meddowes I did take my way,
There I heard a young Man to his Love make reply,
But she answered him scornfully, no no not I.
Sweet heart quoth this young Man, my love is entire,
my heart is inflamed with Cupids hot fire.
Your love I entreat, why should you deny?
But she answered him scornfully, no, no not I.
O sweet it is thy love that I do so much crave,
and I will maintain you still gallant and brave.
Fair Mistress, for your love I certain shall die,
Quoth she, away foolish man, I care not I.
Will you seek to wrong a Man in such a case?
if I die for love, it will be your disgrace,
I hope you will yield me some other reply.
But she answered him scornfully, no, no not I.
Sweet, have you no more regard of a young man?
I will strive to do thee all the good I can,
Methinks you should yield unto me by and by,
But she answered him scornfully, no, no not I.
And if that all Maids should be of your mind,
then what would or should become of us mankind?
Sweet let you and I now try our destiny,
But she answered him scornfully, no, no not I.
Pray what is the reason? I am young and fair,
besides you do know I am my Fathers heir:
Sweet let me entreat your love and courtesy,
But she answered him scornfully, no, no not I.
For vaulting or leaping, or such exercises,
for dancing or skipping I still win the prises,
Come grant me thy favor my pretry pigsnie,
But she answered him scornfully, no, not I.
I am in all parts most complete like a man,
and I can do as much as any can:
Then prithee sweet heart do not my love deny,
Now she answered him kindly, sweet Love not I.
If gold will content thee, why gold thou shall have,
or any thing else that thou can wish or crave:
It Is only on thy love that I do rely,
Now she had forgot to say, no, no not I.
The second Part, To the same tune.
depiction of a man and a woman holding flowers or feathers

I Will be thy maintainer, thou shall know no want,
then let no disparagement my sweet heart daunt:
Thou shall be my Bride, and I Will love thee truly.
This Maid had forgot to say, no, no not I.
With sweet salutations these Lovers did part,
he called her his joy, and she called him sweet heart,
Yet after this young Man his Love did deny,
As I will declare unto you, by and by.
In little space after she met with her Dear,
destring of him some farther news to hear:
She wished him to marry her immediately,
But he answered her scornfully, no, no not I.
Sweet Love, never deny me, thou know I am thine,
and thou often did promise that thou would be mine:
Now thy bitter answer makes me mourn and cry,
To hear thee say unto me, no, no not I.
Fair Mistress, remember, when I sued to you,
you made a scoff at me, and from me you flew:
Now I Will give you leave to sigh, sob, and cry,
Though you are disposed to wed, so am not I.
When first I came to thee, to ask thy good will,
thou made a scorn of me, now I am as ill,
I will not be tide for to wed by and by:
Though you are disposed to wed, so am not I.
Quoth she, will you prove so perjured unto me?
I am sorry that ere I consented to thee:
Let no Maid trust young men, for they will falsify:
Can thou answer scornfully, no, no not I?
Farewell thou false young man, farewell and adue,
the like said this wanton youth, farewell to you.
Now I do see Maidens can love men truly:
But I never mean to wed, no, no not I.
Was ever poor Maiden in such a like case,
to yield to undoing, and such foul disgrace?
I might have been wise, and still made this reply:
I will never yield to thee, no, no not I.
I Will never trust false young man for his sake,
I had warning before, yet no warning could take:
These young men will promise and present deny,
I Will never trust false tongue more, no, no not I.
Now shall I be mocked of other young Maids,
they will dout me, and say, see how her color fades:
She is sick for love, and forsooth they will cry:
Her Love now has left her, and her does deny.
But I wish all them that laugh me to scorn,
hereafter beware, and escape the like harm:
For young men are cunning, and full of policy:
But I Will never trust them more, no, no not I.
I am not the first that has so been deceived,
yet of a great number never was one more grieved.
But now alas I can find no remedy:
I Will never trust false young man more, no, no not I.
R. Climsall.
FINIS.
Printed at London for John Wright the younger, dwelling at the upper end of
the Old-Bayley.


