A breef and sommarie discourse upon the intended Voyage to the hethermoste
parts of America: Written by Captain Carleill in April 1583. for the better
inducement to satisfy such Merchants of the Moscouian Company and others,
as in disburcyng their money toward the furniture of the pre^^nt charge: do
demand forthwith a mesent return of gain: albeit their said particular
disburcements are required but in very slender sommes:

The highest being twenty and five pound. The second at twelve pound ten
shillynges. And ye lowest at six pound five shillinges.

Captain Carleills discourse
WHen the Goldsmith desires to find the certain goodness of a piece of
gold, which is newly offered unto him, he presently brings the same to the
Touchstone: whereby comparyng the show or touch of this new piece with the
touch or show of that which he knows of old, he forthwith is able to judge
what the valewe is of that, which is newly offered unto him. After the exsample
whereof I have thought it good to make some brief repetition of the particular
estate of many other foreign Voyages and trades already frequented and known
unto us, whereby you may be the better able to conceive and judge what certain
likelihood of good there is to be expected in the Voyage, which is presently
reco^mended unto your knowledge and resolution.

And first to lay down that of Moscouia, whose beginning is yet in the
remembrance of many. It is well known that what by the charges of the first
discovery, and by the great gifts bestowed on the Emperor and his Nobility,
together with the leaud dealing of some their servants, who thought
themselves safe enough from orderly punishment. It cost the Company above
four skore thousand pounds, before it could be brought to any profitable
reckoning. And now that after so long a patience, and so great a burden of
expenses. the same began to frame to some good course and commodity: It
faleth to very ticklish terms, and to as slender likelihood of any further
goodness as any other trade that may be named. For first the estate of those
Countries and the Emperors dealinges, are things more fickle then are by
every body understood. Next, the Dutchmen are there so crept in, as they
daiely augment their trade thither, which may well confirm that uncertainty
of the Emperors disposition to keep promise with our Nation. Thirdly, the
quality of the voyage, such as it may not be performed but once the year.
Fourthly, the charges of all Ambassadors between that Prince and her
Majesty, are always borne by the Merchants stock. And lastly, the danger of
the King of Denmark, who besides that presently he is like to enforce a
tribute on us, has likewise an advantage upon our Ships in their voyage,
either homewardes or outwardes whenever he lists to take the opportunity.

The bad dealings of the Esterlynges are sufficiently known to be such
toward our Marchaunts of that trade, as they do not only offer them many
injuries ouerlong to be written, but do seek all the means they can, to
deprive them wholly of their occupiyng that way: and to the same purpose have
of late, clean debarred them their accustomed and ancient privileges in all
their great Towns.

The traffiques into Turkey, besides that by some it is thought a hard poinct
to have so much familiarity with the professed and obstinate Enemy of Christ:
It is likewise a voyage which can not be made but at the devotion, and as it
were in the danger of many States, who for sondrie respects are apt to
quarrel with us upon sudden occasions. And the presents to be given away in
Turkey this year cost little less then two thousand pounds.

As for the trades into all the parts of Italy, it may easily be considered
by every one of judgment, that the same stands in the like terms touching
the passages, as that of Turkey, and that many times our Ships being taken
in the way by the Galleis of Barbary, our poor Mariners after the loss of
their goods and travail, are set at such excessive Rau^somes before they
can be freed of their slavery: as for the most part they are no way able to
discharge: as for Example at this instaunt there are some prisoners poor
ordinary Mariners, for whose releasing there must be paid two hundred Ducats
the man, for some three hundred, yea, four or five hundred Ducats the man for
some of the^. And how enuiously they do already oppose them selves against our
frequenting into their parts, may appear by the late customs which they
have imposed as well upon our English Marchaundize which we bring them, as
also upon such their Marchaundize which we fetch from them.

The trade into Barbury grows likewise to worse terms then before times:
and when it was at the best our Merchants have been in danger of all their
goods they had there, whenever it happened the Ryng to die. For until a new
were chose^, the liberty of al discordered persons is such, as they spoil and
wrong who^ they list without any redress at al.

Touching Spain and Portugal, with whom we have very great trade, and much
the greater, by means of their ventyng a good part of our wares into their
Jndies, as also of the provision they have from the same, wherewith are made
many of our returns from them again. It falls out that twice the year
ordinarily we send our Flates into those parts: So that whenever the Ryng
of Spain lists to take the opportunity, he may at these seasons deprive us
not only of a great number of our very good Ships, but also of our
honestest, and ablest sort of Mariners that are to be found in our whole
Realm again: which is a matter of no small consequence: for it is to be
noted, that when he shall take a quarrel in hand, though it be but his own
perticulerly, yet has he the means to put in hazard as well those our Ships
which are in his own Countries of Spain and Portugal, as also all others
which shall be bound to any the parts of all Italy or of Turkey either. And
further whosoever he be that is but so meanly affected in Religion, as of
necessity becomes every ordinary man and good Christian to be, can not but
be agreeued in his heart to consider, that his children and servant whom he
desires to have well brought up, are in these trades of Spain and Portugal
and all Italy, forced to deny their own profession, and made to acquaint them
selves with that which the Parents and Masters do utterly deny and refuse,
yea which many of them do in their own hearts abhor as a detestable and most
wicked doctrine.

But who shall look into the quality of this voyage, being directed to the
latitude of 40. degrees, or there aboutes of that hithermost part of America,
shall find it has as many poinctes of good moment belonging unto it, as may
almost be wished for. As first it is to be understood, that it is not any long
course, for it may be performed to and from four months, after the first
discovery thereof: Secondly, that one wind suffiseth to make the passage;
whereas most of your other voyages of like length, are subject to three or four
winds. Thirdly, that it is to be performed at all times of the year.
Fowerthly, that the passage is upon the high sea, whereby you are not bound to
the knowledge of dangers, on any other coast, more then of that Country, and
of ours here at home. Fiftlie, that those parts of England and Irelande,
which lie aptest for the proceedyng outward, or homeward upon this voyage, are
very well stored of goodly Harbourghes. Sixthly, that it is to be accounted of
no danger at al, as touching the power of any foraine Prince or State, when it
is compared with any the best of all the other voyages before recited.

And to the godly minded, it has this comfortable commodity, that in this
trade, their Factours, be they their servants or children, shall have no
instruction or confessions of Idolatrous Religion enforced upon them, but
contrarily shall be at their free liberty of conscience, and shall find the
same Religion exercised, which is most agreeable unto their parents and
Masters

As for the Merchandizyng, which is the matter especially looked for, albeit
that for the present, we are not certainly able to promise any such like
quantity, as is now at the best time of the Moscouian trade brought from
thence: So likewise is there not demanded any such proportion of daily
expenses, as was at the first, and as yet is consumed in that of Moscouia and
other. But when this of America shall have been haunted and practiced, thirty
years to an end, as the other has been, I doubt not by Gods grace, that for
the ten Ships, that are now commonly employed once the year into Moscouia,
there shall in this voyage twice ten be employed well, twice the year at the
least. And if for the present time, there do fall out nothing else to be
found, then the bare Fishyng, yet doubt I not after the first years planting,
but by that matter only to serve half a dozen of your best sort of ships,
although my supply of people do not follow me so substancially, as in all
reason may be well looked for.

But when it is asked what may be hoped from thence after some years, it is
first to be considered, that this situation in 40. degrees, shall be very apt
to gather the commodities, either of those parts which stand to the
Southward of it, as also of those which are to the Northward.

In the Northerlie may be expected, not only an especial good fishing for
Salmon, Codde, and Whales, but also any other such commodities, as the
Eastern Country is do yield us now: as Pitche, Tar, Hemp, and thereof
Cordage, Mastes, Losshe hides, rich Furs, and other such like, without
being in any sort beholding to a King of Denmark, or other Prince or State,
that shall be in such sort able to command our ships at their pleasure, as
those do at this day, by means of their straight, passages, and strong
Shippyng.

As for those parts which lie West, and to the Southwardes, it may well be
hoped they will yield wines with a small help, since the grapes do grow there
of themselves already very fair, and in great abundance. Olives being once
planted, will yield the like Oil as Spain and Italy. The Country people being
made to know, that for Wax and Honey, we will give them such triflyng
things, as they desire of us, and showing them once the means, how to provide
the same, the labor thereof being so light, no doubt but in short time they
will earnestly care to have the same in good quantity for us. Besides what
great likelihoode there is of good means to make Salt, which may serve for ye
fishing of those parts, may well enough appear unto them, who can judge the
quality of such places, as are required to make ye same in.

Thus much for the beginning, because they may be had with an easy kind of
trauaill. But when it may have pleased God, to establishe our people there any
such time, as they may have planted amongeste them, in sondrie parts of the
Country, and that by gentle and familiar entreatyng them, they be made to
see, what is better for them, then they do as yet understand of, and that in
so many sorts of occasious, as were infinite to be set down. It is to be
assuredly hoped, that they will daiely by little and little, forsake their
barbarous, and savage living, and grow to such order and civility with us, as
there may be well expected from thence no less quantity, and diversity of
Merchandise, This is spoken upon the opinion which by some is conceived that
Irelande is not suffeted to be reduced to that perfection which it might be,
least one dai^ by chance reuoltyng from the Crown it might prove an
ouerstro^g party to be so nere an enemy unto England.
then is now had out of Dutchlande, Italy, France, or Spaigne. And as the
borderyng neighbors, are commonly the aptest to fall out with us, so these
parts, being somewhat further remote, are the liker to take, or give less
occasion of disquiet. But when it is considered, that they are our own
kindred, and esteemed our own Country Nation which have the government:
meaning by those who shall be there planted, who ca^looke for any other then the
dealyng of most loving, and most assured friends.

There are further to be considered, these two points of good importance,
concerning the matter of trade. The one is, that by the good prosperyng of this
action, there must of necessity fall out, a very liberal vtteraunce of our
English Clothes, into a maine Country, described to be bigger then all
Europe, the larger part whereof bendyng to the Northward, shall have
wonderful great use of our said English Clothes, after they shall ouce come
to know the commodity thereof. The like will be also of many other things,
ouermany to be reconed, which are made here by our Artificers and labouryng
people, and of necessity must be provided from hence.

The other is, if there be any possible means, to find a Sea passage, or
other fresh water course, which mate serve in some reasonable and convenient
sort, to transporte our Merchandise into the East Indian Sea, through any of
these Northerly parts of America, it shall be sonest and most assuredly
performed by these who shall inhabit, and first grow into familiarity with
the Inlande people.

What Mineral matter may fall out to be found, is a thing least in suspense,
until some better knowledge, because there be many men, who having long
since, expected some profits herein, upon the great promises that have been
made them, and being as yet in no poincte satisfied, do thereupon conceive,
that they be but words pourposely cast out, for the inducyng of men to
be the more willing to furnishe their money, toward the charge of the first
discovery.

But now to answer some others, who begin with an other objection, saying:
That it is not for the Merchants purse, to continue the charges of
transportyng and plantyng: and that since these hundred men, which are now
to be planted, will cost four thousand pound, it is then to be thought,
that the charge of a far greater number, will be also a far greater some of
money. Whereunto I answer, that in all atemptes unknown, especially such a
one as is this, wherewith we are presently in hand, the first charges are
commonly adventured in more desperate kind, then those that follow upon some
better knowledge: and therewith it falls out, that whereas one aduentureth in
the first enterprise, an hundred for that one will of themselves be willing,
and desirous to adventure in the next, if there be never so little more
apparaunce, that the intended matter is by some knowledge of our own, found
true in some poinctes of our first presumption. The ewer of Metal brought by
Master Frobisher, caused two several Supplies tho two years next followyng,
whereof the latter was of xiiij. tall Ships.
The examples are many, and may easily be remembered by those who be
Marchantes, even in their ordinary and daiely trades, as well as in
extraordinary attemptes, which of late years have fallen into those terms
of some likelihoode, as is above said. So then no doubt, but when certain
reports shall be brought by them, who directly come from thence: that such a
Country and people, they have themselves seen, as is by us spoken of, but that
then there will come forward a greater number of those, who now neither have
hard any thing of the matter, as also of others, who presently make such
frivolous scruple, as will not otherwise be satisfied, then by the report of
saint Thomas. I speak not this by the Merchants, whom for their freedoms
of trade, I would not have pressed to any further charge, then this first
preparacion, but rather by such as have great affection, to hazard the
chaungyng of their estates, Sir Fraunces Drake his passedge only through the
Isles of Molucca, was cause of a preparation thither of seventeen thousand
pounds, whereof there was not above five or six thousand in Marchaundize, the
rest in other charges of Shippyng and expensiue provision.
and would be well content to go in the Voyage, if they might only be
assured that there is such a Country, and that their money should not be
wasted to nothing in the preparations. The right examination of this poincte,
must be the contrary sequel of the common Poruerbe, Nothing venture, nothing
have, so on the other side by venturyng, many great good proffites are found
out, to the wonderful benefit of the common weal, and to those especially in
private, who take on the hazard of their life and trauaill, or substance in
the first attemptes, and therefore I would wish that they who (God be
thanked) are well able to spare that, which is required of each one toward
the vndertakyng of this adventure, be well content and willing to employe the
same, since the sequel in good and substanciall reason does promise, not
only a great commodity in particular to the Marchaunte, who shall here at
home exercise the trade of Marchaundize: But also to an infinite number of
other, who presently live in poor estate, and may by taking the opportunity
of this discovery, alter the same to a far better degree. Wherefore to make
some conclusion upon this poincte of the Merchants misdoubt, who suspecteth
least this first disburcement, without return of present gain, should not be
all his charge, but that afterward he might yet further be urged to continue
the like again, as has happened in the discovery of the Moscouian trade. It
may suffice to consider, that this is not an action, which concerns only
the Merchants perticulerly, but a great deal more the general sort of
people throughout all England: And that when such relation shall be returned,
as that it may be found a matter worthy the following, the whole generality
will not refuse to contribute toward the furtherance thereof, rather then it
should sincke, for want of any reasonable supply. But as it is a very little
time, since I have been thoroughly resolved, to try my fortune in the matter,
so is it more then time, the preparation were in hand already, and therefore
no fit time now, to make any number of ignorant men to understand with
reason, the circumstance that belongs to a matter of so great consideration
and importance.

To those who have any forward minds in well doing, to the generality of
mankind, I say this much more, that Christian charity does as greatly
persuade the furtherance of this action, as any other that may be laid
before us, in as much as thereby, we shall not only do a most excellent
work, in respect of reducyng the savage people, to Christianity and
civility, but also in respect of our poor sort of people, which are very
many amongst us, living altogether unprofitable, and often times to the great
disquiet of the better sort. For who knows not, how by the long peace,
happy health, and blessed plentifulnesse, wherewith GOD has endewed this
Realm, that the people is so mightily increased, as a great number being
brought up, during their youth in their parents houses, without any
instruction how to get their liuinges, after their parents decease, are driven
to some necessity, whereby very often, for want of better education they fall
into sondrie disorders, and so the good sort of people, as I said before, are
by them ordinarily troubled, and them selves ledd on, to one shameful end or
other, whereas if there might be found some such kind of imploymente, as
this would be no doubt but a greater part of them would be with held, from
falling into such vile deeds: and in stead thereof, prove greatly
serviceable in those affairs, where they might be so employed. This I speak
of mine own experience, having seen diverse come over to the wars of the law
Countries, during my rsidence in the same, who here had been very evil and
idle livers, and by some little continuance with us, have grown to be very
industrious in their faculty, which I ca^ assure you, was a more painful
manner of living, then in this action is like to fall out, and withal to a
purpose of far less value, in respect of their particular recompense, then
with an assured kind of good hope is looked for in this.

Thus you see in every poincte, that may be wished for, in a good action and
voyage, there is matter and reason enough to satisfy the well disposed. But
now to grow somewhat nerer the quick, and to show you some greater
apparaunce, then has been yet spoken of touching the trade which is the only
subject wherewith I do mean to entermeddle at this time, because my address
hereby is chiefly to me^ of such like faculty: you may understand by that
follows, the circo^stance of a little discourse, which does concern these
matters very directly.

In the year 1534. James Carthier of Deep, made his first discovery of those
parts of America, which lie to the Westwardes, and as it were on the backside
of newfoundeland. In which voyage his principal intention was to seek out
the passage, which he presumed might have been found out, into the East
Indian sea, otherwise called the passage to Cathayo, but this year he went no
higher, then the Istandes of the assumption in the great Baie of S. Laureuce,
and so returned back into France.

The next year followyng he went with greater provision into the grand Bay
again, where he keeping the Northerly shore, ran up the great River that
comes down from Canada and other places, until at last with his small
Pinaces, having left his great Shippyng by the way, he arrived at Fochelaga
Town, being five hundred leagues within the entrance of the grande Baie. In
which trauaill he had spent so much of the year, that it was now the month
of October, and therefore thought it convenient, for the better enformyng
himself at large in this discovery, to Winter it out in those parts, which he
did at a place called by himself holy Cross. This Winter fell out to be a
very long and hard Winter, as many times the like happens with us in these
parts, and the savage people who for the most part, make but a slender kind
of provision, even as it were from hand to mouth fell into some scarcity of
victualles; yet did they not refuse to serve the Frenchmen, with any thing they
had all the Winter long, albeit at somewhat higher prices toward the end, when
the need was most, as with our selves the like happens at such times. But
when the French had had their wantes served all the year, and that as yet they
saw not, any appearance of their intended matter, which was the discovery of
the passage, and yet imaginyng by the signs wherewith the willing people,
endeavored to declare their knowledge in that poinct, that some good matter
might be had from them, if they might have been well understood, they
resolved with themselves, to take some of the sufficientest men of that
Country home into France, and there to keep the^ so long, as that having
once achieued the French tongue, they might declare more substancially their
mind, and knowledge in the said passage, concludyng this to be the mean of
least charge, of least travail, and of least hazard. And when they came to
bethink themselves, who might be meetest for it, they determined to take the
King, as the person who might be best informed of such parts, as were
somewhat remote from his own Country, as also that for the respect of him,
the people would be always ready, and content to do them any further
service, when it should happen them to return thither again about the
discovery. Thus the poor King of the Country, with two or three others of
his chief companions coming aboard the French Ships, being required thither
to a bancket, was traitorously carried away into France, where he lived four
years, and then dyed a Christian there, as Theuet the French Kings
Cosmographer does make mention. This outrage and injurious dealyng, did put
the whole country people into such dislike with the French, as never since
they would admit any conversation, or familiarity with them, until of late
years, the old matter beginning to grow out of mind, and being the rather
drawn on by gifts of many triflyng things, which were of great value with
them, they are (as I said) within these two or three years content again to
admit a traffic, The year 1581.
which two years since, was begone with a small Bark of thirty tons,
whose return was found so profitable, as the next year followyng, being the
last year, by those Merchants, who meant to have kept the trade secret unto
themselves, from any others of their own Country men, there was hired a
Ship of four score tons out of the I Will of Jersey, but not any one Mariner
of that place, saving a Shipboye. This Ship made her return in such sort,
as that this year they have multiplied three Ships to be one of nine score
tons, an other of an hundred tons, and a third of four score tons:
which report is given by very substanciall and honest men of Plymouth, who
saw the said Ships in readiness to depart on their Voyage, and were
aboarde of some of them. Here is at this instant in the town a man of
Gernesey, Lewis de Vicke: who reports to have credibly heard, that by this
last years Voyage the Frenchmen got foreteene or fifteen hundred for every
one hundred. But how soever it be, it carries good likelihoode of some notable
profit, in as much as they do so greatly, and thus suddenly increase the
burden and number of their Ships this present year. Now, if in so little as
two years times this voyage of the Northern parts be grown to such good
pass as has been declared unto you: it is worth the thinkyng on to consider
what may be hoped for, from the Sotherne part: which in all reason may
promise a great deal more. And so as one who was never touchd with any
indirect meaning, I presume to wish and persuade you to some better taking of
this matter to heart, as a thing which I do verily think will turn to your
greater and more assured commodity, then you receive by any other Voyage, as
yet frequented of so short and safe a course as this has: dealyng herein no
otherwise with you for your several small sommes, then I do with my self, both
for more of mine own, then is required of any one of you: besides the hazard
and travel of my person, and the total employment of my poor credit, which
(I thank God) has hitherto passed clear and unspotted in matters of greater
importance and difficulty, then is like to fall out in this between you and
me.

Articles set down by the Comitties The Comitties.
Master Alderman Heart. Master Alderman Spencer. M. Hoddesde^. May. Willyam
Burrowgh. May. Slany. M. Towerson. Ma. Stapers. Master Ihon Castelyn. May.
Leake.

appointed in the behalf of the Company of Moscouian Marchaunts, to confer
with Master Carleill, upon his intended discoueries and attempt into the
hethermost parties of America.
FIrst, the Committies are well persuaded that the Country whereunto this
action pretends is very fruitful, Inhabited with sauedge people of a middle
and tractable disposition. And that of all other places which are unfrequented
at this day, it is the only most fittest and most commodious for us to
entermeddle withal.

The conuenientest manner of attemptyng this enterprise, is thought to be thus:
That there should be one hundred men conveyed thither to remain there one
whole year: who with freendly entreatie of the people, may enter into better
knowledge of the particular estate of the Country, and thereby gather what
Commodity may be hereafter or presently looked for.

The charge to transporte these hundred men, to victual them, and to furnishe
them of Munition and other needful things, will not be less then four
thousand pounds: whereof has been very readily offered by the City of
Bristoll one thousand pounds, the reside we being three thousand pounds,
remains to be furnished by this City of London: or any others who will
adventure their money in this first preparation.

The Comitties think it convenient that a Priussedge should be procured by
Master Carleill from her Majesty, by virtue whereof these Conditions and
Articles followyng, may be effectually provided for.

First, that they who shall disburce their money for the first preparation,
shall be named Adventurers, and shall have the one half of all such Lands,
Territories, Towns, Mines of gold and silver, and other Mettalles whatsoever
that shall be found, gotten, obtained, and conquered by this discovery:
yeeldyng to her Majesty one fifth part of all their part gold and silver, as
shall happen to be had out of any Mines that so shall be found.

That those parties which do employe themselves personally in the present
discovery, shall be named Enterprisers, and shall have the other half of all
the Lands, Territories, Towns, Mines of gold and silver, and other
Mettalles, yeeldyng to her Majesty the fifth part of the gold and silver, as
the Adventurers do: The same to be distributed by the General, with the
consent of the greatest part of twelve discreet persons to be chosen out of
the whole number of Enterprisers.

Also, that all trade of Marchaundize which shall be used to and from those
parts, which by this discovery shall be found out, shall appertain only
to the Adventures which first shall disburce their money for this discovery,
with prohibition to all other her Majesty's Subjects and other Merchants to
deal in the said parts, without the consent of the first Adventurers, upon
loss of Ship and goods, and punishment of their persons, that so shall
adventure in trade of Marchaundize: or otherwise by imprisonment at the
Companies pleasure.

That no person shall hereafter adventure in this discovery, as Adventurers
for the profits mentioned in the first Article, but such only as do
disburce their money in this first preparation: and they shall not adventure
hereafter any greater sum then ratablie according to their proportion of this
their first adventure.

Also, the profit which by this discovery shall be attained unto, either by
land which may be conquered, or otherwise gotten: as also such profit
which by this discovery shall be obtained by Mines, or otherwise gotten, that
each one shall have his part rate and rate like: according to the proportion
of their first adventure, and not otherwise.

The Adventurers in this first preparation, shall at their own free will and
liberty, choose whether they will supply hereafter any further charge or not:
if there do fall out any such occasion to require the same. And yet withal
shall for ever hold to them the freedom of the trade which shall grow in
any of these parts. Notwithstanding their said refusal to bear any further
charge.

That in the Patent which is to be obtained, be granted that all her
Majesty's subjects, may transporte themselves thither that shall be contented
to go. And that the patented or his assigns may ship thither from time to
time, so many and such persons, men, women and children, as they shall think
meet. And the same persons to inhabit or remain there at their pleasure, any
law to the contrary notwithstanding, with express prohibition as is mentioned
in the third Article, against all others which shall go thither without the
license of the patented or his assigns first obtained.

That it shall not be lawful for any of her Majesty's subsectes, or any other
to enhabite or traffic within two hundred Leagues any way of the place,
where the General shall have settled his cheifest being or residence.

FINIS.

