A GODLY AND FRVTEFVLL SERMON, MADE ^t Maydstone in the county of Kent the
first sunday in Lent, in the presence of the most Reverend father in God
THOMAS Archbishop of Canterbury. etc. by M. Thomas Cole scholemayster there,
against diverse erroneous opinions of the Anabaptists and others.

LONDINI, ANNO DOMINI. M. D. LIII.

A SERMON MADE AT MAYDSTONE THE FYRT sunday in Lent, the year of our Lord,
1552. in the presence of the most reave rend father in God, Thomas Archby^shop
of Canterbury. etc. by M. Thomas Cole schoolemaister there, against diverse
errors of the Anabaptists and such sects where soever they be, as in
christen religion call them selves Brothers and Systers, and dyuide them
selves from other christian people.
Audite coeli, percipe auribus tuis o terra, quonia^ Dominus loquutus est
WHo does not marvel or count it a thing very strange, that a mortal man,
of the generation of Adam, conceived in sin, borne in wyckednes, bring no
creator, but a creature, yea dust and ashes, should so boldly speak unto al
states and degrees of men, commanding them to hear. Some peradventure do not
only marvel, but accuse the Prophet, that he should say being but a man,
Audite, quoniam Dominus loquutus est. But dear christians, meruail not,
neither charge you gods elect prophet with any euel, or breach of civility,
least happily in faultyng them, whom god sends unto you with the word of
reconciliation, ye procure to your selves the same rebuke, which our Savior
Christ gave to the catchyng Phariseis, namelye,

Quare vos malum cogitatis in cordibus vestris? For although Esaias spoke words
Math, 9. Marc. 2. Luc. 9.
of commandyng and of auctoritye, yet he spoke them not of him self, neither
in his own name, but in the name of the living god, which called him to be
his prophet, and made him a messaunger unto the people, to call them to the
obedience of the faith. Seeing therefore, that almighty God, the lord of all
creatures sent him to speak unto the^, he gave him power to say, Audite: and
seeing he sent him not to speak his own words, but the words of God, he also
gave him power to say, Quoniam Dominus loquutus est. For as the pen is the
instrument, that forms the lettre, whereby the mind of the writer does
appear unto them that read it, not through the pen only, but by the writer
that uses the pen: even so the prophet Esaias, and al they that have ye
ministry of the word of god, are but the instruments which god uses according
to his godly pleasure, to make his will to be known unto the hearers: Which
comes not of themselves, but of god, which speaks in them. David not
forgetting that he Psalm. 45
was the instrument of god, although called to the dignity of a prophet,
unable of himself to set forth the inestimable riches of Gods wisdom, without
the aid of his holy spirit, said Lingua mea calam us scribae, velociter
scribentis. S. Paul well remembering that y^ ministratio^ of ye word was
honorable, whereof God had made him a chose^ instrument, and on the other side,
not forgetful how little he had deserved at ye lords hands such a promocion,
when he heard ye people of Corinth fallen into such a phrenetical contention,
yt they would (as me^ do now a days) either commend or loathe ye word for the
instrument sake, because he would not have the^ to regard his person, but
almighty God yt spoke in him: Therefore to declare him self to be but an
instrument to set forth y^ glory of God, he said: Quid igitur est Paulus? Quis
^utem 1 Cor. ^*
Apollo? nisi ministri per quos credidistis, et ut cuique dominus dedit, Ego
plantaui, Apollo r^gauit, sed Deus deditincrementu^. Itaque neque qui plantat
est aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed qui dat incrementum Deus. Esaias upon like
consideracio^ entendinge to draw the Israelites from the deceauable affections
of flesh and blood unto the worthy receiuyng and reverent embrasyng of the
word of life, that they should not think on the person, but on the Lord that
spoke in him, said: Audite coeli, percipe auribus tuis o terra, quoniam
Dominus loquutus est. The like mind ought to be at this day in all them that
either preach or hear the word of the Lord, that the preachers may
acknowledge themselves to be but instruments, and the hearers to seek nothing
in them, but god, speaking in them the words of eternal life. Now therefore
that almighty God speaks by his instruments, the true preachers of his word,
through the operation of his holy spirit, which in times past spoke immediately
from himself, by the patriarchs and prophets to the world: Let us give ear
with diligence that we may understand his heavenly mind, and beware that we
despise not, neglect and abandon this high treasure of the wisdom of god, the
word of faith, although it seem to come from a base and poor instrument, but
heartily receive it, joyfully accept it, obediently follow it, and faithfully
persist in it to the end, that the may reap with great comfort thie promise
of God, Qui perseue^ auerit vsque in finem, hic saluus erit. For Math. 24. Mat.
^^.
without doubt god wylleth his word spoken by those who^ he choseth to this
sacred function, to be received with like worthynes and estimacion, even as
though he spoke it him self. And therefore he says: Qui uos audit, me Luc. 10.
Joan. 14. Marc. 6. Math. 10.
audit. qui uos spernit me spernit. As the mouth of the kings ambassador is
(for the time he speaks the words of the king) the very mouth of the
king, so the mouth of the preacher, speaking syncerely the word of God, is
ye mouth of god for the time he preaches. And therefore the Prophets wha^ they
had spoken to the people, unto whom they were sent, the mind and word of God,
they for the most part concluded their matters with these words, saying:
Quoniam os Esa. 1.
Domini loquutum est. Wherefore as they that despise the kings emdassadour,
little regard or esteem the king. so likewise they that despise the true
preachers of the word of god as much as in them lies, despise god. Now derely
beloved christians, although Esaias speaks not unto you, but a synful man, one
unworthy to bear Esayes books after him, either for the dexterity of life
that was in him, either for the deep knowledge in the mysteries of God, yet
because it has pleased our heavenly father to call me at this time to this
place, truly without couloure to speak his truth, and nothing but his truth,
I shall defyre you in the name of God to dee dylygent hearers.

Wherefore hopyng to have you like attentive now, as the true worshippers of
God were in Esayes time, I use the same introduction to my matter as Esaias did,
saiynge unto you, as he did unto them: Audite coeli, percipe auribus tuis o
terra, quonia^ Dominus loquutus est: Hear O heavens, harke^ O earth* hear ye
that be rich, and ye that be poor: ye that be honorable, and ye that be
miserable: ye both good and badde, Audite, Audite. But peradventure so me man
museth what I do mean, thus earnestly to will you to hear, declaryng nothing
what you should hear, Cum audire non possitis sine predicante: If here were no man to speak unto, then Romans 10
although I should say audite, yet might I chose whether I would speak further,
because it is written, Auditus vbi non est, non effundas Eccl. 32
sermonem. I can make no such excuse, seeing here is so goodly an audience, so
learned an auditory, so diligently bent to hear that that shall be spoken, but am
compelled for conscience sake to speak that that the lord wylleth to be spoken
by me: (wherefore) as it is written Qui habet aures ad audiendum, audiat. Speak
on therefore, what would you that we should Mar. 4.
hear? Verily ye shall hear the wholesome, comfortable and sweet exhortacion,
yea rather the humble supplicacion that the holy Apostle S. Paul made unto the
Corinthia^s But I would not have you to hear for your belies sake, or to
satisfy the wanton lusts of your flesh, as did the Epicures: neither to
tryppe the preachers in their words, as did the Phariseis or cursed Herodians:
least the Seeing plage, I would say, the Sin plage of. Aegypte fall upon you,
as it did upon them for their so wylfulle enterprise: Auditu audietis and non
intelligebitis, and vide^tes Math. 13. Esa. 6. Marc. 4. Act. 18.
uidebitis, and non uidebitis. But I would wyshe you so to hear, that ye might
learn. so to attend, that ye might comprehend your duty toward our merciful
god. To this end do they hear that are either wise, or religious: As Solomon
witnesses: Auris sapientu^ Pro. 18.
quaerit doctrinam, non calumnia^, as those that be indiscreet do, to who^ to
speak of knowledge it avails not, because they refuse to be learned therein:
unto whom Salomo^ forbids to speak, saying: In auribus insipientiu^ ne
loquaris, despicient enim doctrina^ eloquij tui. hopyng Pro. 23.
therefore that ye seek to know with the wise, and not to carp with the folish,
that ye seek to learn and not to lurch, to savor the truth, and not to snare
them y^ seek the prosperity of your souls. I am bold at this instant through
the permission of god, to open my mouth in the truth. Being well assured, yt
if ye disceaue me herein, yet can you not deceive the lord who sees clearly
in the darkness, Genesis 11. and 17. Psalm. 7. Apo. 2.
who knows the very secrets of all men's hertes, unto whom no thing is hyd,
but known, as it is written: ^mnia nuda sunt illius oculis, de quo agimus, who
can not be begiled, Psalm. 93.
because he made man, and all that is in man. As the prophet says, Shall not
he that made the ear, hear, or he that made the eye, shall not he see, and he
that made the heart shall not he understand and know? yea verily. Wherefore
without all hypocrisy bow your ears to the Lord, and obediently learn to
serve him, that your soul may live. As the Lord him self says: Aurem
uestram inclinate, Esa. 55.
and uenite ad me, audite, and uiuet anima uestra. To this end saint Paul
made this supplication unto the Corinthia^s, that they might live. Therefore to
declare how careful he was over their life, and fearful lest through their
own folly they should fall to death, he said.

Quin adiuuantes obsecramus, ne in uacuum 2, Cor. 6.
gratia^ dei receperitis. Dicit enim, in te^pore accepto exaudiuite, and in die
salutis su^curri tibi. Ecce nunc tempus acceptum, ecce nunc dies salutis. Ne
quam demus offensionem, ne reprehendatur ministerium nostrum, sed in omnibus
commendemus nos^psos vt Dei ministri, etc.

After this humble and lovely manner, did saint Paul exhort the Corinthians,
which were citisyns of the head city of Achaia, of whom they had their names,
and were called Corinthians, wyllyng them, as a tender father does his beloved
chyldern, that they should not receive the abundant grace of god, mynystred unto
them by his preaching, in vain. Wherefore he says, We as helpers exhort Romans
11. 1. Cor. 8. Ephesians. 1. 2. Cor. 3. Apoc. 17.
you. not that he meant by those words, to help god, which needs not the
help of men, because he is a perfect God, holy, just and good, unto whom
nothing can be added nor any thing diminished, but that he help the
Corinthians in this that he slacked not the ministration of the word toward
them, neither behaved him self unfaithfully toward God, by whom he was chosen
to be an instrumente to bear his name unto the Gentiles. No neither unkindly
toward the Corinthians, whom he had converted unto the truth from their
gentilitie and ungodliness. For as it appears by ancient and godly writers,
he lived among the Corinthians one hole year and six months: in the which he
labored with all diligent preaching, to bring them from all lettes that
hyndered Christ's religion, unto the obedience of the faith, wherewith, before
his coming, they were not a little infected.

What mischief was there to be seen among any people, that could not be both
seen and found among the Corinthians before his prechyng? Were they not devout
ydolaters, execrable blasphemers, unmerciful oppressers, violent exactours,
beastly aduoutters, full of envy, pride, dronkennes, gluttonye, strife,
sedition and unspeakable villanye against God and his dear son Jesus Christ?
Did they not through ignorance, the chief enemy to knowledge, abuse all the
good gifts of god? But the Lord entendyng to set forth mercy toward them,
like as he has done to all the hole world, did move saint Paul by his holy
spirit to go preach unto them the glad tidings of salvation, and call them
to repentance, that they might by grace through faith in Jesus Christ, obtein
the crown of immortality and everlasting life. which thing, when he lived
familiarly among them, thorough the spirit of grace in preaching, he
performed. Wherefore by true preaching he laid a sure foundation among them,
vt sapiens archytectus, 1. Cor. 3.
namely the Lord Jesus, y^ they being buylt upon him, might grow to an holy
temple in the Lord. Howbeit the dyuel, the ancient enmy of God, endeuouryng to
destroy that that God works, labouryng to euert that that God buyldeth, and
to root up that that God planteth, because he may not abide the creatures of
God to turn from sin, and faythefully to serve their God. Therefore soon
after saynct Paul's departure from Corynth, the dyuell (woorkyng in the
children of unbelief) styrred the Corinthians to their old vomit again, that
they might peryshe. And to bring this matter to pass, he labored to cause the
heathen people that had concurse thither, not only by their heathenyshe
manners, to corrupt the people, but also thorough false Apostles, to bring
them from the truth to paganry, from the gospel to the law, from the
righteousness of Christ, to their own ryghtuousnes, and from the true
worshyppynge of god, to adore their own invention, that the knowledge of God
might clean be rooted out among the people, Saynct Paul being moved with
godly zeal over them, and loathe to see them desolate, whom god of his fre
mercy for Christ's sake, through his preching had converted unto the truth,
although he had moved them with one epistle to beware of such deceyuers, yet
ceased he not with an other (signifyeng his carefulnes) to exhort them that
they should not receive the grace of god in vayn, neither sin against so
merciful a God. Is there any thing that may deserve more commendation,
thanne in the time of punysshemente, to forgive? and when sentence of death is
pronounced, to pardon? This did our heavenly father for them, and not for them
alone, but also for us, sendyng his dear and only begotten son to be a
raunsom for our sins, in whom all that believe, have remission of their sin,
and life everlasting. He alone is our Redemption and Justification. In him only
are our sin purged and done Romans 4. Romans 5. 1. Joan. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Tim. 2.
Tit. 3. Gal. 3. Ephesians. 2.
away. He is our reconciliation and mercy seat in whom God is pacified toward
us, contented toward us, agreed with us to take us for his sons. Therefore
it is written, Christus pax nostra: And again, Abluti sumus, sanctificati sumus,
iustificati sumus per nome^ Jesus Christi, and 1. Cor. ^. Ephesians. 1.
per spiritu^ dei nostri: Per quem habemus redemptionem, per sanguinem ipsius,
remissione^ peccatorum, de qua ubertim nobis impartiuit, in omni sapientia and
prudentia, patefacto nobis arcano voluntatis suae iuxta beneplacitum suum, quod
proposuerat in seipso etc. This word of reconciliation did saint Paul unto
the Corinthians, whereby the grace of god was manifested unto them in Christ
Jesus, for the remission of their sins, willing them not to be unthankful
receyuers thereof, neither such as by fauourynge their old sins, should
neglect the benefit of their salvation, but bring forth fruit agreeable to the
same gospel, which he had so long time preached among them, and not to give
ear to the subtle sophistry of the deceauer. For well knew saint Paul the
damnable policy of the dyuell, that he cared not though the word were much
preached, so that he might bring to pass to destroy in the people the fruits
of the gospel. Wherefore he exhorted them, not to receive the grace of God in
vain, but to be faithful folowers of Christ, and live after the gospel.
Because the grace of God Tit. 2.
has apeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldely lust, and to live
justly, sobrely, and rightuously in this present world, lookyng for that
blessed hope and apearyng of our Lord Jesus etc. But have not we as much need
at this time to learn this lesson as had the Corinthians? Has not almighty
god showed as much mercy unto us as he did unto them, or rather more? God
sent to the Corinthians one preacher to convert them to the truth: God has
sent to us many. The word was preached by one whole year and a half to the
Corinthians: It has been preached many years unto us. God taught the
Corinthians the true worshippyng of god, he also has taught us to worship god
truly. God removed from the Corinthians by sincere preaching, that which
hyndred godly religion: The same God has also removed from us that that
hyndered godly religion. But as the goodness of God has been more abundant to
us than to the Corinthians, so have our sins far exceded the sins of the
Corinthians: whereby if Paul seared that they would take the grace of God in
vain, much more it is to be seared that we receive it not in vayn. For the
same dyuell that labored to make the Corinthians enemies to grace, at this day
ceasseth not to make us the same, as saynet Peter says: Diabolus aduersarius
noster tanq^leo 2. Pet. 5.
rugiens circuit, quaerens quem deuoret: He is not ydell, but still labors
to root out of man's heart the fear of god and knowledge of the truth, that
they might follow him like captives, snared in the bands of darkness to
pardicion: For as saint John says, Diabolus peccat ab initio, and therefore
studyeth 1. Joan. 3.
to make all men to have pleasure in syn, that they might enjoy his
inheritance, the lake that burns with fire and brymstone. As God has
pleasure in life, so has he pleasure in murderyng and kyllyng the souls of
me^. Not without cause therefore has our savior Christ thus spoken of him:
Diabolus homicida erat ab initio, and in veritate non stetit, quia non est
veritas in eo. By errors Joan. 8.
therefore and false suggestions he goth about to make men always disobedient
and unfaithful against god. To atchiue this his detestable purpose, he puts
into their hearts strong delusions, that they should believe lies, and attempt
things worthy of condemnacion. As he did into Judas heart, as says S. John:
Diabolus immisit in cor Iudae Joan. 13
ve proderet Christum. Many ways the devil did seek to bring the Corinthians
into gods displeasure, after they had received the gospel, but chiefly either
in corrupting themselves with a conversation most contrary to their
profession, either by steryng them by false apostels In Iudaismum, ut
exciderent a gratia. Gala. 5.
Even so he does labor diversely and many ways to bring us into Gods
displeasure, but principally by two ways, wherein he spe^deth no small labor
in these days, not altogyther without bringing his cursed purpose to pass.
The One way is by speaking well, and living abhominably: the other is by living
well (as far forth as men can judge) and speaking evil, that is, teaching or
maintaynyng unsure doctrine. By one of these two ways the dyuell at this day
deceives the souls of men. If the one serves not, he does attempt with the
other. To speak well and live carnally, it displeases him very little: but to
live well, that is not for the dyuels diet: nothing is so contrary to his
pestilent tooth, it is to hot for him to swalow up such a morsel, unless he
play the cook, and take in hand to season the matter himself. That that is
most difficyle to bring to pass, that does the dyuell first enterprise, most
hardlye assault, most busely seeks to conquer, and being conqueror thereof,
more reioyseth than over that y^ is but small maistery to win. The dyuell
does think it easyer to continue an hundredth well speakers in a fylthy
conversation, than to overcome one man that exercises himself in virtue and
godliness. First therefore he byddeth battle to the virtuous man, as to his
most adversary, whose castle he knows to be so strong and vnsaultable,
that without diligent beatynge of his devilish wits, he can by no means win
it. Strong is that munition whose walls are brass, but stronger is that
soul whose wall is the word of God: invincible is that forte, whose rampyres
are strongly couched to the walls, and of great quantitye, but more invincible
is that soul, whose faith is suerly lynked to the word of God, and in great
quantity expresses the fruits thereof through undefiled charity. yet is there
no bastylion so strong, but by some means it may be overcome. For that that
force often mysseth, that doothe prodition bring to pass: and that that can
not be done by other, is often through policy down by our selves. Of this
the subtyle Satanas is not ignoraunte, whose practice it has been from the
beginnynge against man's soul, and will be (I fear me) unto the end. We
have exaumple in Scripture, that sum time by force of other he caused men
to sin, and sometime he provoked theymselues to be cause of their own
myschief.

Whylest Moses was in the Mount with God, the dyuell knew that the
gouernmente of the people hanged upon Aarons shoulders, wherefore thoroughe
the ignorance of God, he styrred up the hearts of the Israelytes, to cause
Aaron to make them a molten Calfe after Exo. 32
the manner of Egypt. Thus by force he caused Aaron to be their image maker,
contrary to Gods will.

But where this feate serves not, he occupies the other, namelye to make men
betraye them selves. What needs me to rehearse the good King Ezechias,
whom the dyuell so myghtilye assaulted 4 Reg. 30.
through his cruel instruments, the capitayn of Sennacherib king of Assyria,
tempting him with outrageous blasphemy against god, to give over his heart with
the people through incredulitye, into the hands of the king of Assyria? Yet
could not the dyuell by these his ministers overcome good Ezechias but the more
they proudly bragged, the more 4 Reg. 20,
Ezechias humbled himself. The more they called to the people, fearyng them
with the name of the king of Assyria, with his gestes and marciall feats to
turn their hearts from their king (that king and people may fall into his
hand) so much the more good king Ezechias called unto God in fervent prayer,
to be defended from Gods enemy, and the enemy of his people, the king of
Assyria. And god of his free mercy heard his prayer, strengthened the peoples
hearts, and delivered Jerusalem from the spoil. O victory of Faith. Satan
therefore perceiving that by this ways he could not prevail against Ezechias,
whose munition was so strong, through Jesus Christ, he went an other way to
work, namely by prodicion to cause him to betray himself, that he might by
some mean cause him to offend. After that god had given him peace, and destroyed
the host of Assyria, the king of Babylon sent 2 Par. 22,
guiftes to Ezechias. The dyuell therwithall made him to forget his humility,
and thrust into his heart opinion of himself, whereby he did not only
rejoice that so famous a king should seek friendship at his hands by guiftes,
but also to ostentate his riches and power, he showed the messangers his
treasure house, for the which the Prophet was sent to rebuke him: and he
repented. This has been his fetch of old (as we here se) and this does he
practice now at this day, against those that couette to lead a virtuous
life, whose fall is his only joy, because he is a deuourer. Therefore where he
perceyueth any that have pleasure in godlynes, and to walk in the orcharde of
Gods eternal word, by whose pleasant savors their souls might be
consolated, to infect those is his whole industrye, which he can by no means
do, but by making them receive the grace of God in vain. Seeing then that
he can not corrupt them with gross sins, which through custom and exercise
of virtue do continually watch that they may escape them, he desires to
corrupt them therein, wherein they lest suspect to fall, namely in doctrine, and
that because he sees them greedy of knowledge, and of the sweet savor of the
truth.

Therefore he gathers together a great heap of noisome flowers, which are
beautiful to the eye, and seem for their gloss and color to have grown in
the orcharde of the Lord, yet is their styncke deathly and pestiferous to
them, that obstinately delight in their sauoure, and declares them not to be
of the orchyarde of God, but of the contagious palude of hell. Those he
straweth before the godly liver, that by their ill savor he may be an evil
speaker, and so receive the grace of God in vain. For as good savor is
comfortable to the body, and a preserver of his health, so is sound doctrine
the preservative of the soul. As it is written: Verba quae ego loquor,
spiritus and vita sunt. Ioh. 6,
But as nothing soever corrupts the body, than stynkyng savor and impure
air: so nothing soever kylleth the soul, than impure doctrine. As it is
written: Erratis, quia nescitis scripturas. Seeing that the Math. 22
dyuell straweth such flowers before good lyners, prouokyng them by their
couloure to poison them self with their savor, charity wills that ye
declare them, least happelye any man through ignorance should smell there
unto, and so receive the grace of God in vain. Give ear therefore, and ye
shall perceive these flattering flowers of the dyuell wherewith he labors to
deceyne, and beeware of them.

First, That all men be so saved, that none at length shall be dampened.

This flower seems to have a goodlye color, and the dyuell by the deceitful
beautye thereof, entiseth some to put it to their nose, that with smellyng
thereto, their souls might be filled with blyndnes and error. For it seems to
be buylt upon the mercy of God, but so, that utterly it destroys his justice,
breeds in manne a false security, clean rooteth out of his heart the
fear of God and obedience to his word: wherefore it is as Cycute, and
mortifyeth the soul. For although God be merciful (as he is in deed) by
the which he wylleth Eze. 18.
not the death of a sinner, Sed magis vt viuat and conuertatur, yet is he also
just, by the which he condemns the unbelievers and impenitente. Therefore
it is written: Eccl. 5. Eccl. 19 Ge. 6 and 19 Nume, 14*


Ne dica^, Miseratio Domini magna est, multitudis peccatorum meorum
miserabitur. Misericordia and ira abillo cito proximant, and in peccatores
respicit ira illius: Non tardes conuerti ad Dominu^, and ne differas de die in
diem. Subito eni^ venitira illius, and in die vindictae disperdet etc. The
word of God therefore does declare God to be both just and merciful, and
that his mercy destroys not his justice, neither his justice diminishes his
mercy. For he has declared in his word their lymites and bounds in such
sort, that we may assure our selves either of salvation or of condemnacion.

Notwithstanding that his Mercy reaches unto the heavens, and is over of all
his works, yet are none thereof partakers, but those in whom Christ dwells
by lively faith, as S. Paul writes: Christus Jesus in vobis est, ni reprobi
estis. 2 Cor. 23:
And again: Iustus ex fide uiuit. To the faithful Rem, 1,
therefore God has, for Christ's sake, promised mercy, which are penitente
and convert unto the Lord, but the unfaithful and impenitent that dye in
their ^ol
sins, shall be confounded and perish: Quoniam nouit Dominus viam iustorum,
and iter impiorum peribit. As the unbelievers and impenitent Psalm, 1
therefore have promised to them M
judgment, so to the faithful and penytent, God, for Christ's sake only,
has promised mercy, and will not enter into judgment with them, because
they be grafted in Christ, upon whom Saint Paul says, there is no
condemnacion. Life everlasting is the guyfte of Godde thoroughe Christ, and
it belongs to true christians, which unfeignedly believe in Christ, whereof
they may be glad: But eternal death is the inheritance of the
unbelievers, whom Godde will cut of from his face with the swearde of
Justice, that they shall be destroyed. as David says.

Exurgat Deus and dissipentur inimici eius, and Psalm, 67,
fugiant qui oderunt eum, a facie eius. Sicut deficit fumus, deficiant: sicut
fluit cera a facie ignis, sic pereant peccatores a facie Dei. Et iusti
epulentur, exultent in conspectu dei, and delectentur in laetitia. etc. Our
savior Christ ente^ding to set before the peoples eyes the limits of his
mercy, and bounds of his justice, y^ they might certify them of whether they
were partakers, not withstandyng the universal preching of his most blessed
word, said: Euntes in mundu^ Mar. 16.
vniuersum, praedicate euangelium omni creaturae: Qui crediderit and baptizatus
fuerit, hic saluue erit: qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. These are the
limits that Christ has set to his mercy and judgment, which are most
certain, of the which every man shall taste, according to his deeds, as saint
Paul says: Hijs quidem qui secundum patientiam boni operis, gloriam and
honorem and incorruptione^ quaerentibus, Romans 1.
uitam aeternam: hijs qui sunt ex contentione, and qui non acquiescunt
ueritati, credunt autem iniquitati, ira and indignatio, tribulatio and
angustia, in omnem animam hominis perpetrantis malum, Iudaei primum and Graeci.
If therefore gods mercy toward all men in Jesus Christ, saves none but
the true beleuers, and that for Christ's sake, as it is most certain: and in
the contrary part, gods judgment condemns none but the unbelievers, Heb. 3.
Heb. 6.
that dye without repentance, as that is not to be doubted: Therefore it is a
stynkynge flower most pestilent to say, that he will save al, for the scripture
does certify us, that some dyed impenitently in their unbelief, for the 2 Genesis
4. Iudic. 1^. Reg. 31. 4. Reg, 19, Genesis 19. Number. 16.
which cause they were condemned: as Cain, Saul, Sennacheryb, the Sodomites, and
the cursed congregation of Corath and Abyron, which went quycke down into
bell, with other mo, of whom we read in the old testament. Also in the new
Testamente we read of Judas the lost son, with many other. Act. 1.
If some therefore are all ready condemned, then abominable is this error,
that at length all men shall be saved. O pernicious heresy so far against god
and his holy testament, through who^ unbelieving Cayn is promoted to salvation
as well as faithful Abell: and cursed Judas as well as blessed Peter, contrary
to the purpose of God, declared in his word. O subtle devil, that with the
stynke of this deathly flower poysonnest man's soul with vain hope and
hellyshe security, clean peruertynge him from the truth, that he should
receive the grace of god in vain. For surely as God has expressed his
justice from the beginning upon the unbelieving, and his mercy upon the
faithful, so will he do to the end and conclusion of the world. As when he
comes to judgment, it shall apeare. For than will he separate the lambs
from the goats, the one on his right hand, to life, and the other on his
left hand, to death. Beati igitur qui Apoc. 22.
servant mandata illius, ut sit potestas little in ligno vitae: foris auteni
canes ve nefici, homicidae and impudici and idolis seruientes, and omnis qui
amat mendatiu^. For the time shall come, that the faithful shall hear this
sweet voice, Venite benedicti patris mei, in regnu^ preparatu^ Math. 25.
pro uobis ab initio. And the unfaithful shall hear, A bite in ignem aeternum
etc. ergo non omnes saluentur.

But if this flower will not serve, than he brings an other of no less
poison than this was, wherwithall he would persuade by a common order, that none
shall be saved. And this is his flower.

That there is no predestination of God: O deceauable dyuel, that leuest no
stone vnrolled to drown men in to perdytion. By this co^tagious flower, he
laboreth to make men deny the holy Predestination of God, and their election in
Jesus Christ, in whom the faythefull are sealed to eternal life. That in
denyenge thereof, he might wype out of their soul the comfort of their
Iustyfycation, and gloryfycation, the effects of the Predestynation of God,
the which Saynet Paul so strongely confyrmethe unto the Romans, saying:
Scimus autem quod hijs qui diligunt deum, omnia cooperantur in bonum, nimiru^
hos qui iuxta propositu^ vocati sunt etc. Romans 8.
Porro quos praedestinauit, eosdem and vocauit: and quos uocauit, cos and
iustificauit: quos autem iustificauit, eos and glorificauit. Thus we see, that
the effects of predestination, is justification and glorification: the which
if the devil could make us to deny, he would soon make us renounce our
justification: if he could make us renounce our justification, then would he
easyly persuade us that there were no Christ, or that he died in vain. If he
could cause us to deny Christ, or to think that he died in vain, then would
he destroy the faith: if no man had faith, that none should be saved: Qui non
crediderit, condemnabitur. Take heed Marc. 16.
therefore that no man smell to this dangerous flower, least he err against
the truth, and deny that which is confirmed by the truth. For saint Paul
confirmynge our election and predestination in Jesus Christ gave hearty thanks
to god for it, as for the sweet conserve of the soul, and principal medicine
to them that by faith clean to Gods promise made in Christ, saying:
Benedictus deus et pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui benedixit nos i^ omni
benedictio^e spirituali Ephesians. 1.
in coelestibus i^ Christo: sicut elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem,
ut essemus sancti and immaculati in conspectu eius in charitate. Qui
praedestinauit nos in adoptionem filioru^ per^^sum Christum etc. If there had been no predestination, then would not S. Paul have given thanks to God for it.
But out of doubt there is a predestynation, the which is certain in God,
although it be uncertain in us, and none otherwise known, but in that we feel
the spirit of grace workyng faith and obedience in our hearts unto the word of
god: and that is the true token whereby the spirit of god certifieth our
spirits, that we at the elect sons of God. Let no man therefore rashely
judge of gods holy predestination, but let every man submyt his judgment to
the word of God, without curiosity, sekyng that end in predestination, which
sayncte Paul wylled the Ephesians to learn, namely Elegit nos in ipso ut sancti
essemus and immaculati in conspectu eius in charitate, That felyng this mind
and desire in them selves, they may rejoice in their election, and give
thaiskes with saint Paul. Who so ever than there be, that is faithful, and
coueteth rightly to understand predestination, let him attend upon Christ,
that he may find him self in him, without whom there can be found no worthy
toke^ of Predestination. and beware that no man be so blind, that he should
deny the predestination of God, for so should he declare him self to be
infected with this stynkyng flower of the dyuell.

Now as it is a wicked error to deny the Predestination of God, and our
election in Christ, and a flower not to be found among christen men, so it is a
most damnable heresy, and an execrable flower of hell, wherein may be smelled
the poison blasphemy of the dyuell against the son of God Jesus Christ, to
affirm and hold that by predestination God is the author of syn, where as we
may learn in scripture, that the holy Predestination of God never passes, but
always continues within the bounds of Godlynes and ryghteousnes: where by
all mighty God at no time moves any man to sin: Vniuersae enim viae domini
misericordia and veritas. Saint James therefore to declare Jacob.
that God is not the author of sin, says that God tempts no man to evil.
Satan is the cause of sin, and sin the cause of our punyshemente, what
brings the wrath of God upon us, and makes his anger so fierce over us?
Syn. What is the cause that Gods truth takes no place in us, and that we
receive the grace of god in vain? Sin. Therefore it is written, In cor
maleuolu^, non introibit sapientia: nec habitabit ^ap. 1.
in corpore subdito peccatis. etc. Esai confirms the same, saying: Your
sins have separate you from god. Saint Paul also teachi^g the Romans,
wherewith God was and is displeased, said: Reuelatur ira Dei de Romans 1.
coelo super omnem iniustitiam and impietatem hominum. etc. If God be than
displeased at sin (as his word does declare him to be) than is he not the
author of syn, unless we should grant (as God forbid) that he is both a
mutable god or a dissembling God, which coueteth or allows that, which he
says by his word, he does hate. For he is the author of nothing but of that
which he aloweth. As he therefore is good only, and goodness it self, contrary
to all iniquity: so is he author of all godlynes and virtue, and no syn. For
this cause has he commanded us to flee from all syn, as from a serpent:
declaryng in his blessed testament, that they be blind, as concerning the
knowledge of god, yea strangers from al truth, that say, they have fellowship
with the light, and yet walk in darkness. 1. Joan. 1.
Therefore he wills al men to absteyn from syn, whereof he is not the author,
but the hater: not the cause, but aue^ger: and with a lively faith to withstand
the devil, the author and only Joan. 8.
cause of syn, as it is written: Diabolus mendax est, and pater eius. Away
therefore with this pestilent flower and creping pestilence in ye dark, whereby ye
devil busily seki^g our destruction, labors to persuade us litell to regard
the law of God, to neglecte our conscience, to eschew no evil, to follow all
mischief like unbridled horses: and that because God is displeased at no
sin, which is the author of all (as the dyuell teaches.) But let us
build our faith upon the word of god, sanctified and sealed with the blood of
Christ, whereby we are taught that God is holy, just and good, and the cause of
no sin, as it is written: Quoniam non Deus uolens iniquitate^ Psalm. 5.
tu es. Neque habitabit iuxta te malignus, neque permane bunt iniusti ante
oculos tuos. Odisti omnes qui operantur iniquitatem. etc. Therefore by
predestination god does not provoke or allure any man to sin, because he is
god, and plays not the part of the dyuel: but he has predestinate his
judgment, wherewith he will reward every man as he has done, either life or
death, unto whose predestination nothing appertains, but just condemnation to
the unbelievers, and undeserved mercy to the faithful. Christ came to take
away our sin, and there was no sin in him. As there was no sin in him, so
was there no sin of him: that that was not of him, was not his work: that
which was not in his work, was not in his predestination. a damnable flower of
the devils orchard.

But if this flower serve not, he has an other ready in store, the smell
whereof no less infecteth than the other. That is,

Christ died for his own sins as well as for the sins of the people.

How the devil has wrought by this flour, ye have an example before your
eyes, that ye may learn to eschew the savor of so perilous a flour. For the
poisonyng of this, ought to be to you a perpetual warnyng, to beware the
engines of the devil, that he at no time bewitch you to fall into such an error
so far against the truth. By this blind suggestio^ the dyuel goth to appeach
Christ's innocence, righteousness and death, and to make him an insufficient
Savior, whereby he might make us opynion, that the law were not satisfied for
us, neither yet God contented toward us. For God could not be pleased
toward us, until his law were satisfied. And the law could not be
satisfied, until one that had not transgressyd the law, should be propitiation
for their sins, that were condemned by the law. Seeing therefore that none
could be found of the sinful generation of Adam, that had not in Adam
transgressed the law, Omnes enim peccauerunt, simul Gala. 4. P^alm.
inutiles facti sunt, when the full time was come, God sent his son made of
a woman, Factum sub lege, vt eos qui sub lege Gal. ^.
erant, redimeret. which thing he could not do, if he had not been innocent
and without sin. Moses therefore to represente his innocence and purity
without syn, caused the children of Israel when they celebrated the passover,
which represented the sacrifice of Christ's body, to take a Lamb of one
year, without spotte, in token that Christ was without sin. To declare
therefore that he was the true Messiah, sent from God to satisfye the law, and
that by his innocencye, he with his own mouth, said: Princeps huius mundi ve
nit, and in me non habet (...)
quicquam. Esaias also says: Christus Iniquitatem non fecit, neque dolus
inuentus est in ore (...).
eius. Christ therefore being without sin, how could he dye for his own
sin? But the scripture teaches us, that he alone dyed for our sins, to
redeem us from sin, as it is written: Ipse vulneratus est propter
iniquitates Esa. 53.
nostras, and attritus propter scelera nostra. Away therefore with this
contagious flower, and receive the truth spoken by S. Paul to your great
comfort, who says Hebr.
Non habemus Pontificem qui non possit affici sensu infirmitatum nostraru^,
tentatum per omnia iuxta similitudinem absque peccato. O subtle dyuell, that
so canste enchaunte the minds of simple men, to make them so judge of the
immaculate lamb Jesus Christ. Whether causest thou the sheep of God to wandre
through thy entysyng flowers, out of the sweet pasture of Gods verity?

But now that he sees his enterprise so shameless and wylfull, yea and open
to all men's eyes that it is espied, he passes from the boddye of Christ,
and blasphemeth his holly Spirit.

Therefore he shows manne an other flower, where thoroughe he would have
his foul perish. Which flower is this.

That a man having the spirit of God, may have his neighbors wife in
common.

This flower is so fyltbye and so blasphemous an error against God and his
hollye spyryte, that the abhominacion thereof abhorrynge the very law of
nature, so condempneth it, that it needs no farther confutacion. For what
other thing means the dyuell by this flower, but to make whooredome and all
such abhominacions to be fruits of Gods spirit? Where as Saint Paul does
prove to the Galathians, that godlynes is the fruit of Gods spirit. And
therefore he says: Fructus spiritus est charitas, gaudium, pax, Gala. ^.
lenitas, benignitas, bonitas, fides, mansuetudo: aduersus huiusmodi non est
lex.

Wherefore whooredome proceeds not of Gods spirit, but of the dyuell and
our flesh, of whom it is a work. whereof S. Paul has thus prophesied,
that who so commytteth therein, unless he repent, shall never be heir of the
kingdom of God.

Gods spyrite does not privilege annye manne to do that, which is
forbidden by the word of God: but to pollute their neighbors bed, is
forbidden by the word of God: therefore no man having the spirit of God, may
do any such abhominacion: For God has said: Non committes Mar. 10. Exo.
20.
adulterium. And again: Scortatores and adulteros iudicabit Deus. A wicked and
pernicious Heb. 13
heresye it is, lothesome to any christian cares, to hear any manne breathe
out the savor of so stynkyng a flower, which violateth not only the sacred
institution of Christ, because the Lord has said: Ambo erunt Heb. 13
vna Caro. Et, Honorabile connubium and thorus immaculatus. but also it
dispatcheth a side the will of God: which thing Gods spirit teaches no man
to do. For S Paul says: Haec est voluntas Dei, sanctificatio vestra, Tess. 4.
vt abstineatis a fornicatione. etc. Ergo to have thy neighbors wife, is
against Gods will, and forbidden the, if thou have the spirit of Christ. How
God hates the cursed sect of Nycolaitans, whose hearts were infected with the
savor of this pestilent flour, S. John does not hide, that we should eschew
Apoc ^
the plages that God brought upon them. Unspeakable is this heresye, and not
to be talked of any man, much less to be holden. I know none infected with
these aforesaid errors (these men except) but if there be any, God bring
them into the way of truth. But now if the devil can not persuade men to
commit whoredom by the spirit of God, whereby God in his wrath may take his
holy spirit from them, that they may perish, tha^ he takes an other shameful
flour, to detestable to be spoken, whereby he teaches men to affirm that,
which gods word flatly condemns: namely

That the inward manne synneth not, when the utter man synneth.

O pestilent flour, breding in man al beastlines, whereby his foot is in hell or
he be ware, For whilst he promises him self; life, through a vain hope, and
gives his members over to serve syn, he becomes the servant of sin, whose
reward is death. For ye outward man never sins unto death, although no good
thing dwells in it, but when the inward manne consents thereto. Therefore
the serpent entering by our flesh assaulteth the soul with wicked
temptacions, to make it obediente to the lusts of our flesh. Wherefore
although we have participate through Adames disobedience the poysonned nature
of the dyuell, which dwells in our flesh, and always byddeth battle
against our soul, yet the dyuell obtains not his pray, until the soul of
man (neglecting the grace of God) gives it self over with consence to serve
the wicked apperytes of the flesh. Sayncte Paul therefore willing manne to
continue Gods warryar against sin both in body and soul, cries to the
Romans: Let not sin Romans 6
raygne in your mortal boddyes, that ye should fulfill the lusts thereof.

When reigns it, but when the soul is be come the bond slave to the flesh?
which ought thoroughe the spyrite of grace, to reign and rule. Therefore
Sayncte Paul says: Look to whom ye give over your selves to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be sin unto death, or
righteousness unto life. To give over and obey what means it, but when through
grace we serve God in soul and body, or else serve the dyuell in soul and
body? David the prophet not infected with this flower, but knowing that the
body sinning, the soul could not be free, yea rather confessyng al mischief
to proceed from the inward man, ouercomme and obeying the dyuell, cried unto
the Lord, who only could help him: Cor mundum crea in me Deus, and Spiritum
Psalm. ^^
rectum innoua in visceribus meis. Which peticion he would never have made,
if he had thought, that the inner manne sinned not, when the outward manne
sinned. Why should the Prophet Joel have wylled the people of Israel to rent
their hearts and not their cloths, if he had thought, (as the dyuell would have
men think,) that the inward man sinned not? etc. But he believed that the
inward manne synneth with the outward, and needs to repent. Therefore he
cried: Scindite corda vestra, and non vestimenta Joel. 2.
vestra. Our Savior Christ to beface and destroy this perilous flour,
declarynge that the inward man synneth as well as the outward, said: Ex cord
exeunt cogitationes malae, homicidia, adulteria, fornicationes, surta, falsa
testimonia, blasphemiae, etc. Beware therefore of this flower.

Another flour the devil has in store, if this serves not to infect man's soul
withal, whereby he woold have him presume of him self, to do that which is not
in him self. This flour is a pestilent flower, wherewith the dyuell has in
time paste deceived many.

This flour is, that by free will, sprung of our own nature, we may believe the
gospel, and do all things pleasyng to God.

Or else he brings an other flour not unlike to ye same, whereby he would have
man to take Christ's office in hand, and to be Christ to him self, namely
(...) That by our fre will, we may save our souls.

These venomous flours of presu^ptio^ to be stinki^g wreds, Gods word does
prove, willing all men to beware of them, for as much as by them, sinful man
is set in the place of our righteous God, and may come to heaven, if this
were not an error, whether God will or no. Than the which what blasphemy
can be greater? To prove the first to be a very lie, Saint James takes
Jacob. 1
in hand, which says, That every good guyfte and perfect guyfte comes
from God the father of light. But faith is a good and perfect guifte, ergo it
comes of God: than man can not give him self faith. Also our Savior
Christ says: Sine me nihil ^oan.
potestis facere. that is, without me you can do nothing ergo we can not please
God of our selves. S. Paul confuteth the latter error and proves it to be
flat against the truth, sayi^g Gratia estis saluati per fidem, idque non ex
uobis, ^ph. 2
Deidonum est, no^ ex operibus, ne quis glorietur. Therefore we be not saved by
our own fre will. Christ has taken us from the vengeance to come, ergo not
our own free will. Christ Tess. 1
is our justification and redemption, ergo not our own free will. No man ca^
come to ye father but by Christ, therefore we can not be saved by our freewyll.
Saint Paul after he felt the comfort of his election in Jesus Christ by
faith, he did not say, Of mine own frewyll I am that I am: but he said, By
the grace of God I am that I am. Sure it is therefore, that we can not think
good nor do good, neither will good, nor work good, without the grace of God.
For as S. Paul says: God works both the will and the deed. Away than with
this filthy freewyll flower, which is able to do us no good (with out the grace
of God) but condemn us. and let us faithfully embrace our savior Christ, which
is our only savior, and none other: and by who^ we receive all good gifts, and
by none other: and by who^ we do al things pleasing to God, and by none other:
in whom god is pleased toward us, and by none other.

But if he can not prevail by this mean, he will seek an other, whereby he may
make man offend against God. And because nothing can sooner deceive manne than
that mischief, that has some color of goodness: therefore he tempts man to
make new inventions to himself, and mislyke all publik and common order:

Saying, that to invent orders in religion, and to mislyke al thing ye we
invent not our self, is not evil: or ye it is lauful to every man to make
peculiar orders to him self, in contempt of the common order. But the word of
God does not allow any man to contemn or mislike any public order, set forth
by his superiors authorized thereunto, which order is consonant to the word of
god, whether it be in ceremonies, or any thing apertainyng to godly religion,
and to use things invented by him self publicly. For this flower has in it
the making savor of self opinion, the which S. Paul wylleth to be absent
from christen men, saiynge: Be not wise therefore in your own conceits. Away
therefore with this flower, and receive the wholesome doctrine of S. Paul, Omnis
anima potestatibus sublimioribus Romans 13.
subdita sit, etc. Who soever therefore, either in ceremonies or godly religion,
does not conform him self to the common order; but mislykyng the common
order, choose ceremonies and doctrines of their own inventions, are authors
of sects.

I do not here count it unlawful, neither cause of division for any man to
use in his house any private order, for the tradynge up of his youth in virtue
and godliness, so that it be consonant to the word of God, and in no contempt
of the common order.

But if the devil can not cause men by his crafty illusyons, to condemn
things done by the superyour powers conuenable to the truth, and make
innouations contrary to the laws, than he labors to poison men with the
stinkyng flower of separation or segregation from other, as from wicked and
damned men, not worthy to communicate the sacraments, or to eat and drink
with them. This flower how far it dissenteth from the exaumple of Christ,
it easyly may be perceived to them, which with humble hearts read the word
of god. For Christ although he were the son of God, rightuous, holy, and
void of al sin, which of his justice could not but hate sin and
wyckednes, yet of his mercy he sought them that were all together
unrighteous, and did not separate him self from them. As well he entered into
the house of the Pharisey Math. 9. Luc. 14*
as into the house of the Publican, and eat as well with the one, as he did
with the other. Which thing if it had been unlawful for a true christian to
do, we should have had in him no such example But when he eat or drank with
them, or came into their company, he endeavored to bring them by charitable
persuasion to the obedience of faith, and to the unity of the spirit, from
their impiety and ungodliness. Because he came to save, and not to lose, as it
is written: The son of man came not into the world, to condemn ye world, but
that the world should have life by him. It is therefore laufull for any true
christian, to come into the company of the ungodly, so long as he follows the
example of Jesus Christ. Yea we ought to have y^ same mind in us, that was in
Christ Jesus, namely to seek to draw the ungodly from sin to virtue, from
corrupt manners to a godly conversation, and not utterly to condemn them as
cast awaies, in respect of our selves. A dangerous thing it is to take Gods
office in hand, or to judge this man or that man condemned without any
exception: Seeing it is to us uncertain who perishes in his syn. We must
therefore leave that to God. Clear he ought to be that should condemn an
other, least happily it be said to him, as was said to the Phariseis: Cast the
first stone. and so he go away ashamed. Therefore it is written, Judge not, lest
ye be judged. But it is forbidden by the word of God, that any christen man
should keep company with the ungodly to follow their ungodliness, or to
communicate with them in their sins: that did we not see in the Lord Jesus,
neither may a christian man do so without blame.

Example we have in Iosaphat, who was blamed of the Lord for going with wicked
Achab, and doing the same enterprise with him, which Achab was forbidden to
do. Solomon says, Si te lactauerint peccatores, ne ^cquiescas. And Paul
says, Peccatis alienis 1. Tim, 5.
ne communicaueritis. When the ungodly do declare them selves to be ennemies of
God, and of all goodness (Ex fruct^bus ipsoru^, cognoscetis eos, and by none
other way) then a christen man must use that order, which Christ has
appointed in his holy testament belongyng to a private man, that is, First
secretly to admonyshe the offendant, than to call two or three witnesses: if he
than doothe not amend, publyshe him to the congregation, or to the authorized
disciplinatours: and he excommunicated by them out of the congregation, shall
separate him self from the good christians, and they shall also separate them
selves from him, as from an Ethnike, until he by repentance be admittted
again. But if the church or authorized disciplinatours be in this their
office negligent, and will not excommunicate such as be notorious and manifest
evil workers, than must the private man commit the matter to god, desyryng
him to redress such an abuse, being contented to live in the church, and
receive the sacraments, without separation, assured that the wyckednes of the
wicked, can not make an holy thing unholy or unprofitable to him, so long as he
believes in Christ, and keeps him self unspotted from their unrighteousness.
Scripture much commends unity and concord. therefore let us cast away all
division, and grow to the unity of the holy spirit. Let those that be
spiritual, help to amend them that are out of the way, in the spirit of
mekenes, consyderyng them selves that they may fall. Labor therefore by a
godly conversation and gostely council to call them to repentance that do ill,
charitably seek them that go astray, without condemnyng them as cast awaies, or
iustifyeng your selves. But yet I will no man to neglect circumspection,
although I reprove uncharitable separation. The wisdom of God does not
teach me to seek an other, and lose my self. Wherefore if any man perceive the
fragilitie of his nature to be such, or rather his weakness, that by occasyons
he is apt to forgette him self, to offend god, and to turn back to his
vomit again by keeping company or familiarity with them that will not be
warned to leave their beastly behavior, than I think it good for that man to
withdraw him self from those occasions, and grow stronger. For to this end
does the scriptures tend, which treat of eschewyng evil company, that no man
by keepynge therein company, should fall to like ungodliness, and not to
separate them selves from other, as though they alone were only just, and all
other condemned. Who so commytteth herein, does declare him self to be
infected with this naughty flower. But truly I know none that uses any such
separation: if there be any, God reduce them into the way of truth.

Where this peuyshe flower serves not, he has an other very foul and
stynkynge, to corrupt man's soul withal. As these are to pestylent to be
found among christians:

Namely to deny that childern be borne in original sin: or that a man
after baptism can not fall into deadely sin: or being so fallen, can not
be renewed again by repentance: or to deny the baptism of infantes.

How the word of god does confute these errors, and deface these flowers, I
would declare if time served: But because it is short, and I have somewhat
more to say, let it be sufficient for you to know, that they are pestylent
and vnwholsom flowers.

An other flower the dyuell has, wherewith he labors to make men break
godly order, which is this:

That it is laufull to be a publyke preacher in a christian common wealth,
without the authority of the christen magistrates.

But leave this flower to the dyuell again, which is and ever will be, an
enemy to christian order. And know you, that it is not laufull in a
christian common weal to be a publyke preacher, without the authority of the
higher powers.

An other flower the dyuell has in store, wherewith he would persuade man,
that in this life he may attain such a perfection, that he shall sin in
nothing.

And this is that dotyng flower, that a man may keep the co^mandementes of god
so perfectly and absolutely, that he shall sin in nothing, nor have nothing
whereof to ask Gods mercy. But beware of this flower, which sauoureth more of
imagination tha^ of knoweledge: more like a dream than a truth: more of folly,
than of godly wisdom. For by it the dyuell goes about, either to make us
forgetful of our imbecillitie, that we might the less regard our strength
and protection Jesus Christ: or else that in the end when our conscience does
accuse us of offense against God, and his holy co^mandementes (that they be not
perfectly kept) he may thrust us down headlong to desperation. We must
therefore refuse the sauoure of this flower, and nouryshe our soul with the
sweet odor of the truth, by whom we may learn our imbecillitie to be
such, and the corruption of our nature so great, that neither we can or may
keep gods holy commandments, so absolutely (no although we have the grace of
God) that here we shall sin in nothing. The experience whereof he shall easyly
have ye beholds himself well in the law of God, whereby he shall see how
infirm he is to observe the first commandment so perfectly, as the law
requires, namely, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum, ex toto cord, etc. Wherefore God
of his infinite goodness, consydering our imperfection how we are letred through
our weakness, and want of our own power, to keep the commandments of God*
Yea although our soul desires to keep them, being thereto moved by grace, he
sent his deer son Jesus Christ to be the fulfillyng of the law in us, as S.
Paul says: Vt i^stitia legis impleretur in Romans ^
nobis, qui non secundum carnem versamur, sed secundum spiritum. This is
therefore to all faithful christians no small consolation, that although our
weakness be such, that we can not here so perfectly observe gods
commandments and sin in nothing, yet we are assured by the promise of
God, made in Christ, if we be faithful, that he will supply that which wants
in us, and will make his perfection to be ours, in whom we shall be presented
before the throne of god, fauteles, as the members of his precious body to
eternal life. So that we shall not fear in the end this stynkynge flour, or
the dyuels accusation, seeing that our Savior Christ 1 Cor. 1
is made of God, our wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification and
redemption. Let us therefore commit our selves to the Lord with weldoyng,
being out of doubt that it shall not perysh, that with an unfeigned hope is
committed to his charge.

Qui confidit in illo, non pudefiet.

But if the dyuell can not end aunger man soul with these flowers, yet that
he make man offend in some thing, he seeks by tri^les to move seisme and
contention, that unity (which he so much hates) and concord in the truth,
might fade and not grow. Therefore he moves much strife, by the particular
calling of Brother and Sister, as though Christ's church were dyuided, or
that God favored such particularitie and diuysion. But God is the god of
peace, and his delyghte is in godly unity, which is the bond of perfectnes,
whereunto he wills all true christians to contend, and with it to certifye
them selves, that they are in Christ, sons of God, and one an others
brother, without all carnalitye or particularitie. Whosoever therefore does call
any man or woman brother and sister otherwise then he calls all other
christian men, Peccat in vnitatem ecclesiae.

The other trifli^g flour of scism and conte^tio^ is

That it is deadly syn to play at any game for money.

By this he laboreth to thrust into ma^s heart such a precisenes, that at
length a good man might judge every thing although it were but indifferent, to be
damnable sin. Beware thee fore good christians of this subtle floor, and that
to play at games of it self is not deadly syn, but the abusyng of our self in
playinge, is damnable sin, and great wyckednes, who soever is permitted to
play at any game by the law, as cards and dyce and such like, although the
games of them selves be not deadlye sin, yet if he blaspheme the name of
God, maintain in play a covetous heart, use his mouth in fylthy
communication, or such like ungodliness, no doubt he commits deadly sin.
Also he that is forbidden by the law to play, if he play in the contempt of
the Law, spends the time Gods creature in ydlenes, his house being unprovided
for, which ought to be bestowed in his honest labor* or if he tear the Lords
body with horrible oaths, spend his goods prodigally, or with crafty
legerdemaine as byfoisting, cogging-girking or false dyce, wi^neth away his
neighbors money, or rages in wrath, swells with spite, deliteth in
brauli^g, fighti^g and such like mischief, although ye game of it self be not
deadly syn, yet they y^ thus abuses themselves in play, sin da^nably.
Pityfull it is to se how licentiously those that be forbidden by policy, spend
their time in unlawful games, yea more lamentable it is to se ye the officers
appointed for y^ search and correction of such brothels and brothel houses, so
neglecte their duty. For this is a common practice, that in every markette
town for the most part these haserders make their pryuye conuenticles and
meetinges upon the markette or fair day, where the one robs the other,
both of wit and monye. In the mean time whilst they be at their merye
fare, the wynes have at home sorrow enough, when they hear their children try:
Mother give me bread, and they have no cru^me to quench their hunger with all,
yet these iollye rutters fare well, and think them selves rich in the dyce
house, where as master beggar rules the roaste at home, and pyncheth both
wife and children by the bellye. But Saynct Paul says: He that prouydeth not
for his familye, is worse thanne an infydell. O myserye of myseries, to much
put in practice in these our days, as the eyes of poor wives almost out
with weping, and the paale color and thynne cheeks of poor children can
testifye. God grant it may be amended in time, least worse euels happen
thereby.

These are the beautiful flouts of the dyuel, wherewith he seeks now, as he
has done in times paste, to blind the eyes of them that lead a sober
life. These he straweth before them to this end, that of good lyuers, they may
become evil speakers, and so receive to their confusion the grace of God in
vain. Wherefore good people, seeing the mysterye of these erroneous or
scismaticall flowers is detected unto you, wherein ye see as it were in a
glass, with what wylynes the dyuell goes about to obscure virtue, by impure
doctrine and erroneous folly^, let this rude detection therefore be a warning
unto you, to flee from his subtelty. Clean to the truth, O thou lover of
virtue, and read it with humility, fear, and reverence, for thine erudition,
not to dispute, but to amend, desyring God always in thy prayer to be
delivered from these and such like stynkynge weeds of sinistre doctrine,
that thou may not by them, as the dyuell would have it, receive the grace
of God in vain. I have not spoken of these erroures to this and, that I would
have you to learn them, but that I would have you to eschew them Neither have
I spoken them unto you, in the way of recantacion, neither came I to this place
to retract any doctrine that I have before taught, as some crooked spirits,
more apt to contention than to concord, perhaps either think, or will
hereafter report of me. For God is my witness, before whom I stand I never held
or taught any of these or such like erroures. neither do I know any that does
hold or maintain any of them, besides these two simple men, which are here
punished for their offenses: by whom ye may learn to beware of like danger:
Pulchrum est alien: frui insania. But I came hither in the way of exhortacion,
to require you in the name of God, and of his dear son Jesus Christ, that
ye suffer not the dyuell so to bewitch you, that you should with the Corinthians
fall from truth in Iudaismum, least I have cause to feate you, as S. Paul had
to fear the Corinthians, Ne in vacuum gratiam Dei recipiatis.

As he therefore receives the grace of God Psalm. 13 Psalm. ^1. Psa. 29. (...). 3.
in vain, which under good living obstinately maintains ill doctrine, so on
the other part he receives the grace of God in vain, which under well saying
shameth not to lead an abominable conversation. By this latter mean, the
dyuel in these days has deceived many, who^ he has persuaded, either (...).
2.
that there is no God, nor pain for euel works or eis that God is blind, and
sees not their execrable ypocrisy. No meruail therefore, though they little
regard with their beastly living to deny god. y^ bought them. Many therbe that
ca^ say well, ye they ca^ speak of God, of Christ of eternal l^^e, yea of
judgment and the reward y^ y^ ungodly shall have, as though there were angels
late come from heaven* but yet fire^ra^ds of hell. For out of al question, if
they did c^^dite y^ truth that comes out of their lips, or fear y^ God of
who^ they talk. or love that Christ who^ they call a savior, or coueted y^
kingdom wherein is everlasting life. to conclude if they believed yt God were
just and ca^ not but reward impenitent ypocrites, would they (think you) serve
their fylthy flesh with such greedines, and be such patrons of impiety? Full well
prophesied Esaias of you ye ypocrites (says the lord.) Esaias. 1^. Math. 1^.
Mar. 7.
This people draw me me with their ^^^pes, but their hearts are far from me. No
greater friends has the dyuell had from the be ginning, than those that say
and do not, neither greater fryendes does he require to have to the worlds
end. For by say and do not, the dyuell brought to pass to kill our savior
Christ. and by say and do not, he purposes to kill even in the blade, the
(...) of the gospel. Who doothe not lamente to hear men so expert in talkyng,
and so abominable in living: so fruitful in teaching, and so frutelesse in
woorkyng: such ba^la^^ of faith, and have so little?

Every man can say covetousness is naught, yet they desire their neighbors
goods and lyuelode. Every man ca^ say that whoredom is ill, but who almost
lives chaste? Every man can say, that envy is a vice, yet for the most, all
are enemies to charity. Every manne can say, slander and detractatio^ is
wicked, yet very few can speak good by their neighbors. Every man can
say Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenness, and insolent behavior be very ill, yet
cannot they away with humility, temperance, sobrenes nor discrete manners. To
conclude, Every man says he loves God, yet very few desire truly to worship
him but in their deeds they deny him, and live like Paganes. There fore with
the same plage that God in time past rewarded them that said and did not, will
he bring upon them, that in these days say and do not, whose damnable
ypocrisy is as hateful in his sight, as their was. But God for their ypocrisy
struck them with blyndenes and dasynes of heart, whereby they thought they were
well, when their case was miserable. they thought themselves in light, when
they were in darkness. and to be the sons of God, when they were (as their
fruits did declare the^) children of the dyuel. Eue^ so will he do to them that
imitate their manners in these our days. Thus God rewarded the^: Perdam
sapientiam sapientium, and prudentiam prudentium adnihilabo. So that whiles
they thought them selves well, and no danger at hand, suddenly came their
destruction upon them like a violent flood, that can not be resysted: yea when
they think with their wisdom to escape, their foolyshnes shall be so great,
that they shall fall into their own mischief, no man persecutyng them, but a
gilty conscience accusynge them, for that they said, and did not: yea for this
their hipocrisy (if they die in their unbelief) all that they take in hand,
shall be impure and accursed of God: so that their prayer to him shall be as
blasphemy, their fasting as fylthynes, their alms deed as robbery, and their
worshyppyng of God, as most greatest dishonor, and that because they said,
and did not. This S. Paul proves, saying: Omnia pura puris, porro pollutis and
infidelibus nihil est puru^. Sed polluta est and illorum men's and conscientia.
Profitentur se scire deum, caeterum factis negant, cum sint abhominabiles, and
dicto non audientes, and ad omne opus bonum reprobi.

If therefore it be wicked (as it is in deed) under good living to mayntain ill
doctrine so is it most wicked and damnable, under well saying, to cloak a
fylthy and detestable living: yea some be (I fear me) grown in such wylfull
wyckednes, that neither the terrible iugementes of God, neither worldly shame
will drive them from their sin, but as past graces, they never leave to work
wyckednes, till it forsake them, that is, till they can syn no more. Wherefore
like inheritance as God gives to those that knowing the truth, wilfully or
obstinatly under good living defend heresy, even so will he reward those
hypocrites that say and do not, so that although they with well saing, be
exalted to ye clouds, yet for their evil workyng, with the Capern^^^es they
shall fall down to hell, as holy Job says: Hypocritae superbia si ad coelum
Io^. ^0.
usque ascederit, and caput eius nubes tetigerit, quasi ster quilinium in fide
perdetur: qui eum uiderant, dicent, vbi est? Wherefore as they can not plead in
judgment their virtue that obstinatly mayntayn untruth, so can not they in
judgment plead their welsaiyng or holsom doctrine, that wilfully lead a
naughtye conversation: but as the sentence of god is fearful to the one, so is
it most horrible to the other. It shall therefore little profit them that say and
do not, although they brag before Gods throne, saying, Master, master, have
we not in thy name prophesied? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name
have done many miracles? where he will answer them again: I never knew you:
Depart from me ye workers (...) these two wais full (...)uel goth about to
ma(...) other in time past, to re(...) in vayn, I thought it not (...)
necessary to make the same (...) exhortation to you ye S. Paul m(...)rinth,
That ye receive not the grace of (...) in vayn. But as god of his favorable
me(...) for Christ's sake, has sent unto you the w(...) of Reconciliation and
of faith, to call you to (...)pentaunce, that ye might not alone fe^e t(...)
comfort of your election, but also express the fruits of the gospel in your
lives and manners; So be ye not found, I beseech you, such children as halt out
of the way, either in defendyng ill speaking under virtuous living, or ill
living under virtuous speaking. But rather, as it well besemeth true christians,
he pure both in word and deed, after the ensample of the fore runner Jesus
Christ. Follow holiness and righteousness, without the which no man shall see
God. for so has he taught us, saying, Sancti eritis, quia ego sanctus sum, do
Leuit. 2.
minus deus uester. Therefore s Paul says, We are not called to uncleanness, but
to holiness. for this cause, as he councelleth us, let us glorify god both in
our bodies and in ou^ spirits. We are not our own, but his, bought with a
precious ranso^, not with corruptible gold and silver (...) (as S. Peter (...)s
blood of Christ (...) and without spot etc. (...) Religion if we follow
(...)oyd of all doublenes and (...)meant, we shall not only es(...)es of them
that received the (...) o^ God in vain (whose carkaises were (...)rthrowen in
the wyldernes, and became (...) the doung of the earth) but also shall en(...)e
the unspeakable mercy of God, decla(...) to the world in Jesus Christ, as did
the (...)atriarkes, Prophets, and rightuous peo^^e, which thorough lively
faith, obeyed ^he Lord, followed his law, and served him ^ith a true heart all
the days of their lives. Not deferryng the time of repentance, and of the true
worshyppyng of God, t^ll after death, as the ungodly did. Wherefore when they
called unto the Lord in the time of their trouble, he delivered them out of
all their distress. Therefore he said unto them, In tempore accepto exaudiui
te, and in die salutis succurri tibi.

When was this accepted time to the fathers? When they being afflicted, and
neded healpe, were comforted of the Lord. When was the day of health? when the
kingdom of God was opened unto them for remission of their sins and life
everlasting, thorugh the passion of Christ, in whom all the faithful are
blessed for ever.

Ecce nunc acceptum tempus, ecce dies salutis. Even now is the same accepted
time to us wherein we have need of the comfortable help of our God. Now is
the day of health and salvation, wherein the glad tydyngs of remission of our
sins, of everlasting life is offered unto us by grace, through faith in Jesus
Christ.

Now is the time that wisdom cries without, and puts out her voice in
the streets, she calls before the congregation in the open gates, and shows
her words through the city, saying: O ye children, how long will the
scorners delight in scornynge, and the unwise be enemies to knowledge? O turn
you unto my correction, lo I will express my mind unto you, and make you
understand my words.

Now is the time wherein we must attayn (by grace given from above to the
faithful) the croune of immortality, which no man shall attain, but he, that
here in this life, strives laufully, as it is written: Nemo coronabitur, nisi
qui legitime certauerit. And therefore Saint Paul councelleth us to fight the
good fight of faith.

Now is the time that god has sent his servants the true preachers of his
word

Vluimus incerti, nec quos lux crastina casus
Adferat, humano pectore nosce datur.
Seeing then it is so uncertain, and when it comes not to be avoided, we must
of duty watch and pray, as it is written, Vigilate and orate, quia nescitis
diem neque horam, least our flight be in the winter. For the day of the Lord
is at hand. Therefore prepare oil in your lamps that ye may enter with the
brydegroome, when he comes. Do you not procrastinate the time of amendment,
least when ye come and knock with the foolyshe virgyns, this answer be made
unto you, Non noui vos, For when he comes, he will not tarry, and his reward
is with him. Now is this accepted time while it is called to day. Now is the
day of health, where in God for Christ's sake has promised to help the true
beleuers. Therefore as Saint Paul councelled the Corinthians: Even so do I
council you now, Ne quam vsquam demus offentionem ne reprehendatur
ministeriu^ sed in omnibus co^mendemus nos ut Dei ministri. This wholesome and
profitable council did sayncre Paul give unto the Corinthians, whereunto he
wished them to obey, that there by they might certify them selves, that they
were partakers of this accepted time. The same council do I also now give unto
you, that ye may have the like certificate. Wherefore so let every man behave
him in his degree and vocation, as Gods mynister, that no fault be found in
his ministration: Omnes enim statuemur ad tribunal Dei. Who is just, and may
not away with those which answer his inexpressible benignity with fair
words and corrupt, yea wylfull wicked manners, not commendyng them selves as
the ministers of God, but of Belial. Seeing then that we must al come to
judgment before the throne of God, which will not wink neither favor
iniquity, where and in whom soever it be found, because with him there is no
respect of persons, let us al take heed, y^ no fault be found in our
ministratio^.

Left the bishops commend them selves as the mynisters of God, that no
fault be found in their ministration, when this judge shall appear.

Let the justices behave them selves as the ministers of God, in the true and
just execution of the laws, without all corrupt affections, defendyng the
welldoer, and punishyng the ill, that no fault be found in their ministrye.

Let the other officers be dylygente and not slack in their mynistry, neither
wink when they ought to se, that no fault be found in their ministration.

Ye husbands love your wives, and be 1 Pet. ^ Colo. ^.
not bitter unto them, but dwell with them according to knowledge, gyuinge
honor unto them, as unto the weaker vessel, and coheare with you of grace,
that your prayers be not let.

Ye women be ye subject to your own husbands Ephe. 5. 6. 2 Pet. 3.
as to the Lord, and obey them even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord,
whose daughters ye are, so long as ye do well.

Ye fathers provoke not your children unto Ephe. 6
wrath, but bring them up in nourture and informacion of the Lord.

Ye children obey your parents in the lord, Ephe. 6.
for that is good. Honor thy father and mother. that is the first
commanndement that has any promise, that it may be well with the, and that
thou may live long upon earth.

Ye servants obey your bodylye masters Ephesians. 6. Colo. 3.
with fear and tremblyng, in the synglenes of your heart, as unto Christ, not
with eye service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will
of God heartily with a good will, seruyng the lord and not men, knowing that
what good every man does, thereof he shall be rewarded of the lord, whether yt he
be bond or free. God work this in servants hearts in these our days, for
surely they had never more need to be amended.

Ye masters do the same to them without Ephesians. 6. Colo. ^
crueltye, knowing that your master is in heaven, before whom there is no
acception of persons.

Therefore to conclude (because I purpose to eschew redyousnes) let every man
in that office whereunto he is called, behave him self as the mynister of
God, that in his office no fault be found. Than no doubt when the householder
comes from far, to take account and to vewe the doings of his
servants, these which he fyndeth faithful as his true mynysters, occupied
in the dylygente execution of their ministration, he will boun^efullye reward
for his promise sake.

And they shall hear this comfortable word, Euge serve bone: where as they
which deal untruly in their mynystration, smite their fellows, waste their
masters good in voluptuousnes, shall be not only rebuked with these sharp
words, serve nequam, but also heauylye rewarded with utter darkness, where
shall be weepynge and gnasshyng of teethe. God make us of the noumbre of the
faithful servants. Amen.

Now have you heard deerly beloved chrystians the exhortacion or supplication
of S. Paul made unto the Corinthia^s, Whereby as he willed them, so has he
done us, not to receive the grace of God in vain. Also ye have heard how the
dyuell labored to make them unthankful receyuers thereof: and how at this
day he seeks us to be the same: And that by two ways pryncipally, either by
corruptynge good lyuers with ill speaking, I mean doctrine, or else good
speakers with ill living. I have showed you what flowers he straweth before me^
to bring this his polycie to pass. Then I declared how the holy men in time
past thankefully received the grace of God, and refused the delusions of the
dyuell. Wherefore God of his great mercy heard them in an accepted time, and
succored them. In conclusyon: I told you, that now is that accepted time and
day of salvation. wherein I exhorted you to walk as gods mynysters (that is
faithfully and godly) in your ministrations, that you which faithfully believe,
may (at the appearyng of our Lord Jesus) receive the reward, namely the
croune of eternal life. What now remains, but to desire you in the name of
our Lord Jesus, that ye will (all scisme, discord and variance laid apart)
grow to the unity of the spirit of Christ, that ye may be like minded in
the truth: Knowing that nothing is more acceptable in the sight of almighty
god in Jesus Christ, then the unity of brethren. Hereunto the whole scriptures
do lead us: this they do teach us: and this they will us to follow: and
that because God is the God of peace, and not of discord. He delyteth to see
unity, dwell among christian men (which by lively faith ar graffed as members
into his precious body, and are his members in deed) and not division,
Christ our head is the peace offrynge, the atonement maker, and the God of
Reconciliation. The members being knyt to the head, What ought they to
express? A contrariety to the head? No, that were a wonderful disorder. They
must therefore express the quality of the head, by whom they be governed. He
is peace, we must be peasable: he made atonement, were must be atone: he is
the Reconciliation, we must be reconciled. He being the head, is knyt to his
members. al true christians be his members, by his free sure holy and merciful
promise of our parts undeserved. The members are knyt to him with a lively
faith, mightily working by love, through whose operation, as S. Paul proves,
we ar members one of an other. The head agrees Ephe. 4
with the body, to teach the members to agree together. The head is not divided
from the body, no more must the members thereof be divided. Wherefore to draw us
to the conformity of his members, and to alien ar from us the ennemy of
unity, he gave us a notable lesson by saynet Paul, saying: Let there be but
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one god and father of all, which is above
all, through all, and in you all.

This is the rule of right christianite, whereunto we all thorough faith must
apply ourselves, and whereby we must be framed, if we purpose to have an even
and straighte buyldyng in the Lord to eternal life. From the which rule who
so wylfully swarueth, and returns not again by repentance, he hurts him
self incurably, and shall be cast out of the vine, as a withered branche
forsaken of the vine, so dry that the sweet moisture of the wine will not
enter. God drynge us therefore to unity so much commended in scripture, that
we may as members ruled by the virtue of the head, agree like members, in the
body of Christ, that we may all hear his ioyefulle voice in the end, saying:
Venite benedicti patris mei in regnum praeparatum pro uobis ab initio. to the
which God bring us for Christ's sake. To whom with the father and the holy
ghost be all praise, honor, power and dominion, now and for ever. Amen. God
be praised.

God save the king, and his honorable council, and send us peace in Christ
Jesus.

NVM. XXI.



Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


