Tunc abeuntes pharisei concilium inierunt, vt caperent Iesum in sermon.

Math. 22. Then went the pharisees, and took counsel, how they might take
Jesus in his communication.


THe natural philosopher Plinius in the.x. book of his natural historye,
describinge ye generation of the Viper, and the manner how she brings forth
her yongeons, says, that the male engendering puts his head in the females
mouth: which head she for very pleasure bytyth of. And within.iii days after
having yongeons in her belly, makes have to bring the^ forth. But by reason of
her slackenesse, they can not abide within her, and gnawynge out her belly and
sides, violently breketh forth with slaughter of their mother.

Sermo 83 de tempo.
What is this else (says saint Augustyne) but the very pycture of an envious
person: ye true image of a malicious pharise. The devil puts by suggestyon
his head, the sede of malice, rankor and envy in to man's heart, and by and by
such swetnes, such pleasure we co^ceyue of it, that we will not suffer him to
pluck out his head and venyme again, but gredely to our utter destruction
deuower it. The viper has young within.iii. days after her conceptio^: and
because she can bring forth but one at a time together, they eat up her
belly, and so she dies. The envious person makes more speed: he co^ceyueth no
sooner, but inco^tine^t he feleth such a gnawynge about his heart and sydys,
that if he keep one hour or.ii. his venomous babe within him, he will braste
belly, heart, and all together. The pharysees clokyd with hypocritical
holiness, wha^ they hard both old and young laudyng and praysyng Christ with
this melodious song: Mat. 21.
Osan na filio david: ingenderinge with the devil conceived malice, and
brought forth indignation, saying: Audis quid isti dicu^t? But here they were
sone quayled by the testymony of ye law: Have you not read (says Christ) by
the mouth of babes and suckelynges, Psalm. 2.
thou haste ordained thy praise? This, foyne could not keep them back, but at
him they go again, and imperyously demand him, by what power or authorite he
drove forth ye buyers and sellers out of ye temple, why he did overthrow the
tables of the money exchaungers, and the seats of the dove sellers. And here to
show (a^ Solomon says) that there is n^ wisdom, Pro. 21.
nor prudency, nor counsel able to prevail against god he asking them again
the ques^^on of Ihons baptism, when^ it was, either from heaven, or of men and
they aunsweringe, they cold not tell, herd likewise of Christ (...) their
confusion: Neither I wy^ tell you, by what authorytie I d^ these things.
Beside those quic^ aunswers, the parables folowin^ did byte them, and sore
kyndl^ their anger, when he compary them to that son, which promised his
father to go into his vy^yarde, but went not: wherevppo^ he inferrethe, that
the publycan and harlettes shall come into t^^ kyngedome of god, before the^
Again he proposyth the parab^ of the householder, which had left his
servants in his vyneyarde: and when he sent to have the fruits of hit, they
bette, stoned, and killed his messaungers. And at the last, put his own son
to death. What will the master of the household (says Christ) do to those
murderers? Here they condemn the^ selves when they give this sentens: He will
cruelly destroy those persons and will let out his vyneyarde to other men,
which shall deliver him ye fruits at times convenient. Upon this answer christ
co^cludith. Therefore say I to you: the kingdom of god shall be taken from you,
and shall be given to other, who shall bring forth ye fruytes of it. Those, and
such like things spoken in ye reproach of the chief prestes and pharyseis sore
greuyd them. These styckes made a burning fire in their hearts: in so much yt
they would hau^ set violently hands upon Christ if they had not feared the
people Nevertheless, they continued fer^ in their purpose. They like th^sty
horse leches, and insatiable blou^ suckers, will not leave the skynn^ until
their bellies be full of blou^ Non missura cutem, Oratius de art poetica.
nisi plena cruo^ hirudo. Then after al those way proved, and nothing brought
pass, they uses circumuention and dissimulyng their malice, v^der ye pretense
of holiness and iustic^ did as ye gospel this day teache^ us. Euangel. Math. 22.
Then went the pharisees, a^ took counsel how they might ta^gle Jesus in his
communicatio^ And they sent to him their disc^ples, with the Herodians, sayen^
Master we know that thou a true, and teacheste the way god trewly: Neither
carest the for any man: for thou consyderest not men's estate. Tell us therefore:
how thynkest thou? Is it lawful to pay trybute to Caesar or no? Jesus
perceyuyng their wickedness, said: Why tempte you me ye Hypocrites? Let me se
the trybute money: And they took him a penny: and he said to them: Whose image is
this, and superscriptio^? They said to him: It is Caesar's. Then said Christ:
Give and pay therefore to Ceasar, that which is Ceasars: and to god, that
which is gods.

To declare this to gods honor, and to the comfort of this honorable
audience, before we proceed any further, let us by prayer call for grace.

Tunc abeuntes pharisei conciliu^ ini^runt vt caperent Iesum in sermon.

Mat. 22.
Wisdom it is, before a man begin or enterprise any matter, to take counsel:
and after counsel taken in dew time to set upon it. This lesson gave ye
wise man to his son: Ecclesi. 32.
Fili, sine consilio ni hill facias, et post factu^ non paenitebis Son do
nothing without counsel, and than it shall never repent the of thy deed. But
in as much as there be diverse kinds of matters, sum good sum badde: Some
cou^celyng to the best: some to the wurst: great warenesse and diligent
circumspection ought to be used, yt we deceive not our selves either in rasshe
enterprise of matters or i^ unadvised delect and choice of our counselers. To
this I may apply and that not amysse, the saying of saint Ihon^: Charissimi,
1. Joan. 4
no lite credere omni spiritui sed pro bate spu^s si ex deo sint. Dear beloved,
believe not every spirit, take not every matter that co^myth to hand, believe
not every man yt gives you counsel, but first prove and examyne the matter
whether it be good or badde: try your cou^selers whether they be of god or no.
If ye matter be never so good, and the counsel naught, the noughtynesse of the
counsel, destroys the goodness of the matter. 2. Reg. 10.
Anon king of ye Ammonites took a good matter in hand, when he purposyd (as his
part was) to have received honorably ye ambassadors, ye were sent to him from
king Dauyd, to comfort him upon the death of his father. But se what ill
counsel does: persuasion was made to Anon, that Dauyd had sentte^ those
men of his, as spies: to vewe his country, and so to find occasyon craftily
to come upon Anon, and to subdewe him, And upon that, he contumelyously sentte
them back again, shamefully disgysed: half shauynge their beardes, and
leaving the other half vnshauen: cuttynge of their robes and apparel by the
hard buttockes.

But this spytfulnesse of his, escaped not unpunished: for not long after, he
gatherynge an hooste, entendynge to fight against David, lost his hooste,
his men destroyed, and all together came to naught.

3. Reg. 12.
King Roboam went about a good matter, when he thought upon the disposition
of his realm, and what answer he might make to Hieroboam and to ye multitude
that were gathered with him. But following the light counsel of the younger
sort, and reiectynge the sage counsel of the elders: where as he thought to
make all, he marde all: losing at one time. x. trybus of his empire. Of the
other part, if a man's matter be naught, and his counsel good, the wisdom
of his counsel shall either cause him to leave of his naughty matter, and so no
more to meddle with hit, or else by wisdom and pollycie, they shall qualyfie
the thing.

When Dauyd fled the persecution of his son Absolon, 2. Reg. 16.
one of Saul's stock called Semei, met with him, and cursynge and bannynge,
hurled stones at Dauyd, haynously cryeng. Egredere Egredere vir sanguinu^ et
vir Beli al. Come forth come forth you blouddy man and thou man of Belyal.
Abisai one of david's chief servants was sore offended with this outrage, and
straight way would have been avenged upon him saying: Quare maledicit canis
hic moriturus domino meo regi? vadam et amputabo caput eius. Why does this
dog which by and by shall dye, blaspheme my lord the king? I will go and
cut of his head. But king Dauyd stayde this fers purpose of his, with this
wise counsel. Dimitte eu^ vt maledicat, dominus enim precepit ei, vt maledi
ceret David. Suffer him to blaspheme and curse, for it is gods permissyon
that he shall curse Dauyd for a punishment. He interpreted all in the best, and
so stayed Abisais deadly purpose. As Jesus was goinge toward Jerusalem about
the time of his passion, Luc. 9.
and should take Samaria in his mydde way: he sent before certain of his
disciples to make prouysion against his coming. But ye Samarytans when they
knew that he was goinge toward Jerusalem, would not suffer him to come to
their town. James and Ihon^ hearing of this, were sturred up to be avenged
upon the Samaritans: and coming to Christ, said: Domine vis dicamus, vt
ignis descendat, et consumat illos? Lord wylt thou that we command yt fire
comme down from heaven, and consume them? They purposed death toward the
Samarytans: but counsel debated their intent, and they herd. Nescitis cuius
spiritus estis: Ye wot not what manner spryte ye are of. The son of man is
not come to destroy, but to save. Now if the matter be good of it self, and
good counsel also given upon it, it must needs turn to a good end. Like as of
the contrary side, if the ma^ter be naught, and naughty counsel given upon
it: it will prove there after. As here it does euydentely appear in the
pharisees attempt. Their matter was naught they went about to take Jesus in his
communication. Saint Matthew says, (...). Vt illa quear e^t eu^ in sermo^e: to
halter him in his communication, or to bring him in to a snare. Saint Mark,
Mat. 1^.
(...). Vt illum venarentur in sermon: to hunte him in his communication, and
to drive him in to a brake. And what counsel took they upon this matter? They
were ashamed so oftentimes confounded to lay this gynne in their own persons:
and therefore they send as false and as crafty as they were them selves, which
should bring with out suspicion this matter to pass. Et mittunt ad eum
discipulos suos cu^ Herodianis. They send to him their disciples with the
Herodians. Lib 1. ca. 22.
The holy man Epiphanius in his work that he makes contra octaginta errores,
says, that the Herodians was one of ye heresies which the Iues had among
them: beleuynge Herod to be Christ because he was the first stranger that
raygned among them out of ye trybe of Judah: and with him agrees Theophilacte.
Homel. in Math. 21.
Origenes says: Peradventure those which said that the people ough^ to pay
tribut to Caesar, were called scornefully and in mockayg^ of ye other part
Herodians. In. 22. Mat.
Afte^ saint Hieromes mind, they were Herodessoudiars. The cause wh^^ those
Herodians were sent with the phariseis disciples to attemp^ Christ, rather
tha^ other, was this There was a great contention an^ strife among the Iues
whethe^ they being the elect and chosen people of god, having the law o^ god
specially given to them, payeng their tethys and other dewtys requyryd in the
law: whethe^ in this case they were bound (...) pay tribute to Ceaser or no?
An^ whether they ought to be subject to any man's laws, or no?

The phariseys, which would ^sene not to swerve a hears bredt^ from justice,
in the favor of the people held, that the people of god should be bound to no
taskes, nor ought be obedyente to any man's laws. The Herodians defending the
Romans right, said the contrary. And to have this controuersye determined: ye
rather to find an occasion to trouble christ, and to bring him in danger,
either to the imperial power (if he should say that ye people ought to pay no
trybute) either to the people as derogating their lybertye (if he should grant
yt they were bound to pay tribute) for this cause, I say, they sent witness
enough of both parts: that what so ever he said, he should fall in danger,
Learn the subteltye and craft of the devil: He can make those which before
were deadly ennemies, agree together: that by their agreement innocent blood
might the rather be shed. There we^ none so extreme enemies, as we^ the
pharyseys and ye Herodian^ but yet to attache christ, they consented together,
and were well (...) greyd. Greatte enmytie was between Pylate and Herod: Luc.
23.
but f^ that day furthwarde that Pyla^ sent Christ to be examyned an^ judged
of Herod, and Herod (...) great derysion sent him back again: there were
none so grea^^ friends as they. Ecclesi. histo. libro 6. capi. 29
Christ's ennem^ Iulianus apostata, which had f^saken his faith, and was becom^
a pagayne, made a law that al^ the temples and churches, which before he had
cawsed to be dedy^ted to false Idolles, and to the paganysme, should be reduced
t^ their old form, and to the chryst^ an religion. Ye he commaunde^ moreover
as it appears in the epystel that he wrote to Arsacium bishop of the
Galatyans, that all his prestes, which had turned with him from Christ, and
served to gentilite: should follow the christian religion in all points resemble
their lives and conversation. Will you se what moved the devil to work here
his old practyse? will you se what made him to sarch, for concord and unity
between the christian prestis and his? Doutles no thing else but this, as the
hystorye shows: Iulianus seeing the fervor and good life of the christian
prestis to be had in hye estimation: well knowing yt the people cold not be
seduced, as long as they vsyd such godlynes, and he such naughtynesse:
ferynge also lest that their virtue should destroy his vice, fell to agremente
with the Christyan prestes: willing his, gentylytye to follow in all poynte^ the
Christian sort, that he mygh^ the sowner by this agreement brin^ al to naught.
But what need v^ to sarche ye scriptures for exa^ple^ in this craftye point of
the devil what need we turn ye old facte^ of our fathers? seeing yt the devil
does not cease in ower time, b^ does admynister matter and exe^ples daily
tomoch in this behalf to us. How he makes enemies t^ agree, and sends the
pharyseis the Herodians to take Christ an^ his mynisters in their words. The
world (the more is the pity is full of schysmes, full of diuers^te and
co^tentio^: So^me going to f^ on the one hand: sum to far^ on the other. To
few (if it please god) that keep ye kings hye wa^ and walk in the myddell
path Such persons when they co^^ or send to hear a sermon, common
reasonynge, ye oftentimes familier communication: they can not be content to
comme alone, or send their faithful servant but they must bring or send
their pharyseis and their Herodians. The pharisey, by interpretation, is he ye
is sequested and diuyded from other: and by him I understand Singularite. Luc.
13.
The Herodian after Christ's own words is he, that has the foxes craft:
and by him I mean Subtelte: Two shrode companions syngularyte and subtelte.
Now when men be to much addicted to their own fantazyes: when they be ons
married to their one Imagination: what soever be preached, said, or read,
contrary to their opinion, their mind, their vicious behauour and life: The
pharise and singularite can not abide it, naught it is in their sigh
singularytey rejects it, condemns it: and taking ye Herodian subtelte with
the^, search al corners turn al ways that can be to tro^ble the truth, and
to keep it underneath the foot. The time hat^ ben, when that those which have
ocupyed this place, have laboure^ and endeavored them selves with a the grace
geuyn to them to hau^ pacifyed and have set at quye^ the weak and feeble
conscyences of their audyens. And now (the more it is to be lamented)
singular^tye so rules: that he that can be^ dispute and reason a new matter in
the pulpyt, he is the best preacher. Simplicitye than did edyfy^ and made
peace: Singularitye no^ does destroy and sets men at ^^ryaunce. Then was
preaching sweet melodye, when the pyp^^ were in tune: Now it is an vnswete
noise: for the pipes yarryth. Then men endeuered them selves to fulfill that in
life, which ye other preached, herd or read by word. Now al our study is to
here new and strange things to speak and set them forth galantly, and little
or nothing to do. whervppon it follows as the holy man saint Beda says: In
epi. Iacobi, cap ^3
Qui ad predicandum verbum quam ad faciendum procliuior est: plerunque per
amorem iactantiae per studium contentionis, per eloquentiae facilitatem, per
inuidentiam aliorum docentium, per ignorantiam catholicae veritatis, stulticiae
reatum incurrit. He that is more redier to preach, to reason, or to hear the
word of god, than to perform it in his living: oftentimes for the love yt
he has in bostinge and setting him self forth, for the desyer that he has
in strife and contention, b^ the redines and facilitye of eloquens, by envy
that he barethe (...) other teachers, and by ignoran^ of the catholyke truth,
falls (...) to extreme folyshnes. The sympl^ men than bare away all the
goodness: and now Singularity wold^ seem to have all the learning wh^fore it is
to be fered, that symplic^tye has violently plucked hea^^ to her, and has
left to singularity grievous damnation: which knows ye law and will of god,
passet^ all together in knowledge, and ^^thinge in doing. It is written o^
saint Augustyne: that when h^ had red the life of a simple, plain^ and holy
man, called Paulus, how virtuously he led his life, and ye^ being a man of no
lernyng, wit^ weeping and syghynge tears said thus, Surgunt indocti et rapi^^
coelum, nos autem cum litteris nostris mergimur in infernu^: The poor vnlexned
and simple people rysith and plucketh heaven to them, and we conning men with
all our learning be drowned in hell. Beware of the pharisey. Avoyde
Syngularite: Be glad to hear the truth of whose mouth so ever it comme. So
let us hear gods word, that we may be the better for it, and express it in
our life. Away with the Herodian: farewell subteltye, and crafty
circumuention: for verily says Christ: Except ye turn, Math. 18.
and become as children, ye ca^ not enter in to the kingdom of heaven.
Singularyte and Subtelte be make bates, they break the peace and unity yt ought
be among christians, they have therefore no part with christ. Iaco. 3.
Saint James says If you have bitter enuyenge and strife in your hearts,
rejoice not, neither be you liars again the treuth. This wisdom desce^deth
not from above: but is erthly, beastly, and deuellysh: for where enuyeng and
strife is, there is unstableness and all manner of evil works. Playnnesse and
symplycyte drive ever to a concord, and would have all me^ to be one. They shall
therefore enherite ye earth of life. They be the children of god: for so says
our sauyoure Christ. Math. 5.
Beati pacifici quoniam ipsi fi lii dei vocabu^tur. Blessed be ye peace makers,
for they shall be called the children of god. To keep this concord and unite,
every man should apply his study. To this should we exercise our tounges. To
this, should you give your ears. Saint Ihon^ ye euangelyst (as saint Hierome
writes of him) dwelling at Ephesus, In common. super 6 cap^. ad gala
and being so old, that he was not able to come abroad by him self, would be
boren forth in his discyples arms: and coming where as any multitude or
companies of people was, thus would he preach to them: Filioli, diligite alte
rutrum. Dear sons, love you one an other. And coming to another company would
preach ye same and no more. Filioli, diligite alterutru^. This co^tynuyng from
day to day both at home and abroad, made his discyples weary still to hear one
thing: whereupon they asked him: Why he preached none other thing but only this,
Filioli diligite. And s. Ihon^ gives the^ an au^swer, mete for so holy a man
as he was: Quia p^ceptu^ dn^i est, et si solum fiat, sufficit. I do preche this
one thing still to you, to love one another: for it is gods co^man^dement, yt so
ye do: and if you perform this, it is sufficient, ye need none other thing.
In all goodness I pray god to make us frendys and lovers: that we all may
think and speak one thing and that there be no dissension among us: 1. Cor.
1.
but that we may be knyt together in one mind and in one meaning. In
naughtynes still to be at varians, that we never consent to it: nor come with
the phariseis and the Herodians under a cloak to take christ in his
co^municacio^. Magister scimus quia verax es, et via^ dei in veritate doces,
and no^ est tibi cura de aliquo: non enim respicis personam hominum.

If an aungel had been sent from heaven to have done a message to christ: he
could not have had a better nor a more honorable induction or preface to his
purpose, than was this, which the pharyseis and Herodians here used to christ
when they said: Master, we know that thou art true: and teach ye way of
god trewly: neither carest you for any man. Thou co^siderest not the person or
estate of man. Joan. 13.
Thapostels called him master, and Christ did well allow that name. Vos
vocatis me magistrum and dominu^ and been dicitis, sum etenim. You call me
master and lord, and you say well, for so I am. They praised him for the
puryte of his life, we know that thou art true and lyuest without spotte. They
praised his learning to be blameless, thou teach the way of god trewly. And
last of al they praised him for keeping of justice: thou carest not for any man,
for you art not parcyal to the rich man, and iniurius to the pooer: But whether
the person be rich, whether he be pooer, of hye degree or low, friend or fo,
there geueste thou sentence where the right wayth. The devil oftentimes and
naughty men, may, and does prophecy, and tells the treuth: But it is done
other ignorauntly or for an ill purpose. Mat. 8.
The ii. devils that possessed the.ii. mad men in the country of Gergesytes,
confessed Christ to be the son of god: not for any love or honor yt they
owed to christ, but only for fear: for they sore dowted lest the time were
come that they should be more grievously ponyshed, and lose ye possessions ye
they had in the creaturs of ye earth. Joan. 11.
Cayphas, nothing ente^ding neither ye health of man's soul, neither ye glory of
christ: but only the sauegarde of the te^porall kingdom of the Iues, prophesied
and said treuth. It is better for us yt rather one man should dye for the
people, than ye all the people should perish. Scripture says, Hoc aute^ a
semetipso no^. dixit, sed cu^, esset pontifex anni illius, prophetauit, quod
Jesus moriturus erat pro gente. This spoke he not of him self: but being hye
priest that same year, he prophesied that Jesus should dye for the people. So in
this our case the pharisees with the herodians be prophets in their salutatio^
to christ: but they intended no such thing. They spoke fear and truly, but
thought malycyously and falsely. Like bees they came about christ bering
outwardly in their mouth honey: and inwardly in their hertes a sharp stynge.
Haec est (says Chrysostom) prima simulatio hypocritaru^, quia laudunt quos
perdere volu^t. This is the first and chief point of an hypocrite and
dyssembler, to praise them, whom they do utterly entende to destroy.

Ioab pretended great frendshyp toward Abner, 2. Reg. 3.
when he send for him as one friend should do for an other ^o commune and
talk (...) him, for his and the hole realme^ profytte, but when they came in
(...) secret place together, 2. Reg. 20,
Ioab dre^ out his dagger and slew Abne^ The same Ioab, feryng, lest Am^sa
should be preferryd in office before him with king Dauyd: wh^ he knew that
Amasa was coming toward the court, disse^blinge his malice, came to met^
him, and with this fair salutatio^ greted him. Salve frater Amasa: alhayle
brother Amasa, holdyng^ him by the chynne with the rygh^ hand as though he
would hau^ kyssed him: and preuely with his lift hand panched him with hi^
dagger. 2. Reg. 13.
Absolon pretended great love toward his father and his brothers, when he made
his shereshyp feast, and when he cold no^ obtain his father to come to his
feast he would have no nay, but that Amnon with the resydewe of his brothers
should come: he said, else his feast should be nothing playsant. And when they
were most meryest, then was Amnon by Absolons commandment slain.

The traitor Judas made a fair face when he came to betraye his master, Mat.
2^.
with this flateryng salutatio^ and deadly kiss, Aue Rabbi: All hayle master.
But he left his stynge behind with the Iues, when he said: Quemcu^que
osculatus fuero, ipse est, tenete eum. whom so ever I kiss, that is he, lay
hands upon him. More fayrer words than is used now adays was never heard: to
promise much, and to perform little: to bear a fair face outward, and deadly
malice inward. In one hand to have fire, and in the other water: To say as
you say: To hold up ye and nay, whether it be true, whether it be false: is
counted much cruylite. To tell the treuth: to speak as a man does think: to
contrary the falsyte, and to be plain in masters, is taken as lack of good
manners and rude rusticite. So much is this flattery, this dissimulatio^ used
among men: that except a man can flatter, except he can dissemble, he is not
mete to dwell among men. The poet Inuenal, in reproach of ye Romans vsyng
this fault, Satyr. 3
was not aferde to say: Quid Romae facia^? me^tiri nescio: libru^ si malus est
ne queo laudare and poscent what shall I do at Rome? I can not ly: I can not
dissemble and flatter: I can not say the croe is white, the swanne is black: I
can not praise that book to be good, which is naught: I can not desire that
thing to be set forth, which I know more meter to be suppressed. This and
such other things following, like as the Hethen poet then spoke against the
Romans: so I doubt not: but if he saw our lives, he would say the same,
and myche more to our confusion. Such hypocrites, such dyssemblers, such
flatterers be of all men most to be detested, most to be abhorred: for when
they seem most to be with us: then be they most against us: when they
pretend most frendshyppe, then ought we most to fear their hatred. The
common proverb does well declare what they be: Crocodili lachrimae: The
tears and weeping of the Crocodyle. The Crocodyle is myche desirous of ma^s
flesh: but yet before he will deuowre any man he bitterly wepeth. The hypocryte
and flatterer in his heart desires nothing so much, as his own wordly
advantage: he cares not to what misfortune his friend be dreuen to, so that he
may have profytte of it: yet to bear a fair face outwardly, he wepeth in the
sight of the people, when in heart he is most gladdest. Of those sort of men
writes the wise man in this manner. Ecclesi. 12,
In labiis suis indulcat inimicus, and in cord suo insidiatur, vt subuertat te
in fouea^. etc Thy ennemy the flatterer and hypocrite in his lyppes bears
honey, and speaks fair: but in his heart he craftily lays wyles, to hurl
the into the dyche. Before thy eyes he will weep, but when he may espy a time,
he will suck thy blod. If aduersite happen to the, he will be one of the first
that shall be against the, helpyng with all the strength he can, to overthrow
the. Super ca^ti. cantico sermon. 33.
The holy man saint Bernard thinks them not worthy the name of man, but
calls them, putridam tabem hominum, the rotten corruption of men: and thus he
declares their conditions.

Omnes amici and omnes inimici: omnes necessarii, and omnes aduersarii: omnes
domestici, and nulli pacifici: oe^s proximi, and omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt:
Ministri Christi sunt and seruiunt antichristo. All the sort of flaterers,
would seem to be our friends, but they be all enmyes: all they would be taken
of the knotte of amytie, but they be of the knotte of emnytie: all would be
counted household gestes, but none of them studyeth to make peace: all be our
neighbors, but every man is for himself, and seeks his own co^modite and
profit. They would be called Christ's mynysters, but they serve the devil and
antichrist. Beware of such says the wysema^: Pro. 1.
Fili mi si te lactauerint peccatores, ne acquiescas eis: My son if such
sinners go about to feed the, consent not to them. And god by his prophet
Esaias. Esaias. 3.
Popule meus qui te beatum dicunt ipsi te decipiunt, and via^ gressuum tuorum
dissipant. My people they that flattereth with the, and says that thou art
blessed, they dysceueth the, and brings the out of ye right way. And where
shall we ley the fault of the mayntenaunce of this vice? Surely in those that
does rejoice to be flattered with all. It is true that one says. Si tu vis
esse Thraso nusquam de^ rit gnato: If thou delight to be flattered with all,
thou shalt never mysse flatterers: men be so blinded now a days and so mych^
stands in their own conceit, yt the proverb which saint Augustyne does
use is verified in us. Epist. 47, ad Proclinianum.


Creuit caput and impinguatu^ est oleo. Our heads be grown great and fatted
with oil. I pray you, who is not glad now a days, ye in manner does challenge
to him to be called, most holiest father: most merciful and ryghtuous judge.

Good and loving master, faithful and wise servant: discrete and learned
pressed: true and obedient subject: with such other names of offices and
dignityes: To those we do applaude outwardly toward the world: and inwardlye
our conscience condemns us for it: and knows nothing less in us than
that. As for punyshemente to them that delytethe in receyuynge such vain
praise: I would desire none other (and that only te^porally, for sauegarde of
their souls) than happened to the great Alexander in such a like matter.
Seneca episto. 70.
Flatterers had persuaded Alexander that he was no mortal man: but was a god,
and that none of the lower sort, but Jupiters own son: the highest god of
all. And in this folyshe paradyse, he long continued. But as he beseged a
certain city, and there was sore wounded with an arrowe in the thygh, having
pain intolerable, daily more and more incresyng, despayryng of his life:
confessed openly that he was before time shamefully mocked with all, saying:
Omnes iurant me esse filium Iouis, sed vulnus hoc homine^ me esse clamat. Every
man boldly affirms and swereth that I am Jupiters son: but this wound of
mine shows openly and cries that I am a mortal man. Herodes syttyng in his
throne, Acti. 2
taking a vain glory when the people flattered him, saying: Dei voces and
non hominis, It is the voice of god ye speaks, and not of man: was
immediately smytten of the angel of god, because he gave not god the honor,
and eaten with worms, or with the lowsy evil, dyed. Let us follow saint
paul's counsel, Gloria nostra haec sit, 2. Cor. 1.
testimonium conscientiae nostrae. Mat. 25.
Let us rejoice and glory in the testymony and clerenesse of our conscience.
Let us do as the five wise virgins did, carrye oil with us: let us not bye it
of the sellers: that is (after saint Austyne.) ab adulatoribus, Epist. 120 ad
Honoratum.
of flatterers. Adulatores na^que laudem suam tanquam oleum venditant stultis.
For flat terers do sclle their praise, as it were oil unto fools. Now after
this flatteryng p^face, they proposes this questyon, and opens their minds.
Dic nobis, quid tibi videtur, licet ce^su^ dari Caesari an non? Tell us what
think you ought we or is it lawful for us to pay tribute to Ceser, or not?
Here at length is ye chycke hatched, But one leyth ye egg, and an other
sits upon it, and brings forth ye chycke. Hiere. 17.
So it comes to pass, as ye prophet Hieremy says: Perdix fouit quae no^
peperit. The partryge has sitten upon the eggs, Lib. 6. ca. 3
which she never laid. S. Ambrose in his Hexamero^s. One partryge (says he)
steleth an others eggs: and she that steleth the eggs sits upon the^ and
brings yongeons: But she can have no profytte of her theft: for as sown as
ye young hereth the call and cry of her, which laid the eggs: they forsakes
the noursshe and follows the true mother. The old pharisees and chief prestis
laid this egg. They ware the true mother of this captious question to be
moved: but the younger sort which ware as craftye as their masters set it
forth: but they had little profytte of their broude, their labor came to no
proof. Cognita aute^ Jesus nequitia eoru^, ait, Quid me te^tatis hypocritae?
For when Jesus perceived their malice and wyckednes, he said, why do you te^pte
me you hypocrites? Salomo^ says truly: prouer, 11.
Iusticia rectoru^ liberabit eos, and i^ insidijs suis capie^t iniqui:
Righteousness shall diliuer good me^, and craft at length shall deceue his
master. Jesus straight with perceued their naughtynes, and according to yt he
said, why do you te^pt me you hypocrytes? They dyssemblyngly called him
master: they flatteringely praised him for his vpryght life, true doctrine,
and good justice. And Christ with out flattering calls them Hypocrites,
dissemblers, according to their deseruyng. They dyssembled with Christ's
goodness: And Christ is plain with their naughtynes. In that geuyng us a good
lesson, never to flatter with vice, but sharply to rebuke it: never to wynke
there, where as we ought to have our eyes most open. This taught us before
saint Ihon^ the baptist, Matthe. 3.
when he sharply reproved the dissimulation of the Pharisees and Saducees
coming faynyngly to be baptized of him, said: Progenies viparu^: quis
demonstrauit vobis fugere a ventura ira? you adders kind and generation, who
caused you to fle from the vengean^ce to come. Luc. 13.
This taught us Christ when he called Herod a fox. Ite, and dicite vulpi illi.
Go tell that fox. Acto. 23.
This taught us s. Paul, when the hye priest Ananias commanded them that
stood by Paul, to smite him on the mouth. He sharply answered: God smite the
thou painted wall, syttest thou and iudgest me after the law, and co^maundest
me to be smytten contrary to the law?

In using such sharp words, we be nothing prejudicial to the lenite of the
gospel: Mat. 5.
where Christ says, I say unto you, who so ever is angry with his brother:
shall be in danger of judgment: who so ever says to his brother Racha, shall be
in danger of a counsel: And who so ever calls his brother fool, shall be
in danger of hell fire. For all this is to be understand (after Chrysostom)
not to be done rashely, without aduisement, and without a sufficient cause. A
sufficient cause is (as saint Augustine writes) when a man is angry not with ye
person but with the offense. Libro. 1. retract. ca. 9,
No^ enim fratri irascitur, qui peccato fratris irascitur, qui ergo non peccato
fratris irascitur, sine causa irascitur. He is not angry with his brother,
which is angry with his brothers offense: for he that is angry with any other
thing, than with the offense, he is angry without a cause. Thus did Christ here
call them Hypocrytes, with ye zele and desire to have justice kept, and the
treuth to be known, and not for any malice or affecte to be revenged upon them.

Ostendite mihi numisma Census. Cuius est haec imago and superscriptio.

Let me se the tribute money. whose coin, whose Image, and superscription has
it? As the great clarke and holy martyr Ignatins writes to the Magnesions:
Duos characteres in hominibus inuenimus: vnum quide^ verae monete signaculum:
alterum vero adulterinum. Pius enim homo and religiosus vera moneta est, quae a
deo for mata vel expressa est. Impius vero and irreligiosus, falsa moneta est,
noxia, adulterina, praua, quae non a deo sed a diabolo facta est. Two pryntes,
or two coins we find among me^: The one is the stamp of true money: and
the other is a counterfeyted or forged coin. Every good man, and that fears
to fall into gods danger is true money, and has gods stamp, gods Image
in him. The wicked and vicious person, and he that cares another for god nor
for man, is coper money, naught, and has the deuyls prynte upon it. There be
so many kinds of vice rayning among us, and so little virtue, that it is to
be fered, lest ye devil has marked the greatter part to him, and puts
Christ to the smaler. One or.ii. coins I will toche, and so pass over this
matter. A coin there is myche to be lamented, and that among men that be of
great richesse: that is this: they have to much charity among the^: they drive
all things to nigh to the first creation. For as the book of Genesis does
teach us: Genesis, 1
god made at the first beginning all lively creatures mates together, the male
and the female in every kind: but man he made first alone without a mate. And
of this one all other came: to sygnify, after the doctors minds, that we ought
to endeuer our selves to anvnite. Men drive (I say) to nigh t^ this unite: they
can not abide diuysion. For let there be a term, ^tenentrey, a small cotage,
or any other thing, whereby any profytte may comme: charity so prycketh them,
they must bring it to one: come together it must: all must be ours: it lies
commodyously for them, they be in love with it: depart it shall not from them.
Furthermore, because it is costely to keep many housholdes, they have found a
good provision for ye, one household shall serve for all. The poor men that
before kept honest and charytable houses upon it, must seek farther: they be
not worthy to dwell so nigh to men of worship.

Would to god they would look somewhat lower, and not to clymme so hye to the
first beginning of the world. Let them come down to Abraham's and Lothes
time. Gene. 1^.
Abraham and Loath had such great possessyo^s in sheep and other cattle,
that the pastures about was not able to find them both: where upon among their
shephardes and other herd men, rose great strife and debate. What did Abraa^
in this matter? took he all to him self? Bad he Loath to seek abroad where he
would? He was of power great enough to have done so? no no. But content that
his brother should have a living as well as he: ye (and that is more to be
marueyled at) content to leave his own to Loath, said: I beseech the brother
Loath, let there be no chiding between the and me, and between my shephardes
and thine, for we be brothers. If thou will take on the lift hand, I will
take on the right hand. If you take the right hand, I will take the lift
hand. Now to enpoueryshement of ye hoole realm, few take all. Householdes be
broken up, and poor men go a beggyng. Cuius imago est haec? whose Image whose
coin is this? If it were gods Image, Esai. 5.
ye prophet Esaias would never have said by gods mouth: Ve qui coniungitis
domu^ ad domum, and agrum agro copulatis vsque ad terminum loci: nunquid
habitabitis vos soli in medio terrae? Woe to you that join house to house, and
couple fylde to fylde, pasture to pasture, that the poor can get no ground
among them, shall you dwell alone in the myddle of the earth? In time paste
were acts made against decayenge of houses, and dwelling places, and for a
time was well observed and kept: and now a days many for fear of the statute
keep up the houses: but as for the house holdyng they maynteyne so, that another
mowse nor sparowe will abide there. Acts also and statutes has been made to
stynt men from great engrossyng of fermes, and a certain number of sheep to be
kept, and no man to pass that: but the laws be oftentimes as the philosopher
Anacharsis was wont to say: Leges aranearum telis sunt similes, in quibus
infirmio ra animalia haerent, valentiora autem perru^punt. Laws be like to the
cobbe web that the spyders make, they hold fast little flees and such
small beasts: but the greater beasts break through them, and be not let.
To speak of the coin of horedome and aduoutery was never so much need: for
the vice was never so much used. This was so detestable in s. Paul's
conscience that he would not have it ones named among us. Ephe. 6.
Let fornication (says he) and all uncleanliness be not ones named among you,
as it becomes saints. And we to have the fylthy communication of it still in
our mouths, count it merry bordyng. The sinful act of it is wynked at. No
man does pownyshe it, and therefore no man does fear it.

Christ says: Mat. 5.
that who so ever looks upon a woman, lustyng after her, he has committed
aduoutery with her in his heart. And we believe that it is no sin to committee
actually the foul deed. We believe not (I say) that it is offense: for if we
did believe, we would fear the sharp judgment of god, which he threateneth
upon this vice, and so would forbear it. Sermon. 243 ^e tempo.
Saint Augustyn says, Si enim fidem haberent, vtique deo crederent, and
venturu^ iudiciu^ cum tremore metuerent: probatur enim quia hominibus credunt,
and deo non credunt, vt public vbi homines vident, adulteria timeanr: and
secret vbi deus videt omnino non timeant. Si quale^cu^que scintilla^ fidei
haberent, sicut non permittunt seruos in praesentia sua peccare, ita nec illi
in co^spectu domini sui adulterare praesumerent. If we had faith, trewly we
would give credence to god, and would tremblyngly fear gods judgment. But
now it is probable, and we may by presumption say, that we believe man and not
god, because we fear to committee aduowtery openly where man may se us, and
pryuely to do it where god may se us, we fear nothing at all. If there were
any sparkle of faith in us, like as we would not suffer our servants to
offend in our presens: so like wise we would not presume to offend in the
syghte of our master about which sees as well in darkness as in light. But
we be the fools of whom the prophet spoke. Dixit insipiens in cord suo non
est deus. Psalm. 13.
The fool and the unwise man said in his heart that there was no god. For
this is for a certaynte, that he does not believe god to be, which pryuely and
in corners will do that thing in the presens of god, which openly in the
presens of man he is a fearde to do. Gene. 12.
Pharao king of Egypt taking Saray in to his house, knowing none other but
that she was Abraams sister, and not his wife, committing no unlawful act
with her, was sore ponyshed for it. The text says: Flagellauit dominus
pharaonem plagis maximis and domum eius propter Sarai vxorem Abraae. God
scurged Pharao grievously, and all his household, because of Saray Abraames
wife. Abimelech like wise king of Gerare, Gene. 20.
being informed of Abraam, that Saray was his sister, and not his wife doing
no vyleny with her, but taking her into his house, hard of gods mouth: En
morieris propter mulierem quam tulisti, Lo thou shalt dye, because thou haste
taken this woman to the. Ignorans here is ponysshed for taking of an other man's
wife in to their houses, without any lecherous act committed? And shall we
escape unpunished, unlawfully doing the foul act? No no: god will not allow
this coin: it is not his, signatum est, it is scaled up for the devil. In the
book of Deuteronomy, Cap. 28.
god showed what coin he would have, when he said No^ erit meritrix de filiabus
israel, nec scortator de filiis israel. There shall be no harlette among the
daughters of Israel: nor no hoar hunter among the sons of Israel. Whether
this precept of god may stand or no, with ye common stues, I put it to your
judgment. This dare I say, that it is a detestable provocation for youth:
here they may sin, and no man say against them: Let the wife dysplease her
housebande: the daughter her father and mother, the servant her master and
dame, hither they may come without nay: here is a safe-conducte for them.
Well it may be permytted by a cyuyle ordynance, gods laws, I am sure did
never permytte it. Suffered it may be to avoid worse inconvenience: but the
mean time many be lost both body and soul: where as if such impunite and
liberte to syn were not, very fear and shame would have prohibyte men, and
kept them honest. This and such other like be the deuylles coin: this is coper
and naughty money. Cast we therefore of, this pryntes: it is the deuylles, to
the devil than with it. Let us suffer it no longer to remain among us, lest
the devil challenge us for his, if he find his mark upon us.

When the pharysees had showed to Christ a penny of the trybute money: and by
their own confession said, that it was the emperors coin, he said: Reddite
ergo quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt dei deo. Restore therefore and
pay to Ceasar that which is Ceasars, and give or yield to god, that which is
gods. An euydente place and a manifest authorite to prove that every
Christyan man is bound to obey the cyuyle magystrates and worldly officers.
And that god does allow them, in that he gives us commandment to pay them
that is their duty: to obey and serve them in temporal bodily and outwardly
goods. Pay to Ceasar, to kings, to the worldly rulers, that which is
theyrs, and to god his duty. In. 22. Mat.
To Ceasar we ought to pay (after saint Hieromes mind) Nummu^, pecunia^,
tributum, Our riches, money and tribu^e: An example of this christ gave us in
his own person, when he said to Peter, Mat. 17.
Solue pro me and te, Pay trybute for me and for the. Romans 13
The powers be ordained of god, therefore we ought reuere^tly to obey the^: they
be ye ministers of god for our wealth: al their care and study is how they may
deliver us from our enemies, how to bring us out of captivity and bondage. A
lively Image of this may every true subject se in our most victorious
prince ye kings most excellent majesty: what dangerous iurneyes he takes
both by water and by land, at home and turth, to set us at rest. what
unspeakable costs he has been, and is continually at, and all for our
quietness and welthe. Read all the Hystories that ever has been written or done,
and in comparison to his gracyous affairs, they shall be but shadows.
wherefore show we again to him as we are bound to do, our obedyent hearts:
submytte we our selves to him, he is our supreme head under almighty god.
Refuse we the usurped power of the bishop of Rome: remember we our oath made to
the supremite of the kings grace: let us perform ye in heart, and think
inwardly, as outwardly by mouth we have sworn. Thus let every men show to him
his obeisance. To this saint Paul does exhort us, not only for fear of
vengeance, but because of conscience. And straight ways he infers: and for
this cause pay you tribute: help him with such as god has lent you, for so
be you bound in conscience. If we have any thing to him give we thanks, for by
his travail and labor he makes us quiet possessyoners. In his affairs
therefore, when he needs we ought to put our helping hands. So says the holy
bishop Hylarius pictauiensis: Si nihil quod Caesaris est penes nos tesederit,
condition reddend^ ei quae sua sunt non tenebimur. Porro autem si tebus illius
incu^bamus, si iure potestatis suae vtimur, extra querelam iniuriae est,
reddere Caesari quod Caesaris est. If we have nothing remayninge with us, that
is Ceasars, tha^ be we not bound to pay him that which is his. But if we
occupye his goodness, if we use the right of his power, and under that be
defended, it is without any co^playnt of injury, that we pay Ceasar that
which is Ceasars. Forthermore if we well ponder and consider this word
Reddite, Restore, yield: we may lightly parceyue, that this to do is not only
gentylnes, but in this part of dewty we are bound so to do. And that very
well does Theophilact note commentynge upon the.xx. chapter of Luke. Vide
quia non dixit date, sed reddite: debitum igitur inquit, est. Reddite igitur
debitum. Custo dit te princeps tuus ab hostibus, vitam tua^ pacatam facit,
debes itaque ei pro iis tributum. Mark (says Theophilacte) Christ said not
give, but pay and restore, than it is debt: Restore therefore the debt. Thy
prince and king does keep and defend the from thy enemies: he causes the to
live at rest, for those things therefore, thou art dettor to him and bound to
pay tribute. He goes forther and says. Etiam ipsum quem habes nummum ab illo
habes. Igitur cum nomisma regis iterum illi reddis, interim tibi lucraris, quod
per ipsum, quae vitae debita sunt prestantur. The money also that thou haste,
thou haste it of him: Therefore when thou restorest to the king again his
monye: thou gettest this luker to thy self, in that by it thou prepareste
such things for the, as be necessary to maynteyne thy life.

Be we than obedient in this part and according to Christ's commandment: let
us pay to Ceasar that which is Ceasars part, Ft quae sunt dei deo. And
gods part to god. After saint Hierome. Decimas, primitias, oblationes, and
victimas. Teathes, the first ^gather offerynges, and sacrifice. In the old
law how that the teathes were commanded to be paid it is to manifest, one
place therefore shall suffice. Capi. 14.
In the Deuteronomy it is commaundyd: Decimam parte^ separabis de cu^ctis
fructibus tuis quae nascuntur in terra per singulos annos, and by and by after,
decima^ frume^t^ tui and vini and olei and primo genita de a^ mentis and ouibus
tuis: vt discas timere dominum deum tuu^ in omni te^pore. Thou shalt separate
and put apart the tethe of all the fruit which the earth brings forth to the
every year. The teth also of thy grain and of thy wine and oil: The first
gendrynge of thy greatter beast, and of thy sheep that thou may learn to
fear thy lord god at al times. 1. Cor. 9.
Saint Paul at large does prove, that in the evangelical law, those that
does serve to the altar, should live by the altar. Christ him self although
he reproved the sinistrall judgment of the scrybes and pharisees, which
prefarred the teathes of myntes, anys, and rewe before the wayghtier matters of
the law as judgment, mercy and faith. Yet he did not reprove such teathes,
but by his own words bound us to pay them, saying: Haec oportet facere and
illa non omittere. Specially we be bound to keep judgment, mercy and faith,
and yet be we bound also not to omytte and leave unpaid our teathes. Saint
Augustine in a book that he intyteleth, De rectitudine co^uersationis
catholicae, thus writes: Vnusquisque de quali ingenio vel artificio viuit, de
ipso decima^ donet. Consideret quia omnia dei sunt per quae viuit, sieve terra,
sieve flumina, sieve semina, vel omnia quae sub coelo sunt vel super coelos. Et
si ipse non dedisset, nihil vtique haberet, na^ deus qui dignatur totu^ dare,
decimam de suo dignatur nobis repetere, non sibi penitus sed nobis profuturam.
Every man of what faculte or craft so ever he be, of that let him teathe, let
him consider, that al is gods whereby he lives, whether it be the earth, the
water, seeds, underneath heaven or above heaven, all is gods. And except he
had sent it, we had had nothing: God therefore which gave us all together, does
vouchsaue to ask the teath of us again, not for his but for our great
profytte: and proving this by the testymony of the prophet Malachy, the
third chapter, infers: Nolite de cuncta substantia vestra fraudare
decimam, ne vobis nouem parts auferantur and sola decima remaneat. Defraude
not your teathes of any part of your substance, lest that the nine parts be
taken from you, and only the tenth remain with you. For as the same saint
Augustyn says in a sermon. Sermon. 219. de tempo.
Haec est domini iustissima consuetudo, vt si illi decimam non dederis, tu ad
decimam reuoceris. This is gods most ryghtuous custom, that if thou pay not
the tenth to him, he will drive the to the tenthe only. Let us be obedient both
to god and to man, yt in both parts we be found giltles, payeng to Ceasar ye
which is Ceasars, and to god that which is gods. Above al things let us
apply our endeavor to set forth the glory of god, to maintain the true
catholic faith of christ: and to use such means as may most make to this
end. And what means is that? Surely the fact of Iulianus teaches us. Augu.
li. ^. co^fes. ca. 5.
Iulianus intendyng to destroy the faith of Christ, commanded no learning
nor scoles to be had among the christians in his empire, well knowing that
when all learning were gone, the faith would soon decay after. Wherefore we
may gether of the contrary that the chiefest means to maintain the faith is
to set up learning, to maintain scoles to put your children to know, what
the will of god is, and so to be able afterward to teach other the same. It
was never more need to speak and cry upon it. The vniuersitees decay:
Gra^mer scoles be desolated. The old trees by reason of age wear away and
gdy: there is another slyppes nor eraffes new planted: it is to be feared
therefore, that there will be no more orchardes: it is to be feared that the
faith will away. The kings grace of his bountyfull goodness, well co^sideryng
this decay, has gracyously erected i^ each vniuersitees of this his realm.v.
lessons: the stypende arysynge to four hundredth pound yearly: beside his
gracyous exhibitio^s surmountynge far the sum before spoken of. This to ye
mayntenaunce of christ's faith and setting forth of good learning, his grace
has done: follow, follow for the reverence of god, follow and help forth good
learning, the key of christ's faith. Much you have of your own, much comes
daily by exectorsshyp, defraude not ye dead, be true to them, help poor
scolers, help poor widows, help the poor prisoners that lie in chains and
yrons. Set forth the glory of god in this point: and so shall you perform this
his precepte, payeng to Ceasar that which is Ceasars, and to god, that which
is gods part. Play here the true stuerdes, and god shall accept your
count, admittyng you to be cytesins of his glorious and tryumphant city,
where as your names shall be written in the book of life, to enjoy the eternal
kingdom: which grant us the father the son and the holy ghost: to whom be
glory, honor, and empire, for ever. Amen:

Here ends master Chedsey sermon.
Here begins master Scotts Sermon.
Miserunt Iudaei ad Ioannem.

John^. 1.
THE Jews sent from Jerusalem prestes and Levites to John^, that they should
ask him what art you? And he confessed, and did not deny, and he did confess,
saying. I am not christ. And they asked him, what then art thou Elias? and he
said I am not, art thou the prophet? and he answered, no, they said
therefore unto him, what art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent
us, he said, I am the voice of a crier in wilderness. Make ready the way of
our lord as Isaie ye prophet did say. Iho. 1.

THe Jews did know by the prophecy of Jacob the Patriarch, Genesis 4.9.
that they should always have amongst them a ruler of their own nacio^ of
the tribe and family of Judas unto such time as Messiah should come to
deliver them out of captivity and bondage. Wherefore they seeing their kyndome
divided into four parts, and ruled of four Alyens and strangers appointed
by the Romans to have rule and dominion over them, did think that Christ
was at hand, which expectation and hoope of his coming (as Origin does say)
did greatly comfort them, in so much that certain factions and busy
fellows did take upon them, and pretended as they had been christ drawing
after them much people under a pretense of delyueringe the Jews out of the
bondage and captivity of the Romans as was Theudas and Judas Galileus, Act.
5.18. Iose. 1 20.4.
as it does appear in thactes of the Apostels, and more at large in the
Antiquites of Josephus, but they were shortly extinguished and dystroyed, not
withstandyng the Jews contynuynge in their hope, and expectation of the
coming of Christ: when they did se John^ Baptist appear in wilderness, a
man ye lived after a straight and hard fashyo^, using none other delicates then
the wilderness did minister unto him. Apareled in homely, and unpleasant
clothinge, made of hear, preachinge earnestlye unto the people penance.
Baptisinge them in water as to prepare the^ to Christ. And also (as Josephus
does testify) teaching them the use of baptism, they did come runnynge unto
him out of every place, and gave such credence to his precepts that many of
the people thought he had been christ, Luc. 3.
but that ye may more plainly perceive both the preachinge of John^ and also
the opinion of the people toward him. I shall open unto you the testimony of
Josephus he says thus. 18. Anti. 10
Iohannem (qui vocabitur Baptista) occidit Herodes. Herod slew John^ that was
called Baptist a very good man, which did bid the Jews yt they should apply
virtue, exercise justice, and live well disposedlye toward god. And that they
should grow as it were into one body by Baptime, saying that Baptime should
then be acceptable, if it were not only taken to wasshe away sins that be
past, but if it be also kept for chastity of the body, purity of the soul,
and be had as a sure seal, or closet of all virtues and when he taught them
thus, the people came runnyng to him on every side, and were ready to obey him
in all things, thus far Josephus. Now at the same time also our savior
Christ began to be notable, both by his preachinge, and by wonders and
miracles that he wroughte, which although many of the common people, did
well esteem and receive, yet notwythstandyng the Pharysees Scrybes, and high
priests did grudge against them greatly enuyenge, and malisynge Christ,
wherefore of the opinion that the common people had conceived of John^, and
of the malice and dysdayne that the Pharysees, Scrybes, and high priests had
against Christ, they sent unto John^ to ask him if he were christ, for no
favor nor good mind that they had to John^ but for the malice and hatred that
they bare toward Christ, coveting to have the testimony of John^ for a time
against Christ, whose estimation, which they perceived did begin to be great
amongst ye people, they would have quenched, as Christ does witness him self,
Ioh. 5.
saying. Vos misistis ad Ioannem. you sent unto John^, and he did witness
with me, he was a shynynge and a burning candle and you would have reioysed in
his light for a time. Now they did send of this measage not of the commyn
sort as they did the 7 of John^ to take Christ, but they sent preistes and
Levites, that is to say men of most Aucthorite with the^ and as they were
thought of most wisdom, and learning, such as might with their Aucthorite
move him, and by flattery persuade him to say that he were Christ. And here
is just occasion ministered unto me, to speak of the prestes both of tholde
law and of the new, which thing I will do so briefly as I can. Preces.

Priests in the old law were always elect and chosen of ye tribe of Leui,
and of the stock of Aaron to stand long in making rehersall of the
ceremonies that they used it should be not only for this matter superfluouse,
but also unto you very tedious. Wherefore I will speak no more of them then
saint Paul does to the Hebrews, that is that they were as means, appointed
between the people, and god, to offer up unto god sacrifice and oblation so
well for thesyn^es and ignorances of them selfs, as of the people, which
sacrifices and oblations, could in no condition puryfye, nor make clean the
conscience of the worshypper, for they did co^siste in outward things, Hebre.
9.
but christ coming a bishop of good things by a more large and a more
perfaite tabernacle, not made with man's hand, yt is to say, not of this kind
of buyldyng, not by the blood, of gootes and calves, but by his own precyouse
blood, entered ones into the holy place, having found ever lasting redemption:
This is the priest that Dauyd did speak on, which is of thorder of
Melchisadech, this is ye priest which offered up thonly oblatio^ which
pacified the wrath of the father of heaven, and reconciled again man unto him,
stoppyng up the deuels mouth, and payeng the su^me dew for ye forfait, and
transgressyo^ according to ye saying of Dauyd. Misericordia, Ssal. 84
and veritas obuiauerunt sibi, iusticia and pax osculati suut. Mercy and truth
has met together, and justice and peace has kyssed. This high priest christ
taking away ye preesthoode of tholde law which was but a shadow, and a
figure given for a time: did constitute a new order of prestes, which should
not be occupied in vain and outward things as the forther were: but yt should
offer up to god ye father in a savor of a sweet smellyng, his blessed body and
blood in ye sacrament of thaulter. which should also minister the sacraments
of the church, whereby (as by means) grace is given of god by christ unto man,
and be diligently occupied in declaryng his word to the people: whose life,
co^uersatio^, and behauour of what sort it should be saint Paul does declare
plainly in Timothe, saying. 1. Tim. 4.
Esto forma fidelium. Look that thou be an example of the faith in word and
communication, in lief, and conversation in love, in spirit, in faith in
purity, apply thy self to readyng, exhorting and teaching, and doctrine, do
not neglect the gift that is in the, which is given unto the by prophecye,
with imposition or layeng hands upon the, by the authorite of priesthood,
exercise these things and be all together in these things, that thy
progress, and going forward may be manifest, to all men, Tit. 1.
likewise unto Tite he says. Oportet Episcopum inculpatum esse, It is
necessary for a Bishop or a priest to be blameles, as the steward of god, not
stubburne, not angrye, not a drunckerde, not a brawler, nor a fyghter, not
fylthily given to lucre, but a keeper of hospitalite, studious of things that
be good, sobre rightuouse, godly, temperate, cleuyng fast unto that faithful
word that is according to learning, that he be able to exhort and teach by
holsom lernyng, and to confute them that say the contrary. Now how far the
lyfes of many prestes have been, and yet be still, from this rule of saint
Paul, I speak this against my will, being sorry for it. It is unknown to no
man in so much that the hole order of presthode, which was wont to be had in
great reputation, as the worthiness of the thing does require, is so run in
contempt, that it is now nothing else but a laughing stock for the people,
and sure that would not be so: 1. Tim. 5.
for Qui been presunt presbyteri, duplici honor digni habentur.

Those prestes that do rule and look to their cure well, be worthy double
honor. And if that a man would consider severally every condition and sort of
men, he should find no one state, wherein there be not very many which nothing
do live according to their vocation: and yet when as this does come to pass
in every condition and sort of men, only ye hole order of presthode, is
therefore despised and contempned: if that for the mysbehauour and naughty life
of certain, the hole company should be despised: why then be not the apostles
of Christ contemned, which were but twelve in nombre, and one of them was a
deuell, and did betraye his master. Amongst the disciples of saint Paul
Philetus and Hymineus did forsake their master, and fell to heresye. 2. Timo 2
Demas did forsake him also, and gave him self to the pleasures of the world.
Alexander the blacksmith did not only forsake him, 2. Tim. 4.
but also besides he did him great displeasures: yet notwithstanding,
Timothe, Tite, and Luke, with other mo, did continewe faithful. And we do not
read, that ever the naughtynes of their fellows was cast unto them, as for a
rebuke. I do greatly meruayl, that seeing in these days men be so well seen in
scripture, that they can not spy among all other things, how they should
use them selves toward prestes. Saint Paul says. Rogamus vos fratres vt
cognoscatis eos qui laborant inter vos. 1. These. 5.
we beseech you brethren, that ye would know them which do labor amongst you,
and have the ouersyghte of you in the lord, and do admonysh you that ye have
them in great price or estimation by love, for their works sake, and be at
peace with them. Also to the Hebrews: Parete his qui praesunt vobis etc. Hebre.
1^.


Obey them that have the ouersyght of you, and submit your selves unto them,
for they watch for your souls even as they that must give account therefore,
that they do it with joy, and not with grefe, for that is not profitable for
you. Saint Paul byddeth you that ye should obey them, and you in all
condicio^s do withstand them: He byddeth that ye should subject and submit
your selves unto them: and you will have them subject unto all other, and as
they were abiectes and castawayes: you make exclamatio^ after a most ungodly
fashyon against them: But peradventure here some will say unto me that they
be no better worthy for they be but fools and negligent in doing their
deuties, but I say unto these again, that they them selves be more fools,
which al together do omit their own deuties, and be so curyous in finding
faults with other men, and think that is leafull for them, all together to
forsloo their own deuties, because that other be negligent in doing of
theyrs. Math 7.
But unto such does christ speak, saying: Thou fool, and blind fellow:
first cast the great block out of thine own eye, and then thou shall se to
take a little mote out of thy fellows eye, likewise saint Paul says unto the
same. Romans 2.
Qui iudicas alterum teipsum condemnas, Thou that do judge an other man thou
doeste condemn thy self, for thou thy self do commytte the same crimes
that thou reprehendes in an other man. But they will say again, that that can
not be so, for they be not priests, unto that I answer, that then they be no
christen men for every true christen man is a priest as the scripture does
witness: Apoc. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
Vos estis regale sacerdotium gens sancta. you are a preestly kingdom, and a
holy people. Also it is said unto Christ: Thou have redeemed us by thy blood out
of all kynredes and tongues, and peoples, and nations: and haste made us unto
our god kings, and priests, and we shall raygne on the earth. yet you must
not think, that every man is a priest, so that he should ministre ye
sacraments, or interpret and teach gods word: but every man is a priest as
he is a king. He is a king for because that where as he was a servant and
bondsman unto the deuell, syn, and the flesh, by Christ he is now delivered,
and they be thrown under his feet: that they no longer should rule him: but
of the contrary he should keape in subjection, and oppress them, so often as
they do assaute him: as saint Paul does say: Ne regnet peccatum in mortali
corpore vestro. Romans 6.
Let not syn raygne in your mortal body, so that ye obey it according to the
desires thereof: another give you your members unto sin, to be weapons of
vnryghtwysenes: but give your selves unto god, as they yt be dead, are become
living: and your me^bres unto god, to be weapons of rightwysnesse: for sin
shall not have power over you: even so every christen man is a priest, that he
should kill and put to death his own affections, ustes, and desires: and
should offer up unto god his body a sacrifice, that is lively and acceptable
unto god: Romans 12.
as saint Paul says. Notwithstanding that this is the dewtie of every
christen man, and unto the performance of this, is every man eue^ so streyghtly
bound, as the priest is to his cure: yet many do give them selves (and
specially these that thus rail and cry out of priests) unto idelnesse,
eating, drynkyng, and banketting, rather to encorage and to provoke the lusts
and desires of their flesh, then to quench and to oppress them: and rather
wyllyngly to give them selves again into the service of ye deuell, then to
withstand his assaults, they do spend their time, at dyse and cards, with
such other (as they call the^) pastimes which ben occasyon of great
contention, debate, and strife, and bring with them great oaths, and perjury.

They have also commonly in their mouths so fylthie, and vnclenlye
communication, as christen ears would not wyllyngly hear, and yet they
living after this ungodly rate and fashion, flatering, and pleasynge well
them selves, do cry out with open mouth of priests, as such as were not
worthy to live: this would not be so brethren, but rather first take the end
of ye wallet that hanges on your back with your own faults, and turn it
before your face, and so espy and amend your own lives, when ye be
admonished thereof: and then if ye se other priests offend, you may rebuke
them: but yet so, that ye do not pass the bonds of brotherly love. And
consider with your selfs whereupon thoccasyon does rise, that there be in these
days so many naughty priests, many there be (it can not be denied) which of
their own wilful naughtynesse, do live unworthy their vocation: yet this I
will say again, that a great sort mo do run amysse, by the means of
temporal men: for if a priest can flatter smothly, if he will wynke or rather
laugh at your vices, if he will keape you company at bankettynge, disyng and
cardynge, run with you of hunting and hawkynge, which things draw after
them al kind of vices, he shall be called a good fellow, and on such ye will
bestow your benefices, if money will let you give them freely. These days of
ours (as touching prestes) be much like unto the time that we spoke of now,
when as the Jews sent from Jerusalem to John^: for as Josephus does testify,
14. Anti. Joseph. 8.
after yt (by the great contention had between Aristobolus and Hyrchanus his
brother) Pompey ye Romayne had entered in to Iherusalem, and polluted the temple
of god, there was neither respect had of the trybe of Leui, 15. Iose 2.
nor of the stock of Aaron: but those that were of leest estimation, and most
unworthy that dignite, were chosen to be hye priests: Even so Pompeye this
Roman, that is to say, Covetousness, that was wont to raygne at Rome, has
invaded us, and is entered into the hearts of men, which should be temples of
god, and so polluted them, that if a man were as well learned as ever was
Salamon, 1. Cor. 6. 2. Cor. 6.
and as virtuous in living as ever was Samuel, he shall speed of living or
benefyce, but at a few temporal men's hands (some be good or else god forbid)
without money: but rather his learning shall be called foolyshnes, and his
virtuous life hypocrisy. But of the contrary part if he bring money, without
any regard, yea or mention of either learning or virtue, he shall be sure to
speade. This Romish monster, I mean covetousness, has so inflamed and set a
fire (as I have said) the hearts of men, that they do not refuse, Romans 7. Acto.
8.
as S. Paul says, to sell them selves to ye deuell, under syn (for Symoni ca^
be no less then perdition, both to ye vyer and the seller) so greatly be we
given to lucre and to gaynes, but what shall it profyt a man to gain all ye
world if he loose his own soul, says christ, yea let Christ say what he
will, that is a thing we regard not we have him much in our mouths and
communication (as it does become us) but in our life and conversation we do
plainlye declare yt in very deed we do nothing esteem him, for our lives do
nothing agree with his word or commandments: we call him father, and
heavenly father, but we do not use our selves toward him as loving
children, yea we call him ye lord and the living lord, but we do nothing
less then show our selves obediente servants unto him: god says by his
prophette Malachie. Si ego pater: Malach. 1
vbi est honor meus: Si ego dominus? vbi est timor meus. if I be your father
where is the honor that ye give unto me, if I be your lord where is my fear,
that should be in you. And surely I do think yt this questyo^, might never
better have been asked then now in our days, for the fear of god is clearly
gonn^ out of men's hearts, in so much that I do fear that there be many
that say in their hearts, there is no god. And that thing does move me so to
think, which moved David to say. Spal. 1.
Dixit insipiens in cord suo non est deus. The folysh said in his heart there
is no god, which thing David does prove after this sort, they be corrupt
and abominable in their studies and inventions, there is not among them that
does good, no not one, they have al run out of the way, and be unprofitable,
their throat is an open grave, they use their tongues to dysceate and craft,
the venom of Aspis is under their lyppes, whose mouth is full of cursynge,
evil sayenges, and bytternes, their feet be swyfte to shed blood,
destruction and myschief is in their ways, and they have not known the way
of peace, and after he adds the cause hereof, saying, the fear of god is not
before their eyes, now we may thus gather an argument with David, now men in our
days live after this same sort, drowned in the same vices, wherefore ye fear
of god is not before their eyes, and where it is not, there is no wysedeme for.
Spal. 1^^.
Initium Sapientiae timor domini. The beginning of wisdom: is the fear of
our Lord: Therefore what so ever they speak with their mouth outwardly, they
say with them selves in their hearts there is no god for if we did think with
our selves that there is a god, which will reward virtuous living as he
promises that he will do, and punyshe the wicked for sin as he does
threte^, if that hope of reward did work nothing with us, yet fear of
punishment, should make us somewhat to refrain, and apply our selves to
godliness: but now I will return, and proceade in the text it follows. Vt
interrogarent e^ Tu quis es? That they should ask him, what art thou. Here
may we note two things. First ye sinistral, and arrogant fashyon of these
prestes, which would not ask him directly if he were christ, although they
were sent for that purpose: but disdaynedly did ask him, what art thou?
which do take upon the to baptyse and to teach the people new rytes.
Again we may note the craft of the deuel which even as he did deceive him
self in heaven, saying yt he wold^ assende above the heavens and be yl^e the
highest, Isai. 14.
and as he did disceyue our fore parents in paradyse, saying unto them,
that if they would eat of the aple, which was inhibited, then their eyes
should be opened, Gene. 3.
and they should be like unto god, knowenge good and evil: Even so he goes
about by these Jews to deceive John^ here in earth, that he should goo about to
be like unto his master, and to take unto him the glory dew unto his master
Christ: but John^ was no reed, that he could be moved with any flattering or
temptation, so that the deuell and his members in temptyng of him lost their
labor. The deuell has from the beginning used always this craft and snare,
in deceauing of men, and yet still does use: and yet man is so dull and gross
of him self, and so negligent in prouydinge those things which he for his
own soul health. And in avoiding of the contrary, that with this old beat
and snare many be daily trapped and poysonid. First to begin with the
bishop of Rome, which did profess to be Seruus seruorum dei. The servant
of the servants of god: but he had this beat laid for him, and swalowed it:
wherefore he would be Dominus dominorum. Lord and master of lords: for he did
usurp and subdewe unto him al christen nations, with kings and emperors, and
over them would be ruler and head. And if a man should have moved this question
to him, which was moved to John^, Tu quis es? what art thou? which do
thus take upon ye to be lord over kings and emperors. He would have answered
that he had b^^ Christ's vicar in earth: when as there could be nothing more
contrary, then was his fashyon and usage, unto the behauour of our savior
Christ, while he was in earth: For as Christ did excel in humilite, so did he
excel in pride, and exalting of him self. But thanks be to god, his comb
is somewhat cut, and we for our part be delivered from his tyranny: and have
him for our chief head under Christ in earth, whom scripture does apoynte us
to have, that is our kings majesty. yet notwithstanding, that we be
delivered from this Romyshe bondage, there be amongst us yet a great meany
which daily be poysened with this same venim of the deuel, that he was poysened
withal. I mean pride of heart, so that they will not be content with their
own state and condition, but do study and labor by all means to be like
unto their masters: which thing I would to god we would banyshe and throw
away with the bishop of Rome: and that every man would be content to walk
worthily in his own vocation, where unto he is called, Ephe. 4.
with all loulynesse and gentylnesse of mind, as saint Paul gives counsayl.
But as I said of christ, so I may say of saint Paul, we do in our mouth,
and in words greatly extol laud, and praise saint Paul and we cry out of
the devil, and defy him. But when as saint Paul bydded us do one thing,
and the deuel does alure us to the contrary: we do in deed forsake the
commandments of saint Paul and do follow the counsel of the deuell. Saint
Paul stands on the one side and says: let nothing be done by contention or
by vain glory, but that through mekenes of mind, Philip. 2.
every man esteem an other better then him self, the oeuell stands on the
other side, and he says be contentious, and vayn glorious, and let every man
think him self better then an other, this intisement and persuasion of the
devil we do gladly enbrace, nothing regarding the precepts of saint Paul.
notwithstanding the great favor and estimation that we prentende in our words
to have him in, we need not to go far to seek examples for the trial or
prove hereof, may we not see a serving man, having not past four nobles,
or.xl. s. wages to live upon, so gorgiously appareled in his gesture, and
behauoure of his body: in his paase, and going so use him self, as if he
were a man of substance, yea an Esquier, or a knight, and if a man would have
experience further of his manners and conditions, he shall find him stout in
words, lyberall ye prodigal in expenses, and all together given to prefer
himself unto other men, and if a man dare be so bold, as to move unto him this
questyon, that was moved to Ihon^. Tu quis es? What an chou? yt thus stoutely
take upon the. He will straight auaunce him self, and be ready to brawle and
to fight with him, so that the prophet Dauyd may be thought to have spoken of
such when he said. Vani filii hominum, Spal. 61.
mendaces filii hominum: The children of men be vain, the children of men be
liars, thus flattering them selves, thinking them selves more worthy then
other men, yea they be more vain then vanite the self, if they were wayed
therewith in a pare of balaunces. yet not only these be straungled in this
snare, but also many other. A prentyse, which is bound by promise, suerties,
indentures to be obediente to his master for certain years to do him true
and dylygent service: within few years after that he has tasted of this
beat, given him of the deuell, he begins to stand in his own conceyte, to
disdain his master, to neglecte his office, and dewtie, yea nothing to
regard, neither his own profyt, nor the profyt of his master: if he be
gentlye admonisshed, he will not regard it, but rather will laugh thereat: if
he be with sharp words reprehended, he will make answer again chorlishly:
and if his master goo about to correct him, he will withstand him yea and
take the staff by the end: and if this question be propounded unto him. Tu quis
es. what art thou, that will not be obediente to thy ma^ster, he will answer
straight I am to good to do service to such a master, and these specially
will have in their hands the new testament, and they will talk much of the
scripture, and gods word, and yet will not learn thereof to be obedient, and
gentle unto their masters: they will taulke much of Paul, and yet it does
nothing move them that Paul in so many places does beete and incoulcate in,
that servants should be obedient, and faithful to their masters, as unto
Tite. Seruos hortare vt suis dominis pareant. Tit. 2
Exhort and move servants that they do obey their masters yt they please
them in all things, that they be no aunsweres, gyuinge one word for an other,
that they do not wtdrawe their masters goods, but that they show all
faythfulnes, yt they may adourne the doctrine of god our savior in all
things. Likewise saint Petre says let servants be subject unto their
masters, with fear, 1. Pet. 2.
not only to those that be good and, gentle, but also to those yt be froward,
much like unto these stubbarue prentyses, be children of this time: which
after they be come to certain years of age, they be also taken in this snare
of the deuel, and begin to please them selves, and will no longer be in
subjection to their parents, and except they be correct by time, and holden
under, it will come to pass that the wise man says. Eccle. ^0.
Equus indomitus euadit durus, and filius remissus, euadit praecep^ A horse
that is not broken by time grows chorlyshe, and a child that is set at
liberty, runs headlynges, yea into all kind of vices. And this comes to
pass for the most part by the remisnes of parents: which with to great
lenite and te^dernes, do bring up their children without fear or correction:
For as the same wise man says: Correct thy child, and thou shalt make him
fear the: play with him and he will make the sad: laugh not with him, lest thou
weape with him: but hold down his neck, while he is young, and correct him
in his youth, lest he grow stoubburne, and will not obey the, and turn to
thy grefe and heuinesse. And if a man should ask any of these young men (when
they will not be obedient to their parents) this questyon before mencyoned:
what art thou? that wylt not obey thy father and mother, and be ruled by them.
They will make answer and say: I am now no child, I am come to the years of
discretion, I know what is for me, and what is against me. Hear how that the
deuell has not only taken the^ in his snare, but also does lead them forth
whither him list: theachyng them to excuse them, and to defend their fault:
which is worse then the crime it self. If I should after this sort, run
through all and synguler states and conditions of men, it should appear plainly,
how that in every condition, very many do labor (as I have said before) to be
like unto their masters, and but a few will come unto christ, to be his
scolers: although he cry earnestly: Math. 11.
come unto me all you that labor, and be laden, and I shall refreshe you, and
you shall find rest for your souls. But the rest of the soul is not the
thing that we regard, of the body and the pleasours thereof is all our mind:
wherefore we do wyllyngly give ear to the deuell: mouynge us to the rest and
pleasures of the body, and do stop our ears, and will not hear Christ,
mouyng us to seek the rest of the soul. Wherefore we be not content with our
own proper vocation, but one does disdain, and envy an other: not being
content that other should excel us in any thing This powder of the deuell
sprynkled in our hearts, is ye cause not only of the enormyte of these that I
have spoken on before: But also of all other of the same sort. This is the
cause that private persons do grudge and disdain with common officers: and
that the officers again do despise those that be under them, laboring still
to go alofte and to be higher in promotio^ and dignite: hereof it comes yt the
lay people do grudge against ye cleargye, disdaynynge to be taught of them,
challengynge unto them selves a more perfaicte knowledge in scripture then the
other have, and say that the mysteries of scriptures be opened unto them, by,
I can not tell, what spirit, so that if they have read over once the new
testament in english, they will not stick to enterprete the most darkest
places in scripture, contrary both to the ancient and most holy doctors,
and also the decrees of the church. And if this question be moved unto them,
that was moved unto John^. Tu quis es? What art thou that thus do take
upon the to interpret scripture, contrary to the church, and the doctors
thereof: he will straight make answer, and say I am one whose eyes it has
pleased god to have opened that I should se his truth: the church has erred,
the doctors have been disceaued, as I know I my self can not be, for I am suere
that I am one of the predestinate and elect, and thereof they will largely, and
lyberally dispute and reason, not knowing what the scripture does mean by
predestination and election: for they seem to make it such a thing, as and if
god should appoint certain out by the head, and say these I will shall be
saved, how so ever they do live. And should shette an other sort ou^ of the
doors, and say: they should be damned if they lived never so virtuously:
which thing either to say or think is a detestable error, and a deuellyshe
opinion. I do think that Paul knew no such election; although they gether of
him, many places for the confirmation thereof, which truly understand, does
nothing make for their purpose, for he says. 2. Timo. 2
Omnia suffero propter electos, vt and ipsi salutem consequantur. I do suffer
all things for the elect, that they also may obtain salvation. Likewise
saint Petre says, 2. Pet. 1.
minister in your faith virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperaunce,
in temperaunce patience, in patience godliness, in godliness brotherly love, in
brotherlye love, general love: for if these things be plentuously in you,
they will not let you be idel, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but he that lacks these things, is blind and gropeth for the
way with his hand, and has forgotten that he was clenshed from his old
sins, wherefore breatherne says saint Petre give the more diligence, to make
your calling, and election sure for if ye do these things ye shall not fall:
and by these means shall there be plenteously ministered unto you an entrance
in to the everlasting kingdom of our lord and savior Jesus Christ. Again
saint Paul says in a great man's house, 2. Timo. 2
are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth, some for
honor, and some to dishonor but if a man purge himself from these, he shall be
a vessel sanctified unto honor mete for the lord, and prepared unto al good
works. Now for gods sake brethren, let us leave these fantasies, and hear
what the prophet Dauyd says unto such that presumptuously do talk of such
things as they be ignorant in, and live after their lusts: Intelligite
insipientes in populo, Psalm. 93.
and stulti aliqua^do sapite. Understand you unwise among the people, and
you fools at the length learn wisdom: Do you think that he that made the
ear, does not hear these your presumptuouse words. Do you think that he
that made the eye, does not se your naughty lives. Do you think that he that
does correct people, will not punyshe you. And it folowes in the same psalm:
Our Lord does know the thought and imaginations of man; yt they be but
vain. Let us therefore learn a lesson of the good honest woman Anne, the wife
of Helchena, which says thus in her song: 1. Regi. 2.
Nolite multiplicare loqui sublimia gloriantes. Do not multiplye in speaking
of proud words glorieng. Let old things depart from your mouth for god is
the lord of knowledge, and your thought and imaginations be manifest unto him.
yea he is not only the god of knowledge: but as David says: Deus vltionum
dominus. Psalm. 93.
God is the lord of punishementes: and specially he will punyshe the proud.
Let us therefore dear brethren consider with our selves, that these fancies
and imaginations of our worthynes, be nothing else but snares of the deuell,
wherewith he has from the beginning deceived our elders: and with the same
goes about to deceive us also. And where as we do perceive them tyckle us: let
us move this questyon unto our selves: Tu quis es? what art thou? And consider
in our own hearts truly and dyligently, what we be in very deed, and how
unkindly we have used our selfs, toward so kind a god and a lord: which
has given us all such gifts, as we have, without any deserving of our
part. And then straight of this shall follow an other questyon, which is
this. Quare superbis terra and cinis? why art thou proud thou earth and ashes?
which thing no doubt John^ did consider: wherefore neither the craft of the
deuel, nor the flatery of the Jews could move him to take, when it was offered
unto him, the glory dew to his master Christ: But he did confess and he did
not deny. He confessed that he was not, and he did not deny what he was: and
so it did become him, which was the messengar of ye trought it self, to
declyne nothing at all from the trought. And undoubtedly that is the dewty of
those that be preachers of gods word, plainly, and at all times to declare
and speak the trought, without any respect of the pleasour or displeasour of
men: yea and also of all those that does profess Christ, which is the self
trought, to be gyrded as saint Paul says: Ephe. 6.
with the gyrdle of trought: so that at no time they go without the compass
thereof. But I do think, yt now in these days, many do not study, how they
may keep them within the compass of this gyrdle: but rather how they may brost
out, and specially merchants, and occupyers of London. which, as it is said,
if a man come to them, and desire to have of their ware, as a piece of clooth
or chamlet, they will straight show him one, and say, that that is for him:
and if he desire to se a better, they will say again, yea: and confirm it
with great oaths, that it is clear the best in his shop, and that there is
not a better in London. Now let him bye it, and so depart: and if an other se
it, and thereupon come to the same merchant, for such an other, he will
straight show him one, and set it out after the same sort, as he did the
other: and if the byer desire to se a better, and say that such a man had a
good piece of him, he will answer with great oaths, and say: This is worth three
of the other. if that this fashion be used among you Londoners, as many say it
is, ye do plainly declare that you have a contrary spirit, to this spirit.
That John^ had, his was a true spirit, and of god: yours is a lyinge spirit,
and of the deuell. But let us g^ forth with the text.

He did confess and said, I am not Christ: omittynge those things, that
they asked in words, he answers briefly to the intent of their mind, using
few words, for when a man begins with long circu^staunces fetched far,
from the matter it self, it is to be feared that there is some subtilte or
craft meant therein, which John^ did not know, he answered therefore to ye
thing it self, yt they went about, they asked him who he was, meaning if he
wear Christ, now he does not answer to the questyon what he was himself,
but to ye intent thereof saying, he was not Christ, which thing when as they
hard they wear no more earnest with him in it, for although they did neither
favor him, nor his doctrine, yet they thought he was worthy to be believed:
such is the strength, and nature of virtue, that it does engender: yea eue^ in
a man's enemies, an opinion of constauncie and faythfulnesse. Then they did
remember the testimony of Malachie the prophet, as touching the coming of
Helyas, Mala. 4.
which should go before christ to prepare his ways: wherefore they think,
seeing that they knew that Christ was at hand, and hearing John^ deny that he
was Christ, yt he is Helyas. They ask him therefore, what then art thou,
Helyas? And he said: I am not. Christ said that John^ was Hebras. Ihon^ him
self does deny it: and both be true. The Jews asked John^, whether he wear
in person Helyas Thesbites, 4. Regi. 2.
which was taken up in the fyrye charet. And unto that John^ answered, and
said he is not. Yet not withstanding he had commune with Helyas austerite of
lyuinge, boldness in reprehendynge of noughtynes, in spirit and office. For as
Helyas Thesbytes shall come before the latter coming of our savior Christ:
even so did John^ come before the first coming, and both to give warning to
ye people to prepare his ways. Wherefore Christ said trewely yt John^ was
Helyas: and also John^ saying yt he was not Helyas. They asked him then. Art you
the prophet? And he said no. They do not ask him simply, whither he were a
prophet or no: but if he were yt notable prophet, of whom Moses did speak
saying: Act. 7. Deuteronomy, 18.
your Lord god shall stir up among you of your own brethren a prophet like
unto me, and ye shall hear him: and so John^ answered truly, that he was not
that prophet. For Christ him self was he. They say therefore unto him. What
art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What say thou of
thy self. These priests and Levites thought them self cunning in scripture,
that if there had been any mention made therein of the coming of John, they
should have known. wherefore now they say unto him: what sayeste thou of thy
self: as who would say: scripture does make no mention of the: therefore thou
must declare thy self what thou art, such is the learning and wisdom of
man, when he stands in his own conceyt, and thinks that he can co^prehende
all mysteries, that then it turns unto very folyshnes. 1. Cor. 1 Isai. 29.
For Infatuauit dens sapientiam huius mundi and intellig^ ^tiam intelligentiu^
reiecit. God has made folysh the wisdom of this world, and has rejected
and cast away the learning of them that think them selves learned, and do not
acknowledge and render dew thanks unto him, that is the gyuer thereof. As it
may appear in these priests, and Levites, which wear cast in their own
turn: for Ihon^ in his answer does bewraye their ignorance, showing that
Isai the prophet had prophesied of his coming. He answers therefore and
faith. I am the voice of a ^^ye^ in wyldernes, to prepare the way of our
lord, as I faith prophet said. I said before, that John^ was no reed,
that is not unconstant, as it does hear appear more plainly for he does
continewe stedfastlye in the humility and lowelynes of spirit, which in his
answer makes no mention of his own worthiness, although he were more
excellent then a prophet, Math. 11.
and none more excellent then he amongst the children of women. Neither he
speaks of the nobility of his stock: although he was come of a great stock
in dead, but he tells what he is by office, forgetting (as saint Paul
says) those things that were behind him, Philip. 3.
loking all together at those things that were before him, he follows
according to the mark that was set him up: that he may get the reward of the
heavenly vocation: which less^^: I would to god yt all men in these days would
learn of John^, and specially common officers, which as it may be thought, be
altogether unlike unto John^ for he (that he might more faithfully and truly
execute his office, according to the will of his master) did forsake his
parents, with their hole family, yea and his patrimony if that he should have
had any, as it is most like he should, he did also forsake and fly from
idelnes, and the rest of the body, with delycate fare, and gorgious apparel he
did take upon him great pains, and labors, living hardly clothed in hear,
Math. 3.
he did lyberallye and boldlye reprehende offenders of all sorts, he hunted
after the favor of no man, nor feared no man's threatenings, but officers in
these our days, be of a contrary sort, for they do not regard nor require
an office, but for this end, that they may promote and exalte their friends,
enlarge their patrimony, live idely, fare dylycately, be appareled gorgiously,
and to bring these things to pas, they flatter great men, the contempne,
ye and polle poor men, if a rich man of any part do his dewtie, that he is
commanded to do, of his lord, or king, by them he shall be praised, yea and
well rewarded, but if the poor man do it with never so great dylygence, there
shall no word be spoken of it: again if the poor man therein offend, he
shall be streyghtly punyshed, if the rich man omit the hole, either the
officers mouths shall be stopped with a bribe, or else for fear of displeasure,
they will let it slyp, so that in them it shall not be punysshed: these
officers be be such as Dauyd speaks on in his spalme, where he says, Homo
cum in honor esset, non intellexit co^paratus est rumentis insipientibus: and
similis factus est illis. Man when he was promoted unto dignite or office did
not considre him self, he is compared to folyshe brute beasts, and he is even
like unto the^ in dead, for as the brute beast does neither remember things
past, nor consider things to come but give them selves altogether to these
things that be present, even so these officers do, for they neither remember
whereof they be come, nor what they have been, nor yet what they may come to, if
they abuse their office, and their master take dyspleasure with them, but look
what thing does playst them for the time, and that they enbrace: And well they
may be likened unto the noughtie servant ye christ speaks of which when his
master had made ouerseer of his householde, Math. 24
and was gone unto a strange contrye, said with him self: It will belong or my
master come home again, and therefore he begone to beat his fellow
servants, to eat and drink with dronckerdes, even so these officers do
think with them selves, that their acts can not come to ye ears of their
lord, or king, but let them take heed, for as it is a common saying. Multae
sunt Regum autes, et oculi. Kings have many ears, and eyes, and although yt
they can keape their factes close from the ears of a mortal king or lord,
yet they can not hyde the^ from him that is immortal: Psalm. 33.
whose countenance is over all evil doers. And he will come in that day that
they leest weane, and that hour that they know not, Math. 24
and will cut them into pieces and give them their reward, with ypocrites, where
shall be waylynge ang knasshynge of tethe learn therefore you officers, of John^
to forget those things that be behind you, that is the world with the pomp
thereof, and set your eyes only upon those things that be before you, that
is your dewtie, and that that does pertayne to the faithful performynge of
your offices. And it shall be said unto every one of you well thou faithful and
good servant, Math. 26.
thou have ben faithful over a few things, I shall constitute ye over many
enter into the joy of thy master for only that thing did John^ regard:
wherefore ^e says, that he is the voice of a crier in wyldernes. Christ in the
gospel says unto his Apostles, when he sent them of preaching, it shall not
be you that shall speak, but the spyryte of my father shall speak in you,
likewise dauyd in his spalmes says. Psalm. 44.
Lingua mea calamus scribae, velociter scribentis.

My tongue is the pen of a writer that writes fast, signifyenge that his
psalms were not his, but they were the work of the holy ghost: so John^ here
says he is the voice of a crier, as and if he should say, I speak nothing
of mine own head, but I speak those things that be commanded me of my
master to speak, lyberally vtterynge those things that my commission wylleth
me to speak, and nothing there unto adding.

Wherefore if you reiecte my saying ye do not reiecte me, but rather him that
speaks in me, for I am but a voice whereby as by an instrument Christ does
declare unto you his will. A voice of (...) self is a sound that goes before
the word, so that if the word do not follow, the voice is a vain thing, as
it were brass soundyng or a Cymball tincklynge. And so was John^ the voice of
Christ the everlasting word of the father without whom John^ should have been
a vain thing, but now that the word Christ did follow the voice is not
vain, but rather as Dauyd says. Vox domini in virtute vox domini in
magnificentia. Psalm. 28.
The voice of our Lord is in virtue ye voice of our Lord is in pythe, and in
strength, the voice of the lord that pulls down the high trees of Libanus,
which in dead John^ did when he pulled down the stout hearts of the Jews,
so that by penance, they wear content to be baptized of him, yet it was not
John^ that did it, but it was he which stood the last great day, of the feast
and cried saying, John^. 7.
if any man be a thyrste let him come unto me, and drink: the Euangelyst
says that he cried, which was because he would have every man to hear him,
that every man might be saved, 1. Timo. 2
and come to knoweledge of the truth, for it is not his will that any should
perysh. Wherefore they err which say, that of absolute necessite some must
needs be damned, for saint Paul says. Periunt, pro eo quod dilectionem
veritatis non receperunt, 2. These. 2.
in hoc vt salui fierent. They do perish, because they received not the love
of ye truth, ye they might have been saved, but peradventure some will
obiecte, and say if he would have every man saved then they shall be saved for
who can resist his will: unto this is to be answered that we must consydre
two wylles to be in in god, a will that goes before and an other that comes
after: by his first will he would have all men to walk in his
commandments: and so come to everlasting life, but when he sees the
untowardness of those that will follow their own lusts, and will not obey his
commandments, then by his later will he will have them punished according to
their deserts: as for an exemple. A man sets a tree in his garden, wyllyng
that it shall grow there many years for to bring forth fruit, now within
few years when he sees that it will bring forth none, he commands by
and by contrary to his first will, to cut it down saying, where unto does it
occupye the ground in vain. It is not unlike unto this, that is written in the
psalm. Psat. 79.
Vineam de Egipto transtulisti. Thou haste brought out of Egypt a vine. Thou
haste cast out Gentyles, and planted it, which vine (as the Psalmis shows
to be brief) for a time did greatly increase and grow, so that the shadow
thereof did cover the hills, but after the hedge was pulled down, and the
wild beasts did destroy it, and why, Isai. ^.
but because (as Esaie says) he looked yt it should have brought grapes and it
brought out thorns, so that the fault was in it, and not in him: for god does
ask by Esaie and says: what should I have done to my vineyard, that I have
not done: truly nothing. For as I have said, he cries unto us, willing
every manne to amend his life, and so to be saved. Yea he has cried in old
time by his prophettes, after by him self, his Apostels and disciples, and
still cries unto this day, by his preachers, but we stop our ears and
will not hear, we be much like unto the people of London, which do hear
after a sort. The belles of Paul's, when they ring to Matyns at mydnight, the
belles do sound in their ears, yet they will not rise, but rather will turn
them on the other side, and sleep again, for they think the day is not as yet
near, even so do we hear the preachers of god, their voice does sound in
our ears, but we will not arise from our noughty life: but still sleep in
sin thinking that the day does not draw near, when as we shall make
account of our acts, but let us not deceive our selves, for saint Paul
says, it is time for us to rise from sleep, the night is past and the day
draws near Now if the day were near in the time of saint Paul, that
is.xv. hundredth year a goo we may well think that it is now very near,
let us therefore open our ears and hear him cryenge: for if we will not, we
shall herafter cry, and he will not hear us, but there shall be other, that is
to say our noughty life, and they unto whom we have done iniurye and wrong,
accusynge us, and they shall be heard. wherefore if we will stop the ears of
god, that he shall not here our accusars, we must here him when he cries, and
also cry diligentely unto him by prayer, as Dauyd does witness of him self
that he did, saying. De profundis clamaui ad te domine. Psalm. 129.
Lord I have cried unto the from the bothome of my heart, Lord hear my voice:
and again. Labo raui clamans, Psalm. 68.
I have taken great pains in cryenge, so that I am horse while I trust in my
lord.

But even as we will not hear him when he cries, so we be very neglygent in
cryinge again to him. For surely I do think that syns the beginning of
Christ's church, there was never so little prayer used among christen men,
wherefore it may be well said unto us, that saint James said unto those that he
wrote his epistle unto, ye desire and ye have not, that ye desire, ye envy and
ye have indignation one toward an other and ye can not obteigne, ye fight, ye
war, and have not, because ye ask it not, ye ask and receive not because ye
ask it amysse, that ye may spend in your voluptuousnes. To stand long in
this thing, the time will not suffer me, but only this I will say, that where
as we stand, neade of many things all ready, we shall stand need of moo: if
we will not hear him cry and be dylygente in cryenge again to him: and that
not only in mouth, but also in heart, yea and in life: For what shall it
proffytte us to call god our father, if we will not use our selves as loving
children. What shall it avail us, to desire him to deliver us from all evil,
when as we our selves wyllyngely, do fall hedlynges in to all wickedness. But
now let us hear what he cries by John^, he cries thus: prepare and make
ready the way of our Lord. There be two ways of our Lord, one is, whereby
he commethe unto us, an other is whereby we goo unto him: and both these must
be prepared of us, after that we have hard his voice, as touching the first,
the condycyon and state of man is so miserable, Roma. 5,
that he of him self can not ones thyncke of the preparynge of this way, nor
of going unto god. But the love, mercy, and gentylnesse of god toward man, is
so great, that he wyllynglye of him self does come unto us: yea being his
extreme enemies, searching if he can have any entrance into our hertes, but
yet although that he comes of his own free will unto us without all our
deserts, we must molyfye, yea and open our hearts, that he may have
enteraunce, or else he will depart again: he says him self. Ecce sto ad
ostium, and pulso. Apoc. 1.
Behold I stand at the door, and I knock, and if any manne will hear my
voice, and open the door I will come into him, and I will suppe with him. Mark
he says he stands at the door of our hearts, and knocks, but now it is
our part, to hear his voice, and open our doors, for if we so do he will
(as he says) come in, if we will not, he will not brust the doors, and come
in, whether we will or no, for he will save no man against his will. But now
it is necessary to know how we should open this door, this same John^ does
teach us saying. Math. 3.


Penitentiam agite vitae prioris.

Do penance for your old life, for penance, if it be perfaict with the
three parts which be well enough known, Contrycyon, confession, and
satysfactyon. It is of such streyngthe, that by Christ, it makethe a man of
the servant and bondeman of the devil, the son and heir of god and
fellow heir with Christ, Luc. 3.
it makethe also (if that by it hye hills be pulled down, and low places be
exalted, if crooked ways be made streyghte, and sharp ways made plain) the
heart of man of a filthy lake, or den of sin and the devil, a temple and
dwelling place of the holy Ghost. But now when as this way is thus prepared
by penance we must beware and take heed yt we do not return again into
Egypt, but rather remember what we be now become, yt is that we be made the
temple of the holy ghost which temple if any manne profane, god will
destroy him, 1. Cor. 3.
we must therefore now straight enter into the other way, which is spoken of
in the Psalm: Psalm. 118.
Beati immaculati in via. Blissed be they that be undefiled in the way, that
is to say, that walk in the way of our Lord, in the latter end of this
verse, it does appear both what the way is, and also how we should use our
selves in it. First the way is ye law or commandments of god, which if we
keep will bring us to the heavenly kingdom where as Christ is gone before to
prepare us a place, but we must mark that the Psalmiste says, that we must
walk in the way, for we be strangers and have not here a bydynge city,
Hebre. 13.
but we look after one to come: wherefore we must not stand still, but rather
walk and go forther from virtue to virtue. Now if the time would suffer me, I
would speak here of the fashyons of men now in these days, for many there be,
as I think which do not walk in this way, but do ru^ne as it were in a
circuit, and may be lykened to a dog that runs in a whele, which still
goes and laboreth, and when he makes an end, he is even where he begone.
And so I do fear that men do in these days: their time goes, and they grow
in age, and yet look how they lived the last year, and even so they live this
year, and so will do the next: nothing at all increasynge in virtue nor
godlynes, but do as vittelars use to do, which take bread and drink of
bakers and brewers, to a day, not payenge money in hand, but tail with them:
and when the day of payment comes, they pay their money, and strike of the
old tails, and begin again to tail of new. And eue^ so do we: we be very
bold with god all the year long, and tail with him till lent comme: and
then we be confessed, keeping abstinence for a time, and receive the holy
Sacrament, and so sone as Easter is past, we begin even to tail of new, and
fall again to our old kind of living. But such be not these that David
called in this place, happy: for they do not walk undefiled in this way. This
same David does teach in an other place saying: Psalm. 18.
Si mei dominati non fuerint tunc immaculatus ero: if that the deuell and sin
did not overcome me, then I shall be undefiled. He that will endeavor him self
to walk thus in this way, must take the counsel of David in the first
Psalm, that he do remember and meditate this law both day and night, and
be like unto a tree that is set nigh unto a river to bring forth fruit in dew
time. And not only he must remember this way or law in his mouth, in
speaking and talking of it, but also he must have it in his heart. And then
as David says in an other place. Non subplantabuntur gressus eius. Psalm. 26.
He shall be sure that he can not be overthrown. yet not withstanding Christ
says that this is a narrow and a straight way, and that there be but a few
that find it: For although that there be no other thing, yea not the deuell
him self, that can pulle us out of this way, or overthrow us against our
will yet not withstanding, we our selfs if we walk not circumspectly, may
soon fall, and go out of it: Wherefore we must provide for three things. First
one to teach us this way, Secondaryly a candle to se how to walk in it.
Thyrdely and last a staff to hold up when we comme to slypper places. It is
god that must teach us this way, upon whom we must diligently call with
David, and say: Psalm. 24.
Vias tuas domine demo^stra mihi, and semitas tuas edoce me Lord show me thy
ways, and teach me thy paths. The candel that must give us light, is the
scripture of god, as Salamon witnesses saying: Prouer. 6
Mandatum lucerna, and lex, lux. The commandment of god is a candell, and the
law is light. The staff that we must walk by, is to live soberly,
ryghtuously, and godly. For as John^ says there lies in our way three
stumblyng stones, Tite. 2.
that is the concupiscence of the flesh, 1. John^. 2
the concupiscens of the eyes, which is covetousness, and pride. And if yt we
stumble at none of these three, we shall walk save in this way, which thing
we shall do, if we observe and keape ye three virtues before mencyoned which
must be gotten and preserved by three means: To live soberly, the mean is
fasting. To live ryghtuously, ye mean is to give alms. To live godly, ye
mean is to be occupied in prayer: which things if ye diligently observe, and
keep: we shall walk undefiled in this way, and so come home again at the length
to our heavenly country, from whence we were banished and exiled. There ever
to continewe, with the fathe, and the son, and the holy gooste: to whom be
laud, and praise in world without end. Amen.

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Aldersgate street by Johannes Herford, at the costs
and charges Robert Toye dwelling in Paul's church yard, at the sign of the
Bell. Anno dn^i 1545.


