BRITAINS GLORY, OR An Allegorical Dream: with the Exposition thereof.

Containing, The Heathens infidelity The Turks blasphemy The Popes
Hypocrisy Amsterdams variety The Church of Englands verity
in Religion.

And in our Church of England, The Kings excellency. His Issues integrity.
The Nobles and Gentries constancy. The Council and Judges fidelities. The
Preachers purity. The Bishops sincerity.


Conceived and written by ROBERT CARLYLE Gent. for the love and honor of his
King and Country.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELDE 1618.

Directions for the Reader.
THe Dream is implicate, or Allegorical, in Verse. The Exposition is
explicate, in Prose. The Staffes are numbered for the speedy turning to the
Exposition of every Staff; which also bear the same numbers: without which,
the Mystery of the Allegory, will hardly be understood. The Heathens
infidelity, is contained in the first four Staffes. The Turks blasphemy
from the fifth Staff to the eight. Amsterdams variety, from the eight to the
thirteenth. The Popes Hypocrisy, from the thirteenth to the seven and
twentieth. Our Churches verity, from the twenty seven to the last.
The Kings excellency, is handled in the 27.28.30.38. and 39. Staffes. His
Issues integrity, in the 29. Staff. The Nobility and Gentry, handled in the
33. Staff. The Council and Judges, in the 35 Staff. The Preachers purity,
in the 31. Staff. The Bishops in the 36. and 37. Staffes.
Errata.
Page 5. line 27. for pure read pour. Page 19. line 25. for which read does.

TO ALL VIRTUOUS Nobility, reverend Clergy, and well affected Gentry, ROBEKT
CARLYLE wishes grace, mercy, and peace in Christ Jesus.
RIGHT Noble, Religious and worthy persons, the Title Page demonstrateth unto
you, that the plot of this fabric has a general scope, and is erected upon
all your several reputations, so that for the interest which you may challenge
in this structure, I will entitle you with the Dedication: For in so much as
God has given you the inheritance of knowledge, Religion, and Virtue, you are
also coheires of the commendation thereof: And because this building is thus
magnificently beautified with excellent Statues, no less persons then your
selves, adorned with all the golden and precious robes of faithful Saints:
marvel not that I give it a glorious name; for if the Ark of God was called
The glory of Israel being a type only, 1. Sam 4.21. Then the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, the foundation of this frame, shall make it glorious eternally. I have
been curious in the workmanship of this Edifice, and careful lest my blunt
edged Chissell, in the caruing of your pictures, and inscription of your
Trophies, should blemish your personages, or dash out one letter of your fame:
If I have done well I shall be glad for my Countries sake; If I have committed
any one error I disdain not to have it amended in this work by such as are
better experienced then my self. Mean time I desire my love and good will may
be lovingly accepted. And so I rest,

Yours most devoted R. C.

The Dream.
1. THe Dream is this: One in a shape divine,
Transported by the Winds as swift as thought,
Whose face more glorious then the Sun did shine,
Me to an unknown climat quickly brought,
Whereof strange things that were within that Nation,
And of their natures he gave true relation.
2. He showed me Oar of Gold, which being tried
As Metals use to be in burning fire,
One should have thought would have been purified,
But contrary it turned to filthy mire,
And whosoever kept it afterward,
Should be with Sprights and Goblins strangely scard.
3. Besides the operation of this Oar
Was, whosoever touched it, to make blind
And sottish, so that they could never more
Have wit or sight in any perfect kind,
Except by bathing in one River pure,
In Europe Northward where they might have cure.
4. In this strange Country also was a flower,
Which this good Angel had no sooner gathered,
But within one half quarter of an hour,
As a thing blasted suddenly it withered,
And as the Marigold by the Sun is spread,
This by the Sun shut up and seemed as dead.
5. The Angel then transferred me to a Land,
Where huge deformed ugly Giants breed,
Which spoiled and burnt good corn which there did stand,
And set Tobacco that foul stinking weed,
One bad me taste, but the Angel bad me leave,
For that would me quite of my life bereave.
6. For this is not a man as you suppose,
But a black fiend which humane shape assumes,
That takes Tobacco thus through mouth and nose,
And brings from Hell these deuillish perfumes,
I started back seeing it was a Devil,
And prayed good Angel, save me from this evil.
7. Be not afraid quoth he, thou shall that see
Before that we depart this wicked Land,
Which never eye beheld: And then to me
Appeared damned creatures in the flames to stand,
Thse are Tabacconists said he, that for this turn,
Did whilst they lived, beforehand learn to burn.
8. Then suddenly he snatched me up and flew,
Until he came unto a thick-set Wood,
Where trees of all sorts many thousands grew,
And likewise Shrubs innumerable stood,
And look how many Trees and Shrubs there were,
So many several fruits they all did bear.
9. Some were like Apples, but were Crabs in taste,
And in the eating had but sour digestion:
Some were as bitter as the Oaken mast,
More fit for swine then any mags refection:
Some were delicious sweet, and perfect good,
Such as at first in Edens Garden stood.
10. But as that fruit was good and lushious,
The Situation of the Trees was bad,
For none of them by means of Vnder-bushes,
Sufficient room to sprout their branches had,
So th^^ for want of elbow-roome, a Tree
Not half so fruitful was as else might be.
11. Unfruitful briars choakt their sappy root,
And with sharp pricks did goad their tender Rind,
Thorns would not let their springing Arms to shoot,
Sprigs of wild Trees about their branches twinde,
As if they all malicious envy had
At that good fruit, seeing their own was bad.
12. Pity it was the husband-mans respect,
Did not root out these inconvenient lets;
He might have remedied that great defect,
By burning up those prejudicial sets,
For those Trees properly are made to burn,
As some to build, and some for other turn.
13. This when I had perused curiously,
The Angel led me to a goodly Vineyard,
Kept by a Tyrant, who swore furiously,
That he would kill me with his bloody whineyard.
The Angel saved me, and compelled him to
Declare the mischiefs which he there did do.
14. Then thus the Tyrant timerously said,
Northward from hence there is within a Land,
Amidst the Sea, a fruitful Paradise made,
Where goodly Vines in curious order stand,
Which prove exceeding plentiful: And there
I sometime great authority did bear.
15. And those fair Vines to all estates were free,
As well the Plough-man as the Potentate,
And every beggar might sufficed be,
Without controlement of the Magistrate,
That all degrees by virtue of that Grape,
Grew perfect wise, sober, temperate.
16. But I by craft and deuillish invention,
Desiring their subversion, cut those Vines
Unseasonably, to hinder their extention
In growth and spreading: And as oftentimes
As J with blood the Roots should have made moist,
A poison strong I closely in did foist.
17. Which to conceal from men's detection,
This trick I had, I suffered none to come
Within that Paradise for to make collection,
But I my self in person, or else some
Of my confederates, whom I put in trust,
Delivered them how, and to whom we lust.
18. Many diseases heerevpon did grow,
The Ague, Palsy, Megrims, Scurfe and Scab,
The cause of sicknesses they did not know,
For no man of the Grapes suspicion had.
By this I got at ending of their days,
All that they had for Rosemary and Bays.
19. At length my hellish purpose was descried
By one that vomited a poisoned Grape,
By reason of an Antidote applied,
And all the Country then did bear me hate,
And for those faults which I committed there,
They banished me, and so I thence came here.
20. And all these Vines which here you planted see,
Are of that sort, which I from thence did bring:
But I have caused other Weeds to be
Set with them, that they may together spring,
And both at one time put into the Press,
The Grapes and Weeds, to make a mingled mess.
21. And to keep well those Weeds, I have ordained,
They be continually underpropped with stakes,
By such as I have purposely retained,
Who in like case for their own lucre sakes,
Ten times more curious are to trim and prime
Their branches, than the branches of the Vine.
22. This mingle mangle composition,
Has much besotted all the Peoples brains,
And such is their sond supposition,
They hold him cursed that from this drink refraines:
The gains being great for selling of this Ale,
Has lift my head as high as Dragons tail.
23. And all the Country call me Demy-god,
Bending their knees to me with great devotion,
And offer Gold, Jewels and Emmerods,
And all they have for this my potion:
But out alas, their blind inchaunted sight
Sees not the Adder me that does them bite.
24. And that my gain may be enlarged the more,
I have devised a Law on Pain of death,
That none the Iuce of Grapes shall taste, before
The Iuce of Weeds be mixed, whereby of breath
I have bereaved thousands with this blade,
Which for that purpose only I have made.
25. The Angel answered, for this Impious fact,
A judgment on thee suddenly shall come,
Worse then the Serpents curse, for his vilde Act
Which in deluding Euah he had done:
Vengeance from Heaven shall one day drive thee out
From this fair Vineyard with thy Rabble rout.
26. Who pitifully shall lament thy case,
The aspect thereof will be so vehement:
But others shall rejoice at thy disgrace,
And for deliverance from thy mischiefs sent.
And therefore double shall thou punished be,
For thy delusion and vilde Tyranny.
27. And then me thought I was translated thence
Into a Paradise replenished
With fruitful Trees, Corn, Vines, and Herbs, from whence
The Tyrant had before been banished:
Who when be kept it was not so perfidious,
As is the man that keeps it now Religious.
28. For having Children, he instructs them how
They may those Trees, Corn, Vines and herbs best keep
From Caterpillars, Cankers, and the Sow,
That longs into that place by stealth to creep,
To spoil the Paradise; Of which sort there were
Some by that Tyrant left of purpose there.
29. So that this Paradise is like to flourish
Until the final period of all things,
For his fair issue know well how to nourish
Those holy Plants, and those clear water-springs,
Running there-through to keep from foul pollution,
Till all things have their final dissolution.
30. And how provision is by virtue made
To keep the Caterpillars from the Trees,
Js thus; A fire underneath is laid,
Whose smoke consumes them, as in swarms of Bees
Is used commonly to rid the Drones,
And so they prove continual fruitful ones.
31. And that the Corn from Cankers may be clean,
Thousands of careful Laborers are fitted,
To polish, cleanse, and winnow, by which mean,
None but good Corn is to the ground committed:
The like care is to clear the herbs from weeds,
So there good Corn and good herbs only breed.
32. But to keep out that beastly breed of Swine,
Three thick-set hedges decently are placed
About the Paradise, least they should undermine,
And so it might be utterly defaced:
These Fences being strong, this stinking rout
Shall never get in, though they run round about.
33. The first and out-most hedge is guarded well
By Champions of valiant condition,
Whowatch continually them to repel
With shield, and spear, or sword, or such munition:
And if the Swine but once come near that fence,
One of those weapons sure shall beat them thence.
34. But if the Swine do chance to sneake unseen,
Of all that well approved outward guard,
Within their hedge a little space between
The first and second fence, them to reward,
Lie beagles to discover the intrusion
Of those, that wish to Paradise confusion.
35. Being set on by this quick-sented crew,
The second guard being hunts-men soon prepare,
Who make those Swine their boldness for to rue,
By force of Iauelin, Pistol, Pike, or Spear:
Whose proved shields, and virtue of their Arms
Them' against a thousand boares, will save from harms.
36. But say a foul Swine in a clean beast skin,
Were closely put (as none but clean come there)
Thinking by subtle policy to get in,
Yet would it be discried ere it come near,
For the third guard is clad in Arms complete,
And search each beast that thither comes to eat.
37. And they with complete furniture addressed,
In single combat shun no fierce assault,
Such manly courage rests in their breast,
From an whole host they never will revolt,
But fight courageously and win the day,
And carry conquest for their Prize away.
38. This goodly Paradise thus is safely kept,
From unclean beasts, chiefly from Wolves and Boares
By virtues care, and provident respect,
Who chief Commander is, and keeps the doors,
And lets all in and out, and sets these guards,
(Whom for their pains he daily gives rewards)
And so the Lambs and silly Sheep feed free
From the Wolves rapine, and the Swines infection,
Plenty of Corn is always seen to be,
And fruits great store, by Virtues good direction,
Good Sallet herbs abundant, water clear
(As if it were distilled) in Rivers there.
40. And those three Guardes me thought devoutly prayed
For the continuance of this heavenly place,
And God grant Virtue all bappinesse they said,
And his posterity, with increase of grace
Mercy, and peace, for evermore. And then
Legions of Angels answered Amen.
THen toward me the Angel turned his face,
And said he now had showed me good from evil,
Virtue from vice, Celestial from base
Terrestrial things, bright Angels from the Devil,
And of these things to know the explanation,
Read these few leaves and see the Demonstration,
Which take and copy out with expedition,
For I must leave you now to Virtues guard,
To whom present it without intermission,
And he to you for this will give reward,
I took my pen, as he gave me commission,
And thus I writ the Visions exposition.
The EXPOSITION.
1 -- One in a shape divine, BY these words is meant the Spirit of Truth, the
Revelation of the Mystery of Jesus Christ, the divine and heavenly operation
of the holy Ghost.

Transported by the winds as swift as thought, Which is inspired, and breathed
into our souls, thoughts and consciences, from the mouth of the most sacred
Trinity: as Acts 2.2. it is said, that when the Apostles received the Holy
Ghost, suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing, and mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they sat.

Whose face more gloious then the Sun did shine. The Word of Truth may well
be said to be far more glorious then the Sun in brightness and shining, in
respect of the integrity and eternity, thereof: for the Sun only gives
light unto the outward eyes, to guide our natural feet from stumbling: But
this gracious visitation in Christ Jesus has lightened the darkness of our
hearts, to guide our minds and affections, lest we stumble at errors and
deadly sins, and so fall into perdition. S. John 1.4. speaking of the
worthiness of the word, says, It was life, and the life (meaning Christ Jesus)
was the light of men.

Me to an unknown Climate quickly brought. By this is to be understood a
Representation unto us of such places, where the light of the Gospel has not
yet shined, and where the word of Truth is not yet preached, as amongst the
Heathen people, Pagans, Infidels, Virginians, and other the like barbarous and
brutish Nations, and as it was with us Gentiles in the time of the Law before
our vocation, as it is written, we were sometimes strangers from the promise,
Ephesians. 2.12.

Where of Strange things that were within that Nation,
And of their Natures he gave true relation.
That is, the Spirit of grace does demonstrate unto us, the strange Religions
and Heresies of those foreign Nations, their vain superstitions, and blind
Idolatry, and the effects and events of their errors: 1. Cor. 4.5. He will
lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the Councels of the hearts
manifest.

2 He showed me Oar of Gold, -- All is not gold that glistereth, neither is
this meant to be material Oar, but that which indeed (if it had been of the
right touch) would have been far more precious then gold. It is meant by
their Religion, which being of a counterfeit stamp, is but a superficies,
fair without, but dross within; for instead of worshipping the living God,
they adore a dead Idol of gold, and sometimes of wood and stone: some of them
also worship the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; some put their trust in their
Coin, saying, with the covetous miser, Pecunia omnia potest: I pray God too
many of those Idolaters be not amongst us; nay, some worship the Devil
himself.

We read in the 2. King. 16.3. That Ahaz King of Jerusalem made his son to
go through the fire, after the abominations of the Heathen, as a Sacrifice to
the Idol Molech.

Also, in the 2. Kings 21. It is said of Manasseth, that he built the high
places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed, and he erected up Altars for
Baal, and made a grove as did Ahab King of Israel, and worshipped all the host
of Heaven, and served them.

And as in those times, they worshipped the Gods of their Nations, 2. King.
17.29. So is it now with those ignorant incredulous people in our days which
know not the true God.

-- which being tried,
As metals use to be, in burning fire,
One should have thought would have been purified,
But contrary it turned to filthy Mire,
The Gospel of Christ Jesus is compared to a burning fire, most vehement,
which makes a change of things through all the World: as in Luk 12.49. Christ
says, I am come to put fire on the earth, speaking of the Gospel, so then
this is the meaning of the last verses, That the Religion of those Idolaters
and Heathen people, being compared and examined with our Catholic and
Apostolic Doctrine, it needs no other touchstone, it shows both inside and
outside, that in respect thereof it is base and vilde, and as dirt and dross
to pure gold, as a pibble-stone to a precious Diamond.

If we diligently peruse the Scriptures, we shall find that Idolatry is
forbidden 500. times in the New and Old Testament with severe punishments: And
God himself for the vilde wickedness and abomination thereof, has
pronounced that the entisers of Idolatry seem they never so holy should be
slain, Deuteronomy. 13.5.

Blessed is the Tree whereby Righteousness comes, but that is cursed that is
made with hands, both it and he that made it: He because he made it, and it
being a corruptible thing, because it was called God, Wisd. 14.7.8.

And whosoever kept it afterward
Should be with sprights and goblins strangely scard.
Here is to be noted, that after our consciences have been thoroughly tried,
by the word of God, and that we have received by the spirit of Grace the
knowledge of Christ Jesus, if we revolt again from the truth, to serve strange
Gods, the Lord will give us over to the temptations of Satan, hardness of
heart, blindness of understanding, and will bring upon us war, famine, and
all the curses mentioned in the Book of his Law, and in the end death and
destruction, and after death perpetual damnation.

It is evident in diverse places of the Old Testament in every book, that the
Kings of Israel so long as they kept the Commandments of God, and observed
his Laws, as the Lord has appointed, not according to their own
imaginations, they prospered in all their doings, and many blessings were upon
them: But when they went a whoreing after strange Gods, the vengeance and wrath
of God came upon them with many heavy curses pronounced: whereof read 2. King.
17.7. Exodus 22.20. also 23.32.33. Deuteronomy. 17. from 2. verse to 8. also 29. from
the 18. to the last verse. also 30.17.18. Revel. 21.8.

3. Besides the operation of this Oar
Was, whosoever touched it to make blind
And sottish, so that they could never more
Have wit or sight in any perfect kind,
Here are described the effects of Idolatry, blindness and dullness of
understanding: So here are blind Gods, and blind People:

2. Sam. 5.8. When king David and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Iebusites,
he promised preferment to those that would smite the Lame and Blind, meaning
the Idols which his soul hated, as the text mentions.

And Salom. Wisd. 14.26.27. says, that the worshipping of Idols, which ought
not to be named, is the beginning and the cause and end of all evil, for
either they be mad, when they be merry, or prophecy lies, or live ungodly, or
else lightly forswear themselves.

The Apostle Paul also writing to the Ephesians. 4.17.18.19. exhorts them that they
will not walk as other Gentiles, in vanity of their mind, having their
cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts, etc.

And it may be truly applied unto them that is spoken by Isa. the Prophet cap.
59.10. They grope for the wall like the blind, and as one without eyes, they
stumble in the noonday, as in the twilight, and they are in solitary places
as dead Men.

Except by bathing in one River pure,
In Europe Northward where they might have cure.
The word of God in diverse places of the Scripture is likened to Rivers and
waters, whereby is meant, that if those Idolatrous Nations have recourse to the
holy Scriptures as they are now professed and taught in the Church of Great
Britain, they shall be delivered and freed from their blindness and ignorance.

John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water (says Christ) that I shall give
him, shall never be more a thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

Ezech. 47.8.9. The Scriptures are called wholesome waters, in these words,
These waters issue out toward the East Country, and run down into the
plain, and shall go into one Sea, and the waters shall be wholesome, and
every thing which moves wheresoever the Rivers come shall live, and there
shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come
thither, for they shall be wholesome, and every thing shall live whither the
River comes.

Also in the 36. ver. 25. Gods Spirit is compared to clean water, where the
Lord says, I will pure clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, yea,
from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.

And the Apostle Paul writing to the Ephesians. cap. 5. ver. 26.27. shows how
Christ sanctifies and cleanses his Church by the washing of water through the
word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.

Lastly, Baptism (which these Heathen people have not) is a token, that God
has consecrated the Church to himself, and made it holy by his word, that is,
his promise of free justification and sanctification in Christ.

4. In this strange Country also was a flower
Which this good Angel had no sooner gathered,
But within one half quarter of an hour,
As a thing blasted, suddenly it withered,
And as the Marigould by the Sun is spread,
This by the Sun shut up and seemed as dead.
Certain it is, that there is a flower in the Indies, which when the Sun
shines it shuts it self close, as a Marigould opens by the Sun. And there
is a Tree called the shamefac'd-Tree, which grows very fair and green,
whose leaf if you touch, though you pluck it not from the Tree, yet it will
shrink together for a season, like as if it should wither, and so continue
until your departure from that place, but the purpose here is not to discover
natural causes, but to make Spiritual use.

Therefore, By this flower, is signified the weak faith of these Infidels,
which as it is little or none at all, so it has no sure foundation whereupon
it is built, and therefore cannot stand against the power of the spirit of
truth, no more then the Idol Dagon did before the Ark of the Lord, whereof it
is written, 1. Sam. 5.2 3.4. That the Philistines took the Ark of God, and
brought it into the house of their chief Idol Dagon, and set it by Dagon, And
when they of Ashdod rose the next day in the morning, behold Dagon was fallen
upon his face on the ground before the Ark of the Lord, And they took up
Dagon and set him in his place again, And they rose up early in the morning
next day, and behold Dagon was fallen again upon his face on the ground before
the Ark of the Lord, and the head of Dagon and the two palms of his hands
were cut off upon the threshold, only the stumpe of Dagon was left to him: And
so is it with this flower which properly I cannot call Faith, seeing the
Apostle Paul 2. These. 3.2. says, all men have not faith, but it is a kind of
blind zeal in their blind Religion, which at the appearance and trial of
the spirit of God withers like a flower.

5. The Angel then transferred me to a Land,
Where huge deformed ugly Giants breed,
Who spoiled and burnt good Corn which there did stand,
And set Tobacco that foul stinking weed.
By this land is conceived so much as is under the Dominion of the great Turk,
where the people may properly be called deformed ugly Giants, in respect of
their horrible foul Heresies and blasphemies which in them is more monstrous
and damnable, then in the Heathen people before mentioned, which neither have
heard of Christ since his coming, nor any type, figure, or Prophecy of him
before his coming: But these Monsters have ever had the Law of Moses among
them, and also the books of the Prophets, which likewise they have now in use;
whereby the foreknowledge of the true Messiah was prefigured unto them: They
did also know of his coming, they have heard his Doctrine, seen his miracles,
he lived and died amongst them; Yet, these savage and wild Giants of the
earth, which never were naturally borne as I may say in respect of
Regeneration, wast and burn up (our Bibles wherein is written the Gospel of
our blessed Savior) that good seed which that great Husbandman Christ
himself did sow within their Land, The bread of life, John. 6.48.

I am the living bread (says Christ) which came down from Heaven, If any man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever: And the bread that I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the World, Ioh. 6.51.

This bread was given to the Jews before any other Nation, which is within the
Turks Dominion now (by Invasion,) being the elect people of God, before the
calling of us the Gentiles, as appears, Math. 15.26. When the Canaanitish
woman cried out to Jesus for her daughter which was miserably vexed with a
Devil; Christ answered, It is not good to take the Childrens bread, (which
were the Jews) and to cast it to whelps, whom Christ so called being
strangers from the house of God: But Christ's holy name be glorified, that we
now are made partakers of this heavenly bread, whereby we are made one body
with him, 1. Cor. 10.17.

But instead of this bread of sincerity and truth, 1. Cor. 5.8. These deformed
Giants the Turks, have sowed another kind of seed, such Corn as will prove
unto them as the bread of affliction mentioned in the 1. King. 22.27. Or as the
bread of tears, Psalm. 80.5. Or as the bread of Adversity, Isa. 30.20. For it
is Tobacco, it is the black seed of blasphemy, which they have sown, a
horrible contempt and defiance of the Gospel, and an approbrious injury and
violence done to Christ himself, worse then the blasphemy of Pharaoh, saying,
who is the Lord that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5.2. Worse then the blasphemy
of Olofernes, saying, Who is God but Nebuchadonozor? Judith 6.2.5. Worse then
the blasphemy of the Pharisees, that said, Christ cast out Devils by Beelzebub
the chief of Devils, Luke 11.15. For the Turk yet cease not to defy and
blaspheme Christ Jesus that was crucified about 1585. years past, terming
himself in derision and scorn of the Savior of the World, occupier and
possessor of the Tomb of the hanged God of the Jews: And in the Gates of
their Temples (I tremble to think of their deuillish rebellion against the
Lord) they place the Image of Christ hanging upon the Cross with his head
downwards, when they have taken a Christian, and they force him either to turn
to their abominable Religion, or else put him to extreme and miserable
slavery, in which desperate case, many Christians are drawn to revolt from
their faith, and believe in Mahomet, and then when the Christians enter into
their Church, they are constrained to spurn that Image on the face, in
despite and defiance. Let the World judge what they do to Christ himself in
their hearts, when to his Image they are so despightfull: For which cause this
their odious blasphemy is compared to that stinking weed Tobacco: For as
Tobacco being sucked into the mouth, causes men to euacuate a noisome choking
smoke, and makes the body of Man black and unclean within: so does their
profession and their faith in their Religion make their souls black, and cause
filthy blasphemies to come out of their mouths, as it is written of
Antichrist, He opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, Revelation 13.6.

One bade me taste, -- Satan has been a Tempter from the beginning, and is,
1 Thessalonians. 3.5. and consequently the wicked which are the Children of the Devil
are always ready to seduce and deceive the Children of God, and cause them to
forsake God if it were possible, but such are enemies to Christ and deceivers.

Many deceivers are entered into the World which confess not that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, He that is such a one is a deceiuer and an Antichrist, 2.
John 1.7.

-- the Angel bad me leave,
For that would me quite of my life bereave.
By the corruption of nature we daily commit sins of infirmity, but such as
belong unto the Lord shall be kept and preserved by his grace from falling into
heinous sins such as blasphemy is, we are delivered from the snares of
death, the delusions of the Devil, and the temptations of the wicked, by the
infusion of Gods spirit, and the illumination of the Gospel.

The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2. Peter 2.9.

Because thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore I will deliver thee
from the hour of temptation, Revel. 3.10.

6. For this is not a man as you suppose,
But a black fiend which humane shape assumes,
That takes Tobacco thus through mouth and nose,
And brings from Hell these deuillish perfumes.
The first man Adam was made a living soul, 1. Cor. 15.45. After the Image of
God according to his own likeness, Genesis 1.26. That is, in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephe. 4.24. and continued in that state until his fall. The
last Adam was made a quickening spirit, 1. Cor. 15.45. that is, Christ brings
us from Heaven the spirit of life, whereby we are now in the state of Grace: Of
which state the Turks have no part, because they deny and defy Christ.

So then the Turks are the Children of the Devil according as Saint John
writes Cap. 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
father you will do.

As for their Blasphemy, of all the sins in the World that man can commit,
it is so high and presumptuous against our Savior that died for us, that the
very light of our natural understanding, without any further probation of
Scriptures, will tell our hearts and consciences, with fear and trembling (if
we have any conscience at all, or except we have a seared conscience) that it
is the very works of darkness, hellish, damnable, and deuillish, and if there
be any spirit of error and wickedness worse then Devils, it is their invention
and Doctrine, For Devils know and confess Christ, Luke. 4.41. Oh miserable and
wretched people, that having the shape of men, they should be worse then Devils.

I started back seeing it was a Devil,
And prayed, good Angel save me from this evil.
By the starting back is meant, that we should not keep company with the
wicked blasphemers of Christ, but fly from them: Put away therefore from among
your selves that wicked Man, 1. Cor. 5.13. which is spoken of those which are
without, that is, which are not subject to Gods word, and to the Discipline of
the Church.

The last verse signifies, that we ought to pray in the Holy Ghost. Jude 20.
ver. Edify your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost.

And Math. 6.9. Christ himself commands us to pray thus, Our Father etc. but
deliver us from evil, etc.

7. Be not afraid quoth he -- Here is to be observed the singular love of
Christ, that in any fear or danger he will comfort and strengthen such as
belong to him: John 16.33. Christ speaking to his Disciples, says, In the
World ye shall have affliction, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the
World: Wherefore let us say with the Apostle Paul 2. Cor. 1.3.4. Blessed be the
God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercy, and the God
of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able
to comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God.

-- thou shall that see
Before that we depart this wicked Land
Which never eye beheld: --
Sometimes the Lord shows signs and wonders that his power may be known,
Exodus 34.10. Sometimes for the confirmation of the Doctrine of them that
believe and establishing of their faith, Mark. 16.17. Sometimes preceding the
day of judgment, Math. 24.29.30.31. So is it also with his sights, hearings,
and apparitions, Joshua 5.13.14.15: 2. King. 7.6.7. Acts 16.9. 18.9.

-- And then to me
Appeared damned creatures in the flames to stand,
Here is the just judgment of the Lord seen upon the wicked for their
unbelief: He that will believe and be baptized shall be saved, but he that
will not believe shall be damned, Mar. 16.17. For the time is come, that
judgment must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at us, what shall
the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the righteous
scarce be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1. Pet. 4.17.18.

Also 2. These. 2.8.9.10.11.12. The Apostle Paul speaking of the wicked man that
shall be revealed, says, The Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his
mouth, and because that wicked man's coming is by the working of Satan, with
all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, he shows, because they received not
the love of the truth that they might be saved, Therefore God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned
which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Many examples may be produced out of the Scriptures to prove and declare the
judgment of God against the wicked, will be terrible and fearful at the day
of his second coming; and that Hell is prepared from the beginning for the
Devil and his Angels, and all wicked persons. One more only shall suffice to
show the Description of Hell, that these wicked blasphemers, and all others may
be affrighted in their consciences, and convert and be saved: Isa. 30.33. The
Prophet says, that Tophet is prepared of old, that is, Hell, It is even
prepared for the King, he has made it deep and large, the burning thereof is
fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a River of brimstone does
kindle it.

These are Tabacconists that for this turn,
Did whilst they lived beforehand learn to burn.
These Tabacconists are those blaspheme's spoken of before, and such as despise
the word of truth, and the Gospel of Christ Jesus, whose wickedness is said
to burn as fire whilst they live: Isa. 9.18.19. For wickedness burns as a
fire, it deuoureth the briars and the thorns, and will kindle in the thick
places of the Forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke,
By the wrath of the Lord of Hoasts shall the Land be darkened, and the people
shall be as the meat of the fire.

8. Then suddenly he snatched me up and flew,
Until he came unto a thick-set Wood,
Where trees of all sorts many thousands grew,
And likewise shrubs innumerable stood,
And look how many trees and shrubs there were,
So many several fruits they all did bear.
Here is represented unto our eyes, the confused mixture of opinions and Sects
in Religion of Amsterdam, a Town within the 17. Provinces, where it is
certainly known, that there be more varieties of Doctrines, then in any one
place of the World, as namely, Protestants, Papists, Atheists, Anabaptists,
Brownists, Arians, the Family of Love, and such like, and I think some of no
Religion at all, wherefore the place is compared to a Wood, the people to
Trees, and their Sects to fruits, which may fitly be said to be of several
kinds, in respect of the difference of opinions. Every tree is known by his
fruit, whether it be good or evil, Math. 12.33. A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of an
evil treasure brings forth evil things, Math. 12.35.

9. Some were like Apples, but were Crabs in taste,
And in the eating had but sower digestion.
This may be understood of the fruits of Man's inventions, which carry only a
similitude of goodness, but are bad in themselves, as the Crab is like to an
Apple, but is lesser and far worse in taste. Such is the hypocrisy of the
Brownists, whose digestion is sower, (that is) their punishment certeinely will
be very grievous upon themselves, Seeing that the earth which sins not shall
be made wast because of their wickedness, as in Micah. 7.13. Notwithstanding,
the Land shall be desolate, because of them that dwell therein, and for the
fruits of their inventions.

Some were as bitter as the Oaken Mast,
More fit for swine then any man's refection.
These are the fruits of the flesh, which in many things are brutish. To. 7.18.
I know (says the Apostle Paul) that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing, for to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform
that which is good. Gal. 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Debate, Emulations, Wrath, Contentions, Seditions, Heresies, Envy,
Murders, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and such like. To all these every man is
naturally prone, but two of these may be appropriated to the fruits of the
Papists, to wit, Fornication and Idolatry, the one being tolerated, the other
allowed by their Religion, so that it seems they never learned this lesson of
Saint Paul, or else they scorn to allow his Doctrine, or else it is out of
their book. But let them know as Saint Paul says, That such shall not inherit
the kingdom of God.

Some were delicious sweet, and perfect good,
Such as at first in Edens Garden stood.
These are the fruits of Righteousness, and of the Spirit, and may be said to
proceed from a true zealous Protestant.

Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance.

10. But as that fruit was good and lushious,
The situation of the Trees was bad,
For none of them by means of vnder-bushes,
Sufficient room to sprout their branches had,
So that for want of elbow-roome, a Tree,
Not half so fruitful was as else might be.
Many times it falls out that the godly are hindered by the wicked, that they
cannot show their good works in such measure as they would. For the profession
of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, is oftentimes ecclipsed in them by the
dark cloudy meetings, and mixture of Heresies of others, among whom they live,
so that it does not shine with his perfect light, especially among such as
either refuse to hear the Gospel of Christ at all, or else if they hear it,
they will pervert it, and make the construction thereof according to their own
fantasies. So these ungodly people are compared to vnder-bushes, that hinder
the propagation of Gods holy word, and the growing and prospering of the fruits
of the Spirit.

And they are like to the Pharisees, that neither would believe the Gospel
themselves, nor suffer others to believe, Math. 23.13. Add like to the Jews
spoken of in the 17. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where Paul being in
Thessalonica, (as his manner was) went into their Synagogue, opening and
alleging, that Christ must have suffered and risen again from the dead, and
some believed, but the Jews which believed not, took unto them certain
vagabonds, and wicked fellows, and made a tumult in the City, and would have
brought Paul out to the people.

11. Unfruitful briars choakt their sappy root,
And with sharp pricks did goad their tender Rind,
Thorns would not let their springing Arms to shoot,
Sprigs of wild Trees about their branches twinde,
As if they all malicious envy had
At that good fruit, seeing their own was bad.
Envy is one of the fruits of the flesh, as before mentioned, and therefore is
altogether repugnant to the Spirit. And here is demonstrated unto us, the
malice of the Children of the Devil against the Children of God. According as
Christ says to his Disciples, Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake, Math.
10.22. They that do maintain those wicked Heresies, and vain inventions,
have their eyes evil, because the Protestant is good. The similitude of sharp
pricking briars and thorns is alluded unto such as have heard the word, but
the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lusts of
other things, enter in and choke the word, and it is unfruitful, Mark. 4.19.

But that is not all the hurt they do, to be unfruitful in themselves, for
the nature of such briars and thorns is to make the ground barren round about
where they grow, and to hinder the growth of any thing, that is near thereunto.

And they may be said to be wild Trees, which have not the knowledge of truth
grafted in their hearts, of which there are too many in that place, and those
of several Sects, so that it is now with the good Protestant in that place, as
it was with the Children of Israel, who being but one people in their journey
to the Land of promise, met with diverse Nations that resisted them; and being
there is but one truth, which the Protestants profess, there they are much
cumbred and troubled with many hoastes of Errors, but as the Lord ever gave the
Conquest to the Israelites, so no doubt he will be to the Protestants.

12. Pity it was the husband-mans respect,
Did not root out those inconvenient lets;
He might have remedied that great defect,
By plucking up those prejudicial sets,
What greater ruin and spoiling of a delicate fair garden then to suffer it
to be ouer-growne with weeds? What greater confusion to a Commonwealth then
errors in Religion? and as it belongs to the providence and care of a good
Gardener to prevent the one: So it appertains to Magistrates and
Ecclesiastical governors to remedy the other, so near as they can.

But it falls out sometimes, that those weeds only which are grown great and
apparent, are only plucked up, the rest being near the ground amongst good
herbs are not so easily discerned, so is it with Sects, which if they once
grow up and shed their seed, they cannot be cleansed, they multiply so fast,
and grow so thick, that commonly they ouergrow the good Religion. And likewise
in goodly fruitful Orchards, where trees are pestered thick together, the bad
trees that are unfruitful, hinder the prospering of the good trees, that they
cannot be so fruitful as otherwise they might be. Even so, is it with the good
and sound Religion of the Gospel, amongst other wicked Sects and divisions of
opinions. But if laborers were purposely appointed for the one, and subordinate
Ministers for the other (because the eye of the Magistrate cannot see all) both
the one, and the other, might be freed from these great inconveniences.

For those Trees properly are made to burn,
As some to build, and some for other turn.
The use of Trees is diverse, according to their natures: some are for timber
and building as we read, 1. King. 5.56. And behold (says Solomon) I purpose to
build an house unto the name of my Lord my God. Now therefore command that they
hew me Cedar trees out of Lebanon: Of such trees, that is, of the faithful,
God has beautifully built his Church militant here on earth Yea are Gods
husbandry, and Gods building, 1. Cor. 3.9. Now as concerning Thorns and
Briars, that is, the wicked, they were from the beginning ordained for the
fire. And so likewise every tree though it bring forth fruit, yet if the fruit
be not good, it is hewn down and cast into the fire, Math. 7.10. If any man
abide not in me (says Christ) he is cast forth as a branch, and withers,
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burn.

13. This when I had perused curiously,
The Angel led me to a goodly Vineyard,
Kept by a Tyrant, who swore furiously,
That he would kill me with his bloody whineyard.
By this Vineyard is meant the Church of Rome (in respect the Gospel of Christ
is there preached, though with many heresies) and by the Tyrant is understood
the Pope, whose bloody disposition I need not tell to the World, he is so well
known, and manifested to be such as Solomon speaks of, Pro. 28.15. As a
Roaring Lion is a wicked Ruler over the poor people, for he can never be
satisfied, but ever oppresses and spoileth, And he is worse then Herod the
tyrant, who sent forth and slew all the male Children that were in Bethlehem,
and in all the Coasts thereof, from two year old and under: For the Pope he
neither spares men, women nor children, young nor old. The Prophet Micah. cap.
3.2. writing against the tyranny of false Prophets, says, they hate the good
and love the evil, they pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh
from their bones, and they eat also the flesh of the people and break their
bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as the flesh within the
Caldron. And as the Prophet Zeph. spoke concerning the City of Jerusalem, so
it may be fitly applied to the City of Rome: Zeph. 3.1.2.3.4. Woe to her that
is filthy and polluted, she heard not the voice, she received not correction,
she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near unto her God, her princes
within her are as roaring lions, her Judges are as Wolves in the evening, which
leave not the bones till the morrow, her Prophets are light and wicked persons,
her priests have polluted the Sanctuary, they have wrested the Law.

The Angel saved me, -- It is the Lord that delivers us out of all
adversity, 2. Sam. 4.9. David in the 22. Chapter of the same Book 2.3.
verses, confesses, that the Lord was his Rock, his fortress, and he that
delivered him: saying further, God is my strength, in him will I trust, my
shield, and the horn of my Salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my
savior, thou have saved me from violence. Every word of God is pure, he is a
shield to them that trust in him, Pro. 30.5.

-- and compelled him to
Declare the mischiefs which he there did do.
It is the justice of God, that the wicked confess their sins to their
condemnation, for they will not believe to obtain remission: and their own
words shall be a sufficient proof to condemn them if there were no other
thing.

Every man shall be justified or condemned by the words of his own mouth,
Math. 12.37. Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and confessed that he had
sinned, and that the Lord is righteous, but he and his people were wicked,
Exodus 9.27.

14. Then thus the Tyrant timerously said, This shows that the power of God
makes the wicked afraid: The Israelites having seen the mighty power of God,
feared the Lord, Exodus 14.31. Adam after he had sinned was afraid of God, Genesis
3.10.

And the word of the Lord is herein fulfilled, for the Lord threatens they
shall be afraid in their chambers, which provoke him by Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 32.25.

Northward from hence there is within a Land,
Amidst the Sea, a fruitful Paradise made,
Where goodly Vines in curious order stand,
Which prove exceeding plentiful: --
That is within this Island of great Britain, which lies Northward from Rome,
the Gospel of Jesus Christ which is compared to a fruitful Paradise of Vines,
which plentifully abound, and the profession thereof is spreadth oughout the
same, like as goodly Vines flourish and spread. The Prophet David speaking of
the Church, Psalm. 80.8. compares it to a Vine, Thou have brought a Vine out of
Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen, and planted it, thou made room for
it, and did cause it to take root, and it filled the Land, the mountains
were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof are like the goodly
Cedars, she stretched out her branches unto the Sea, and her boughs unto the
River.

I am the Vine (says Christ) and my father is an husbandman, John 15.1.

-- And there
I sometime great authority did bear.
Too great was the Popes authority in this Kingdom, when before the Reign of
King Henry the eight he had the supremacy.

15. And those fair Vines to all estates were free,
As well the Plough-man as the Potentate,
And every beggar might sufficed be,
Without controlement of the Magistrate,
The freedom of the Gospel is twofold: free of expense and restraint. The
Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 9.18. speaking of the Preaching of the Gospel, says
thus, What is my reward then, verily, that when I preach the Gospel I make the
Gospel of Christ free, that I abuse not mine authority in the Gospel, that
is, that I be not chargeable to them to whom I preach, seeing that they think
I preach it for gains.

And the same Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.8.9. exhorting Timothy to be constant in
trouble, to suffer manly, and to abide fast in the wholesome Doctrine of our
Lord Jesus Christ, bids him remember, that Jesus Christ made of the seed of
David, was raised again from dead, according to Saint Paul's Gospel, wherein
the Apostle suffered trouble as an evil doer even unto bonds, but the word of
God is not bound, thereby showing that notwithstanding his imprisonment, the
word of God has his race, and increases.

That all degrees by virtue of that Grape,
Grew perfect wise, sober, temperate.
Who seek wisdom early shall find it, that is, they that study the word of
God diligently, and with a desire to profit shall find wisdom: Riches and
honor are with her, ever durable riches and Righteousness, that is,
spiritual treasures and heavenly things, Pro. 8.17.16. Moses exhorting the
people to keep the ordinances and laws of God, Deuteronomy. 4.6. tells them that is
their wisdom and their understanding in the sight of the people, which shall
hear all those ordinances, and shall say, only this people is wise, and of
understanding, and a great Nation. The wisdom of the World is but
foolishness with God, 1. Cor. 1.20. But unto them which are called both of the
Jews and Grecians, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God, for the
foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men, 1. Cor. 1.24.25.

Also the words of God are the words of sobriety and truth, as appears in
the Acts of the Apostles 26.25. where the Apostle Paul rehearsing his
conversation to approve his Innocence, being accused before Festus, said, I am
not mad noble Festus, but speak the words of truth and soberness.

16. But I by craft and deuillish invention,
Desiring their subversion, cut those Vines
Unseasonably, to hinder their extention
In growth and spreading: --
The Devil and the Pope have ever yet been envious against the propagation of
the Gospel, and have labored by all the devises that possibly they could, to
extinguish, or at least to obvmbrate the true light thereof, wherefore it was a
subtle deceit of the Pope, to have the word of God set forth in the Latin
Tongue, which the common people could not understand, whereby the knowledge of
the Gospel was like the Sun in Eclips, and could not be so generally spread
as if it had been written in their natural English, so thereupon it may be
said, that it was unseasonably cut, to hinder the extention thereof.

The Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 14.1.2. speaking against prayer and service in a
strange tongue, exhorts men to follow after love, and covet spiritual gifts,
and rather, that they may prophecy, (that is, to expound the word of God to
the edification of the Church) for he that speaks a strange tongue, speaks
not unto men but unto God, for no man hears him, (that is, understands him.)

Also in the 4 and 5. verses of the same Chapter, the Apostle says, he that
speaks strange language edifieth himself (for he profits none save
himself) greater is he that prophesies, then he that speaks diverse tongues,
except he expound it that the Church may receive edification.

-- And as oftentimes
As J with blood the Roots should have made moist,
A poison strong I closely in did foist.
That is, As often as the Pope and his Ministers should have sincerely
delivered the word of God to the people according to truth, whereby it might
have taken root in their hearts, So often they preached their own inventions,
bringing in many horrible new heresies which poisoned the peoples
understanding. Saint Paul gave them other direction, 2. Tim. 2.15. Study
(says he) to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not be
ashamed dividing the word of truth aright. But the words of that holy Apostle,
1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. are truly verifide in the Pope and his Ministers. Now the
spirit speaks evidently, That in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils
(meaning false teachers) which speaking lies through hypocrisy, have their
consciences burned with an hot Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with giving
thanks, of them which believe and know the truth. And as for the Gospel, as
it is professed by them, Deuteronomy. 32.32.33. there it is decyphered, Their Vine is
the Vine if Sodom and the Vines of Gomorah; their Grapes are Grapes of gall,
their Clusters be bitter, their Wine is the poison of the Dragons, and the
cruel gall of Aspes.

17. Which to conceal from men's detection,
This trick I had, I suffered none to come
Within that Paradise to make collection,
To cast a mist before the peoples eyes, that they might not discern the false
Doctrine and superstitious ceremonies which were then brought into the Church,
the Pope would suffer none to have the bible in English, least their heresies
should be detected, and their discipline despised, (for the Pope and his
Ministers know in their consciences, if they have any consciences, (or else God
lighten their understanding that they may know) that their Doctrine is a
Doctrine of vanity, and the work of errors, according to the Prophet Iere.
10.8. They altogether dote, and are foolish, for the stock is a Doctrine of
vanity: Where because the people thought that having Images was a mean to
serve God, and to bring them to the knowledge of him, the prophet shows, that
nothing more displeases God, nor brings man into greater errors and
ignorance of God.

But I my self in person, or else some
Of my confederates, whom I put in trust,
Delivered them how, and to whom we lust.
The common people wanting the knowledge of the Latin tongue, were forced to
receive the word from the Priests, delivered according to their own fantasies,
and so were deluded by these false teachers: of whom the Apostle Peter
prophesied, 2. Peter 2.1.2.3. But there were false Prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, which privily shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and
bring upon themselves swift damnation, and many shall follow their damnable
ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and with
covetousness shall they, with feigned words make merchandise of you, which is
evidently seen in the Pope and his Priests, which by lies and flatteries sell
men's souls, so that it is certain that he is not the successor of Simon
Peter, but of Simon Magus.

18. Many diseases heerevpon did grow,
The Ague, Palsy, Megrims, Scurfe and Scab,
This false Doctrine brought in by the Pope and his Priests has wrought many
sects, opinions and divisions in this our true Catholike-Church, and by that
means, many doubts, questions and controversies did arise, which are compared
to Agues, Palsies, and Megrims, and are as great a blemish to the true faith in
Jesus Christ, as a scurffe or scab is to a natural man's body. For this cause
says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.30. Many are sick and weak among you, and many
sleep, that is, they died or be dead.

The cause of sicknesses they did not know,
For no man of the Grapes suspicion had.
The Pope and his Priests will say that they are the people of God, make a
fair outward show of sanctity in words, but not in Action, for they abuse
Gods name, and color it with shadow of Religion to cloak their hypocrisy.
The Prophet Micah 3.11. speaking of the heads of the house of Iaakob and the
Princes of the house of Israel, figureth out plainly the state of Rome:
saying, They abhor judgment, and pervert all equity. They build up Zion
with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, (that is, they build them houses by
bribery) The heads thereof judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for
hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money, yet will they lean upon
the Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come upon us: Which
hypocrisy being thus cloaked with Religion, is the more free from suspicion of
the people.

By this I got at ending of their days,
All that they had for Rosemary and Bays.
The silly people were taught such blind devotion, that notwithstanding their
daily offerings to Idols, which came to the use of the Priests, and whereby
they grew exceeding rich, commonly at the time of their deaths, they would
bequeath all, or the greatest part of their substance to massing Priests, for
maintenance of lights, obits, and prayers for their souls, persuading
themselves verily that they should never be saved without such fond babbling,
and so the whole Kingdom almost came into the hands of the Churchmen. So
those Dirges are alluded to a little Rosemary and Baies, as to a thing of no
value or respect, but they are hardly so good, for indeed the Rosemarie and
Baies is a decent ornament for the corpse when it is carried to the grave, but
as for the songs and prayers and their feighned power to do the soul of the
dead any good, or to be any ornament thereunto, there is no true Christian but
will hold him a very simple understanding man that imagines it. For as a man
dies, so shall he come to judgment. Eccles. 11.3. If the tree do fall toward
the South or toward the North, in the place that the tree falls there it
shall be.

19. At length my devilish purpose was descried
By one that vomited a poisoned Grape,
By reason of an Antidote applied,
The whole circumstance hereof is largely and truly recorded in the book of
the Martyrs of the kingdom of England, among the memorials and acts done in
the time of the Reign of King Henry the eight, to which for brevity the
Reader shall be referred. Thus much only may be said, That it pleased the Lord
to illuminate the understanding of that renowned, virtuous and well affected
king with the light of his truth, whereby he discerned the hypocrisy of the
Pope and his ministers, And then caused the Bible to be printed in English, and
the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus to be truly preached, and so the whole
kingdom was plentifully fed with the heavenly and spiritual food of the
Soul, which that famous and blessed King having received and digested, it was
to him as a preservative, or an Antidote against the Heresies of Rome, and
caused him as it were to vomit out those vilde errors out of the Church of
England.

And all the Country then did bear me hate,
And for those faults which I committed there,
They banished me, and so I thence came here.
Here the people began to observe the Doctrine and institution of Saint Paul,
that is, to fly from Idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.14. and to hate those detestable
follies, and superstitious vanities which hindered them from the true service of
God, according as our Savior Christ says, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me
and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, yea, and his own life also (that is, he that casts not off all
affections and desires which draw us from Christ) cannot be my Disciple. And
the government of the Church being settled according to the profession now used,
the Pope was not only justly deprived of his Supremacy, but his authority
and traditions were quite abolished out of the kingdom, his Ministers put to
silence, their religious or rather irreligious houses (as I may rightly term
them) utterly defaced, according as the Lord commanded. Deuteronomy. 12.2. Ye shall
utterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations which ye shall possess
served their Gods upon the high Mountains, and upon the hills, and under every
green tree, Also ye shall overthrow their Altars, and break down their
pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and ye shall hew down the graven
Images of their Gods, and abolish their names out of that place.

20. And all these Vines which here you planted see,
Are of that sort, which I from thence did bring:
The Pope and his Ministers in the manner of their worship in many things do
much derogate from Gods glory, insolently attributing their prayers either to
dumb Idols, or to Saints, or Angels, which can do them no more good then the
golden Calfe that the Israelites worshipped, Exodus 22.4. Which afterward Moses
abolished, Exodus 32.20.

Such was the Religion of the Romish Catholic when that Religion was here
professed, and such or rather worse is it now at Rome.

And I have caused other Weeds to be
Set with them, that they may together spring,
And both at one time put into the Press,
The Grapes and Weeds, to make a mingled mess.
By these Weeds is meant the worshipping of Idols invocation of Saints, their
rabling repetitions of Pater-Nosters, Aue-Maries and Creedes, their superfluous
Sacraments. Transubstantiation, their obits, lights, and prayers for the dead;
the Popes Bulls and Pardons, and many other such vain inventions which were
never heard of in the time of the Apostles, nor since used in any Church but in
theirs, neither indeed ought any such to be used, seeing the Lord has
forbidden it with his own mouth, as it is in Deuteronomy. 22.9. Thou shall not sow
thy Vineyard with diverse kinds of seeds, least thou defile the increase of
the seed which thou have sowed, and the fruit of the Vineyard. By this is
meant, we should walk in simplicity and not to be curious of new inventions.
But by this means it is true of them that was spoken by the Prophet Isa. to
the Jews, Isa. 1.22. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water,
that is, whatsoever was pure in thee before is now corrupt though thou have an
outward show.

21. And to keep well those Weeds, I have ordained,
They be continually underpropped with stakes,
By such as I have purposely retained,
Who in like case for their own lucre sakes,
Ten times more curious are to trim and prime
Their branches, than the branches of the Vine.
By this is perceived that Birds of a feather will hold together, The Pope and
his Prelates to make their Doctrine more probable, have conspired together like
the false Prophets and Priests of Jerusalem, Ezechiel 22.25.26. There is a
conspiracy of her Prophets in the mids thereof like a Roaring Lion ravening
the prey, they have devoured souls, they have taken the Riches and precious
things, they have made her many widows in the midst thereof, her Priests have
broken my law and have defiled mine holy things, they have put no difference
between the holy and profane, neither discerned between the unclean and the
clean, and have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, that is, they have neglected
my service, and I am profaned amongst them. And these are such as the Apostle
Paul told Titus of, Tit. 1.10. saying, there are many disobedient and vain
talkers and deceivers of minds, whose mouths must be stopped, which subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for lucres sake, 2 Timothy
3.6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive simple
women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts: And in the margent of that
text, they are expounded to be Monks, Friars, and such hypocrites, which I
also mean to be those whom the Pope has retained and appointed in his Church
to uphold his heresies.

22. This mingle mangle composition,
Has much besotted all the Peoples brains,
The Prophet Isa. speaking against the Israelites, to wit, of the hypocrites
which were among them who were altogether corrupt in life and doctrine, cries
out against them. Isa. 28.7.8. They have erred because of wine, and are out of
the way by strong drink, the Priest and the Prophet have erred by strong
drink, they are swallowed up with wine, they have gone astray through strong
drink, they fail in vision, they stumble in in judgment, for all their
tables are full of filthy vomiting, no place is clean. And as natural wine
immoderately taken besotteth the brains of the outward man, and causes
drunkenness, so the superfluity and dregs of the Romish heresies fills the
inward man's understanding with spiritual drunkenness, a beastly kind of
life, vomiting their unclean errors out of their foul gorges, And such is
their fond supposition,
They hold him cursed that from this drink refraines:


It is not unknown to any that know any thing at all of the Popes malicious
disposition, how he and his Prelates curse the children of God (that follow not
his vilde traditions) with Bell, Book and Candle, as they say: Witness his
Bulls, which very often have been sent out against the Lords anointed Kings
and Princes and their People and Nations, and also his excommunications. But as
we are the children of Abraham the father of the faithful through Christ
Jesus, elected and called to our profession, so let us stand fast in our faith,
and then the Lord will turn their curse upon their own heads, as he promised
Abraham, saying; I will bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them
that curse thee, Genesis 12.3.

The gains being great for selling of this Ale,
Has lift my head as high as Dragons tail.
23. And all the Country call me Demy-god,
Bending their knees to me with great devotion,
And offer Gold, Jewels and Emmerods,
And all they have for this my potion:
The yearly profit which comes into the Popes treasury for pardons and
redemption of Souls out of Purgatory, amounts to a great sum, The
Peter Pence spoken of in the book of Martyrs paid quarterly to the Friars,
came to above 500000 li. yearly alone, Their mortuaries, gifts and legacies
for Requiems, obits, and lights, is an unknown value, The peoples offerings at
the Altar and to Images which come to the Priests use, is a secret gain. But
if we reckon all the tricks which they have to get money, and add the profit
together, it will arise unto an unspeakable mass of wealth. The Book of
Martyrs in the time of King Henry the eight, demonstrateth many worthy
memorials hereof, and other the devises of the Pope and his Prelates, to which
I also refer the Reader. But by this means we see the Pope is grown mighty in
riches and power, And as the Apostle Paul says, 2. These. 2.4. speaking of
Antichrist, he exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

But out alas, their blind inchaunted sight
Sees not the Adder me that does them bite.
The Apostle Paul to the Ephesians. 4.18. as before is said, exhorts the Ephesians
not to walk as other Gentiles in vanity of their mind, having their
cogitations darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts. Which
example is very good for us to follow, Let us not walk as the Romish
Catholics, for it is with them as it was with the Israelites when they
provoked the Lord with strange Gods by changing his service for their
superstitions, Deuteronomy. 32.28. They are a Nation void of Council, neither is
there any understanding in them. For if the Romish Catholics were directed by
the true light of the Gospel, which makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 5.13.
they would easily discern the delusions of the Pope and his Ministers, who
deceives them as the Serpent deceived Euah.

24. And that my gain may be enlarged the more,
I have devised a Law on Pain of death,
That none the Juice of Grapes shall taste, before
The Juice of Weeds be mixed, whereby of breath
I have bereaved thousands with this blade,
Which for that purpose only I have made.
Here is set forth the tyranny and bloody persecution of the Pope. We read
Acts 8.1. that Stephen was stoned to death for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
that at that time there was a great persecution against the Church which was at
Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad through the Regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the Apostles.

But if we turn over all the Histories of the Jews and Gentiles, we shall not
find greater examples of cruelty, and more devilish plots of treachery,
against the true Church of God then has been acted and conspired by the Pope
and his confederates, Priests, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, etc. and their
followers. Witness that heavenly Communion of Saints, that great company of
Martyrs which have patiently suffered death for the Gospel, by his cruel and
bloody hand, some in this our Nation, and those an infinite number, some in
France, Italy, Germany, and other places beyond the Seas. So that if there
were no other argument, this were sufficient to prove that his inventions
proceed from the Devil and not of God nor good men.

We read in the Revel. 17.4. of a vision described of a woman araied in
purple and scarlet and gilded with gold, etc. This woman is the Antichrist,
that is, the Pope with the whole body of his filthy creatures: who afterward
in the 6. verse of the same Chapter (inferring his merciless severity) is
said, to be drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus.

25. The Angel answered, for this Impious fact,
A judgment on thee suddenly shall come,
Worse then the Serpents curse, for his vilde Act
Which in deluding Euah he had done:
Vengeance from Heaven shall one day drive thee out
From this fair Vineyard with thy Rabble rout.
Here is set forth the judgment of him and all persecuters. The vision of the
beast mentioned, Revel. 17.8. is meant by the Roman Empire, which being fallen
into decay, the whore of Rome usurped authority, and as he proceeded from the
Devil, thither shall return, as in the Margent of the Text. The words are
these, The beast that thou have seen was and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition. And Revel. 18.2. the
overthrow of Rome is described under the name of Babylon, thus, And the Angel
cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon that great City, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold
of all foul spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Again,
Revel. 19.19.20. the destruction of Rome is prefigured in these words, And I
saw the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their warriors gathered
together to make battle against him that sat on the horse and against his
soldiers, (that is, the Pope and the worldly Princes shall fight against
Christ) but the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet that wrought
miracles before him, whereby he deceived them that received the beasts mark,
and them that worshipped his Image, These both were cast into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone: (which will be accomplished at the second coming of
Christ.) Also Revel. 20.10. there is his perpetual damnation set forth in
these words, And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented even
day and night for evermore.

26. Who pitifully shall lament thy case,
The aspect thereof will be so vehement:
It is written of the whore of Babylon, Revel. 8. ver. 8.9.10.11. That her
plagues shall come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be
burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God which will condemn her, And the
kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her which have committed
fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoke of
her burning, and shall stand a far off for fear of her torment, saying,
Alas, alas, the great City of Babylon, the mighty City, for in one hour is
thy judgment come, And the Merchants of the earth shall weep and wail over
her, for no man buyeth her ware any more, By that is meant both they that
temporally have had profit by the strumpet, and also the spiritual Merchants
shall for sorrow and want of their gain cry out and despair, for besides
their spiritual livings, the Monks and Friars, as sometimes they were here
in England, being stewards to Cardinals, Bishops and Abbots were temporal
Merchants, and held and occupied Farms, Manors, and Graunges, etc.

But others shall rejoice at thy disgrace,
And for deliverance from thy mischiefs sent.
The Children of God shall rejoice at the fall of Antichrist, as in the Revel.
19.1. praises are given to God for judging the whore, and for auenging the
blood of his servants, in these words: And after these things I heard a great
voice of a great multitude in Heaven, saying, Hallelu-iah, Salvation, and
glory, and honor, and power, be to the Lord our God, for true and righteous
are his judgments, for he has condemned the great whore, which did corrupt
the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants shed
by her hand.

And therefore double shall thou punished be,
For thy delusion and vilde Tyranny.
In the 137. Psalm. ver. 8.9. They are said to be blessed that could repay the
like to Babylon, where the Israelites were so tyrannously handled, O daughter
of Babel worthy to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that rewards thee as
thou have served us, blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth thy children
against the stones. But in the Reu. 8.6. speaking of the whore of Rome, it is
said that her reward shall be double, For there was a voice heard, saying,
Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double according to her
works, and in the cup that she has filled to you fill her the double.

27. And then me thought I was translated thence
Into a Paradise replenished
With fruitful Trees, Corn, Vines, and Herbs.
By this Paradise is meant the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland A
comprehensible Type of the incomprehensible excellency of the holy Jerusalem,
spoken of in the Revel. 21.10. descending out of Heaven from God. And by the
Trees, Corn, Vines and Herbs, is understood how plentifully the word of God
abounds there: for sometimes the Gospel of Jesus is compared to a Tree,
Revel. 22.2. Which bears 12. manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month,
and the leaves of the tree served to heal the Nations with: This is the tree
of life, Christ the life of his Church, and is common to all his, and not
peculiar to any one sort of people. Sometimes the Gospel is compared to Corn,
as in the parable of the sower. Math. 13.3. Behold a sower went out to sow,
etc. Sometimes it is compared to Vines, as before is mentioned in the 14.
staff. And in respect the Gospel is the Spiritual food of the soul, it may
be compared to herbs and any other sustenance, which is the natural food of
the body, applying the one to the soul, spiritually, as the other is applied
to the body naturally.

-- from whence
The Tyrant had before been banished:
Who when he kept it was not so perfidious
As is the man that keeps it now Religious.
This our Nation is the Paradise where the Pope sometime did bear such great
authority, as before is relation made in the 14. staff: And from whence he
and his errors were abolished as in the 19. staff: Whose perfidious
treachery, he himself has here already at large demonstrated. But the Lord
be praised, we have now a Religious Sovereign Lord King James, who is
supreme head and governor of our Church under God, to whom for sincerity and
truth in Religion, the speech of Saint Paul may be appropriated, Ephesians. 4.20.
That he has learned Christ, and has heard him, and been taught by him, as
the truth is in Jesus, that is, he has cast off concerning the conversation in
time past the old man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and is
renewed in the spirit of his mind, and has put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

And for integrity of life, he is like unto Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.3. And for
uprightness in heart he is like unto those worthy Kings Josias, Hezekiah and
David, whose deserved commendations are singularly set forth in the Book of
Ecclus. cap. 49. And God grant that he may long live to multiply his virtues in
himself and his Royal issue.

28. For having Children, he instructs them how
They may those Trees, Corn, Vines and herbs best keep
From Caterpillars, Cankers, and the Sow,
That longs into that place by stealth to creep,
To spoil the Paradise; Of which there were
Some by that Tyrant left of purpose there.
By the Caterpillars and Cankers is meant al such as either envy, or wish hurt
to, or deprave, derogate or speak ill of the true Preaching of the Gospel of
Christ, of what Religion or Sect soever they be: But by the Sow is particularly
intended the Papist, of which sort their be too many yet remaining that do
much hurt secretly to the weak members of our Church, animated and set on by
the Pope, but by the Religious care of our virtuous King, the Paradise is
pretty well rid of them, the Church is reasonably cleared, and the word of God
more plentifully planted amongst us, then heretofore it has been. And
herein all the World may see his Majesty's great providence in the education
of his children, for the continuance and upholding of the Gospel, according to
the commandments of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 11.18.19. Therefore shall you lay up these
my words in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your
head, that they may be as a frontlet between your eyes, and you shall teach
them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

29. So that this Paradise is like to flowrish
Until the final period of all things,
For his fair issue know well how to nourish
Those holy Plants, and those clear water-springs,
Running there-through to keep from foul pollution,
Till all things have their final dissolution.
Here is set forth the excellent towardness of our renowned Prince Charles
Prince of Wales, Frederike Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his
wife, as the issue of our royal King, which may well be said to be fair and
beautiful: Not as Absolon, That was comely in outward proportion only, 2.
Sam. 14.25. Nor as Saul, which was a goodly yong-man and a fair, 1. Sam. 9.2.
for among all the children of Israel there was none goodlier then he in
person, Nor as the daughters of men, whom the sons of God saw were fair,
Genesis 6.2. For this is but the beauty of the flesh which withers and decaieth
like grass, 1. Pet. 1.24.

But their beauty is an everlasting beauty, which excels the beauty of
all other Princes in Christendom, and like the Sun appears glorious to the
whole World, their beauty is the Divine beauty of their souls, made and
fashioned after the image of Christ Jesus. The holy plants of that Paradise
they have learned of their royal father to nourish, that is, they allow and
maintain the Gospel truly preached amongst us, and to keep those clear
watersprings from pollution, that is, that the word of God be not defiled with
Heresies, whereupon depends a great hope of the prosperous estate of this
kingdom, for the Lord has promised, that whosoever meditateth his word
continually, his days shall be multiplied, and the days of his children, as
long as the Heavens are above the earth, Deuteronomy. 11.21.

30. And how provision is by Virtue made
To keep the Caterpillars from the Trees,
Js thus; A fire underneath is laid,
Whose smoke consumes them, as in swarms of Bees
Is used commonly to rid the Drones,
And so they prove continual fruitful ones.
Under the name of Virtue is comprehended our royal King James, for whose
desert no less name can be given him, seeing that God has endued him with
such full measure of Faith, knowledge, temperance, and godliness, which is
evidently seen in that he is continually careful and provident that the
Gospel of Christ may have free propagation, and so prove fruitful amongst his
subjects, and that it be not hurt or violated by ill affected people, who as
Caterpillars are consumed with fire, so are they utterly destroyed by the truth
of the word professed, which is also compared to fire, Luke. 12.49.

31. And that the Corn from Cankers may be clean,
Thousands of careful Laborers are fitted,
To polish, cleanse, and winnow, by which mean,
None but good Seed is to the ground committed:
The like care is to clear the herbs from weeds,
So there good Corn and good herbs only breeds.
That the word of God be not mingled with the false Doctrines of Heretics,
thousands of diligent preachers are provided, who are called Laborers, Math.
9.37. who as Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 4.2. have cast from them the cloakes of
shame (meaning such shifts and pretenses as become not them that have such a
great office in hand) and walk not in craftiness, neither handle the word of
God deceitfully, but in declaration of the truth approve themselves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God: And so deliver the word of God purely to
the people.

32. But to keep out that beastly breed of Swine,
Three thick-set hedges decently are placed
About the Paradise, least they should undermine,
And so it might be utterly defaced:
These Fences being strong, this stinking rout
Shall never get in, though they run round about.
The three thick-set Hedges are three sorts of people principally in this his
Majesty's Dominions, which being true and sincere professors of the Gospel of
Christ, and steadfast and confident in their profession, do keep out the
Papists insinuation and incroaching into this Kingdom, with the traditions of
their deuillish inventions. And as long as they continue in the true faith of
Jesus Christ, it is impossible that the Pope with all his host of erroneous and
subtle Clergy, shall ever have any place here, though they work never so
closely, or diligently range about seeking to seduce from the true faith daily
by cunning circumstances, such as they find or suppose to be weak members of
the Church of Christ.

33. The first and out-most hedge is guarded well
By Champions of valiant condition,
Who watch continually them to repel
With shield, and spear, or sword, or such munition:
And if the Swine but once come near that fence,
One of those weapons sure shall beat them thence.
The first outward hedge or defense consists of three degrees of people,
vizt. Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen of virtuous and Religious disposition
which being of the number of the faithful, are well provided with their
spiritual weapons, to repel the darts of the Papists. For by the shield,
spear or sword is not meant those which are material: for the exercise of such
weapons is forbidden in some respect, Math. 26.52. Put up thy sword (says
Jesus) into his place, for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
And Revel. 13.10. If any lead into Captivity, he shall go into Captivity
(this is meant of leading souls captive) If any kill with a sword, he must be
killed by a sword. Neither indeed is it the sword or bow or any other
material weapon whereby Gods children overcome, Ios. 24.12. But by this shield
is understood the shield of faith, by the sword, the sword of the spirit. For
the faithful have not only to strive against men and themselves, but also
against Satan their spiritual enemy, which is most dangerous, for he is over
our heads so that we cannot reach him, and therefore he must be resisted by
Gods grace. David by faith feared not to fight with the Giant Goliath with a
sling and a stone, for he flung away from him his Armor and weapons which Saul
put upon him, 1. Sam. 17.37.39. Nay, by faith we resist the Devil, and
overcome both the World and him. 1. John 5.4. For all that is borne of God
overcomes the World, and this is the victory that overcomes the World,
even our faith.

Also in the Revel. 19.15. the word of God is called a sharp two-edged sword,
in these words, And out of his mouth went a sharpesword, that with it he should
smite the Heathen, for he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, etc. These are
infalliable weapons which the weak faith of the Papists is not able to resist;
which shows that their faith is but counterfeit, and that ours is the true
Catholic and Apostolic.

34. But if the Swine do chance to sneake unseen,
Of all that well approved outward guard,
Within their hedge a little space between
The first and second fence, them to reward,
Lie beagles to discover the intrusion
Of those, that wish to Paradise confusion.
Under the name of Beagles is comprehended all subordinate officers and
Ministers, who are appointed by the superior powers to hunt out or make
inquisition or search for all slye Recusants, Papists, Jesuits, Priests and
such like, who closely sneake and insinuate into the bosoms and hearts of many
well disposed persons, attempting to extirpate and root out their well affected
thoughts.

35. Being set on by this quick-sented crew,
The second guard, being hunts-men, soon prepare,
Who make those Swine their boldness for to rue,
By force of Iauelin, Pistol, Pike, or Spear:
Whose proved shields, and virtue of their Arms,
Them against a thousand boares, will save from harms.
After these subordinate officers have found out any such, they report to the
Judges and Council of this Land, who are put in the place of the second Guard,
and are likened to huntsmen, because indeed, if the knowledge of such persons
come once to their ears, either they do utterly subdue them with their
spiritual Arms, strong arguments of Religion; or else they chase them quite
out of the Kingdom: whose wisdom in this I cannot sufficiently express, and
whose worthiness I want experience to commend. Only thus much I have observed
in them which now supply those eminent places of authority and justice, that
they have a watchful care for the suppression of all heretical and
diabolical Inventions that may happen to proceed from the fantastical
delusions of seducers, and maintenance of such things as shall tend to virtuous
institutions, and are so sufficiently furnished with the weapons of the spirit,
that a thousand foolish blind Papists with all their philosophical devices, are
not able to prevail against the least one of them, whereby is approved the
sincerity and truth of their Religion, and the invincible power thereof; which
as it works in them uprightness of heart; so it araieth them with many other
virtuous induments, as mildness, as well to poor as rich; indifferency, in
the hearing of causes, as well for strangers as their friends, sincerity in
affection, soundness in their skill and judgment, constancy in their
resolutions besides great prudence in politic government, and that which is
the true token of a wise discreet Judge, to be more apt to hear, see, and
consider, then to speak or give judgment, which should be also in every
person of what degree or condition soever, seeing that nature has given all
men two eyes, two ears, and but one tongue: To conclude, if any ^^ation upon
the Earth be well supplied with a virtuous Council and upright Judges, this
Land may boast thereof, which is furnished with such as are spoken of Exodus
18.21. Men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness,
Deuteronomy. 16.18. That judge the people with righteous judgment, that wrest not the
Law, nor respect any person, nor take reward, which blinds the wise and
peruerteth the words of the just.

36. But say a foul Swine in a clean beasts skin,
Were closely put (as none but clean come there)
Thinking by subtle policy to get in,
Yet would it be discried ere it come near,
For the third guard is clad in Arms complete,
And search each beast that thither comes to eat.
37. And they with complete furniture addressed,
In single combat shun no fierce assault,
Such manly courage rests in their breast,
From an whole host they never will revolt,
But fight courageously and win the day,
And carry conquest for their Prize away.
By this third Guard is meant the Reverend and learned Bishops of this
Kingdom, which are complete in all things that appertain to their place and
calling, and they are like a neast of Eagles, whose eyes steadfastly look upon
the Sun without winking, whose judgments discern Divine Mysteries, whose
profession in Ecclesiastical government is suitable to Christ's and the Apostles
prescription, whose preaching and writing manifests the truth of their
Religion, and whose godliness and virtue is seen by their life and
conversation whose learning abounds like the Sea, and whose wisdom
extends throughout the whole Land, God forbid that ever bastard egg should
be hatched in this neast, for what greater confusion then errors and divisions
in Religion? These are they that search the Papists inside though they appear
never so fair in the outside. These are the Tutch-stones that try the false
faith of Recusants, These make the Priests and Jesuits appear to the World as
they are, like the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23.21. Hypocrites which make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of
bribery and excess, And like painted Tombs which appear beautiful outward,
but within are full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness: These are Gods
warriors and Champions that are strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6.10. That have put on the whole Armor of God, their loins
girded with verity, and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and their
feel shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and have taken the
shield of faith, the helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the spirit. Let no
simple Romish Catholic presume to make trial of their profound knowledge,
lest as they deserve, they suffer a disgraceful repulse.

38. This goodly Paradise thus is safely kept
From unclean beasts, chiefly from Wolves and Boares
By Virtues care, and provident respect,
Who chief Commander is, and keeps the doors,
And lets all in and out, and sets these guards,
(Whom for their pains he daily gives rewards)
39. And so the Lambs and silly Sheep feed free
From the Wolves rapine, and the Swines infection,
Plenty of Corn is always seen to be,
And fruits great store, by Virtues good direction,
Good Sallet herbs abundant, water clear
(As if it were distilled) in Rivers there.
Oh that I had the spirit of perfect wisdom, that I might here set forth our
Solomon, our Royal king in his true shape, of whose excellency I am ravished
with admiration, O King, the Lord has annoi^^^^ (...) with his holy Oil, as
he anointed his servant David, Ps. 79.20. Prosper with thy glory, Ride upon
the word of truth, and of meekness, and righteousness, Ps. 45.2.4. It is thy
goodness and careful providence O King to elect such worthy and wise Bishops,
Council, Nobility and Judges, for the defense of this Kingdom, who are as
Guards and bulwarks, Forts and defenses against the Ravening Wolves, the
merciless Papists, (who as they are the enemies of Christ may be so called,
Mat. 10.16. also) That seek to deuourethe silly Lambs your poor subjects.
Acts 20.29.

Thou art the sole Commander and Supreme head under God of this our temporal
Paradise, the Lord make thee great in the Kingdom of Heaven at the day of thy
dissolution. By thy protection we have plenty of spiritual Corn, the bread of
life: plenty of spiritual fruits and herbs, the food of the soul: and
plenty of spiritual water to refresh our spirits; to wit, the Word of God
truly taught amongst us, the Gospel of Christ Jesus; which as I have showed
before, is thus in several places so compared. And under thee O King we are
happy above many other Nations for the peace and tranquillity of our Land.

40. And those three Guardes me thought devoutly prayed
For the continuance of this heavenly place,
And God grant Virtue happiness they said,
And his posterity, with increase of grace
Mercy, and peace, for evermore. And then
Legions of Angels answered, Amen.
St. Paul writing to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.23. declares, that it is a good and
acceptable thing in the sight of God our Savior, that supplications, prayers
and intercessions be made for Kings and for all that be in authority, And
herein is observed the allegiance of these eminent persons and the general
love and duty of the people, whose daily Inuocations of God according to the
Apostles direction, are devoutly made for all Spiritual and Temporal
blessings to be multiplied upon the King and his Royal issue, which, the Lord
grant may be infinite without number or measure. Amen.

FINIS.

