The foundation of the Universitie of Cambridge, With a Catalogue of the
principal Founders and special Benefactours of all the Colleges, and total
number of Students, Magistrates and Officers therein being, Anno 1634.
To the right honorable THOMAS Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Primier Earl of
England, and Earl Marshall of the same Kingdom, Baron Howard, Mowbray,
Segrave, Brus, of Gower, Fitzallen, Clun, Oswaldstree and Mautravers; Knight of
the most nobe Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his MAJESTY'S most
honorable privy Counsel, JOHN SCOT wishes all increase of honor and
felicity.

Anno Christi 630.
blazon or coat of arms

ACADEMIA CANTAB. 630.
coat of arms of Cambridge University

THe learned in antiquities have diversely written about the time of the
foundation of the University of Cambridge: some affirming it was founded by
Cantaber a Prince of Spain, brother to Partholinus King of Ireland, son in
law to Gurguntius King of Great Britain, many years before the incarnation of
our Savior Christ, of whose name (according to the Spa^ish language) it was
first called Cantabriga, after of his son Grantinus (who is said to have
walled it about) Grantbriga, and Grantbrige. Others say, that Cassivilanus
Prince of the Troynobantes, King Octavius, Arthur King of Great Bitain, and
Ethelbert King of Kent, were each of them founders or restorers of the same.
But the chiefest conclude and agree, that Sigebert King of the East Angles was
the principal Founder thereof, about the years 630 and 636, who assigned
dives Hostles and Houses for students to inhabit in, giving them large
privileges and charters, whereof some are yet extant, procuring also great
immunities from Pope Honorius the first, which Sergius the first confirmed.
Since which time, by reason of mny incursions, and continual wars between
the Britains, Romans, Saxons, the Kings of this Heptarchie, Danes and Normans,
the light and glory of this Academie was not only of old much eclipsed; but
even since the Conquest (in the Barons war.) also obscured and defaced: and
it is most certain, as the destructions were many, so the restaurations thereof
shortly ensued by one Prince or other; so that at length recovering it self, it
is most worthily reputed one of the famous Universities in the world. Muh
honor this place has received by the soones and nephews of Kings, in being
Earls thereof, viz. William brother to Ranulph Earl of Chester, John Earl of
Henault uncle to Philip le Beau King of France, whose daughter Isabel was wife
to King Edwar the second, and mother to King Edward the third: William
Marquess of Juliars, Edmund of Langley Duke of York, Edward Duke of York,
Richard Earl of Cambridge, Richard Duke of York, James Marquess Hamleton Earl
of Arren, Baron Hamleton of Chattelrault, etc. and at this present James
Marquess Hamleton Earl of Arren, etc. Master of the Horse to his Majesty,
etc. And howsoever the Hostles, Halls, Innes, Schools, and religious Houses,
whereof the University before and sice the Conquest did consist, which now are
wholly defaced, or in part converted into some of the present Colleges, were
for their number and number of Students in them, much above all that are now
extant, many of them being formerly known by these nmes, Frater de Poenitentia
Jesu Christi, S. Johannis Zacharii, S. Botolphi, Divi Gerhardi, S. Edvardi, S.
Edmundi, S. Augustini, Divi Thonae, Beatae Mariae, S. Clementis, Hovingi
Diversorium, Divi Gregorii, S. Margaretae, S. Katharinae, Hospitium Phiswici,
Tegularii Hospitium, Harlstoni Diversorium, S. Trinitatis Domus Dei, Ruddi
Hospitium, Michaelis Domus Aulae Regae, S. Pauli Diversorium, Burdeni
Hospitium, with many others; yet at this present it consists of sixtee goodly
Colleges and Halls, erected and maintained with the lands and revenews of
their several Founders (one of the Chapels thereof, founded by holy King
Henry the sixth, and the College of the holy and undivided Trinity founded by
King Henry the eighth, no University in the world can in all points
parallel.) These are the nurseries of Gods true religion, and seminaries of
good literature, which by the special favor and gracious protection of our
most dear Sovereign Lord CHARLE, By the grace of God of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland King, etc. do enjoy all peace and happiness.

S. PETER'S College, or House. 1280.
coat of arms of St. Peter's College, Cambridge

HVgo de B^lsham, Supprior, and after Bishop of Ely, began the foundation of
this College about ann. 1257, in the place where the two Hostles of Students
were (purchased the one for the Friars de poenitentia Jesu Christi; the other
for the Friars Hospitalis S. Johannis and near to the Church of S. Peter's
extra Trumpington gates. He settled not the endowment till anno 1284, at which
time upon six of both prties, translating the Seculars unto this place, he
established one Master, and 14 Fellows, and died before all things we
finished. After, Sinon de Montacute, Simon Langham, and John Fordam Bishops of
Ely, added to their means. In this while S. Peter's Church fell to the ground,
and Ecclesia beatae Mariae de gratia was built where now it stands, from whence
the College also came to be commonly styld for an hundred years together,
Coll. B. Mariae de gratia, which after in process of time, by the liberality
of John Holbrook Doctor of Divinity, Chancellor of his Universitie, Master
Thom. Lane, Thom. Deynman, John Warkworth, William Burgonie, Henry Hornbie,
John Edmund, Andrew Pern Dean of Ely, all Masters of this House, it was much
increased. Since, William Martin, Robert Shorton, Edmund Handson, To. Gilbert,
Mast. Skelon, Mt^s Elisabeth Wolf, John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury,
Edward Lord North, Master Robert Smith, Mast. Henry Wilshaw, the Lady Marie
Ramsey, M. Robert Warden, M. Thomas Warren, Mtis Margaret Dean, M. William
Hern, M. Robert Slade, and John Blithe late Fellow, have been all good
benefactours. To these must be added the late religious founders of the new
Chapel (dedicated March 17 1632) whose names are in a catalogue there affixed,
that have already contributed 1000 pounds toward the same: and the present
Master and Fellow^ have not only finished the said Chapel, with the expense
of 1200 pounds; but also by the help of Mtis Frances Matthew widow, etc. who
g^ve 200 pounds, Doct. Richardson late Fellow, Doctor Hawkins late of this
College, who gave each of them 100 pounds, have builded a new Court, with a
fair front and gate next the street. This College being the first of all that
now are standing in this Universitie, has a this time in it a Master, 19
Fellows, 29 Bible-clarks, 8 poor scholars, besides other students, with
officers and common servants, being in all 106. Matthew Wren Doct. of Divinity,
Dean of Windsor, and Dean of his Majesty's Chappel-royall, etc. now Master.

UNIVERSITIE House or Hall, now CLARE Hall. 1326.
coat of arms of Clare Hall, Cambridge

RIchard Balew Chancellor (and the Universitie then being) founded this
College or Hall, by the name of the Universitie House or Hall, in a street
called Mylne street near S. John Zacharies Church; wherein the first sixteen
years the students lived at the Universitie charges. Afterward Walter Thaxted
Master of the same, with the consent of Richard Ling then Chancellor, and the
Universitie, resigned th first foundation into the hands of Elisabeth Countess
of Clare, widow, sometimes the wife of John de Burgo, Earl of Vlster, which
Elisabth had formerly given the perpetual patronage of Litlington, and
bestowed many other favors upon this College. She then (under the license of
King Edward 3) altered the first name, and called it after her own name,
Collegium, sive Aula de Clare. In which College by the gift o^ this Honorable
Foundresse, and of Thomas Stoyl, and Edm. Naturesse Masters thereof; John
Thaxton, Edith Green, William Ducket, Will. Worleigh, Will. Marshall, Ralph
Scrivener, Thom. Cave, Doct. Leeds late Master, Thom. Cecil late Earl of
Excester, and the Lady Dorothe his wife, who gave 108 pounds per annum,
William Butler sometimes Fellow and President of this House, the famous
Physician, who gave one challice of pure gold, with other plate and books, etc.
to the value of 500 pounds, John Freeman Esquire, who gave 2000 pounds, Doct.
Scot Dean of Rochester, etc. late Master, who gave in money, plate, and books
the sum of 300 pounds. Mast. George Ruggle late Fellow, who gave in money,
plate, and books, above 400 pounds, Sir Robert Heath Atturney-Generall, etc.
Mast. Thomas Biag, Mast. Humfrey H^de, Robert Johnson of Luffenham Esquire,
Mast. Erasmus Farrer, Mast. William Briden, Mast. Thom. Cropley, and diverse
other benefactours; there is at this present in the same a Master, 18 Fellows,
36 scholars, 20 poor schol. besides officers and servants of the foundation,
with other students, the whole number being 106. Thomas Pask Doct. of
Divinity, Archdeacon of London, etc now Master thereof.

PEMBROKE Hall. 1343.
coat of arms of Pembroke College, Cambridge

MArie de S. Paul, Countess of Pembroke, Baroness of Veisser and Mountenact,
daughter to Guido Chastillion Earl of S. Paul in France, and of Marie Britannia
his wife, after the death of Audomarus de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, etc. whose
third wife she was (but for one day as it is thought) betook her self wholly to
devotion, bestowing the greatest part of her estate on Churches, religious
houses, the poor, and her servants, having built Dennie Abbey, and procured
license from King Edward 3, to found this house by the name of the College of
Mary Valence, after called Pembroke Hall, (within the compass whereof, as now
it stands, are the ancient Hostles of the Universitie and S. Thomas, Knaptons,
Boultons, and Cousing places, with part of the Chauntrie-house of little S.
Mary's) endowing ^^e same with diverse Patronages, Impropriations, lands, rents,
plate, jewels, and other ornaments, and established therein one Master, six
Fellows, and two scholars It has been since enlarged by the gift of holy King
Henry the sixth, Edward Story Bishop of Chichester, Gerhard and Nich^as
Skipwith, Doct. Atkinson, Sir William Hussy Knight, Charles Booth Bishop of
Hereford, S. Roger Strange Knight, Doct. Wats, William Marshall, Will. Smart
and Alice his wife, afterward married to Ralph Scrivener, Jane Cox widow; all
these besides John Laughton Bishop of S. David's, Laurence Booth, and Thomas
Scot, alias Rotheram, both Archbishops of York, Richard Fox Bishop of
Winchester, Doct. Short^n Dean of Stoa^, Edmund Grindall and John Whitgift
Archbishops of Canterbury, William Fulk Doct. of Divinity, which were all
Mastes of this House, and have by gifts of lands, money, plate, books, etc.
augmented the same; and Lancelot Andrews Doct. of Divinity, late Mast^r and
Bishop of Winchester has given 1000 pounds, and the perpetual Patronage of
Rawreth in Essex with 374 folio books well bou^. Wherein there is at this
present a Master, 19 Fellows, one tanquam, 33 scholars of the House, besides
officers and servants of the foundati^n, with other students, the whole number
being 100. Benjamin Laney Doct. of Divinity, Chaplain to the Kings Majesty,
etc. now Master.

CORP. CHRISTI College. 1351.
coat of arms of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge

Henry of Monmouth, surnamed Torto Collo (son and heir of Henry of
Laneaster, Lord of Monmouth and Pomfret, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and
Derbie, and high Steward of England) succeeded his father in all these honors,
and was by King Edward the 3 created Earl of Lincoln, and Knight of the most
honorable order of the Garter, Duke of Lancaster, and Lord high Steward of
England, etc. Of the Fraternity or Guild of Corpus Christi, and blessed Marie
the Virgin, near unto Luthborn lane, and the Hostle of S. Bernard in the East,
(whereof himself was then Alderman) ordained this College, in the year 1351,
and among other things appropriated unto the same, the perpetual patronage of
S. Benedicts Church, adjoining to this College. Which College since has been
much beautified with buildings, and increased in revenews, by the liberalities
of the Lady Margaret Brotherton Duchess of Norfolk, etc. Thomas Cambridge
Esquire, S. John Cambridge Knight (who gave a place called Stonehouse or
Stonehall, toward the augmentation of the same) John ^ee^ Esquire Bedle,
Matthew Parker Fellow and Master of this House, Doctor of Divinity,
Archbishop of Canterbury, S. Nicholas Bacon Knigh^ Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, Roger Manors late Earl of Rutland, Lord Roos of Hamlake,
Belvoir and Trousbut, etc. Mast. Roger Manors his great uncle, M. William
Benedict, and M. Leonard Cawson (who gave 18 pounds, 13 shillings, 4 pence for
the maintenance of three scholarships) besides diverse other benefactours: So as
there is at this present in the same, a Master, 12 Fellows, 37 scholars,
besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole
number being 126. Richard Love Doctor of Divinity, now Vicechancellour and
Master.

TRINITY Hall. 1353.
coat of arms of Trinity College, Cambridge

WIlliam Bateman born in the city of Norwich, Doct. of the Civil Law,
Archdeacon of Norwich, after the 18 Bishop of that See, for exchange of certain
Parsonages, obtained an ancient Hostle, near adjoining to the University
House or Ha^l, butting upon Milnstreet, and S. John Zacharies Church East,
where in former time students lived at their at their own charges, which one
John de Crawden Prior of Elie had purchased for the Monks of that Priorie to
inhabit and reside in, and made thereof a College or Ha^l for the students of
the Law, dedicating the same to the honor of the (...) and blessed Trinity in
the city of Norwich, endowing the same with lands and possessions. To this
Hostle (before it was by him purchased (...) ^ichard Ling Doctor of Divinity,
Chancellor of this Universitie, Archibald of Norwich, Simon de Rekenhall, and
Walter Elvedon g^^^ four tenements; Robert Stratton, John Trunch, Walter
Baketon, Walte^ de Aldersey, and Peter de Bittering gave two messuages, and
seven pieces of ground, one of the messuages being called Drakes entry. This
College has since, by the bounty of M. Simon Dalling, and Walter Huke,
Masters thereof, Robert Goodnap, John Maptid, Gabr. Dun, Richard Nix Bishop of
Norwich, Steph. Gardener Doct. of Law, Master of this House, Bishop of
Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of this Universitie,
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Doct. Mowse, Doct. Harvey, M. Busbie,
M. Hare Esquire, Doct. Cowell late Master, Doct. of Law, and Kings Professor,
S. George Newman Knight, and other benefactours, been much enlarged: So as
there is at this present a Master, 12 Fellows, 14 scholars, besides officers
and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number being
threescore. Thomas Eden Doctor of Law, Chancellor of Ely, etc. now Master.

GONE. and CAI. College. 1353.
coat of arms of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge

EDmund Gonvil Rector of Terrington and Rushworth in Norfolk, obtained license
of King Edward 3 to erect this College; the first foundation whereof he laid
anno 1348, where the orchyard of Corpus Christi College is now situate; which
he dedicated to the honor of the Annunciation of Blessed Marie the Virgin,
wherein he established a Master, and 4 Fellows, whom, while he lived, with his
own money he maintained: But he died untimely, anno 1353, giving by will a
great sum of money in trust to Will. Bateman Bishop of Norwich, to perfect
this his College or Hall, and to endow it with competent possessions, who in
anno 1353 procured the said Master and Fellows to remove to a place near unto
his own College then in building, called Trinity Hall, anciently called
Henny, in the parish of S. Michael, where he purchased by exchange diverse
messuages and tenements, on which he erected the same, by the name of Gonvil
Hall. Afterward John Caius Doct. of Physic, a learned antiquarie in ann.
1557, was made a Co-founder by letters Patents, who caused it to be called
Gonvil and Caius College: he added to the former court being four square, his
fair building of freestone, increased the treasury with new revenews,
enriching it with large possessions for the maintenance of three Fellows, 20
scholars, and a porter. Since the Ladies Marie Pakenham, and Anne Scroop,
Elisabeth Clear, Doct. Balie, Stephen Smith, Richard Willison, Thom. Atkins,
Peter Hewit, William Gale, Thom. Willows, William Sigo, Doct. Knight, John
Whitacre, Matthew. Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Traps and Ione his
wife, Joyce Franklin their daughter, Doct. Wendie, Doct. Bishbie, Doct. Harvey,
S. William Paston Knight, William Cutting, Doct. Leg, Doct. Branthwait, and
Doct. G^stlin late Masters of this House, Doct. Perse, and Doct. Wells, late
Fellows of this House, and many other good benefactours, have increased the
number of Fellows and scholars, books and buildings, etc. of this College; so
as there is at this present in the same a Master, 25 Fellows, one Chaplain, 69
scholars, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students,
the whole number being 209. Thomas Bacheroft Doctor of Divinity, etc. being
now Master thereof.

KINGS College. 1441.
coat of arms of King's College, Cambridge

HEnry the sixth, called Henry of Windsor, King of England and France (son
and heir of King Henry the fifth, and of Katharine daughter of Charles the
sixth King of France) began this royal foundation, dedicating the same to the
honor of S. Nicholas, consisting then of one Master, and 12 scholars, in or
about the places where the Churches of S. Nicholas, and S. John Zachary, S.
Augustines Hostle, and Gods House had formerly been situated: But within two
years after, he enlarged the first foundation, dedicating the same to the
honor of our blessed Lady Mary the Virgin and S. Nicholas. In which College
at this present is standing one of the fairest Chapels in the world,
conformable whereunto he intended to have made this his College, which by his
untimely death he left only begun and unperfected, for some of his Royal
Successors to finish. Afterward King Henry the 7 finished the stone-work (in
part) of the said Chapel, and King Henry the 8 caused the same to be glased,
seated, paved, and perfected. To this College the Founder under his great Seal
by Act of Parliament confirmed this coat of Arms, which here in the margin they
bear, placing in chief a flower of France, and a lion of England, that it may
appear to be the work of a King. Since, Roger Goad Doct. of Divinity, late
Fellow and Provost, Adam Robins, Richard Day, and Doct. Cowell, late Fellows,
Doct. Smith late Fellow and Provost, William Henshaw late Fellow: also Thomas
Weaver late Fellow (new Fellow and late Vice-Provost of Eton) has wainscotted
the back of the Fellows and scholars seats on both sides of the said Chapel,
in a decent and comely manner, and diverse other benefactours, with books and
other ornaments have much enriched the same. In which College at this present
is a Provost, 70 Fellows and scholars, 3 Chaplains, one master of the
Choristers, 6 Clarks, 16 Choristers, 16 colledge-officers of the foundation,
besides 12 servitours to the seniour Fellows, 6 poor scholars, with other
students, the whole number being 140. Samuel Collins Doctor of Divinity, and
the Kings Professor, etc. now Provost.

QUEENS College. 1448.
coat of arms of Queen's College, Cambridge

MArgaret A^degavensis, daughter of Reyner Duke of Aniou (titularie King of
Sicilie, Naples, and Jerusalem) Consort of King Henry the 6, obtained license
of the same King, to build this College upon part of the ground belonging to
the Carmelites or White Friars, butting on Milnstreet in the parish of S.
Botolphs, and to purchase land of the value of 200 pounds for the endowment
thereof, dedicating the same to S. Margaret and S. Bernard: but she died and
left it unperfect. Afterward Queen Elisabeth, wife to King Edward the 4,
obtained license to finish the same, which she accomplished. This College
since by the liberality of the Ladies Margaret Roos, Jane Inglethorp, and Jane
Borough, George Duke of Clarence, Ciciley Duchess of York, Richard Duke of
Gloucester, the Lady Anne his wife, Edward Earl of Salisburie, Maud Countess
of Oxford, Marm. Lomly Bishop of Lincoln Chancellor of this Universitie,
Andrew Ducket Rector of S. Botolphs, sometimes Principal of S. Bernards
Hostle, and the first President of this College (who had formerly been a
Friar, and gathered of well disposed persons much money, and procured the Kings
mandate, that the Mayor, Bailiffes, and Burgesses of the Town of Cambridge
should sell him a parcel of ground called Goose-green, in the parish
aforesaid, which is now an island lying between the College, and the green
called Youngs green or bank) Hugh Trotter Doct. of Divinity, John Drewell, and
William Weld, Canons of S. Paul's, S. Thom. Smith Fellow of this College,
principal Secretary to Queen Elisabeth, Henry Wilshaw 13 President of this
College, D. Stokys, John Chetham, Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, John
Joslin, George Mountague late Archbishop of York, together with many other
noble and well disposed persons, benefactours, it is so increased, as at this
present there is in the same a President, 19 Fellows, 23 scholars, 8
Bible-clarks, and 3 Lecturers of Hebrew, Arithm. and Geomet. besides other
officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number
being 190. Edward Martin Doctor of Divinity, being now President thereof.

KATHARINE Hall. 1475.
coat of arms of St. Catherine's College, Cambridge

RObert Woodlark, born at Wakerly in Northumberland, Doct. of Divinity, the
last fellow that King Henry 6 placed in Kings College, third Provost of the
same, Chancellor of this Universitie, founded this College or Hall in a place
called Mylnestreet, over against Queens Coll. Orchard, formerly known by the
name of the Carmelite Friars, of four Tenements which were purchased for that
purpose: he dedicating the same to the Honor of S. Katharin the Virgin and
Martyr, obtained of King Edward 4 a license of mortmain for the endowment
thereof; which was confirmed to him and his Successors for ever. Wherein he
established a Master, and three Fellows. Since it has been enlarged by the
liberality of Isabel Canterbury widow, William Tailor, Katharin Miles, Robert
Simpton, Hugh Pemmerton, the Lady Elisabeth Bernardiston, John Leach, Richard
Nealson, Robert Shorton Doct. of Divinity, Master of S. John's Coll. in this
Universitie, Dean of Stoak, etc. after Master of Pembroke Hall; Hugh Garret,
John Chester, Thomas Green Doct. of Divinity, Master of this House, Doct.
Thymblebie, Doct. Middleton, Rosamond Pain widow, John Cholmley, John Duke, S.
John Claypool Knight, John Gostlya Doct. of Physic, late Fellow and Master of
Gonvil and Caius Coll. Vicehancellour 1618, who died Vicechancellour October
21, 1626, a large and bountiful Benefactour: Thomas Buck late Fellow of this
House, Seniour Esquire Bedle, Master Christopher Shirland, Mistress Stafford,
Master Thomas Hobbs, Master Peter Phesant, Anne Lady Cocket widow, Mistress
Iurdayn widow, Anne Lady Bernardiston, William Gouge Doct. of Divinity, Master
Coulson, Master Skerne Esquire, Mast. Alured, Master Cradock citizen and
merchant of London, the worthy company of the Nercers in the City of London,
and many other benefactours: So as there in now in the same a Master, 6
Fellows, 10 Scholars, 9 Exhibitioners, besides Officers and Servants of the
foundation, with other Students, being in all 150. Richard Sibbs Doct. of
Divinity, etc. being now Master thereof.

JESUS College. 1496.
coat of arms of Jesus College, Cambridge

John Alcock born at Beverley in Yorksh. Doct. of the Civil Law, etc. being
Bishop of Ely, and Lord Chancellor of England, procured license of King Henry
7. to convert into a Coll. an Ancient Nunnety (the Nuns whereof all but 2. were
dead and dispersed, and the house much wasted) formerly consecrated to S.
Rhadegund, and endowed by sundry Benefactors, whereof Malcolme 4 King of
Scotland, and the whole race of the Earls of Hunt. with their Families, were
the chiefest who gave the ground whereon it stands, and 10 acres of land
adjoining, as also the Manor House and Lands, with the Rhadegund tithes, with
the appurtenances, etc. In the time of the Prioresse and Nuns, John Portois,
Hervens the son of Thurstace, John Thriplow, Rector of Hardwick with his
sister Dionis, Nicholas Morris, Hugo Filius Absolonis, and others, were
liberal Benefactors. He also obtained license under the great seal of England,
that all the lands belonging to the said Nunnery, should be appropriated to
this his Coll. dedicating the same unto the honor of the blessed Virgin Marie,
S. John the Evangelist, and the glorious Virgin S. Rhadegund, commonly called
Jesus College, wherein he established one Master, 6 Fellows, and 6 Scholars:
Since by the liberality of the Lady Willoughbie, and the Lady Bray, who
builded the side from the Cloister Court to the Garden, James Stanley and Tho.
Thirlbie, Bishops of Ely, John Beauchamp Knight, S. Robert Read Knight, Lord
chief Justice of the common pleas, John Andrews, Doctor Royston, Doctor Fuller
Masters of the same, John Batemanson, Tho. Roberts, Roger Thorney, Rich. Pigot
Godf. Fuliam, Will. Marshall, Jane Woods, Thomas Sutton Esquier, and other
benefactors, it is so increased, that there is at this present in the same, a
Master, 16 Fellows, 24 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the
foundation: with other Students being in all 110. Richard Stern Bachelour of
Divinity, etc. being now Master thereof.

CHRIST'S College. 1505.
coat of arms of Christ's College, Cambridge

MArgaret Countess of Richmond and Derbie, daughter and sole heir of Ionn
Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, widow of Edmund of Hadham Earl of Richmond (son
of Owen ap-Tuder of Wales, Knight, and of Queen Katharine his wife, Dowager of
King Henry 5, half Brother to King Henry 6, etc.) Mother of King Henry 7; in
testimony of her love to learning obtained license of the same King to erect a
College without Barnwell-gate, in Preachers-street, of four Messuages and
Gardens belonging to the Abbot of Tiltie, and Prioresse of Dennie (where King
Henry the 6 had founded a house called Gods house, in hew of that which had
been formerly builded by William Bingham Rector of S. John Zacharies Church in
the City of London, which was pulled down by the same King when he founded
Kings College) dedicating the same to the Honor of our Savior Christ, which
she endowed with lands and revenews, for the maintenance of a Master, 12
Fellows, 47 Scholar, besides Officers and Servants: The number of which has
been since increased by the liberality of John Fisher President of Queens
College, Bishop of Rochester and Cardinal, etc. King Edward the sixth, Thomas
Tompson, and Edward Hawford Doctors of Divinity, Masters of the same, S.
Walter Mildemay Knight, Chancellor and Treasurer of the Exche^uer, Richard
Risley, Doct. Patison, Philip Rawlins, Master Jennings, Nicholas Colverwell,
Thomas Laughton, Master Wentworth, Robert Ishan, Richard Bunting, Richard Car,
benefactours; and the revenews for other purposes augmented: So as there is at
this present in the same a Master, 13 Fellows, 60 scholars, besides officers
and servants of the foundation, with other students; the whole number being one
hundred threescore and six. Thomas Bainbrigg Doctor of Divinity,
Vicechancellour anno 1627, now Master.

(...)
coat of arms of St. John's College, Cambridge

THe abovesaid Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derbie, Mother of King Henry
7, etc. obtained license of her nephew King Henry the 8, to convert an
Hospital or house of Regular Canons (founded by Nigellus the second Bishop of
Ely, in the year 1134, afterward translated to a Priory, and dedicated to S.
John the Evangelist in the Jury, by Hugo de Balsham to Bishop of Ely) into a
College by the ancient name of S. John the Evangelist: The perfecting whereof
she left to her executors, Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, John Fisher Bishop
of Rochester, Charles Somerset (...) other^s who did most justly perform the
trust she reposed in them. This College has been since enlarged by the
liberality of John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal, the Lady
Anne Rooksbie, Doct. Lan^ Doct. K^yte^, Hugh Ashton, Doct. Lupton, Doct.
Thymblebie, Doct. Downham, John Constable, Robert Simpson, Robert Ducket,
Thomas (...), Ion Griggeson, James Betisford, Robert Holitrecholm, John
Replingham, Doct. Linacre, John Baily, Doct. Tompson, Walter Sawkins, Kath^ine
Duchess of Suffolk, John Thurlston, Stephen Cardinal, S. Ambrose Cave
Knight, Thomas Cunny, Doct. Goodman, William Cecil Lord ^leigh, the Lady
Mildred Burleigh, S. Henry Billingsley Knight, Doct. Gwyn, the Lady Iermin,
Henry Heblethwait, William Spalding and (...)iam Spalding brothers, Robert
Booth, Henry Albry, John Walton, John Waller, Mary Countess of Shrewsbury,
George Paylin, William Lo^d Maynard, Baron of Wicklow, etc. Robert Lews, John
Knewstubbs, Mistress Cutler, John Hooper, John Williams Lord Keeper of the
pr^v^^ Seal Bishop of Lincoln, S. Ralph Hare K. of the Bath, Robert Johnson of
Luffenham Esquire, and other good benefactours; So as there is at this present
in the same, a Master, 54 Fellows, 84 scholars, besides officers and servants
of the foundation, with many other students, being in all 282. William Beal
Doctor of Divinity, etc. now Master thereof.

MAGDALENE College. 1519.
coat of arms of Magdalene College, Cambridge

EDward Stafford, last Duke of Buckingham, Earl Stafford, Hereford and
Northampton, (son and heir of Henry Stafford, second Duke (...) Buckingham,
and Constable of England) founded this College by the name of Buckingham
College, in a place where the Priory ^. Gy^es had formerly been situated; it
was after an Hostle or Hall, inhabited by diverse Monks of several monasteries,
to reside and study in, and therefore of old called Monks College; (the
backsides whereof at this present retain the name of Monks corner) Afterwa^ds
in the year 1542, Thomas Audley, Baron of Walden, Lord Chancellor of England,
obtained license of King Henry 8, to alter the former name, and call it S. Mary
Magdalene College, in the fair Universitie of Cambridge, unto which he gave
both lands and revenews. The right Honorable Theophilus Howard, Earl of
Suffolk, Knight of the Garter, being now (by inheritance) Patron thereof. Which
College, by the gift of King Henry 8 the Founder and Patron, S. Christopher
Wrey, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, John Spenliffe, of Lincolnsh.
Edmond Grindall, Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho. Parkinson, Rector of
Wivelingham, Will. Roberts of Norfolk, John Hughes, Tho. Su^ton of Balsham
Esquire, and also the Honorable Lady Frances, Countess dowager of Warwick,
wife of Robert Rich, first Earl of Warwick, who gave maintenance for one
Fellow, and 2 scholars, and others who have been benefactours, is much
increased: so as at this present there is a Master, 11 Fellows, and 22
scholars, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students,
being in all 140. Henry Smith Doctor of Divinity, etc. being now Master
thereof.

TRINITY College. 1546.
coat of arms of Trinity College, Cambridge

HEnry the 8 King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
after the suppression 1546. united Kings Hall, founded by King Edward 3.
Michael house, founded by Hervicus de Stanton, Chancellor of the Exchequor to
King Edward 2. and Phiswick Hostle, founded by John Phiswick, one of the
Esquire Bedles, into a College by the name of the holy and undivided Trinity,
which he endowed with 1640 pounds per ann. in or about the places where
formerly (besides these 3 houses) were anciently situated S. Gregory's Ho^tle,
S. Katharines Hostle, Margaret Hostle, S. Gerhards Hostle, Tylers Hostle, and
Owens Inn. Since Queen Mary augmented the College by a third part in Fellows
and scholars, besides the whole foundation of the Quier: As also Thomas Allen
Clark gave two fellowships, and lands to other uses: S. Edward Stanhop Knight
founded a library keeper and a servant under him, the Lady Anne Bromley gave 5
scholarships, George Palyn Girdler, the Lady Anne Weld widow, Roger Jesson
Haberdasher, Mistress Elis. Elwis widow of Jeffery Elwis Alderman, have each of
them given several pensions, Doct. Bill, Doct. Beaumont, John Whitgift
Archbishop of Canterbury, all Masters of this house, D^ct. Cousins, Doct.
Barrow, Doct. Skeffington, Will. Cooper Esquire, Peter Shaw, S. Will. Sidley
Knight and Baronet, S. Tho. Lake Knight, S John Suckling Knight, Thomas Nevill
Doct. of Divin. late Master, who expended the sum of 3000 pounds in building
the back Court, R^^ert Banckworth, Doct. of Divinity, late Fellow, S. Raph
Hare Knight, Master Silvius Elwis, now of this College, and King James,
besides ^^^ers other noble and generous benefactours, have so increased the
same with buildings, books, and revenews, as at this present it is one of the
^st goodly and uniform Colleges in Europe; wherein is a Master, 60 Fellows, 67
scholars, 4 Conducts, 3 Public Professors, 13 poor s^^olars, a master of
the Choristers, 6 Clarks, 10 Choristers, 20 Almesmen, besides officers and
servants of the foundation, with many other s^^dents, being in all 440. Thomas
Cumber Doctor of Divinity, Dean of Carlisle, etc. now Master thereof.

EMMANUEL College. 1584.
coat of arms of Emmanuel College, Cambridge

SIr Walter Mildmay Knight, Chancellor and Treasurer of the Exchequour, Privy
Counselor to our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elisabeth, obtained license of
the said Queen to found and erect this College for the maintenance of a
Master, 30 Fellows and scholars, (nomine plurium) as the revenews should ever
be able to maintain, in the place where in times past inhabited the
Blackfryars, otherwise called Fratres Praedicantes, in the street (of them)
called Preachers street, and therein established a Master, 3 Fellows, and 4
scho^ars; for increase of which foundation, the said Queen Elisabeth gave 16l
13s. 4d. per annum out of the Exchequor: Since it has been much ^ugmented, by
the liberality of Henry Earl of Huntington, S. Francis Hastings his brother,
S. Robert Iermyn, S. Francis Walsingham, S. Henry Killegrew, S. Wolstan Dixy,
S. John Heart, S. Samuel Leonard, and S. Thomas Skinner Knights, Alexander Noel,
Doctor of Divinity, Dean of S. Paul's in the City of London, Doct. Leeds,
Doct. Harvey, Doct. Branthwait, Robert Tailor, Customer Smith, Nicholas Fuller,
Roger Snegg, Francis Chamberlain, Master Ellis, John Spenliff, William Neale
and Edmun. English Esquires, Aldermon Radcliff, John Morley, Richard Cul^erwel,
Robert Johnson Esquire, John Bernes, the Lady Mary Dixy, Martha Iermin, Alice
Owen, Joyce Franckland, and Elisabeth Walters widows, Doct. Richardson late
Fellow, Master of Trinity College, S. Henry Mildmay of Graces in Essex
Knight, Master Richard Knightly of Preston ^n Northamptonshire Esquire, and
diverse other benefactours: which College is now enlarged with a fair new
building of 4 stories high, containing 140 foot. There is at this present in
the same a Master, 14 Fellows, 50 scholars, 10 poor scholars, besides officers
and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number being
310. William Sandcroft Doctor of Divinity, etc. now Master thereof.

SIDNEY SUSSEX Coll. 1598.
coat of arms of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge

FRances Sidney Countess of Sussex (sister to S. Henry Sidney Knight, Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales, Aunt to the renowned, S. Philip
Sidney) widow of Tho. Radcliffe, 3 Earl of Sussex, founded this College by the
name of the College of the Lady Frances Sidney Sussex, in a place called the
Gray Friars, which Friary builded by King Henry 1. suppressed Anno 1546. by
King. Hen. 8. and given to Trinity College in Cambridge, was since from it by
Act of Parliament conveyed to the executours of the said Countess, Henry Gray
5 Earl of Kent, and John Lord Harrington of Exton, in fee-farm: for the
building and perfecting of this her College, she gave by her last will and
testament (besides her goods unbequeathed) 5000 pounds, wherewith her executors
aforenamed built and endowed it with lands and revenews, for the maintenance of
a Master, 10 Fellows, and 20 scholars: Which being increased by the accessarie
foundation of S. John Heart Knight, Leonard Smith, Citizen of London, Peter
Blundel of Tiverton Clothier, John Freeston Esquire, Edward Lord Mountague of
Boughton, etc. has in present a Master, 12 Fellows and 33 scholars, and for
the further enlarging thereof, S. Francis Clark Knight has lately built 20
Chambers for students, founded 4 fellowships with 8 scholarships more, and
augmented the scholarships of the foundation. Benefactours to the same College
have been the forementioned executours, John Lord Harrington the younger, the
Lady Lucie Countess of Bedford his sister, the Lady Anne Harrington his
mother, the aforenamed Lord Mountague, James Mountague his brother, Doctor of
Divinity, Bishop of Winchester, the first Master, George Lord Goring, S. John
Breerton Knight, his Majest. Sergeaunt in the Kingdom of Ireland, one of the
first scholars of this house, a most bountiful benefactour, John Young Doctor
of Divinity, Dean of Winchester, Fellow of this College, S. William Wilmore
the first Pensioner in it, Robert Johnson of Luffenham Archdeacon of Leicester,
John Harrington, Godf. Fuljambe, Edward Wray, and Robert Hudson Esquiers. The
whole number of students at this present with officers and servants of the
foundation are 210. Samuel Ward Doctor of Divinity, and the Lady Margaret
Professor, etc. now Master thereof.

The total number of Students of all Degrees in this University, that had
names in every particular Colled^e, with the Magistrates and daily officers
thereunto belonging, besides diverse young Scholars that were relieved herein,
which had no names in any of the Colleges aforesaid, was in Anno 16^^, 3050.
And by reason of the visitation of sickness in the year 1629, many were then
dispersed to Oxford, and other places, and no supply came the year ^^lowing,
by which means there is now in the same but 2848.

Printed by the Printers to the University of Cambridge, for JOHN SCOT the
elder, and to be sold over against Holborn Conduit, at the house of Robert
Peak, Anno 1634.


