THE ANATOMY OF THE INWARD parts of Woman, very necessary to be known to
Physicians, Surgians, and all other that desire to know themselves.
FOr so much as the declaration of most of the principal parts is sufficiently
set forth in the Anatomy of man, therefore will I remit you thither: There to
behold the operation of them, and here we will declare the situation and manner
of such parts as are in a woman, different from the parts in a man. Howbeit,
first ye shall understand the signification of the letters, which are graven
within this figure.

A. The gully of the throat.

B. The Longes.

C. The heart.

D. The Middriffe.

E. The inner part of the throat pipe passing through the boolke and the lunges
into the stomach.

F. The mouth of the stomach.

G. The stomach.

H. The bottom of the stomach.

I. The nether mouth of the stomach.

K. The liver. Next unto this letter K. you see this

L. letter V. the which would be L. and signifies the gaul.

M. Vena port, the liver vain.

N. The Spleen.

O. Signifies the place and vessel to the which the flowers be derived from
the liver: Nam menses in primis sensum erumpunt ab ipso iecinore, velut per
quedam interualla, donec peruentu^ sit ad illa (super primum ceruicis pudende
exortum) acetavula: quos hec, quasi hianti and aperto ore effundunt.

P. Signifies the Kidneyes, in Laten Renes.

Q. The bladder, in Latin Vescica: this bladder receives the waterie parts
and urine which descends from the reins, and it lies in the lower parts of
the belly before the womb or matrix of the woman, whose neck enters in at,
and is fastened to the neck of the womb through the which naturally it sends
forth the urine.

R. Signifies the great vain, which is derived out of the liver, called in
Latin Parigibba, and Chilis: Concaua venarum matter, the mother of all veins,
and from whom and through his branches (other smaller veins) blood is conveyed
into all parts of man's body.

S. T. V. X. Signifies the womb wherein mankind is conceived, nourished and
fostred, unto the time it be of a certain might and force, and then naturally
is sent and brought forth into the world, but it is somewhat higher then the
bladder: the bottom of it extends it self unto the Navel.

S. Signifies the bottom of the womb, where is a certain thick carnosite,
which boweth downward, and causes a distinction to be in the womb.

T. Wherefore T. signifies the right side of the Matrix.

V. The left side. Some there be that write, that there should be many selles
or distinctions in the Matrice, the which is not true, for other distinction
then the fleshie part (which is signified by S.) does cause, is there none. In
the right side as Philosophers write, lies alvvay the man child, in the left
the woman child. And to know whether the conception be male or female, they
bid to mark whether it move more on the right side then the left, for the^ it
is a man. If on the left more then on the right side, then it is a woman: and
for that cause also is to be noted the two breasts, the right and the left: if
the right be greater and harder then the left, it is a token of a man: if the
left, of a woman, and if she have more pain and dolor in the right side,
likewise it signifies the man child, if in the left, a woman. Whether it be
man or wonan, according to the Doctor of Physic and Philosophers, when the
seed is first conceived in the Matrix, it encloseth it self after such a sort,
that the point of a needle cannot enter in at it but by violence. And the first
vi. days that it is conceived, it remains crude and white like milk.

Then in the space of other nine days it waxes read, and is become thick
blood: then in other xii, dries, it begins to come to some fashion: then in
the xviii. days following, the face and other pricipall members, begin to
grow into a full shape and form in longitude, latitude and profunditie. In the
rest of the time unto the birth it is comforted, and prepared to come forth,
the which many times chances in the vii. month, and the child proves and
does very well: but in the xiii, month, few or none prove. About the later end
of the ix. again, if it be borne, it proves very well, that is the most
common course xl. weeks after the conception. The manner how the child lies
in the mothers womb, is this: the face lies on both the knees: so lies it
round in manner, and the face toward the inward part of the womb: and this
partly have I showed you of the operation of the Matrice.

A perfect and particular description of the secret parts of the body of woman,
with the signification of the letters contained in the same.
1. The womb is called in Latin Matrix* as it were, Matter (that is) a mother:
for as much as all beasts proceed out of that as borne of a mother: It hangs
between the spleen and the bladder: but somewhat higher then the bladder. The
bottom and hollownesse thereof is extended unto the navel, and it is the
place of the first mass of conception called Embrion.

2 The right side or goulfe of the Matrice wherein male children are begotten.

3 The left gulf of the Matrice, wherein femall children are begotten.

4 The mouth or entrance of the Matrice, which is unclosed in work of natural
generation, and receives the seed of man, and after conception so straightly
closes it self, that the point of a needle can not enter into it: yet at
times convenient, (that is to say, at the avoiding of fluores) it opens if
self.

5 From hence proceeds the seed of woman in conception: and likewise the seed
of man.

6 This is the division of the great veins proceeding from the liver to the
heart, and again from the heart, passing through the ridge bone of the back,
whereunto also the kidneyes do cleave. From hence come the veins whereby the
menstruall blood (for lack of natural heat engendered of crude and vndigest
blood) is conveyed into the matrice.

7 The neck of the matrice is vi. fingers in length, having beneath a narrow
mouth, whereby the issue of the bladder sends forth urine.

8 The privy member of woman.

9 Two great artery veins, whereunto the matrice is fastened, and are
therefore called the Matrice.

Imprinted at London in the Black Friars. 1599.


