The fantasies of a troubled man's head.
BY Fortune as I lay in bed, my fortune was to find,
Such fancies as my careful thought has brought into my mind.
And when each one was gone to rest, all soft in bed to lie,
I would have slept, but that the watch did follow still mine eye.
And Sodeinlie I saw a Sea of woeful sorrows pressed,
Whose wicked ways of sharp repulse, bred mine unquiet rest;
I saw this world and how it went, each state in his degree,
And that from Wealth ygraunted is, both life and liberty,
I saw eke how Envy did reign, and bare the greatist price,
Yet greatter poison is not found within the Cockatrice,
I saw also how foul Disdain, often times to forge my woe,
Gave me the cup of bitter sweet, to pledge my mortal foe,
I saw also how that Desire, to rest no place could find,
But still constraind in endless pain, to follow natures kind.
I saw also (most strange of all) how Nature did forsake,
The blood yt in her womb was wrought, as does ye lothed Snake.
I saw how fancy would retain no longer then she lust,
And as the wynd how she does change, and is not for to trust.
I saw how Stedfastnes did fly, with wings of often change,
A flyeng bird but seldom seen, her nature is so strange.
I saw how pleasant times did pass, as flowers do in the mede,
To day that rises red as Rose, to morrow falls dead.
I saw my time how it did run, as sand out of a glass,
Even as each owre appointed is, from time and tide to pass,
I saw the years that I had spent, and loss of all my pain,
And how the sport of youthly plays, my folly did retain,
I saw how that the little Ants, in Somer still does rome,
To seek their food whereby to live, in Winter for to come,
I saw eke Virtue how she sat, the threede of life to spin,
Which shows the end of every work, before it does begin,
And when all these I thus beheld, with many mo pardie,
In me, me thought each one had wrought a perfect property:
And then I said unto my self, a lesson this shall be,
For other that shall after come, for to beware by me,
Thus all the night I did divise, which way I might constrayne,
To form a plot yt wit might work these branches in my brain.
I. C.

FINIS.
Of evil tounges.
O Evil tounges, which clap at every wynd.
Ye slay the quick, and eke the dead defame:
Those that live well, some fault in them ye find,
Ye take no thought, in sclaundring their good name.
Ye put just men, often times to open shame,
Ye ryng so loud, ye sound unto the Skies:
And yet in proof, ye sow nothing but lies.
Ye make great hatred, where peace has been of long,
You bring good order to ruin and eke decay:
Ye pluck down right, ye do enhaunce the wrong,
Ye turn sweet mirth, to woe and wallawaye.
Of mischeifs all, you are the ground I say,
Happy is he, that lives on such a sort:
That needs not fear such tounges of false report.
quod I. Canand.

FINIS.
Of trust and trial.
WHo trusts before he tries, may soon his trust repent,
Who tries before he trusts, does so his care prevent:
Thus trust may not be cause of trial (then we see)
But trial must be cause of trust, in each degree,
B. G.

Finis.
A strife between Appelles and Pigmalion.
WHen that Appelles lived in Greece,
Pigmalion also reigned than:
These two did strive to frame a piece,
Which should amaze the sight of man.
Whereby they might win such a name,
As should deserve immortal fame.
Appelles then strayed every where,
To mark and view each courtly Dame:
And when he heard where any were,
Did well deserve the praise and fame:
He thither rode with willing heart,
Of her to take the cumliest part.
And when he had with travail great,
A thousand wights knit up in one:
He found therewith to wurke his feat,
A pattern such, as erst was none.
And then with joy returned back,
For to those limbs, but life did lack.
Pigmalion eke, to show his art,
Did then conclude, in Iuorie white
To form and frame in every part,
A woman fair to his delighte.
Wherein was every limme so coucht,
As not a vain he left untouched.
When their two cunnings joined were,
A world it was to see their wurke:
But yet it may grieve every ear,
To hear the chance did therein lurk.
For throught the piece they framed had,
For love, Pigmalion did run mad.
Which seen, Appelles shut his book,
And durst no longer view that sight:
For why: her comely limbs and look,
In one did pass each other wight.
And while Appelles wiped his eye,
The piece did mount unto the Sky.
Where as dame Nature took it straight,
And wrapped it up in linen fold:
Esteeming it more, then the weight
Had ten times ben of glistryng gold.
She locked it up fast in chest,
To pleasure him that she loved best.
Appelles then dismayed much,
Did throw his book in to the fire:
He feared lest the Gods did grutch,
That wurkemen should so high aspire.
Yet once again he travailed Greece,
With less effect, and made a piece.
Which long time did hold great renown
For Venus all men did it call:
Till in our days began Nature frown,
And gave the workemannes work a fall.
For, from her chest t'auoyde all strife,
She took the piece, and gave it life.
And for a token gave the same,
Unto the highest man of state:
And said: since thou art crowned by Fame,
Take to thee here, this worthy mate.
The same which kyld the caruers strife,
Before that Nature gave it life.
Lord, if Appelles now did know,
Or if Pigmalion once should hear:
Of this their work the worthy show,
Since Nature gave it life to bear.
No doubt at all, her worthy praise,
Those selie Greeks from death would raise.
Then those that daily see her grace,
Whose virtue passes every wight:
Her comely corpse, her crystal face,
They ought to pray both day and night.
That God may grant most happy state,
Unto that Princess and her mate.
Ber. Gar.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London without Aldersgate in little Britain, by A. Lacy.


