THE TRVE ISRAELITE, OR, The sincere Christian distinguished from the
hypocrite. By Master WILLIAM ANDREWS, late Minister of the word of GOD.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Oulton, for Ralph Mabb, and are to be sold by
Charles Green. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Tho: Ratcliffe Esquire: Secretary to the right
Reverend and right Honorable William Lord Bishop of London and Lord high
Treasurer of ENGLAND.
Sir,
THe worth of the Author, the respects I owe you, and your own Innate
goodness have encouraged me to choose you the Patron of this Post-humus.

For the Author, as he was a Divine sound and orthodox in judgment, so he
was peaceable in the Church, and sincere in his life; for his learning, though
himself (it may be) was a stranger to you, yet as he that by Hercules his
foot drew the proportion of his whole body, so in this little Mirror (if J
mistake not) you may perceive him to be one that was brought up at the feet
of Gamaliell, mighty in the Scriptures, and well studied in the Fathers.

The respects I owe to your self, are such as that having this opportunity to
manifest my acknowledgement of them, I had (doubtless) incurred the censure of
ungrateful negligence, if J should have let it slip and not improoved it to
this end from your own goodness. I gather an assurance of your favorable
acceptance, both of this Orphan and the presenter, who am put in trust to
commend the patronage of it to some one, whose emminency in the World for
virtuous qualifications might somewhat shelter it from these blacke-mouth'd
Calumniators that these times are pestred with.

These are the reasons (worthy Sir) why I have (though without your
foreknowledge) prefixed your name in the Front of this tract. I humbly crave
your pardon, if herein I have trespassed any thing, and that you would be
pleased to do the Author and me, so much honor as to suffer His Israelite to
come abroad into the world under your worthy patronage; In the assurance
whereof I crave leave to remain,

Your worships to be commanded, Ralph Mabb.

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe Author of this Treatise, had no sooner intented and fitted it for the
Press, But it pleased God to take him hence into the fellowship of the spirits
of just men made perfect: After a whiles detainment, it is now fallen to my lot
to usher it into the World. It is his own, and a piece well beseeming such a
workman, The judicious Reader may find in it a compendious Epitome of
divinity, morallity, and elegancy of phrase, joined with no less honesty and
integrity of the hidden man of the heart, A thing in the sight of God much set
by. It is a discourse very seasonable, the world being filled now more with
shadows then substances, men striving rather to appear to be that which they
are not, then to be that indeed which they only appear to be; This may
therefore serve thee for a touchstone to try the truth of that which if thou
have, will gain thee esteem with him that sees not as man sees. It
mattereth not so much what men are valued at in the scales of humane
judgments, so they be found weighty in the balance of the Sanctuary: Popular
esteems are always subject to error, If Christ reckon a man a true
Israelite, None dare call his judgment into question: and who would not have
his approbation; who would not glory in such a testimony? This small tract
(Amongst others) may serve thee both for direction and trial: If by it thou
reapest any comfort and furtherance in thy heavenly course, thou can do no
less than be thankful to God for the Author, and to esteem of me as one
that is,

A desirer of the common good, R. M.

April 8. 1636.
PErlegi tractatu^ hunc, cui titulus est, The true Israelite, in quo nihil
reperio sanae fidei aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate
publica inprimatur.

Tho. Weeks R: P: Episc: Land: Capell: domest:

THE TRUE ISRAELITE.
John 1.46, 47. Then Nathaniel said: Can any good thing come from Nazareth?
Philip said unto him: Come and see.

Jesus saw Nathaniel coming unto him: and said of him, Behold a true Israelite
in whom is no fraud!


SAint John, who alone among the Evangelists sets down the history of
Nathaniel, has from the forty verse of this Chapter unto the end thereof,
delivered unto us six special things concerning him.

Calling to the Faith of Christ, and that by the ministration of Philip.

Coming to Christ.

Commendation that Christ gives him.

Conference with Christ.

Confession, and notable acknowledgment of Christ: saying, Thou art that Son
of God, Thou art that King of Israel. Ioh. 1.49.


blessing in the promise of Christ made unto him saying (...), Ioh. 1.50.
thou shall see greater things than these.

Three of these are contained in the words now to be handled. namely,
Nathaniels 1. Calling. 2. Coming. 3. Commendation.


First, his Call, in these words, Come and see.

In his Call to Christ, two things are observable. 1 His prevention, he comes
not of himself, but moved and excited by God. 2 His direction, he comes not
by himself, but guided by the hand of Philip.


1. His Prevention.
THAT Nathaniel comes not to Christ, but moved and stirred up by the preventing
grace of God, shows that the state and condition of every man by Nature is
such, that we are found of God, before we seek him: and moved by his grace,
before we stir unto him: So that each one of us may truly say of our selves
with the Prophet David: Ps. 119.176.
I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, O seek thy servant! We are by
Nature as the lost groat, fallen out of the hand of Gods favor by Adams fall:
We are by continual practice of our natural errors, as the lost sheep, that
have wandered from God: and we are by rebellion, and wilful neglect of Gods
offered grace, as the prodigal and lost Child, that have wantonned against
God.

We are bound therefore thankfully to acknowledge, and carfully to maintain
the preventing grace of God, which finding us lost under the Fig Leaves of vain
security, in the shadow of death: yet leaves us not, till we are brought to the
tree of life, the Light of Grace and Glory. For though it be said only, that
Jesus saw Nathaniel coming unto him: yet he was not a bare beholder of his
coming, but the Cause, the moover, the secret worker thereof. Jesus saw
Nathaniel coming, but he also saw his own handy work upon him, according to
that speech of our Lord, Ioh 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing: Nathaniel being deceived in the apprehension of
Christ, as mere man, asked him, vnde me nosti? Whence knewst thou me? John
1.48.
to whom the Lord replied: Before that Philip called thee when thou wast under
the fig tree, I saw thee O Nathaniel, if the Lord had not known thee, thou
had not known thy self, not known him, not known heaven! If the Lord had
not seen thee first with the eye of mercy, thou had never seen him with the
eye of faith. So beloved, before Gods messengers call us from the darkness of
sin and ignorance, to the marveilous light of Grace and truth: the Lord saw
us in our danger, lying as it were at the gate of hell, full of sores, full of
sins, uncovered, uncured, unpityed, according to that of David, Ps. 142 4.
there was no man that would know me, no man that cared for my soul. He then
saw us with the eye of mercy, and had compassion on us, and decreed concerning
us to give deliverance, according to that charge to his messenger, Job 33.24.
Deliver him, that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a
reconciliation. If then the Lord know us, if the Lord see us, with this
preventing gift of Grace, whilst we embrace the same, we are so moved, that
we do not only come to see Christ with Nathaniel, nor long only with the
Greeks saying: We would feign see Jesus! Ioh. 12 21.
But as the faithful soul speaks, Ca. 1.3
we run after him in the sweet savor of his Ointments, and so run that
we obtain the Savior: yet having obtained, we humbly remember that saying of
the Apostle Paul, what have thou that thou have not received. 1. Cor. 4 7.
O tu ecclesia says Saint Austine, O thou Church, S. Au. in pri. cap.
O thou Israel without fraud, if thou art now an holy people, and have known
Christ by the Word of the Prophets and Apostles, as Nathaniel knew him by the
guidance of Philip: yet miserecordia sua ante te vidit, quam tu eum cognoseres,
cum sub peccato jaceres, with his mercy he saw thee, before thou knew'st him,
when thou layest under the burden of thy sin, where this is not confessed,
and the Glory of our Convertion not given to the preventing Grace of Christ,
there is not the true Isralite, but the fraudulent, and proud-hearted Pelagian.
An injurious ungrateful fraud it is, to arrogate that to our selves which we
have of the mere goodness of our Lord: therefore in the feeling of the Lords
mercy upon us, and remembrance of our desperate and lost estate, Let us
thankefully say with the Prophet David, Not unto us, Ps. 115.1.
Lord not unto us, but to thy Name be the glory.

2. His Direction.
AS ye have heard how Nathaniel was prevented by a merciful Call from God: so
next hear how he was directed by Philip as a faithful guide! In which two
things are remarkable.

1 The Power of his Direction. 2 The Manner of his Direction.
For the power of it, we are to know that God has appointed the ministerial
direction as an Order for the working of faith, sanctifying the preaching of
the Word to be the Power and Wisdom of Christ to salvation: according to
that in St. John's gospel: Ioh. 17.17.
sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is the Truth, and to that in the Acts
spoken by St. Paul: I commend you to God, Act. 20.32.
and the word of his grace, which is able to build further: who therefore calls
the Gospel the word of Gods grace, not only because it is a gracious word,
full of comfort to the penitent, contrite, and borken heart, but because it is
the Instrument or means whereby God conveies his grace to the faithful
hearer. Hence Saint Peter exhorts: 1. Pet. 2 2.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby: and Saint James having said that God of his own will begat us by the
word of truth, inferrs presently, therefore let every man be swift to hear:
Ia. 1.9.
And Saint Paul by that question of his. How shall they believe unless they
hear? To. 10.14.
Does manifestly approve the word as the Instrument of faith. And therefore in
his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 3.2.
he calls the ministry of the word, the hearing of faith, saying: received ye
the Spirit by the work of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Gods Order for
salvation, and that the Church is tied to the direction of the word: let us
magnify Gods Ordinance; an Instrument so powerful and divine. Next let us not
dream Course from God for our Conversion. Lastly let us know that the Spirit
of God in that ministration, truly, effectually, infallibly, moves the minds
of men, and enclineth them to faith and good works, whilst the word is heard
of them, read, and thought upon: So that God is never wanting to bless this
his order of ministering the word, and our labor in hearing never lost, so that
we take heed how we hear, and neglect not so great salvation. For as in
receiving the holy Sacrament of our Lords body and blood, if we do not set a
bar against the grace of that by a purpose to continue in sin, we do
infallibly partake of the spiritual food to eternal life: So in the hearing
of the word we have assured certainety to receive the gift of faith, unless by
our idle and wanton neglect, it falls out that the Pearl is cast before swine.
Mat. 7.6.


2. The manner of the Direction.
HAving heard of the Power, now consider the manner of Nathaniels direction,
wherein we may observe these three things.

1 The Charity of Nathaniels guide. 2 The Prude^cy of Nathaniels guide. 3 The
Fidelity of Nathaniels guide.
His Charity appears in desiring speedily to impart unto others of that good,
which he himself had received: Philip was no sooner called himself, but he
called Nathaniel: no sooner had he experience of the heavenly and incorruptible
treasure, and tasted how gracious the Lord was, but he endeavored to
communicate the same to Nathaniel thas he also might rejoice in God his
Savior. And it is observable how Cheerfully, Philip proceeds in this
business: as a man surpised with Joy, ravished with Contentment, in the voice
of exultation, his heart as it were leaping for joy at his newfound treasure,
breaks forth into these words: John 1.45.
We have found him of whom Moses spoke and the Prophets, Jesus the son of
Joseph of Nazareth. It is a specious mark of Gods children to be cheerful in
speaking good of the name of Christ, and Careful to acquaint others with that
happy good which themselves have found. And like as the leprous men having eat
and drunk and enrich't themselves, 2. Kin. 7.9.
when they considered the multitude of the City of Samaria ready to dye for
hunger, they having enough, were touched in their hearts, and said one to
another: We do not well: this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our
peace: So the Messengers of God, and every true Convert having bread enough in
their fathers house, considering the multitude of sinful Prodigals ready to
perish in their sins everlastingly, know they should not do well, having the
good tidings of salvation, to hold their peace. Yea, as the Apostle said we
cannot but speak the things which we have heard and seen: Act. 4.20.
2. Cor. 5.14.
for the love of Christ says Saint Paul constrains us.

Philips prudency and Wisdom how he suppressed the carnal Curiosity of
Nathaniel, which indeed commonly is an impediment to the Simplicity of Faith
and Devotion, which the godly have in Christ Jesus. Philip having told him him
of Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth, he with a curious exception at the
meanness of the place said: Can any good thing come from Nazareth? But Philip
wisely represt that Curiosity, saying: Veni and vide, Come and see. As if he
should have said, sit not still Nathaniel under thy Figtree, pleasing thy self
with thy curious fancies, offended with the baseness of Nazareth, but Come and
see, that by experience thou may speak, and not by prejudice: There is no
better way to suppress curious reason, and the pride of wit, and the
contemptible conceit which many have of the meandness, and homeliness of Gods
ministers, those earthen vessels, which conveyes to us the spiritual and
heavenly treasure, than to take Philips counsel, come and see! Though many
times under thy fig tree, in the midst of thy pleasures, thou sitt'st and
make but a jest of Nazareth, yet if thou did come and see, thou might
see and be saved with Nathaneel, if thou come without fraud of partiality,
and respect of persons, more desiring the goodness of the treasure, than
respecting the meannesse of the Vessel: for as Saint Austin says well, Quid
prodest clavis aurea, si non aperiat quod volumus etc. What profits a key of
gold if it cannot open that which we desire? and what hurts a key of wood if it
make way for us to the treasure? What profits the Holiness of Jerusalem, the
height of Capernaum, the greatness of Niniveh, with a fearful dissolution,
downfall, destruction? or what hurts little Bethlem, despised Nazareth, simple
Galilee, with the consolation of Israel, the light of the Nations, the Savior
of the world? O that we were wise! soon would we content our selves with
Nazareth, if there we find Christ. If Philip lead us to the treasure, what
can we more desire? What though he cannot satisfy Nathaneel in every objection
and curious question: yet he can bring him to Christ, the way, the Truth, and
the Life, and that suffices. But the Apostle has foretold us of the
wantonness of these times, which are too much stained with Nathaneels curious
exception. Can any good thing come from Nazareth? Now all Truth with many must
come from Rome, where indeed there is scarce room for any Truth. But the grace
of Christ is tied neither to place nor person. Ioh. 3.8.
The Spirit blows where it lists: and the sound thereof may be heard (if
our crying sins hinder not) as well in England as in Rome. Nothing more
common with these admirers of place and Succession than this. Can any good
thing come from the North? from Geneva? from Basil? Truly, Iam. 1.17.
every good and perfect gift comes from above, from the Father of lights, and
lights upon all the Churches of God: and that Star which directs us to
Christ, may appear as well in the North as in the West. According to such
curious Exception, there be many says Saint Paul, which will not suffer
wholesome doctrine, but like Athenians cry out of Paul, Acts 17.18.
what will this Babbler say? and having their ears itching, after their own
lusts, get unto themselves an heap of teachers. 2 Timothy 4.3.
Philip cannot content them, although he can lead them to Christ. Gregory
Nazianzen in his Oration against the Eunomians, says that there are certain
which not only have itching ears, as Saint Paul foretold, given to Novelty and
Curiosity, but also itching Tongues, prattling against the Prelacy, against
those which are in Authority: and itching Hands not contented with their own
portions, but fingring the Lords part: and I may add itching feet also, which
are not shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, for then we should
have less Schism, less affectation of Singularity, less straggling from
their own Pastor to strangers: such sheep over-runne with itch from ear to
foot, had need be dressed with the salt of Gods word, for fear of Infection:
They may easily, be discerned by the great and small spotts of separation,
singularity, vanity, which they have got by the cunning of some Shepherds,
that laid party-colored rods in the trough where the Sheep, hot with zeal
came to drink, who likes rather of the spotted and change able hew of
division, than of the plain and single color of uniformity.

Thirdly, observe the fidelity, the faithful care of Nathanaels guide: who to
encourage him in this business, and to hasten the work of his Conversion,
does not leave him to himself, but as a faithful guide in his own person
conducts Nathaneel, saying, Come and see, not go and see. Cicero says of
Caesar, that he was wont never to say to his soldiers ite illuc, sed venite
huc, not, Go thither, but Come hither! being himself a pattern unto them of
labor, patience, and courage. It ought to be thus with all the messengers of
God, and guides of the people, that they may say with Saint Paul, Be followers
of me, 1 Cor. 11.1.
even as I am of Christ Jesus, and encourage their people with Abimelech, Judge.
9.48. Judge. 9.48.
Hoc vos facite quod me vidistis facere: Do this which you have seen me do.
It is but an idle and retchlesse Conduct, that sitting still himself, cries
out to others, Go and see. Behold then in Philip a guide indeed without guile.

Caring for Nathanael not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, 1
Pet. 5.2.
but of a ready mind: not as Nathanaels Lord, but as his Leader, his Ensample,
his Pattern. Many show the good things of God to the people, but yet like
Moses on the top of Pisgah that beholds the good la^d a far off: Deuteronomy. 34.1.
Many learnedly set forth the blessings of God in Christ, and the paths that
lead thereunto, but sitting themselves under the fig tree of deceiveable
pleasure, leave the people to go and see Christ, if they will, but go with
them they will not. But as Philip told Nathanael of Christ in plain words, so
he came with him to Christ in personal encouragement. These messengers ought
to take heed most carefully, least that of the Prophet Esaias be verified of
them, Esaias 59.5. Esau 59.5.
They hatch the eggs of the Cockatrice, and weave the webb of the Spider. The
egg dangerous, the webb vain, the Cockatrice and the Spider loathsome and
vile: The Cockatrice egg, damnable heresy, to be avoided as the poison of the
Soul: The dusty Web, Humane conceit, to be swept out of the pulpit as more
fine than firm, deceitful stuff, like unto the wind which fills, but feeds
not the body: which, though it may catch flies, the curious and the vain, yet
it will never save souls; and the Cockatrice and the Spider, the loathsome
conversation of unclean men, whose example of life is offensive in the Church
of God, as a most infectious thing. How much harm, both in weakening the power
of the word, and in confirming the corruptions of the World, the Ministers
conforming and fashioning themselves to the riot, excess, sensuality of these
times, have done; the wicked see and deride, the godly see and lament. If thou
want faith, love, and a good life in the weighty calling of the ministry,
though thou have an Angels tongue, yet thou art but as harsh-sounding brass, a
brazen-faced Hypocrite, and few good men will desire thee: thou art but a
tinckling Cymball, and too many will play upon thee. To a wanton young man that
was disputing of temperance and sobriety, one said well, Who can endure thee
building like Crassus, supping like Lucullus, and yet speaking like Cato. But
as Nazianzen said of Basil, sit tonitrum oration tua, fulgur vita, so let thy
speech be thunder, but thy life lightning: many thunder but they lighten not:
the one may rouse the drowsy sinner, terrify the secure wanton: the other
comfort the faithful hearers who are glad of such a light, amongst them, guide
and direct the weaker minds who need such an help, who look for such a
pattern. If then Nathanael go and see Christ by thy ministry as Zacheus got
upon the Sycamore tree to see Jesus; the one shall be received, the other
left, Zacheus honored the tree cursed; then let Philip always say, Come and
see, that going together to Christ, there may be honor to Philip, comfort to
Nathanael.

2. Nathanaels coming to Christ, in these words, Jesus saw Nathanael coming.

In Nathaneel his coming to Christ four things may be observed.

1. His Consent he coms without resista^ce. 2. His Speed he coms without
delay. 3. His Truth he coms without fraud. 4. His Success he coms without
loss.
1. His Consent.
NAthaneel having a call from God, a direction by Philip, does not resist
either by excuse or frowardness, but freely, willingly, resolutely, yields
himself to forsake his fig tree, and his prejudicial conceit, and addresseth
himself to go to the Lord. True it is, that the Mediator had never seen
Nathanael coming unto him as a true Israelite, if the Father had not drawn
him by secret and effectual persuasion: yet if Nathanael had wantonly and
wilfully resisted the holy Ghost, and Philips direction, he had not been
drawn. Let us then endeavor in the receiving of the Grace of God to consent
to the heavenly motion, and not to be stiff-necked, as St. Paul speaks, to be
hardened in our hearts through the deceitfulness of sin: or as Saint Stephen
says of the Jews, Heb. 3.13.
to resist the holy Ghost: Acts 7.51. For in our conversion, in our coming
unto Christ, these three are co^nexed, namely the prevention of Gods grace
mooving and stirring us: the direction of the Gospel in which the Holy Ghost
effectually works, and the consent of the will which striving against
diffidence and sin, endeavors to yield unto the counsel of Gods Word, and
motion of the Spirit. If we should dream as the Manichees and the Anabaptists
of the power of the holy Ghost, carrying us unresistably without any action of
ours, without endeavor and labor in the exercise of Prayer and hearing the
Word, the ministry of the Gospel should be needless, and there could be no
conflict in the mind, no thirsting, no contending to lay hold on God. Hence St.
Basil says well, (...), only resist not being called, consent being moved,
endeavor being counseled, desire being stirred, and the Lord that sees thee
struggling, draws near, helps thy infirmity, and gives the Victory of thy
conversion: to this purpose speaks Saint Chrysostom, (...), whom the Lord
draws he draws consenting: that is not giving himself to idleness and neglect
of endeavor: but having the voice of the Gospel, and the inward moving of the
Spirit, labors against the savor of the flesh to delight in God.

So ye see a Co^nexion of these three, prevention of Grace, direction of the
Word, and consent of the Will in the work of our conversion: according to that
of St. John Revel. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride says come, and let him that
hears say also come, and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely. Nothing excepts thee from the
spiritual fountain but thy will. Not God; for the Spirit says come! Not the
Church; for the Bride says come! Not any convert; for he that hears says
also come! Not necessity; for he that is a thirst may come: Not want of
merits! for it may be taken freely: Only want of will may hinder, because it is
taken by desire and will. As then in the Old Law there was the Holocaust or
whole burnt-offering of which all was given to God, nothing reserved either for
priest or people: and the offering for sin, of which part was given to God,
and part reserved for the Priest, but none for the people: and the peace
offering of which God had his part, the Priest his part, and the people their
part: So in the Gospel we find a threefold work: The work of Redemption,
the work of Ministration, and the work of Conversion. In the work of
Redemption all is given to the Mediator, to the blood of Christ as the only
price of our redemption, nothing to the Priest or people: In the work of
Ministration part is given to God, part to the Priest, but nothing to the
people: the consecration and sanctification of the work unto God, the
execution to the Priest: But in the work of conversion part is given to God,
preventing by grace and effectual persuasion: part to the Priest, directing by
counsel, by instruction: and part to the people consenting by will. For if the
will of man were utterly idle in our conversion, in vain should the Apostle
say, We beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

2. His Speed.
YE have heard Nathanaels consent: now observe the have and speed which he
makes to have experience of the Lord: He is called, and he comes at the first
call, he observes the time of his visitation without delay. He is now called;
if he dally out so gracious occasion, he knows not whether he shall be called
again or no. For as Gregory the great well notes, Qui promisit poenitenti
veniam, non promisit peccanti crastinum: though God has promised pardon to him
that repents, yet he has not assured the sinner one day to live. His speed
confounds our sloth, he comes at the first. O that we would come to Christ at
many, at any call! In worldly matters we can say, delay breeds danger, and
opportunity is precious according to that of the heathen (...), Hesiod.
opportunity is the best thing: If we were truly wise, we would have a care,
not to drive away the acceptable time of our salvation, but as the Apostle
counsels, to redeem the time, because the days are evil: and to think that
if delay be dangerous in the baser, it is madness to use it in the best
things: The Lord Jesus beholding Jerusalem, foreseeing her desolation,
lamenting her misery, declares the cause of it in this speech, Because thou
knew'st not the time of thy visitation. Luke 19.
So the Holy Ghost ascribes the captivity of the Israelites to their neglect
and contempt of the Lords call. 2 Chr. 36.15, 16.
The Lord God of their Fathers sent his messengers unto them, rising early and
sending, for he had a compassion on his people, and on his habitation: But they
abused his Prophets, and made a mock of his messengers, till the wrath of the
Lord was against them, and that there was no remedy. The wasting of Israel by
the Egyptians is also assigned to the abusing of Gods grace offered. Ier. 2.17.
Have not thou procured this unto thy self (says the Prophet) because thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way? mark how the
Lord aggravates their sin, by reproving their ingratitude, namely in that
they then forsook the Lord even when he was their guide and leader. O how
fearful is that commination of Saint Paul! Heb. 6.7.
The land which drinks in the rain that falls often upon it, and brings forth
herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God, but if
it bring forth briars and thorns, it is reprobate, near unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned. That we are a land which have often received the
spiritual rain of Gods Word, cannot be denied: whether we have brought forth
fruits meet for him by whom we are dressed, our lives may testify: sure I am,
that whosoever being dressed by the ministry of Gods word, does bring forth
still briars and thorns, injurious and noisome works, is certainly near unto
cursing, and his end to be burned. The same rain has diverse effects
according to the variety of the subjected matter: The clay is pierced and
softened, and made fruitful: the sand is pierced, but not softened, and
remains barren: the stone is neither pierced, nor softened, nor yields any
hope of increase. What mould our hearts are made of our works demonstrate.
There is but a little vein of the good earth the fruitful clay: Ceremonious
religion, lip-labor, show of godliness without the Truth, shows too much of
the sandy barrenness: but sacrilegious prophanenes, obdurate rebellion,
ungrateful contempt of Gods grace in these times argues that stony ground,
where the heavenly rain runs off, as fast as it falls on. How near we are
unto cursing for turning the grace of our God into wantonness, many will not
see being blinded with their lusts. An unwise man says David does not
understand this, Psalm. 92.6.
and a fool does not regard it: the godly wise prevent the curse, but as the
heathen man said well (...) Hesiod. the fool will not perceive till he smart
for it.

3. His Truth, or Sincerity.
YE have seen the Have; observe the Heart of Nathanael, he comes (even in the
judgment of Christ himself that discernes all comers) as a true Israelite,
seriously, without fraud: having an earnest desire to see the Glory of Israel.
He hungers and thirsts after righteousness, and it is the very joy of his
heart to hear of his Savior. Such is the truth and sincerity of all Gods
people, who come into the presence of God, in the hearing of his word, and
prayer, as men that feel their extreme need of Gods blessing, of the grace of
Christ, and so affected with God and his goodness in Christ, that each one of
them in his heart, says with the Prophet David, Whom have I in heaven but
thee, and who is it in earth that I desire in comparison of thee! Thou O God,
art the thing that I long for. There be too many far from this serious and
sincere coming unto Christ. Many come unto Christ with prejudicious conceit,
stiffely holding their fore-conceav'd opinions against the Truth, resolved to
maintain them against all the Counsel of God. Some again with a desire of
novelty, like unto the Athenians, that gave themselves to nothing but to hear
or tell some news, Act. 17
who seek not the word of God as a power to save their souls, for that is
rejected as old stuff; but some new strain of wit, some curious conceit to
tickle the ear. Let but some Eutrapelye, some fine-turn'd phrase, or acute
trick of wit drop from the Preacher, and these take them up as the Manna from
Heaven, with admiration and great contentment. O the wanton childishness of
our times! As if such chafe, such frothe, such smoke, could feed the soul.
Such vainly conceited comers had rather have a shell, a shale to play
withal, than the meat, the kernel to give strength unto the Heart. Some
again come with a mind to calumniate, to contradict, to carpe at the word,
like the froward Jews, Acts 13. Many with a politic and proud mind, who are
so ravished with the admiration of their own wisdom, and carnal reason, that
they loath the homeliness and plainness of the Gospel, and despise the
Counsel of God against themselves, as did the Pharisees, Luke 7. If thy heart
be stuffed with such fraud, no mervaile if thou come often to no purpose: no
mervaile if the wisdom of God enter not, and thou find no blessing.

So necessary is the disposition of truth and sincerity, in every one that
comes to God, that he ought to examine his soul, and call his heart to account
in every action of religion how it stands affected in uprightness of intention
to that business, for it is fearful to dally with God, and foolish to trifle
in the matter of our salvation, and dangerous to thrust in with a false heart.

4. His success.
But as we have observed how Nathanaels heart was disposed with truth in his
coming: so let us consider of the happy success of his labor. As he comes
without fraud, so he comes not without fruit, he comes not in vain to Christ,
it is no lost labor, such heart, such hope: It is impossible that a
true-hearted coming, should go without a blessing: First, now having seen
and had experience of that, to which Philip invited him, he has forgot his
curious objection, and breaks forth into an earnest, free, and honorable
confession of faith, saying, Master, thou art that Son of God, thou art that
King of Israel. O strange! whence Nathanael made a question if any good could
come, thence has he found a good so infinite as is confessed to be his Master,
his King, his God. A wonderful change, from the doubt of any good, to the
confession of the Son of God! Thus oftentimes our minds being obscured, whence
we look for most, we find the smallest good, and whence we think least,
comes the greatest benefit. Though Naaman the 2. Kin. 5.12.
Syrian bragged of his Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, yet he found that
good in little Jordan which he could not have in all the rivers of the world:
Again, see how Nathanaels coming and seeing has got a victory over his
curiosity and vain exception at Nazareth; Experience has wrought that in him,
of which Philips tongue was not able to inform him. Philip taught him well,
directed him wisely, but the Honor of the victory is reserved for Philips
Master. It is the part of a good teacher, says one, docere, delectare,
flectere: to teach, to delight, to persuade: upon which words says Saint
Austin, docere necessitatis est, delectare Iucunditatis, flectere victoriae: to
teach is the work of necessity, to delight, a matter of comfort, but to bend,
move, and persuade the mind, is the Honor of Victory. Such a power Nathanael
found in the words of Christ, that he might truly say, Never spoke any man
like this man: for by his speech Nathanael got, not only knowledge and
contentment, but also victory: so that he might say of himself, as the Roman
Commander sometime wrote unto the Senate, veni, vidi, vici, I came, and saw,
and overcame. O that the fruit and profit of our coming might be such; that in
the power of the Word of God, we may so overcome the lusts of the flesh, so
break asunder the snares of the Devil, and with full purpose of heart cleave
unto the Lord, that we may also truly say, We came, and saw, and overcame!

Secondly, Nathanael got more by coming and seeing, than his guide did or
could then show him: So that as the Queen of Saba said of Solomon and his
royalty, that the one half was not told her, which yet she coming and seeing
did find: So the better half was not told by Philip, which yet Nathanael
found by coming and seeing. Philip told him indeed, We have found Jesus the
son of Joseph, of Nazareth: but Nathanael more divinely, Thou art that Son
of God, thou art that King of Israel. Philip preached him the son of Joseph:
Nathanael found him the Son of God: Philip told him of a Citizen of Nazareth,
Nathanael found him the King of Israel. Philip spoke of the form of a servant,
Nathanael found the better half the majesty of a Lord. Such benefit have all
they which come without fraud, and find by experience the Grace of Christ. For
in the feeling of the comforts of God, we find much more than can be told us or
expressed by us. Job 42.
I have heard of thee, So the children of God may truly say, We have heard of
the Lord Jesus Christ, by the hearing of the ear, but now that he dwells in
our hearts by faith, now that we see him, and know him by experience, we
abhor the lusts of flesh and blood, yea we have judged all things but loss,
and do count them but dung that we might possess Christ. Hence says
Bernard, O Jesus, spes poenitentibus, quam pius es petentibus! quam bonus te
quaerentibus! sed quid invenientibus? O Jesus the penitent man's Hope! how loving
art thou to those that desire thee, how good to those that seek thee, but what
to those that find thee? what but that which Nathanael found him, the Son of
God, the King of Israel? what but that which Thomas found him, My God and my
Lord? John 20.2
what but that which we all find him, The rest for our souls, Mat. 11.29.
Ioh. 1.29.
that Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, and that great,
good, and only Shepherd of our souls, through whose blood the everlasting
Covenant is sealed unto us. Heb. 13.20.


Thirdly, Nathanael by his coming got a hopeful blessing, a comfortable
promise, That he should see greater things than those. So deals God with all
his children, by giving them the earnest of their inheritance, he seals them
unto the day of their redemption, and concludes them under hope of future
blessings, that they may be encouraged to go on cheerfully, and to continue
faithfully in their profession: We are now the Sons of God, 1 Ioh. 3.5.
it appears not yet what we shall be, says Saint John. We have now milk, we
have now strong meat, but there is a Manna that is hid, reserved for us. We
have now comfort in the forgiveness of our sins, glory in the testimony of a
good conscience, protection from the danger of our enemies, but yet the promise
of entering into our Masters joy, adds unspeakeable contentment, and we are
much moved with this hopeful blessing; Ye shall see greater things than
these. And is the experience of Christ thus full of profit and bliss? what
folly and madness is it in men therefore to be so wedded to their Fig Tree,
the deceiveable lusts of sin, that when they have run, and seen, and tried
all the courses of the world, yet they must say with that heathen man, Omnia
fui, sed nihil prodest, I have been of all ranks, but I am nere the better?
What shame is it, that our negligence of divine things, our wilfulness should
be such, that the Lord complains saying: and yet ye will not come unto me,
that ye might have life. Ioh. 5.40. O whither do ye wander ye sinful sons
of men? ye have no whither to go but to Christ, no way but by Christ, if ye
will find rest for your souls.

2. Commendation.
Nathanaels praise and commendation come now to be observed, contained in these
words,

Jesus said of him: Behold a true Israelite, in whom is no guile. Concerning
which, three things may be considered: 1. The Author of this praise. 2. The
Manner of this praise. 3. The Matter of this praise.


The Author: Jesus said of him: he said it of him, that knew what was in him:
and none could say that of him but he that searches the heart. It is peculiar
and proper to the Lord so to praise. The conscience of man is Gods secret Arc,
into which to assay to pry is audacious presumption, which to touch with
humane censure is impious arrogance. Therefore the Apostle speaking of the
inward Jew, Romans 2.29.
of the Circumcision of the heart, in the Spirit, not in the letter says that
the praise thereof is not of men, but of God. Hence observe the variety of the
Lords speech concerning his people, For first he speaks to us: according to
that in Saint Matthew, Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that be weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: and
in the Gospel of Saint John 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. O merciful and liberal speech! Next he speaks in us: according to
that of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 13.3. Do you seek experience of Christ that
speaks in me? For which voice David prays thus; Psalm. 35 3.
Say thus unto my soul, I am thy salvation. O familiar and comfortable speech!
Thirdly, he speaks for us: according to that in Saint John 17.24. Father, I
will that those which thou have given me, be there even where I am: and in
his first Epistle 2. cap. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father Jesus Christ the righteous. Lastly, he speaks of us: according to that
in the Revelation. cap. 3.5. I will confess his name before my Father and the
Angels. So then he speaks to us, by way of Invitation; in us, by way of
Inspiration: for us, by way of Intercession: of us, by way of Commendation: he
speaks to us, by his word: in us, by his Spirit: for us, by his blood: of us,
by his Judgment. But observe the Lords Order: first to us, next in us, then
for us, lastly he speaks of us.

If thou will not hear the Lord speaking to thee in his Word; if thou do
not find the Lord speaking in thee by his Spirit: if thou do not rest upon
the Lord speaking for thee by his blood; thou shall never hear him speaking of
thee by commendable testimony. That the Lord speaks for us is good and
gracious, but that he speaks of us, as in the Gospel, Mat. 25. Euge serve
bone, etc. Well done good servant and faithful: is an absolute happy and
honorable speech. Blessed is that man may hear the Lord Jesus say of him,
Behold a true Christian.

2. The Manner.
IN the manner of Nathaneels commendation eight things may be observed.

First, the Order of Christ in praising. The Lord knew Nathaneel before, but
yet he never said any thing of him by commendation, until he saw him coming
unto him: whence we may collect that then a man's actions are laudable in Gods
judgment, and his life honorable, when Christ is made the end and scope
thereof. It cannot be but that the Lord sees thee coming: he sees thee going,
he sees thee hearing, praying, working, trading, he is about thy bed, and
about thy paths, and spies out all thy ways: then thy heart has comfort,
thine action honor, when the Lord may say that he sees thee coming to him.
Men talk of fair and goodly sights! but how happy for us, and how comely a
sight were it, if the Lord might see us all this day coming unto him! But we
may now justly complain with Bernard, Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum:
scarcely is Jesus sought for Jesus sake: the falsehood of intention, not aiming
at Gods glory, not respecting the Lords eye which beholds the truth of the
inward parts, make, that though by customary, and ceremonious profession, the
Lord may say that he sees many coming, yet indeed few coming unto him.

praise is given (...), in presence, Jesus said of him, and that before him: he
prayseth Nathanael to his face: which shows that if praise be free from
flattery used with moderation, intending the encouragement of virtue, and
approbation of the good, it is no fault to commend in presence: though it is
the part of a wise man to use it sparingly, and of a good man not greedily to
hear his own praise.

praise is given (...) openly and in public in the audience of many. The Lord
is not ashamed to take notice of his poorest servant: openly to acknowledge and
honor his meanest professor. Here have we specimenfuturae retributionis, the
very Image and token of our future recompense, according to that of Christ,
Mat. 6.4. Thy Father that sees in secret, he will reward thee openly. Let us
endeavor to abound in good things, and to lay up good works as treasures, and
let us leave it to the Lord to lay them open, to show them forth, who has all
things noted in his book.

praise is given by certainety of demonstration, Behold a true Israelite, says
Christ, he is pointed forth by him that is only able to discern between the
Sheep and the Goats: we praise by the censure of charity, Christ, by the
certainty of knowledge: we hope well of many, we can point out none. We leave
them to be discerned and pointed forth by that finger that made them.

praise is according to the truth of the thing in him: for Jesus would never
have said this of him, if he had not found it in him. It is impossible that
the eyes of the Lord which behold the things which are just, should be obscured
with Error, Vanity, or Partiality. For as Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 3.7.
He that does righteousness, is righteous, so the man which is righteous
indeed is so accounted before God, and no other. Think thou that the Lord
will account the hypocrite, the wanton, the unjust person, a true Israelite?
the praise that comes of God is not deceitful or vain: He neither condemns
the righteous, nor justifies the wicked. And that praise which the scripture
gives unto the servants of God is according to the truth of the thing in them,
not according to imputation.

Sixthly, this praise is according to the favor of the Gospel, and the
measure of sincerity: not according to the rigor of the Law, and the fullness
of perfection. Though Christ says of Nathanael, Behold a true Israelite in
whom is no guile, yet he says not, in whom is no sin. Saint John says, 1
John 1.8.
whosoever affirms that he has no sin, deceives himself, and there is
no Truth in him: and if Nathanael should have thought that he had no sin in
him, he should have had no truth in him. By the grace of Imputation we have no
guilt, no sin: but by the grace of Sanctification we have no guile, no fraud.
That is, in very deed we confess that in many things we offend all, and
sincerely and from our hearts endeavor no longer to serve sin, but to please
God in all things: Before the preventing grace of GOD comes, which makes us to
walk commendably before God, we are all lame from our mothers womb like the
Creeple at Lystra, not able to stir in the ways of GOD, having received
grace, yet we are many times lame like Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 4.4.
by some grievous fall: and having present grace, he that stands surest may cry
with David, my foot had well-nigh slipped: and the truest Israelite, that
striveth to walk with God in uprightnes, Genesis 32.31.
is lame, like Jacob that halts on his thigh, though not in his heart, and
though his spirit be willing, yet his flesh is weak. Though the true Israelite
does not appear before the Lord empty, yet he has but a Mite in his hand: and
he that sees clearest by the annoynting of the eye salve, has yet a mote in
his eye: and he that is covered with the white raiment that his filthy nakedness
appear not, has yet a moath in his garment. He that turns his back to the
Sun has his shadow before him: and he that looks upon the Sun, though his
Shadow be not before him, yet he has a shadow. He that looks not upon Christ
has no comfort, his sin being ever before him to torment him: and he that
looks upon the Mediator, though his sin be not before him by way of
horror; because there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus,
yet he is not without sin dwelling in him, though not reigning over him. So
far is Nathanael from the praise of perfection, that as Origin says, the
just man lives rather in the shadow of virtue than in virtue it self. There is
an insufficiency in the best men. He that is soundest is not without
concupiscence, which is as it were naevus in cute, a spot in the skin, which
though it endangers not our health, yet it takes away our beauty: so that of no
man living can that be verified spoken in the Canticles. Thou art all fair,
Can. 4.7.
O my love, and there is no spot in thee, unless it be meant of the spots of
worldly corruption, injustice, intemperance, prophannesse, concerning which St.
James says, that pure religion causes a man to keep himself unspotted of
the World: Iam. 1.27.
the soundest Israelite is not without the difficulty of tentation, which is as
it were morsus in calce, a nibling at the heel, a bruising, and weakening of
our strength, so that a man cannot pull on the shoes of the preparation of the
Gospel of peace without some pinching, pain, and difficulty. Nay the best man
is not free from infirmity, ignorance, negligence, passion, which is as it were
morbus in corpore, a hidden disease, a sudden fit of distemperature, which
though it does not make it deadly sick because our heart consents not to the
evil, yet it makes us far from the perfect soundnes which needs not the
Physician.

Seventhly, this phrase is spiritual, not according to the savor of carnal
vanity. Christ does not say of him, Behold a man skillful and learned in the
Laws, and yet St. Austin calls him eruditum ac peritum legis a learned man.
But behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile: Here is no mention made of
Nathanaels learning, or of any outward parts, but that which Christ commends in
him is the sincerity of his heart, the truth of his religion, and his upright
intention in coming to him. Prove. 23.26.
Therefore God speaks by Solomon saying: My son give me thy heart! the Lord
cares not for thy head be it never so witty: nor for thy face be it never so
beautiful, nor for thy tongue be it never so eloquent, that which God loves
and commends in a man is the truth of profession, according to that of David,
Psalm. 51. Thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and again, The Lord takes
no pleasure in any man's leg, Ps. 147 10.11.
but his delight is in them that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy.
So Solomon speaking of the woman says, Favor is deceitful, Prove. 31.30.
beauty is vain, the woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

Eighthly, this praise is by way of admiration: Ecce! behold, showing that a
true Israelite is the wonder of the world, a rare and excellent person. So
speaks the Prophet Esaias 8.18. Behold I, and the children which the Lord has
given me as signs and wonders in Israel. And yet this praise is common to all
the Israel of God: for though in respect of the measure of Gods grace there be
extraordinary gifts, and one Israelite excells another, and though in respect
of the world, this froward nation, the true Israelite shines as a light rare
and supernatural, yet to be a true Israelite, without the guile of a false
heart in the profession of religion is so common, that all the people of God,
every man that is saved is adorned with that praise: It Is no prerogative in
Nathanael, but the general praise of all Christians indeed, to be true
Israelites.

Hence observe two things, 1. The Honor of praise 2. The Rule of praise


The Honor of praise is, 1. To be commended of God. 2. To be commended for
Truth.


1. Of God.
FOr whatsoever applause the wicked have amongst fools and flatterers, yet
they shall never have the Honor of the sons of God: their names shall we,
Prove. 10.7.
the Lord will not make mention of them within his lips. Only the true
Israelite shall have his name confessed before the Father and his Angels. No
contumely, no reproach in this world can discourage the mind of him that has
the honor of this testimony. Let the Jews think and speak of Christ what
they will, that voice from heaven sufficiently honors him, This is my beloved
son in whom I am well pleased. Matthew. 3.17.
What though vile wantons make a jest of the servants of God, and disgrace them
with names of scorn, yet the holy Ghost has graced them with sufficient
Honor, whilst he makes their hearts his temple, sealing them to salvation,
whilst he speaks in them comfortably, and Christ of them honorably.

2. For Truth.
FOr what would not thou have true? thou desire a true wife, a true friend,
a true servant. Do thou affect that in another which thou regard'st not in
thy self? know that thy profession makes thy soul the Lords Spouse his
servant, his friend: for every soul is either Gods wife or the devils
Concubine. Now what more precious than Truth in the Spouse of Christ? what more
necessary in the Lords servant? what more honorable in the friend of God.

2. The Rule of praise.
Not to praise our selves: for as St. Paul says, he which praises himself
is not allowed, but whom the Lord praises. If the Lord say unto my soul, I am
thy salvation, I am glad to hear it: If it please the Lord to say of me,
Behold a true Israelite, his testimony carries honor and comfort. But of my
self let me say with the Publican, Luke 18.13.
O Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Romans 7.14. 1 Timothy 1.15.
and with the Apostle Paul (...), O wretched man that I am! what lost the
Apostle Paul by saying of himself, Christ came into the world to save sinners,
of which I am the chief? what lost Saint John the Baptist by counting himself
unworthy of the meanest office about Christ, Matthew. 3.11.
even to unloose the latchet of his shoe? In the judgment of Christ the one
was nere the less a chossen vessel, Acts 9.15.
the other the greatest man that ever was borne of a woman. Matthew. 11.11.
What can I loose by taking the lowest room, if the Lord say Amice ascend
superius, Luke 14.10.
friend sit up higher? Yea let me have part in Christ Jesus though it be but
at the hemme of his garment and I shall be safe. A foolish kind of men there
be, who cannot stay the Lords leisure, but in the height of Pharisaicall pride
fall to valuing, to praising of themselves and despising others, forgetting the
handwriting against Baltazer, Dan. 5.27.
Thou art weighed in the balance and found to light; pondus meum amor meus non
lingua, says Saint Austin, it is the truth of my heart, not the vehemence of the
tongue that is of moment and weight in Gods trial. Selfe-praise is the fruit
of Folly, Security, Pride, Unthankfulness, Self-love: for he that praises
himself, either considers not the glory of perfect virtue, 1 Esaias 64.6.
in comparison of which all our righteousness is as a stained cloth, and so
shows his folly and vainglory.

Or remembers not the multitude of his secret sins, under burden whereof
David prays, 2 Psalm. 19.12.
ab occultis munda me Domine, cleanse me from my secret faults O Lord, and so
shows his Security.

Or forgets the bond of man's duty, 3 Luke 17.10.
which being performed, leaves yet the doer as an unprofitable servant, and so
shows his Pride.

fountain from whence every good and perfect gift comes according to that of
Saint John, John 3.27.
No man can receive any thing except it be given him from above, and so shows
his unthankefulnesse.

in his own eyes, not taking notice wherein he is exceeded by many, and so
shows his self-love. To avoid this, let us say of our selves as we are
taught of God, let us devise nothing. By the corruption of Nature let us say we
are enemies: Romans 5.10. Gal. 4.6.
by the grace of Adoption, say: We are sons by neerenesse of conjunction to
Christ, say: Heb. 2.12.
We are brethren by familiarity of love, say: We are friends: John 15.15.
by tenderness of Christ his protection over us, say: We are his spouse, Reu.
21.9.
by condition and covenant of our profession, say: We are servants, and by true
acknowledgement of our wants and insufficiency, say, We are unprofitable
servants; Luke 17.10.
let the Lord find that we are without fraud: let the world see that we are
without crime. But let not us say that we are without sin: yea let us say
nothing of our selves but in the humility of mind, because the poor in Spirit
are blessed, Mat. 5.

praise is to speak in Truth, without flattery or partiality. It is not fit to
cast the Childrens meat unto dogs: Praise is only the encouragement of
virtue. Never did Christ give this testimony of true Israelite to the
hypocritical Pharisie: John the Baptist did not salute them as True Israelites,
but thus, Mat. 3.7.
O generation of Vipers! It had not been fit for Saint Paul to have graced
Elymas with this testimony, when as he was full of all subtilty and mischief,
Acts 13.10.
the child of the Devil, and enemy of all righteousness. As charity is not
suspicious, so it is not sottish: and where apparent wickedness is, there ought
not to be the dawbing of untempered flattery. Therefore it is well said by
Elihu in the Book of Job: I will not accept the persons of men, Job 32.22.
nor give titles unto men, least my maker take me away suddenly. I will not
reach Judas a sop, nor cut a lappet from Saul's coat; let us not speak good of
the covetous whom God abhors, nor extenuate the commendable deeds of any by
envious destraction. The sinners Oil, though bright and sweet, yet is slippery
and vayn, and becomes not any wise man, not any friend, much less a Priest a
messenger of GOD.

Thirdly in the Rule of praise we are to observe that our praise ought to be
spiritual, not according to the vanity of worldly praise, which neither aims
at a spiritual end, nor discernes the spiritual thing: some praise out of
lightness making way for lust, so wantons praise in whole volumes: some praise
out of covetousness making way for lucre, so worldlings praise where they
think to make use of a man: some out of fear making way for security, so
weaklings praise to avoid oppression: some out of affection, making way for
consort and idle fellowship, so schismatic sectaries, so good fellows
praise: some in tongue and show only, making way for friendship, so flatterers
praise: some praise to be praised again, making way for glory, so fools
praise: some praise either the forbidden fruit, or at least the apples of
Sodom, which when they are touched are but dust: the vanities and trifles of
this World which when they are weighed are but Smoke, when they are embraced
are but shadows, honor, wit, riches, beauty, proportion, nobleness,
strength, are the wonders of the world, but the true Israelite whom heaven
honors, the Angels guardeth, the Glory of Christ is neglected, and passed
over with no applause: and yet in truth none more noble than he that is borne
of God: none wiser than he that is wise to salvation, none richer than he that
possesses God: none more beautiful than he that is unspotted of the World,
none more proportionate than he that bears about in his body the marks of the
Lord Jesus, none more strong than the true Israelite that prevails with God.

praise observe that it ought to be in the discretion of charity, more ready to
encourage by praising the good, than to grieve by publishing defects: Though
Nathanael had imperfections, yet the Lord would be no divulger of them: The
rule of praise requires charitable silensing of defects and weaknesses: and
therefore that butchers dog as Bonaventure calls him, that slanderer which
has his mouth always bloody in backbiting the godly, is to be abhorred of
all good men. Those hoggs coming into the paradise of Gods Church stored with
herbs and flowers, instead of taking their sweet savor, with their foul
mouths besmeares, and brands the plants, the people of God: how much the Lord
hates the wickedness of Cham, ye may know by his curse: and yet we see
nothing more common, nothing more pleasing to man's corruption for want of
discretion and charity than to detract, to gird at others, to traduce, and to
play with others infirmities, forgetting their own.

3. The matter of the praise: a true Israelite.
THe manner of Nathanaels praise being finished, the worthithinesse of the
matter, viz: a true Israelite, without fraud, calls for a diligent observation:
what a true Israelite is, may be discerned two ways, 1. By imitation of
Israel. 2. By exemptio^ from fraud.


Not all says Saint Paul, Romans 9.7, 8.
are Israelites that are of Israel, but the sons of promise are reckoned for
the seed: not all that cry Lord, Lord, are subjects indeed, but they which do
the will of God. Not carnal propagation, not external profession, but
imitation of Israel makes the true Israelite. In Israel therefore seven
special things may be briefly observed for Imitation.

Israelis simplicitas, Isreal's plainness, upright simplicity, which appears
Genesis 27.12. who being advised by his Mother to prevent his brother Esau of the
blessing, answered, My Father may possibly feel me, and I shall seem to him
to be a mocker, and so bring a curse upon me and not a blessing. Art thou a
true Israelite? behold, here examine thine own soul and descry thy Heart. The
true Israelite cannot endure to seem a mocker, and that of his Father, of whom
he expects the blessing. O Beloved! we are all come into the presence of GOD,
for a blessing of peace and love in CHRIST: what a reverend regard should we
have in our hearts, that we appear not as mockers and dissemblers before him?
Gal. 6.7.
remembering that saying of the Apostle, Be not deceived, GOD is not mocked. We
bring a fearful curse upon us and not a blessing, if we equivocate with the
LORD in the matter of our profession. Let us not say perhaps our Father will
feel us: it is most certain that our thoughts, and affection, and intention
is open and manifest in the sight of him with whom we have to do, Heb 4.13.
and no cunning covert can hide us from GOD. Of the true Israelites plainness
speaks the Prophet David, Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man in whose Spirit is
found no guile: and again, be joyful all ye that are true of Heart: and of
this the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11.3. I fear least as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity that
is in CHRIST JESUS. But foolish wantons are not afraid to make a lie, a mockery
of their profession in the Church of God, in the presence of GOD, and his
Angels. Away with such Meteors, such falling, such false planets, they are no
true, but seeming stars in the heaven of the Church, No Israelits indeed, but
the shadow of Israel.

Israelis (...) Isreal's religious reverence in the house of GOD: which appears
Genesis 28.16. GOD having manifested himself unto him by a vision, Israel no
sooner observed the LORDS presence, but breaks forth into a reverend admiration
of the place, saying: How fearful is this place? This is no other but the
house of God, this is the gate of heaven. O see the property of a true
Israelite! he has indeed an heavenly vision, (though worldlings count it a
foolish dream) in which he sees the spiritual ladder, the word of Faith, the
doctrine of the Cross, by which alone access is made to the presence of GOD,
on top of which alone, and no where else, the LORD of mercy stands to receive
those that clime up thereby, and to give a gracious voice to the true
Israelite, as he did to Israel: Lo I am with thee, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee, which he no sooner comfortably co^sidereth in the house of God,
where this Ladder is set, this vision appears, this voice is heard, but he
acknowledging Gods presence, reverently uses and esteems that Place as the
Gate of heaven. Away then with these wantons, these slow-bellyes, that make the
Gate of heaven a sleeping room, a place of outward gazing, no inward vision,
these are no Israelites indeed, they are Idols in the Church, they have eyes
and see not.

Israelis votum, Isreal's vow is to be observed, Genesis 28.20. If God (says he)
will be with me, and keep me in this journey, and will give me bread to eat,
and clothes to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house in safety,
then shall the Lord be my God, this stone shall be Gods house, and of all that
thou shall give me, will I give the tenth unto thee. Lo, by the way first; how
Israel dedicates his tenth unto God in the Law of Nature, before Moses Law,
that the true Israelite might know wherein commendably to imitate that
necessary devotion: next see how he cares that God may be with him, how he
rests upon God for his bread, and cloth, and guidance, giving unto God the
glory of the provision of his outward means, according as St. Paul
acknowledges, Gal. 2.20. That I live in the flesh, I live by faith in the
Son of God. See Isreal's contentment, having bread to eat, clothes to put on,
protection in his Journey, and the Lord with him, he desires no more, and need
not truly: For he is too covetous, that cannot be content with God. See Isreal's
thankfulness, he has vowed himself to the Lord, and the Lord is his God:
his heart cannot brook a desolation of the place where the name of God is
called upon: nor that they which serve at the Altar, should sterve at the Altar.
In this descry the true Israelite from the counterfeit. Many says Solomon
would be counted good doers, Prove. 20.6.
but where shall a man find a faithful man? an Israelite indeed, that will
stand to the Vow that Israel has made? Away with those earth worms, those
catch-polls, those caterpillars which make no reckoning neither of an house for
God, nor of a Tenth for God, nor of themselves for God. His house they make a
den of thieves, his Tenth a sacrilegious pray: and themselves the servants of
Corruption, and their Mammon their God. Are these Israelites indeed? Indeed
they are the shame of Israel.

Isreal's confession, his humble acknowledgement, expressed Genesis 32.10. O God
(says he) I am not worthy of the least of the mercies and truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant. Lo how the true Israelite in the feeling of his
own unworthiness is lowly in his own eyes, and humbles himself before the
Lord! The true Israelites that were found mourning for the abominations of the
people were signed with a letter, the last in the Hebrew Alphabet, to signify
that in humility they take the lowest room. Ezech. 9.4. See how Israel here
makes God his only refuge: his mercy and truth his only stay: that we may
discern the true Israelite to rely nothing upon merit nor expect due
recompense of desert, but only as Saint Basil says, has his hope in the
mercies of God. If thou will carry thy Light safe, cover it with both thy
hands: if thou will preserve the treasure of grace, let it be Thesaurus
absconditus a hid treasure, lest either the puff of vainglory blow out thy
light, or ostentation of pride bereave thee of thy treasure: if thou will have
the Spiritual fire preserved in the hearth of thy heart, cover it with the
ashes of Isreal's humility, I am not worthy of the least of Gods mercies. A way
then with the proud Iusticiary Romanist, the ostentant Pharisie, the enemies of
Isreal's humility, the disturbers of Israel.

Isreal's resolution. Genesis 32.26. who wrestling with the Angel, resolved saying,
I will not let thee go before thou bless me. Behold the true Israelite
wrestling with GOD, by Faith, by Prayer, by Patience, having taken sure hold of
him, cannot be divided: he is resolved that neither gain, nor force, nor
fraud, shall remove his hold, nor separate his heart from the love of GOD: So
the true Israelite Job: Job. 13.15.
If he kill me, I will still put my trust in him: Luke 18 39.
So the poor blind man being checked, cried so much the more, O son of David
have mercy on me! So the royal Prophet, My heart is fixed O GOD, my heart is
fixed. So the worthy Anselmus: Come Lord Jesus, for now I desire not my feet
but to seek thee, nor my hands but to serve thee, nor my knees but to worship
thee, nor my tongue but to praise thee, nor my heart but to love thee. Here is
wisdom, let the true Israelite keep his hold, none can bless thee but he,
therefore let him not go before he bless thee.

Isreal's Integrity, his Zeal, his true love of Virtue and hatred of vice. When
he comes to give his blessings, Genesis 49.3.6. remembering the sin of his eldest
son, he gives him a token of disgrace: Reuben (says he,) mine eldest son
light as water, thine honor is gone. Coming to Simeon and Levi, he says of
them, Simeon and Levi brethren in evil: Into their secret let not my soul
come, my glory be not thou joined with their Assembly. See here the property of
a true Israelite, which brooks not sin nor the dishonor of GOD, in his own
family, in his own children, in his firstborn: wheresoever he finds sin,
without partial affection, he gives it his just disgrace, rebuke, and Curse.
This is the Zeal of the Israel of GOD. O beloved, if the danger of sin in
our children, in our family, in our friends, in all men be such, that we may
truly say of the infected heart as the children of the Prophets cried out to
Elisha, 2 King 4.40.
O Master, Mors in olla: death is in the pot: death is in the house, the heart:
except we could either work a miracle, or else would play with their
destruction, why should we cast in meal when we have salt in our hands? It is
not the mealy-mouth that can cure the deadly wound of sin, but a sharp
proceeding to the wounding of the Conscience, and confusion of security.
Observe hence also the faithful and sound heart of a true Israelite, that by
no means will have fellowship with wickedness, either by approbation, imitation
or commerce. Into their secret (says he) let not my soul come, my glory be
not thou joined with their assembly. We ought not to carry our selves
indifferently unto the wicked, but as S. Jude Jude 23.
says, hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. O when I think upon the
brood of that Romish Cockatrice, unnatural traitors, a generation of vipers,
more fit for the halter than the Altar, that perfidious assembly of false
Catholics, I judge him false, no true Israelite to Church or State that in
utter hatred of their impieties, does not break forth into Isreal's zealous
integrity, Into their secret let not my soul come, my glory be not thou joined
with their assembly.

Isreal's contempt of the world, his Pilgrimage on earth, who coming to Pharaoh
and being asked of his age, answered thus, The whole time of my pilgrimage are
an hundred and thirty years, Genesis 47.9.
few and evil have the days of my life been, and I have not attained unto
the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimages. See
here what reckoning the true Israelite makes of this life: here he is a
pilgrim and a stranger, having (as the Apostle says) no enduring City here,
but looking for one to come, whose maker and builder is God. If thou art not a
stranger upon earth, Heb. 11 10.
thou art no true Israelite: if thou have set up thy rest here, thy state is
miserable, for of such says our Lord, Woe be unto them, they have their
comfort here. Luke 6.24. The dove that was sent out of Noah's Arc could not
be satisfied with the carrion that the Crow seaz'd upon, but finding no rest
for the sole of her foot, hasted to the Arc again. The true Israelites are
so far from being wedded to this world: and to the vile pleasures thereof,
that they cry in their hearts with the Prophet David, Psalm. 55.6.
Oh that I had the wings of a dove, that I might fly and be at rest. Of this
Pilgrims life speaks the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.29. Seeing the time is short, it
remains that they which have wives be as though they had none, they that weep
as though they wept not, they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not: they
that buy as though they possessed not, they that use this world as though they
used it not, for the fashion of this world goes away: hence David prays,
Psalm. 119.19
I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me! and hence
Saint Peter exhorts, 2 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts which
fight against the soul. It is an undoubted truth, a true Israelite is a
pilgrim. If then whilst thou do walk here as a stranger thou be
contemptiblie questioned with, as Jonas Jonas 1.8.
by the mariners; Whence comst thou? where wast thou borne? where dwelst thou?
what art thou? whither tend'st thou? comfort thy self with that testimonial
which the word of GOD does afford every true Israelite. If it be asked whence
they come? St. Peter answers, that they are a people set at liberty from the
spiritual Egypt, that they should set forth the virtues of him that has
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light: 1 Peter 2.9.
if where they were borne? Saint James shows that they were borne from above,
Iam. 1.17.18.
from the Father of lights, borne as says Saint John, John 1.13.
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man but of God,
if where they dwell? Saint Paul answers, Col. 3.2.3.
their conversation is hid with Christ in GOD, by affection seekeing the things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. If what they are?
Saint John answers that they are now the sons of God, and Saint Paul, 1 John
3.2.
the lights of the World. Phil. 1.15.
If whither they go? shall we say as CHRIST to his Disciples, whither they go
ye know, John 14.4.
and the way ye know? it is like then too many may say, we know not whither they
go, how then should we know the way? therefore let the Apostle in the behalf
of all true Israelites declare their passage, I (says he) follow hard toward
the mark, Phi. 3.14.
for the price of the high calling of GOD in Christ Jesus. Here then, whither
they go ye know, toward the mark: and for what, for the price of the high
calling of GOD, and the way ye know, CHRIST JESUS. Thus in the imitation of
Israel we find seven worthy ornaments of a true Israelite, viz.

1. Upright plains without fraudulent Policy.

2. Reverent religion without rudeness.

3. Holy devotion without prophannesse.

4. Humble confession without pride.

5. Constant resolution without faintnes.

6. Zealous integrity without corruption.

7. A pilgrims life, sober Contentment without Luxury, without love of the
World. The true Israelite is discerned.

2. By exemption from fraud.
THere is a threefold Fraud from which the true Israelite is free.

1. Fraus iniqua, the fraud of injustice deceiving others.

2. Fraus stuha, the fraud of folly deceiving themselves.

3. Fraus impia, the fraud of impiety, deceiving the Lord.

The first is in outward Conversation, the second in the information of the
Conscience, the last in the profession of Religion. If Nathaniels testimony
from Christ, saying a true Israelite without fraud, be considered according to
this difference of guile, we shall more plainly perceive who is the true
Israelite without fraud. fraud of couzenage or deceit in the matter of
bargaining, or trading, or outward conversing one with another is hateful to
every true Israelite, as being contrary, 1. To Justice. 2. To Charity. 3. To
Piety.


To Justice, for St. Paul calls it Oppression, 1 These. 3.6. Let no man, says
he, oppress or defraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is an avenger
of all such things.

To Charity: therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.25. exhorts Christians saying:
Wherefore cast of lying and speak the truth every man to his neighbor, for we
are members one of another: It Is the care of one member to help, but not to
hurt the other.

Contrary to Piety and Christian profession, for St. Paul, Col. 3.9. charge
us saying, Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put of the old man with his
works: Now then, how should not a true Israelite, a true Christian man be
ashamed of that work which has neither justice, nor charity, nor godliness
in it? The plainness and simplicity of faith in Christ admits neither of false
weights, false measures, nor couzening tricks, nor equivocating fraud. This
deceit is com to that height now that it is admired, studied, and practiced as
a great mystery, and he is rejected as a fool that has it not. What an
injurious proverb unto truth and upright dealing is that, Plain dealing is a
Jewel, but he shall dye a beggar that uses it: whether he shall dye a beggar
or no I will not strive, one thing I am sure of, he shall live a Saint. All
the wickedness of this fraud is now put of with caveat emptor: let the buyer
look to it. O foolishness! should the buier take heed of being deceived, of
suffering loss in his penny, and the seller take no heed of being a deceiver,
and so to loose thereby the Grace of God, the Honor of Truth, the Hope of a
better life? Of this deceit speaks the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy; Among my
people are found wicked persons, Iere. 5 26.
that lay wait as he that sets snares, they have made a pit to catch men:
As a Cage is full of birds: so are their houses full of deceit, thereby they
are become great, and waxen rich. First, it is utterly a shame for us that the
Lord should complain that such persons are found among his people, those that
profess the knowledge of the Truth: next very properly and significantly does
the Lord say, that deceit is in their house, as a bird in a Cage. It Is there as
imprisoned, and cannot get forth, they have got such an habit of Couzenage that
they cannot leave it.

Yea their false swearing, lying, couzening tricks to draw in gain, is become
to be a darling, a delight unto them, a bird that makes them sweet music,
and their shop is the Cage; well is he that can get such a bird, such a
prentise boy, that can tune his note artificially to deceive. If thou be a
true Israelite, thou will not make thy house a snare, a pitfall to catch plain
men, nor thy shop a Cage for that unclean bird. O rather let the voice of the
Turtle Dove be hard in thy house, Can. 2.12. mourning for sin, thankesgiving
to God, devout prayers, comfortable instruction, words of truth and love, that
is the true Israelites bird, the true Christians music.

2. Foolish fraud.
AS we have seen the fraud of injustice from which the true Israelite is
free, so in the next place observe the fraud of folly by which the mind
deceives it self, from which the true Israelite is also exempted. This deceit
is in the information of the mind, a couzenage of a man's own heart, of which
St. James speaks, Be ye doers of the word, Iam. 1.22.26.
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves: and again in the same
Chapter: If any man (says he) among you seem religious, and refraineth not
his tongue, but deceives his own heart that man's religion is vain. Of this
fraud there may be three branches observed.

1. Vain excuse to lessen sin. 2. A blasphemous cloak to cover sin. 3. A
presumptuous security to lie in sin.
1. Vain excuse.
dross, and loosest the true treasure: thou winnest the world, loosest thine
own soul: thou gettest earth, and loosest heaven, thou art joined to Mammon,
and divided from God. I but (says another) my children will find the good of
it, my posterity will praise my doings: O fraud! Thou shall be praised says
Chrysostom where thou art not, and tormented where thou art. What profits it
thee to be commended of thy posterity for leaving riches, and to be condemned
eternally for getting them? Can thy sons pleasure on earth, ease thy pain in
hell? Oh that the scales of this fraud would fall from the eyes of these
earthly men, that they might discern between things that differ, the riches of
Gods grace, and the dross of this world that in the love of the one, and
contempt of the other, they may truly say, Christ is to us both in life and in
death advantage. Philip. 1.21.


the everliving God? Can thou dally with the consuming fire, with the Majesty
of GOD, into whose whose hands to fall is a fearful thing? Woe be unto thee,
thou have thy Comfort here. And yet alas it is but the Comfort of an hog in a
stye, a bird in a cage, thou laughest and sing'st in the midst of thy slavery,
it is but from the teeth outward, no sound Joy, the worm of remorse gnawes thee
within, thou have not a Crumme of true Consolation, much less that continual
feast with the sons of GOD.

custom says another; too true, and as the Scribes and Pharisees said, seeing
the multitude to follow Christ, Do ye not see how you prevail nothing, Lo
all the world goes after him: So these insult, and object to Gods Ministers
saying, Do you not see how you prevail nothing with all your pains, your
labor is but lost, men will not leave their pleasure in sin, their profit by
deceit, for all that you can say or do: and therefore let us do as most do.
O foolish deceit! and will this wretch be damned for company? Is the sin
common? why? what though it be in the mouths of Kings, in the reyns of Nobles,
in the hands of Judges, in the eyes of the Priests, yet will that help nothing
in the day of thine account, nor can such example make any Royal, Noble, Just,
or Holy sin. Well said Eucherius to his Cozen Valerian, Obsecro te, alienum
delictum semper ut opprobrium respice nunquam ut exemplum: I beseech thee,
always behold another man's fault as a shame to the doer, but never as thy
pattern. Is sin customary? why? what though evil may plead for it self as
the Roman Church does, Antiquity, Universality, Consent, yet it is no less
blemish for thee to be infected with a customed and common sin, than to
consort with an old and common whore. swarm of natural men buzzing about me,
and urging a conceit of humane frailty, that flesh and blood can do no
otherwise, deceiving themselves with Information out of St. Paul misunderstood,
To. 7. where the Apostle says, So in my mind I serve the Law of GOD, but in my
flesh the Law of Sin. I am verily persuaded that this very fraud sends many
thousands to hell. For what in their account is the sin of humane frailty?
under burden of which the Apostle groaned saying, O wretched man that I am!
Look into their bill of account and you shall find cursing, swearing,
gluttony, drunkenness, couzenage, fornication, lying, hatred, and revenge,
ranked as the sins of their infirmity and humane frailty. Lo here Salomons
sluggard that cries yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber; slumber and
sleep, infirmity and impiety, all is one, all but little, and all too little
for him. But O good God! shall we imagine that the holy Apostle did in his
flesh serve the Law of sin after this manner? And was he indeed a couzener,
a liar, a fornicator, a drunkard? God forbid. There are indeed sins of
infirmity against which the godly man has a continual conflict. As
concupiscence, motions unto evil, idle words, inconsiderate passions,
surreptions, sin stealing upon us before we are aware, propter
inadvertentiam as the schools speak, for want of due circumspection: but that
sin which has the consent of the heart, and is done with purpose and
deliberation, as fornication, revenge, lying, couzenage, treason, and such like
must not be counted infirmities but iniquities, and such abominations as cannot
stand with the grace of Christ, but does quench the spirit, and so long as they
are continued by any, there is no Seal of salvation in him. The Apostle then
in the place forenamed does not mean that he serves in his flesh the law of
sin by actual and voluntary corruption, but by natural and involuntary
Concupiscence, which though he is compeld to obey in respect of evil motions
arising, yet neither does his mind consent, nor his actions conform unto them.

2. Blaspemous cloak for sin.
AS some deceive themselves in lessening their wickedness by a vain excuse,
as ye have observed already, so there are ungodly men crept in, which father
all their sin upon the force of Gods decree, affirming a necessity of their
sinning, through the inclination and secret working of God, who (say they) does
determinate their wills to evil, and so every one of their sins is their
destiny, and could never have been avoided. But this is a foolish and damnable
fraud, seeing that St. James faith, Iam. 1.13.
that God cannot be tempted with evil, and that it is against the very nature
and goodness of God to infuse evil, or to incline the heart to sin, and
against the justice of God and his truth, who both protests that he would not
the death of a sinner, and also cannot justly damn that in another, to which
(as they say,) he himself inclines the heart, yea by a powerful decree
inforceth it. God indeed orders and limiteth the corrupt will of man, prone
of it self to evil, suffering it to be carried to this sin and not to that,
according to his wisdom and good pleasure; and although God justly leaves men
for their unthankefulnes and rebellion in the snare of the Devil, yet he
neither inclines nor enforces them to sin.

Some have wrote to make this Spiders web, whom I will not name, for I had
rather hide than hit them: affirming absurdly that the ancient Fathers gave but
a frigid, a cold answer, when they said that God hardened men by desertion,
forsaking their rebellious minds, and by permission giving way to Satan to
seduce, ensnare, and overcome men. Yea one says Adulterium est opus Dei:
Adultery is of Gods working: another Deus movet latronem ad occidendum, God
sets on a thief to kill, which speeches they understand not to be in respect
of Gods permission, without whose leave nothing can be done: nor in respect of
that general aid and sustentation of the power of God, in whom we live, and
move, and have our being, but they conceive God particularly and necessarily to
incline the Adulterer and the thief to their villainy by a special motion, and
by a fatal decree. Whereby the very nature of sin is taken away, and the
filthiness thereof, because (as they conceive) God has so deep an hand in it,
that it is found to be his special work: But from this fraud the true
Israelite is free, who acknowledges that of the Prophet O see, Perditio tua ex
te Israel: thy destruction, O Israel; comes of thy self: and that of St. Paul,
Ye did run well, Gal. 5.8.
who did hinder you, it is not the persuasion of him that called you.

3. Presumptuous security to lie in sin.
YOu have seen how foolishly men deceave themselves by lessening their sins
by vain excuse, or covering their wickedness by blasphemous conceit of Gods
inclination and fatal decree enforcing their sin: now observe how also many
deceive themselves by a secure presuming that continuance in sin shall never
hurt them because of their confidence in the grace of Christ. The Apostle 1
Cor. 6.9. notably confounds their gross deceit: Know ye not (says he) that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: be not deceived, neither
fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor
thieves, nor covetous persons, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners
shall inherit the kingdom of God. What? does the Apostle terrify here and
teach not? Is it not rather a fearful doctrine? Are these but words of
course? if thy heart believes this doctrine. Deceive not thy self by secure
presumption. Mark what the Apostle adds, and such were some of you, but ye
are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ and by the Spirit of our God: he does not say, and such are some of you,
and yet ye are justified, but such were some of you, giving us to understand
that such sins cannot stand with the grace of Justification and
Sanctification of the Spirit. I but yet such a person may be elect, says one:
We do not now dispute what he may be, or what Gods purpose is to work in him
hereafter; but this we are bound to teach, and the people believe, that men so
long as they continue in such sins, are not in the state of salvation, and if
they dye without repentance they are certainly damned. Neither must men deceive
themselves with a conceit of hidden grace, and presence of the Spirit during
the continuance of such sins: for these sins being contrary to the Holy
Ghost, does so quench the divine motions and so pollute the soul, that Saint
John speaking of one of such sins affirms flatly, 1 Ioh. 3.15.
We know that no man-slaier has eternal life abiding in him. He does not
deny but that a man-slaier repenting may have eternal life; but he concludes
against this fraud of presumption maintaining that such an one during his sin
without repentance, has not eternal life abiding in him: but by his sin he
has lost the Spirit of GOD, and the comfort of salvation by Christ, until he
be again renewed by repentance. And therefore men that continue in such sins
ought to be so far from believing that they in Gods favor are safe, they
that are bound to believe by the word of God that they shall never inherit the
kingdom of Christ. I but says this deceiver, does not the scripture say:
Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.
and whose sins is covered: if covered (says he) then continuance in sin
cannot hurt a believer. But the godly which know the comfortable sense of these
words, admits not this deceivers gloss. All our former sins by repentance and
faith in Christ are forgiven, and so covered that they shall not appear to our
confusion: but then we know also that repentance imports not only a verbal
confession and acknowledgement that we sin, but also a real and true forsaking
of such sins as are committed against conscience. The grace of Christ then
covers our infirmities as a cloth to hide them, because they continue so long
as we live: but it covers our impieties and crimes as a plaster that draws
out the filth, and heals the sore. We must not think that the Name, and
merits of Christ are a cloak for villainies, or a covert for iniquities: but as
by the grace of Christ our weakness is covered, so our wickedness is cured: so
that a wicked man and a Christian are directly contrary.

3. Fraus impia, the wiced fraud in profession of Religion.
WE have observed already that fraud of Injustice deceiving others, that
fraud of folly deceiving themselves, now let us see that impious fraud in the
profession of Religion, deceiving the LORD, of which we may briefly observe six
kinds.

The FRAUD
1. Of Formal and Politic 2. Of Faint and Negligent 3. Of Fained and
Counterfeit 4. Of Forced and Servile 5. Of Forged and Arbitrary 6. Of
Flattering and Carnal
RELIGION.

1. Of Formal.
Politic Religion admits no more of Gods service than may stand with the
state, serve the time, and please men: a rank of men there are that so turn
themselves to serve GOD, that yet they have always an eye therein to serve
their own turn. Aug. de civi: dei ca. 20. l. 2.
Hence come the principles of politicians: Tantum stet, tantum floreat, copijs
referta, victorijs gloriosa, pace secura Respublica, et quid ad nos caetera?
Let but the state of the common wealth stand and flourish, abundant with
plenty, glorious with victory, secure with peace, and we look after no more.
Hence come their positions, Conservatio Reip. status prior ac antiquior esse
debet quam religionis causa. B^lloy. page 2.
The preservation of the Commonwealth ought to be more precious and more to
be respected than the matter of Religion. Antiquisart. p. 124.
Hence comes this their brutish conclusion, Virorum fortium hic scopus, hoc
studium, haec cura primaria esse debet, vitam laetam ac affluentem ducere: This
ought to be the drift, the study and prime care of a generous man to live a
jocund and delicious life. Of which beasts yet Job has fearfully concluded,
Job 21.13.
They pass their days in pleasure and in a moment go down to hell. O how
this politician smiles to observe the true Israelites following their
profession in earnest, counting them therefore God Almighties fools. But well
answered the Lady Paula, the Politicians of her time, nos stulti propter
Christum, sed stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus: We are fools for Christ's
sake, but the foolishnes of God is wiser than men, Inertiaese et otio dante,
etc. says Jerome, whilst these Mammonists give themselves to idleness and
sloth, they count those which seriously meditate in the Law of God day and
night, tanquam garrulos et inutiles, as vain and scripture-men: Psalm. 14.6.
and as David says, They have made a mock at the Council of the poor,
because the Lord is his trust. This formalist is in the Church as a sword in
the heart, as a serpent in the bosom, as a poison in the stomach, as a thief
in the house: by him the righteous soul is grieved, the plain Israelite
circumvented, the weak infected, the Church robbed. From this fraud the true
Israelites exempted, who first seeks the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, serves not the time, but the Lord, and their prime care is to
work their salvation with fear and trembling.

2. The fraud of faint Religion.
THe second fraud in profession is Negligence, when the professor is not
inflamed with zeal, and the love of God, but with a remissnes and carelessness
creeps about the works of godliness: This fraud the holy Ghost espied in the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Reu. 3.15.
saying, I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot: and of this
guile speaks the Scripture fearfully; Ier. 48.10.
Cursed is every one that works the work of God negligently. Free from this
guile are all true Israelites. Psa. 42.2.
So David, that said; my soul is a thirst for God. 1 King 19.10.
So Elias, that protested saying; I am zealous for the Lord God of Hosts:
though many times they which are at ease in Syon, count Elias his zeal the
maine disturbance of Israel. It Is a fearful commination of the Lord against
neutralls, these lukewarm professors, in the Prophecy of Malachy: Mal. 1.14.
Cursed is the deceiver that has in his flock a male, and offers a corrupt
thing. 2 Pet. 2 7.
If thy righteous soul be grieved at sin with just Lot: If thou mourn'st
because men keep not Gods Law with zealous David: Ps. 119 136.
If thou art weary of thy life for the daughters of Heth with Rebecca, Ge.
27.46.
If thou can cry with Samson for that well of life, Judges 15.18.
give me drink or I die with thirst, then art thou free from fraud, and thou
art known of God for a true Israelite. O let us raise up our hearts from this
fraud, remembering that of the Apostle, Gal. 6.9.
Be not weary of well-doing, knowing that ye shall receive if ye faint not:
and let us carefully follow the council of the holy Ghost: Reu. 3.2. Be awake
and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die.

3. The fraud of fained Religion.
THe third fraud in profession is counterfeit religion, which stands in outward
show without intention of the heart, drawing near unto God in the lips, the
mind being far from him. This deceiver shows himself in the Feathers of the
Swan, but secretly wallowes in the mire of the Swine: and though he seems to
be a very hoorder of the Manna, yet is he found feeding at the Prodigalls
trough. These deceivers says Nazianzen weave Penelopes web, what they make in
the day, they mar in the night. Like they are unto Plinies bastard Eagle,
that has the face of an Eagle, but the foot of a Goose: Ezech. 10.14.
or to Ezechiels vision with many faces, of Angel, of Man, of Beast: these
show themselves Cherubims in the Church, in company men: beasts in secret.
Suidas.
Pasetes the Iuglers feast full of varieties in show, vanishing all away when
they should be tasted, was but a mock-belly: the goodliest building the fairest
house without Inhabitant to give relief, that poor men call but a
mocke-beggar: and the most ostentant professors, which have a show of
godliness without the power thereof, a counterfeit Israelite is but a
mocke-God. these are reeds shaken with every wind of tentation, smooth but yet
hollow, without the pyth and substance of godliness. This fraud the holy Ghost
found in the Angel of the Church at Sardis; saying, Reve. 3 1.
I know thy works that thou have a name to live but indeed art dead. From this
guile was David free who cheerfully appeals to Gods view saying, Ps. 138.23.
Examine me O Lord and prove me, try out my reins and my heart: It Is with
every true Israelite as St. Jerome speaks of a good Priest, Christiani
Sacerdotis lingua, manus, men's, concordent. A true Israelites tongue, and his
hand, and his heart go together.

4. The fraud of forced Religion.
SErvile and compelled religion is the fourth fraud in profession: and that is
when men attend the exercises of religion without freedom of soul and spirit.
Where appears the main difference between religion inspired, and religion
commanded, the one leads by cheerefulnes and love, the other draws by fear
and force. I will offer says David unto the Lord free will offerings, Psalm.
110.3. Psalm. 45 6.
that is offerings of a ready and cheerful mind. A special mark of a true
Israelite: for where the spirit of God is, there is liberty says Saint Paul. 2
Cor. 3.17.
I was glad says David when they said, Come, we will go into the house of the
Lord. But these deceivers reckon the Lords service as a very torment to their
pleasures and profits, a cooling of their delights: and as the devils in the
Gospel was affected with the presence of Christ, so these with the exercise of
godliness, what have they to do with them, they come to torment them before
the time. Mat. 8.29.


5. The Fraud of forged Religion.
ARbitrary and devised Religion is the fifth fraud in profession, which
magnifies private inventions to the neglect of the council of God, which being
urged as necessary parts of divine worship, argue the Word of God of
Insufficiency: but it is the wantonness of men's wits and luxury of their mind,
that rove out beyond the limits of God, and are not content with his Wisdom.
This fraud Christ spied in the Pharisees, Mat. 15 6.
who made the Commandments of God of no effect, to establish their own
traditions. This fraud also is observed to be in the Romish Church, who have
equalled their traditions to the Scripture, and have devised a new Creed,
making their fancies Articles of Faith needful to salvation: This fraud some
also impute to the Church of England, though injuriously: for it urges no
humane invention as an essential part of Gods worship, or as needful to
salvation, but only for order, for comeliness, for signification. From this
fraud the true Israelite is free, who is so bound to the word of God, that he
makes it the warrant, the honor of his actions, the warrant that secureth the
rule that directs, the honor that graceth his Religion.

6. The Fraud of carnal Gospelling.
THe last fraud in profession I call flattering or carnal Religion, which does
not crucify the flesh with the lusts, therefore they say of their lusts as
Pilate said to Christ, what evil have they done: These deceivers admit nothing
that savours either of labor or restrain of the appetite: tell them of
mourning for sin, of watching in prayer, of fervency in devotion, of fasting
and abstinence, of mercy and alms deeds to the poor and such like, and they
will put of all to the hearing of a Sermon, an easy work; and for the rest
seem to say as the Devils did to the sons of Sceva, Jesus we know, and
Paul we know, Act. 19 13.
but who are ye? Sporting they may say we know, and feasting we know, but what
is fasting? what mourning? what alms? Of this fraud speaks the Apostle S. Jude
saying, Jude 1.4.
there are certain men crept in, Ungodly men, which turn the grace of our God
into wantonness. These men instead of building that Spiritual Tower, mount up a
narrow and overtopping Chimny: Luke 14.28
instead of sound religion, a smoaky vain, and foul singularity. These fly
not like doves to their windows Esaias 60.8.
as the Prophet describes the Godly man's celerity, and spiritual
contemplation, but hop like frogs, raising themselves a little from the earth,
in a ceremonious hearing of the word and prayer, the weight of their belly, of
their lusts pulls the^ down to their pond, to their filth again: and there
though they croake of Religion, and of the Gospel of Christ, yet in truth they
can not abide to enter into the straight gate, the narrow way that leads unto
life. Quintus Cicero perceiving his brother Mark to sue for the Consulship;
counseled him that continually he should think upon these words Novus homo es,
Consulatum petis, Roma est. Thou art but a stranger, thou suest for the
Consulship, and it is Rome where thou seek'st it: thinking that each one of
these considerations would spur him on to virtue and honorable deportment. He
was a stranger, no citize^ of Rome: no Patrician, but a man of Arpinas, of an
obscure place: next he sought for the Consulship the highest dignity: and that
in the city of Rome where was a multitude of choice competitors. O beloved, we
al seem to make suit for eternal life, the preparation whereunto is a true
Israelite, Christianity with out fraud: that we may inflame our hearts to a
conversation agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, let us oftentimes think of
these words, Novus homo es, Caelum petis, Ecclesia est. Thou art a stranger,
not born a Citizen of the spiritual Kingdom but by nature a child of wrath
thou seek for heaven the highest dignity, and that in the Church, in the
holy city, where are a multitude of choice competitours, Israelites indeed,
exercised in labor, patience, prayers, sorrow, and contemplatio^ of God, and
think thou to get it in ease, wantonness, Idleness? here the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force of devotion, and think
thou to get it by fraud of sensuality? If the divine Eagle can scarce soar
unto it, when shall the carnal frog attain unto it by remiss and intermitted
girds? Sophocles.
well said the tragaedian (...) no man prospers without diligence: would thou
have the highest honor with the basest thoughts? the greatest happiness with no
difficulty, no pains, no diligence? fro this fraud is the true Israelite
exempted. So St. Paul, Phil. 3.14. 1 Cor. 9.27.
I follow hard toward the mark: and again, I beat down my body and bring it
into subjectio^: Ps. 131 2.
so the Prophet David, My soul is as a weaned child: Behold now a true
Israelites religion, not formal and ceremonious, and politic and
time-serving, but serious, not faint, but zealous; not fained, but faithful and
true: nor forced, but free: not forged, but divine: not carnal, but spiritual.
Let us then all labor every man in his place, from the highest Cedar to the
lowest shrub, for Nathanaels approbation, his praise, a true Israelite. A
worthy testimony it is when the Lord may say: Behold a true King in who^ is no
fraud of tyranny, oppression, injustice. Behold a true Bishop, a Pastor indeed
in whom is no fraud of heresy seducing others, no fraud of schism disturbing
others, no fraud of idleness neglecting others: no fraud of evil example
corrupting others, no fraud of humane conceit, of light froth, of curious
teaching and wantonning in the chair of Christ, vainly pleasing others. Behold
a true Judge, a Magistrate indeed without fraud of injustice, partiality,
bribery. Behold true subjects, without fraud of treachery to their Sovereign,
conspiracy against their country: Behold in the Church true Israelites without
fraud of injurious couzenage deceiving their brethren, of folly, deceiving
themselves; of impiety dishonouring their profession and making a mock of the
service of God. Now then, as when Christ Jesus mentioned the traitor, the
disciples were presently stirred and began to say to him one by one, Mat. 26 25.
Is it I? master is it I? and the Lord gave no answer: But when the course came
for the traitor indeed to speak, saying Is it I? the Lord sealed his word
presetly, saying, thou have said: So beloved whilst we hear such good things
of the true Israelite, and are moved one by one to common and search of our
own estate, saying, Is it I? that is the true Israelite, Lord is it I? when he
speaks that is the Israelite indeed that truly repents of his sins, believes
only in the Lord Jesus, and lives justly, soberly, and godly in this present
world, and says, Lord is it I? The voice of the Holy Ghost seals and
confirms it saying, thou have said. If the^ any soul which has long pleased
it self with the shadow of his Fig Tree, the delights of sin, begins to
resolve with himself to come with Natha. to the Lord Jesus the true rest of
souls: or if any being truly affected with the sincerity of the true Israelite,
does inwardly hate the unjust, foolish, and wicked fraud of earthly, sensual,
and devilish men, or if all you that hear me this day, are so delighted with
the honor and comfort of Nathanaels testimony, that you go away resolved to
regard no applause in the world, in comparison of this, that ye may be
accounted of God true Israelites in who^ is no fraud; then have I my desire,
you have the blessing, and let God have the glory. Amen.

FINIS.

