A COURT OF GVARD FOR THE HEART.

LONDON, Printed by Aug: Mathewes 1626.

TO THE NOBLE AND FERVENT Lover of Religion, Sir GEORGE HASTINGS, Knight.
SIR,
MEEting with this Copy by accide^t, and per using it with observation and
delight, J found it too worthy to be buried in obscurity, or co^fined to one
private study. And though the reverend Author, (who is to me, after much
inquiry, still unknown) for what cause I cannot guess, did omit to bless the
World with so happy a fruit of his Labors; J presumed to bring it forth to
that light, which otherwise it was likely never to have seen. Upon the hope to
make that, which was at first good, so much the better, by being more public
and general Not that it shall lie exposed to sale on every Booke-sellers
stall, but only be commended into the hands of some few noble and worthy
Persons. Among whom, I am principally encouraged by the certain knowledge of
your Zealous affection to such holy Pieces, and Divine meditations, to Dedicate
it and my self to the Patronage of your Worship not doubting of your gracious
respect to so grave a Guest, and free pardon to

Your Worships unworthy Servant JOSEPH TAILOR.

A COURT OF GVARD.
PROVE. 4.23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it come issues of
Life.
NOne speaks more feelingly of a storm, then he that has suffered
Shipwreck; none, of the loss of innocence, more punctually, then the broken,
the decayed, the bankerupt sinner: for as some men that have undone themselves
by suites of Law, have yet got the knowledge thereby to be good Lawyers; or as
other by their many diseases have out of their Apothecaries bills, made up a
book of Medicines: so does the dear experiment of our sins prove us good
Counselors for others, (though by a strange argument) because we have been ill
ones to our selves. There was a time when none kept his heart with less
diligence then Solomon did, when if his wives had bin made out of his side, as
Eve was out of Adams, he had been a monster of seven hundred ribbs at least; 1.
King. 11.3.
for so many wives he had besides his Concubines. There was a time when every
wanton eye had a flame for him to singe himself by, every temptation had a
picklocke to his breast to enter in at pleasure; when his heart was like a
shiuered glass, reflecting so many several sins as there was pieces of it;
his Cinque ports of senses, under an ill guardian, so many inlets for treason;
himself a Captive, though a King, a slave in sin, though a Royal one: So that
Tertullian durst say, Solomon quite lost that glory which God gave him. And
Saint Ambrose with as much sharpenes, but mingling with it a wish of pity,
says of him, He built God a Temple, but I could wish, he had not let the
Temple of his heart to fall to ruin. There were not more workmen about the
building of the one, then there were foul sins busy in destroying of the
other: his heart went down far faster then the Temple rose, as if God had
meant successively in one pattern to have drawn to the life, the best of his
graces, the worst of our sins; showing Solomon to the world, like the same
picture with two resemblances; look on him on that side where God portrayed
him, with his Intellectuals sublimed above his fellows, you shall find an
Angel: step on the other side, where he drew himself in his own colors of
Idolatry, you shall see a devil; For a sinner is no better, St. Peter himself
having had that name (the only title of his, which the Pope leaves out) get
thee behind me Satan. Let this therefore be the discovery of the Speaker,
that he that knew what the loss of a heart was, gives you counsel cheap,
which he dearly bought. Keep thy heart with all diligence for out of it come
issues of life.

But I must not do Solomon that wrong as to gaze on him in his falling, not to
cast a glance on him in his rising; beside, it may be my Text may suffer in it;
the counsel may be less welcome if it be thought a condemned Sinner gave
it: Yet we shall find, 1 King. 17.6.
Elias refused not his meat, because a Raven (an unclean Creature) brought it
to him: Gal, 1, 8.
Should an Angel preach any other Gospel then this (says Saint Paul) let him
be accursed; But, he says not, should the Devil preach no other then this, Let
this Gospel be accursed? Had Solomon at that time when he bended his knees to
the Idol Asteroth (which by many of the Learned is thought to have bin the
statue of Venus, a fit Gods for his turn) had he then, I say, pronounced,
that the true God were only to be honored, should we retire our Faith from it
because an Idolater spoke it? But to what end is it that Solomon's sins are
shown in such a Scarlet, as if the whole sea of Christ's Passion could not wash
it out? Why it needs be thought that he is damned, whose words, no doubt, have
sent more souls to heaven, then there are letters in them; who was an
immediate Secretary to God, nay, a Royal type of Christ: he sinned indeed, in
that he was no type of Christ, no more was Jonas in his flying away from God,
or Samson in being deceived by Dalilah: yet both types of Christ. But it
troubles the^, that they find it registered, he sinned; but they find it no
were that he repented. But their Divinity might teach them that in matters of
fact, arguments of authority drawn from negatiues are but weak; it is not
written that he repented, therefore he did not repent, is but a loose
ungrounded consequence: Where do they find that Adam repented of his sin in
Paradise, Noah of his Drunkenness, or Lot of his Incest; are these therefore
in the black-booke of the damned? But suppose it be written, what action shall
Solomon have against them for so high an Injury? I am sure S. Jerome, whose
credit may weigh down a whole College of Cardinals, though weighty Bellarmin
makes one against him, cites a place for it out of Solomon's himself, where the
Septuagint translate it out of the original (though otherwise rendered in our
English) at last I repented. Pro. 24.32
If this move not, yet let Gods promise be of some credit, which was made so
firm for Solomon, 2 Samuel 7, 15.
I will be his Father, he shall be my Son: if he commit iuiquitie, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, But my mercy shall not depart away from him as
I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. Mark the words, If he
commit iniquity, he would chasten him, but how? with the rod of Men, But where
in the Scripture, is the Rod of men taken for damnation? He would take his
mercy from him; but how? not as he did from Saul that was a Reprobate; why
therefore Solomon a reprobate?

I confess the Fathers are not very tender handed in searching the faults of
Solomon; but he that reads them, may soon find the reason was because the
vulgar Jews took Solomon to be Christ, for the noysing of him to be the
Messiah was the cause (as some imagine) the Queen of Sheba took so long a
journey to visit him; Therefore S. Ambrose well conjectures. God it may be
suffered him to sin so foully, least others should (induced with the rariety of
his wisdom) sin more fowly in believing him to be God; But shall we
therefore infer God sufsuffered him to be damned? I would not pronounce it of
the greatest sinner that I should see dye, though I should visibly perceive his
sins to cover him like a cloud, as if they would keep God from looking on
him, the devil waiting for him, as for a certain prey, yet I would not
pronounce it? The ways of thy mercies O God, are past finding out, more
unknown then the way of a Ship in the sea, or of an Eagle in the air. Let
them show me how a flash of Lightening melts the Sword without making any
impression in the Scabberd: I will show them as well, how at the instant of our
death, (...) mercy more sudden, and more penetrating then the Lightening, may
melt our hearts into repentance, though outwardly the eyes of the standers by
perceive it not. Of the two then, I dare say, the Pope offends the less,
because more charitably in Canonizing them for Saints, who for ought he knows
are damned, then these do in damning them, who for ought they know are Saints.
But I will no longer tract the uncharitable footsteps of Solamo^s censurers;
more I might say, to secure him from their malice, less I could not. I will
leave them only with this advise, To bestow more time in saving their own
souls; less, in damning of the souls of others! For Solomon says not here,
Damn another man's heart with all diligence, but Keep thy heart with all
diligence, for out of it come issues of life.

The best counsel that ever was from the most able Counselor that ever was;
for we have already discovered him to be no less then Solomon; one that
leaueled the uneven ways of knowledge from the Caedar of Libanus to the Hisop
that grows on the wall; that had traced the Labyrinth of all secrets without
a thread, and left never a knot in nature to vnty; to whom God himself had
said, There was none like thee before thee, nor shall any arise after thee that
is like thee. Preferred therefore for his Wisdom by Abulensis, before Adam in
his Original perfection: nay (that which touches us more nere) one that
exactly knew the true value of a heart, as well by the loss, as by the
enjoying. He it is gives you the advice, as a short exact drawn out of the
large copy of his experience, Keep thy heart with all diligence: nor only
so, he prescribs not as ignorant Empiricks give Physic, take this, but ask me
not why; or as Tyrants give Laws, obey this, my will is my reason: For he has
a quia for you, as well as a quid, a why, as well as a what, For out of it come
issues of life. Thy Heart therefore is a Jewel, thy Body the Cabinet, the
Guardian thy Self; the Watch, all diligence; the motive of all, Life Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it come issues of life.

The first survey shall be of the Jewel, a Jewel of Gods own cutting; he that
only Lapidary, if you mark the fashion of it; you may easily find it, large
and open toward heaven, but angular and narrow, and shut up toward the earth.
Ask the Philosopher what the Heart is, he will tell you, It is the fountain
of life, the furnace of heat, and center of the blood: But ask the Divine,
and you shall hear, It is a Ray, a Spark an Image of the Divinity; It is the
soul it self in St. Paul's language, Romans 10.10.
With the heart man beleeus unto righteousness. Make the heart of this thy
people fat (says the Prophet Esaiah) but why? Esaias 6.10
Lest they understand with the heart. So that as St. Basil observes, The Court
has got the attribute of the Queen that dwells in it, the Queen the name of
her Court, the Heart, the attributes of the Soul; the Soul in exchange, the
name, the title of the Heart. To keep therefore thy Heart, is as much, as to
keep thy Soul,: Nay, Saint Bernard will tell you, That to keep your Heart is
as much as to keep thy God. For do but open thy several Closet there, and
there you shall find a nest of Jewels involued and shut up one within another.
Open thy Heart, thou shall find thy Soul there; open thy Soul, thou shall
meet thy Spirit there (...) unfold thy Spirit, thou shall see thy Faith;
unlock thy Faith, and thy God will show himself. St. Basil therefore justly
cries out unto us, Contemn not O man, this miracle within thee, do not
undervalue the heart which God has so inricht. What madness is it to think
meanly of your Souls, which the Devil esteems so precious. He wageth war
against God himself, he observes, he watches, he compasses the world to
gain one heart. If thou will not take some care to keep, what the devil
bestows so much to gain, must it not follow that thou think far (...) of
thy self then the devil does?

If nothing else will teach thee the value of they heart, know it is the only
glass that God delights to look^ in, it is a letter written by himself to
himself, as well directed to God, as sent from him; the Inscription his, the
Superscription his: It is (...) Sacrifice, his Altar, and his Temple, it is a
Sterling piece of Gods own Coin, a Medall on which he stamp his Image, and
in that stamp thou may read thy value.

I have said enough, but no^ all, yet did ever any affirm the shadow to be
worth the substance, or the Picture worth the face of him it represents. Yet
St. Augustin^ has a strain above this, with so exact compleatnesse was our
Redemption accomplished, God laying down at stake his soul, for the soul of
man that was forfeited, as if the soul of a sinner were worth the soul of his
God. Bold words, holy Father, the soul of a sinner worth the life of his God:
worth those stripes, those buffetings, those rivers of blood, that Passion, nay
that Death? Had not the least drop, or the easiest groan of Christ, been
ransom enough for more worlds, then there were ever men from Adam to this
hour. Had not the very act of descending from his Glory into the bosom of the
Virgin merited as much. Yet such was the will of our blessed Savior, that
could it be supposed there were but one lost soul in all the world, imagine it
were only thine, yet he would have come into the world, and would have
suffered all those torments, to have saved that one Soul of thine, for Christ
dyed as much for one as for all; in the share of his Passion as in the enjoying
of the Sunneshine; All has all, every one has all. I can go no higher in the
valuing of this Jewel; it shall be my wish that none here ever go lower in
the esteem of it. St. Cyprian was of the mind, That if the meanest or the
poorest man amongst us did but know how noble his heart were, what honors,
dignities, and privileges it had, he would scorn as much to dishonor it with
sin, as a great Prince would do to pilfer for his dinner. For do but think
with your selves, what have your dear, your familiar sins in them, worth a
heart that God has dyed for: before you part with it, look upon it; a
Prodigal will do so much for his money, though he throw it away afterward:
see what you change, see for what, observe from whom you take it, to whom you
give it, remember what sorrows it must suffer, if you part wath it. When you
have done this, St. Austin lets you loose, Sin if thou can whoere thou art,
for either thou art already an incarnate Devil, or by this thou shall overcome
the Devil. Thus let me leave this Jewel a while in trust with your ears,
till I have found a Cabinet for it, which is my next Search, thy heart.

Souls once separated needs no looking too, but while they are here united,
they are neither without their Prisons, nor their Guardians: Seneca says,
These pillars of bones that we see covered with flesh, spread over with Nerves
and veins, the Face, the Breast and Hands, make up but one Fabric of a
Prison, to keep the unruly Heart in: Prison and Prisoner both at a time; For
says Tertullian, As soon as the prison is made, the prisoner is in. But
Epictetus will not grant the body a name of so much strength as a Prison, with
him it goes for no more then a China dish, an artificial dirt, or Clay neatly
made up. Plautus the Comaedian has an other strain for it, he calls man the
Saltseller of his own soul. But as it is a defense which women use, when it
is urged to them, why there should be left in Story, more arguments of the
malice of their Sex then of men: to answer that, the reason is, Because men are
the writers of those Stories, not women: So we may use the like in these
titles, of disparagement of the body, That the Soul was the Inuentor of them,
not the Body. But whether a Prison, or a Chinadish, or a Saltseller, or what
else they please to call this outward frame of ours, it must needs be the only
Casket of this Jewel which we have so highly prised: nor shall we less in a
proportion esteem the Caskee the the Jewel Teroul says, Far be it that God
should for ever forsake that Body which was the Divine work of his own hand,
the Masterpiece of his Art, the Vial of his breath, the Heir of his bounty,
the Priest of his religion, 1 Cor. 8.16.17.
the Soldier of his testimony the Sister of his Christ: If Tertullian weigh to
lieghly Saint Paul's Words in the Scales: Know ye not that year the Temple of
God, that the Spirit of God dweleth in you? If any Man defile the Temple of
God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple you
are. It was scoffe^ put upon Galba, a Roman of better wit then face, that
Galbas neat wit had a foul dwelling; But the Christian needs not fear any such
byword, for Saint Cyprian says, That the Flesh of a Leaper is as fair to
God, as his that is bathed in Milk and Spices; Nor can a good Soul ever
complain justly of an ill lodging for though the walls of this thy House of
Flesh totter with a Palsay, though they flame about thee with a Fever, or fall
to ruin with old Age, though thou art become an entire Hospital of all
Diseases within thy self, yet as long as thou have not parted with this Jewel
of Solomon's, if neither thy eyes have pauned it to Lust, nor thy ears morgaged
it to Vanity, nor thy will sold it our right to presumptuous and to reigning
Sins: If it be thine own Heart in thine own Body (for to alienate one, is
to make away both, for let none think he can give away his Body to his Sins,
and keep his Soul for his God) but if both be thine, be assured God will
keep both of them thine, and will make up the defects of both If both be not
thine, power out thy prayers, that it would please thy angry God to give thee
thy self again, that Christ's wounded heart may send thee back thy heart
vnwou^ded, with this, with this warning reuited through the midst of it,
Hereafter, keep thy Heart.

The Soul is so insinuated into the Body, with so nere so close a combination,
that it posed Tertullian (as himself confesses) to distinguish, Whether the
Body Carried about the Soul, or the Soul the Body. On the same hinges we may
hang another doubt, which may be said to keep the other; For look on the
Soul discussing, deciding, and commanding all, you will say, she is the
Guardian: Look again on the Body, see in it the several statio^s of the
Senses; the Eyes watching, the Ears listening, all standing Sentinels, and the
whole frame of it like a well built Castle, it might tempt you to believe, that
the Body had the charge given of keeping the Heart. But since the Guard may as
well be said to keep the King, as the King the Guard, we will leave the care
between them, wishing the^, that neither of them answer as Kain, did, Genesis 4.9.
Am I my Brothers keeper. For the Heart will one day give account for the
lustful wandering of the Eye, the Eye shall give account for betraying of the
Heart. Tertullian says, The same fire shall then hold them, that no^ ^ally in
the same flame; colleague fellows they have been in sin, and God will not
part them in the punishment.

The best resolution then of these words will be, Heart keep thy self. But it
is a high way saying, That he that learns of none but himself, has a fool to
his teacher. How then shall the heart that is kept by none but it self, have
no wiset a Guardian? I fear no wiser. David has therefore found out another
for the custody; For (says he) unless God keeps, Psalm. 127.2
the watchman waketh but in vain. He that keeps the Spheres in their
motions, the Sun with a whole army of Iesser lights in their courses, he that
sets the Sea his bounds, Thus far shall thou pass, but no farther; He that
hanges the whole World upon the Hindges, is as careful of thee as of the whole
world; nor does he leave thee only to his general Influence, as Pelagius (too
proud of the strength of his own Heart) would have it; He does not wind thee
up as a Watch, then give thee up to thine own motion, but says Saint Austine,
When he has sent his Graces as Harbengers to prepare thy heart, he continues
them there to guard thy Heart: Do but recount to your selves the Stories of
your own lives. Remember how often your hearts have been resolutely set on
such, or such a sin, yet God has diuerted them: How often have your tongues
been ready to blaspheme, or slander, yet God has stopd them; and your hands
prepared for a mischief, yet God has stayed them. How this affects you I know
not, but St. Augustine was so taken with it, when he thought on it, that it made
him speak those words (...) which nothing but such a zeal, such a devotion,
as St. Augustine had, could make warrantable? Such are the mercies of God
(says he) to my soule^ that I can scarce imagine God does any thing else, but
study how to save me; as if he had forgot all the rest of his creatures, to
have the more time to look to me alone.

Nor is this all; but as great Princes will have their Servants attend on him
whom they honor: so God comma^ds the glorious Angels to wait on their Hearts, on
whom he casts a gracious eye, nay, They are no longer Angels, (as St. Gregory
well observes) then they are so employed: For according to S. Austin, An Angel
is a name of Office, not of Nature. They are always Spirits, but not always
Angels, for no longer messengers from God to man, no longer Angels; since only
to be a Messenger, implies to be an Angel.

That every one of us has a several Angel deputed for his guard from his
nativity, is the judgment of some of the learned Fathers: Saint Hierome
proves the dignity of the soul by that argument, St. Basil as confidently
says That every true believer has his Angel: the like says Origin of every
one that is baptized. Others of later times, have gone so far, as to affirm,
our Savior Christ while he lived on earth, had his tutela^^ Angel: because it
is said that when he was in that bloudyagony in the Garden, Luke 22.
there appeared an Angel from heaven comforting him. But the bold forehead of
the Jesuit Maldonat, blusheth at this, rejecting it for a Paradoxe, That he
that was the true God should want the guard of one single Angel. Bellarmins
Meditations have elevated him to so high a fancy, as to find out, that in
every Kingdom there are two Kings, a Man and an Angel; in ever Dioces two
Bishops, a Man and an Angel; nay, in the Catholic Church two Popes without a
Schism, the one a visible Man, the other an invisible Angel. But we
knowledge is bounded o^ the one side with the Scripture, on the other side, by
ou^ own modesty, do willingly forbear to give you dreams instead of
Revelations, Fancies, instead of Truth. Whether every Soul of us has a
several Angel for a Tutor^ Let it rest with those Fathers that thought so:
But whether each of us has a bad Angel to oppose, as a good to assist, as
Maldonat thinks probable? or whether at the resurrection, every man's good
Angel shall gather together the bones of him he guarded, as Suarez teaches:
Or as Bellarmine will have it, In the Chair of Rome there be seated an
invisible Pope, as well as a visible; Let the Jesuits only determine, that have
made themselves a false Key to the Cabinet of Gods secrets. It shall suffice us
to whom the Foolishness of the revealed Gospel is sufficient, That he that
maks his Angels ministering spirits, Heb. 1.7.
and his Ministers a flame of Fire, has given his Angles charge over us, Psai
91.11
to keep us in all our ways. Daniel 10
In Daniel we find but one Angel to guard a whole Kingdom, all Persia.
Genes. 32.
In Genesis two Armies of Angels to keep one Jacob. Of their protection we
are certain, of their number whether one or more, we may be with religion
euough uncertain. That which concerns us nearest, is to make such use of it,
which St. Bernard does on those words already cited; He gave his Angels charge
over thee. O what reverence should these words strike in thee, what devotion
should they stir up, what confidence to hear that thy Angels are thy guides,
to hear that they are not only present with thee, but present for thee: they
are the coniuring words of that devout Father, Let me beseech you Brethren,
that ye would not commit those foul sins in the sight of the Angels that
keep you in the eyes of God himself, which you would not do if no more then I
were by? If you will needs sin (says St. Basil) choose out some place where
neither God nor his Angels are; but if their be no corner so dark, so
solitary, so secret, but they are there, let there as well be no place for you
to dare to sin.

I have shown you the attendance of the Angels under God the great Keeper of
all hearts; That there is a heavenly watch daily set about us. I will only add
this out of St. Basil, That God, nor his Angels never part with us, till we
make them go, that only our sins dismiss this Watch. For as smoke drives
away Bees (says that Father) or as ill smells chase Pigeons from their
Doue-coats, so does the smoke, the stench of sin drive God from us with all
his Angels. Let not therefore the unregenerate Sinner complain that his Heart
is not in Gods keeping: For had he not thrown dirt on it himself, nay, had
he not razed out of it the Image of the Deity, as a Thief does the mark of
stolen Plate, that the owner should not know it, God had still kept it. But he
keeps no defaced Hearts, nor yet no counterfeit; he keeps no careless,
unregarded, throwne-away hearts. Heart keep thy self, must be the watchword;
that passion that meets thee without that word, let it not live a minute
longer; for there is no greater Treason then selfe-Treason, when the betrayer,
and the betrayed, spell but one man.

But it troubled St. Austine much, how the heart should keep the heart, when
the heart would so seldom obey the heart. It makes him begin with admiration;
The mind commands the body, it is obeyed; the mind commands it self, it is
resisted; bid thy feet stir, or thy hands move, or thy eyes turn, in a moment
it is done, with such ease and suddenness, that you can scarce distinguish the
performance from the command: but the Heart commands the Heart, to will this,
or that good; which it had not commanded had it not willed, yet does it not
will what is commanded. He ends with the admiration he began, What Prodegie is
this, what Oedipus shall vnriddle it? But the good Father finds it out at
last, For (says he) the Heart turns but half a fide on good actions, it
looks on them but with one eye; if it chance to bid farewell to sin, it is
as foolish friends part, with many lookings back, many excuses, still one
farewell more. When Saint Austine himself in his younger days, prayed to God
for Chastity, he confesses he could not keep his rebellious heart from
adding, give me chastity, but not yet O God, let me have some pleasure more.
No wonder then if the heart be not obeyed, that would not be obeyed: if sin
depart not, when the heart will not let it go. To close up this, if we banish
sin, it must be withal the heart; if we entertain God, it must be into all
the heart. If we keep our hearts it must be withal diligence: So shall we be
able to bear a part in the Prophets song, My heart is ready, O God, my heart
is ready, for I have kept my heart with all diligence.

Thus have we seen the Jewel that is guarded, the watch set, the watchword
given; we are now to walk the round to see the Discipline: For St. Bernard will
have Solomon here mean a Military watch, that is, keep thy heart through all the watches of the night: So that we all lie perdue under Martial law, he that
sleeps dies for it. The Original word Samarah (as it is observed by Scalager)
will well bear it: for it not only signifies the place, the station of the
watch: as it is said in Baruch, the Stars shined in their watches. But the
actio^ of the Watch it self, as David uses it, Psalm. 130.6
My soul wayteth for the Lord, more then they that watch unto the morning, I
say, the^ they that watch unto the morning. The Ancients divided the night into
four Watches; two from the Evening to the first crowing of the Cock; two from
the crowing of the Cock to the rising of the morning. These night watches
Origin seconded by St. Austin, compared to the four ages of man, his Infancy,
his Youth, his Manhood, and his Old Age: So that you may now perceive what it
is to keep your hearts all the Watches of the night; it is no less then from
thy Cradle to thy deathbed; from the first moment that God kindled a light of
knowledge in thy heart, till the last when he shall put it out: a light indeed
so dimne, that the Fathers doubted not to compare it to the night; yet by that
light, by that weak light, that glimmering, we are all to watch; Nor did our
Savior blush to be likened to a Thief that should come in such a night; for
he that took on him our Nature, shames not at the name of our vices; so that
he by that name may keep us waking? But whether he come as a Thief, or as the
Master of the house in the second or third watches, Luke 12.38.
blessed are the servants whom he finds thus watching. But why in the second or
third only, St. Gregory makes question of? why names he neither the first
watch nor the last? He answers, the first is implied in the second, but the
last is left out as desperate. He that dreams out the first watch, may awake
in the second, he that shuts his eyes in the second, may open them in the
third: But he that drinks down sin like Opium to sleep with it, till the
conuulsions of old age, or the last crampe of death awake him, 1 Samuel 25.
shall be like wretched Nabal who when he had slept, found that his heart was
dead within him. But let me beseech you brethren to awake before that hour
awakes you; to remember how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of an
angry God, who^ ye have so often mocked with delays, as you meant to cosen
your selves to hell in spite of heaven. Yet make a stand, look back on the
time, which you have rather thrown away then spent (...) flatter not your
selves, that the last Watch is far from you, for none is truly young that is
old enough to dye: To shut up all, use but that wit, that study, that
diligence to save your souls, which you have done to damn them. For God
requires no more of you, then his enemy; you have spared neither time, nor
cost, nor trouble in the Devils service, You have lost your hearts with all
diligence; In Gods service do but so much, Keep your hearts with all
diligence.

Neither Love, a Kingdom, or the Deity endures a sharer, neither a divided
diligence or a divided heart can serve Gods turn. Though the Translators
therefore differ, whether it be Custodia, Cura, or Munitio, whether ex or prae
be affixed, yet in the intirenes, in the word of latitude, they all agree; For,
whether we look upon the watch we set about our hearts, it must be no
slumbring, no supine, nor intermitted watch; or on the care with which we
watch, it must be no loose, scattered, distracted, or aguish care that comes
by fits; or on the places, from whence we watch the Forts or Block houses, the
inward or outward senses, all must be manned. Since therefore sin assayles
every where, we must be armed every where. If we do but observe nature, we
shall find by her placing of the Heart, how we should keep it: First, it is
seated with all advantage of intelligence, almost in the center of man, with a
curious net of veins, spread from it over all the body; like the Spider in the
midst of her web, which feeling the least touch that shakes her work, retires
instantly from the danger: So should the Soul shrink at the least noise,
whispering, or murmr of sin, it should avoid the very complement, the first
address of it, and to be sensible of danger at the very sight, the glimpse of
a Temptation. But this is not all that Nature has blessed the Heart with; for
besides this situation of advantage, it has a double natural fence, the one
more inward, a tender, though firm skin, to enwrap the heart with; the
other, an outward strong wall of ribbs. St. Cyril in his book of Adoration,
bids us note it as remarkable, That the first ruin of this wall was in
Paradise, when God took a ribb out of Adam to make a woman of: so that the
forming of our first Mother, has caused many of her Sonns the loosing of their
hearts; For as St. Cyril follows the Allegory: Ever since that time, sin
assayles the heart at that place where it wants that rib for to defend it. St.
Gregory Moralizeth the Ribbs into so mamy rational Virtues encompassing the
heart like the strong men about the bed of Solomon, The tender skin of the
heart he makes to be the tender Conscience, For he that wraps not up his
heart in a soft, a clean, and vnseared Conscience, is either about to make a
forfeit of it, or has already lost it. That therefore we may immitate
Nature, Let the Heart nouer be unguarded, let religious meditations be as
veins to convey pure thoughts from it, constant unshaken resolutions be the
nerves, let a wall of Virtues, immure it instead of Ribbs, a clear Conscience
in lieu of a defiled; so shall we find the motive of al, made good, For out
it come issues of life.

It was Platoes advice in his second Dialogue of his Republique, That every
City should have his Fountain in the midst of it, his reason, that it might
be readier for use, either for the ordinary employments of it, or if a casual
fire should need the help of it. For the same causes thinks St. Christome,
That blessed Fountain of, blood and water, brake forth out of our Saviors
side about the heart nere the middst of him, that it might be equally near to
all, that would either drink out of that eternal spring, or quench the fire
with it, that either Lust or Anger had made flame. Like such a Fountain in the
middst of a besidged City, should the Heart of man be among his many enemies.
But poisoning of waters is the ordinary stratagem of war, nor has our great
Adversary forgot it, He knows that if the Fountain of Life be not spoiled,
his broken Cisterns of death will never be frequented, nor can he ever call
himself his Conqueror, whose heart stands out against him. It was the
complaint of Italy in the Civil Wars: That as often as Rome was set on, she
of necessity was the way of the War; but it fares worse with the Heart, For
as it is the first part of the man that lives, the last that dies; so it is the
first the Devil gives assault unto, and the last that he gives over; nay, were
there never a Devil, the Heart has anill Spirit of 'its own to trouble it.
For as some Boroughs with us boast of the Priui ledge, that they may hang and
draw within themselves: so is the heart of man such a Corporation, it may
execute it self within it self, without any Foreign, either Judge, or
Executioner. For should we go no further then the thought, might we not make
a shift to think our felues to hell? if we had neither hands, nor eyes, nor
feet, would not our hearts find the way thither? I know we all keep an
outward state with our sins, as Princes do with their mean Favorites, we
will not seem to acknowledge the^ abroad, yet we hugg, and play, and make
wantons of them in the inward Chambers of our hearts: as if ill thoughts at the
day of Indgement would weigh no more then the air or the Sun beams do in
the Scales against us: but at that trial we shall find, that without the mercy
of our God, every loose lascivious thought which we take delight in, shall be
as a sheet of Lead to help to sink us. Proclus tells us a story of Pollidorus
the Tyrant, who in a vision saw his Heart thrown into a boiling Caldron, where
after it had been a while tormented in the heat, it cried out of the Caldron to
him, Apollidore, I am the cause to thee of all this. Nor may we unjustly
fear, that their hearts will really cry out so, who now pass over all as in a
slumber, whose ill thoughts daily usher them to ill actions, whose ill actions
bring them in a circle back to ill thoughts again. For David found it out,
The wicked still walk the round; First, they act a sin, because the thought
has pleased them; then they think that sin over again, because the Act has
pleased them; by a damned Arithmatike multiplying one sin into a thousand.
How then, must this Fountain be so pure, may not the least straw, nor grain
of dust be thrown into it? Cannot the Heart so much as play with the Devil?
Are ill thoughts sin; Good thoughts that are not put in execution are not
rewarded, shall then the ill ones vnacted be condemned: Cannot the
distinctions of the Doctors of Rome excuse, when our great God shall examine,
may not we answer for our thoughts in the subtle Language of their School,
That some of the^ were but first first motions, therefore no sins; others
second first motions, therefore but venial sins. How the learned Papist may
euade from Hell with this, I know not: but we dull Protestants have no such
Art, we dare not venture on it. That all our inordinate thoughts are sin, is
our Confession, for all is our sorrow, of all is our repentance.

Nor is it a wonder that thoughts should be interpreted for deeds: For, St.
Chrisostom shows us, That as the Deed of the band is the out ward action, so
the Deed of the Heart is the thought. Ye have heard, says our Savior, Mat
5.37.28.
it was said by them of old, Thou shall not commit Adultery, but I say unto
you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery in his heart, already. For says Tertullian, The will it self is
imputed to it self, nor can the beart because the deed is undone, having done
the thought that it self could do, be excused.

As Hanibal therefore was wont to say of the Romans, that they could not be
overcome but in their own coun trey, So let us use this Stratagem in fighting
against our sin in the very heart, the country where it breeds It was St.
Bernards advice to his Sister, to mark well what God said of the Woman to the
Serpent, She shall bruise his head: He himself answers, The very head of the
Serpent is then truly said to be bruised, when sin is there stifled, where
it is first borne. Psalm. 137.9
He is a religious Herod, that kills such Insants, nor shall he want the name
of happy, that dashes these little ones against the Stone. The Ebrew has it,
against the Rock. A misery which concerns us all, cries St. Augustine, for
the Rock is Christ: Does the tender Conscience complain of young growing
sins, of disordered unruly thoughts, that break in upon us in the midst of
our prayers? Away with them to the Rock; That Rock has strength to bruise
them: does Lust kindle a flame in our hearts of loose Lascivious regitations?
Away with them to the Rock; that Rock has water to quench them. Do we find
Gods anger kindled against us for these sins? Away again to the Rock, that
Rock has holes to hide us in. Moses was in the cleft of the Rock when he saw
God passing by: but if we once get into the cleft of this Rock, God shall be
always passing by, but never pass, so he is ours for ever.

It can be neither time no^ labor lost, that is spent i^ clensing of the
Fountain, for if any one here would th^^ minute make it his work (...) God
would be well please^ (...) to look down from he^^^^ uen upon such
Laborers, whom his Son has already blessed, saying, Blessed are the clean in
heart; yet this is not enough: be thy heart as pure as Truth, as white as Snow,
or Innocence, if it be a Fountain sealed up, only a wishing, a thinking, or
intending heart; nay, I may add, if it be only a believing heart, if there be
no good works, no issues of Life from it, then flatter not thy self that there
is any life in it. Tertullian speaks of some in his time, That God well
satisfied, if they acknowledged him in their hearts, howeuer in their actions
they denied him: Inferring from hence, that they might sin without forfeit of
their Faith; As if (says he) they could commit a chaste Adultery, without
wrong to marriage; or Religiously poison their Father, without loss of their
Piety. But they that have the Art to sin, without forgoing of their Faith, may
have as strange a conueyance, no doubt, to be damned without loosing of their
pardon. We should hardly say, a good House were kept, where we never saw the
Chimney smoke, nor Alms given at the gate; nor can it be the thrift of a
good soul, not to dispense it has abroad: Howsoever our Clanculary concealed
Saints imagine, should the natural heart contract all the heat it had within
it self, neither it, nor the body could have a being. For as in Glass works
though the fire be still to be kept enclosed within the Furnace, yet there is
some vent, some breathing for it; So when the Spiritual Heart has entertained
a vestall fire of Faith in it; the hands cannot but be warmed with Charity,
the Tongue heated with Devotion, and the Eyes sparkling toward Heaven; All the
out-parts must feel the warmth of it; for it is well observed, that it is not
said, In it is life, but out of it come issues of life.

To shut up all with an observation of St. Cyrils, The Heart of man is like the
Rod of Moses, as long as he held it in his hand, it remained a Roll, but when
he threw it to the ground, it turned to be a Serpent: nay, a Dragon, the
Prince of Serpents, as Philo the Jew says. So the Heart of man as long as
there is fast hold of it, as long as man is the possessor, God the Guardian, it
continues still a Heart, but if our boisterous unruly sins once throw it to
the earth, it changes instantly, to be a Serpent. So let me beseech as many
as hear me to day, whose Consciences this minute tells them, that their Hearts
are turned into Serpents, and are now crawling on the earth, to stretch forth a
hand of sorrow, a hand of true repentance, to take them up again, in what
shape soever they appear. For he that was exalted on the Cross, as the
Serpent in the wilderness, shall turn those Serpents into Hearts again, their
gall and poison into Innocence, their sting of Death, into Issues of immortal
life.

Lay up therefore these Memorialls ye that love your Hearts, Lay them up ye
that do not, that you may love them. Remember the Heart is a Jewel of Gods
own cutting, the substance and fashion of it is heavenly. Remember it is the
Glass that God delights to look in, why should you break it and scatter it?
It is his Letter sent from Himself to Himself, why should you either blot, or
falsify; or not deliver it where it is directed? It is his Coin, his Meddale,
why should you undervalue it? It is his Sacrifice, his Temple, and his Altar,
why should you profane it? But if the Devil has any sin so powerful as to
strike out the memory of all this: Yet remember it is that Jewel, which Man
having forfeited, the Son of God was feign to dye for to redeem it. So that
he that dares loose his Heart again, dares crucify his God again. Remember
next, the pure Eyes of the Angels, that like the eyes of a wel-drawne Picture,
are fastened on you which way soever you turn. Remember the neuer-sleeping God
that is all Eye to be your Guardian, until that your wilful sins dismiss
him from you with all his Angels. Remember last of all, that this heavenly
watch is not set about dead Treasure. That as the celestial Orbs have a
motion of their own, though moved perpetually by the First Eternal Moouer:
So thought the Powers of Heaven be set to Guard you, yet this excuses not the
Guard you are to set upon your felues; for if a man keep not himself, God
does not keep him. Keep therefore your Hearts through all the watches of the
Night; from the twilight, to the crowing of the Cock; from the crowing of the
Cock to the dawning of the day; from the Mantle to the Winding Sheet; sheet;
from the Cradle, to ^he Grave. Let neither ill ^houghts pollute the Spring, nor
foul deeds the River; so shall there from thence come Issues of life, not
only the life of nature, which the worst men have, nor only the life of
Grace, which the Good have here, but the life of Glory, which the Saints have
in the world to come, Amen.


