decorative border

A Diet for the Christian soul, Constantly to be observed every day, that it
may always rejoice in the Lord.

printer's or publisher's device IN DOMINO CONFIDO

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1600.

bull on bridge CONSTANTIA ET LABOR

To the Reader.
CHristian reader, thou have here prescribed unto thee a Diet for the Soul,
which if thou with a faithful heart be careful to observe: It shall be a good
mean to co^uey thee safely through the troublesome and dangerous storms,
which do continually arise in the salt Sea of this world till thou come to the
haven of safety, which is the everlasting Kingdom of God. My desire is to
add a Preparatiue to this Diet, that it may make it more sauorie to those
whom God shall enable with his grace carefully to practice the same with
sincere hearts to come unto him. And that the rest which do it only of custom,
or to some other inordinate end, may be left more without excuse.

Now the Preparatiue which I add, is none other but such as God has appointed
to be mixed with every spiritual dish, that he will have set upon his table,
otherwise the meat will be so far from nourishing us, that it will turn to
our bane, and this Preparatiue is faith without which it is impossible that any
part of Gods ordinance should profit us. Read Heb. 4. 2. The word that they
heard profited not them because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heardit, yea without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. 6. These
are proofs sufficient, to show unto us the necessity of faith. Mine
exhortation therefore is, that thou look to thine heart, and take heed that
thou bring faith with thee, when thou entrest into the service of God, in any
part thereof, as it is here set down in this Diet, otherwise in using of it,
either thou do set thy self a work, or thou art procured thereunto by some
other man, but the Lord has no part in it, and therefore thou can hope for
no blessing upon thy labor, because those whom he does set a work by the
motion of his holy spirit, and outward ministry of his word: for that is
the ordinary mean whereby he does work our conversion. Iam. 1. 18. Such
when they do rightly enterprise any part of those duties, which here in this
treatise thou have rules of. First, they come unto it with fear and trembling,
because they see with the eyes of faith, how pure the Lord is, who can abide
none impuritie, and how vile and wretched they them selves are, whom God does
now summon to appear before him, and as they come in the feeling of their own
wretchedness, so also they come with greedy appetites to be taught of God,
and to be relieved at his hand, yea and they come also with hope, that they
shall be relieved; howsoever the same may seem small at the first, yet by
daily and continual exercise they do feel it to grow and increase, and so
receive comfort, because their hope is grounded upon the promises, and nothing
else, and this is to have the word mixed with faith in us, and this fruit will
come of it, for God does never set us a work upon the means, to seek for
mercy and grace at his hand, but he does give the thing also that we seek
for, because he is infinitely merciful. The sea is not fuller of water, nor
the Sun of light, then he is of mercy to all these that call upon him in
truth, be their sins never so great. And it is al one with him to pardon ten
thousand talents, as to forgive ten pence. He is as easily entreated to heal a
deadly wound, as to cure the prick of a pin. It is not the greatness of our
misery that does hinder this mercy, but a heart of unbelief, when w^e do
utterly distrust the same, God does many times forgive great and grievous
sins to those that do believe, when he does impart small sins be they
neue^ so small, to those that are void of faith: his children do know this,
and therefore are imboldned to seek unto him in their greatest aistresse; for
whom should the wife seek unto in her trouble but to her husband? and whom
should the child seek unto when he is grieved, but to his father? By faith
we know that God is our husband, and our Father, and therefore has commanded
us to call upon him in the time of need, nay, to speak more properly, he does
set us a work so to do by his holy spirit, whereby he does assure us also
that he will relieve our griefs, by ministering comfort unto us: but as for
those who set themselves a work without the Lord. It is either of custom to
serve the time, because they would not be contrary to their Prince, or else
for that they having knowledge, may be able to talk of it, and so seem to
others to be that they are not, or else they do it with a mind to merit by the
thing done, as if there were religion and holiness in the bare ceremony, and
as if it were a meritorious work to read, to hear, to pray, to med^ta^e, or
to perform any other part of Gods ordinance, be it never so vnfruitfullie and
barrenly passed over of them. Now any of these, though they take never so great
pains, yet shall not feel any fruit at all upon their labors, for they are
such as the Scripture speaks of, which are ever learning and never come to
the knowledge of the truth. If they who use the means may so vaunt of faith,
miss the mark of salua^ion, they who neglect the means, must needs fall into
damnation. Wherefore I do not dissuade any from the use of the means still,
but rather I advise all to use the mea^es still, yea and that more earnestly,
but with a better mind, and to build upon a better foundation, that so they may
receive better fruit from their labors, and more certain and sound comfort;
otherwise all their glory ing will vanish like smoke, and that which they seem
to have shall be taken from them like wise, and they left naked: what will it
boot them then, though their neighbors and all other men have still thought
well of them, and highly, commended their ways, if God himself do not
approve of them, but utterly reject them, and al their doings: for as we are
before the Lord, so we are in deed, and not as men do account of us, and
therefore let us in all things seek to approve our selves unto God who
searches the heart, and discerns the very secret cogitations guile cannot
be hid from him be it never so close, although we smooth it over with never
so many fair and goodly shows to the world-ward, yet the Lord can easily
find it out, and such shall be accounted of in his sight no better then
Hypocrites yea, and all their pretended serving of God, none other then the
sacrifice of fools, till the Lord of his infinite mercy do purge their hearts
by faith, because whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and therefore we have
great need to pray unto the Lord that he will increase our faith, that so both
we, and all that we do may be acceptable in his sight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, and Savior, in whom the Father is well pleased, even with those
who in themselves are wretched, and does freely admit them to the heavenly
banquet of his own ordinance, where they shall grow and in crease till they
come to his heavenly kingdom, when all the wicked and unbelieving shall be
shut out. And so an end.

A Diet for the Christian soul, con stanilie to be observed every day, that
it may always rejoice in the Lord.
IF the estate of most of us be suruaide: it will be found not far unlike a
very crasie and sickely body, which longer then it is ordered by a very
skillful diet, is always out of frame, if not full of pain. Even so men not
knowing or not precisely using any Christian direction, for the well ordering
of their whole life, are not long in any good temper, but fall into many evils:
which the longer they be line in, the more hardly, and with the more grief
will be cured. The truth hereof will easily appear.

First by looking back every one into his life between God and his Soul:
considering how empty he has been of all good graces, and stuffed with many
noisome thoughts and lusts, and how negligent, unprofitable and uncomfortable
he has been in all heavenly exercises.

Also what need there is of this direction will appear, by considering every
one his open conversation before men: how barren he has been in all good
works, so that few or none, are moved to bless God for him. And on the other
side, how apparently his corruption has broken out as foul spots in the face
of his profession, to the great dishonor of God, offense of many, and grief,
or else more hurt to his own soul. As for example. First, in open loathing of
the heavenly food. Secondly, in excessive delighte in all earthly pleasures.
Thirdly, in immoderate care for earthly commodities. Fourthly, in open pride.
Fifthly, in covetousness. Sixthly, in impaciencie: all apparent in word and deed.


All which is greatly increased, for that through deep security he has not
feared, but has been senceles of this dangerous estate.

These things being thus, it cannot be denied, but that it is high wisdom for
all, betimes both to inquire after such a skilful direction, as is approved to
be able, as such as is not grounded a right.

3 To prou^ke us to reuengement.

4 To make us grudge against our good God, etc.

Now to repel these mighty enemies. God has appo^nted us armor, and will
always succor us at our need, so as we fight still under his b^nner,
calling conti^ually upon his power, and using the means that are offered us by
his word.

We may see diverse that have a good zeal as far as can be judged: and yet it
shall be but a blast, it will not continue, and why? Because they be not fenced
against Satan, where let us put on this Armor of God, keeping it on fast, and
let us not hang it on a nail by the wall at any time, for it is certain we
cannot live in Gods obedience, and keep the way that he shows us but by
fighting. And if we fight without Armor, what shall become of us?

This Armor we find in the sixth Chapter to the Ephes^ans, 14 15. 16, and 17.
ver^es. And it is as follows. 1 The girdle of verity. 2 The breast plate of
righteousness. 3 The shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 4 The
shield of faith. 5 The helmet of salvation. 6 The sword of the spirit.


1 By the Girdle of ver^tie, is meant a sound heart, whereby the Apostle
condemns all hypocrisy, enioyning us to give our ^elues to the serving of
God, with a free heart, and a right meaning mind.

No marvel though the devil overcome us easily and steal upon us all kind of
ways unawares both Evening and Morning, and ever e minute. For where is this
soundnes which the apostle requires first of all?

2 By the Breastplate of righteousness is meant an holy life: so as we should
be resolved to deal up rightly in all our actions both before God and man.

3 By the Shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace is meant not only
skill in the Gospel, but also haste and valiancie. We should so take hold of the
peace of our God offered in the Gospel, as that we be prepared to endure any
hardness in the Christian course.

When we are trained in the doctrine of the Gospel, as we ought to be, then we
may walk safelye through the world, whilst we see the unbelievers snarled
in the world, and with pleasures and profits plunged over head and ears in
it, sinking themselves daily deeper and deeper in it.

For us there is but one only way to make us wade thorough this world, and
to attain to the kingdom of heaven which is to hauesuch instruction as is in
the Gospel, namely, that God having adopted us freely to be his children, will
not have us to dwell here beneath for ever, but that we should come unto him,
yea, even with all have and speed. For we are borne to an heavenly life.

And If we refuse not the succor that our God gives us, but rather make it
effectual, by enforcing our selves to withstand all evil, we shall have peace
in the midst of wa^re. And why? For the Gospel is the gospel of peace

This peace indeed does not discharge v^, of all care: yet this Christian care
which we o^ght to have shall be no impediment, but that we enter into the
b^tte^l freely with a steddie and well settled mind. For as much as God is on
our side, and will utter his mighty power in our defense, which consideration
ought to make us quiet, so as no such fear attach us, as may make us turn
head, or so disfurnish us of advise, but that the more we be pinched, the more
we fly unto our good God. Thus our care drives us to prayer, that we might
cry strongly to our God to luccour us, and to provide for all our needs which
he knows much better then we our selves do.

This is to be shod with the Gospel of peace.

4 By the shield of Faith is meant: Grace to app^ie the promises as a shield for
our defense, that so we may find our hearts comfortably p^rswaded of the
truth of Gods promises unto us, assuring our se^ues we shall teach from the
Lord all grace to help in time of need.

Faith and Gods word have such relation one to the other, as they cannot be
sundere^: for faith is nothing of ^tself f^rtherforth, then it is grounded upon
Gods word. And Gods word also profits us not, except we receive it by faith.

Faith thus grounded, has for the object thereof our Lord Jesus Christ, and it
is the only mean we have to fetch power from God to be preserved from Satan

This faith is our shield: whosoever shall make themselves shieldes of any other
thing that can be devised, to repulse Satan withal, they shall have but a
Spiders web, and Satan will but sport himself at such presumption: wherefore
let us learn to make faith our buckler, that is to say, when we mind to
enter into the battle, and to hold out in it: Let us consider, that God is our
father, because he has elected and chosen us for his children, of his own
infinite goodness. Seeing he has assured us that he will always be on our
side, and that he is greater then all the world, and that he has put us in
good and safe keeping, by ordaining our Lord Jesus Christ to be our sheepherd:
Let us gather all those promises together, and make a shield of them to set
before us when soever we be assailed, and let us defy the devil, because we
be in the protection of our God, who is of inuin cible power, and because our
Lord Jesus Christ has taken upon him the charge of our salvation, and
promised to be a faithful keeper of our souls, to the end.

1 If we be tempted with covetousness, because we be afraid least the
earth should fail us: let us remember God has taken upon him the charge to
nourish and sustain us. And therefore let us rest upon him, and ask our daily
bread at his hands. 2 If the devil labor to win us to whordome, let us call
to mind how Jesus Christ has incorporated us into himself, and made us his
own members to be all one with him. And shall we go rent our selves from
Christ, to make our selves the members of a filthy Harlot? God forbid. 3 Are
we provoked to gluttony? And why not? Has not God created victuals to our
use? Yes: But should we defile and overthrow the order that God has set, which
is, that we should be sustained by them, thereby to be directed to the
heavenly life? And shall we turn the thing to our hinderance that ought to be
our help. 4 Again, we are tempted with ambitition to glorify our our selves?
yea, but what example has our lord Jesus Christ set before us? How lowly? how
meekely did he bear himself? Moreover, if we cover to be great in this
world, we shall bec enemies to God, for he resists the proud so, as their
pride and presumption must needs be pulled down. Thus may we every way
beat back the darts of Satan by faith.


5 By the Helmet of salvation is meant our constant hope, to enjoy in due time
whatsoever GOD has promised, and therefore with boldness we lift up our
heads against all our enemies, looking for the full victory unto salvation.

6 By the sword of the spirit, is meant, the word of God: and let us assure our
selves that we have a good sword, when we can skill to apply Gods word to
our use. And (as above is showed) let us assure our selves that we have a good
shield, when we have faith which proceeds out of the word of God.

Now Christian Reader, that thou may keep this Armor fast upon thee, have
care to practice these rules following.

1 His first care in the morning must be that presently after rest, before the
mind be entangled with other thoughts, affections and cares, he awake with
God, and therefore that he suffer not his mind before meditation and prayer, to
be wandering after the world which is found a great quencher of grace the
whole day after.

But rather that he stir up the grace of God in him, by thinking on such
heavenly matters, as be most fit for the same.

As First, that shortly he must lie down in the dust, and part with whatsoever
de light he does here enjoy; that this may breed in him a contempt of the
world, and a longing after the life to come.

Secondly, that he consider, to what great preferment he is come by being
Gods child, that by the comfortable sight of this high prerogative, he may
cheer up his heart to all holy duties to God and man: resoluinge to deal
(without fraud) religiously and simply.

Thirdly, also that he consider his late preservation and other mercies
received from God with thankful remembrance of all, both earthly and (most
especially) heavenly blessings.

These meditations ended, he is in the fear of God to address himself to
offer up unto God his morning sacrifice of prayer, in such sort as may be
accepted, taking heed that in any case his prayer be hearty: and therein these
three principal parts are to be remembered.

First, Gods mercies bodily, and spiritual, with hearty thanks for the same.

Secondly, his sins, with hearty desire of pardon for them.

Thirdly, his necessities both of body and soul, with fervent request to be
relieved in all, both for himself, and others, so particularly as conveniently
may be.

Secondly, he is to watch over his thoughts, words and deeds all the day,
that evil may be kept out of them, preventing the occasion and tentation to
evil. And for such sins whereunto he is more prone then to others, he must
have more care to avoid them, and the prouocations, that were wont most to
prevail against him: oftener thinking on the foulness of those sins, and
waying the reasons that should kindle in him a detestation of them, using all
lawful remedies against them: And not to enterprise any kind of business
whatsoever, without hearty prayer to GOD in the name of Jesus Christ for the
obtaining of his holy Spirit and merciful protection.

Also he is to observe how sin dies and is weakened in him, and must be
careful to shun one sin as well as another, and must delight in the word
and worship of God, and in the fellowship of his Saints, and mourn and strive
against his sins, renewing his covenant with GOD for that end.

This watchfulnes and care will be found no more then needful, if we
consider,

First, among how many occasions and prouocations we walk.

Secondly, how shiftles we are to avoid them.

Thirdly, how our lusts and ill affections carry us head long unto evil: so
as we go about nothing but some one or other of them is in our way to molest us.

Fourthly, the great hurt that many godly minded have taken for want of this
watchfulnes, as Eve, Noah, David, etc.

A little diligent practice will so fill his heart with peace of conscience
(which is more of all true christians desired then any gain) that the labor
will be most pleasant, sweet, delightful and easy.

3 Thirdly he is faithfully and diligently to follow his lawful calling, yet
so that his diligence be no let from the service of God, and practicing the
helps in this direction set down. For we must so play the good husbands,
that we become not worldelings: and so we must look to our business, as we be
not careless of our brothers good We must use the world as though we used it
not, not lifting up our hearts when we prosper; nor casting them down when
we are crossed. And thus will the diligent (...) as are able to enform him, and
as often as he may, to seek opportunity to confer with such as fear God,
that he may both do and receive good. As the coals of fire lying together do
yield more heat and endure longer: so the servants of God receive mutual
comfort one of another: and do by their mutual love declare indeed, that they
are Gods children, 1. John, 3. 13. 14. Marvel not my Brethren though the world
hate you; we know that we are translated from death unto life, because we
love the Brethren, and he that loves not his Brother abides in death. In
which blessed sentence, note both an evident mark of the child of God, and
the reprobate. The Child of God loves Gods Children: the reprobate worldlinge
hates Gods children.

7 When at any time he finds himself to have failed in his duty to God: he
must take heed that he neither make slight reckoning of it, which hardens
the heart: nor yet that he too deeply be cast down by it, which much
discourageth a poor distressed soul from comfortable proceeding, but rather
speedily to reconcile himself to God, and so recovering himself to be made
more circumspect by his fall.

8 He is to take heed that al these duties be not made matters of course and
custom, without care to grow better thereby: for this is the subtlety of
Satan, to make men think, when they have performed outward obedience, it
suffices. God is a spirit, and therefore must be worshipped hart^lie and in
truth.

9 He is also to observe Gods blessings and chastisementes, that by both, his
heart may be drawn to thanks and requests, that so all the day as it were he
may walk with his gracious God.

10 He is to look well to his carriage in company, that he do no hurt by word
or example, nor take any from others: but contrariwise endeavor rather to do
good. If all the company be not of one mind, etc. then he is to wait for
fit occasion from their talk, to utter somewhat wisely to th'holding out of
unsavory talk, that attendance may be given to better, being wisely and
kindly offered. And to this purpose before he go into company, he is to think
of some matter that may be profitable for the company to which he goes.
Without this care it is better to attend upon family and charge at home, then
to frequente company. If the company be scornful or brutish, so as he can
have none opportunity to do good.

First, he is not to join with them in their idle talk, but to show apparent
dislike of it, by silence, countenance, etc.

Secondly, he is to break off company as soon as may be.

If he light upon such as think it an ouercharging of them always to be held
to this communication, he must have regard of their weakness, and must bring
them on so as he may best prevail with them. But not to make them think that
there is no talk allowed but of Scripture, when as it cannot be denide, but
men may talk of their trades, how to grow to more skill in them, etc. When
he comes in company, to deal about his affairs, or other men's matters, when
just occasion shall draw him thereto, he must so carry himself as may be
suitable to the other parts of his life, that there be no breking of his peace
with GOD, taking heed that he do not in any evil follow the fashion of other
men.

He is also in company to avoid as rocks, those common sins against the third
and ninth commandments. Let not God or any word or work of his be once
mentioned but with reverent fear. Let not any man be named but with love,
remembering that royal Law, Whatsoever men should do unto you do you the same
unto the^. Waying well these holy sentences of the 119. Psalm. 53. Fear is come
upon me for the wicked that forsake thy law. 63. I am companion of all them
that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. 97. Oh how love I thy law: it is my
meditation continually. 139. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because
they keep not thy Law. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked, because they
seek not thy statutes 158. I saw the transgressors, and was grieved because
they kept not thy word. The sweet and blessed spirit of GOD write these
sentences in our hearts, that we may Christianly behave (...) as well in
regard of health, as also behavior, which makes me the more willing to
describe it, for all men's easier apprehension.

When the stomach or ventricle has received the food, it locks it up
afterward, to heat and convert it into a kind of white matter, which being so
changed (according to his qualities) discends by degrees into the guts and
bowels, certain veins whereof do suck and draw the very purest and best
substance, and so do carry it to the Liver.

When it is gross and super^ (...)


