The praise of Brotherhood: OR. A description of Hoodes writ in Verse, not in
Prose
Showing which best becomes the Nose.

To the tune of Abington Fair.




TO Fashions strange the world is bent,
one fashion gives not al content,
For some with maskes there faces hide,
and some their breasts lay open wide.
Some go with curled locks of hair
and some fine hoods like hawks do were,
Then choice of hoodes I will disclose,
And show which best becomes the nose.
He that through storms and tempests does ride
has need of a hood his head for to hide,
To keep off each blast of the Northern wind
for to much cold comfort I know is unkind,
When tempests rise and winds do blow,
and sturdy storms their fury show,
A Close hood is good, when cold the wind blows,
Yet brotherhood best becomes the nose.
He that will have the world to his mind
must search well his wits new fashions to find.
And study new fangles to pleasure fond fools,
for wantons are willing to follow bad rules.
Deceit is unseemly it blindes the eyes,
plain-dealing is pleasing which fools do despise,
Keep peace in thy bosom, show love to thy foes,
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
For brotherhood most I must commend,
the virtue thereof so far does extend,
True love and peace and charity,
in brotherhood do hidden lie,
He that true brotherhood has possessed,
shall liu^ well beloved and die double blessed,
Great hopes there in I do repose
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
An days of old when I was but a boy,
then Brotherhood went for a fashion each day,
But brotherhood now is out of request
and other hoodes are accounted best,
For now strange tricks and trifles they use,
which makes the poor man to stand in a muse,
I do say no more then all the world knows,
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Priesthood is an order divine,
let them that attain it in glory so shine,
That poor men unlearned may find out the way
which leads unto Rest, that shall never decay,
This priesthood was unto the learned ordaynd,
O blessed is the man that true wisdom has gayn'd
To succor the needy and pray for his foes,
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Knighthood proceeds from honor and fame
when men try there Valor to win them a name
With undaunted force to fight in the field,
to purchase renown with sword and with shield:
He that fights in field with might and with main,
deserves well the honor of Knighthood to gain,
Thus poor men by Valor to honor have rose,
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
The Second Part
to (...)




Manhood I Will praise the best that I can,
for he that wants manhood is counted no man
And he that wants manners is counted an ass,
A dunce, or a fool, but for that let it pass.
Manhood is more then some men have possessed,
yet he that has manhood is a man at the least,
And a man is a man, where so ever he goes
Yet brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Woman-hood next I in order apply,
in good sooth gossipe, I Will tell you no lie,
A beautiful woman from woman-hood free,
is like a fair Image made of an old tree.
A modest woman is accounted wise
and a shameless woman is a grief to the eyes,
A woman that is shameless her shame will disclose
Then brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Neighborhood next does follow in rank
but men are not now so free and so frank,
So frank, and so free, So loving and kind,
for neighborhood now is quite worn out of mind
Each man for himself now, and God for us all:
for neighborhood now among men is but small,
Yea those that are friends live as if they were foes,
Though brotherhood best becomes the nose.
The French-hood is a fashion of old,
in France well respected as I have bin told
For it so well becomes the Crown,
that it is held in high renown,
Old women do think it is wonderful rare,
as if that none with them might compare,
But for all that I do depose,
that brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Yet cause the French-hood does make a fine show,
therefore I Will speak of it as much as I know,
For sure the French-hood much honor does gain,
it holds all the wit that comes in the braine^
Give love the French-hood and she will ap^eare
to look like a Lady all times of the year.
For hoods are deceitful which makes me suppose,
That brotherhood best becomes the nose.
Childhood, is a wonderful simple thing,
Yet time and old age more wisdom will br^
Yet some men in age are so Childish groan
as if that true manhood they had never kno^^
Let childhood alone for children to use,
and when they are old they will it refuse*
As a child grows in age so in wisdom he grows,
Yet brotherhood best becomes the nose.
But yet there is one hood which I have not expressed
and that is called fals-hood more worse then the rest,
For false-hood breeds folly in a^^ man's heart:
that does so unwisely from virtue depart
He that two faces bears under a hood,
his deeds are deceitful they cannot be withstood,
It will make true friends to be mortal foes,
Then brotherhood best becomes the nose.
I would that the world to love were inclind
that each man might have a brotherly mind,
For brotherhood then would come in request
and poor men find comfort which are much oppre^^
He that has purchased much wealth and much gold
and sets his poor brother to starve in the cold.
I respect such a friend but as one of my foes*
For brotherhood best becomes the nose.
I. D

FINIS.
Printed at London for R. Harper.


