A Letter which Monsieur Desdiguieres Constable of France, has sent to the
King his Master, to persuade him by pregnant Reasons to make Peace with the
Rochellers, and the other Protestants which live in his Dominions, and to show
how necessary it is that the King of France enter in league with the
Protestants and other Potentates, Princes and States of Christendom to make
war against Spain to hinder the King of Spain from the universal Monarchy
to which he aspireth.

The lading of two Hollandish Ships which are come from Porto Ricco, which
Town the Hollanders have taken in the West Indies.

The censure and condemnation of a Book (lately written by a Jesuit, De
Potestate Papa^) by the Court of Parliament, which has been since publicly
burned at Paris.

The strange death of Peter Cotton a Jesuit.

The new Admiraltie which is to be erected both in Spain and the subdued
Provinces of the Low Countries to the great hurt and damage of several
Potentates, Princes and States of Christendom, unless they look in good time
to themselves.

Printed for Mercurius Britanicus. 1626.

A Letter which Monsieur Desdiguieres Constable of France has sent to the King
his Master to persuade him by pregnant reasons to make peace with the
Rochellers, and the other Protestants which live in his Dominions, and to show
how necessary it is that the King of France enter in League with the
Protestants and other Potentates, Princes and States of Christendom to make
war against Spain, to hinder the King of Spain from the Universal
Monarchy to which he aspireth.
SIR,
THe Baron of Copet having informed me few days ago of the present state of
the affairs of Rochel, and Arsen^ the Extraordinary Ambassador which the
States have sent to your Majesty, having added to it the dispatch which I send
with this present, I have thought my self bound, both by reason of the
importance of the matter, and in regard of the affection which I have had
always to the good of your service, to supplicate and beseech your Majesty,
that you will be pleased to find good that I show unto you, with all the
respect I can, that although the obstinacy of this people is excessive, and
that it seems that nothing can be added to their hardness, your prudence may
nevertheless keep back the effects of the resolutions, which a just anger
has made you to (...), and make you to defer them till an other occasion, to
show the displeasure and dis^ontentment which you have conceived against them:
for I assure you that it is as true as the light shines, that if your Majesty
will (...) dissension to grow in your State, that he gives the game won to
the Spaniards, and opens unto them the gate to the Universal Monarchy. It
is you Sir that can hinder them from coming to it, and this same reason moves
all other powers of Christendom to rely upon yours: without the aid which
they have, and expect from you in this occasion, all their resistance is in
vain. And if according to the aim and scope of this common Enemy, the
domesticke occupation divert you from it, they shall be in danger to carry the
yoke which they shun, and your Majesty's self shall put your State in hand to
fall into great inconveniences. I write (...) this to excuse them in any
manner, ^^ose disobeisance has made them guilty, (...) for as much as
concerns the Rochellers, (...) not to condemn them with all the rigours of
the World. For it is certain that they have committed a crime, of which after
your Majesty, God has reserved the vengeance unto himself. For I hold Sir,
that they ought to acknowledge you absolutely, and with an obeisance without
any condition, and that they are bound to do unto you all endeavors of good,
and faithful subjects. But it is likewise certain, that as you are one of the
wisest Kings of the World, you may use in this matter your Royal prudence, and
practice this necessary course, which seems to be a part of the Royal
Functions. Now forasmuch as concerns your state, to kindle the war in the
same, is to open the gate unto the Spaniards, and (I beseech you Sir) doubt not
that they labor with all their power to increase it. The like causes have in
former times brought it into such confusions that the end of them has hardly
been seen after the expiration of fifty years: The same has at other times
caused all the disorders and mischiefs, which could not otherwise be remedied
then by the valor of the late king your Father. I doubt not but that amongst
them which have the honor to come near to your Majesty, there are some which
will labor to make suspect the advice and counsel which I give, and will
metamorphose my sincerity into a secret support of the Rebels. But I give
thanks unto God, that your Majesty will not be carried away with false
impressions, which others will conceive to the prejudice of your Majesty's
loyal servants. The time it self justifies enough that my counsel have no
other scope then your Majesty's service. But neither that which may he said to
disguise and disgrace my faithful intentions, nor that which may be invented
^w^ll minded persons, who labor to make me unprofitable and unserviceable,
shall ne^^^ (...) able to hinder me from giving your (...) to understand (as I
am bound) my (...) mind: And I shall not leave to protest (...) my conscience)
that such as will (...) your Majesty to bear arms against (...) and to kindle
the war, which will (...) become a general war, do neither w^ll ^^unsell
or serve your Majesty. For al^ it is believed, that it will come nei^^^^
^^ngued^ck nor in Guienne, the contra^^ (...) seen. And I am sure that your
Majesty knows that which is done in one of those Provinces: In another
occasion if they do not mend themselves, you shall always have the same
power, yea, (if it may so be spoken) you shall have better means, and it may
be that in the mean time they shall come to the acknowledgement of their
endeavors. Moreover, I may say that your Majesty having achieved with glory
the affairs of Italy, you may triumph at one time over two enemies; namely,
the ^omesticke and Foreign, in lieu that if you will rather expel the other,
then subdue these, you shall lose the present advantages which never had any of
all the Kings your Predecessors. It may please your Majesty to pardon me, and
to attribute the freedom of my discourse to the affection which I bear to
your Majesty. I expect your answer concerning this matter, and pray God that
he will replenish you with all manner of graces and favors.

Your Majesty's most humble most obeysant and most faithful subject, and
servant, DESDIGVIERES.
Turin the 24. of December 1625.
The lading of two Hollandish Ships, which are come from Porto Ricco with good
prises.
In the one Ship are twelve bags with 2400. Rials of eight.
1. bag with three pounds of Silver. 1. A Cross of Silver. 51. Chests with
Sugar. 40. Last, or eighty tons of Ginger. 12 Hides. 23. Chests with Tobacco.
6 Chests with Money of Brass. 6. Basins of Copper. ^. Chest with Copper.
In the other are
2200. Hides. 172. Bales of Ginger. 4. Double Chests of Sugar. 18. Iron Pieces
of Ordnance. 1. Barrel with steel. 2. Chests with Frankincense. 1600 Rials of
eight.


The new Admiralty which is to be erected both in Spain and the subdued
Provinces of the Low Countries, to the great hurt and damage of several
Potentates, Princes, and States of Christendom, unless it be timely prevented.
I.
SEeing that it is the mind and will of our gracious Lord and King, to use all
means, which may tend and serve to increase the traffic and trading betwixt
our Subjects of the kingdoms of Spain, and them of his Majesty's hereditary
Netherlands, intending to erect and augment thereby both the old and new
workmanships, and such as may yet be found out, and to further the sale of them
which shall be made in those Lands, which are under his subjection: As
likewise to hinder that the workmanships and merchandises of the Rebels be not
brought and sold in the aforementioned Lands of Spain by deceit, or any
color, or pretext whatsoever.

His Majesty has found good and fitting to ordain, that all the goods, wares,
manufactures and merchandises of these Lands, shall be laden in the ports of
the same, to be carried thence into Spain.

II. And to do this conveniently, and with more security, and that the goods
of Spain may in the same manner be brought into the Ports of the aforementioned
Lands which are under his Majesty's subjection; his Majesty has been pleased
to grant by a Patent (dated October. 4. 1624.) to his faithful subjects of these
Lands, both to them which dwell in Spain and here, that they may erect and make
a Company for trading and traffic, under the name and title of Admiralty.

III. That they shall have leave to arm, and set forth under the same name and
title of Admiralty, in the first beginning of it, the number of 24
men-of-warre, to serve them in the aforesaid trading and traffic.

IIII. In which ships only such shall have power to lade their goods, and none
else, as shall have contributed to the setting forth of them, and be enrolled
in the Company, or Admiralty* with this advantage, that the danger of the Sea
and enemy, shall be at the general charge of the Company, upon condition, that
the owners of the goods shall pay such a praemio or reward to the Company, as in
reason shall be appointed by common voices.

V. It is his Majesty's will, that all the manufactures which shall be laden or
embarked in these Lands, in the ships of the aforementioned Admiralty, ariuing
in Spain, shall be esteemed and received as free goods, and true manufactures
of these Lands which are under the subjection of his Majesty, so that in Spain
there shall not be made any search, inquiry, trouble or hindrance to them,
considering that the diligence and care which shall be taken in these Lands
shall be accounted sufficient to avoid all manner of deceit.

VI. The same shall likewise be observed in regard of all other wares and
merchandises, which shall here be laden in the aforementioned ships of the
Admiralty.

VII. And no manufactures of these lands which shall not be laden or embarked
in the Ports which are under his Majesty's subjection, but be sent through
other Lands, shall be admitted into Spain, but to the contrary, be arrested
and confiscated.

VIII. To aid this design, and to ease the said Admiralty of the charges of
the aforesaid ships, which it is to undergo, and to repair the damages and
losses which may now and then happen, his Majesty has consented that the
aforementioned Admiralty shall receive and take one in the hundred of all the
goods which shall either come in or go out of the ports of Andalusia, and of
the Kingdom of Granado, which shall either he carried Northwards, as namely
toward France, England, Flanders, East land, etc. or be brought thence into
the aforesaid ports of Spain.

IX. Which one in the hundred, amounts now (notwithstanding there is but
little trading to about 90000 Ducats per Annum, and may be augmented and
increased to 3. ^ the hundred* when the aforesaid Comp^ny (...) Admiralty shall
be settled within this (...)

X. Moreover, his Majesty gives to the (...) Admiralty forty thousand of
Ducats (...) the which sum, is to be found and p^^^ according to the content
of the said ^^^nt

XI. And the aforementioned Admiralty shall likewise have power to lay such a
taxation and charge upon the goods that shall be embarked in these Lands, as
shall be thought reasonable in consideration of the customs, charges, and
impositions which the same goods are to bear when they are sent through
France, etc.

XII. Also, the fraughts of all the goods, which shall be transported to what
place soever by the ships of the Admiralty, shall belong to the Company.

XIII. Besides all this, it is the intention of his majesty, to transport to
the said Admiraltie, by a contract the Merchandises called in Spvine,
Mercaderias de Rey, as namely, Salt, Spices, Cochineil, Wool, Hides, and
other, or such sort, and part as the Admiraltie shall think fit to accept of,
and all the gain that shall be made by them, shall be for the good of the
company of the Admiraltie.

XIIII. Which several parcells of reuennues and profits shall far exceed the
yearly charges for the maintenance of the aforementioned four and twenty
ships.

XV. Without making any account of the confiscations, and other advantages
which his Majesty is granting to the said Admiralty, by the said Grant, or
Patent. Among which advantages, it is no small thing to be accounted, that it
is his Majesty's will and desire, that his subjects of these his obeisant Lands,
and their children, which shall have part in this Company or Admiralty, shall
be preferred to all dignities and offices, which shall be vacant in these
Netherlands, and sort with their quality; if they shall demand them, and serve
them in their own persons.

XVI. In such manner, that they which cause themselves to be enrolled in this
Company may expect both profit and honor.

XVII. For the erecting of which the Netherlanders which are resident in Sivil,
have made a beginning, by forming of their College (or Court) and in setting
forth diverse good ships, for the service of the general Company.

XVIII. So that to bring this Admiralty to a full effect, and a beginning of
Navigations may be made, there wants nothing else, but ^at here in these Lands
there be made a Company of all such as will come into it, and have their part
and share therein, who may henceforth declare themselves, to the intent that
out of them may be chosen such a number as shall be necessary for the direction
and administration of the said Admiralty, which shall have her chief College
in the City of Antwerp.

XIX. Which Directors or Deputies shall with the consent of the Deputies that
are in Sivil, and after communication with the common participants in the
Company, ordain a form and manner how they may keep their correspondency,
and divide the profits of the said Company.

XX. This being done to the full contentment of every one, and a good order
made for the government of the said Admiralty, and not before, shall such
persons which will be declared as participants declare how much they will
contribute and lay in it, the which may not be less, but more then the sum of

(...)
