Londons Tempe, OR, The Field of Happiness. In which Field are planted several
Trees of Magnificence, State and Bewty, to Celebrate the Solemnity of the Right
Honorable James Campebell, At his Inauguration into the Honorable Office of
Praetorship, or Maioralty of London, on Thursday the 29 of October, 1629.

All the particular Inventions, for the Pageants, Shows of Triumph, both by
Water and land being here fully set down, At the sole Cost, and liberal
Charges of the Right worshipful Society of Ironmongers.

Written by THOMAS DEKKER.

Quando magis Dignos licuit Spectare Triumphos? coat of arms or blazon

To the Right honorable James Campe-bell, Lord Mayor of the most renouned City
of London.
Honorable Praetor:
THe Triumphs which these few leaves of paper, present to your view, (Albeit
their glories are but short-liued as glittering only for a day) Boldly show
their faces unto the eye of the world, as Servants attending on your Lordship
only to do you honor.

With much care, cost and curiosity are they brought forth; And, with exceeding
greatness of Love, a free handed bounty of their Purse, a Noble and generous
Alacrity of Spirit, have your worthy Fraternity, and much to be honored
Brotherhood of Ironmongers, bestowed them upon you.

It much winnes upon them, to have such a Chief; and you cannot but be glad to
have such a Society: By a free Election are you Londons Praetor; The Suffrages
of Commoners call you to your seat. A succession to the place, Takes you by
the hand, your Industry has met with Blessings, those blessings given you
ability, and that ability makes you fit for a Maiestrate.

Yet there is a music in your own bosom, whose strings being touchd yields
as harmonius a sound to you, as All these: And that is, to see your self heir
to that Patrician Dignity with which your Father was Invested. It was an honor
to him to wear that Robe of Scarlet, It it a double glory to you, in so short
an age to have his sword borne before you.

You have the voice of Senators breathing out your welcome, A confluence of
Grave Citizens, Adding state to your state, The acclamations of People,
vshering you along. Whilst I (the least part of this Triumphant day) spend such
sand as I have to help to fill up the hour glass, my Service ronning.

Attending on your Lordship Thomas Dekker.

Londons Tempe.
WEre it possible for a Man, in the Compass of a Day, to behold (as the Sun
does) All the Cities in the World, as if he went with Walking Beams about
him; That Man should never see in any Part of the year, Any City, so
Magnificently Adorned with All Sorts of Tryumphes, variety of Music, of
Bravery, of Bewty, of Feastings, of Civil (yet Rich) Ceremonies, with gallant
Lords and Ladies, and Thronges of People as London is enriched with, on the
first Day, that Her Great Lord (or Lord Mayor, for it is all one) Takes, That
Office upon him.

In former Ages, He was not Encompast with such Glories, No such Firmaments of
Stars were to be seen in Cheape-side: Thames drank no such Costly Healthes
to London, as he does Now. But as Troynouant spread in Fame, so our English
Kings, shined upon her with Favors.

In Those Homespun Times, They had no Collars of SS, no Mace, Sword, nor Cap
of Maintenance, These came by Degrees, as Additamenta Honoris, additions or
Ensigns of more Honor, Conferd by several Princes on this City: For, in the
time of Edward Confessor, the chief Ruler of the City was called Reeue,
Grieve, or Portreeue: The next to him in authority, Provost.

Then in the first of Richard 1. two Bayliffes carried the sway: This continued
till the ninth of King John, who by Letters Patents gave the Citizens power,
yearly to choose themselves a Lord Mayor, and two Sheriffs.

Then, King Henry 3. made the first Aldermen in London (yet the Name of
Ealdorman was known in the Saxons time, for Alwin in the reign of Edgar, was
Alderman of All England, that is to say, Chief Justice:) and those Aldermen of
London, had Rule then (as Now) over the Wards of the City, but were every
year changed, as the Shreiffes are in these days.

Then Edward 1. ordained that the Lord Mayor, should in the Kings absence, sit
in all Places within London, as Chief Justice; And that every Alderman that
had bin Lord Mayor, should be a Justice of Peace for London and Middlesex all
his life after.

Then, in the reign of Henry 7. Sr. John Shaw Goldsmith, being Lord Mayor,
caused the Aldermen to ride from the Guild Hall to the water side, when he went
to take his Oath at Westminster, (where before they Rode by land thither,) and
at his return to ride again to the Guild Hall, there to dine, all the
Kitchens, and other Offices there, Being built by Him: since which time, the
Feast has there bin kept: for before, it was either at Grocers Hall, or the
Merchantaylors.

Thus small Roots grow in time to Caedars, shallow streams, to rivers, and a
Hand of Government to be the strongest Arm in a Kingdom. Thus you see London
in her mean attire, then in Robes Maiestical; and sitting in that Pomp, cast
your Eye, upon those alluring Objects, which she her self Beholds with
Admiration.

The first.
The first Scaene is a Water-worke, presented by Oceanus, King of the Sea (from
whose Name the Universal Maine Sea is called the Ocean) He, to celebrate the
Ceremonies and Honors, due to this great Festival, and to show the world his
Marine Chariot, sits Triumphantly in the Vast (but Queint) shell of a silver
Scollup, Reyning in the heads of two wild Seahorses, proportioned to the life,
their maynes falling about their necks, shining with curles of gold.

On his head, which (as his Beard) is knotted, long, carelessly spread, and
white, is placd, a Diadem, whose Bottom, is a conceited Coronet of gold; The
middle over that, is a Coronet of silver Scollops, and on the top a fair
spreading branch of Corrall, interwouen thickly with Pearl. In his right hand,
a golden Trident, or three forked Scepter.

His habit is Antique, the stuff watchet, and silver: a mantle crossing his
body, with silver waves, Bases, and Buskins cut likewise at the top into silver
scollups. And in this language he congratulates his Lordship.

Oceanus his Specch.
THus Mounted, hither comes the King of waves,
Whose voice Charms roughest Billows into slaves,
Whose Foot, treades down their necks with as much Ease
As in my shelly Coach, I reyne up These.
Loud Echoes called me from my glittering Throne
To see the Noble Thamesis; -- A Son
To this my Queen and Me ((...)) whose Ear
Never Ieweld up such Music as sounds Here.
For, our vnfaddomd World, Roares out with None
But Horrid Sea Fights, Nauies Overthrown,
Islands halfe-drownd in Blood, Pirates pell mell,
Turks slavish tugging Oars, The Dunkerks Hell,
The Dutchmans Thunder, And the Spaniards Lightning,
To whom, the Sulphures Breath gives Heat and Heightning,
O! These are the Dire Tunes my Consort sings,
But here! old Them out shines the Beams of Kings.
This City Adds New Glories to Jove's Court.
And to All you, who to this Hall resort,
This (...) via (as a Path) is given,
Being P^l^d with Pearl, as that with Stars in heaven
I could (to ^w^ll my train) Becon the Rhine.
(But the wild Boar ha tusked up his vine.)
I could Swif^ Volga Call, whose curld head lies
On seven (...) pillowes, (But, in merchandizs
The Russian, him imployes)-I could to these
Call Ganges, Nilus, long haird Euphrates,
Tagus whose golden Hands claspe Lisbone walls,
Him could J call too, But what need these calls?
Were they all here, they would weep out there eyes,
Mad that new Troys high towers on tiptoe rize
To hit Heavens Roof: Mad, to see Thames this day
(For all his age) in wanton windinges Play,
Before his, new Grave Praetor, and before
These senators, Best fathers of the poor.
That Grand Canale, where (stately) once a year
A Fleet of bridal Gondoletts appear,
To marry with a golden Ring, (That's Hurld,
Into the sea) That minion of the world
Venice to Neptune,-A poor Lantscip is,
To these full Brauereis of Thamesis.
Go therefore up to Caeasars Court,-And claim
What honors there are left to Campe-bels name
As by disent, whilst we tow up a tide
Which shall run sweating up by you barges side:
That done, Time shall Oceanus Name Inroll,
For guarding You to Londons Capitol.
The second Presentation.
The Invention is a Proud swelling Sea, on whose Waves is borne up, a sea Lion,
as a proper and eminent Body, to Marshall in the following Triumphs; In
reguard it is one of the supporters of the East Indian Company, of which his
Lordship is free, and a great aduenturer. And these Marine creatures, are the
more fitly employed, In regard also, that his Lordship is Mayor of the Staple,
Governor of the French Company, and free of the East-land Company.

On this Lion (which is cut out of w^^d to the life) rides Tethys wife to
Oceanus, and Queen of the Sea; for why should the King of waves be in such a
glorious progress without his Queen, or she without him? They both therefore
twin themselves together to heighten these solemnities.

Her hair is long, and Disheuelled, on her head, an antique sea-tyre,
encompast with a Coronall of gold and pearl, her garments rich, and proper to
her quality, with a Taffaty mantle fringed with silver crossing her body. Her
right hand, supporting a large streamer, in which are the Lord Majors arms.

On each side of this Lion, attend a Mermaid, and Merman, holding two Banners,
with the Arms of the two New Shrieues, several fishes swimming as it were
about the border. And these two having dispatched on the water, hasten to
advance themselves on Land.

The third.
The third show is an Estridge, cut out of timber to the life, biting a
horse-shoe. On this Bird rides an Indian boy, holding in one hand a long
Tobacco pipe, in the other a dart. His attire is proper to the Country.

At the four angels of the square where the Estridg stands, are placed a
Turk, and a Persian. A pikeman and a Musketeere.

The fourth.
The fourth presentation is called the Lemnian Forge. In it are Vulcan, the
Smith of Lemnos, with his servants (the Cyclopes) whose names are Pyracmon,
Brontes and Sceropes, working at the Anuile Their habit are wast coats, and
lether approns: their hair black and shaggy, in knotted curles.

A fire is seen in the Forge, Bellows blowing, some filing, some at other
works; Thunder and Lightning on occasion. As the Smiths are at work, they
sing in praise of Iron, the Anuile and Hammer: by the concordant strokes and
soundes of which, Tuballcayne became the first inuentor of Music.

The Song.
Brave Jron! Brave Hammer! from your sound,
The Art of Music has her Ground,
On the Anuile, Thou keep'st Time,
Thy Knick-a-knock is a smithes Best Chyme,
Yet Thwick a-Thwack,
Thwick, Thwac-a-Thwac-Thwac,
Make our Brawny sinews Crack,
Then Pit a-pat-pat, pit-a-pat-pat,
Till thickest bars be beaten flat.
We shoe the Horses of the Sun,
Harness the Dragons of the Moon,
Forge Cupids Quiver, Bow, and Arrows,
And our Dames Coach, that's drawn with Sparrowes.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
Jove's Roaring Cannons, and his Rammers,
We beat out with our Lemnian Hammers,
Mars his Gauntlet, Helm and Spear,
And Gorgon Shield are all made here.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
The Grate which (shut) the Day out-barres,
Those golden studdes which nail the stars,
The Globes-case, and the Axletree,
Who can Hammer these but We.
Till thwick-a-thwack, etc.
A Warming-panne to heat Earth's bed,
Lying ith frozen Zone halfe-dead,
Hob-nailes to serve the Man ith Moon,
And Sparrow-bils to cloute Pan's shoone.
Whose work but ours? Till thwic-a-thwack, etc,
Venus Kettles, Pots and Pens,
We make, or else she Brawles and Bannes,
Tongues, Shouels, Andirons have their places,
Else she scratches all our faces.
Till thick a-thwack, etc.
Cupid sits in one place of this Forge; on his head a curld yellow hair, his
eyes hid in Lawne, a Bow and Quiver, his armor. Wings at his back; his body
in light colors, a changeable silk mantle crossing it: Golden and silver
arrows, are ever and anon reached up to him, which he shootes upward into the
air, and is still supplied with more from the Forge.

On the top sits Jove, in a rich Antique habit, a long white reverend hair on
his head, a beard long and curld: A Mace of Triple fire in his hand burning who
calling to Vulcan, This language passes between them. Jove. Ho Vulcan.

Vul. Stop your Hammers: what ails Jove?
We are making arrows for my slip-string son,
Here, -- reach him those two dozen; I must now
A golden handle make for my wifes fann:
Work my sine Smugges.

Jove First hear; you shall not play,
The Fates would scold should you keep Holiday.

Vul. What then?

Iov. Command thy Brawny fisted slaves to sweat
At the Anuile, and to dust their Hammers beat,
To stuff with Thunderbolts Jove's Armoryes,
For Vices (mountaine-like) in black heaps rize,
My sinews crack to fell them: -- Idiot pride
Stalks upon stilts, -- Ambition, by her side,
Climbing to catch Stars, breaks her neck in the fall,
The Gallant Roares, -- Roarers drink oaths and gall,
The Beggar curses, -- Avarice eats gold
Yet never is filled, -- Learning's awrangling scold,
War has a Fatal hand, -- Peace, whorish Eyes,
Shall not Jove, beat down such Impieties?
Is It not high time, Is It not true Justice then
(Vulcan) for thee, and thy tough Hammer-men
To heat thy Anuile, -- and blow fires to flames
To burnethese Broodes, who kill even with their Names?

Vul. Yes Jove, it is more then Time.

Jove. And what helps this, but Iron! O then, how high
Shall this Great Troy, Text up the Memory
Of you her Noble Praetor, and tall Those
(Your worthy Brotherhood) through whose Care goes
That rare, rich prize of Iron, to the whole Land,
Iron! far more worth then Tagus golden Sand.
Iron! best of Metals! Pride of Minerals!
Heart of the Earth! Hand of the World, which falls
Heavy when it strikes home: -- By Irons strong Charms
Ryots lie bound: -- War stops her rough Allarmes
Iron; Earthquakes strikes in Foes: -- Knits friends in love,
Iron's that maine Hinge, on which the World does move:
No Kingdoms Globe can turn, Even, Smooth and Round,
But that his Axletree in Iron is found:
For, Armies wanting Iron, are puffes of wind,
And, but for Iron, who thrones of peace would mind?
Were there no gold nor silver in the land:
Yet Navigations (which on Jron does stand)
Could fetch it in -- Gold's Darling to the Sun,
But Iron, his hardy Boy, by whom is done
More than the The Other dare: The Merchants Gates
By Iron, bar out theeuish assassinates:
Iron is the Shopkeepers both Lock and Kay,
What are your Course of Guard, when Iron's away?
How would the Cornepricke up her golden Ears:
But that Iron Plough shares, all the labor bears
In Earth's strange Midwiffry? Brave Jron! what praise
Deserves it? More it is beat, more it obayes;
The more it suffers: More it smoothes offense:
In Drudgery, it shines with Patience.
This Fellowship, was then with Judging Eyes
United to the twelve great Companies:
It being far more Worthy, than to Fill
A File inferior; -- You's the Sunne's guilt Hill:
On toot: Jove guardes you on: Cyclopes a Ring
Make with your Hammers, to whose Music Sing.

The Fifth.
The fifth Presentation is called Londons Tempe, or The Field of Happiness;
thereby redecting upon the name of Campe-bell, or Le Beu Champe, A fair and
glorious field. It is an arbor, supported by 4 Great Terms: On the 4 Angles,
or corners over the Terms, are placed 4 Pendants with arms in them.

It is round about furnished with trees and flowers: the upper part with
several fruits: Intimating that as London is the best-stored Garden in the
Kingdom for Plants, Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and such like; So, on this day it
is the most glorious City in the Christian world.

And therefore Tytan (one of the names of the Sun) in all his splendour, with
Flora, Ceres, Pomona, Ver and Estas, are seated in this Tempe; on the top of
all stands a Lions head, being the Lord Majors Crest.

Tytan being the Speaker, does in this language court his Lordship to attention.

Tytan his Specch.
WElcome (great Praetor) Now hear Tytan speak,
Whose beams to Crown this Day, through Clouds thus Break
My coach of beaten gold is set aside,
My Horses to Ambrosiall mangers tied,
Why is this done? why leave I mine own Sphere?
But here to circle You, for a whole Year:
Embrace then Tytans Counsel: -- Now so Guide
The Chariot of your sway in a Just Pace,
That All (to come hereafter) may with Pride,
Say, None like you did Noblier quit the Place*
Lower than Now you are in Fame, Never fall,
Note me (the Sun) who in my Noone Careere,
Renders a shadow, short or None at all,
And so, since Honors Zodiac is your sphaere,
A shrub to you must be the tallest Pine,
On poor and rich you Equally must shine.
This if you Do, my Arms shall ever spread
About those Rooms you Feast in: -- From her head
Flora, her garlands pluck (being Queen of Flowers)
To dress your Parlors up like summers Bowers:
Ceres, lay golden sheaffes on your full board,
With fruit you from Pomona shall be sloard,
Whilst Ver and Estas (Spring and Summer) Drive
From this your Tempe, Winter, till he Diue
In The frozen Zone, and Tytans Radiant shield
Guard Campe-bels Beuch ampe, Londons fairest field.
The sixth and last Presentation.
This is called Apollo's palace: because 7. persons representing the 7
liberal Sciences are richly Inthroned in this City. Those 7 are in loose
roabes of several colors, with mantles according, and holding in their hands
Escutcheons, with Emblemes in them proper to every one quality.

The body of this work is supported by 12 silver Columns. At the four angles
of it, four Pendants play with the Wind. On the top is erected a square Tower,
supported by four golden Columes. In every square is presented the Embosd
antique head of an Emperor, figuring the 4. Monarchs of the world, and in
them, pointing at four Kingdoms.

Apollo is the chief person; on his head a garland of bays; In his hand a
Lute; Some Hypercriticall Censurer perhaps, will ask, why having Tytan, I
should bring in Apollo, sithence they both are names proper to the Sun. But
the youngest Nouice in Poetry can answer for me, that the Sun when he shines
in heaven is called Tytan, but being on Earth (as he is here) we call him
Apollo. Thus therefore Apollo tunes his voice.

Apoloes speech.
APollo never stuck in Admiration till now: My Delphos is remouen hither; my
Oracles are spoken here: Here the Sages utter their wisdom, Here the Sybels
their divine verses.

I see Senators this day in Scarlet riding to the Capitol, and to morrow the
same men riding up and down the field in Armors Gowned Citizens, and Warlike
Gowne-men. The Gunne here gives place, and the own takes the upper hand. The
Gown and the Gunne march in one File together.

Happy King that has such people, happy Land in such a King! Happy Praetor so
graced with Honors! Happy Senators so obayed by Citizens. And happy Citizens
that can command such Triumphs.

Good in your full glories: whilst Apollo, and these Mistresses of the Learned
Sciences, waft you to that Honorable shore; whither Time bids you hasten to
arrive.

A speech at Night, at taken leave of his Lordship at his Gate, by Oceans.
AFter the glorious troubles of this day,
Night bids you welcome home, -- Night who does lay
All pomp, all Triumphs, by,-state, now desends,
Here or Officious Train their service ends,
And yet not all, for see: the golden Sun,
Albeiu he had his days work fully done,
Sits up above his hour, and does his best
To keep the stars from lighting you to rest,
Him will I take along to lay his head
In Tethys lape, Peace therefore Guard your bedds:
In your years Zediacke may you fairly move,
Shined on by Angels, blessed with goodness love.
Thus much, his own worth, cries up the Workman (M. Gerard Chrismas) for his
Invention, that all the pieces were exact, and set forth lively, with much
Cost. And this year, gives one Remarkable Note to after times, that all the
Barges followed one another (every Company in their degree) in a Stately and
Maiesticall order. This being the Invention of a Noble Citizen, one of the
Captains of the City.

FJNJS.

