A CROWN FOR A CONQUEROR; AND TOO LATE TO CALL BACK YESTERDAY.

Two Poems, The one Divine, the other Moral.

By R. D.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his
shop, under Saint Martins Church, at Ludgate* 163^.

A CROWN FOR A CONQVEROVR: Made apparent in these words.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, REV. 20. 12.
BEhold? why Lord, is thy approach so rare,
That it deserves an Ecce? Ecces are
Vshers to admirable things. It Is true,
If I (with spirit-ravish'd John) take view,
Of th^e in thy celestial seat, thy sight
Is clear as Crystal, as the Sardin bright,
And rounded with a rainbow; twice 12 seats,
(Whereon the shine of thy fair brightness beats,)
Bearing these four and twenty Elders, all
With white roabes, Palms, and Crowns Imperial,
This sure deserves an Ecce. Or at thy last
And general coming Lord, when thou shall cast
A^^onishment on all things, and descend
With an Earth-shaking shout, when hills shall bend
And rocks dissolve at the Archangels voice,
And towers tremble at the Trumpets noise,
This sure deserves an Ecce. But my Lord,
(Give Dust and Ashes leave to speak, afford
My frailey so much favor) when thou doom'st
A sick Saint on his bed to death, and comst
In a particular judgment, Lord unfold
Where lies this word of wonder then, BEHOLD?
Christ. When your sick saint lies gasping, and his soul,
Forsaken of the senses, when his soul
And deadly foe trumphs in h^s temptations,
And with distrustsand frequent perturbations
Buffets his panting faith, and shows his sins
Had in their circumstances, and begins
To blast the beauty of his hope, from thence,
Implying that soul pierceing consequence
Of condign justice, from my deserved rod,
And asks your sick saint, where is now thy God?
Then, and even then, when his fear shaken faith,
(Save, sighs and greanes) no plea for pardon has;
Even when your says does faint, and in this throng
Of fiery trials, can but truly long
For my salvation, then when Giants war
Against his weckenesse, when the heathen are
Within my heritage his heart, and he
Looking upon his right hand, but can see
None that will pity him, and on his left,
But none compassionates, seeming bereft
Of help and hope, then gets his trembling soul
To me his God, right humbly, and does roll
If self upon me, as the Heart does pant
After the brook so does his says, being faint
With these hot pursuits, thirst for me his God.
Then lay I by my exercising rod,
And lend my staff of comfort, this bruised reed
I break not, but support; whilst he does bleed,
I bring him balm from Gilead: tell me you
That modestly, yet questioned, is there not due,
To such great grace an Ecce? Even when
Your Saint lies languagelesse, being left of men,
Tempted within, his faith, even like to dye,
Does sore-sicke of a spiritual ague lie*
When nature fails, and conscience gives his doom,
God has forgot thee, then BEHOLD I come.
J Come.
TWo ways I come: yet as in fields we see
Diverse paths pointed upon one style be;
So, every way I to mine own appear,
Tends to Eternity. First I draw near
By my sweet Spirit, the noblest company
That can be kept, and the deep mystery
Of your sick Saints salvation he makes plain,
Teaching him more then is whole life could attain.
When I bid death go, then I come indeed,
And show him my salvation, then the good speed,
Of Faith and Patience comes, and makes him cry,
Oh large rewa^d for little industry.
Quickly.
But drink set in a thirsty laborers eye,
And not in's reach, augments his misery.
Or say a friend do bring it, each delay
Lessens the courtesy, and makes more way
To tothers torment: therefore (thou sad soul
That sighst to be dissolved, and do condole
My long thought stay) BEHOLD! as I with grace
Do come, so I come QVICKLY, I whose face
The Builders spat on, I the refusd stone,
(Their scourge,) will be to thee a Savior shown.
Christian. O wounded Master! now I know it is thee
Eagle-eyed faith informs me, she does see
The wide wound in thy side, thy holy head
Thrust through with thorns, when al thy body bled.
Comst thou dear master? comst thou quickly too?
Look soul, what he, for whom thou have sighd does do!
He comes, and he comes for thee, fairly greet him,
It is the Bridegroom, soul, go forth and me^t him.
And my reward is with me.
The world says still, The more haste, the worse speed,
Haste makes no waste with me; what was decreed,
To guerdon thy sharp sufferings, I have not
Sent by a swifter convoy, nor forgot.
As I come quickly, so, Behold; I bring
My reward with me, Triumph for suffering.
Christian.
Thy reward Lord? it is thine yet, but for me
Thou broughtst it sure, if thine, it is mine, for we
Were long since troth plight to each other wrong,
I sing else of thee in the sweet Love-songe.
There I protest in a truth all divine,
I my beloveds am, and he is mine.
But (my hearts noble Master) what may it be
Thou calst here thy Reward? Me thinks I see
In thy white, liberal hand a Crown, and set
With seven celestial stones (none counterfeit.)
Bearing these names, Election, Creation,
Redemption, and that middle Iemme Vocation.
Sanctification, Justification, and
Glorification. These seven stones do stand
About this Crown more glorious then the stars
And this is their Reward, die in thy wars.
For me this crown? oh what sweet pains I prove!
Grace gives the Wound, and I lie sick of Love.
Alas Lord, my unworthiness!
Christ. Forbear.
Though you to Heaven might pass through humble tears
Yet in Me all your worthiness is come
Before my Father. I have given in the sum
Of all your sufferings, all your sighs, your tears,
Your gracious groanings, your faith-vanquisht fears;
Your prayers, your alms, your earning bowels, when
You Have known me hungry, in poor helpelesse men.
Your pious acts, which shall preserve your name
Sweet as a perfume in the mouth of Fame.
What think you this (summed up in heaven) will be?
Truly the Total is Eternity.
Have you not heard of one Onesimus.
Paul did but write for him, I will speak thus
For you my dear one, Father I beseech
Thy Mercy for this sinner. Let my speech Phile-

Be prevalent, as with him was my word,
Which unto Faith begot him: yet afford
Me audience Holy Father; in times past
He was unprofitable, but this last
Part of his life (full of sincerity)
Was fruitful to the faithful and to me.
It Was for a season he went from thee sure,
That thou for ever might receive him; Cure
His wounded conscience, and accept him now,
Not as a servant LORD, to him allow,
The liberty of a beloved Son.
Oh righteous Father! if this Saint has run
In areares with thee, if be owe thee ought,
Put it to my accounts, for I have bought
Him highly, yet that thou sustain no loss,
Dear Father, score his debt upon my Cross.
Thus will I speak for him whom sin casts down,
Thus plead his Cause to whom I give this Crown.
Christian. But Lord, before I of this grace be sped, Admit my Faith fail, then
I lose the head, (down, Should wear this wreath, faith beats all enemies And
overcomes the world, to such this Crown By promise appertains.


Christ. With patience sit, I that keep it for thee, keep thee for it.


Christian. Then I receive it with all due regard, Not as my merit (Lord) but
thy reward.


FINIS.
TOO LATE TO CALL BACK YESTERDAY.

AND, TOMORROW COMES NOT YET.

The words fancied in a DIALOGVE, supposed between A LOVER AND THE DAY.

By R. D.

NOLI ALTVM (...) printer's device of Elizabeth Purslowe

LONDON Printed by E.P. for Francis Constable 163^.

TO MY NOBLE FRIENDS, Mr RICHARD ROBINSON, And Mr MICHAEL BOWYER.
THese Poems (true and Noble Friends) being some expense of my time at Sea, I
have thus habited, to present them as my true love to you on the Land. In one
morning J present you with two poems. They are Virgins that never before kissed
the Press, yet now come ready pressed to kiss your hands. J have phrased them
rather with a native familiarity, then an impertinent Elegancy, least by
disregulating Art, J had made nature monstrous. Yet where the dignity of the
subject duly invites a higher-valued language, J have (to my ability)
endeavored a redemption. Were I versd in the trick of flattery, I should have
Decked my dedication with some protestations of your worthiness and my love But
I suppose honest faithfulness rather blemished then embellishedwith those
adulterated beauties; Favor me to read this Messenger of my love; and more,
to Accept it as the fruits of those fair respects in which (as J ever was) I
am always,

At your commandment a servant, ROB. DAVENPORT.

TOO LATE TO CALL BACK YESTERDAY; AND TOMORROW COMES NOT YET.
He yesterday a Lover was,
Tomorrow comes to Age,
He calls, both fail: toward Heaven today
He points his pilgrimage.
Lover HO! yesterday!

Yester. Who calls?

Lover. A Lover.

Yester. Why?

Lover. Dear yesterday come back.

Yester. Lover not I,

I dare not so transgress against times glass,

Lover One word -- but one word

Yester. Not one: let me pass.
By the Dewes that decked thy locks,
By the Herds, and by the Flocks,
By Times often Wel-taken Lock.
By the Swallow, Cy the Coke
That told the Ploughman thy approach,
And that the Sun was taking Coach,
By the Dainty-languag'd Lark.
By every thing that hates the Dark,
Good yesterday come back.
By thy fair and lovely Face,
And by the Sun which gave that grace
Sweet Yesterday come back.

Yest. What should I do?

Lov. I gave my Mistress vows, nay and tears to;
Bring them all back, for (oh sad truth to say!)
She seemed true then, I find her false Today.

Yester-Day. What Is this to me? their griefs they past cure find,
Who (to give love eyes) strike their Reason blind.

Lov. I stained thy fair face with a foul sin, bring
But that then back.

Yest. Fool! hope for no such thing.
Go grieve, go weep; and let thy teare-stain'd face
Court Mercy, and beget thee new to grace.
For, to repent is nere too late, all say.
But it is Too late to call back yesterday.

Lov. Why then (my blinded Reason to restore)
I Will leave to Love, and love to sin no more.

TOMORROW COMES NOT YET.

Lov. Since then yesterday is gone,

Tomorrow! wing thee, haste, come on.

To-M. I must not look Today in the face.

Lov. Yet good Tomorrow mend thy pace.

To-M. I dare not.

Lov. Why?

To-M. If I too swiftly pass,
I press Times sands too hard, and break his glass.

Lov. By my Hopes to thee extended.
By the Fears of men condemned.
By the Joys thou briug'st along.
By the Griefs that with thee throng.
By the promised meetings made.
By the money thou't see paid.
By their gladness that receive it.
By their sadness that do hear it.
By thosweet Maids languishings
To whose beds thine Evening brings
Kind husbands, Tomorrow make haste.

To-Mo. Why?

Lov. Shall I tell thee merrily?
With thee my lands come to my hands,
and sommes of money store.
With thee I Will laugh, caper and quaffe,
and never mind a Mistrisse more.

To-Mo. This hasts not me. I must perforce refuse thee
Better not see, then see me and abuse me.

Lov. Why then To-Morow make a friendly have,
And my wild, rough, old WILL I will new cast.
I, that Today am practiced in the trade
Of sin, I will Tomorrow be new made.
Therefore Tomorrow make have.

To-Mo. Thus some say,
Who are found worse Tomorrow then Today.
When Verbalists subdue our easy trust,
We plough in sand, and write our hopes in dust.
Dissembler cease; swift vows we soon forget,
Repent Today Tomorrow comes not yet.

Lov. Why then (to shun succession of my sorrow)
I Will be new made Today, yet mend Tomorrow.

TODAY WHILE I MAY.

Lov. Well met Today. Why such great have?

Today. To please
The long^ng eyes of the Antipodes.
Yesterday is their Day, in joy and sorrow.
And I, thatam thy Day, I am their Morrow.
The round faced world is looked on by us three,
I pursue Yesterday, Tomorrow me.

Lo. Yet good Today do not so swiftly slide.
By the causes this Day tried.
By thy beauty And. by all.
Thy dainty Deckings. By the fall
Of thy sweet fertile showers. And by
Thy again unclouded eye.
By the Birds that sing thy grace.
By the winds that fan thy face,
By thy four and twenty steps.
By thy minutes active leapes,
By my intended goodness. And
By times strickt-observed sand.
Since it is too late, as all men say,
To call back gadding yesterday.
And since Tomorrow comes not yet,
To my pain a period set.
Being left alone to thee,
Good Today stay, be kind and pity me.

To D. And why, important pleader, should I stay?

Lover I feel a noble change methinkes to day,
My souls dear Lover calls for me his choice,
And I desire to day to hear his voice.
Enlarge not then my griefs by thy neglect,
But let my high cause court thy kind respect.

To D. This stops not me, Farewell, I must away.
Lovers call for me past America.

Love. Why then dear lover of my soul,
(Since I cannot times control)
Seek thy sheep, lost in this worlds brackey ground,
Seek him that does desire to be found.

Christ. Why wooest thou me? have sinners hope to speed?

Lov. True Lord, a sinner, yet a broken Kneed.

Christ. Thy life is spotted, foul, and black as night

Lov. True Master, but thy life was virgin white.
By thy Love my hearts Delight.
By thy un-match'd excellence.
By thy victorious Patience.
By thy comely silence, when
Thou (my God) were skorn'd of men.
By that sweet, and saving look
Thou did cast back on Peter's Book
Me in thy mercy. Let thy grace abound.
Seek him, that does desire to be found.

Chr. Tell me oh thou for whom I bled, (I see
A Majesty in thy Humility)
And therefore tell me my lost sheep, be true,
And tell me where thou feed'st. A tear or two
Will bring thee back. Or, if thou art gone astray,
I Will send A voice behind thee, that shall say
This is the, way walk in it.

Lov. I am not in
Thy SPICIE GARDEN, but a Sea of sin.
I feed not Lord amongst the LILLIES, No;
I feast with mine own follies. Since it is so
That YESTERDAY I was lost in this ground,
And being not sure TOMORROW to be found;
Dear Master, and good Shepherd; mind thy gains,
Find me TODAY, and take me for thy pains.

FINIS.

