Other thus it is: or thus it should be.
Classical pediment
THe golden world is now come again,
God is known, believed, loved, and otheyed:
True doctrine is taught, and false exyled clean,
Sin is mortified, all vice is decayed.
Peace does take place, all wars be delayed,
Youth is brought up in learning vertuouslye:
Common wealth does flourish, poverty has aid,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Kings and Princes, do Gods laws advance,
Justice and equity also, they do maintain:
They love peace, they hate war and variaunce,
Vice they suppress, and virtue cause to reign.
To get learning and knowledge, they take great pain
They make good Jaws, and see them kept justly:
To defend their cuntries, great travel they sustain,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Maiestrates and officers, each one in their degree,
Give good ensample of obedience and living:
For the common wealth also, they take great study,
They execute justice justly, in every kind of thing.
To the poor poverty, they be good and loving,
The wylfull they restrain from their iniquity:
To the humble and good, they be gentle and benign,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Bishops and Ministers, do themselves apply,
Sincerely to preach Gods holy law and Gospel:
According to their doctrine, they live virtuously,
In hospitality, and alms deed, they greatly excel.
They give good example, for other to do well,
They be chaste, and sobre, and full of humility:
They study the Scriptures, all vice they do expel,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Judges that sit in judgment, matters for to hear
Be so uncorrupte, that no bribes they will take:
Till they hear both parties, they stop the one ear,
By the law deliberately, the cases they debate.
By evidence and witnesses, the truth they out beat
Falsehod they fetter, but right they do set free:
Just judgment they give, none can entreat,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Justices Gentlemen, peace do maintain.
The Queens laws and statures, they see executed:
Contention and variaunce, they do subdue clean,
The uppressour they punish, the naughty is rebuked.
The sturdy they correct, the poor be refreshed,
They live on their lands, rented reasonably:
Matters before them, be justly and soon ended,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Mayours and Bayliffes, and all other officers,
Of Cities, Boroughes, and of Towns corporate:
They study such decrees, and such godly orders,
That the people be well ruled. Treat pain they take
For the common weal. Tumult and debate
They destroy. But they encreace godly unity:
They cause plenty by prudence, dearth they abate,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
All Lawyers do persuade their clients to agree,
Rather then at the law, to spend out their money:
If they will not, they search their case profoundly,
And therein they proceed, without fraud or delay,
They bring it to judgment, or to some godly stay,
If they promise their clientes, they perform justly:
They take reasonable fees for their pains always,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
The Commons fear God, and obey the Queen,
They come to hear Gods wurd, and together pray:
Disobedience in no case, is now no more seen,
Contention they hate, they love peace always.
Every one is content, to live as he may,
The rich help the poor, yea and that gladly:
The poor be content, and for them do pray,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Parents do bring up their children very godly,
Children obey their elders, and follow their advice:
Husbands love their wives, and they them heartily
Women be sober and gentle, neither proud nor nice.
Servants be faithful, they need no warning twice,
to virtue and learning, youth gives all their study:
If any fall in decay, he is helped again to arice,
Other thus it is, or thus it should be.
Al Subjects faithfully, pray for their Queen,
That God may endue her Royal heart always:
With faith, fear, and love, before him to be seen,
And for her honorable counsel they humbly pray.
That good laws and statutes, set forth they may,
To the wealth of the realm, and communaltie:
That the queen may rule well, and they truly obey,
Amen. God grant that so it may be.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London without Aldersgate, in little Britain by Alexander Lacy.


