Saint GEORGE, and the DRAGON, ANGLICE, MERCURIUS POETICUS:
To the Tune of, The Old Souldjour of the Queens, etc.
NEws, News: -- Here Is the Occurrences: and a new Mercurius:
A Dialogue betwixt Haslerigg the Bafled, and Arthur the Furious:
With Iretons readings upon Legitimate, and Spurious,
Proving that a Saint may be the Son of a Whore; for the satisfaction of the
Curious,
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea, Libera nos Domine.
Here Is the true reason of the Cities Infatuation:
Ireton has made it Drunk with the Cup of Abomination:
That is, -- the Cup of the Whore, after the Geneva Interpretation:
Which, with the Juice of Titchburn's Grapes, must needs cause Intoxication.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Whipper whipt-by a Friend to George, that whipped Jack, that
whipped, the Breech,
That whippd the Nation, as long as it could stand over it: -- After which
It was it self Re^jerk'd, by the sage Author of this Speech:
Methinks a Rump should go as well with a Scotch spur, as with a Switch.
From a Rump, etc.
This Rump has many a Rotten and unruly Member:
Give the General the Oath, cries one; -- (but his Conscience being a little
tender,)
I Will Abjure you, with a Horse-pox, quoth George; -- and make you remember
The 'Leaventh of February, longer than the Fifth of November.
From a Rump, etc.
With that -- Monk leaves (in Rump assembled) -- the Three Estates.
But oh, -- how the Citizens hugged him for breaking down their Gates,
For Tearing up their Post^, and Chains, and for Clapping up their Mates,
(When they saw, that he brought them Plasters for their broken Pates.)
From a Rump, etc.
In truth, this Rufle put the Town in great disorder;
Some Knaves (in Office) smiled, -- expecting 'twould go further;
But at the last -- my Life on it, George is no Rumper, -- said the Recorder:
For there never was either Honest man, or Monk of that Order.
From a Rump, etc.
And so it proved, for Gentlemen, says the General, I Will make you amends:
Our Greeting was a little untoward, but we'll part Friends,
A little time shall show you which way my Design tends,
And that, besides the good of Church and State, I have no other ends.
From a Rump, etc.
His Excellence had no sooner passed this Declaration and Promise,
But in steps Secretary Scot, -- the Rump's man Thomas,
With Luke, their lame Evangelist -- (the Devil keep 'um from us,)
To show Monk what precious Members of Church and State the Bumm has.
From a Rump, etc.
And now comes the Supplication of the Members under the Rod,
Nay, My Lord, (cries the Brewers Clerk) -- good my Lord, -- for the love of
God,
Consider your self, us, -- and this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad;
Don't leave us, -- but George gave him a Shrugg, instead of a Nodd.
From a Rump, etc.
This mortal Silence was followed with a most hideous Noise
Of Free-Parliament Bells, and Rump-confounding Boys:
Crying, Gueld the Rogues, Singe their Tails, -- when with a low Voice,
Fire and Sword, by this Light, cries Tom, let us look to our Toys.
From a Rump, etc.
Never were wretched Members in so sad a Plight:
Some were Broyld, -- some Toasted, -- others Burnt outright.
Nay, against Rumps, so Pittylesse was their Rage, and Spite,
That not a Citizen would kiss his Wife that Night.
From a Rump, etc.
By this time, Death, and Hell appeared in the ghastly Looks
Of Scot, and Robinson; (those Legislative Rocks)
And it must needs put the Rump most damnably off the Hooks,
To see, that when God has sent meat, the Devil should send Cooks.
From a Rump, etc.
But Providence, their old friend, brought these Saints off, at Last,
And through the Pikes, and the Flames, un-dis-membred they past,
Although (God wot) with many struglings, and much Have.
(For -- Members, -- or no Members, was but a measuring Cast)
From a Rump, etc.
Being come to Whitehall; -- there is the disinal moan:
Let Monk be damned, cries Arthur; in a Terrible tone:
That Traitor: -- and those Cuckoldly Rogues that set him on.
(But, though the Knight Spits Blood, it is observed that he Draws none)
From a Rump, etc.
The Plague Bawle you, cries Harry Martin, you have brought us to this
condition,
You must be canting, and be Pox'd, -- with your Bare-bones Petition,
And take in that Bull-headed, splay-footed Member of the Circumcision,
That Bacon-sac'd Jew, Corbet: that son of Perdition.
From a Rump, etc.
Then in steps Driv'lin^ Mounson, to t^ke up the Squabble:
That Lord; which first taught the use of the Wooden Dagger, and Ladle,
He, -- that out does Jack Pudding, at a Custard, or a Caudle:
And were the Best Fooll in Europe, but that he wants a Bauble.
From a Rump, etc.
More was said, to little Purpose: the next news, is -- a Declaration
From the Rump; for a Frees State, according to the Covenant of the Nation,
And a Frees Parliament, under Dath, and Qualification,
Where none shall be Elect, but Members of Reprobation.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Tail Firk'd; a Piece acted lately with great applause,
With a Plea for the Prerogative Breech, and the Good Old Cause:
Proving, that Rumps, and Members are antienter than Laws:
And that a Bumme Divided, is never the worse for the Flawes.
From a Rump, etc.
Bue all things have their Period, and Fate,
An Act of Parliament dissolves a Rump of State:
Members grow weak; and Tails themselves run out of Date:
And yet thou shall not Die; (Dear Breech) thy Fame I Will celebrate.
From a Rump, etc.
Here lies a Pack of Saints, that did their Souls, and Country Sell
For Dirt; The Devil was their good Lord; him they served well;
By his Advice, they Stood, and Acted: and by his President they Fell,
(Like Lucifer) making but one step betwixt Heaven, and Hell.
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea, Liberasti nos Domine.
FINIS.

