AN ABRIDGMENT OF Military Discipline, For the Use of His Majesty's Forces in
the Kingdom of Scotland.

By His Majesty's special Command.

royal blazon or coat of arms I R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686.

WHITEHALL, April 30. 1686.
THis is the Book of Exercise, Ordered to be Printed, as the Rule for
Exercising His Majesty's Forces in His Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.

MELFORT.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF Military Discipline, For the use of His Majesty's Forces in
the Kingdom of Scotland.
WHen a Regiment or several Companies are Commanded to draw out, It is
necessary that the Major and Adjutant (or at least the Adjutant) be there to
give each Company its due Post. The eldest on the Right, the second on the
Left, so till the Youngest come into the Center. And all Companies (and Bodies
of Men) are to draw up at first at the same Order they march at, both in Rank
and File, the single Companies observing to leave room for the Sargeants and
Drums to stand on the Right and Left of each Company.

Before you form your Battalions, remember always to draw out the odd Men from
every Company, Forming a Rank in Opposition at Fifty Paces distance from the
Head of each Company, thereby to have no broken Files, which is much the better
and quicker way to complete your Files, then after your Battalions are formed.

When your Companies are thus disposed, the most ready way to Form a Battalion,
is by these words of Command.

Have a care to Form the Battalion.

Musketeers to the Right and Left outward.

Pikes to the Right and Left inwards.

March, interchanging Ground.

When Pikes and Musketeers Interchange Ground the first Rank of Pikes pass
before the first Rank of Musketeers. And it is always to be observed, That
(after any Command for moving) no Man stir before the Word of Command, March,
be given, thereby to make them all move together.

When they have thus changed Ground, they are not to Face to their Leaders till
the word of Command be so given. At which time they are then in Battalia, but
at close Order in File. And now it is to be observed that the Officers are no
more limited to their particular Companies, but are all concerned in the whole.
He that Commands, is to see how many Sargeants there are present, and dispose
of them in this following manner, Viz. If a Battalion consist of Eight, or Ten
Companies, or more; And the Companies have each Two Sargeants, and Three
Corporals, (who are designed to do Sargeants Duty) It is necessary to place two
on each Rank to the Right and Left, and the rest in the Rear; But if the number
of Sargeants be fewer, then there can be but one to each Rank, on the Right and
Left: The remainder always to be in the Rear, making a Rank parallel to the
Soldiers at Three Paces distance from the last Rank.

The Sargeants being placed in this manner: The Drums are to be disposed of,
one half on the Right, and the other on the Left, Ranging directly with the
first Rank of the Soldiers, unless there be many Drums, and the Ground
Straight; And then they are to be formed into Two Ranks, on the Right and Left,
to range with the Two first Ranks of the Soldiers; And they are always to have
their Drums slung, unless Commanded to the contrary.

The Hoboys to be on the Right of the Drums, which are on the Right of the
Battalion, ranged in the same Rank with them.

The Commission-Officers are to take their Posts at the head of the Battalion
as the Colors are drawn. But the more particular placing of the Officers will
be directed hereafter.

Now it is to be observed, That though the Files are still at their close
Order, the Ranks are to have their Distance of Twelve large Feet, which the
Sargeants are to be very diligent and active to see kept very even.

The Officer in Chief is to place himself before the Center of the Pikes, about
forty Paces from them, the better to observe what is done; And that he may be
more easily understood by the whole Body. He is to be on Horseback.

The Words of Command are to be given leisurely, that the Soldiers may have
time to perform the Exercise without confusion. And above all, Silence is to be
kept very strictly. And the first Word of Command before you begin the
Exercise, is Silence.

When every thing is thus disposed, The next Word of Command is Files, Open to
the Right ((...) Le^t) to your Order. March.

At which Word every individual man turns to the Hand named, and after a little
pause, t^^ Sergeants on the Flank lead t^^ Ranks (which are the^ Files directly
forward, as slow as pos^ble, by the least Steps they (...) make, with their
Halberts A^vanced, the Iron upwards; observing always for a Rule, To mind the
Front, that is, If they move to the Right, every man is to observe his Left
hand man. And if they move to the Left, his Right hand man.

As Soon as the last man but one of the first Rank stirs his Foot, They are to
be commanded all to Halt. And no man is to stir after that Word.

In this manner of Opening of Files, no man is to stir till his ^eader be Four
foot from him; and then to move and keep at that Distance, which will make them
Three foot distance from ^ach other, when Faced to the Proper Front.

As Soon as they are commanded to Halt, The next Word of Command is To your
Leader.

The Captains and Lieutenants are to carry their Pikes Comported always when
they move to the Right or Left, and the Colors to be Advanced. The Sargeants
are to be very mindful to keep the Ranks even, and at Twelve large feet
distance, and the Files at Three. And for the better keeping Files straight
(after they are Opened to their Order) every man is to look to his Right and
Left hand man, and to see that he has an equal distance from both, especially
the File, leaders, by whom all the rest are governed.

The next thing is to Draw the Officers from the Front of the Battalion to the
Rere, which is done by these Words of Command: Have a Care of the Exercise.

At which Word of Command the Musketeers are to pull off their Right hand
Gloves, and put them under their Girdles.

Officers, take your Posts of Exercise in the Rere. March. Which is to be done
by the Officers Facing to the Right about, The Captains marching at a good
round pace in one Rank and the Lieutenants and Colors in another, Two paces
behind the Captains, who as well as the Lieutenants are to carry their Pikes
Advanced.

When they are come into the Rere, the Lieutenants and Ensigns are to be in
one Rank, Eight paces from the Sargeants, And the Lieutenants and Ensigns
Eight. The Captains being from the last Rank of Soldiers Thirteen paces, and
the Lieutenants and Colors Eleven.

At the same Word of Command or Signal for the Officers to take their Posts of
Exercise in the Rere, Six Sergeants of those that are Posted in the Rere are to
March through the Intervals of the Files into the Front and Post themselves
Forty six paces from the first Rank of Soldiers, that is, Six paces advanced
before the Commander in Chief, where they are to Range themselves so as to make
a parallel Line with the Battalion, and to keep the Front clear and
undisturbed. And at the same Word of Command, the Pikemen are to join their
Left hands to their pikes even with their Shoulders.

Now the Musketeers being Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, Silence being
Commanded, and none to Speak but the Officer in Chief, He is to proceed as
follows.

Order your Pikes.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right about.

As you were.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left about.

As you were.

Exercise of the Fire-Lock.
Musketeers, Have a Care to the Exercise, and carry your Arms well.

Lay your Right hands on your Muskets

Poize your Muskets.

Rest your Muskets.

Cock your Muskets.

Guard your Muskets.

Present.

Fire.

Recover your Arms.

Half-bend your Muskets.

Clean your Pans.

Handle your Primers.

Prime,

Shut your Pans.

Blow off your loose Corns

Cast about to Charge.

Handle your Chargers

Open them with your Teeth.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth your Scowrers.

Shorten them to an Inch.

Charge with Bullet.

Ram down Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scowrers.

Shorten them to a handful.

Return your Scowrer.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Order your Muskets.

Pikemen take heed.

Advance your Pikes.

To the Front. Charge.

To the Right. Charge.

To the Right. Charge.

To the Right. Charge.

To the Right. Charge.

To the Right about, Charge.

As you were. Charge.

To the Left. Charge.

To the Left. Charge.

To the Left. Charge.

To the Left. Charge.

To the Left about. Charge.

As you were. Charge.

Advance your Pikes.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Charge to the Front.

As you were.

Charge to the Right

As you were.

Charge to the Right about.

As you were.

Charge to the Left.

As you were.

Charge to the Left about.

As you were.

Port.

Comport.

Charge to the Front.

Trail.

Charge as you were.

Advance your Pikes.

Musketeers take heed.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Musketeers make ready.

At which time the Musketeers are to perform distinctly every Posture of the
Musket together, and being ready, (which is understood to be Cockt,) they are
to guard them with their Thumb on the Cocks, and to bring up their Muskets
straight before them, their left hands the height of their mouths.

And the Pikemen at the same Word of Command (Make ready) are to bring their
Pikes straight before them also to the Recover, their left hands the height of
their mouths. Both Pikemen and Musketeers always observing whenever they Recover
their Arms before them, t^ bring their right heels to their le^^ insteps. And
when the Pike^ Charge, and the Muskets Rest, t^ fall back with their right feet
in (...) direct Line. The Pikemen and Musketeers are to take care to bring down
their Pikes and Musk^ets together very quick, especially the Pikes with a jerk,
as i^ they were to strike with them, Observing to bring the Pikes down at a
convenient distance from one another breasts to prevent clattering, and to
close them to their breasts after they are Charged. They must also observe to
bring them up straight before them as quick before they turn, which keeps the
Arms from clashing one against another.

In all Facings the Soldiers must keep their Left Heels very firm and fixed.

Charge

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right about Charge.

As you were Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left about Charge.

As you were Charge.

Recover your Arms.

Half-bend your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

At which time the Pikem^ are to bring their Pikes from ^ing Recovered before
them their Right Thighs to their A^vance.

Poise your Muskets. At which word of Comma^^ the Pikmen are to join the Left
Hands to their Pikes ev^^ with their Shoulders.

Order your Arms.

Pikes to your inside Orde^

Lay down your Arms.

Quit your Arms.

To the Right about. March.

When they are Clear of the Officers in the Rere they are to disperse, and at
the Beat of Dru^^ to draw their Swords and run to their Arms with an Huzza,
observing to keep the points of their Swords upright.

Return your Swords.

Handle your Arms.

Order your Arms.

Pikes to your Outside Order.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Advance your Pikes.

Officers, take your Posts at the Head of the Battalion. March.

At which time the Officers are to March back in the same Method to the Front
of the Battalion as they went from it. The Six Sargeants likewise that Advance
from the Rere, are to return the there to their Posts.

Memorandum, At any time whatever, when the Soldiers have laid down their Arms
and quitted them, upon Beating the Drums they are all to draw their Swords and
run to their Arms with an^ Huzza.

Observing always, to keep the points of their Swords upright for fear of
mischief.

The Exercise of a Battalion having Match-Lock Muskets.
The Musketeers being Shouldered and the Pikes Advanced.

Have a Care of the Exercise. At which time the Musketeers are to pull off
their Right hand Gloves and put them under their Girdles.

Officers, take your Posts of Exercise in the Rere. March. At which word of
Command the Pikemen are to join their Left hands to their Pikes even with the
top of their Shoulders.

Order your Pikes.

Lay down your Matches.

To the Right. Four times.

To the Right about.

As you were.

To the Left. Four time^

To the Left about.

As you were.

Lay your Right hands o^ your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Rest your Muskets.

Handle your Match.

Blow your Match.

Cock and try your Match^

Guard your Pans. Bringing your Mu^kets Recovered before you.

Blow your Match.

Present, and open your Pans.

Fire.

Recover your Arms.

Return your Match.

Clean your Pans.

Handle your Primers.

Prime.

Shut your Pans.

Blow off your loose Corns.

Cast about to Charge.

Handle your Chargers.

Open them with your teeth.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth your Scowrers.

Shorten them to an Inch.

Charge with Bullet.

Ram down Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scowrers.

Shorten them to a handful.

Return your Scowrers.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Order your Muskets.

Then follows the Exercise of the Pike being exactly the same with that
before in the Exercise of the Fire-Lock.

Exercise of the Pike, and Match-Lock-Musket together.
Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Musketeers, make ready.

At which time the Musketeers must leisurely and distinctly perform every
Posture of the Musket together, and being ready they bring up their Muskets
straight before them, with their Two Fore-fingers guarding their Pans, the
height of their Mouths, and bringing their Right Heels to their Left Insteps.
The Pikmen at the same word of Command (Make ready) are to bring their Pikes
before them to their Recover, Their Right Heels also to their Left Insteps, the
But-end of their Pikes in the Palm of their Hands, and are to Charge as the
Musketeers Rest their Arms, and Face as the Musketeers Face.

Charge

To the Right Charge. Four times

To the Right about. Charge

As you were Charge.

To the Left Charge. Four times

To the Left about. Charge.

As you were Charge.

Recover your Arms.

Return your Match.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

At which time the Pikemen bring their Pikes to the Advance from the Recover.

Poise your Muskets. At which time the Pikemen join their Left Hands to their
Pikes even with the top of their Shoulders.

Order your Arms.

Pikes, to your Inside Order.

Lay down your Arms.

Quit your Arms.

To the Right about.

March.

As Soon as clear of the Officers the Rere, They are to disperse, upon the Drums
Beating the Preparative, They are all to draw their Swords and run to their
Arms with an Huzza, Carrying the points of their Swords upright. And when they
come to their Arms, they are to stand with their Swords Poised before them as
they do their Muskets.

Return your Swords.

Handle your Arms.

Order your Arms.

Pikes to your Outside Order.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Advance your Pikes.

Take up your Match.

Officers, take your Posts at the Head of the Battalion.

March.

Directions for the Postures i^ Exercising the Fire-Lock Musket.
In Exercise both of Pike an^ Musket, the feet are to be at (...) moderate
distance: for if they a^ too wide asunder, or too near together, it weakens;
And in the^^ Exercise they must be sure to kee^ the left heel fast, and to set
the^^ feet right, or else they can never handle their Arms as they ought.

Lay your right hand on your Musket. Turn the Barrel toward you, the Lock
uppermost; and lay your right hand (your fingers extended) just behind the
lock, close the Butt-end of your Musket to your shoulder, that the Muzzels may
be all of a height.

Poise your Musket. Grasp your Musket hard, facing to the Right with a quick
motion upon your left heel, keeping your Musket directly before you, the height
of your Crevat, your right elbow on your side, your feet neither too near, nor
at too great a distance; but so, that by turning the point of your left toe to
the front, and that of your right as you face, your left heel being exactly
against the middle of your right foot, you are in the posture for resting,
which is the reason of Facing to the Right, that you may be in a readier
p^sture to rest; but when you inte^^ to Shoulder, or Order from Poi^ you keep
faced to the Front. At that the Soldiers may never m^ take, they are to take it
for a g^neral Rule, That they are ne^ to face to the Right in Poising, (...)
when the Word of Command given before to lay their rig^^ hands on their
Muskets. At a^ times when they Poise, they a^ to keep their Muskets direct
before their noses, but not (...) arms end extended, but to let the right
elbows rest upon their b^dies, which makes the Muske^ more on a direct Line,
and (...) much easier for the men to ho^^ them.

Rest your Musket. Let your Musket sink down to your left hand, that arm
hanging as low as may be without stooping with your body, and receive the
Musket into it just where the Scowrer enters into the Stock; Be sure your hand
touch no part of the barrel; the Musket is to be held but a little sloping from
perpendicular half a foot from your side. Be sure to let your left arm hang
down free as low as you can without stooping (and not hugg your Musket up above
your waste as was used formerly) keeping the right hand upon your Musket behind
the lock, your singers extended.

Cock your Musket. Place your right Thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers
behind the Trigger, and with the help of closing it to your thigh, you cock it,
keeping it still rested with your thumb upon the Cock.

Guard your Musket. Keeping your Thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers behind
the Trigger, you bring up your Musket with a very quick motion straight before
you to the Recover, your left hand as high as your mouth, about half a foot
from it without stooping. Let not your Musket sink, but keep it at the height:
Always observing when they bring up their Muskets before, (which is Recovering
the Musket) to bring their right heels to their left insteps; And be sure to
have a care of tossing the Muzzel of the Musket backwards, but keep it straight
upright perpendicular.

Present. Fall back with your Right foot, so that the left heel be against the
middle of it, raising the Butt-end of your Musket to your shoulder; That is,
between your breast and your right shoulder, which locks it fast; but little of
the Butt-end to appear above the shoulder, your right elbow not at all, or very
little higher then your Piece, having your fingers ready to pull the Trigger,
y^ must bend your left knee, an^ keep the right very stiff, you^ Piece must be
levelled breast high, and no higher.

Fire. Let them be sure to draw the^^ Trigger at one motion, keeping their
bodies very steddie, ta^king aim and their Muskets fa^^ to their shoulders,
till they have the Word of Command to Recover their Arms.

Recover your Arms. Sink the Butt-end of your Musket till you hold it
perpendicular in both hands, the left hand as high as your mouth, and the right
under the Cock. Bring up your Musket always (when you recover it before you)
with a very quick motion, bringing up the right heel to the left instep.

Half-bend your Musket. Falling back with the right leg^ Rest your Muskets
together, and laying their right Thumbs upon the Cock, and their fingers behind
their Triggers, with the help of closing them to their thighs, they Half-bend,
which done, they place their right hands behind the Lock, keeping them rested,
their fingers extended.

Clean your Pan. Pressing the ball of your thumb into your Pan, you wi^^ it;
having done that, you ho^ your right hand behind the Lo^ again of your Musket,
that eve^^ Posture may appear the better.

Handle your Primer. The great end of it to t^^ back of your hand, between yo^^
thumb and forefinger, your an^ backwards.

Prime. At which time they level the^^ Muskets to be exactly upon a^ Line, not
one Muzzel highe^ then another, putting in a proportionable quantity of Powder
at the side of the Pan, and not on the top, keeping their left toes directly to
the front.

Shut your Pan. With your two first fingers, At this Word Casting back your
Primer, bring up your right heel to your left instep, and your Musket straight
up before you, recovered with the Barrel toward you, your left hand always as
high as your mouth, and with a very quick motion; your Thumb on the top of the
steel.

Blow off your Loose Corns. Be sure to blow all together at one strong blast,
bringing your Pan up to your mouth, standing upright, and not putting your
mouth down to your Pan. Cast out your arms after your blast, not letting your
Muske^ sink from the Posture 'twas i^ before.

Cast about to Charge. You advance with your Righ^ Leg turning your Musket the
Barrel downwards, so bringing i^ to your Left side a little back war^ in your
Left hand, be sure none of your fingers touch the Barrel. The Right foot is to
have the To^ directly to the Front as if yo^ were to Fence, your Right hee^
being over against the middle of the Left foot, ballancing your Muskets in the
Left hand, the Muzzels directly to the proper Front half a foot from your
body all of a height, and your Right hand joined to the Muzzel of your
Muskets, your Thumb ex^ended to the side of the Barrel.

Handle your Charger. With a full Grip hold it even with the Muzzel of your
Musket about an Inch from it underneath your Musket.

Open it with your Teeth. Bring it up to your Mouth standing upright with your
Head and not to bring your Head down to it: As Soon as you have done this, bring
the Charger within an Inch of the Muzzel underneath, as before, and Cover the
Mouth of your Charger with the Ball of your Thumb.

Charge with Powder. When you have put the Powder into the Barrel, you hold
your Charger again underneath your Musket as before.

Draw forth your Scowrer. You are to let fall your Charger and turn your Hand,
your little finger next the Muzzle and draw it at Three Motions, being drawn,
dart it, That is, hold it level the height of your Eye, your Arm extended.

Shorten it to an Inch. Turn the great end of your Scowrer toward you, and
slip your Hand till without an Inch of the End, letting it rest against your
Body a little below your Right breast sloped all of a height.

Charge with Bullet. Take the Bullet out of your Mouth putting it into the
Barrel and then put the great End of the Scowrer after it just into the Muzzel
of the Piece, and so stand till the next word of Command.

Ram down Powder and Ball. With a full Grasp, your Thumb and Forefinger from
the Muzzel, your Thumb on the top of the Scowrer, keeping a handful of the
Scowrer in your Hand.

Withdraw your Scowrer. Turn your Hand, your Thumb^ and Forefinger toward the
Muzzel, and when your Scowrer is clear, which is to be done at Three Motions,
dart again as before.

Shorten it to a Handful. Turn the small end of your Scowrer to your Breast and
slip your Hand till within an Handful of the end of it, holding it to your
Body, a little below your Right breast sloped till the word of Command.

Return your Scowrer. Replace it in the Stock of your Musket pressing it down
with your Thumb, and then without any word of Command grasp the Muzzel of your
Musket with your Right hand, your Thumb straight out upon the Scowrer, keeping
your Musket clear from your side some half a foot, the Muzzels all of a height
directly to the Front.

Poise your Musket. Bring up your Musket before you with your Left hand, and
falling with your Right Leg even to your Left, grasp your Musket with your
Right hand under the Cock, and poise straight before your Nose (keeping Faced
to the Front) letting your Right Elbow Rest upon your Body.

Shoulder your Musket. As formerly.

Poise. As before.

Order. Sink your Right Hand a little, Take hold of the Stock with your Left
Hand upon the place where the Scowrer goes into the Stock, then sinking that
hand, take hold of the Muzzel with your Right Hand, and let the Butt-End easily
sink near the ground, where you make a little stop so that the Muskets may come
to the ground all together, your Musket all this while perpendicular, and your
Thumb at last straight out on the Side of the Muzzel, being set down to the
ground all together that it seem but one Thump. Place the Butt-End close to the
Right Foot about the middle of it, your Right Hand an Inch below the Muzzel,
the lock from your Body.

Lay down your Musket. Turn your Musket with the Lock upwards, and stepping
forwards with your Left Leg and Right Hand, lay it on the ground in a very
straight Line. You must never lay down or handle your Musket but with one hand,
viz. the Right Hand.

Quit your Musket. Fall back with your Left Leg even to your Right, and stand
up.

Handle your Musket. Stepping forward with your Left Leg, lay your Right Hand
near the Muzzel of your Musket.

Order your Musket. Lift up the Muzzel of your Musket, and fall back with your
Left Leg even to your Right, turning the Lock of your Musket outward by the
middle of your Foot.

Directions for the Postures in Exercising the Pike.
Pikemen take heed.

Advance your Pikes.

Lift up your Pike in a direct Line near your side with your Right Hand, as
high as you can well reach, and take it with your Left Hand, as low as you can,
your fingers straight out, and with that Hand Raise it till the Butt-end comes
into your Right Hand, then place it between your Breast and your Shoulder, And
be sure to keep the Butt-end close to your Thigh which keeps your Pikes upright.

To the Front. Lay your Left Hand on your Pike even with the top of your
Shoulder, your Fingers straight out, and bring the Pike right before you with a
quick motion, at the same time drawing in your Right Heel to your Left Instep.
Be sure to keep your Pike straight upright which will be done best by putting
your Right Hand well from you.

Charge. Fall back with your Right Leg, so that the Heel of your Left Foot may
be directly against the middle of your Right Foot. Bring down your Pike extreme
quick with a jerk, as if you were to strike one with it, and Charge Breast
high, your Left Elbow under your Pike to Support it, yielding your Body
forwards, and bending your Left Knee that you may stand the firmer and with
more ease, always observing to hold the Butt-end of your Pike in the Palm of
your hand, and your Left Toe pointing directly with the Spear of your Pike,
your Feet at a convenient distance, neither too far asunder nor too near, that
you may stand strong.

Of all things you must look that your Feet are set right, or else you can
never handle your Arms as you ought. It Is to be observed in charging your Pike
to bring it down at some distance from one another Breast so to prevent
Clattering, And to Close it to your Breast after it is Charged.

To the Right. Four times. Turn your Left Toe to the Right, Bring up your Right
Heel to your Left Instep, and your Pike Recovered straight before you with as
quick a Motion as in Charging, then having turned fall back with your Right Leg
as before. Charge as before.

To the Right about. Turn your Left Toe to the Right about, bringing your Right
Heel to it as before, and your Pike Recovered as before, always with the same
quickness. Being turned, Charge as before.

As you were. You turn your Left Toe to the Left about, bringing up your Pike
Recovered, your Left Hand never to be higher than your Mouth, and your Right
Heel as before, And being turned you fall back with your Right Leg and Charge.
You must be sure always to bring your Pike straight up, and not to swing it
about, for then 'twill clatter against the other Pikes.

To the Lest. Four times.

To the Left about.

As you were.

Advance your Pike. Bringing up your Right Heel to your Left Instep and your
Pike first before you, You fall out with your Right Foot even with your Left,
and bring your Pike to your Right Thigh.

Shoulder. Lay your Left hand on your Pike even with your Shoulder, your
Fingers extended, bringing your Right Heel to your Left Instep, And your Pike
right before you, then fall back with your Right Leg, and put back your Right
Arm as far as you well can, and holding your Pike half a foot from your Side,
cast your Eye toward the Spear, which you must keep directly to the Rear, your
Pike sloped, and forsaking it with your Left hand bring up your Right Leg, and
Lay your Pike on your Right Shoulder, your Elbow close to your Body, The
Butt-end half a foot from the ground and in the middle of the distance, That
is, between your Legs.

Charge to the Front. Fall back with your right Leg, and put back your right
Arm as far as you can, be sure to keep the Spear directly to the Rear, and your
Pike sloped at the same height with the Spear as when it was shouldered,
neither higher nor lower. Then with your left hand bring the Butt-end of your
Pike backwards, turning the head of it with your right hand, then forsaking it
with that hand, take hold of the Butt-end, and Charge breast-high, the palm of
your hand open against the Butt-end, and your left elbow under your Pike; your
left toe pointed directly with the Spear of your Pike, and be sure to Charge
directly forward and not to the Angles, your left heel just against the middle
of your right foot.

Shoulder as you were. You raise your Pike with both hands, then forsaking it
with your right hand, and turning the head backwards with the left, the Spear
directly to the Rear, take hold of it again with your right, as high as you can
reach with ease, and stand with it as before from your body sloped as before,
then bringing up your right leg, and forsaking your Pike with your left hand,
lay it on your shoulder: When you stand with your Pike from your side, you
continue it but a very short space. Be sure always to keep the Spear directly
to the Rear, and not to cross your Pike in the exercising it.

Charge to the Right. Fall back with your right arm and leg as before, and be
sure to keep the Spear to the Rear, sloped at the height as when shouldered,
and turning your left toe to the right, fall with your right leg behind your
left, so that the middl^ of your right foot may be ove^ against your left heel.
While you do this, bring your Pike up and turn the Butt-end backward^ by your
right side; and taking (...) in the palm of your right hand Charge.

Shoulder as you were. Bring your left toe to the left bringing your right foot
with the middle against your left heel and your Pike up, then with you left
hand turn the head of the Pike to the right: That is, directly to the Rere,
which must b^ done together to prevent clattering, then taking hold of it wit^
your right hand, stand with it i^ both hands, at a little distance from your
body as before, sloped at the same height as when shouldered, then bringing up
your right leg, lay it on your shoulder.

Charge to the Right about. Fall back with your hand and leg, as before, and
stand with your Pike from your side in the same Posture: Then turning the Left
toe to the right about, bring the Butt-end of your Pike to the right side, and
falling back with your right leg, Charge: the Spear of your Pike all this while
kept to the Rere, the height you are shouldered: For you must take great care
not to throw the Spear of your Pike higher, or drop it lower. When you are
faced to the Right about, level your Pike breast high, and Charge, as before.

As you were. Turn your left toe to the Le^^ about, and advancing your right
foot one ordinary pace, so that the middle of it may be against your left heel,
then with your le^^ hand bring the Butt-end by your left side, keeping the
Spear exactly to the Rear, the same height as before, taking great care neither
to cross your Pike, or to tos^ the Spear too high, laying your right hand as
high as you can easily reach, stand with it from your Body as before, then
bring up your right leg and shoulder.

Charge to the Left. Fall back with your Leg and Arm as in the rest, then turn
the left Toe to the Left, and with your left hand turn the Butt-end of your
Pike to the Right, and bringing up your Right Leg, Charge.

As you were. Raise the Spear of your Pike with both hands, and turn your left
Toe to the right, and fall back with your Right leg and Arm, the Spear directly
to the Rear, holding your Pike from your side as before, then bring up your
Right leg, and shoulder.

Charge to the Left about. Fall back with Arm and Leg, as before, then with
both hands bring the Pike over your head, keeping the Spear very exactlie to
the Rear, neither higher nor lower then when shouldered; Then turning your left
toe to the Left about, and bringing up your Right Foot with the middle of it
against your left heel^ Charge.

As you were. Bring your Pike over your head with your left hand, falling back
with your right leg, and putting back your right arm as before, keeping the
Spear directly to the Rear without crossing, hold it from your body, then bring
up your right leg and shoulder. You must be sure to take care to set your feet
exactlie, or self you can never Exercise well.

Port. As Charging to the Front, but that you sink not the Spear of your Pike
so low, and in stead of letting the Pike rest upon your Left Elbow, it is to
rest between the Thumb and Forefinger, and you Elbow close to your Side.

Comport. You bring your Left Hand as far back as you can, and stretching out
the Right as far as you can, at the same time stepping forwa^^ with your Right
foot, Grasp the Pike with your Right Hand (...) far as you can reach, have a
ca^ not to Toss the Spear too high then forsaking it with your Le^^ Hand, and
falling back wi^^ your Right Leg even with yo^ Left, Close the Pike to your
Sid^ the Spear of your Pike about t^^ height of your Head.

Charge to the Front. Extend your Right Arm much as you can, advancing yo^
Right Leg at the same motion and putting your Left Hand: far back as you can
bring forwar^ your Pike, then stepping bac^ with your Right Leg, take hol^ of
the Butt-end of it with yo^ Right hand and Charge, taking care not to throw the
Spear of the Pike higher then it was when you went to Charge, when you Charge,
Charge always Breast-high.

Trail. Face to the Right about, and let the Spear of your Pike fall behind
you; Quit your Right Hand from the Butt-end of it without stirring your Left,
you must take care not to bob up the Spear of your Pike, which is very
ungraceful.

Charge as you were. Turn to the Left about, and ^aking the Butt-end of the
Pike on the Palm of your Right Han^ Charge, as before, always (...) king care
not to Toss your Spe^ higher than the Charge.

Advance your Pikes. Bring up your Right Heel (...) your Left Instep, and your
P^^ before you to the Recover, (...) fall out with your Right Foo^ven with your
Left, and b^^ your Pike to your Right Thigh.

Order your Pikes. Lay your Left Hand on y^^ Pike even with the top of yo^
Shoulder, your Fingers strei^^ out, and sinking your Left Han^^ and Raising
your Right, ta^^ your Pike so that when the Bu^ and is on the Ground, your
Right ^and may be against your Eye, ^eeping your Pike near your Head, the
Butt-end to the Latchet of your Shoe. When near the Ground hold a little while
still, that the Butt-ends may all touch ^he Ground together, and make put one
Thump.

Pikes to your Inside Order. Place the Butt-end of your ^ike on the Inside of
your Right foot about the middle of it. Be ^ure to move your Pike, and not your
Foot.

Lay down your Pikes. Stepping forward quick with our Left Leg, and stooping
all together, lay it down straight only with your Right Hand.

Quit your Pikes. Falling back with your Let (...) even to your Right, stand up
all together.

Handle your Pikes. Stepping forwards with yo^ Left Leg quick, and stooping
together, laying your Right Ha^^ only on your Pike as far as you (...) reach.

Order your Pikes. Raise the Pike only with you Right Hand, and fall back with
your Left Leg: You must (...) sure when you are Commanded ^o Handle your Pikes,
to get the Butt-end within the middle of your Right Foot.

Pikes to your Outside Order. Place the Butt-end of your Pike on the Outside of
your Foot, ^ust to the Latchet of your Shoe. ^e fure to move your Pike, and ^ot
your Foor.

Advance. As before.

Exercise of Pike and Musket together.
The Pikes being Advanced and the Muskets Shouldered, The word of Command is,
Musketeers make ready.

They are to perform all their Postures, and the Motions exactly together, till
they stand Guarded with their Muskets before them, Their Thumbs on the Cocks,
at which time also the Pikes are to be Recovered before them, the Butt-ends in
the Palms of their Hands, and their Pikes upright, Their Left Hands the Height
of their Mouths, and no higher.

At the Word Charge, They are to bring down both Muskets and Pikes together at
once, And the Pikes with a jerk, as if they were to strike one with them. They
must be sure to turn their Left Toes that way they Charge, and their Left Heel
directly against the middle of their Right Foot. When they Charge they are to
Charge directly forward. But the Pikes are not to Charge close to one another
Breasts at first, because that makes a clattering, but they are to Charge a
little way from one another Breasts in bringing down their Pikes, and after
they are Charged, then to close them to their Breasts.

To the Right Charge Four times.

To the Right about Charge.

As you Were. Charge.

To the Left Charge Four times.

To the Left about. Charge.

As you were. Charge.

The Pikemen turn as the Musketeers, bringing up their Right Heels to their
Left Insteps. As they turn they extend their Arms, and hold their Muskets
straight before them, Their Left Hand as high as their Mouth pulling back their
Arms and falling back with their Right Legs when they are Faced.

The Soldiers do not bring down their Arms till the word of Command, Charge.

They must be sure to bring up their Pike and Musket as quick as they bring
them down straight before them ere they turn, or else the Pikes will clatter.

Recover your Arms As before

Half-bend your Muskets. As before

Poise your-Muskets As before

Shoulder your Muskets. As before

The Musketeers Shouldering, The Pikemen (who stood Recovered) falling out with
their Right Legs, bring their Pikes to their Thighs to their Advance.

Poise your Muskets. At which Word of Command, the Pikemen are all to join
their Left Hands to their Pikes the height of their Shoulders.

Order your Arms.

Pikes to your Inside Order.

Lay down your Arms.

Quit your Arms.

Tothe Right about.

March.

When clear of their Arms they are to disperse, and upon the Beat of Drum to
run to their Arms with an Huzza, their Swords drawn and the points upward.

Return your Swords.

Handle your Arms.

Order your Arms.

Pikes to your Outside Order.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Advance your Pikes.

In Ordering their Arms, They must be sure to make a little stop before the
Butt-ends come to the ground, that they may come down all at one Thump. After
laying down their Arms and quitting them they are all to stand up together, and
no man to stoop afterward.

When they March from their Arms, they must be sure to step all together Front
and Rear, with their Left Feet, and to March close to their Arms.

When they lay their Right Hands on their Swords, they must take hold of the
Scabbord with their Left Hand.

When they have drawn their Swords, They must hold them up straight before
them, as they do their Muskets when poised.

When they return their Swords, They must do it all at one Motion, And as soon
as they have put up their Swords, they must all stand upright to their Arms
looking to their proper Front.

The Pikemen must always when they stand to their Arms (lying on the ground)
get the Butt-end of their Pikes to the middle of the inside of their Feet.

The easiest and readiest way to teach Soldiers the use of their Arms, that
they may do it exactly to the Drum, Is to give every File-leader the Word of
Command, in writing of that part of the Exercise, viz. The posture of the Pike
and Musket only, That every File-leader may instruct his File, so as to do it
exactly to the Drum.

EXERCISE OF THE GRANADIERS ON FOOT.
A Great part of the Exercise of Granadiers on Foot is the same with that of
the Musketeers.

Granadiers are to draw up at the same Order in Rank and File as Musketeers,
only they draw but three deep, being supposed to be Shouldered, Lay your Right
Hand on your Firelock. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Poise your Firelock. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Rest your Firelock. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Cock your Firelock. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Guard your Firelock. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Present. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Fire. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Recover your Arms. As the Exerercise of the Musketlers.

Cast over to the Left. Then they are to lay their Right hand on their Daggers.

Draw your Dagger. Holding it fast before you upright.

Screw it into the Muzzel of your Firelock. So that the flat side may be toward
you when recovered.

Recover your Arms.

Charge.

To the Right Four times. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under
the Lock with the Right hand.

To the Right about. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under the
Lock with the Right hand.

As you were. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under the Lock
with the Right hand.

To the Left Four times. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under
the Lock with the Right hand.

To the Left about. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under the
Lock with the Right hand.

As you were. Charge With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under the Lock
with the Right hand.

Recover your Arms.

Cast over to the Left. They are to ^^^ze their Daggers with their right hand.

Withdraw your Dagger. Holding them before them the flat side toward them.

Return your Dagger.

Poise your Firelock. As the M^^ketiers.

Half-bend your Fire-lock. As the Mu^ketiers.

Clean your Pan. As the Mu^ketiers.

Open your Cartridge-box.

Handle your Primer.

Prime. As the Exercise of the Musketeers.

Return your Primer. As the Exercise of the Musketeers.

Shut your Pan. As the Exercise of the Musketeers.

Blow off your loose Corns. As the Exercise of the Musketeers.

Cast about to charge. As the Exercise of the Musketeers.

Handle your Cartridge.

Open it with your teeth.

Charge with Powder and Ball

Draw forth your Scowrer. Putting them together into the Muzzel of the
Fire-lock Hold it there.

Shorten it to an inch. Putting them together into the Muzzel of the Fire-lock
Hold it there.

Ram down Powder. and Ball. As the Musketeers.

Withdraw your Scowrer. As the Musketeers.

Shorten it to a handful. As the Musketeers.

Return your Scowrer As the Musketeers.

Poise your Fire-lock. As the Musketeers.

Shoulder your Fire-lock. Upon which word of Command the Ranks are to close
forward to six foot, the Sargeants taking care to plant their Halberts at the
due distance.

Poise your Firelock. Seizing the sling with the Left hand.

Sling your Firelock.

Handle your Pouch. Your Left Hand on the bottom all of a height, the Right Leg
advanced, and their Right Hands all of a height.

Open your Pouch Together.

Take forth your Granade The Right Hand extended before you.

Shut your Pouch At once.

Uncase your Fuse. Falling back with the Right Foot even to the Left, and
facing.

Handle your Match The Left hand to the Left side, both Arms extended. The
three Ranks are to do it together.

Blow your Match The first Rank only falling back with the Right Leg. A strong
blast.

Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade At which word of command the second Rank is to march six
foot before the first, with their Matches ready to blow.

Blow your Match.

Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade The third Rank perform as the second.

Blow your Match At which word the two other Ranks are to lay their Left hands
on their Hatchets.

Fire your Fuse. Then they are to raise their Hatchets.

Deliver your Granade. At which time the Sargeants are to take care that the
first rank stand, the second march six foot before the first, and the third six
foot before the second with their hatchets raised expecting the word of
command. The first rank is to raise theirs also

Fall on. Stepping forward with the Left Leg.

Recover your Hatchet. As in handling it.

Return your Hatchet. Into the frog of the Belt.

Poise your Firelock. As the Musketeers.

Shoulder As the Musketeers.

your Firelock As the Musketeers.

Granadiers make ready. The first Rank make ready their Firelocks. The second
Rank handle their Pouch. And the third Rank their Hatchets.

The first Rank present. At which word of command the second Rank is to open
their Pouch and take forth their Granade, and the third raise their Hatchets.

Fire. The second Rank are to shut their Pouch, And uncase their Fuse, And
handle their Match.

Recover your Arms. Without any other word of command the first rank are to
cast over to the Left, ward their Dagger, screw it into the Muzzel of their
Fire-lock, Recover their Arms and Charge, the second Rank to march six foot
before them.

Blow your Match.

Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade Then they poise their Firelocks and make ready, the third
rank march as the second with their Hatchets.

Fall on.

Recover your Hatchets. At the same time the third Rank is to march twelve ^^ot
before the first, charging; The second to six foot, and the first return their
Hatchets, and make ready their Firelocks.

Recover your Arms. At which time they half-bend their Firelocks.

Cast over to the Left.

Withdraw your Dagger. As before.

Return your Dagger.

Poise your Fire-lock.

Shoulder your Fire-lock.

Face to the Right about. March. The Sargeants are to take care that the Ranks
open forward to twelve foot, and to continue marching till they come to their
ground, and there to halt without any word of Command.

As you were.

Poise your Fire-lock. As the Musketeers.

Order your Arms. As the Musketeers.

Lay down your Arms. As the Musketeers.

Quit your Arms. As the Musketeers.

Face to the Right about. As the Musketeers.

March. When clear of their Arms they are to disperse, and upon the ^eat of
Drum they are to run to their Arms with an Huzza, their Daggers deawn, and
their points upwards.

Return your Daggers.

Handle your Arms. As the Musketeers.

Order your Arms. As the Musketeers.

Poise your Firelock. As the Musketeers.

Shoulder your Firelock. As the Musketeers.



Directions for the Postures in Exercising of the Musket (that is, the
Match-lock-Musket) being that Part which is not in the Directions already.
Lay down your Matches. At Four Motions, Viz. First, Turn a little the Butt-end
of the Musket gently, slipping it as it lies on your Shoulder, and lay your
Right Hand on your Match. Secondly, Extend your Right Hand and Foot before you,
turning your Musket again in its place. Thirdly, You Stoop bringing the Match
near your Right Foot within side, bending the Left Ham. Fourthly, You quit it,
and stand up, bringing your Right Foot even to the Left.

Lay your Right Hand on your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Rest your Muskets.

As in the Exercise of the Firelock.

Handle your Match. Take your Match from between your Third and Fourth Finger,
with your Thumb and First Finger of your Right Hand, the Palm turned from you,
extend your Right Arm toward your Right-Handman.

Blow your Match. Bring up the Match to your Mouth without stooping to it
turning your Head a little to the Right; and having blown (...) quick strong
Blast, Cast out you Arm again to the Right,

Cock and Try your Match. Bring your Match to the Coc^ with a Compass, and
press (...) down with your Thumb, Supporting it with your Two nex^ Fingers, of
which the Middle Finger guides it, and is to b^ kept between it and the Pan.
Pul^ your Cock down to the Pan, and Raise or sink so your Match, that it may
fall just in the middle of it.

Guard your Pan. Your Two first Fingers upon the Pan, your Thumb behind it,
bringing up your Musket straight before you, That Hand by which the Pan is
guarded, being even with your Mouth, about half a foot from before it without
stooping, or letting your Muzzel of your Musket either hang backward or
forward, but keeping it straight upright perpendicular, with your right heel to
your Left Instep.

Blow your Match. Bring your Match up to your Mouth without stooping, then blow
a quick strong blast, after which extend your Arm straight forwards, let not
your Musket sink, but keep it at the height you blow, your Cravat in the middle
of the space between your Two Hands.

Present and Open your Pan. Raise the Butt-end of your Musket to your Shoulder,
keeping your Fingers upon the Pan, and let it lie level before you open your
Pan, which having done, bring your Hand back to your Trigger, raising a little
your Right Foot. And immediately letting it fall, the Butt-end of your Musket
is to be between your Breast and your Right Shoulder, which locks it fast, but
little of the Butt-end to appear above the Shoulder, your Right Elbow not at
all, or very little higher then your Piece; you must bend your Left Knee a
little, and keep the Right very Stiff: your Piece is to lie Breast-high.

Fire. Be sure to draw the Trigger but once, and keep your Body steady taking
Aim.

Recover your Arms. Sink the Butt-end of your Musket, till you hold it
perpendicular in both Hands, the Right being behind the Pan, your Fingers
extended, and the Left the height of your Mouth, bring up the Right Heel to the
Left Instep.

Return your Match. Hold your Musket in your Left Hand, the Barrel toward you,
your Left Elbow resting on your Body, take your Match between your Thumb and
Forefinger of the Right Hand, your Thumb on the top of it, as when you Cock
it, and turning the Palm of your Hand from you, place one end of it between the
Third and Fourth Finger of your Left Hand, and the other end between the First
and Second Finger, and then join your Right Hand again under the Pan of your
Musket, your Fingers extended.

Clean your Pan. With the Ball of your Thumb pressing it into your Pan you wipe
it. At this Word of Command you Rest your Musket, falling back with your Right
Leg, and when you have wiped your Pan with your Thumb, you lay your Right Hand
again on your Musket behind the Pan on the Notch of your Musket, your Fingers
extended.

Handle your Primer.

Prime on the side of the Pan, and not a top.

As the Fire-Lock.

Shut your Pan. With a full Hand, that is, with the Palm of it, the Fingers
extended, at which Word casting back your Primer, bring up your Right Heel to
your Left Instep, bringing your Musket straight up before you, your Left Hand
the height of your Mouth and your Right under the Pan.

Blow off your Loose Corns. As the Fire-lock.

Cast about to Charge.

Handle your Charger.

Open it with your teeth.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth your Scowrer.

Shorten it to an Inch.

Charge with Bullet.

Ram down Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your scowrer.

Shorten it to a handful.

Return your Scowrer.

As the Fire-Lock.

Poise your Musket.

Shoulder your Musket.

Poise your Musket.

As before.

Order your Musket. Sink your Right Hand a little, take hold of the Stock with
the Left Hand where the Scowrer goes into the Stock, then sinking that hand,
take hold of the Muzzel with your Right Hand, and let the Butt-end easily sink
near the Ground where you make a little stop, so that the Muskets may all come
to the ground together, your Musket all this while perpendicular, the Butt-end
close to your Right Foot, about the middle of it, your Right Hand an Inch from
the Muzzel, and your Thumb straight up to it, the Barrel of the Musket
backward, your Match, one end between the first and second Finger of your Left
Hand, the other end between the Third and Fourth Finger, a large Inch from the
Cole.

The Exercise of the Pikes is to be as at other times with the Fire-Lock.

Directions for Exercising the Pike and Match-Lock-Musket together.
The Pikes being Advanced, and Muskets Shouldered, Musketeers make Ready.

At which Word of Command, the Musketeers are to perform leisurely and
distinctly every posture of the Musket together, and being Ready, they bring up
their Muskets straight before them, their Two first Fingers Guarding the Pans
the height of their Mouths: And bringing up their Right Heels to their Left
Insteps; The Pikemen at the same Word of Command to Make Ready, are to bring
their Pikes before them to the Recover, and their Right Heels also to their
Left Insteps, the Butt-end of the Pikes in the Palm of their Hands.

Charge. Falling back with their Right Legs, they all Rest their Muskets
together, their Two first Fingers Guarding the Pan, they must be sure to keep
the M^zzels all of a height very well sloped, and clear of their Bodies,
Resting directly to the proper Front, with their Left Toes directly that way
they Face, their Left Heels being just against the middle of their Right Feet.
The Pikes at the same Word of Command, Charge, are to fall back with their
Right Feet, bringing their Pikes down as quick as it is possible (or as if they
were to strike with them) They Charge Breast-high, pointing their Left Toe with
the Spear of the Pike directly to the Front, the Left Elbow under the Pike to
Support it, etc. As is mentioned in the Exercise of the Fire-Lock.

To the Right Four times. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

To the Right about. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

As you were. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

To the Left. Four times. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

To the Left. about. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

As you were. Charge As with the Fire-lock.

Recover your Arms. As before.

Return your Matches. As before.

Poise your Muskets. As before.

Shoulder your Muskets. As before.

Poise your Muskets. As before.

Order your Arms. As before.

Pikes to your Inside Order. As before.

Lay down your Arms. As before.

Quit your Arms. As before.

To the right about As before.

March.



When clear of their Arms they are to disperse and upon the Beat of Drum to run
to their Arms with an Huzza, Their Swords drawn and the points upwards.

Return your Swords. As before.

Handle your Arms. As before.

Order your Arms. As before.

Pikes to your Outside Order. As before.

Poise your Musket. As before.

Shoulder your Musket. As before.

Advance your Pikes. As before.



Take up your Matches. Which is to be done at Four Motions. First, They advance
their Right Foot and Hand without turning their Shoulders, their Arms extended
before them. Secondly, They seize the Match bending with the Right Knee.
Thirdly, Raising themselves, they bring their Right Foot into its place, and
slipping a little the Musket, and turning the Butt-end a little they bring the
Match to the left Hand. Fourthly, They quit the Match with their Right Hand,
and turn the Musket again into its Place with the Left.

For Drawing up a Battalion and placing the Officers for Parade to Receive the
King or any Prince of the Blood, or General.
WHen a Regiment is to draw up, the foregoing Method of placing the Companies
is to be Observed, And the Ranks are to have twelve large feet distance, and
the Files three. The Musketeers are to slope and carry their Arms well. The
Pikemen to Order their Pikes close to their bodies, holding them near their
heads, and to the Latchet of their Shoes, and not to their Toes. The Sargeants
are to be posted (as is said before) two or one on the Right and Left of every
Rank and at the same distance the Soldiers are at in the File, and the rest on
the Rear Three paces distance from the last rank of Soldiers, Their Halberts
all Ordered and their Hatts off, The Drums on the Right and Left ranging even
with the Front Rank of the Soldiers, and the same distance one from another as
the Soldiers, the Ho-boys on the Right of the Drums, and the Drums on the Right
in the same Rank.

For placing the Officers.
The Lieutenants are to be divided equally, Half at the Head of the Right Wing
of Shot, and the other at the Left. The Ensigns are to be at the Head of the
Pikes upon the same Line with the Lieutenants, and each of them Two paces
distant from the Body. The Captains like wise are to be divided equally and
placed on each Wing two paces before the Lieutenants. None are to stand before
the Ensigns but he only who Commands in Chief, who is to be Two Paces before
the Captains, (that is) Six paces from the Pikes, unless when a Regiment makes
but one Battalion and the Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel are both present, Then
the Lieutenant Colonel is to be posted on the Left hand of the Colonel. The
Major (who always is to be on Horseback) in a direct Line before the Sargeants
on the Right Angle a little advanced before the Line of the Captains. And the
Aid-Major on the Left Angle in like manner on Horse^ back.

To Receive the King or Queen, the Pikes are to be Advanced and the Muskets
Shouldered, But to all others the Pikes are to be Ordered.

If there be a Company of Granadiers, It is to be Drawn up on the Right of the
Battalion Three deep, about two or three paces distance between the Drums of
the Battalion and that of the Granadiers.

Of Saluting.
When the King approaches, The Drums are to Beat the March, and the Officers to
Salute one after another as the King passes by, keeping the Spear of their
Pikes directly forwards to the proper Front and not cross.

As Soon as ever they have Saluted, They are to pull off their Hats without
making a Leg, but standing upright, keeping their Hats off till the King or the
Person they Salute be passed by them.

The Ensigns are to Salute with their Colors all together at one Motion,
bringing them down near the ground directly before them, Then taking them up
all together at one Motion, They pull off their Hats in the same form the
Captains and Lieutenants did, keeping their Hats off without bowing till the
Person whom they Salute be past.

The Sargeants (as is faid before (are to stand with their Halberts Ordered,
and their Hats off, and to Face the same way the Battalion does, as also the
Drums, and the Commission-Officers likewise. For if the King (or whatsoever
Person is Received) goes round the Battalion, the Battalion is to Face toward
him every one being to keep his Post, only (as is said before) Facing as he
goes round.

This manner of Saluting the King or the General is meant for a private Review
of a Battalion, For if it be in the Field and the Army Drawn up, every
Battalion is to Salute with Pike^ and Muskets Charged, which is to be performed
in this manner, The King or General approaching, The Musketeers are to be
Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, Then the Colonel or Commander in Chief
gives the Word.

Recover your Arms. Which is (as is said before) to bring the Pikes and Muskets
directly before them, The Buttends of the Pikes always in the Palm of the Hand
and the Right Heel to the Left Instep. And as soon as ever the Drums strike the
March, both Pikes and Musketeers are to Charge at one Motion quick, and to keep
their Arms so Charged till the King or General be past, And then the word of
Command is, Recover your Arms.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets



At which time (as is said before) The Pikemen bring their Pikes to the Advance.

Of Marching and Posting the Officers, and of Saluting Marching.
If the Battalion be to March, The first thing is to make the Files Close
either to the Right or Left to their Marching Order, which is a Foot and a
half, or so near to one another, that every Soldier may have the free use of
his Arms, and not to crowd one another, which is a thing of dangerous
consequence: The best way to avoid which, is for every Man to keep Half a Foot
from his Right Hand Man.

Single Companies may March Shoulder to Shoulder, but in greater Bodies there
must be more allowance.

The First Word of Command is (the Pikes being Advanced, and the Muskets
Shouldered) Files Close to the Right (or to the Left)

To your Close

Order, March



At which Word every Man turns to the Hand named, and accordingly Closes to the
Distances and Hand named, Observing (as is said before) the Front: That is,
either their Right or Left-hand-Men.

As soon as they are Closed to the Order you would have them, The Word of
Command is, To your Leader.

The Sargeants at the same time are to be careful in keeping the Ranks at their
Twelve large Feet distance.

As soon as the Battalion is thus disposed, If it March in a Body, all the
Lieutenants are to be in the Rear at the same Distance from the Soldiers as
they were at in the Front: And the Sargeants which were in the Rear, are to
Assist on the Flanks, to see that the Ranks March exactly even and at their
distance.

When the Word is given to March, both Front and Rear step all at a time with
their Left Feet, setting them down all together, so that they may be heard.
They are then to March very slowly, and the Pikes to March even with the Wings
of Shot. And great care is to be taken that the Men do not press one upon
another, but March directly forward without inclining to either hand.

As soon as the Body is Marched as far as is intended, they are to be Commanded
to Halt.

To the Right about.



And the Drums beating a Retreat, the Lieutenants lead them in the same Order
and Method as before, back to their Ground, which being come to, the Command
is, Halt.

To the Left about. (Or) As you were. (That is, to the Left about.)

Lieutenants take your Posts in the Front of the Battalion.

March.



At which Word the Lieutenants return from the Rear into the Front; And the
Sargeants that were before in the Rear, return thither again from the Flanks.

Of Marching in Three Divisions.
If the Battalion be to March in Three Divisions, the Captains are to be
Divided, one half at the Head of the first Division of Shot, and the other half
in the Rear of the last Division; one half of the Lieutenants in the Rear of
the first Division of Shot, and the other half at the Head of the last Division
of Shot.

The Colors are to March at the Head of the Pikes which are to be Advanced,
The Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel, or (in their absence) the Officer in Chief
is to March Two Paces before the Rank of Captains at the Head of the first
Division of Shot; the Captains and all other Officers keeping the same distance
from the Soldiers as they were Posted at, at the Head of the Battalion when
Drawn up; and taking great care that they keep that distance exactly, and no
more, Viz. The Captains Four Paces from the Soldiers, and the Lieutenants and
Ensigns two, or at least at a proper distance to Salute.

The Officers that are to March in the Rear of the Division are to fall after
them as they March off, and not before. And the Sargeants that were Posted in
the Reat, are to take care of the Pikes in their Marching.

The Drums are to be divided equally to the Divisions, and to March between the
Second and Third Rank.

The Granadiers are to March about Twenty Yards before the Battalion.

The Equipage of the Colonels and Officers of the Front is to March a little on
the Left Hand between the Granadiers and the Battalion. The Ho boys are to
March at the middle Distance, between the Commander in Chief and the Granadiers.

Whenever a Division is Commanded to March, they are to step together at once,
both Front and Rear with their Left Feet, and to March slowly.

In Marching, both Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and all Officers are to March
with their Pikes underhand Comported, taking care not to droop the Spear too
much, nor to swing their hands in Marching, but to keep them steady.

As Soon as they come near the King or Person whom they are to Salute, They are
to Shoulder their Pikes and to take Care to do it together that is, Every Rank
of Office as they approach the King to Shoulder their Pikes together, and to
carry them level upon their Shoulders; And when they come to Salute, to be very
exact in doing it together, that i^ may seem as if but one man Saluted.

The first Rank of Captains are not to begin to Salute till the Colonel or
Commander in Chief has done Saluting. And the Officers must take Care above all
things, That they neither stand still when they Salute nor mend their pace, so
as to get too fat from the men; And to take Care in the Salute not to do the
Motions too quick.

The Ensigns are to take Care to bring their Colors down all together directly
before them without waving them to either Hand; And to take them up all
together without standing still or mending their pace.

As Soon as the Officers have Saluted, They must pull off their Hatts, and keep
them off till they are past by the Person they Salute without bowing. And when
they are past at a convenient distance, they are to bring their Pikes again
underhand.

The Sargeants are to march with their Halberts Shouldered, the Butt-end
upwards, and are always to march with their Hatts off when they pass by the
Person that comes to view the Battalion, whether the Officers Salute or no.

None is to Salute the same Person but once standing and once Marching.

The Major and Aid-Major have no fixed Post for Marching, But are always to
attend the Colonel or Officer in Chief to receive his Orders.

No Sargeant or Corporal is at any time to Carry or Hold the Colors in the
absence of the Ensign, but only a Pikeman.

If a Battalion be Attaqued in Marching, They are immediately to Draw up,
Facing either the same way they March or by Wheeling either to the Right or
Left as the Ground allows, or as they are Attaqued. For the readier performance
of which, It is most necessary to practice a Battalion to it in Exercising.

If a Battalion be Attaqued Marching in Three Divisions (or more) and thereby
the Divisions obliged to Wheel to the Right. The First VVing of Musketeers is
to Draw up on the Right of the Granadiers, and the Pikes on the Right of the
Right VVing of Musketeers, and the Left VVing of Musketeers on the Right Hand
of the Pikes, which takes up much less time then Marching round the Rear.

As Soon as ever there is occasion to Prepare for being Attaqued on a sudden,
or that the Commander in Chief is disposed to Draw up a Battalion in that
Method, He Commands the Rear Half-Files of Musketeers to double their Front to
the Left in Marching. And as soon as ever the Officer in Chief gives Command to
the Musketeers to Man Ready (which is to be Coc^ and Guarded) or in Exercise
(...) make the Motion of it by Receivering their Muskets before the^^ The
Pikemen at the same wo^^ of Command are to Port the Pikes, and the Drums to
Beat t^^ Preparative, which gives Notice the Rear that they are to Dr^^^ up.
The Ensigns at the same ti^^ are to give their Colors to t^ Right Hand-men of
the resp^ctive Companies who are to R^tice with them immediately (...) the
Center of the Pikes, and t^^ Ensigns to take the Pikes whi^^ the said Soldiers
carried, and a^ to March at the head of t^ Pikes.

The Drums that marched b^tween the Ranks of the Musketeers (as also those of
the Granadiers) are to join themselves to those Drums that March with the
Pikes. And the Ho-boys to join with the Colors.

As Soon as ever the Drums beat the Preparative, every Division (except the
first) is to March up with all the speed they can, keeping their Order, that
first Division marching no faster then it did before. The Ranks in Marching are
to close forward to Six foot, which the Sargeants are to be very careful to see
kept very even and in good Order.

The Granadiers are to be divided into Three equal parts, One third with the
Captain at the Head of the Pikes, some Eight Paces from the first Rank, and the
two other parts on the Right an^ and Lest of the Battalion. Thos^ at the Head
of the Pikes are t^ be Commanded to Present and Fire when the first Rank of
Musketeers are commanded to Knee^ and as soon as ever they have F^red they are
to make ready the Granado's, and after the Two la^ Ranks of Musketeers (who
Fir^^ before the Front Rank) have F^red, Then they are to delive^ their
Granado's, and to put their Daggers into their Firelocks.

Those Granadiers on the Righ^ and Left of the Battalion, are to Fire as the
Musketeers Fire, that is the Two last Ranks to Fire with the Musketeers, And
as soon as Fi^red are to put their Daggers into their Firelocks. The Front Rank
of Granadiers having their Gra^nado's ready, are to kneel when the first Rank
of Musketeers kneel, And after the Two last Ranks have Fired, They are to stand
up, And when the first Rank of Musketeers Fire, They are to deliver their
Granado's, And immediately to fix their Daggers in their Firelocks. And when
the Musketeers Club their Muskets and Fall on, They are to Charge with their
Daggers as aforesaid.

When the Battalion has Marched (so near that the Granadiers may throw their
Granado's so as to fall among the Enemy) with the Officers, both Captains,
Lieutenants and Ensigns in one Rank at the Head of the Battalion, Two good
paces from the first Rank of Soldiers, with their Pikes in the same posture
with t^ Pikemen, which they are to o^serve, The Commander in Ch^gives the
Command to Half (...) which word of Command (...) Drums are to cease from
Beati^ and all the Officers in the Fr^stand at the Head of the Batt^ on in one
Rank, as is said befo^ Two paces from it with the Pikes Ported.

Four of the Sargeants t^ Marched with the Pikes bef^^^ they drew up are to
Draw (...) with them, Two with the (...) Rank and Two with the last (...) the
Right and Left of each Ran^ The rest of the Sargeants are (...) be on the
Flanks, and to assist (...) Officers in the Rear, who are (...) be the same
Officers that marc^ed in the Rear of the Division before they were drawn up,
and to continue in the Rear of the Battalion and to take care of it. Only the
eldest Captain that was there is to come up immediately to the Front at the
Head of the Left Wing of Shot. And the Sargeants are immediately (upon the
Battalions drawing up) to be very exact in making the Ranks even at Six Foot
distance, The Files are to be kept at the same distance (as is said before) so
that every Soldier may have free liberty to use his Arms; The best Rule for
which is, That every Soldier keep half a Foot from his Right-hand-man.

As Soon as the Commander in Chief has Commanded them to Halt, The Command is,
First Rank of Musketeers Kneel.

Which they are to do by Fa^^ing back with the Right Legs and not stepping
forward wit^ their Left, and keeping the Muskets so low, that the Two other
Ranks may Fire easily over them.

At the same time that the Command is given for the First Rank to Kneel, The
whole Ran^ of Officers at the Head of the Battalion, retire at one time into
the Intervals, just behind them of the first Rank of Soldiers, but are to take
Care that the Soldiers perform their Duties. The Officers (as is said before)
are to have their Pikes in the posture conformable to the Pikemen. And those
with the Musketeers are to Kneel as they do.

When the first Rank is commanded to Kneel, the Two other Ranks of Musketeers
are to Close forward, as also the Five Ranks of Pikes as close as they can with
convenience to use their Arms, without any other word of Command.

Two last Ranks Present. Which they are always to do Breast high, and the First
of the Two is always to stoop without any word of Command. And the Pikes at the
same word of Command are to Charge their Pikes and to continue so Charged.

Fire.

Recover your Arms.

At which word of Command, The Front Rank stands up, without any other word of
Command, having their Muskets Recovered straight upright before them ready
Cockt and Guarded.

Front Rank Present.

Fire.

Recover your Arms.

Club your Muskets.

Fall on.

Which they do with an Huzza, and the Pikes are to continue Charged, And the
Drums to Beat the Preparative again.

Halt. At which time the Drums are to cease Beating.

Reduction.
Poise your Muskets. At which word of Command the Pikemen Recover their Pikes
before them from their Charge, and the Granadiers take the Posts they had
before they were divided.

Shoulder your Muskets. At which word of Command the Pikemen bring their Pikes
to their Thighs to the Advance. And the whole Rank of Officers Advance together
Two paces before the Head of the Battalion.

Ranks, Open backward to Twelve Foot Distance. March.

Rear Half-Files of Musketeers that Doubled, To the Right about As you were.

March.

Officers, Colors and Drums and Ho-boys to your proper Posts. March.

If you would Fire a Battalion in Exercise more then once before you Fall on,
in stead of Clubbing your Muskets after the first Firing, the Musketeers are to
make ready as they March, and the Pikes Port, And so proceed as before
mentioned.

Memorandum, Every Right Hand man of the Pikes of each Company is always to
March with the Ensign's Pike.

The Drums are to beat the Preparative whenever the first Division Drawsup,
whether it be of a Battalion or single Company, which is the best way to give
Notice to the Rear that they are to Draw up, The Pikes at the Drums Beating the
Preparative (if they are Shouldered) are then to Advance, unless the Musketeers
be commanded to Recover their Arms, and in such case the Pike^ are to Port, but
never otherway in Drawing up, but to be kep^ Advanced. Nor are the Ranks to
close forward, or to mend their pace in Marching, but to Draw up as at other
times, unless the Musketeers are Commanded to Recover their Arms (or to make
ready) which is the same Posture, and then they are always to March as is
before mentioned.

Of Marching by Sub-Di^visions.
If a Battalion be to March on the Long March by Sub-Divisions, the Files are
first to be Counted, and according to the largeness or narrowness of the way
they are to March, they must be Divided accordingly, Posting one half of the
Captains at the Head of the first Sub-Division of Shot, and the other half in
the Rear of the last. The Lieutenants are to be divided to every Sub-Division
of Shot, that they may take care of them. The Colors are to be divided also to
March at the Head of every Sub-Division of Pikes. The Sargeants are always to
March on the Flanks; and are never to Lead or Bring up a Division (unless
Commanded) The Sargeants that are Posted in the Rear of the Battalion, when
Drawn up, are always to take care of the Pikes in Marching.

When they March by Sub-Divisions, they are to March Shoulder to Shoulder in
Files, but n^^ so as to crowd one another. A^^ tho there may happen to be momen
in one Rank then another yet no Gaps are to be left in the Ranks, but they are
to March (as is said before) Shoulder to Shoulder.

The Captains and Officers are always to March with their Pike^ underhand,
except only when they pass by a General Officer, or come before a Guard to
Relieve it, or off the Parade, and then they are to be Shouldered,

Of Defiles.
To pass a narrow Defile, The readiest way to perform it, and to Draw up again
in order as soon as past, is to make the Ranks File; If to the Right, the
Right Hand Man is to File first; and the rest of his Rank is to follow him;
then they are to Rank again as they were, which is better then Files Filing,
because it immediately makes a Front to the Enemy.

If the Ranks be great, let them File Two a Breast, beginning with the two
Outwardmost File-leaders.

For larger Defiles, the Commander may draw off as he judges the way will
easily receive.

Of Wheeling.
When a Battalion is to Wheel to alter the Front, either to one hand or the
other, or to bring the Front where the Rear was The Command is, to Wheel ^^ther
to the Right or the Left first If to the Right, you say, Wheel to the Right.

March.



At which Word of Command every man in the Battalion moves, and Wheels from the
Left to the Right, only the man on the Right Angel turns ver^ slowly, being as
it were the Hinge on which the rest move. In this way of VVheeling the^ must
observe both their Right and Left Hand Men. And the first Rank is to take such
a com^ Pass of Ground, as neither to press one another out, nor yet to make a
Gap or Interval in the Ranks; The best way to avoid both which is, for every
man to be sure to observe what distance he is at in File, when he is Commanded
to Wheel; And If he Wheels to the Right, to be sure to keep that very same
distance from his Right Hand Man; And the Ranks are to observe their Leaders
well, and to Close quick to the Left in the Rear. The same method must be
observed to the Right, if the Battalion be Commanded to Wheel to the Left.

Of Wheeling when a Battalion or a Body of Men March in Division.
When upon March the Word of Command is given to Wheel, if it be to the
Right, the Right Hand Man keeps h^^ Ground, and only turns upon h^^ Heel, At
the same time the Left hand Man moves about quick till he makes an even Line
with his Right Hand Man, and that the Officer bids him Stand.

The Second Rank must no^ begin to Wheel till they have taken the Ground of the
first; (...) every Rank successively is t^ March directly forward up t^ their
Leaders Ground before the^ begin to Wheel, upon which d^pends this way of
VVheeling.

Before they come to VVhee^ the Soldiers are to observe th^^ hand in Marching
to which the^ are to Wheel. For as the Right hand Man is to be observed i^
Marching when they Wheel to the Right, so they must observe the Left Hand in
Marching when they are to Wheel to the Left, But when they are Wheeling they
must observe the contrary Hand.

Of Wheeling by single Ranks.
When an Officer is Marching a Body of men, and there be occasion to Form them
on a sudden into a single Rank, either to make a Guard, or to line a Hedge,
the Words of Command are these, Ranks to the Right (or Left) hand, Wheel.
March.

If they are to Wheel to the Right, the Right Hand Man of every Rank is to
stand, and only turn to the Right on the Ground he stands on, and the rest are
a^^ to Wheel together into one Ra^^ at the Word of Command, March. The Colors
are to Wheel in before the Rank, and the Drums to take their Posts a the Right
and Left of the Ran^ as also the Sargeants.

When they are so VVheel'd, they may either be Closed to the Right or to the
Left, that there may be no Gaps in the Ranks.

Reduction.
Form your Ranks to the Left (or) As you were.

March.

For the performance whereof, the Left Hand Man of every Rank is to stand, and
only turn to the Left. And at the Word March, the rest are to Wheel into
their places as they were.

Of Wheeling backward by half Ranks.
To Wheel backwards by half Ranks upon a long March, the following Directions
are to be observed.

The Number of men ought to be even in every Rank, and the Right and the
Left Hand Man of every Rank being Ordered to stand, and only to Turn to the
Right and Left Inwards, the following Words of Command are to be observed.

By Half Ranks Wheel to the Right and Left Backward. March. At which Word of
Command^ the Half-Ranks Separate, and fa^^ back to the Right and Left Hand men,
Forming Two Ranks in opposition to one another. The Officers and Colors are to
sepa^ rate accordingly, and to take their Posts, Ranging themselves before the
Soldiers to make a Guard.

The Sargeants and Drums are to be on the Right and Left.

Reduction.
By half Ranks to the Right and Left Inward, Form your Ranks as you were.
March. The Directions are the same as before: For the Right and Left Hand Man
of every Rank is to stand, and only Turn to the Right and Left Inward, and the
rest at the Word March, are to Wheel, and they will be in the same Marching
Order that they were.

Closings and Openings.
Ranks Close forwards to Order, Three Foot. March.

Ranks Close forward to Close Order, A foot and half. March.

Ranks Open backward t^ Order, Three Foot. March.

Ranks Open backward t^ Open Order, Six Foot. March.

Ranks Open backwards t^ double distance, twelve Foo^ March.

In this way of Opening backward, the Ranks are to fall bac^ without changing
aspect, obse^ving their Right Hand men, an^ their Leaders.

Files close to the Right, March

Files close to the Left, March

Files close to the Center, March

Files open to the Right, March

Files open to the Left, March

Files open from the Center. March

When Files open from the Center, they are to face from the Center, and if
there be an odd File it is to stand, which is the Center File. Also when Files
are to open to the Right or Left, they are not to stir, not so much as changing
aspect, till the Word of Command, March be first given; and then they are
in^mediately to Face to the hand named, and to take their distance Commanded
every one from hi^ Leader.

When they open to the Right, they must always observe the^ Left Hand men. And
when they open to the Left, their Right, hand Men.

If they open to the Right, the Second File from the Right, first takes its
distance by little Steps, and letting his Leader go as far from him as the
distance he is Ordered, before he stir, the rest of the Files do the like
successively; And the Left Hand File is not to move at all. In opening of Files
they are to move extreme slowly and directly forward.

Doublings.
Ranks to the Right, Double. March.

Ranks as you were. March.

Ranks to the Left, Double. March.

Ranks as you were. March.

The Ranks that double are to observe their Right Hand Men to move at the same
time with them.

They are to begin the Motions with the Foot next the Hand named, and to come
into this doubling, the even Ranks are to double into the odd; and if t^^ odd
Ranks are to double, Fa^^ the Body to the Rear, and the same Word of Command
will perform it, or else it may be do^^ by this Word of Command.

Odd Ranks that stood, T^^ the Right about double t^^ even Ranks. To Reduce the
Ranks.
The Ranks that double a^ first to Face to the contra^^ hand, and then with the
contrary Foot come into their form^ Ground; But they are not t^ stir, not so
much as to alter the aspect, till the Word of Command, March be first give^ And
it is a constant Rule upon all Doublings of Ranks or half Files, That tho they
are to turn to the contrary Hand they Doubled on from the Ground they Doubled
to; yet when they come to their own Ground, they are always to turn to the Hand
they doubled, which brings them directly after their Leaders.

The doubling of Files is performed in the same manner, and is the same thing
with the Reduction of doubled Ranks.

Doubling of Front Half-Files by the Rear Half-files, with the Reduction.
Rear Half-files to the Right hand, Double your Front. March.

Rear Half-files, As you we^ March.

Rear Half-files to the Le^^ hand, Double your Fron^ March.

Rear Half-files, As you we^^ March.

If it be upon a March, the Rear Half-files are to move into the Front with a
quicker Motion The Front Half-files still contin^ing theirs. But all must
observe their Right Hand men.

And for Reduction, Let the Rear Half-files without Facing about, stand till
the Front Half-files have passed by, and then fall after their proper Leaders;
But if the Front Half-files are to be doubled by the Rear, the Body standing
still, the Rear Half-files are to March extreme slow, observing well their
Right Hand men, that every Rank may double at one time. And in the Reducement,
As in the Doubling of single Ranks, no man is to stir till the word of Command
March be first given, And then they are all to turn together to the contrary
Hand they doubled on. And when they come upon their own ground they are always
to turn to the same Hand they Doubled to.

Doubling of Rear Half-files by the Front Half-files, with the Reduction.
Front Half-files to the Right about, Double your Rear Half-files.

March.

At which Word of Command, the Front half-files, or the Three Front-ranks turn
to the Right about, and passing on the Right Hand of their followers, or the
Rear half-files, they are to Double into them; and as soon as doubled, to face
to the Left about to their Leader, without any Word of Command.

Reduction.
Front half-files as you were. March. At which word, The Front Half-files are
to March slowly, observing to keep Three foot from their Right-hand-men, which
makes them incline to the Left, and brings them directly upon their former
ground.

In Doubling to the Left about, the same thing is to be done, only observing
the contrary hand.

Of Firing to the Front.
Soldiers are to be Exercised to Fire all manner of ways, In keeping of ground,
Gaining of ground, and losing of ground.

To make them Fire in keepi^^ of ground, it is necessary that (...) Body be as
close in Rank and F^^ as can be conveniently with the use of their Arms.

One way is thus.

Musketeers make ready a^^ At which time the Musketi^^ are to be Cockt and
Guarded an^ their Arms straight before them the Pikes ported. And when the
Musketeers Present, The Pikes a^ to be Charged.

The Five first Ranks, Knee^

The Rear Rank Present Fire.

Fifth Rank stand up.

Present. Fire.

Fourth Rank stand up.

Present. Fire.

And so of the rest. And as they have Fired, They are to Charge again, and to
be in a readiness against the First word of Command.

This way of Firing may be performed either by Two Ranks at a time, or Three
Ranks, The first kneeling, and the second stooping, or the Two first stooping.

It Is necessary also to exercise them to Fire gaining ground, which is to be
performed in this manner.

The Battalion Marching, the Commander in Chief Orders.

The first Ranks of Musketers, Make ready. Halt. At which time the whole
^^talion Halting, He is to Command the first Rank of Musktiers to Present, and
Fire.

When they have Fired, they a to Recover their Arms witho^ any word of Command,
and File off very quick to the Rig^^ and Left into the Rear. When t^^ first
Rank Presents, the next Ra^^ is to Make ready in course w^^^ out any word of
Command, A^^ as the first Rank Files off, t^^ next makes good the Front, A^^ so
the Battalion is to march ^gain, and every Rank to Fire (...) this Method.

The Pikes are to Charge wh^^ every Rank Presents without (...) word of Command.

Firing to the Front Retreating.
If a Body of men or Battalion be pressed in Front and forced to Retreat, The
most commodious way of Firing is by single Ranks in the same Method as in
gaining ground, only after every Rank has Fired and Filed off to the Right and
Left into the Rear, Instead of the next Rank Advancing to make good the Front
of Pikes, The Pikes are to Retreat to the Musketeers, who stand still till the
Pikes make an even Front with them, and so every Rank of Shot is to Fire
successively in the same manner as the first.

Of Firing to the Flanks.
If upon a March a Body o^ men be forced to Fire to bo^^ Flanks, the way of
doing it is th^^ The Ranks being at six foot (...) stance, Intervals of about
(...) foot distance are to be left b^tween the Divisions of Mus^^tiers and the
Pikes, which the O^ficers must have a great Care (...) keep open, by causing
the Musl^tiers to incline to the Right an^ Left after every Firing to the
Flanks, which is to be perform^^ in this manner.

The Right and Left-han^ Files of Musketeers, Mak^^ ready. Which they are to
do and keep along with the Body and not to Face to the Flanks till they are bid
Present.

As Soon as they have Fired they are to Face to the Rear, and so are by a
Sargeant to be led athwart it very quick, and so up between their own
Divisions, and the Pikes as soon as the outermost Files Face to the Flanks to
present, The next File of the Right and Left is to Make ready without any word
of Command, and to keep along with the Body till the outermost Files be clear
of them, that is, Till they are bid Present, which is the next word of Command
the Commander in Chief is to give after he bids the Two first Files Make ready.
The Files that Fire are to fall back with their Right Feet and not step forwa^^
with their Left.

In Exercise, this way of Firi^^ is to be continued till all the (...) have
fired.

Of Firing to the Rear.
This way of Firing is perfor^ed almost the same way as Fir^ to the Front
Retreating.

The Rear Rank of Mus^^tiers, Make ready. At which time the Rear Ra^^ stands
Cockt and Guarded.

Present. Fi^^ When they are bid Present they are to turn upon their (...) Foot
To the Right about, (...) cast their Right Leg backwards, then Present and
Fire. And immediately as soon as Fired without any word of Command, They are to
Recover their Arms, and at a good round rate within three foot of the Body to
the Right and Left outward to March, up into the Front, and there place
themselves.

As Soon as the last Rank is bid Present, the next Rank of Musketeers is to make
ready of course without any word of Command, But not to Face to the Rear till
they are bid Present.

As Soon as the first Rank is commanded to Present, the Pikes are to march till
the Rear Rank of Pikes come even with the next Rank of Musketeers, which is
standing Cockt and Guarded, so that there will be room left in the Front for
the Rank of Musketeers that Fire to come up a^^ place themselves even with the
first Rank of Pikes, and so every Rank successively is to do (...) same by the
same Method; The Officers and Sargeants are to s^ the Soldiers move away qui^^
without noise (which of a^^ things is most to be avoided) an^ that they place
themselves rig^^ in the Files.

The word Make ready i^ made use of but once, after which (as is said before)
when the Rea^^ Rank is bid Present, the next Rank is to Make ready.

Of Firing the Street-way.
If a Street, or any way be to be defended against Horse, where they can Charge
only in Front, the best Method is this; If there be fewer Pikes then
Musketeers, which most commonly happens, the Rear Half-files of Pikes are to
double the Front by these words of Command.

Rear Half-files of Pikes to the Right Hand, double your Front.

March.

Then Musketeers to the Right about, March.

As soon as they are clear of the Pikes, Musketeers, Face to the Right and Left
Inwards. March.

By which they are to join the Center of the Pikes.

Then Face to your Lead^

The Officers must take care see that the Shot and the Pi^^ Wing alike, and
that the Mu^^tiers be at no greater dista^^ from the Pikes then only to (...)
room for the Colors, Dr^^ and Hoboys to be between.

The Captains are to be in (...) first Rank of Pikes, and the Lie^tenants with
the Musketeers. (...) the Body is greater or lesser, Sargeant or more is to
ca^^ the two first Ranks of Mu^^tiers to Face to the Right or (...)

As Soon as the Officer (...) Chief has given Command, Port your Pikes.

The two first Ranks of Musketeers, Make ready.

March. At which Word the Sargeants are to bring up the two first Ranks either
to the Right or Left, as is Ordered beforehand, who Filing two and two up into
the Front, March athwart it under the Pikes, carrying the Muzzels of their
Muskets so as they may neither knock against the Pikes, nor yet do their
Leaders any Mischief.

Being placed under the Pikes, they are to face to the Proper Front without any
word of Command, and to make two Ranks.

That there may be alwa^ some Fire reserved, it is best (...) Fire but one Rank
at a time, t^^ second standing Cockt an^ Guarded, both of them being (...)
close to the Pikes as they can w^^ the convenience to use their Ar^^

First Rank of Musketier^ Kneel. Which they are to do by fall (...) back with
their Right Foot, a^^ not stepping forward with the Left; and to be sure to
keep the Arms straight upright before them, their Left Hands the heig^^ of
their mouths.

First Rank Present. Fir^^ As Soon as they have Fired, the are to Recover their
Arms wit^ out any word of Command and to File off to the contra^^ hand they
came up on, as qui^^ as it is possible, and are to be Led by a Sargeant close by
the Body unto the Rear, and there placed ^n their Right Files.

When the Musketeers are bid Present, the Pikes are to Port very low without a
word of Command: And as soon as they have ^ired, the Pikes are to Raise their
^ikes again to the height they ^ere at, without a word of Command, which is to
avoid be^^g shattered with the Shot.

The Subaltern Officers must ^^ke care that the next Rank of Musketeers be
always ready just (...) the Angle to March under the ^^kes in the room of the
second ^ank; which upon the Firing of ^^e first, is to take the place of it.

If the Street to be Defended be ^^ry broad, an Interval must be made (besides
the passages on t^^ Flanks) wide enough for t^^ men on a Breast: For otherwi^^
the long intermission betwee^ the Firings will give the Hors^ opportunity to
Attack them.

Reduction.
Musketeers, Face to t^^ Right and Left outward March. As soon as they are
clear of (...) Pikes.

Musketeers, to your prop^^ Front. March, Till even with the first Rank (...)
Pikes.

Rear half Files of Pikes, (...) the Left about as y^^ were. March. Which done,
the Officers, ^lours, Drums and Hoboys are be Commanded to their prop^^ Posts.

Of Firing by a running Fire for Show.
A Battalion being drawn up or Parade, if they are to Fire by (...) running
Fire, they are to take ^t either from the Right or from ^he Left, but commonly
it is be^un on the Right.

The manner is thus.

After the Musketeers are Commanded to make Ready (which (...) Cockt and
Guarded) they are ^o be Ordered to Present in the ^^r, giving Order to the
Officer ^n the Right to make the first man (after they are presented) begin to
Fire; because if the Word be given aloud, they (...) all take it, and Fire a
Volley (...) stead of a running Peal.

Every File-leader is to Fi^^ a quick as it is possible after (...) Right Hand
Man, and ev^^ File is to take care to Fire w^^ their File-leader.

Words of Command for For^ing the Hollow Square.
The Battalion being draw up, the Ranks at Twelve For distance, and the Files
at Th^^^ the Muskets Shouldered, and (...) Pikes Advanced, the Comma^^ is,
Colors, Drums and H^ boys, to the Center of t^ Pikes. March.

Ranks close forward to O^der. (Which is three large feet.)

March.

The three outward most Files of Pikes on the Right and Left, double your Files
to the Right and Left inwards. March.

Rear half-files of Musketeers to the Left Hand, double your Front. March.

Files close all to the Right to your close Order. March.

To your Leader.

Pikes Face square.

Pikes close forward every way to close Order. March.

Pikes to your proper Front.

Left Wing of Musketeers, To the Right about.

Both Wings of Musketie^

March.

Halt.

Musketeers face to the (...)

March.

Halt.

Face to your proper Fr^^ all.

Officers and Sargea^^ take your Posts. March.

Granadiers take your Pos^ in the Angles. March.

Face Square.

Musketeers make ready. At which word Command the (...) are to Port ^^low, and
to co^^nue so, and (...) Charge when Musketeers Pr^^.

First Rank kneel. Which they must do so low, and hold their Muskets so, that
the two last Ranks may Fire over them.

The two last Ranks Present. Fire.

Recover your Arms. At which word of Command, the first Rank stands up with
their Muskets Recovered straight before them ready Cockt and Guarded, and the
two Ranks that have Fired, Load again.

Front Rank Present. Fire.

Recover your Arms. At which Word of Command, the Pikeman Recover their Pikes
from their Port.

To your Leader.

March.

Halt.

Face Square, etc.



After which Method they (...) be made to March them, and (...) to every Front,
the Soldiers alw^ observing that Facing to t^^ Leader, is to face that (...)
wherever the Commander (...) Chief is; but to face to the p^per Front, is only
that way (...) Front of the Bastalion prop^^ stood before this figure (...)
formed.

Reduction of the Hollow Square.
They being all faced to the proper Front, the Words of Command are as follow.

Granadiers take your Posts on the Right of the Battalion.

March.

The Right and Left of each Wing of Musketeers, Face to the Right and Left
outward.

March.

Halt.

The Three Files of Pikes of the Right and Left that doubled, As you were.

March.

Musketeers, Face to the Right.

March.

Halt.

To your Leader.

Rear half-files of Musketeers that doubled, To the Right about, as you were.

March.

Ranks open backward to twelve Foot. March.

Colors, Drums and Hoboys, to your former Posts.

March.

Files close to the Right to close Order. March.

To your Leader.

Directions how to Form the Hollow Square.
The Battalion being Drawn up, the Muskets Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced,
you must first of all Command the Colors, Drums and Ho boys to the Center of
the Pikes: Which done, you are to make the Ranks close forward to Three large
feet distance: Then you must make the three outwardmost Files of Pikes on the
Right and Left, to double into the three Files of Pikes on the Right and Left,
to double into the three Files of Pikes which are next them on their Right and
Left. After which you are to make the Rear half-files of Musketeers to double
their front either to the Right or Left; which being done, you must make all
the Body close their Files to close Order, and after having faced them again to
the Proper Front, you are to make the Pikes face Square, and close forward to
close Order, as they then are faced every way; which done, you must make the
Pike^ face again to their Proper From^ Then you Command the Le^^ Wing of Shot
to face to the Right about; which being done, both Wings of Shot are to March
till clear of the Front and Rear of Pikes. After you have made the Musketeers
to Halt, both VVings are to face to the Left, and are to be led by the
Sargeants cross the Front and Rear of Pikes. That is to say, the Right VVing of
Shot to be led (as near the Pikes as they can March) round, till the Head of
the Shot comes even with the Left Rear Angle of the Pikes; and the Left VVing
of Shot is to be led in like manner round the Rear of the Pikes, till the Head
of the Shot comes even with the Right Front Angle of the Pikes.

Then you must command them all to Face to the proper Front. The Officers are
to move with the Musketeers as they move, by which they will naturally fall
into the Posts where they are to be, viz. The Lieutenants divided equally into
the Four Angles, as also the Sargeants. The Captains are to be divided in the
following Manner.

First Captain To the proper Front. Second Captain To the Rear. Third Captain
To the Right Flank. Fourth Captain To the Left Front Angle. Fifth Captain To
the Right Front Angle. Sixth Captain To the Left Front Angle. Seventh Captain
To the Left Rear Angle. Eighth Captain To the Right Rear Angle.
The Officers are to take Care that every Front of Soldiers do their Duty, and
the Captains that are in the Center of each Front are to retire into the first
Rank when the Musketeers Make ready, and are to kneel when the Soldiers kneel,
and to perform the same with their Pikes that the Pikemen do. When you have
done this, you place your Company of Granadiers (being divided into four equal
parts) in the four Angles, and if there be not room enough for them to stand in
the Angles without, you must take some of the Files and place them within the
Angles with their Daggers in their Firelocks, keeping the rest on the Angles
without Three deep, The two last Ranks of which are to Fire with the
Musketeers, The Front Rank making ready their Granado's, as soon as ever the Two
last Ranks have fired they are to put their Daggers into their Firelocks and
stand Charged, and when the first Rank of Musketeers Present, the first Rank of
Granadiers are to deliver their Granado's, and as soon as done, they are to
unsling their Firelocks and put in their Daggers and stand charged as the rest.

When you give the Command to Face square the Musketeers on the Right and Left
are to Face outward, and those in the Rear to Face to the Right about, The
Three outwardmost Files of Pikes on the Right and Left are to Face outward,
and the Rear half Files of the rest of the Pikes are to Face to the Right
about. Those men that are in the Angles, are to Face toward the Points of the
Angles, the Musketeers must close backwards as near to the Pikes as they can
with convenience to use their Arms, that the Pikes may reach the farther over
them.

The Ensigns are to keep their Colors Advanced and Flying, which are to be
Posted within the Square after this Method.

If there be Ten Colors, The three Colors on the Right are to be against the
proper Front of the Battalion, The two Colors next to them are to be against
the Right Flank. The two Colors next to them are to be against the Left Flank,
and the Three next to them are to be against the Rear, and they are all to Face
as the Boby Faces, and to March as they do. The Drums and Ho-boys are to divide
themselves equally, to make as much room as they can within the Square.

The Musketeers being commanded to Make ready, They are all to make the motion
of Cocking and Guarding, and at the same time the Pikemen to Port their Pikes
very low, (as they stand faced) without any word of Command, as also the
Officers.

You must fire only the Two last Ranks together, that is, The second and
third, the first of which being to stoop, the Front Rank or the first Rank of
all is to kneel, holding their Muskets so that the two other Ranks may Fire
clear of them. As Soon as ever the Second and Third Rank have Fired and
Recovered their Arms, the First Rank is to stand up without any other word of
Command with their Muskets Cockt and Guarded ready to Present. And at the same
time the two other Ranks which have Fired Load their Arms again and Make ready.
The Pikes are to continue Ported very low all the while till all the three
Ranks have Fired. After the Front Rank stands up, They are to be commanded to
Present and Fire, and after that to Recover their Arms, the Pikemen at the same
word of Command being to Recover their Pikes. The Front Rank which Fired last
and all the rest that have not Primed and Loaded their Arms, are to do it (or
in Exercise to make the mo^tion of it) as they March, and are afterward to
Shoulder. The Granadiers are to be Ordered as is before mentioned.

The reason why the Pikes do not Charge when the Musketeers Present, but
continue Ported, is, That the Musketeers in firing may not shatter the ends of
them with their Shot, but when the Musketeers have fired, if there be occasion,
the Pikes may be made to Charge from their Port in the twinkling of an eye.

Of the Saluting Posture standing.
An Officer is to stand in the same posture with his Pike Ordered as a private
Soldier, only his Arm stretched out, holding his Pike at Arms end, the Buttend
at the same distance from his Right Foot, which keeps it upright.

To Salute standing.
The Officer is to fall back with the Right Arm and Leg, keeping the Spear of
his Pike directly (...) the Rear sloped, just about the same height as a
Soldiers Pike (...) when it is Shouldered, his Le^^ Toe to the Front, and the
middl^ of his Right Foot against his Le^^ Heel, his Left Hand stretched ou^
straight before him, he is to take hold of the Pike and turning i^ with his
Right Hand, to quit that place he had hold of with his Right Hand, and taking
hold of the But-end with his Right Hand, he is to bring the Spear of the Pike
close to the ground, but not to touch it, his Fingers of both Hands straight
out as soon as ever he has brought the Spear so low, he is to raise the Pike
again, and to bring the Spear backward directly to the Rear at the same Height
'twas at, and bringing up his Right Foot at the same time, brings his Pike up
to the Order 'twas at, and then he is to pull off his Hat without bowing, and
to keep it off till the Person be past whom he Salutes. He must be sure to
observe to do every Motion leisurely, and not too quick. And take Care to have
his Salute timed, so that he may be ready to pull off his Hat just as the
person he Salutes comes right against him.

In Saluting he must take care always to stand Faced directly to the Front, or
that way the Soldiers Face, and to Salute just so, let the Person he Salutes
come which way he will.

To Salute Marching.
As Soon as the Officers approach the Person they are to Salute, They must be
sure to Shoulder their Pikes from their Comport all together, and to take great
care that they do not swing them round, but only turn the Spears directly
backwards, and lay them as level as it is possible to carry them on their
Shoulders, their Elbows out.

When they Salute, they must take great care to do every Mo^tion exactly
together and leisurely. And therefore 'twould be necessary for One to give the
Word to the rest. And they are to take care that in Saluting they neither stand
still nor mend their pace.

The first motion in Saluting is to dart their Pikes leisurely directly forward
upon the same level as they are Shouldered, stretching out their Right Hand as
far as they can, advancing at the same time with the Right Foot, and then
advancing with the Left Foot, bringing the Right Hand back, they turn their
Pikes the Spear directly forward bringing them near the ground, and then
raising them again, They bring them to their Shoulder upon a direct level as
they were; Which done, They pull off their Hats without bowing, and keep them
off till they are past by the Person they Salute.

They must be sure to time their Salute so, as to be ready to pull off their
Hats just as they come over (...) the Person they salute.

Of the Exercise of Horse.
THe Exercise of Horse, consisting in fewer words of Command than that of Foot,
i^ more generally known; and there is little alteration to be made from former
practice, but what is rather for Show than Use.

When a Troop or Squadron is to Exercise, they must have their Carabines and
Pistols Laden, and when the Corporals have been through the Ranks, and seen
that they are all ready, the Officer in Chief Commands Silence, and proceeds,
as follows.

Words of Command.
Lay your Right Hands on your Swords.

Draw your Swords.

Put your Swords into your Bridle hands.

Lay your Hands on your Pistols.

Draw your Pistols.

Cock your Pistols.

Hold up your Hands.

Give Fire. Note, that after they have given Fire they must still keep their
Hands up till the Word of Command be given to Return their Pistols.

Return your Pistols.

The same Words of Command are given for the other Pistol. And then as
follows.

Lay your Hands on your Carabines.

Advance your Carabines.

Cock your Carabines.

Present your Carabines,

Fire.

Let fall your Carabines.

Take your Swords from your Bridle Hands.

Return your Swords.

All which Motions the Officers are to see done exactly at the same time, and
therefore must not give the Words of Command too fast.

When a Body of Horse is Drawn up, the Officers are to stand close to their
Men, only he who Commands must be a Horse-length before the rest of the
Officers; and the same is to be observed in Marching, for nothing is more
unseemly than Officers to be at too great a distance from their Men.

It is thought requisite to make an Alteration in the manner of VVheeling of
Horse; For whereas formerly when a Squadron of Horse was Commanded to Wheel
(if it were to the Right) the Right Hand Men Closed to the Left, by which the
Ranks were apt to be put out of Order; And therefore the Practice now is, That
the Right Hand Men keep their Ground only Turning their Horse Heads to the
Right, whilst the Left comes about; In which Motion they must observe their
Left Hand Men.

It is also necessary to practice Horse to Facing to the Left About.

When a Squadron of Horse is to Charge another, it is better they should do it
with their Swords in their Hands, than either with Pistols or Carabines.

The Exercise of Granadiers on Horseback.
WHen they are on Horseback, then the Common Exercise used by Horse is most
proper for them, only they must strictly observe, that whenever they March,
Wheel, Face or Halt, they keep Three foot distance betwixt every File, that
they may have room to Dismount their Horses, March through, or Face about. And
being thus Marched into the Field, their Arms Charged, and their Hatts on, the
Word of Command being given to Halt, the Officer in Chief Commanding Silence,
is to proceed as follows, Viz.

Granadiers have a Care.

Sling your Muskets. Having your Left hand on your Sling.

Put on your Caps. Right and Left Hand Me^ of each Rank keep Mounted.

Clear your Right Foot of the Stirrup. At which t^^ they are to Handle their
Mus^kets, and to cast them backward^ over their Cloak.

Sismount. Which is to be done quick and all together.

Make ready your Links.

Link your Horses to the Left.

March clear of your Horses. Which may be done by the second or third Rank
Marching through, and as soon as clear, Handling their Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets. Marching, and the Sargeants and Corporals taking care
of the Ranks, etc. and that the Files open in their Marching to three foot
distance.

Halt.

Lay your Right hand on your Musket.

Poise your Musket, Facing to the Right.

Rest your Musket.

Cock and Guard.

Present.

Fire.

Recover your Arms. Half-bending your Muskets.

Cast about to the Left.

Draw your Dagger.

Fix them in your Musket.

Recover your Arms.

Charge to the Front.

To the Right, Charge Four times.

To the Right about Charge.

As you were.

To the Left, Charge Fo^^ times.

To the Left about.

As you were.

Recover your Arms.

Cast about to the Left. Having your Ri^^^ Hand on your D^^ger.

Withdraw your Dagger.

Return your Dagger.

Poise your Musket.

Clean your Pan.

Open your Cartridge Box.

Take out your Primer.

Prime.

Return your Primer

Shut your Pan. Bringing your Musket up quick before you.

Blow off your Loose Corns.

Cast about to Charge.

Take out your Cartridge. Immediately after shutting the Cartridge Box.

Vncap your Cartridge, with your Teeth.

Load with Powder and Ball.

Draw forth your Scowrer.

Shorten it to an Inch.

Place it in the Barrel.

Ram home Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scowrer.

Shorten it to a Handful.

Return your Scowrer.

Poise your Musket. Before you.

Shoulder your Musket.

Poise your Muskets. Seizing their Slings wi^^ their Left Hands.

Sling your Muskets.

Handle your Pouch. Stepping forward w^^ your Right Leg, yo^^ Left Hand at the
bo^^tom, all of a height, your Right hand held up all of a height.

Open your Pouch.

Take forth your Granade The Right Hand extended before you.

Shut your Pouch. The left hand held up all of a height, shut them all together
at one motion.

Uncase your Fuse Falling back with your Right Leg even to your Left and facing
to the Front.

Handle your Match. The Left hand to the Left side, both Arms extended. The
three ranks doing it together.

Blow your Match The first Rank only salling back with the Right Leg, blowing a
strong blast.

The first Rank Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade Afterward they are to unsling their Muskets.

At which word of Command the second Rank is to march through on the Right Six
Foot before the first, with their Matches ready to blow.

Blow your Match.

Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade Unsling and stand cockt and guarded.

At which word of Command the Third Rank is to march through on the Right Six
Foot before the Second.

Blow your Match.

Fire your Fuse.

Deliver your Granade. Unsling and stand (...) and guarded.

At which word of Command the first or proper Front is (...) march through Six
Foot.

First Rank, Present.

Fire. After which they are to fix their D^^ger in their Musket.

Which the Second and Thi^^ Ranks are to perform in the sam^ manner
successively by the sam^ words of Command.

Recover your Arms.

Cast about to the Left.

Withdraw your Daggers.

Return your Daggers.

Poise your Muskets To the proper Front.

Shoulder your Muskets.

To the Right about. Taking up your first ground, and opening your ranks in
your march.

To your Leaders.

Poise your Muskets.

Rest upon your Arms.

Lay down your Arms.

To the Right about.

March. Breaking their Ranks, then the Drum beating they draw their Swords
faceing to the Left about, running with a Huzza to their Arms.

Return your Swords.

Handle your Arms.

Recover and Poise.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Face to the Right about.

Sling your Muskets.

March to your Horses. The second and third ranks marching and standing at
their Horses Head Facing to the Front.

Vnlink your Horses.

Fasten your Links. When done they are shorten their Bridles.

Put your Foot in your Stirrup At which time the must lay their Muskets over
their ^^dles.

Mount. Which must be done all togeth^^ and the proper Officers are ^^mediately
to take care of (...) Ranks.

Handle your Swords.

Draw your Swords.

Place your Swords In your ^^dle Hands.

Handle your Pistol. Which is aways the (...) first.

Draw your Pistol.

Cock your Pistol. Keeping your Th^^ on the Cock assisted (...) the Left Hand.

Present. The Cock equal with your h^^ in height on Exercise.

Fire. Still holding it up till the next word o^ Command.

Return your Pistol.

The same for the Right Pistol.

Handle your Muskets.

Vnsling your Muskets.

Mount your Muskets.

Here if you order the Muskets to be Charged, you may proceed, as follows.

Cock your Muskets.

Present your Muskets. Into the Air.

Give. fire Keeping the Muzzel still up till the next word of Command.

Sling your Muskets.

Handle your Swords. By taking your Swords in your Right Hands.

Ma^ch

After which the Officer may proceed to Marchings, Facings, Wheelings, or what
other Exercise he shall think fit and prop^^ for them on Horseback and t^ show
them the Method of charg^ing their Arms on Horseback (...) well as on foot, and
the words (...) Command are to be given so (...) stinctly that the other
Officers m^ have time to see every particul^^ person exactly observe the sam^
and that they be accustomed to Fire at Marks both on Horseback and on Foot.

Exercise of Dragoons.
It Is to be supposed, That when the Officer in Chie^ comes into the Field, he
finds the Dragoons Drawn up in Thr^^ Ranks, with their Muskets Advanced:
Whereupon Silence being Commanded, The Word is, Dragoons have a Care.

Sling your Muskets.

Make ready your Links.

Clear your Right Foot of your Stirrup.

Dismount, Standing at your Horses Head.



When they Dismount, the Six Outside Men are to continue Mounted, that they may
take Care of the Horses.

Link your Horses to the Left.

March clear of your Horses, and Shoulder as you March.

Halt.

Then the Battalion is to be Formed in the same Method as the foot, by evening
the Ranks, and Streightning the Files; The Sargeants and Corporals falling into
the Flanks and Rear of the Battalion, and the Commission. Officers Forming a
Rank in the Rear, which is done by the following words of command, the Officer
in Chief standing about Twenty Paces distant from the Front of the Battalion in
the middle of it

Have a care of the Exercise.

Officers to the Right about.

Take your Posts in the

Rear of the Battalion.

March.

Dra^goons have a care. At which time they pull off their-right hand Gloves,
and place them under their Girdles.

Lay your Right Hand to your Musket.

Poise your Musket.

Rest your Musket.

Cock and Guard.

Present.

Fire.

Recover your Arms with the Cock half-bent.

Rest upon your Musket.

Handle your Dagger.

Draw forth your Dagger.

Fix them in the Muzzel of your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Charge to the Front.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right Charge.

To the Right about Charge.

To the Left about Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left Charge.

To the Left about Charge.

To the Right about Charge.

Recover your Arms.

Rest upon your Muskets.

Handle your Dagger.

Withdraw your Dagger.

Place your Dagger.

Poise your Musket.

Rest your Musket.

Clean the Pan with the Ball of your Thumb.

Open your Cartridge-Box.

Handle your Primer.

Draw forth your Primer.

Sink and Prime.

Return your Primer.

Shut your Pan with your two Fore-fingers.

Blow off your loose Corns, Recovering your Arms at the same time.

Cast about to Charge.

Handle your Cartridge.

Take out your Cartridge Immediately after shutting your Cartridge Box.

Open it with your Teeth.

Charge with Powder and Ball.

Draw forth your Scowrer.

Shorten it to an Inch Against your Right Breast.

Put it into the Muzzel of your Musket.

Ram down Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scowrer.

Shorten it to an handful Against your Right Breast.

Place your Scowrer

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Poise your Muskets.

Rest upon your Arms.

Lay down your Arms.

Quit your Arms.

To the right about.

March clear of your Arms. and Break.

When they are from their Arms, they are at the first Beat of Drum to return to
them with a Huzza, and as they run, Draw their Swords: And then every Man is to
stand over his own Arms.

Return your Swords.

Handle your Arms.

Rest upon your Arms.

Poise your Muskets.

To the Right about.

March to your Horses.

Unlink your Horses.

Shorten your Bridles

Put your Left Foot in the Stirrup.

Mount

Fasten your Links.

Unsting and advance your Muskets.

For Firing on Horseback.
Their Muskets being advanced on their Right Thigh.

Ioyn your Left Hand to your Muskets.

Cock and Guard.

Rest your Muskets on your Bridle-hand.

Present.

Fire.

Recover your Arms with the Cock Half-bent.

Then they are ready to March, Wheel or Face, with or without their Daggers
fixed in their Murkets, as the Officer commanding shall think fit.

Of Encamping.
THe Major Genral for the day, having with him such of the Guards of Horse, as
shall be thought fit, and ordered by the General for the Security of the Camp,
is to March before the Army that he may have time to view the ground and to
Settle the Camp, not far from Water, if it may be with convenience, Which being
done, He is to order the Quarter-Master-General to Set out the Ground to the
Majors of the Brigades, who thereupon Set it out to the Adjutants of each
Regiment, who divide it for each Troop or Company. The Major General in the
mean while is to Ride about the Camp to Post the Main-guards, as he finds best
for the Safety of the Army, and is to order the Quartermaster General what
ground or Village he shall take up for the Kings Quarters, as also some
commodious place for the Park of Artillery, and another for the Bread-Carts
which is Commonly near the Center of the Army with the Hospital.

When every thing has been done as above mentioned, and the Camp all Marked
out, then the Major General is to send an Aid de Camp to give Notice to the
General that all is ready. And at the Entering into the Camp the Major General
is to meet the General to give him a full Account of every particular, The
Adjutants General of Horse and foot attending always on the General, that they
may be ready to Execute his orders, and make Detachments without delay.

It is the usual Practice to Camp an Army in two Lines, The Second distant from
the First Three hundred Paces; that is, From the head of the First Line to the
Head of the Second, whereof one hundred and twenty are for the Encamping of the
First Line, so that there remains One hundred and eighty Paces for the distance
between the last Tents of the first Line and the Head of the Second. And if the
Army Encamp with a Reserve, Then the same distance is to be observed by them.

The Horse are to be posted on the Wings, and the foot in the Middle in such a
manner that the Lines of the Camp look toward the Enemy and be Covered behind
by a River, Brook, or Marsh, if it may be with Convenience.

Every Squadron consisting (...) Three Troops, and fifty men (...) each Troop,
must be allowed fi^ty paces. And every Battalio^ consisting of sixteen
Companies and fifty men in each Company, must have One hundred paces allowed
for their Encamping.

All Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot consisting but of fifty men, are to
be Encamped on one Row of Baraques or Hutts; But when Troops or Companies
consist of more men, there must be two Files of Baraques or Hutts.

It is to be observed that in each Squadron or Battalion, The Colonels Company
be always upon the Right or Left, And there make their Row of Hutts. Behind
them must be left a space for the Street. Then the Second Company makes their
Row of Hutts, near to which the Third makes theirs, leaving the space of two
Foot only between their Hutts which is called the Bystreet. And the same thing
is to be observed by the Horse.

The Hutts of the Foot always open toward the Street, the Baraques of the
cavalry always toward the Horse Heads.

The Hutts of the Quartermaster and Sargeants are always to be at the Head of
the Troopers and Soldiers, And the Officers Tents behind.

The Camp of the first Br^^ gade of the Army is on the Righ^ Hand of the first
Line, That (...) the second on the Left, the Third is posted on the Right of
the Second Line, the Fourth on the Left, and the rest in the Cente according to
their seniority. This is to be observed among the Horse as well as Foot.

The Dragoons are never to be Encamped in the body of the Army, but have their
Camp at the Head, or on the Wing on that side where the greatest danger is,
serving always as an out-guard for the Army.

Every Regiment is to have a Guard at the Head of their Camp, And (...) the
Major General for the ^ay, takes care to place the great Guard in a proper
place and distance from the Army toward the Enemy, choosing for that effect a
place where all the Avenues may be discovered. There it is to continue during
the day, and at night is to draw off near the Army at the Head of the Foot.

When an Army Encamps near an Enemy, and there be no river to divide them, the
General oftentimes Entrenches his Camp and makes his men pass the night under
Arms.

The Colonel, or Officer of Horse who Mounts the Guard, is to send off an
Out-guard, or Advance-guard, consisting of twentey four Troopers commanded by a
Lieutenant, whom he posts where he sees most convenient in a place from whence
the country about may be easily discovered.

The Duty of him who commands the great Guard, is to let no person whatsoever
pass without an Order, to look every where about, and to send Notice to the
General whenever he discovers any Troops or Forces.

It is to be observed, That the Measure of ground before mentioned, is meant
only for Encamping of an Army, For if it were to be Ranged in Battle in case
of Service, the distances between the Battalions or Squadrons are to be greater
then in a Camp. It must be end eavoured as much as may be, That the Second Line
be equal to the first, keeping the same distance upon the right and Left.

The Particulars of Encamping a Battalion.
WHen the Quartermaster has his Ground alloted to him for Encamping a
Battalion (which is commonly One hundred Paces) he is to divide it in the
manner following, Viz. He must allow Seven Foot Square to each Hutt, Two Foot
to the By-streets. and fifteen Foot to the great Streets. Every company
consisting of fifty men ought to have Ten Hutts; And' there must be the
distance of Two Foot between the Hutts. The Kitchins must be marked out at
Twelve Foot distance from the last Row of Hutts, and are to be placed just over
against them, so that the streets may be open quite through for the Officers to
pass easily to the Head of the Camp as there shall be occasion. The length of
the Kitchins is to be Nine Foot, and the breadth six Foot. There must be Thirty
Paces distance between the soldiers Kitchins and the Front of the Captains
Tents; Forty Paces distance between the Captains Tents and the Front of the
Tents of the subaltern Officers; and the remaining Ground is for the Encamping
of the Field-Officers, and the Captains Equipage. The Suttlers are to Encamp
behind the Officers Tents: The Colonells, and Field Officers, and
Staff-Officers Tents are to be in the Center of the Battalion, behind the Tents
of the Captains.

There must be twenty or thirty Paces^et ween one Battalion and another: The
Sargeants Hutts are to be at the Head of the Soldiers, to open the contrary
way; That is, to the Front.

The Pikes (whether they are placed against a Cross or in a Stand) must be
allowed at Eighteen Foot distance from the Hutts. The Muskets at Eighteen Foot
distance from the Pikes. That is, before them.

The Colors and Drums are to be set within the Hollow of the Pikes; The
Holberts of the Sargeants that March with the Shot, should be placed with the
Muskets, and those of the Sargeants that March with the Pikes, with the Pikes.

The Particulars of Encamping a Squadron.
WHen a Quartermaster of Horse has his Ground allotted to him for a Squadron,
which is commonly Fifty Paces, He is to divide it in the following manner, Viz.
He must allow Three Paces for the length of a Baraque, and Two Paces distance
from the opening of the Baraques to the Stakes to which the Horses are
fastened, and Three Paces for each Horses standing, and Ten Paces for the
Street.

To the Second Troop is to be allowed Two Paces distance, three Paces for their
Baraques, and One Pace distance for the By-streets.

The third Troop must have two Paces distance, three Paces for the Baraques,
and three Paces for the Horses, after which there will remain Fifteen Paces,
which makes the distance from one Squadron to another.

If the Squadron be stronger, they must have more Ground, this being only for
a Squadron of one hundred and fifty Men in three Troops, each Troop making but
one row of Baraques.

The Colors are to be placed at Eighteen Foot distance from the Front of the
Baraques, in the same Line with the Pikes.

There are commonly ten or twelve Baraques on a row for every Troop of Fifty
Men, (...) there must be at least two Pac^ distance from one Baraque to (...)
other.

For the Kitchins belonging to the Troops, the Officers Tent^ and the Suttlers
which attend up on the Troops, the same measures are to be observed in
propor^tion as are used for Encamping (...) Foot. By a Pace is meant thr^ Foot.

Orders for Battle.
THo there can be no certain Rules given for any Orde^ of Battle which depends
chiefly upon the Circumstances of Place, and other accidents; yet these short
Directions are to serve for an Example to show the nature of the thing by a
single Battalion.

You must first of all command Silence, at which time the Ranks are to be two
good Paces distant, and the Files closed in such manner that every Soldier may
march at his ease, and so Load and Fire; which will be best effected by every
ones keeping the distance of half a Foot from his Right Hand Man; So that they
may have liberty of moving their elbows as they March.

You must Command them to March very slowly, to observe the Right in Marching,
and to preserve the Intervals, which are always to be Fifty or Sixty Paces at
least, and (if the Ground will afford it) more; that Fifty or Sixty of a
Battalion may pass through them with ease, nothing have ever proved more
prejudicial (...) Battle, then the leaving interva^ too strait.

None is to speak but the Commander in chief, or the Major (by his Order) who
is alway^ to attend his commands.

To a Battalion of ten Companies, there are supposed to b^ (besides the Colonel
and Lieutenant Colonel) Eight Captains, and Nine Lieutenants, who are to be
Posted in the Form of Battle as follows.

Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel, and Five Captains at the Head of the Pikes.

1st and 3d Captain at the Head of the right Division of Shot. 2d and 4th
Captain at the Head of the Left Division of Shot. 6th Captain in the Rear of
the Pikes. 7th Captain in the Rear of the Left Wing of Shot. 8th Captain in the
Rear of the Right Wing of Shot. ^st and 3d Lieutenant at the Head of the right
wing of shot. ^d and 4th Lieutenant at the Head of the Left VVing of shot. 5th
Lieutenant on the Right Flank. 6th Lieutenant on the Left Flank. 7th Lieutenant
in the Rear of the Pikes. 8th Lieutenant in the Rear of the Left VVing of shot.
9th Lieutenant in the Rear of the Right Wing of Shot.
Which Rule is to be obser^^ whether the Colonel or Lieu^^nan-Colonel be
present or (...) by placing the Eldest Captains at the Head of the Pikes, and
so proceeding in the Method be^^^^ specified, the Youngest being Posted in the
Rear, what ever the Number of Officers may be, u^less the General or Command^
in Chief give Orders to Post the^ otherwise, as there may be o^^casion.

Advancing against the Enem^ in Battle out of Musket Shot, the Captains and
other Officers at the Head of the Bat^alion are all to March in a Line with
their Pikes in their Hands two good Paces before the Men, and are often to look
behind them, be cause otherwise they may insen^sibly get too much before the
Body and the Soldiers by following too fast, fall into Disorder, whereof great
care is to be taken in Marching against an Enemy.

When Musketeers come within Shot, and March ready with their Muskets Guarded,
the Ranks should be closed forwards to Swords point; the Distance of Files is
to be preserved, as has been said already.

In a Battle, the Captains and other Officers are to March in a Line; But
coming within Shot of the Enemy, and the Musketeers Marching ready Cockt and
Guarded, when the first Rank is commanded to Kneel, the whole Line of Captains
and other Officers is to retire, each of them into the Intervals of his files
next behind his Post, yet so that they (...) look to the Right and Left of
(...) Battalion.

The Officer Commanding the Rear, is to observe that the Batalion keep
Marching, to cause (...) Soldiers to close for wards eal^^ without noise or
confusion. H^ chief care is, to comma^^ the Pikes to March alwa^ even with the
VVings of Sh^^ For it often happens, that (...) Marching any considerable tim^
in Battle the VVings Advance and Form a Half Moon, so tha^ the Pikes in the
middle being extremely pressed upon, the Battallelion falls into confusion;
^^provided the motion of the Pike be equal with the Right an^ Left, the
Battalion cannot be d^ordered in its March. Abo^^ all, care must be taken to
preserve the distance in Rank and File, according to what has been said already.

The Granadiers (when there are any) are to be drawn up on the Right of the
Battalion and to augment it, without intermixing with it, or troubling the
Order of it, they being a separate number of Men that are to be always ready
for whatsoever shall be commanded them.

The Commander of a Battalion may be on Horse back at the Head of it, when the
Captains are on Foot, with their Pikes in their Hands, in as much as he is to
be stirring to a^l parts, to see that they March as they should; and above all,
that none speak xcept himself, or the Major by his Order; And is to alight
when the Musketeers make Ready^ and to March with his Pike Charged against the
Enemy.

When an Army is drawn up f^^ Battle, the usual distance betwee^ the Lines is
Three hundred Paces.

Of Garrisons and Guards.
THe Officers usually placed in (...) Garrison, are a Governor, a
Lieutenant-Governour, a Majo^ Aid-Major, and Captains of the Gates.

It is the Governors part to have a continual care of the Preservation of the
Place Entrusted to him. Hi^ Office is to appoint the Guards, Rounds, and
Patrolls, to give the Word every Evening, visit the Posts, keep the Officers
and Soldiers to their Duty, Charge them to be diligent, and to send out
frequent parties as well to learn News of the Ene^y; as to Raise Contributions
from ^he neighboring Country.

The Lieutenant-Governour, or ^fficer in Chief, Commands in the Place and
Government in absence of ^he Governor, with the same Authority.

The Major sees the Guards Mount^d, the Rounds and Posts Assigned, ^^e
Regulates the Sentinels, goes every Evening to receive the Word from the
Governor, and gives it about upon the Place of Arms, to the Quartermasters and
Sargeants of the Garrison. He goes his Round^ Major, Visits the Corpse of
Guards, and sees that all the Soldiers Arms are fixed and in good Order; He
causes necessary Ammunition to be distributed among them, Orders the Gates to
be opened and shut, and gives the Governor an exact accou^ of all that passes
in the Place.

The Aid-majors are more (...) less in number, according to the greatness of
Places; They go the Rounds with the Major by turns, and the Duty of their
Places differs nothing at all from his, they being as Assistants to him.

The Care of the Captains of the Gates is to go Evening and Morning to the
Governors house, to receive the Keys of the Gates, that they may open and shut
them.

There is usually in every Garrison (especially a Frontier Town) a Commissarie
of Artillery, a store-keeper, who keeps Account of all the Ammunition, and
distributes it according to the Governors Order, a certain number of Gunners,
whereof there is always to be one on the Guard at the Batteries, a Commissary
of Provisions who has the Charge of the Corn, Flower. and all that may serve
for the sustenance of a Garrison.

The Officers who are in a Garrison, owe all Obedience and Respect to the
Governor or Commander in Chief, and they cannot be absent for any Reason
soever, without a permission fr^^^ him in Writing, or from the Person that
commands there in his absence.

In Garrison, some Men are to be placed at the Gates, whose Care is only to
observe Strangers that come in and go out, and according to the comparing the
Memorials which they and all the Innkeepers of the Town are to bring every
Evening to the Major; It is known how many Strangers are every night in the
Place, whatever they are, and where they Lodge.

The hour of Mounting the Guard is different in Garrisons, according to the
inclination of the Governors. In some places it is done at the break of day,
because at the time when the Ga^^ are opened (which are the usual hour of
Surprises.) Two thrids of the Garrison are in Arms; others Mount it at Ten of
the Clock in the Forenoon, or toward the Evening, but the most usual time is
at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Whilst the Drums beat for the Guard, the Sargeants or Corporals are to go the
Major's House, who makes them cast Lots for the Posts and Rounds, and writs
them down in a Register kept for that purpose.

Having, done so, they return to their Companies or Squadrons, who gather
together before the Captains Quarters, and if they do not Mount by whole
Companies, but by Detached Men (which is the most practicable way of doing
Duty) the Sargeants Lead them in good Order, Drums Beating as far as the Place
of Arms, to that part where the Guards of the Post which has fallen to their
share, ought to meet.

When all the Detachments are Drawn up on the place of Arms, Formed ready for
the Guards, the Major or Aid-major makes the Officers draw Lots for the Post
and Rounds, beginning by the Captains; and ending at the Sargeants.

At the Places which are weakest, and where there is greatest danger, there
ought to be a stronger Guard Commanded by a Captain, with a Sub-Lieutenant or
Ensign, and two or three Sargeants.

The guards being Set, and the Officers having taken their Posts, the Major
begins to make the guard of the Place of Arms (or the Main-Guard) March off,
then those of the Gates and Bastions: And lastly, those that are without.

Whilst the Guard is Mounting, the Officers of the Guard that is to be
Relieved, put their Soldiers in Arms and draw from the Guard, that they may
leave the Place to the Guard that is to Relieve them, and Post themselves over
against them, every Officer standing in his post at the Head of them.

The Officers of the Guard that is Relieved Delivers to them whatever Orders
there are, the Corporals do the like to their Comrades, they Charge them with
Furniture of the Corpse of Gu^^ and informs them of the Num^^ of Sentinels that
are to be (...) well by Night as by Day, and what they have to do extraordinary:

The Consignations being made, an^ the Sentinels Relieved, the Office^ of the
Guard that is Reliev^ March off their Soldiers to (...) Place of Arms; where
when (...) have Drawn them up, they dis^^ them.

The Officers of the Guard t^^ have Mounted, Command the S^^diers to set down
their Arm (...) these Words of Command, the (...) being Advanced, and Muskets
Sh^^dred.

Recover Your Arms.

Ranks, File Off by Division To the Right (or Left) March.

Set down your Arms in good Order.

As soon as the Arms are set down, the Officers are to Order the Corporals to
take care that they be in condition to Fire, and that the Bandaliers be
provided with Powder and Ball, Flints or Match, and to give strict Command to
the Sentinels that are at the Gates, never to suffer any stop of Wagons or
Carts upon the Bridges, Charging them to stop the Carriages that come in or go
out, until they know that no others are coming to meet them.

When a stranger on Horseback or Foot, offers to come into the Town, the
Out-Sentinels a^^ stop him, then to call the Co^^ral, who give notice of it to
t^^ Officer, and the Officer (...) one or two Musketeers with (...) to the
Governors House.

At what distance soever a Sen^tinel discovers any Troops, he ought to give
notice thereof to the corpse of Guard, and the Office causes immediately the
Barr^^ to be made fast, or a Bridge to (...) Drawn, letting no body in, unles^
the Major or Aid-major bring Orders for it from the Governo^^

When it is time to shut t^^ Gates, the Bell is rung to call (...) those that
are abroad in the Field and the Aid-majors, or Capta^^ of the Gates, attended
by some Musketeers of the Main-guard come to the Governors house for the Keys,
and as soon as they come to the Gates, the Officers Draw the Guard in Two
Ranks, and Order the Musketeers to stand Guarded, and send some of the Pikemen
to help to Draw up the Bridges.

After the gates are shut, One half of the Guard is to be drawn upon the
Rampart to pass the Night in the Corpse of Guard of the Curtains or Bastions.
The Corporals send some Soldiers for Firing and Candle, And Sargeants go to the
Place of Arms to receive the Word which is no sooner given but the Sargeants of
the Guard carry the Word to their Officers, and give it about among the
Corporals, who command the Sentinels, to suffer no body after that time to pass
upon the Ramparts without commanding them to stand and giving Notice of it to
the Corpse of Guard.

The Taptoe or Retreat is be^^en either at Nine or Ten, as the Governor
directs.

When the Major goes the Round, the Officers of the Guard receive him by the
Corporal and Two Musketeers, and give him the Word once only, That is, at his
Round-Major.

When the Governor, Lieutenant-Governour or Commander in Chief go the Round,
The Offi^cers having Ranked their Soldiers before the Guard without Arms, Send
a Corporal and Four^ Musketeers to receive them Te^^ Paces off. And are to give
them the Word as often as they pleas^ to demand it. All other Rounds without
exception ought to give the Word to the Corporals or Lanspesades of the Corpse
of Guards who receive it with the point of their naked sword at the Breast of
him who gives it.

In Garrisons hat are well guarded, the Rounds go every quarter of an hour, To
the end the Rampart may never be unfurnished. And that there may be an
exactness in it, They carry Meddals of Lead from guard to guard, so that if
there be any neglect it may be found where it was.

The Rounds are made with Light, and so soon as a Sentinel perceives any, it is
his duty to cry, Who comes there? so loud that he may be heard by the next
Corpse of Guard. He who goes Round should Answer.

The Round. Or

The Round-Major. Or

The Governors Round.

The Sentinels by whom he passes should always rest their Arms, and ne^^ permit
any whomsoever to come to near them. When he draws nea^ Corpse of Guard, The
Sentinel before the Arms shall ask him very loud.

Who comes there? So soon as he answers The Round. The Sentinel is to call to
him to Stand.

And to the Corporal to Come forth.

Thereupon the Corporal is to come immediately out of the Corpse of Guards, to
draw his Sword and ask, Who comes there?

When he is answered, The Round. He is to say, Let him who has the Word Advance.

Then the Round Advances and gives the Word into the Corporals Ears so low
that he cannot be heard of any body else. But if one should give any other
Word then what is true, He ought to be stopped, And the Officer of the guard is
to be acquainted with it, who either keeps him all night a prisoner, or
disposes of him as he th^^ proper.

Though all Sentinels rest the^ Muskets in the night, and stand with their
Pikes Charged when an^ Round or Officer comes by, ye^ in the day the Muskets
are to b^ Shouldered, and the Pikes Ordered.

The Out-corps of Guard m^^ Rounds about the covered way but give no word, they
being only made to hearken, and every Soldier goes the Round by turns.

The Patrolls are made in the Streets by a Sargeant and six Mu^ketiers of the
Main-Guard to cau^^ the Soldiers to retire to the^^ Quarters, The public
Houses (...) shut their Doors, and to hind^ the Disorders that may be
co^^mitted stopping and carrying to the Guard all that are found in the Streets
without Light and disorderly.

At what hour soever the Alarm is Rung, all the Companies are with speed and
diligence to assemble before their Captains Quarters, who are to lead them to
the Posts that have been appointed them by the Major.

At the Break of Day the Drums Beat the Reveille, the Aid-Majors and Captains
of the Gates come to the Governors for the Keys, and the Officers of the
Guards bring off the Soldiers that passed the night on the Ramparts, and Rank
them in two Ranks, and make them stand with their Arms guarded whilst the Gates
are Opening. The Majors send a Sargeant with some Musketeers ^^scout in the
Suburbs and in the Hollow ways about the Town, and draw the Bridge upon them
until they come back. When they bring an account that there is no Danger, the
rest of the Bridges are let down. The Corporals place the Out-sentinels whom
they i^ form of what they have to d^. The Majors and Captains of t^^ Gates
carry back the Keys to the Governors House, and the Offi^cers make the
Soldiers set dow^ their Arms.

In Garrisons that are well provided with Horse, The Gov^nour places daily a
Guard of F^^^ Troopers, and sends every mo^^ing an Officer with some Hor^^ men
to Beat the Road a Mile^ Two round the place.

Every Officer of a guard is to answer for his Post, and no man, not so much as
his Colonel can Command him in any thing except the Governor of the Place, or
he who Commands in his absence.

All Governors or Commanders in Chief ought to have a Sentinel at their Door;
and as often as they pass by any Corpse of guard, the Officers are obliged to
draw out their Soldiers before the guard in a Rank without Arms and stand at
their Head.

If the Governor or commander of a Place be a Lieutenant General, he is to
have a a Guard at his door consisting of a Lieutenant, Sargeant and Thirty men,
who are to be under Arms as well as the other Corpse of Guard every time he
passes, but the Drums are not to Beat the March.

If the Commander of a Place be a General, he is to have a Guard of Fifty men
Commanded by a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Sub-Lieutenant or an Ensign and two
Sargeants, And all Corpse of Guard are obliged to be under Arms when he passes,
and the Drums to beat the March.

When any Prince of the Blood, or General of an Army passes through a^
Garrison, The Governor furnishes them with a Foot-Guard; And at their Entry
and Departure Salute them with Cannon.

Memorandum, All Field-Offic^^ and Commanders of Battalions (...) exempted from
mounting of Guards.

That the Regiments and Troops of Guards are never to Roll with any other
Regiments or Troops, but are always to choose their Posts.

That the Sargeants of the Regiments of Guards are never to receive Orders in
the Ring with any other Sargeants, but in a Ring separately.

General Directions.
THe Officers are to take great Care that their Soldiers keep themselves
cleanly and handsome in their Clothes, as well as their Arms in good order, It
being as much the duty of an Officer to see that a Soldiers Clothes and Shoes
and Stockings be as they ought to be, as their Arms, and especially upon
Mounting of Guards or coming upon Duty They are to see that t^^ have every
thing in order.

The Captains of Foot, Lieu^^nants and Ensigns are to wear th^^ Gorgets
whenever they are upon Duty, or appear in Arms w^^ their Companies.

It Is very necessary for all Captai^^ and Commanders of Companies to practice
their Musketeers to Exercise Pikes, and their Pike-men Musket^. As also to
practice their men to Sh^ot at a Mark, which is extreme useful.

It Is to be observed that in Marchin^ a Battalion in Three Divisions, the
Distances between the Divisions b^ neither too great nor too little, The best
Rule for which is the judgment of the Officers, to keep just so much Distance
between the Divisions as is necessary to Wheel a Division to make good the
Front, as if you were to draw up on a sudden.

In Marching by Subdivisions also, the same Method is best for the distances
between every Division.

No Sentinel or Soldier under Arms ^s to bow or pull off his Hat.

It is likewise to be observed, That when the Pikes or Muskets of a Body, of
men are all Ordered, and that they be to Shoulder their Muskets and advance
their Pikes, The Musketeers to be Commanded to Poise and Shoulder their Muskets
before the Pikes are to advance.

When Officers are at any time to be Divided and Posted, It is to be done by
the Odd and Even, the most easy way.

Upon Detachments or part^^ all Officers of Horse are to command according to
the Dates o^ their Commissions, and all Officers of Foot according to t^^ Ranks
of their Regiments, and not according to their Commissions, But the Lieutenan^
and Ensigns of the same Re^ment upon such Detachmen^ or Parties are to command
among themselves, according (...) their commissions, and not (...) Rank of
their Companies.

In Marching off any (...) rade or Place where men a drawn up, The Pikes are to
continue Advanced till they ha^^ Marched clear off the Place* Arms, The like is
to be observ^ when a Body of men are to draw up, or that they March before any
Person that comes to view them.

No Soldiers are to March with any Coats on their Arms, or Sticks in their
Hands, or any thing to incumber them.

Of Councels of War, or Courts-Martial.
IN an Army the Council of War is always to meet at the Generals Quarters or
Tent, And none are called to it, but the Lieutenant-Generals, the
Major General, the Brigadiers, and the Colonells or Commanders of Bodies when
the Matters concern their Regiments.

Private Councels of War or Cou^^^ Martial in a Garrison are either Held at the
Governors House, at (...) Main-Guard, or where the Governor orders. In a
Camp, at the Colonels Tent, who causes Notice (...) be given to the Captains to
be present.

When all are met, The Governor or Colonel or he who is (...) Sit as
President, takes his place at the head of the Table, the Captai^^ Sit about
according to their Seniority (that is to say) The First Captai^ on the Right
Hand of him that Presides, The Second on the Left, a^^ so of the rest. And the
Town-M^^jor or the Aid-Major or Quarter Master of the Regiment, who in the
absence of the Judge-Advocat di^charges his Office, is to Sit in (...) Place at
the lower end of Table.

The Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants and Ensigns have right to Enter into the Room
where the Council of War (or Court Martial) is held, But they are to stand at
the Captains backs with their Hats off, and have no Vote.

If the Council be Called to Deliberate on some Matter of Consequence, The
President having Opened it to the Court, Asks their Opinions.

The Youngest Officer gives his Opinion first, and the rest in order till it
come to the President, who speaks last. The Opinions of every one being set
down in Writing, the Result is drawn conformable to the Plurality of Votes,
which is Signed by the Persident only.

If the Council of War, or Court Martial be Held to Judge a Criminal, The
President and Captains having taken their places, and the Prisoner being
brought before them, And the Informations read, The President Interrogate^ the
Prisoner about all the facts whereof he is accused, and having heard h^
defense, and the Proof made or a^^ ledged against him, He is ordered to
withdraw, being remitted to the care of the Marshal or Jailer. Then every one
Judges according to his Cons^^ence, and the Ordinances or Articl^ of War, The
Sentence is framed according to the plurality of Votes, and the Criminal being
brought in again, The Sentence is Pronounced to him in the Name of the Council
of War, or Court Martial.

When the Criminal is Condemned to any Punishment, the Provost-Marshal causes
the Sentence to be put in Eexecution, And if it be a public Punishment, the
Regiment ought to be drawn together to see it, that thereby the Soldiers may be
deterred from offending. Before a Soldier be punished for any infamous Crime,
he is to be publicly Degraded from his Arms and his Coat stripped over his Ears.

A Council of War or Court Martial is to consist of Seven at least with the
President, when so many Officers can be brought together, And if it so happen,
that there be not Captains enough to make up that Number, the inferior
Officers may be called in.

FINIS.

