Anno quarto et quinto, Philippi and Mariae.

Acts made at a Parliament begone and holden at Westminster, the.xx day of
January, in the fourth and fifth year of the reign of our sovereign Lord
and Lady, Philippe and Marye by the grace of God, king and Queen of England,
Spain, France, both the Sicilles, Jerusalem, and Irelande, defendours of the
faith Archidukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgondie, Millaine and Brabant, counties
of Haspurge Flaunders, and Tyrol, and there continued and kept until the.vij.
day of March, then next folowinge, and enacted as follows.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

printer's device of John Cawood (or Iohannis Cavvodi)

The Table.
AN Act for the confyrmation of letters patentes. Cap. i. An act for the
having of Horse, Armoure, and Weapon. Cap. ii. An act for the taking of
musters. Cap. iii. An act that accessaries in murder and diverse felonies,
shall not have the benefit of clergy. Cap. iiii. An act touching the making
of woollen clothes. Cap. v. An act to inquire of Frenchemen being denisens.
Cap. vi An act to make up the Jury with circumstantibus, where the king and
Queen's majesty's or the Queen's majesty is a party. Cap. vii. An act for the
punishment of such as shall take away maidens that be inheritours, being
within age of.xvi. years, or that mary them without the consent of their
parents. Cap. viii An act for the continuation of certain statutes. Cap. ix.
An act for the confirmation of the Subsedye of the clergy. Cap. x. An act of
a Subsedye and one fyftene granted by the temporaltie. Cap. xi.
An Act for the confirmation of Letters Patentes.
WHERE sythen the.vii. day of Iulye in the first year of the Queen's Majesty's
reygne diverse and sundry Honors, Castles, Manoures, Lands, Tenements, Rentes,
Reuercions, services, and other hereditamentes, have been conveyed and assured
to her highness, her heirs and Successoures by or from diverse and sundry
persons, and bodies politic, as well for the discharge and satisfaction of great
debtes, and sums of monye, as for other good considerations. For the perfytte
assurance confirmation and further suretye whereof.

BE IT enacted ordained and establyshed by the king and Queen's Maiestyes, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by thaucthoritie of ye same. That all Feoffementes, Fynes,
Surrenders, assuraunces, conueyances and estates in any wise conveyed had or
made, to or for our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and queen's
Majesty's, or to or for our said soueraygne Lady the queen, by or from any
such person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, of any such Honors,
castles manoures, Lands, Tenements, Rentes, Reuertions, Services, or other
hereditamentes, for any debte, sum or sums of monye or other
consideration, whatsoever, shall stand remain and be good and available in
the law to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, according to the true
meaning, intent and purporte of the same.

SAVINGE to all and every person and persons, and to their heirs bodies
politic and corporate, and to their Successoures, and to every of them,
(other then such person or persons, and their heirs and wives, and every of
them bodies politic and corporate, and their successoures and every of them,
of or from whom, the king and queen's highness, or the queen's hyghnes only
has obtained or purchased, the said premises, or any percell thereof, by
exchange, gift bargayne, fine, Feoffement, recovery, deed, enrolled or
otherwise) al such right title, interest, use, possession, rentes, reuercions,
Remainders, Olfiees, Fees, Commons, profyttes, and commodities, whatsoever
which they or any of them have might or ought to have had of, in or to the
premises or any part thereof in as large and ample manner, form and condition
to al intentes co^structions and purposes, as if this act had never been had
ne made. This present Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND where as well our said sovereign lord, and Lady, as our said sovereign
Lady the Queen's highness, since the said.vii. day of July in ye first year of
her majesty's reign, as well for diverse and great so^mes of money, as also for
diverse and sundry other considerations, have, and has bargained, sold, given
or granted by their or her graces so^dry letters pate^ts indentures, or other
writings, sealed under ye great seal of England, or the seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, as well to bodies politic and corporate, as to diverse and sundry
other their loving and obedient subjects, diverse and sundry honors, castles,
manors, lands, tenements, rentes, reuercions, seruyces, and other
hereditamentes, in fee simple, fee tail, or for term of life, lyfes or
years, as in the same several letters patents, indentures, and other
wrytynges, is mentioned and declared. And to the intent the same letters patents,
indentures, and other writings, should be of good auayleable and perfect force
and effect, to al and every her highness loving Subjects, according to the true
meaning and effect of the same.

OVRE SAID Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen, are contented and
pleased, that it be enacted by thauthoritie of this present parliamente. And
therefore by our said Soueraygne lord, and lady, the king and queen's
majesty's, the laides spiritual and temporal, and the commo^s in this present
parliamente assembled, be it enacted and established, ye as well al and singular
letters patents, indentures and other writings Sealed under the great Seal
of England, or under the Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster, and heretofore made
or granted by our said soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queen, or by
our said sovereign lady the Queen, for any Su^mes of monye, or for and upon
any other consideratio^s, as al other letters pate^tes, hereafter to be made by
our said sovereign lord and lady, for any sum or su^mes of monye during
the space of Seven years next ensuynge the making of this act, to any body
politic, or corporate, or to any other person or persons, whatsoever, of any
honors, castles, manors, lordeshippes, graunges, Meses, lands, tenements,
meadows pastures, rentes, reuercions, seruyces, woods, aduousons, nominations,
patronages, annuities, rightes, interestes, entrees, conditions, letes,
courts, liberties, privileges, fraunchyses, or of any other hereditamentes,
with their appurtenaunces, or of any part or percell of the^ sealed with or
under the great seal of England, or under the Seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, of whatsoever kind, nature, or qualitye they or any of the^ be or
shall be reputed known or taken, with their appurtenaunces or any part or percel
of the^, shall be good perfyt and effectual in ye law, and shall stand, be taken,
reputed, demed, and adjudged good perfect sure auayleable and effectual in the
law, as well against the king and Queen's Majesty's, as against the queen her
heirs and successors according to the tenor of the said letters pate^ts, the
same to be expounded co^strued demed and adjudged most beneficial for the
patentees and grau^tees of the same, according unto the words and purport of
every the said letters patents, without any confirmation, license, or
tolleration of the queen, her heirs or successors, any misnaminge, misrecital,
or non recital of any the same honors, castles, manners, lands, teneme^tes and
other the premises or any percel thereof, or any lack of fyndinge of offices,
or inquisitions of and in the premises, whereby the title of the Queen's highness
therein ought to have been found before the making of the same letters
patentes or other writings, or any misrecital, or none recital of leases
thereof before made, as well of record as not of record, or any lack of the
certainty, miscastinge, rating, or setting forth of the yearly values and
rates of the premises, or of the yearly rentes reserved of and for the
premises or any percel thereof, mentioned or contained in any the said letters
patentes, or other writings, or for that the premises be, or any part thereof
is valued to a more or less value in the said letters patentes or writings,
then the said manors, lands, tenementes, and other the premises, then were or
shall be in yearly value, or any misnaming of the towns, Hamlettes, parishes, or
counties where the same honors, Castles, manors, lands, tenementes, rentes,
hereditamentes, and other the premises and every percell thereof, or any
percell thereof lien or ben, or any lack of the true naminge of the lands,
tenementes, or hereditame^tes, or of the natures, kinds, sorts, or quantities
of the said possessions or hereditamentes or any percell thereof, or any lack
of the true naminge of the corporation, or any lack of atturnement, livery, or
season, or any misnaming of any the late tenauntes or fermours of the same so
sold or given, notwithstanding.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this act
nor any thing therein contained shall not extend to make any letters patents
of any office or offices, to be of any other effect, force, or strength the^
the same letters patents were or should have been before ye making of this act.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that all and
singular such patentees, grauntees, and donees, and every of them, which at
any time heretofore since the said seventh day of July have obtained and
gotten of our said Sovereign Lord and Lady the king and Queen or of any of
them, or at any time hereafter during the space of seven years, shall obtain
and get of our said Sovereign lord and lady the king and Queen that now be,
or of any of them, by way of exchange, or for any sum or sums of monye,
any letters patents of any monasteries, abbathies, priories, nonneries, or
other ecclesiastical possessions, or of any percell of them, or of any other
manours Lands Tenementes or Hereditaments whatsoever, which at the date and
making of any the same letters patentes so made, since the said seventh day
of Iulye or hereafter to be made during the space of seven years as is
aforesaid, were or shall be of better and more yearly valewe to the king and
Queen's highness or to any of them, in yearly rent and ferme, then was, is, or
shall be contained, mentioned or specified in any such letters patentes, or in
the perticulers or rate thereof made or to be made by any auditour or
auditors, surueyour or surueyours or other officer, that then every such
patentee, grauntee, and donee, their heirs executours or assigns and every of
them, within one year nerte after office and other due proof order and decre
thereof made and had, or to be made and had within the space and term of ten
years next after this present parliament in the court of the eschequer,
shall content and pay unto the queen's majesty her heirs and successors, for
the same overplus and more value of the same monasteries, abbathies, priories,
nonneries, manors lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes whatsoever, with
their appurtenaunces, so sold, given, granted, or exchaunged as is
aforesaid, after the rate of twenty years purchase, and according to the
yearly value and rate as the same manours, Lands, tenementes, and other
hereditamentes whatsoever, were at the time of the making of any such letters
patentes so made, or to be made in manner and form aforesaid. Any thing
contained in any such letters patentes to the contrary in any wise
notwtstanding.

PROVIDED also and be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this
act or any provision therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to
confyrme, ratify, or make good any lease or leases, made or to be made by our
said Sovereign Lord and Lady the king and Queen, or by any of them for
term of life, life's, or for years, whereupon the old and accustomed rentes
or more, be not, or hereafter shall not be reserved, and yearelye payable
duringe the time and term of every such lease, nor that this present act
shall in any wise extend to revive or make good any letters patentes made of
any office or offices to any comptroller, customer, alneger, sercher ne to
any letters patentes of the grant of any other office or offices heretofore
granted or made by the king and Queen's majesty, or any of them, which now
be or at any tune heretofore have been adnichilated, determined or made void
by judgment, by authority of parliament, or by decree, nor to any patent to
be made to any person or persons for term of years, or during ye minority
of any heir of any manours Lands or tenementes, whereof any trauerse
hereafter shall be tendered within three months after any office found and
certified into any of the kings courts of record, ne to make good any
letters patentes made by our laid Sovereign lord and Lady or any of them,
of any office or offices to be of any other effect force or strength then
the same letters patentes were or should have been before the making of this
Act.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this act
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any letters patentes
which at any time heretofore sithen the beginning of the Queen's majesty's
reign have been made or hereafter shall be made by the king and queen's highness,
or by the queen's majesty only, to any person or persons of any manours
Lands, tenementes, rentes, reuercions, services, or other hereditamentes, by
force of any information, suite, or suggestion, made, or to be made to her
highness, that the same manoures, lands, tenementes, or other hereditamentes,
so contained in any such letters patentes, were concealed lands, nor to any
letters patentes heretofore made by our said sovereign Lord and lady the
king and Queen's majesty's, or any of them, to Rause Iackson clerk, now
master of the hospital of the Sauoye in the parish of Saint Clementes
Dacorum, without the bars of the new temple London, and to his brethren,
being perpetual Chaplaynes of the same Hospital, and to their successoures,
but that the same letters patentes and every of them, shall stand, remain,
and be in the same force, strength, and effect, as they were before the
making of this act, any thing in this act mentioned to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND where the manoure of Southwell in the county of Nottingham, and also the
Site and procincte of the college of Southwell in the same county together,
with diverse other lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes to the said late
college lately belonging or appertaininge, were conveyed and assured by
indenture, fine, or otherwise, by or from John Beamount esquier, unto our late
Sovereign Lord king Edward the Sixte and to his heirs and successors, for
the discharge and satisfaction of diverse great sums of money, wherein the
same John Beamounte was indetted to the said late king. Be it enacted and
established by the authority aforesaid, that the said co^ueyaunce and
assurance shall be perfect, good, sufficient and auayleable against the said
Beamount and his heirs, to all intentes, constructions and purposes, according
to the purport, tenor, and true meaning of the same conueiaunces, and
assuraunces. Saving to al and every person or persons, and bodies politic and
corporate, their heirs and successors and every of them, other then the said
John Beamount, his wife, and his heirs, and all other clayming any estate or
intereste by or from the^ or any of the^ since the same conueiaunce and
assurance, all such right, title, interest, possession, estate, leases,
rentes, services, commons, and all other profits and commodities whatsoever,
as they or any of them, should, or might have had if this act had never ben
had ne made. Any thing therein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AN ACT for the having of horse, armor, and weapon.
The.ii. Chapter.
FOR THE BETTER furniture and defense of this Realm. Be it enacted by the king
and queen's Majesty's, with thassentes of the lords spiritual and temporal
and the commons in this present parliamente assembled, and by authority of
the same, that as much of al and every act and Statute concerning only the
keeping or fyndinge of horse, horses, or armoure, or of any of them heretofore
made or provided, and all and every forfeyture, and penaltye, concerning only
the same, shall be from hence forth utterly void repealed and of none effect.
And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that every noble man,
gentelman and other temporal person, after the rate and proportion hereafter
declared shall have and keep in a redines such horses, geldinges, Armoure and
other furniture for ye wars, at the lest, and in such sort and manner as is and
shall be in this act hereafter expressed and declared. That is to say, all and
every person temporal, having any honors, lordeshippes, manors, houses,
lands, meadows, pastures or woods of estate of enheritaunce or freholde, to
the clear yearly value of one thousand pound or above, shall from and after the
first day of May, which shall be in the year of our lord god, a thousand.v.
hundred fifty and eight, have, find, keep sustain and maintain with in this
realm of England, of their own proper and at their own proper costs and
expenses.vi. horses, or geldyngs, able for dimilaunces, whereof.iii. of the^ at
the least to be horses, with sufficient harnesses, steel sadels and weapon,
requisite and apperteyning to the said demylaunces, horses or geldynges, and
ten light horses or geldinges able and mete for light horsemen, with the
furniture of harnes and weapon requisite for the same. And also forty
corselettes furnished, fortye almayne ryuettes or instead of the said almaine
riuettes, forty cotes of plate, corseletes or brygandines furnished fortye
pykes.xxx. long bows.xxx. shefes of arrows.xxx. steel cappes or sculles.xx.
black bills, or halberdes.xx. haque buttes, and twenty morians or salettes.
And every person temporal having any honors, lordeshippes, manors, houses,
lands, meadows, pastures or woods, of any such estate as is aforesaid, to
the clear yearly value of a thou sand marks, or above, and under the clear
yearelye value of a thousand pound, shall have, find, sustain and maintain
within this realm of their own proper and at their own proper costs and
expenses, four horses or geldinges, able for dimilaunces whereof two at the
least to be horses, with suffycyente harnesses, and weaponne, and sadels mete
and requysyte to the said dymylaunces Horses or Geldynges, and six light
horses or geldinges, able and mete for light horsemen, with furniture of
harnes, and weapon requisite for the same. And also of armor and weapon.xxx.
corselets furnyshed.xxx. almayne ryuettes or instead of the said almaine
ryuettes, xxx. cotes of plate, corselettes, or brygandynes furnyshed.xxx.
pykes, twentye long bows.xx. shefes of arrows.xx. stele cappes or sculles,
ten black bills or halbertes, ten haquebuttes, and ten morians or salletes.
And every person temporal having honors, lordships, manors, houses, lands,
meadows, pastures, or wodes of any such estate as is aforesaid, to the clear
yearly value of four hundred pounds or above, and under the clear yearly
value of a thousand marks shall have, find, keep, sustain and meynteyne as
is aforesaid two horses, or one horse and one geldyng able for dimilaunces,
with sufficient furniture of harnes, stele sadels and weapon for the same as is
aforesaid, and four geldynges able for light horsemen with sufficient harnes
and weapon for the same, and also.xx. corselettes furnished.xx, almayne
riuettes furnished, or instead of almaine riuettes, twenty cotes of plate
corselettes or bryga^dines furnyshed, twenty pykes, fyftene long bows fyftene
shefes of arrows, fyftene steel cappes or sculles, six haquebuttes, and six
moryans or salletes. And that every person temporal having lord ships,
manors, houses, lands, meadows, pastures, or wods, of any such estate as is
aforesaid, to the clear yearly value of.CC. pounds or above, and under the
clear yearly value of.CCCC. pou^des, shall from the said first day of May, have
keep sustain and maintain.i. great horse or gelding, able for a dimilaunce,
with sufficient furniture of harnes, steeled sadle, and weapon for the same,
and two geldings, able for light horsemen with harnes and weapons sufficient, as
is aforesaid, for the same, and also ten corselettes furnished, ten almaine
riuettes, or in ye place of almaine riuettes, x. cotes of plate, corselettes or
brigandines furnished, x. pikes.viii. long bows viii. shefes of arrows.viii.
stele Cappes or sculles, three haquebutts, and three morians or salettes. And
every person temporal having any lord ships, manors, houses, lands,
meadows, pastures, or woods, of any such estate as is aforesaid, to the clear
yearly value of one hundred pou^ds, or above, and under the yearly value
of.ii. hundrede pounds shall from and after the said first day of May, have,
keep, and maynteine (as is aforesaid) two geldinges, able and mete for light
horsemen, with sufficient harnes, and weapon requisite for the same. And also
three corselettes furnished, three almaine riuettes, or instead of them so
many cotes of plate, corselettes, or brygandines furnished.iii. pikes.iii.
long bows, three shefes of arrows, three steel cappes or sculles, two
haquebuttes, and two morians or sallettes. And also every person temporal
having lordeshippes, manors, houses, lands, meadows, pastures, or wooddes, of
any such estate as is aforesaid, to the clear yearly value of a hundred marks
or above, and under the yearelye value of a hundred pounds, from the said
first day of May, shall have, keep, maintain and sustain one gelding able and
mete for a light horsema^, with the harnes and weapon sufficient and requisite for
the same, two corselettes furnished, two almaine riuittes, or instead of ye
same two cotes of plate, or briga^dines furnished, two pikes, two long bows,
two shefes of arrows.ii. steel cappes or sculles.i. haquebut.i. morian or
salet. And also every person temporal, having lordships, manors, houses, lands,
meadows pastures or wods, of any such estate as is aforesaid, to ye yearly
value of.xl. pou^des or above, and under the yearly value of a hundred marks,
shall from and after ye said first day of May, have maintain and keep.ii.
corselettes furnished.ii. almaine ryuettes, or instead of ye same.ii. cotes of
plate, corselettes or briga^dines furnished, two pikes, one long bow, one
shefe of arrows, one steel cap or scull.ii. haquebuttes.ii. morians or
sallets. And also every person temporal having lordships, manors, houses,
lands meadows, pastures, or wods of any such estate as is aforesaid, to the
clear yearly value of.xx. pounds or above, and under the yearly value of
forty pounds, shall from ye said first day of May, have, keep, and mainteyne
one corselet furnished, one pike, one haquebut, one moria^ or saller, one long
bow, one shefe of arrows, and one steel cap or scull. And also every person
temporal having lordshipes, manoures, houses, lands, meadows, pastures or
wods, of any such estate as is aforesaid, to ye clear yearly value of.x
pounds or above, and under the yearelye value of.xx. pound, shall from and
after the said day have, keep, and sustain one almaine ryuitte, cote of plate
or brygandyne furnyshed, one haquebut.i. morian, or sallet, and one long bow,
and one spefe of arrows, one steel cap or scul. And also every person
temporal having lordships, manors, houses, lands, meadows, pastures or
woods, of such estate as is aforesaid, to the clear yearly value of five
pounds or above, and under the yearly value of x. pounds, shall from and after
the said first day of May, have, keep, and sustain one cote of plate
furnished, one black byll, or halbert, one long bow, one shefe of arrows,
and one freele cap, or scull. And also every person temporal, having goods
or cattells to the value of one thousand marks or above, shall from the said
first day of May, have find, keep, sustain, and mainetayne as is
aforesaid, one horse, or gel dynge able for a demylaunce, with sufficient
harnes, stele sadle, and weapon, requisite and convenient for the same, and one
geldinge able and mete for a light horseman, with harnes and weapon sufficient
and requisite as is aforesaid for the same, or eightene corselets furnished in
ye stead of the said horse, and geldyng, and furniture of the same at his
choice. And also shall from the same day have, find, keep, and maynetayne of
armoure and weapon, two corseletes furnished, two almaine ryuettes, or for the
same almonryuettes, two cottes of plate, two corselettes, or two brygandynes
furnyshed, two pykes, four long bows, four shefe of arrows, four stele
cappes or sculles, and three haquebuttes, with three morians, or salletes. And
also every person temporal having goods or cattels, to the values hereafter
in this present act, specyfyed and declared, shall from and after the said
first day of May have find, keep, sustain and maynetayne such geldynges,
armoure, weapon and furniture forwarre as is hereafter declared. That is to
say, having to the value of four hundred pounds or above, and under the
value of a thousand marks, one geldynge able and meat for a light horseman
with sufficient harnes and weapon requisite, and mete for the same or.ix.
corselettes, furnyshed at his election, and also shall have, find, and keep one
other corselette furnished, one pike, two almayne ryuetes, or plate cotes or
brygandines furnyshed, one haquebut, two long bows, two shefes of arrows,
and two stele cappes or sculles. And having in goods and catteles, to the
valewe of two hundrede pound or above, and under four hundred, one corselet
furnished one pyke two almayne ryuetes, plate cotes, or brygandynes, furnyshed
one haquebut, one murryan or salet, two long bows and two shefe of arrows,
and two scules or stele cappes. And having in goods and cattells to the value
of a hundred pounds or above, and under.ii. hundred, one corselette, furnyshed
and one pyke, one pair of almayne ryuyttes, one plate cote, or pair of
brygandine furnyshed, two long bows, and two shefes of arrows, and two
sculles. And having as is aforesaid, in goods and catteles, to the value of
fourtye pounds, or above, and under a hundred pounds, two pair of almon
riuettes, or two cotes of plate or brygandynes, furnyshed, one long bow and
one shefe of arrows, one stele cappe or scull, and one black byll, or
halbert. And having as is aforesaid in goods and cattelles to the valewe
of.xx. pounds or above, and under.xl. pounds, one pair of almayne riuettes,
or one cote of plate, or one pair of brygandines, two long bows, two shefes
of arrows, two sculles or steel cappes, and one black byll or halbert. And
having as is aforesaid to the value of ten pounds or above, and under
twenty pounds, one long bow, one shefe of arrows, with one steel cappe or
scull, and one black byll or halbert. And also that every person temporal,
not being above charged by this act, having, or that hereafter shall have
any annuitie or annuities, or yearly fee or fees for term of life, or of any
estate of inheritance, or any copyholde or copyholdes, for term of life, or
of any estate of inheritance, to the clear yearelye value of.xxx. pounds or
above, shall be charged and chargeable with such furniture of war as is
aforesaid, in every degree, quality, and condition, according to the
proportions and rates before expressed, limited, and appointed for goods and
cattels.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person
which by virtue of the act made in the parliamente holden at westminster in
the.xxxiii. year of the reign of king Henrye the eight, was bound (by
reason that his wife should wear such kind of apparel or other thing, as in
the same statute is specially mentioned and declared) to keep or find one
great stoned trottinge horse and is not by this act before charged, to have,
mainteyne, and keep any horse or geldinge, shall from the said first day of
May, have, keep, and maynteyne one geldinge, able and mete for a light
horseman, with sufficient harnes and weapon for the same, in such manner and
form as every temporal person having lordeshippes, houses, lands,
meadows, pastures or woods of such estate as is aforesaid, of the clear
yearly value of one hundred marks, is charged or appointed to find have and
maynteyne by this present act.

AND BE IT further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person
chargeable by this act, as is aforesaid, shall by the space of any three whole
months after the said first day of May, lack or want the said number
and kinds of horses, geldinges, armoure, weapon, and furniture aforesaid, or
any of them, after such rate, proportion, manner, and form as is in this act
above limited, declared, and appointed. That then every such person shall
forfeyt and loose for every such three months that he shall so lack and want
the same number and kinds of horses, geldinges, armoure, weapon, and
furniture, or any part thereof, for every horse or geldynge so lackyng, ten
pounds, and for every dimilaunce and turniture of the same, three pou^des, and
for every corselet and furniture of the same.xl.s. and for every almayne
ryuette, cote of plate, or brigandine, and the furniture of the same.xx.s. and
for every bow and shefe of arrows, byl, halbert, haque but steel cappe,
scull, moryan and salette.x.s. the one moytie of which said forfeytures, shall be
to the king and Queen our Soueraygne Lord and Lady, and to theyres and
successors of the same our soueraygne lady, and the other moytye to him or
them that will sue for the same in any court of record, by byll, playnte,
action of debte, or information, in the which byl, playnt, action, or
information, no wager of law, essoyne, or protection shall be allowed or
admitted.

AND BE IT further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
inhabitauntes of every city, boroughe, town, parish, and hamlette within
this realm, other then such as are specially charged before in this act,
shall have, find, keep, sustain, and mainteyne, at their common charges and
expenses, such harnes, and weapon, and as much thereof as shall be appointed by
the comissioners of our said sovereign lord and lady, and of the heirs and
successors of the same our soueraygne lady, for the musters or vewe of armor
within such city, boroughe, town, paryshe or hamletre, there to be kept, in
such place as by the said comissioners shall be appointed. And the numbers and
kinds thereof to be written and comprised in a pair of indentures, to be made
between the said commissioners or two of them at the least, and twelve,
eyghte, or four of the chiefest of every such city, borough town, parish,
or hamlette, whereof one part to remain with the chief officer of the same
city, borough, town, paryshe, or hamlette: and the other part to remain with
the clerk of the peace of the shyre or countye where every iuche city, town,
borough, paryshe, or hamlette shall stand or be. And if the same inhabitauntes
of every such city, borough town, paryshe, or hamlette, other then such as
are specially (as is aforesaid) charged, shall lack or want such harnes or
weapons, or any part thereof, as shall be unto them appointed by the said
comissioners for the musters or vewe of armoure, as is aforesaid, by the space
of any three months together next after any such appointment made: that then
the same inhabitauntes shall forfeyte for every the said three months for
every such harnes or weapons so lackyng after the rate above limited, the one
moytie thereof to be to our said sovereign lord and lady, and to theyres and
successors of our said soueraygne lady, and the other moytie to him or them that
will sue for the same in any of the courts of record of our said soueraygne
lord and Lady, and of the heirs and successors of the same our sovereign
Lady, by byll, playnte, action of debte, or information, wherein no wager of
law, essoyne or protection shall be admitted or allowed.

AND BE IT further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the lord
Chancellor of England for the time being, shall have full power and
authority by virtue of this present act, from time to time to grant out
commissions under the great seal of England, to the Justices of peace within
every shyre or county of this realm, or to so many of them as by his
discretion shall be thought mete and conueniente for the appointinge and
limittinge of the said harnesses and weapons, to be found, kept, and
mainteyned, in every such city, borough, town parish, and hamlette, at the
common charges of the inhabitauntes thereof, as is aforesaid.

Provided always, that this act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to take away or discharge any tenant, or fermour, of his service or
couenaunte toward his Lord, for the fyndinge of horse, armoure, or weapon,
or for doing of service by him self or any other, which, by the tenure of
his land or ferme, he is bound to do, at the time of making of this act,
but that he shall yield, pay, and do the same in as large ample manner and
form, as though this act had never been had ne made.

AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the justices of
peace, of every Shire, shall have power and authority by virtue of this act,
from time to time, to make search and vewe of and for the said furnytures of
horses, geldinges, armor and weapon, to be found maintained and kept by any
person abouesaid, having lordshyppes, manors, houses, lands, meadows,
pastures or woods to ye clear yearly value of.CC. pounds or under, and not
above the yearly value of.CCCC. pounds, or to be found, maintained or kept by
any person or persons chargeable by this act, by reason of his or their goods,
cattels, annuities, fees, or copyholdes as is aforesaid, and to hear and
determine at their quarter Sessions all and every the defaultes committed or
done contrary to this act, within the countye, where such Sessions shall be
kept, by inquisition, presentment, byl, or informatyon before them exhibited,
or by examination of two lawefull wytnes, at the discretion of the same
Justices, and to award process thereupon as though they were indicted before
them by verdict of.xii. men or more. And upon the conviction of the offender by
informatio^ or suit of any other then the king or the queen, or of theires or
successors of ye queen to make estreates of the one moitie of the said
forfeytures to be leuyed to thuse of our said soueraygne lord and lady, or of
theirs or Successors of the same our sovereign lady, as they use to do of
other fynes issues, and amercyamentes, growing in the Sessyons of peace, and
to awarde execution of the other moytie for the compleynaunte or informer
against the offender, by fieri facias or capias, as the kings Justices at
westminster, may do and use to do. And if any such conviction shall hereafter
happen at thonely suit of our said soueraygne lord and lady, or of the
heirs or successoures of the same our Soueraygne lady, that then the whole
forfeytures to be estreated and leuyed to their uses only.

AND BE IT FVRTHER enacted by the aucthorytie aforesaid, that whenever any
person shall at any time hereafter be convicted by virtue of this act, for
any defaulte or thing mentioned in this act, that then the same person shall
not otherwise or eftsoon be vexed, troubled, sued or convicted for the same
defaulte or thing, wherefore he shall be so convicted.

AND be it moreover enacted by the auchtoritie aforesaid, that if any
Souldioure shall at any time hereafter make sale of his horse, harnes, and
weapon, or any of them contrary to the form of the said statute, made in
the said second and third years of the said late king, that then not
only the same Soldier shall incur the penalties of that statute, but also
the said sale made by such souldioure to any person or persons knowing him
to be a souldior, shall be void and of none effect, against him or them that
found or set forth the said horse, harness, and weapon, or any of them, to,
or for the furniture of such souldioure to serve with the same.

PROVIDED always, that no person shall be impeached or troubled for any
offense done contrary to this act, unless presentmente or suit thereof be had,
made, or taken with in one year next after thoffence done, any thing in this act
to ye contrary thereof in any wise notwtstanding.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if at
any time hereafter it shall fortune any person or persons aforesaid, to be sued
or impeached for any forefeyture or penalty, for not having, susteyninge, or
kepinge such furniture of corselets, pykes, haquebuttes, or morians, as by this
act is before limited, rated, and appointed, and for his or their excuse and
answer, shall allege and plead that the same furniture so lacking, could
not by him or them conveniently be had, gotten, or provided, for want and lack
of the same within this realm, according to the tenure and purporte of this
act, the same matter of want and lack as is aforesaid, shall be allowed, and
taken for a good and sufficient answer and bar in the law, in case it be
true, and if the same be denied or trauersed, that thereupon an issue shall be
joined, and that the trial shall be of every such issue only had by the
certificate to be made by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the Lord
president of the Council, the Lord Steward of the Kings and Queen's most
honorable householde, the Lord pryuye Seal, the Lord Admiral, and the lord
Chambrelayne of the said householde, or by three of them, in wrytinge under
their seals, or the seals of three of them, this present act, or any
statute, law, or usage heretofore had to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no
person or persons chargeable by virtue of this Act, to or for the finding
or having of any Horse, Geldynge, Armoure, Weapon, or furnyture for the
war, as is aforesaid, shall be charged with the same, or with any of them
both, for his manours, houses, lands, meadows, pastures and woods, and also
for his goods, catels, fermes, leases, copyholdes, rentes, annuities.

Provided also and be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this
act or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend or be
adjudged or interpreted, to abrogate, repeal, or make void any part,
sentence, matter, clause, article, or thing, contained or specified in the
statute, made in the.xxxiii. year of the raygne of the late noble Prince of
worthy memory king Henry the eight, for or concerning the having of long bows
and arrows, and the using, order, exercisyng, and mayntenaunce of archery, and
shotinge in long bows, but that the same statute, and every article, clause,
sentence, and thing therein contained and specified, touching, or in any wise
concerning the having of long bows, arrows, vsinge, order, exercisinge, or
maintenance of archerye, and shotinge in long bows, shall stand and remain
in force, and be observed, performed, and kept, according to the tenure,
effect, and true meaning of the said act, upon the pains contained in the
same, as this act had not been had ne made, this present act or any thing
therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also, that if it shall fortune the said furniture of armure
aforesaid, or any part thereof, at any time hereafter to be lost or spente in
any service of defense of this realm, or else the horses or geldinges
aforesaid, to be killed or distroyed, or else by some other occasion to be dead,
that in such case or cases, no person or persons shall be charged with any
forfeiture or penalty aforesaid, for not having such quantity or number of
armor, horses, or geldinges as is aforesaid, so that he or they within one
year next after such loss or want, do supply the same again in all points,
according to the true meaning and purport of this act, any thing in the same
act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided also, that the want of any gauntlet or gauntlets, shall not be demed,
accoumpted, or taken for any tacke or want of furnyture for a corselet, any
words before expressed, soundinge to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that every person
and persons charged with the fyndinge of any haque but, and his or their
servant or servants, shall and may exercise and use shotinge in the same
haquebutte, at such marks as are limited and appointed by the statute made
in the.xxxiii. year of the raygne of king Henry the eight, or at their own
proper games, so that they carry not, or use not the same haque but in any high
way, unless it be coming or going to or from the musters, or marching
toward or from the service of defense of the realm, any clause or article in
the said act of the.xxxiii. year, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this act ne any thing therein contained, shall extend
to charge any person or persons, dwellinge or abydinge within the countries of
Northwales, and Southwales, and within the countye Palentine of Lancaster and
Chester, or either of them, with the findinge or having of any haque but, but
that they and every of them, shall and may at their will, liberty, and
pleasure, have and keep, instead and place of every haquebutte, charged by
this act, one long bow, and one shefe of arrows, over and besides such
other armor and munition as is by the laws of this realm limited and
appointed, any thing in this act to the contrary notwythstandinge.

PROVIDED always that the Lord Chauncelour of England, or keeper of the great
seal for the time being, shall and may from time to time by virtue of the
king and Queen's highness commission, name assign, and appointe comissioners in
every city, boroughe, and town corporate, wherein there be Justices of the
peace, as well in England as in Wales, so many of the same Justices of peace,
with such and as many other persons, to be joined with them dwellinge out
of the said cities, boroughes, and towns corporate, as he or they shall think
mete, to take view of armor in every of the same cities, boroughes, and
towns corporate, according to this present act, and also to assign what
harnes and armoure shall be provided and kept by the inhabitauntes of every
such city, boroughe, and town corporate, as is aforesaid, according to
this present act.

AN ACT for the taking of musters.
The.iij. chapter.
WHERE heretofore commandment has been given by the king and Queen's
majesty's, and other the progenitors of the Queen's majesty, kings of this
realm, to diverse and sundry persons, to muster their majesty's people and
subjects of this their realm of England, and to leuye a number of them for the
service of their majesty's and of this realm, in their wars, such as were
most hable and likeliest to serve well in the same, which service has been
greatly hyndered, as well for that a great number has absented them from the
said musters, which ought to have come to the same, as also for that many of
the most hable and likelye men for that service, have been through frendshippe
or rewards, released, forborne, and discharged of the said service, and some
other not being able or mete, taken, appointed, and chosen thereunto, and yet
the same disabilitie and unaptness notwithstanding, the same unable and unmeet
persons upon sums of money, or other kind of rewards, or exactions by the^
paid, to some such as had the order of the said musters, have been also
released and discharged of the said service, to the great impoueryshmente of
the subjects, and cheyfely to the great peril and danger of this noble
realm, in the hinderaunce of the true and necessary service thereof.

FOR remedy whereof, be it enacted by the king and queen our soueraygne lord and
lady, with thassent of the lords Spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present parliament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, that if
any person or persons, that shall be commanded, at any time hereafter,
generally, or specially, to muster before any such as shall have authority or
commandment for ye same by, or from the king and queen's Majesty's, or by
theires or successors of the queen's majesty, or by any lieutenaunte, wardeyne
or other person or persons aucthorysed for the same, do willyngly absente him
or them selfs from the same musters, having no true and reasonable excuse of
syckenes, or other laweful impediment, or at their apparaunce at such musters,
do not bring with them such their best furnyture of arraye, and armoure, as he
or they shall then have for his or their own person in a redynes, shall for
every such defaulte and offense, have and suffer imprisonment by the space of
ten days, without bail or mainepryce, by the commandment of such as shall
have authority as is aforesaid, to take the same musters, unless he or they
so offendyng as is aforesaid, do agree to or with the said commissioners, or
two of the^, to pay to thuse of the king and queen our soueraygne lord and
lady, or of the heirs and successoures of the same our soueraygne lady, for
every such offense, forty shyllynges for a fine, which said fine after
agreement for the payment of the same as is aforesaid, shall be certified and
estreated into the court of the escheker at Westmynster, by such as shall have
power to take the said musters as is aforesaid, or by two of the^, under their
seals or ye seals of two of the^, within the space of two months next after
such agreement, to pay the said fine had or made, and the same fine so
estreated to be leuyed in such form as fynes assessed by the Justices of
assise, or of Jail deliuerye, in their circuites are used to be leuyed.

AND BE IT FVRTHER enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons which at any time or times hereafter shall be commanded or appointed
by the king and Queen our Soueraygne Lord and lady, or by the heirs and
successors of the same our Soueraygne Lady, by their commission, letters, or
otherwise authorysed, to leuye muster or make any men to serve in their wars,
or otherwise for the defense of this realm, do by any mean exact, leuy,
receive, or take, or cause to be taken any su^me or su^mes of money, or other
reward or thing whatsoever, of any person or persons, for service in the
wars, or that shall be appointed, named or mustred to serve in any such setuice,
or for the sparyng, releasyng or dischargyng of such person or persons from
the said service, that then every such person that so shall offend in
exactyng, receauyng or taking by any ways or means any su^me or sums of
monye, or other reward, or thing whatsoever as is before said, shall for every
such offense forfeite.x. times so much as he shall so receive exact or take.

AND be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any capytayne,
pety captain or other, having charge of men for service in war, shall for
any advantage, lucre or gain by him to be taken, or received, dyscharge or
license, any of the souldyours, or men appointed to serve in the wars, under
his rule or order, to depart from ye same service, or shall not pay unto his
souldioures, and to every of them, their full and whole wages, conducte and
coat monye, within ten days next after that such captain, pety captain,
or other having charge of men as is aforesaid, shall have received the same,
that then the party so offendyng in geuyng any such license or dyscharge as is
aforesaid, shall lose and forfeyt for every such offense, ten times the value
of the thing so taken or received, and shall also pay to every soldier from
whom he shall so withhold any the said wages, conduct, or coat money; treble
the sum so withholden, the one moytie of al which forfeytures, other then
such as before by this act is lymitted or given to the sold your or souldyors
as is aforesaid, for their wages, coat or conducte money withdrawn, shall be to
the king and the queen's majesty's, and theirs and successoures of the queen's
majesty, and the other moitie there of to him or them that will sue for the
same, by action of debte, byll, playnt, information or otherwise, in any court
of record, in which action or suit no essoygne protection or wager of law,
shall be allowed.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all Justices of
assizes in their circuites, and al Justices of peace, within the lymittes of
their commission, in their assizes and sessyons, and Stewardes of leetes,
lawedayes, and libertyes, at their leetes and lawdaies shall and may from time
to time enquire, here, and determyne every of the said offenses, committed or
done contrary to this act, within the precynctes of their commyssion, leete or
lybertye, and if any person or persons shall be before the said Justices of
assise, Justices of peace, or any of them, presented or indicted of any
thoffe^ces aforesaid that the^ the said justices of assise, or justices of
peace, before whom such indytement or presentment shall be taken or had, shall
and may by the aucthoritye of this act, award such process against every such
person or persons so indicted as upon inditements of trespass is used and
accustomed to be made, and if any such person or persons so indicted, do appear
before the said justices and confess the same, or plede to the same
indytementes, and after by verdycte of.xii. men shall be of any the said
offenses contained in such inditeme^t or inditements convicted, yt the^ the
said Justices before who^ any such conuyction shall be so had, shall and may award
such person or persons so conuycted unto prison, there to remain without bail
or maynepryce, until such time as he or they have paid, or satisfied the
moytie of the forfeiture aforesaid, unto the king and queen's majesty's use, and
the other moitie thereof unto him or them that shall come before the said Justices
and give evidence against the party to be convicted at the time of the said
conviction, and by whose euydence he shall be of the said offense convicted. And
if any such co^uiction shall be had without any euydence openly given by any person
or persons, that then the party convicted as aforesaid shall remain in prison
as is aforesaid, until he have satisfied the hole forfeiture to the king and
queen's majesty's use.

PROVIDED always and be it further enacted by thauctoritie before said, that if
any the offenses aforesaid, touching captains, pety captains, or other having
charge of men, shall be committed during the time that any army or number of me^
being under a lieuten aunt shall be assembled and continue together, or by any
captain, pety captain, or other having charge of men that shall serve under
any lord warden, or other cheiftayne, that then upon complaint thereof, the
lord lieutenau^t or the lord warden, or other cheyftayne, during the time of
any his or their commyssyon shall and may hear, order, and determyne the
same offenses, by his or their dyscretyons.

Provided always that this act, nor any thing therein contained shall not in
any wise extend to take away or discharge any tenaunte or fermoure of his
service or covenant, toward his lord, for the finding of horse, armor or
weapon, or for doing of service by him self, or by any other, which by the
tenure of his land or otherwise is bounden to do before the making of this
act, but that he shall yield, do and pay the same in as ample manner and form
as though this art had never been had or made.

Provided also and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that if any
such capytayne, pety captain, or other having charge of men as is aforesaid,
shall be at any time hereafter conuycted, or ordered by virtue of this act, for
any of his offenses aforesaid, that then the same Capytaine, petie Captain
or other having charge of me^ as is aforesaid, so convicted, shall not otherwise
or eftsoon be vexed, troubled, sued, or convicted for the same offense,
whereof he shall be so before convicted or ordered.

AND where one branch or article contained in the statute made in the second
and third year of the reygne of the late king Edward the syxte, entitled,
an act touching the true service of Captains, and Souldyoures, whereby the
departure of any Souldyoure serving as in the said act is expressed,
without license of the lyeutenaunte or other offycer or officers named in the
said act, or in their absence, of their deputies, was made felonye is of no
force, strength, ne effect, at this present, by reasonne of the act of
repeal of certain treasonnes felonyes and primynyre made in the first session
of the parliament holde^ at Westminster, in the fyrstyere of the Queen's
majesty's reygne. Be it for good and reasonable consideratyons enacted and
establyshed by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that the said branch
or article, and every sentence and matter therein contained, be from henceforth
holy reuyued, and recontynued, and be and remain in full strength and effect
to al intentes, co^structions and purposes, the said act of repeal
notwithstanding. And that al and every other article, clause, prouyso, and
matter contained in the same act, shall stand, remain, and be in their full
force, strength, and effect. Any thing in this act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND yet nevertheless wherein the said act it is provided, that no person or
persons, should be charged for the taking or receyuynge of any gift or
reward of any of his or their tenauntes or friends toward the releyfe,
aid, or help of the same persons being commanded to serve in wars, or
otherwise to find men on horseback, or on foot, within this realm or
without, nor for the gift, reward, aid or help reserved, or couenaunted,
to be paid or given to any person appointed to serve in wars, or to find
horse or men, to serve by reason of any grant, couenaunte reservation, custom
or tenure, any thing in the said act to the contrary notwithstanding, as by
the said act and prouyso more plainly it does and may appear. Be it enacted
by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, ye no person or persons shall or
may by color of the said prouiso, or of any words or matter therein
contained, exact or demand, or leuy any sum or sums of money, horse,
armoure, or any other thing, other then shalve employed furthwith in the
present service of those wars, of the king and queens majesty's, her heirs
or successoures, for which it is leuyed, the which sum or sums of money,
horse, armoure, or other thing, or as much thereof as shall not be spent, lost,
or consumed in the said service, shall be rendered and restored to such person or
persons, as paid or delivered the same, upon the penaltyes and forfeytures,
contained in ye said act.

PROVIDED always, that no person or persons, inhabitynge within any city,
borough, or town corporate, being a countye of it self, or in which any
Justices of peace be or herealter shall be, by charter, shall be compellable by
virtue of this act, to make his or their apparaunce, with such furniture as is
aforesaid, at any muster hereafter to be had, or taken out of the Suburbs,
precinct, or lyberties of the same City, Borough or Town, nor before any
person or persons, aucthorysed by commission or otherwise as is aforesaid,
unless the mayor, or other head of fycer, of such city, borough, or town, and
one other discrete inhabitaunt of the same at the least be joined in the same
commission or other authority as is aforesaid, with the same other person or
persons so aucthorised, any thing before mentioned to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AN ACT that accessaries in murder and diverse felonies, shall not have the
benefit of clergy.
The.iiii. Chapter.
FOR THE due punysshmente of such as command, counsel, or hire any person
or persons, to commit, perpetrate, or do any petie treason, wylful murdre, or
any of the offenses in this present act mentioned. Be it enacted by the
authority of this present parliamente, that all and every person and
persons that after the first day of March next coming, shall maliciously
command, hyre, or counsel any person or persons, to commit or do any petye
treason, wylfull murder, or to do any robberye in any dwelling house or
houses, or to commit or do any robbery in or nere any high way in the realm
of England, or in any other the Queues dominions, or to commit or do any
robbery in any place within the marches of England against Scotland, or
wylfully to burn any dwelling house, or any part thereof, or any barn then
having corn or grain in the same, that then every such offender or
offenders, and every of them being outlawed thereof, or being thereof
arraygned and found gyltie by the order of the law, or being otherwise
lawfully attaynted or convicted of the same offense, or being arraygned thereof
do stand mute of malice or froward mind, or do challenge peremtorye above the
nombre of twenty persons, or will not answer directly to such offense, shall
not have the benefit of his or their clergy.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted, that every lord and lords of the
parliament, and piere and piers of the realm, having place and voice in the
parliament, upon every indictment for any of the offenses aforesaid, shall be
tried by theyrpiers, as has been accustomed by the laws of this realm.

AN ACT touching the making of woollen clothes.
The.v. Chapter.
WHERE in the parliament holden at westminster, in the fifth and sixth year of
the reign of our late sovereign lord king Edward the sixte, there was by
great deliberation and advise one good act made for the true and perfect
making of woollen cloth within this realm, sythence the making whereof, diverse
clothiers found them selves agreued, alleging that it is impossible for them to
observe ye same act in all points, and have in this present parliament prayed
some mitigation thereof, it is therefore at their special instau^ce and request
ordered, established, enacted, and provided, in manner and form following.

IN PRIMIS, that every white cloth and clothes commonly called long Worcesters,
and all like clothes of like making mentioned in the said act, which by ye same
was limited to weigh.ixxxiiii. pou^des, being well scoured, thicked, milled, and
fully dried, shall weigh.ixxv. pou^ds at the least.

Ite^, every white cloth which shall be made in the counties of Wyltes.
Gloucester, and Somerset, or any of the^, or else where of like making, being
appointed by the said act to weigh.lxiiij. pounds, shall weigh being well
scoured, thicked, milled, and fully dried.lxj. pounds at the least.

ITEM, every broad cloth made in the shyres of Kent and Sussex, or at the
town of Reding, or any of them, or else where of like making, mentioned in the
said act, which by the same was limited to weigh lxxxx. pounds at the
least, shall weygh being well scoured, thicked, mylled, and fully
dried.lxxxvi. pounds at the least.

ITEM, that every course short cloth made in ye shyres of Suff. Norff. and
Essex, or any of them, or else where of like sort, and every course clothe to be
made within the Shyre of Kent, not exceadinge the price of six pounds, all
which by the said Act are appointed to conteyne.vii. quarters of a yard at
the least in breadth, shall conteyne and be at the water, being thorough wette,
six quarters and a half within the list through and by all the whole cloth at
the least.

ITEM, every yard of cloth commonly called handy warp, being welscoured,
thicked, mylled, and fully dried, shall conteyne the breadth specified in the
said act, and shall weigh two pounds and a half at the least.

And forasmuch as many persons do counterfeit the making of Coksal, Bocking and
Braintree clothes commonly called handiwarpes, adding there unto such like
listes as the makers of such clothes do, to the great deceipte of the king and
Queen's majesty's subjects. Be it therefore enacted, that no person or persons
from the first day of May next coming, shall add unto any cloth or clothes,
any such like list or listes, except the warpe thereof be sponne upon the rock
or distaffe, upon pain of forfeyture of the same cloth or clothes, or the very
value thereof. Provided always that the clothe makers within the city of
Worcestour may make such listes as they have done heretofore.

Item that no person or persons inhabiting within the westriding in the county
of york, shall make or cause to be made any broad clothe or clothes called
pewkes, tawneis, violets, or grenes, except the wolther of before it be
converted into yarne, be first died, litted, and coulered with the color blue,
of the value of two pence a pound, upon pain of forfeiture of every such
colored cloth, or ye value thereof, whereof the wol shall not be first died,
litted, and colored with the color blue of.ij. d. a. li. as is aforsaid.

Item that every ordinarye karsey mentioned in the said act, shall contain
in length in the water betwixt.xvi. and.xvii. yardes, yard and ynche, and
being well scoured, thicked, milled, dressed, and fully dried shall weighe.xix.
pounds the piece at the least. And every karseye called sortinge karsey,
mentioned in the said Act, being well scoured, thicked, mylled, dressed, and
fully dried, ready to be showed, shall weyghe.xxii. pounds at the least.

ITEM, that every Deuonshyre karsey called Dossone, the which is appointed by
the same statute to weygh being dry.xiiij. pounds at the least, shall weygh
being well scoured, thicked, mylled, and fullye dried, after the rate of every
yard one pound at the least.

ITEM, that one article mentioned in the said statute concerning welshe
cottons touching the length and weight, shall be clearly void, and every good
of welshe lininge shall conteyne and be three quarters of a yard in breadth in
the water, and shall weygh one pound and a half quarter, and every yard of
cotton being fully wrought and cottoned, shall weygh one pound at the least.

AND be it further enacted, that no person or persons which shall buy to
sell again by way of retayle or otherwise, any of the said welshe lininges,
shall dress or work, or cause to be dressed or wrought within his or their
dwelling house or houses, or in any other place by him self, or his servant
or servants, any of the said welshe lininges, but shall put the same to
some such person or persons, as shall be of the art or science of Sheremen,
Cottoners, or frysers, to be by them wrought and dressed, upon pain of
forfeyture for every welshe cotton or lyninge, frysed or cottoned to the
contrary.vj. s. viij. d.

ITEM, that all and every cotton or cottons called Manchester, Lanckeshire,
and Chesshyre cottous, and all clothes called Manchester Rugges, or Manchester
Fryses, may be divided into two half pieces, and shall conteyne and be after
the rate of such breadth and weight, as in the said actis limited and
appointed to a whole piece of every of the several pieces of cottons and rugges
aforesaid any thing in the said former statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND if any cloth or karsey of the several kinds of makinges, mentioned in
the said former act, or this estatute, do excede the several lengthes mentioned
in the same, that then every yard so exceeding, shall weygh after such rate as
every yard of such cloth or karseys containing the said several lengthes,
shall or ought to weygh, upon pain of forfeyture for every yard, not weyinge
after such rate.v.s. And if any such cloth or karseys shall lack of such
weight as by the said statute or this act it ought and is appointed to have,
then the maker thereof or other person in whose hands or possession the same
shall be found, shall forfeyte for every pound lacking above.iiij.
pounds.v.s. and also for every pound exceadinge not above.iiij. pounds.ij.
s. in manner and form as in the said former act is appointed.

ITEM, one article mentioned in the said statute, wherein the alneger is
prohibited to set his seal to any cloth or karsey which shall prove pursy,
bandy, squally, in or by warpe or wofe, or else shall happen to be evil burled
or wasted in the mylle, or otherwise to be full of holes, mylbrackes, or to be
hoolye, shall be void and of none effect.

ITEM it is enacted that if at any time after the first day of May, any
clothe or karsey, thoroughe the defaulte or necligence of the karders,
spinners, or weauers, or any of them, shall, or do prove either pursey,
cockeley, bandye, squally, or rowye, by warpe or woofe, or else shall happen to
be evil burled, or wasted in the myll, or else thoroughe the defaulte or
necligence of the myll man, or otherwise, to be full of holes, mylbrackes, or
to be holy, that then the maker of every such clothe or kersey so being
defective or faulty as is aforesaid, shall fix unto every end of the said
clothe or karseye so being defective and faultye, and offered to be sold, one
seal of lead, in the which seal shall be ingraued this word (faultye) upon
pain of forfeyture of such clothe or karsey, or the value thereof so offered
to be sold, whereunto such seal shall not be set.

ITEM, the article mentioned in the said former act of retourninge of
defective clothes, karseyes, frises, or cottons being transported over the seas
by the merchants, shall be utterly void. But nevertheless be it enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that if it shall fortune hereafter any marchaunte or
merchants, to transporte any clothe or clothes, karseys, fryses, or cottons,
whereunto the seal with this word (faultye) was not annexed at the time of the
sale thereof by the clothier, and the same clothes, karseys, fryses, or cottons
so transported, or any of them to be found faulty or defective, and the same
merchant or merchants thereof, within two years after such sale, to bring
a certificate, sealed with the seal of any town or company in the parties
beyond the seas, or signed by a Notarye there, after the accustomed manner,
testisienge and declarynge thereby the loss and damage which the merchants
shall have sustained by such defective and faulty clothe or clothes so
transported, that then the clothier or clothiers, or other person of whom the
clothe or clothes was boughte, their executours or adminisiratours, shall
within six wekes next after request made by the said marchaunte, his
executours, administratours, or assigns, well and truly satysfye coutente
and pay, to such marchaunte, his executours or administratours, or assigns,
all and every such sum and sums of money as shall so be mentioned,
expressed, and declared in the said certificate, upon pain of forfeyture to
the party grieved, for every none payment upon such request, double the value
of such sum or sums mentioned in the said certificate.

PROVIDED always, that such marchaunte shall not in any wise have by virtue
of this act, any recompense for lack of length, breadth, or weight, of, or for
any cloth, whereunto the seal of any citie-borough or town corporate shall be
fixed.

ITEM, if any person shall by him self, or by any other person by him
procured cou^terfet, set to, or take away from any cloth, karsey, frise, rugge,
or cotton, any seal appointed to be fixed to any clothe, karseye, fryse,
rugge, or cotton, either by this act, or by the said former estatute, that
then every such person so offendinge, shall incur and have like
penalties, forfeitures, and punishments, as in the said former act is
appointed and limited for the like offense.

And for the better execution as well of this present act, as of the said
former estatute, and to the intent that all kind of karseys, cottons, frises,
rugges, and other woollen cloth, made in any town shall be the better known, it
is further enacted, that the seal of every borough or town corporate,
appointed, or to be appointed for the sealynge of any such kind of cloth,
shall be fixed to all and every such kind of clothe, being well and
substaunciallye made within such City, boroughe, or town corporate, which
clothe so Sealed with the seal of any City, Boroughe, or Town corporate,
shall not be searched, tried, or viewed by any Searcher or Sealer of any
other City, Boroughe, or Town corporate, by virtue of his said office, any
thing in this act, or in the said former estatute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Item, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person
and persons, not dwellinge and inhabitinge within any City, Borough, or
corporate town, and making any of the clothes or karseys aforesaid, may
lawfullye bring the same to the next City, Boroughe, or corporate town,
where any such kind of clothes or karseys be or shall be commonly made, there
to be sealed in manner and form as is before expressed.

Item, if any Searcher or Sealer appointed, or to be appointed by virtue of this
present act, or of the said former Statute, shall set the Seal of any
City, Boroughe, or Town corporate, to any cloth, which shall not conteyne
such length, weyghte, and breadth, as in the said former Statute, or in this
present act is appointed, that then the Mayer and Cominaltie, or Baylyf and
Comynaltie, or other corporation of the Towneshippe, by whatsoever name or
names it or they shall be incorporated, where such cloothe, karfeye, fryse,
cotton, or rugge shall be so sealed, shall forfeyte and lose the hole value of
the cloth so fealed.

It is also enacted by the authority of this present parlyamente, that the
said Searchers or Sealers, and every one of them, shall have full power and
authority by virtue of this Act, in the day time, to enter into all and
every house and houses, of every person or persons, where he or they
shall think mete to search, and to try all and every kind of cloothes,
karseyes, fryses, and rugges as they shall find defectyue, either in length,
breadthe, or weyghte, and the same to try by water and weyghte, and alsoo to
search and sease as forfeyte all and every cloth and clothes made of other
colors then in the said former act is appointed, friars gray, crane color,
purple, and old medley colors, most commonly used to be made before twenty
years last past, only excepted.

AND if any manner of person or persons, at any time after the first day
of May next coming, shall deny, withstand, or withholde any cloth or
clothes, karseys, fryses, rugges, or any of them, from the said Sealers or
Searchers, or any of them, or will not suffer the^ to enter into their shops,
warehouses, houses or places where their clothes, karseys, fryses, or rugges
shall be, the same to be searched and tried as is aforesaid, that then every
such person or persons so denyinge or withstandinge, for every such
withstandyng, withholding or denial, to forfeyt and lose.x. pounds.

Be it likewise further enacted, that it shall not be lawful for any of the
said Searchers, or Sealers, or any other person, to search any manner of
woollen cloothe or karseye, whereunto the Seal of a City, Boroughe, or Town
corporate, shall be fyxed, within the common clothe markette of London,
commonly called Blackewell hall, or in any common clothe fair, or clothe
markette of any other City, Boroughe, or Town corporate, in and during the
time of the fair or markette, any Act or Statute to the contrary
notwythstandynge.

BE IT further enacted, that all and every article, clause, and sentence in
the saydeformer Statute made in the fyfte and sixte year of the reygne of our
said late Sovereign Lord, king Edward the Syxte, being not repugnaunte or
contrary to any article, clause or sentence contained in this present act,
shall stand in full force and effect.

Provided always, that no person or persons shall incur the danger,
penaltye, or forfeyture limited and appointed for any offense in the said
former act, the which is already mittigated or otherwise appointed by this
present act.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every clothier
shall cause every clothe which he shall put to sale, from and after the
feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptiste necte coming, to be marked
with the letter M. crowned, wrought in the cloth, upon pain to forfeyte.xx.s.
for every clothe, being sold or put to sale by any such clothier after the
said feast not marked with the said lettre M. as is aforesaid.

And moreover be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons after the said feast of the nativity of S. John Baptist, shall sell or
put to sale within the realm of England, any colored cloth of any other
color or colors then are hereafter in this act mentioned that is to say,
scarlet, red, crimson, morrey, violet, pewke, brownble us black, grene,
yellowe, blue, oriche tawny, russet, marble, gray, sad new color Azner,
watchet, shepes couloure, Lion color, motleye, iron gray, friars graye, crane
color, purple, and old medley color, most commonly used to be made above and
before.xx. years last past.

ITEM, where as diverse aunciente cities, boroughes, and towns corporate within
this realm of England, has been in times past well and substauncially
inhabited, occupied, maynteyned, and vpholded, as well by reason of making of
broad woollen clothes and karseys, as also by diverse other artificers,
inhabitinge then in the said towns, at which time also the vyllages and
husband towns flourysshed, and husbandrye and tyllage was well maintained, to
the great benefit of the realm, and all the people therein, forasmuch as
diverse years paste, such persons as do use the feat or mystery of cloth
making, not contented to live as artificers, and with the trade wherein they
have been brought up, do daily plant themselves in villages and towns,
being no cities, boroughes, nor corporate towns, and there occupying the
seat and place of a husbandman, do not only ingrosse diuiers fermes and
pastures into their hands, displeasing the husbandman, and decaying the
ploughes and tyllages, but also draw with them out of cities, boroughes, and
towns corporate, all sort of artificers, whereby not only diverse ancient
cities, boroughes, and towns corporate, are utterly decayed, destroyed, and
depopulated, but also husbandrye and tyllages very much decayed, to the great
hurt, damage, and prejudice of this realm, and the people therein, if spedy
remedy be not forsene. And forasmuch also as the weauers and workmen of
clothiers when they have been traded up in the trade of cloth making and
weauinge.iij. or.iiij. years, do forsake their masters, and do become
clothiers and occupiers for the^ selves, without stock, skyll, or knowledge to
the great sclaunder of the true cloth making, besides a great number of
inconveniences which do grow to the commonwealth of this realm thereby, as
daily experience teaches. Be it therefore ordained and enacted by thauctoritie
of this present parliamente, that from and after the first day of May next
coming, no person or persons whatsoever, shall use or exercise the feate
or misterye of making, weauynge, or rowinge of woollen clothes, long or
short, or karseyes, pynned whites, or plain streites, to thintente to put the
same to sale, but only in a market town where cloth has commonly ben used
to be made by the space of ten years last past, or in a city, borough, or
town corporate, upon pain of forfeyture for every such woollen cloth or
karsey, made, wouen, or rowed out of such city, borough, town corporate or
market town, five pounds.

AND it is further enacted, that from and after the first day of May no person
whatsoever, shall weaue or make, or put to weauinge or making any woollen
clothes or karseys last rehearsed, to be sold, unless such person shall have
been apprentice to the occupation of making, weauinge, and rowinge of clothe
or carseys, or have been exercised there in by the space of seven years before,
upon pain of forfeyture of such cloth, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
pains, penalties, and forfeytures to be due by force of this statute, or of
the said former act being not otherwise appointed, shall be divided equally
into two parts, whereof the one shall be to the queen's highness, her heirs and
Successors, and the other unto him that will sease (in cases where seaser is
limited or appointed) or else to him or them that will sue for the same
pains, penalties, and forfeytures, or any of them, by action, byll, playnte,
information, or otherwise, in any court of record, wherein no essoyne,
protection, wager of law, or iniunction shall be admitted, allowed, or obeyed.

PROVIDED always, that it shall be lawful to any person, now using or
exercisinge the feate or misterye of making, weauynge, or rowinge of clothe or
karsey, to inhabit and dwell where he now does, and there to use the making,
weauinge, or rowinge of cloth or karsey, as he has done heretofore, any thing
in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED always, that it shall be laweful to all and every person or persons,
which now do, or hereafter shall inhabit or dwell in any of the Shires of
Northwales or Southwales, Chesshyre, or Lancka shyre, Westmerland, Cumberland,
Northumberlande, Byshoprike of Durham, Cornwall, Suffolk, Kent, the town of
Goddelmyne in the countye of Surrey, or yorkeshyre, being not within twelve
miles of the city of york or in any the towns or vyllages nere adioyninge
the water of Stroude in the county of Gloucester, where clothes has been
usually made by the space of twenty years last past, and having been prentice
to the occupation of clothe making, or exercised in the same by the space of
seven years, to set up, use, and exercise the feate or mystery of making,
weauinge, or rowinge of clothe out of a city, borough, or markette town, as
heretofore they might have done, any thing in this act to the contrary not
withstandinge.

Provided also, that it shall be lawful to any person, now using or
exercisinge, or that has used or exercised the feate or mysterye of clothe
making, the same to contynus, use, and exercise, although he has not been
thereunto apprentice, or have exercised the same by the space of seven years,
any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanstandinge.

Provided always and be it also further enacted by thaucthoritie before said,
that it shall be lawful to every person and persons, to sell and put to sale by
retaile or otherwise, all and every such colored cloth and clothes as he or
they now have, as frelye as he or they may lawfully sell any clothes of the
colors in this present act allowed to be sold, until the feast of Saint
Mychaell tharchaungell nect ensuyng, This act or the said former statute, in
any wise notwithstanding.

AN ACT to inquire of the behauor of french men being Denizens.
The.vi. Chapter.
IN THEIR most humble wise, shown un: to your most royal Majesty, the lords
spiritual and temporal, and all other your most loving and obedient
Subjects, the commons in your most high court of parliament assembled, that
where at a parlyament holde^ at Westminster, in the.xiii. year of the reign of
king Rychard the second, it was for sondrye good considerations, ordained and
enacted, that no alyen frenchman, should have or enjoy any benefyce within
this realm, but that they should be avoided forthewith out of the same,
before a certain time in the said act limytted, as in the same act is more
plainly contained. And that at what hour, any pryores alyens, conuentuall or
other benefice or office, given by title of the king, did void by laches, or
death of the said pryor, and other occupyers, that than (during the wars)
honest persons English, should be put therein, in the place of them to
accomplish divine service, and none of the enemies aforesaid. And yet
notwithstanding the said ordinance, the said alyens frenchmen, by evil
imagination and brocage, to continue the evil myschyfes of the said ordinance
did purchase letters patentes of the king to be denizens, and lyeges of the
king, and so swear to continue the same, to thuitent to occupye and enjoy the
said benefices, and by that means did occupye great number of benefices,
against the said ordinance, by means where of the alyens french were
incresed, to the deminishing of the Subjects of the king and the treasure of
the king and the Realm did carrye out of this Realm, and the council of
the king did discover to the enemies of france, to the great damage of the
king and the Realm. For remedy whereof at a parliament holden at Westminster,
the first year of the reign, of the most worthy prince of famous memory,
king Henry the fyfte, the same king considering the myschyfes aforesaid, by
thaucthoritie of the same parlyamente, wylled that the said ordinance should
be saufely holden and kept, and put in due executyon, (certain pryor aliens
excepted) and that they should put in suretye, not to discover nor cause to be
dyscouered, the council nor the secrets of the Realm. And where sythence the
making of the said Acts of Parlyamente, sondrye other good laws and acts,
have benne made, as well in the time of king Richard the third, as in the
time of king Henrye the Eyghte, in which acts, it is provided, lymytted,
ordained and declared, under what sort the said Alyens, and every of them
should use themselfes within this Realm.

AND where also by one act of Parlyament made at Westmynster, in the two and
thyrtye year of the raygne of the said late king Henrye the Eyghte, it was
enacted amongst other things contained in the said act that al manner of
Strangers borne out of his graces obeysaunce, which before that time were
made Denyzens, or that after that should be made Denyzens, from and after ye
first day of September then next coming, should be bounden, and be
obedyente, by, and unto all the foresaid acts and statutes, made in the
first year of the said king Richard the third, and in the fourtene and one
and twentye years of the said king Henrye the Eyghte, and to all the
contents of the same, and to all other acts, and statutes of this Realm
before that time, made or from henceforth to be made. And that also in all and
every Letters Patentes, of or for any Denyzen from and after the last day of
the same Parlyamente, so holden in the said two and thyrtye year, to be made
to any stranger, not being borne under the kings obeysaunce, there should
be contained in every such Letters Patentes, a prouyso that he or they to
whom such Letters Patentes, shall be so made and granted, should be bounden
and be obedyente by and unto all the acts, and Statutes, of this Realm, as is
aforesaid, and to all and every the contents of the same, as by the same
acts more playnelye it does and may appear.

Yet Sythence the making of the said several Acts, a great number and
multitude of the french nacyon, have aryued into this Realm, as well nere to
the Seasyde, as else where, and under a feigned false and untrue promise or oath
of alegyence, and faith promised to be by them borne to this Realm, they have
of late years sithence the said two and thyrtye year of the Reygne of the
said late king Henrye the Eyghte, by synyster and undue means obtained,
diverse and sondrye several Letters Patentes, whereby they be made Denizens,
and by force thereof do emoye the lybertyes and pryueleges of this Realm, and
yet contrary to the true meaning of the said Letters Patentes, in their
condytions and behaunures, they do remain French, and daily from time to
time do discover the council, state and priuities of this Realm, and
compass, Imagyne, and procure sondrye myschyfes and damage to be done by the
french nacyon to this Realm, contrary to the said Acts of Parlyamente, and
contrary to their said letters patentes, and the prouyso contained in the
same.

FOR remedy whereof, and for the auoydyng of the imminent peril that for want
of due prouydence, may ensue to your most royal person, (whom our Lord GOD,
long preserve to reygne over us) and to this your hyghnes Realm, by the
malicious and secret practyses of the said Denizens, we most humblye beseech
your most excellent Majesty, to have vigilante care and tender consyderatyon,
of your own suretye, and preservation of this your Realm, and having good
and sure experience of your accustomed honorable and merciful disposition and
inclination, do also most humblye beseech the same, that by your royal
assente, it may be enacted by thaucthoritye of this present parlyament, that
al french men, and all and every other person and persons, borne in any
place, beyond the Seas, which at the time of the birth of any such person or
persons, was under the french kings obeysaunce, not being Denizens, other
then such as the king and Queen's highness, or the queen only shall specially
license, lymit, and appoynte to remain within this Realm, shall depart out
of this Realm, and out and from the dominions and terrytories of the same,
there to remain and continue without return into this Realm, during the
time and contmuaunce of the wars, between the french king and our
Soueraygne Lady the queen, or her heirs or successoures. And that our
Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and the queen, or her hyghnes only, by
the authority of this Act, by their letters patentes, under the great Seal
of England, shall and may have full power and authority, from time to time,
during the life of the queen's hyghnes (which almighty GOD long prosper and
continue) after office found or other due proof, of the mysdeamenor of any
such Denizen, committed contrary to the laws of this realm to repeal and
make void all and synguler letters patentes, or asmanye of them, as to her
hyghnes shall seem good, made sythence the said two and thyrtye year of the
Raygne of King Henrye theyghte, to any alyen or stranger borne french, and
under the obeysaunce of of the french king, concerning only the making of
such alyen, or Stranger Denyzen, the same Letters Patentes of repeal, to be
proclaimed and used in manner and form following, that is to say, that every
such Letters Patents of repeal, shall contain the names and surnames of every
such alien Stranger, whose letters Patents shall so be repealed, and shall be
solempnlye and openly read and proclaimed in the king and Queens Court of
Chauncerye, between the hours of nine, and a leven, before none, one day in
any one term to be kept at Westmynster, and in such and asmanye terms and
counties of this realm, as shall be limited, or appointed, or other wise seem
mete to the queen's majesty, at any time hereafter, during her highness said
life, and that al and every such letters patentes, to be repealed in manner and
form aforesaid, from, and immediately after xxx. days next ensuynge such
repeal, shall touching only the making of such alyen or stranger denizen,
be void and of none effect, and not before.

AND be it further enacted by thauchorytie aforesaid, that such aliens and
strangers denizens, whose patentes the queens hyghnes hereafter shall fortune
to allow or confirm, or whom her hyghnes shall license to remain and tarry in
this Realm, shall be bounden to the king and Queens majesty's, by
recognisaunce, not to dyscouer nor cause to be discovered the council nor the
secreates of this Realm, and further to be bound and obedyente unto and by
the laws and statutes of the same, and if any such alyen borne french, and
under the obeysaunce of the french king, as is aforesaid, shall refuse to
knowledge any such recognisaunce, that then the said confirmation, allowaunce,
and license, shall be void and of none effect.

PROVIDED always that if any such alyen as is aforesaid, shall have purchased
any Manor, Lands, Tenementes, or hereditamentes, of any estate of
inherytaunce, within this Realm, sythence the time that he was made denizen,
or ye any Manor, Lands, Tenementes, or hereditamentes within this realm, were
given to any such alien, of any estate of inherytaunce, by any letters patents,
or in ye same letters patentes, whereby he was made denizen, that the same
Manor, lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, after the decease of such
alien, whose letters patentes, of making denizen, shall be as is aforesaid,
repeled, shall and may discende, remain or come unto such his heir or
heirs, as been borne within this realm, and as be inheritable to the same, or
to such other person or persons that should by the laws of this realm,
have and enjoy the same, or any part thereof, if this act or no such repeal
had been made in such manner and form as though no such repeal were had or
made, the same repeal or any thing in this act to the contrary not
withstandyng.

Provided also that it shall be lawefull to the Queen's majesty, her heirs and
successoures, immediatelye from and after the departure of every such denizen,
out of this Realm, to receive and take the clear yearly issues, revenues, and
proffyts of al such Manours, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Fees, Annuityes, and
Heredytamentes, whereof any such Denyzen were seassed or had at the time of
this act, or at the time of his departure out of this Realm, as is
aforesaid, for and during the life of every such Denizen, in as ample and
large manner and form, and in such qualytye, condytyon, and degree, as any
such denisen might lawfullye have received and taken at the time of the
making of this present act, and not otherwise, any thing in this act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT to make up the Jury with circumstantibus, where the king and Queen's
majesty's or the Queen's majesty is a party.
The.vii. Chapter.
WHERE in the parliament holden at Westminster the.xiiij. day of January in
the.xxxv. year of the reygne of the most noble and victorious Prince king
Henry the eight, late king of England, amongeste other things it was enacted
and establyshed, for the spedye trial of Issues joined between party and
party, in any of the kings courts of record holden at Westminster, to be
tried by the verdicte of twelve men, before the Justices of assise, or nisi
prius, that in every writ of habeascorpora, or distringas, with a nisi
prius, delivered of record to the Sheryffe or other minister or ministers to
whom the making of the return shall apparteyne, where a full Iurye shall
not appear before the Justices of assise or nisi prius, or else where after
appearaunce of a full Iurye, by challenge of any of the parties, the Iurye is
like to remain untaken for default of the Jurors, that then the same Justices
upon request made by the parties playntyfe or demaundaunte, shall have
authority by virtue of the said act, to comaunde the Sherif or other minister
or ministers, to whom the making of the said return shall appertain, to
name and apoynte as often as need shall require, so many of such other hable
persons of the said countye then present at the said assizes or nisi prius,
as shall make up a sull Iurye, which persons so to be named and enpanelled by
such Sherif or other minister or ministers, shall be added to the former
pannell, and their names annexed to the same, as by the said act more at large
appears, which Statute was made to endure till the end of the next
parlyamente, and after was and is from time to time continued, and does now
remain, stand, and be in effect, which act does not extend to any Jury
enpanelled, to try an issue joined between the king and the party, or
between such as pursue any matter for the king and them selves.

Be it therefore enacted, ordained, and establyshed by the king and Queen's
majesty's the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that from and after
the lyrste day of June next cominge, the Justices of assise and nisi prius,
before whom any trial shall be made, by virtue of any writ of habeas
corpora, or distringas, with a nisiprius, where a full Iurye shall not appear,
or after appearaunce of a full Iurye by challenge the Iurye is like to remain
untaken, for defaulte of Iuriours, shall have authority by virtue of this
Act, upon request made for the king and Queen her heirs or Successoures, by
any aucthorised thereunto, or assigned by the Justices of the Court before
whom the said enqueste shall be taken, or upon request to be made by the
party that follows as well for the king and Queen, her heirs and
Successors, as for him self upon any penal Statute or his or their
Attorney, to command the Sheryffe, or other minister or ministers, to whom
the making of the said return shall appertain, to name and appoynte, as
often as need shall require so many of such other hable persons of the
said Countye then present at the said assizes, or nisi prius, and to add
and annexe the names to the former pannell, as shall make up a full Iurye of
twelve men for the trial of every such Issue. And that all and every
clause, sentence, article, and prouiso comprised in the said former act,
shall be taken, enterpreted, and expounded, to give the like and the same
advantage and commodity to the king and Queen's majesty's, her heirs and
Successoures, and all such person and persons as shall pursue any action,
byll, playnte, or information for the king and Queen's majesty's, her heirs
and Successors only, or for them and the party, as the party playntyfe in
any other action should or might have by virtue of the said Act, in such
form and condition, to all intentes and purposes, as if such actions or
suites for the king had been specially and perticulerly mentioned and
declared in the said Act.

AN Act for the punishemente of such as shall take away maidens that be
inheritours, being within the age of sixtene years, or that marye them
without the consent of their parents.
The.vij. chapter.
WHERE maidens and women children of noble men, gentlemen, and others, as well
such as be heirs apparaunte to their ancestors, as others, having left
unto them by their father or other auncestre and freindes, lands, tenementes,
and hereditamentes, or other great substaunces in goods and catelles
moveable, for and to thintente to advance them in marryage somewhat like,
according to their degrees, and as might be most for their suertye and
comfort, as well for them selves, as of all other their friends and
kynnesfolkes, be often times unawares to their said freindes or kynnesfolkes, by
flattery, tryfelynge gifts, and fair promises of many vnthryftye and light
personages, and thereto by the intreatye of persons of lewd demeanoure and
others, that for rewards bye and sell the said maidens and children,
secretlye allured and won to contracte matrimonye with the said vnthryftye
and light personages, and thereupon either with slyghte or force, oftentimes be
taken and conveyed away from their said parents, freindes, or kynnesfolkes,
to the high displeasure of almyghtye God, dispargement of the said children,
and the extreme contynuall heaviness of al their freindes, which ungodly
dealing for lack of wholesome laws to the redress thereof, remains a
great familier and common mischeife in this our commonwealth.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by the king and Queen's majesty's, the
lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this present parliamente
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that it shall not be lawful to
any person or persons, to take or convey away or cause to be taken or
conveyed away any maid or woman child unmarried, being within the age of
sixtene years, out, of, or from the possession, custodye, or governance, and
against the will of the father of such maid or woman child, or of such
person or persons to whom the father of such maid or woman child, by
his last will and testamente, or by any other act in his life time has or
shall apoint assign, bequeth, give, or grant the order, keeping, education,
or governance of such maid or woman child, except such taking and
conueyinge away as shall be had, made, or done, by, or for such person or
persons, as without fraud or couyn be, or then shall be the master or
mystres of such maid or woman child, or the gardeine in socage or gardeyne
in chyualrye, of or to such maid or woman child.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons above the age of.xiiij. years, shall from and after the first day of
Apryll next coming, unlawfully take or conueye or cause to be taken or
conveyed any maid or woman child unmarried being within the age of.xvi.
years, out, of, or from the possession, and against the will of the father or
mother of such child, or out or from the possession, and against the will of
such person or persons as then shall happen to have by any lawful ways
or means, the order keeping, education, or governance of any such maiden or
woman child, that then every such person and persons (so offendinge) being
thereof lawfully attaynted, or convicted by the order and due course of the
laws of this realm, other then such of whom such person taken away shall
hold any lands or tenementes by knights service, shall have and suffer
imprisonmente of his and their bodies by the space of two whole years without
bail or maynprice, or else shall pay such fine for his or their said
offense, as shall be assessed by the counsel of the Queen's highness her heirs or
successors in the Star Chamber at Westminster.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any such
person or persons after the said day, shall so take away, or cause to be taken
away as is aforesaid, and deflower any such maid or woman child as is
aforesaid, or shall against the will, or vnknowinge of or to the father of
any such maid or woman child, if the father be in life, or against the
will, or vnknowinge of or the mother of any such maid or woman child
(having the custodye and governance of such child, if the father be dead)
by secret letters, messages, or otherwise, contracte matrimony with any such
maiden or woman child, except such contractes of matrimony as shall be made
by the consent of such person or persons as by the title of wardshippe
shall then have, or be entitled to have the marriage of such maid or woman
child, that then every such person or persons so offendyng, being thereof
lawfully convicted as is aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonmente of his or their
bodies by the space of five years, without bail or mayneprice, or else shall
pay such fine for his or their said offense as shall be assessed by the said
counsel in the said star Chamber. The one moytye of all which fynes shall be
to the king and Queen's majesty's, her heirs and Successoures, the other
moytye to the parties grieved.

And be it further enacted by the said authority, that the king and Queen's
highness honorable Council of the Star Chamber by byll of complaynte, or
information, and Justices of assise by inquisition or indictemente, shall have
authority by virtue of this act, to hear and determine the said offenses,
upon every which indictementes and inquisitions such process shall be awarded
and lie, as upon an indictement of trespace at the common law.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any woman
child or maiden, being above the age of twelve years, and under the age of
sixtene years, do at any time consent or agree to such person that so shall
make any contracte of matrimonye, contrary to the form and effect of this
estatute, that then the next of the kynne of the same woman child or maid, to
whom thinheritaunce should discende, return, or come after the decease of the
same woman child and maid, shall from the time of such assent and agreement,
have, hold, and enjoy al such lands, teneme^ts, and hereditaments, as the
same woman child and maiden, had in possession, reuertion, or remaynder, at
the time of such assent and agreement, during the life of such person that
shall so contracte matrimony. And after the decease of such person so
contractynge matrimony, that then the said lands, tenementes, and
heredytamentes, shall descend, reuert, remain, and come to such person or
persons as they should have done in case this act had never been hadne made,
other then to him only that so shall contracte matrimony.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted, that this act nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend to take away or diminyshe any lybertye, custom, or
authority touching or concerning any Orpha^t or Orphantes, which now be,
or hereafter shall be within the City of London, or any other city, boroughe,
or town, where Orphantes are commonly used to be provided for, either by
grant, or by custom, but that the lord Maire of the said city of London,
and the aldermen of the same for the time being, and al and every other head
offycer or officers, of any other city, borough, or town, where such
Orphantes be provided for, shall and may have and take like rule, order,
keeping and charge of such orphant and orphantes, and of all their lands,
tenementes, goods, and cattels, as heretofore they or any of them lawfullye
had or used, or lawfully might have had and used, if this act had not been made.

AN ACT for the continuation of certain Statutes.
The.ix. Chapter.
WHERE IN THE PARLIAMENT Begone and holden at London, the third day of Noue^ber,
in the.xxi. year of the reign of our most dread Soueraygne lord of most famous
memory, king Henrye the eight, and from thence adiourned to Westminster, and
there holden and continued by diverse prorogations, unto the dissolution thereof,
one act was made and established for the restraint of caryage and conueying of
horses and mares out of this realm. And also one other act was there made for
the true winding of wolles. And one other act was there made to restrain
kylling of wainlinges, bullockes. Stiers and heyfers, being under the age of
two years, which said several acts were the^ made to endure and continue unto
the next parliamente, as by the said several acts, more playnelye
appears. And where also in the same Parliamente one other act was made and
establyshed for attayntes, to be sued for the punishment of periurye upon
untrue verdictes, which act last before rehearsed, was then made and ordained
to continue and endure to the last day of the next parliamente, as by the same
act more plainly at large is showed and may appear.

AND where also in the parlyament begone and holden at Westmynster the eyghte
day of June, in the eight and twenty year of the reygne of our said most
dread Soueraygne Lord, king Henrye the eight, and there continued and kept
until the dissolution thereof. It was ordained and enacted, that all and
synguler the said acts above remembered, and every of them, should continue
and endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until
the last day of the next parliament, as by the same act amongst other
things therein contained, more playnelye appears. And where also in the
Parliamente begone and holden at Westmynster, the eight and twentye day of
Apryll, in the one and thyrtye year of the reygne of our said late most
dread Soueraygne Lord, king Henrye the eight, and there continued until the
eight and twentye day of June then next following, it was ordained and enacted
by thaucthorytie of the same parlyamente, that all and singular the said
several acts above remembered, and every of them, and al clauses, artycles,
and prouysions in them, and every of them contained, should continue and
endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the
last day of the next Parlyamente, as by the same Act among other things
therein contained, more playnelye appears.

AND where in the Parlyamente holden at Westmynster, in the five and thyrty
year of the Reygne of our said late Soueraygne Lord, king Henrye the Eyghte,
one act was made for the preservation of woods, to endure for seven years
then next following, and from thence to the end of the next Parlyamente, as by
the same act more playnelye it does and may appear. And where also at the
Parlyamente holden at Westmynster, in the seven and thyrtye year of the raygne
of the said late king Henry the eyghte, and there continued and kept until
the dissolution thereof, it was ordained and enacted that all and singular the
said acts above mentioned, and every of them (except the said act made
for the preservation of woods, as is aforesaid) should continue and endure
in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the last
day of the next Parlyamente, then next following, as by the same Act
among other things therein contained, more playnelye appears.

AND where also at the Sessyon of the Parlyamente ended at Westminster
the.xiiij. day of March, in the third year of the raygne of our late
Sovereign Lord king Edward the Sixte, one act was made for the true
courryinge of leather, which act was made to endure to the end of the next
parliaments, as by the same act more playnelye appears.

And where also at the Session of a parliament ended at Westminster the first
day of February, in the fourth year of the reign of our said late
Sovereign Lord king Edward the Sixte, one Act was then and there made
concerning the buyinge of rother beasts. And also one other act was then and
there made, touching the buyinge and selling of butter and chese, which
said several acts were then and there made to endure and continue unto the
end of the next parlyamente, as by the same several acts more at large it
does and may appear.

And where also at the Session of a parliamente by prorogation holden at
Westminster the.xxiii. day of Ianuarye in the fyfte year of the raygne of our
said late Soueraygne Lord king Edward the Syxte, one other act was then and
there made, against regratours and forestallers, to endure unto the end of
the next parliamente, which all and synguler the said acts above mentioned
together, with the said act for preservation of woods, at a parliamente
holden at Westminster the first day of March, in the seventh year of the
raygne of our said Soueraygne Lord king Edward the Sixte, and there
continued and dissolved the last day of the same month of March, and all
clauses, articles, and provisions in them, and every of them contained, were
there revived and continued, to stand in their force and strength until the
last day of the next parliamente.

And where also at the Session of a parlyament holden by prorogation at
Westminster the.xxiiij. day of October, in the first year of the reign of
our most gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens majesty, and there continued
and kept until the dissolution thereof, one act was there made and
establyshed, against unlawful and rebellious assembles, to endure to the end
of the next parliamente, as by the same act more playnelye does and may
appear.

And where also at the same Session of parliament last before mentioned, all
and singular the acts above mentioned, and before that time continued at
sundry parliamentes, as is aforesaid, and all clauses, articles, and
provisions in them and every of them contained, were there revived and
continued to stand in their force and strength unto the last day of the next
parliament.

And where also at a parliament begone and holden at Westminster the.xij. day
of November, in the first and second years of the reigns of our most
gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady the king and Queen's majesty's, and there
continued and kept unto the dissolution of the same, being the sixtenth day
of Ianuarye then next ensuynge, one act was then and there made against
seditious words and rumors, to endure to the end of the next parliamente,
as by the same act moore playnelye it does and may appear. And where also
in the said Parlyamente last before recited, all and singular the Acts above
mentioned that were before that time continued at sondrye parliamentes as is
aforesaid, and all clauses articles and provisions in them and every of them
contained, were by authority of the said parliamente, there revived and
continued to stand in their force and strength, unto the last day of the
next Parliamente.

AND where at a parliamente begone and holden at Westminster the one and
twentye day of October, in the second and third years of the reygnes of our
aforesaid Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen's majesty's, and there
continued until the dissolution of the same, being the nynth day of December
then next ensuinge, one Act was then and there made for the keeping of milche
kyne, and for the breadynge and rearinge of calves. And one other Act for the
reedifyinge of decayed houses of husbandrye, and for the increase of Tyllage,
the said three several acts to endure till the last day of the next
parliament. Forasmuch as all and singular the said several acts above
mentioned be good and beneficial for the common wealth of this realm.

BE IT therefore enacted, ordained, and establyshed by the king and Queen's
majesty's, our Soueraygne Lord and Lady, with the assente of the lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all and singular the said
several acts and estatutes above mentioned and rehearsed, and every of
them, and all clauses, articles, and provisions in them and every of them
contained, shall be revived, continued, stand, and endure in their full force
and strength, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, and shall be
observed and kept in all things until the last day of the next
parliamente.

PROVIDED always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that this
present act of continuance of statutes, or any thing therein contained,
shall not in any wise extend, to repeal or make void one act of
parliamente, entitled, an act for the sale of diverse wynes and spyces
brought in by merchants, made and ordained in this present parliamente, nor
any clause, article, or matter therein contained, but that the same Act, and
every thing therein contained shall be of as good strength, force, and
effect, to all intentes, and purposes as if this act of continuance of
statutes, had not been had nor made, any thing herein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND where in the parliamente begone and holden at Westmynster the.xxi. day of
October, in the second and third years of the reigns of our said Soueraygne
lord and lady, king Philippe and Queen Mary, and there continued and kept
until the.ix. day of December, then next ensuynge, one act was then and
there made, entytuled, an act for the releife of the pore, the said act to
endure to the latter end of the first session of the next Parliament.
Forasmuch as the said act is good and beneficial for the commonwealth of this
realm, be it therefore enacted, ordained, and establyshed, by the authority
of this present Parliament, that the said act, last above mentioned and
rehearsed, and all clauses, articles, and prouysions in the same contained,
shall be reuyued, continued, stand and endure, in full force and strength, to
all intentes and purposes, and shall be observed and kept, in all things, until
the last day of the next parlyament.

AN ACT for the confirmation of the Subsedy of the cleargye.
The.x. Chapter.
WHERE THE PRELATES and Clergy of the prouynce of Canterburye, have most
louyngly and lyberally for certain considerations, given and granted to the
king and queen's Majesty's, a Subsedye of eyghte shyllynges of the pound, to be
taken and levied of all and synguler the Spiritual promocions, within the same
prouynce, during the term of four years now next ensuinge, in such
certain manner and form, and with diverse exceptions and prouysyons specyfyed
and contained in a certain instrument, by them thereof made and delivered to
the queens hyghnes, under the Seal of the most reverend father in God,
Reginald Poole Cardinal Archbyshoppe of Canterburye, and prymate of al
England, as in the same instrument exhibyted in this present parliament, more
playnelye does appear, the tenor whereof ensues in these words.

The Prelates and clergy of the prouynce of Canterburye, being lawefullye
congregated and assembled in a convocation or Synod upon great and weyghtye
causes to them purposed, and amongst them well wayed and debated, considering
their most bounden duetyes to the king and queen's Maiestyes, the great and
ample benefytes they have received of their munificency and bountyfull goodness,
for an evident declaration of their good hearts and minds, specially now when
the imminent necessity for the defense of the Realm requires present aid
and remedy, with one vnyforme agreament, accord, and consent together, with
most hartye good will, have given and granted, and by these presents, do
give and grant to the king and Queens Maiestyes, one entyre Subsedye, in
manner and form following. That is to say, that every Archebyshoppe.
Bishop, Abbotte, Pryor, Abbatesse, or Pryoresse, Deane, Archedeacon,
Prebendarye, Provost, master of College, master of Hospytalles, parson and
Vycare, and every other person and persons, of whatsoever name or degree he or
they be, enioyinge any Spyrytuall promocyon or other temporal possessions, to
the same Spyrytuall promotions annexed, now not divided nor separated by Act
of Parlyamente or otherwise, from the possessyon of the Cleargye, shall pay
unto the king and Queens Maiestyes, for every pound that he or they may
yearelye dyspende by reasonne of the said Spyrytuall promotion, the sum of
Eyghte shyllynges. And for the true and certain knoweledge of the yearelye
vallewe of the said promotyons, and every of them, whereof payment shall be
made, the rate, taxation, valuation, and estymation, remaining of Record, in
the king and quenees Maiestyes late court of the first Fruits and Tenthes,
and now in their Court of the Eschequer, for the paymente of the Disme of the
Cleargye, concerning all such promotions, as be in possessyon of the
cleargye, or any other, not divided by act of Parlyamente, or otherwise as is
aforesaid, shall be followed and observed without making any other valuatyon,
rate, taxation, or estymation, then in the said Record is comprysed and
mentioned.

AND where by the great bountye and godly disposition of the king and Queens
Majesty's, certain relygyous houses, have benne of late erected and endowed
with Spyrituall and Temporal possessions, the tax whereof is not specyfied in
the Records of Thexcheker, or else where within any of their Majesty's
Courts, such tax and valuation of the possessions of the said Relygyous
houses, shall be followed for the paymente of this Subsedye, as the Bishop of
that diocese within the which the said relygyous houses be Situated, shall
upon dew search and examination, certifye under his Seal, into the Exchequer
before the first day of May next ensuyng, in which tax the said Bishop
shall and may make all such allowaunces as by the act of Parliamente, made
in the six and twentye year of the late king of famous memory Henrye
theight, of and for the granting of the perpetual Tenthe, were appointed,
granted, and assigned in the valuation and tax of all Ecclesiastical and
spiritual promocions, for the due and true paymente of the late perpetual
tenthe, and also shall and may further allow all such Sums of monye, as
are given, assygned, or appointed to the fyndyng and maintenance of poor
men, Scoole masters, ushers, gramaryens, choristers and other officers and
mynysters, serving and found within the said Monasteryes, and religyous
houses.

PROVIDED always that forasmuch as the tenthe part of the said valuation
and tax before mentyoned, shall be for a time upon certain reasonable
consyderations and respects yearelye paid by the Cleargye, so that there
remains only nine parts to the incumbente clear, this Subsedye of Eyghte
shyllynges of the pound, shall be understand and mente only of the said nine
parts, and of no more, where and so long as the Tenthe is or shall be paid.

Also the said Prelates and Cleargye further do grant, that this Subsedye
of eyghte shyllynges of the pound, of the yearelye value of every promocion,
taxed as is aforesaid, shall be paid to the king and Queens Maiestyes, within
four years next ensuynge the date hereof, That is to say, two shyllinges of
every pound, in every of the said four years.

The first paymente thereof to be due at the five and twentye day of March,
which shall be in the year of our Lord GOD, a thousand five hundrede fyftye
and eyghte, and the Second paymente thereof to be due, at the five and twenty
day of March, then next following, which shall be in the year of our Lord
GOD, a thousand five hundred fyftye and nine.

The third paymente thereof to be dew the five and twentye day of March,
then next following, which shall be in the year of our Lord GOD, a thousand
five hundred and syxtye.

And the fourth and last paymente thereof to be due at the said five and
twentye day of March then next ensuynge, which shall be in the year of our
Lord GOD, a thousand five hundred syxtye and one, to be delivered and paid
yearelye, by such person and persons as in this present grant shall be
appointed, to have the collection thereof, to be paid into the receypte of the
king and Queens Maiestyes Eschequer, or to such person or persons, place
and places, to whom and where it shall please their hyghnes to appoynte for
the receypte thereof, before or at the Tenthe day of June, in every of the
said four years, without payinge any thing to the receyuer or receyuours,
or to any other offycer or person by their Maiestyes to be assygned, for
any dyscharge, acquyttaunce, or Quietus est, upon paymente and receypte of the
same Subsedye, to be given and delivered, but only twelve pence for the
acquyttaunce.

ITEM the said prelates and clergy, do also grant that every priest and
all other spiritual persons, having a pention by reason of ye dissolution of
any the late monasteryes, colleges, free chappeles, chau^teryes, fraternities,
guyldes, and hospytalls, or of any other spiritual dignity, and corporation,
now dissolved, and extinguished within the said prouynce of Canterburye, shall
likewise pay to their highnesses eight shyllynges of every pound of the said
pencyons, within the said four years, at such days and times, as is before
specified, and that for the sure and assertayned payment thereof, deduction and
retention of the said eight shyllynges, shall be made yearly in the hands of
the payers of the said pencion, after the rate of two shillynges of the pound,
every of the said four years, to be delivered and paid unto their majesty's
use, at such time and to such persons as the Subsedy of eight shyllynges of
the pound aforesaid, shall be paid unto.

ITEM that every stypendarye priest, receyuyng annual stipende of eight pound
by the year, and under, (being no perpetuity) within the said prounce,
shall pay unto their Majesty's use six shyllynges eight pence yearly, during
the said four years, at such time and to such persons as the said Subsedy
shall be paid, and under the same penaltyes as the rest of the clergy do pay
for their promotions. And that every priest receyuyng above eight pound
yearly and not above ten pound, to pay likewise ten shyllynges. And that
every preyste receyuynge above ten pound, and not above twentye marks, to
pay thyrtene shyllynges four pence yerelye, during the said four years at
such time and to such persons as the said Subsedye shall be paid. And that
every preiste taking stypende above twentye marks, to pay likewise two
shyllynges of the pound, every year duringe the said four years, in such
manner and form as the rest of the clergy do pay for their promotion
spiritual, and for defaulte or lack of payment by the said stipendaryes,
that every person, vycarre or other spiritual or temporal person,
proprietarye, or fermour, hiring any priest to serve in any place, shall be
answerable for the payment of the said preyste in that behalf, after the
said rates, and shall and may make retencion of his and their wages quarterly,
of so much as the said stipendaries be charged with, by this present
commission and grant every of the said four years.

ITEM the said prelates and clergy, further do grant that every
Archebyshoppe and Bishop, and the Sea being vacant, every Deane and
Chapter of that Sea void, shall be Collectoures of this Subsedye, within their
proper Dyocesse, during the said four years.

AND to thintente the king and queen's Majesty's may be surely and duly
answered and paid of the said Subsedie, in manner and form aforesaid, and
the Collectoure of the same throughlye charged and discharged according to the
tenor of this grant.

The said prelates and Clergy do ordeyne and decree with one assente and
consent, that every Collectoure of the aforesaid Subsidye, and of every
part and percell thereof, and their lawful deputye or deputies, shall have
full power and authority against every person and persons liable,
charged and bound to pay the said Subsidye or any part thereof, denyinge,
refusinge, or delayinge to pay the same, or making any defaulte in the
paymente thereof, at the day or days that it ought to be paid (after
lawful warning to them given personallye, or at their Churches or mansions)
to proceed with the censures of the Church, that is to say, by suspention,
excommunication, or interdiction, and also by sequestration of the fruictes and
profits of their benefices or promotions spyrytuall, in whose hands soever
they be, and to make sale of the same fruictes, and by all other lawful
remedies by their discretions thought conueniente, to coarcte, constrayne, and
compel them and every of them, to the full and vndelayde satisfaction of the
said Subsedye, and every part and percell thereof, and shall also have like
power and authority, both to absolve or cause to be absolved, all persons
so payinge, from all the said censures and other pains, and also to release
and revoke al such process as shall be made against them, or any of them,
after they shall have fullye satisfied the said Subsidye accordingelye. And
upon full paymente or satisfaction of the said Subsidye or any part thereof,
all such acquittaunce or acquittaunces, which shall be made by the collectour
or his lawful deputy, shall be sufficient for the discharge of the same.

PROVIDED always, and it is ordained and decreed, that all and every person
and persons, refusinge or neglecting to pay the said Subsedye at time
conueniente, as is aforesaid, shall for his or their first defaulte or
necligence in not payinge the Subsedye, according to the purporte and tenoure
of this grant, bear all the charges and reasonable expenses of the said
Collectoure or his deputye, in coming going, and demaundinge of the same, and
for the second time likewise offendynge in none paymente, to pay to the said
Collectoure, or his deputye the fourth part of the said Subsedye, over and
above the said sum upon him or his church or person allotted and taxed,
which he is bound to pay, and charged by this act of free grant.

Also the said prelates and clergy do further ordeyne and decree, that if
any person or persons above named, chargeable to this Subsedye, or any
part thereof, after the said censures and process executed against him or
them, yet still obstinately refuse, neglecte, or make delay to pay the same,
or any part thereof as is beforesayde, that then after lawful monition given
unto him or them, refusing, neglectinge, or delayinge by the said Collectours,
or their lawful deputy or deputies, personallye, or at their Churches, do
still by the space of thyrtye days refuse, or negiecte to make payment of the
said Subsidye, that then, and in every such case, it shall be lawful to the
said collectoure or his lawful deputy, every such person so refusinge,
neglectinge, or delayinge and contempning these former processes, to deprive,
amoue, and destitute from his or their benefice, spyrytuall promotion, or
pention Ecclesiastical, any appellation, inhibition, or other remedy,
ordinary or extraordinary notwithstanding: the said persons so refusinge, to
be and remain for ever without hope of regresse to such their promotion as he
or they shall be deprived of, for the causes aforesaid, by any new presentation
of him or them to be made to the same. And that it shall be lawful to the
patron of the said benefice or benefices, or other Ecclesiastical
promotions, from which the said person or persons so neglectinge to pay
shall be depryued, to present unto, or confer every such benefice or
promotion Spiritual, as if the said Incumbente or Incumbentes were deceased.

ITEM the said prelates and clergy further do ordeyne and decree, that of so
much as the said Collectours shall be charged with in their accoumptes,
clearelye to be paid into the receipte of the said Eschequer, or to such
person or persons as it shall please the king and Queen's majesty's to
appointe for the receypte of the same, shall be allowed to the said
collectoure upon his said accoumpte for the same, for every pound six
pence, by way of reward, or in liewe of his charges, collection, portage,
conueying, and payinge of the said Subsedye.

PROVIDED always that no Spyrytual promotion, or any lands, possessions, or
revenues annexed to the same, being charged by this grant or act of the
province of Canterburye, or any goods or catelles growinge, being, or
renewynge of the same, or apparteyninge to the owners of the same Spiritual
promotions, shall be charged or made contributorye to any.xv. or any other
Subsidye all ready granted, or within five years next ensumge the date of
this present to be granted by the laitye to the king and queen's highnesses.

ITEM, the said prelates and cleargye further grant, that all Deanes,
Archedeacons, Dignities, Prebendaries, preachers, and petye Canons, of all
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches within the said prouynce, shall be charged
with this Subsidye for their own portions only, thereof to pay eyghte
shyllynges of the pound, with in the said four years, as is above
rehearsed, and that those portions of rentes and revenues which their highness.
or any of their most noble progenitoures, or any other persons, have given unto
the said cathedral or Collegiate Churches, for the mayntenaunce of pore men,
Scoole masters, vshers, gramariens, choristers, and other officers and
mynysters, not to be charged with any part of this Subsedye.

Provided also that every parson, vicar, or spiritual man, paying any pencion
whereof no allowaunce is made in the valuation of his said benefice, in the
records of the said late Court of first fruits, or Eschequer, or otherwise,
shall and may retain two shyllynges of every pound, of every such pencion,
every year during the said four years, to his own releyfe, in
consideration that he is charged to pay his Subsedye of eight shyllynges of
the pound, out of every pound of the said pention. Any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that where certain lands, tenementes, rentes, tithes,
pencyons, porcions, fruits, and other hereditamentes, lately be lougynge to
diverse cathedral churches, and other places ecclesiastycal, within the said
prouynce of Canterburye, or any other yearelye paymentes, going out or being
paid out of the said Lands, Tenementes, and other the premises, or any of
them, which were given and assygned to be bestowed, and spente to and upon the
fyndyng and maintenance of certain chauntryes, anniuersaryes, obyttes,
lights, lamps, and other like things, intentes, and purposes, be of late come
into the hands and possession of the king and Queen's Maiestyes, our
Soueraygne Lord and Lady, by force of a statute thereof made in the first
year of the reygne of our late Sovereign lord king Edward the syxte, as by
the same Statute more plainelye appearethe. That the said cathedral churches
and the deanes or presydentes, and chapters of the same, and all other places
and persons to whom the said lands, rentes, and all other the premises or
any of them did lately apperteyne, shall not be charged to and with any
contributyon or paymente of this Subsedy, of and for that part or portion
whereunto the king and queens majesty's, be and has been entitled or
possessed of. nor of, and for any the said yearelye paymentes, goinge out or
paid out of the premises, or any part thereof. But that this said Subsedye
shall be understand to be chargeable and dew only of all and singular lands,
tenementes, rentes, tithes, pencions, portyons, fruits, and other
hereditamentes, which do yet still remain, not disseuered from the hands and
possession of the said cathedral churches, and other the places and persons
aforesaid. And that deduction and allowaunce be made to them and every of
them, in the payment of the said Subsedye, out of the valuation, taration, and
estymation, made for the payment of the said Disme, remayninge of record, in
the king and queen's majesty's court of the Escheker, for that rate and portion
or yearelye paymente which is come into the hands and possession of our said
Soueraygne lord and lady, or otherwise severed from the possessions of the
said cathedral churches, and other places and parsons aforesaid, by force of
the Statute premysed.

PROVIDED also that every parson and vicar, whose benefyce is above the
valuation of five pounds, and not above six pound thirtene shillinges and
four pence, after the rate of the late perpetual tenth, shall pay every
year of the said four years only, Six shillinges eight pence, as
Stipendary preistes of eyghte pound yearly wages benne charged to do by force
of this act, and grant, and none otherwise. And that al parsons and vycars,
whose benefices be of the valuation of five pound or under, after the rate of
the said late perpetual Tenthe, shall not be charged nor chargeable with this
Subsedye, or any part thereof.

Provided always that this Subsedye granted by the clergy shall not be
demanded or leuyed out of any benefice, house of students, or college,
situate or set within the universities of Orforde and Cambridge, or of any
benefice, or other revenues, unto any house of Students, or college in
Oxforde or Cambrydge, united, appropried, or appertayninge, or of the college
of Eaton, nigh Windesour, or of the College of Winchester, founded by Wyllyam
Myckeham, some time Bishop of Winchester, or any pore men, women or children
living of alms, in any Hospitalles, alms houses, alms halles, or of
gramer scooles, or of any other church or benefice, or of any other revenues
of the said houses, Colleges, or hospitalles, alms houses, or alms
halles, or gramer scooles, or to any of them annexed, appropried or otherwise
appertayning.

Provided also that every preyst and all other late professed relygions
parsons, having a pention by reason of the dissolution of the late Monasteries,
Colleges, free Chappells, Chauntryes, Frateruytyes. Guyldes, and Hospytalls,
or any other incorporation, within the prouynce of Canterburye, and being of
the sum of fortye shyllynges or under, and not above, shall not be charged or
chargeable to the said Subsedye or any part thereof, for any such pencion
of fourtye shyllynges or under. Any thing contained in this grant to the
contratye notwithstanding.

Fynallye the said Prelates and Cleargye, being desirous that the said
Subsedye may be entierlye contented and paid to thuse of the king and Queen's
Majesty's, within the said four years, do grant, ordeyne, and decree, that
if it shall happen in the end of the said four years, anyde arrerages of the
said Subsedye to be behind unpaid by reason of the exilitie, and decay of
any benefyces, or other spiritual promotions, liable to this Subsedye, That
then it shall be lawefull to every Archebyshoppe and Bysihoppe, within their
several Diocese, by the consent of his cleargye, and the Sea being void, to
the Deane and Chapter of that Sea void, to assesse and tax all and singuier
the ecclesiastical promocions, within their said several Diocese, to become
contributors to the full satisfaction of the said Subsedye, the same to be
collected, leuyed, and paid the next year immediatelye ensuynge the said
forth year, at the days and under the pains, form, and qualities above
limited. Anything in this grant to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND for the true and sure payment of this Subsedye, granted by the said
Prelates and Clergy of the prouynce of Canterburye, according to the tenor,
purporte, effect, and true meaning of this present instrument. The said
Prelates and Cleargye most humblye desire and require the king and Queens
most excellent Majesty's, that it may be enacted by aucthortie of this
present Parlyamente, that the prouysyons contained in the foresaid grant,
shall stand good and effectual to all intentes and purposes, mentioned in the
said grant. And that all processes and penalties, and all other clauses,
touching the payment of the said Subsedye, and the leuyinge and collection of
the same, and of every percell thereof, may be by the said Prelates and
Cleargye, and their lawefull deputies, put in due execution according to the
true meaning thereof, without incurrynge any penaltyes or dangers of any
laws and statutes of this Realm.

AND for the true and sure paymente of the said Subsedye, granted by the said
prelates and clergy, of the said prouynce of Canterbury, according to the
tenor, effect, and true meaning of the said instrumente. Be it enacted by the
king and Queen's Majesty's, with thassente of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parlyamente assembled, and by
thaucthoritie of the same, that the said gift and grant, and every matter,
sum of money, provision, clause, and sentence in the said instrument
contained be ratified, establyshed, and confirmed by thaucthoritie aforesaid.

AND furthermore be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that every
person that shall be appointed to the collection and gatherynge of the said
Subsedye, shall have full power and authority to leuye take and perceive the
same Subsedye, by thaucthoritie of the censures of the church, in manner and
form as in the said instrument of grant is contained, without danger of the
laws of this realm or by distress upon the possession of the fermours or
occupyers of the lands, and tenementes, chargeable by the said instrumente,
for or to the paymente of any sum or sums of monye, or otherwise by the
discretion of the collector thereof. And that no repleuye, prohibition, or
supersedias shall be allowed, or obeyed for any person or persons, making
defaulte of payment of the said Subsedy, contrary to the tenor of the grauntes
thereof, until such time as they have truly satyssyed and contented all
such part and porcions, as to the^ in that behalf apperteyneth. And that
every such fermoure and fermoures, their executours and assigns, that shall
fortune hereafter, to be charged to and with the paymente of the said Subsedy,
or any part thereof, shall by thaucthoritie aforesaid, be allowed and retayue
in his hands, as much of his yerelye rent and ferme, as the sum which he
shall fortune to pay for his Lord or Lessor shall extend unto, except the
said fermor or fermours, their executors and assigns, by the lease and grant
that they have of any part of the lands, and tenementes, chargeable to this
said Subsedye, or by force of any couenaunte or article, therein contained,
be bounden and charged to pay the same, and there of to discharge their leassor
and landlord, during the term mentioned in the said leasse.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present
parliament, that every lay person having a spiritual promotion chargeable by
this act, and also having temporal possessions, goods, cattells, and
debtes, chargeable to this Subsedye granted by the temporaltye, shall be
charged, taxed, and set for his said spiritual promocions with the clergy, and
for his said temporal possessions, and cattells, with the temporaltye, and not
otherwise, any thing before mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, by thaucthoritie of this present parlyament, that
the said archebyshoppes, and Bishops, and other parsonnes chargeable to and
with the collection of the said Subsedye of eyghte shyllynges of the pound,
within the said prouynce of Canterburye, shall have upon every payment thereof
made in the Queens court of the escheker, or else where the king and queen's
Maiestyes shall appoynte the same to be paid, a sufficient acquittaunce in
writing, of such person or persons, as their majesty's shall appoint for the
receipte thereof, the same acquittaunce witnessing the same receipt, of as much
of the same sum of the same Subsedy, as shall be by any of them so received,
and every such acquitaunce, in writing, sealed, and Subcribed with the name or
names of every such person or persons, that so by their highnesses appointment
shall receive any of the said Sums of monye, shall be as good and effectual
in the law, and also a sufficient discharge, to all intentes, constructions,
and purposes, as if it were made by act of Parlyamente. And that every
person and persons, which shall have and receive any such acquytaunce,
shall pay but only two pence, for every of the same acquyttaunces.

BEIT also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
grant and grauntes of all and every Sum and Sums of money which
hereafter shall be granted to the king and Queen's Majesty's by the cleargye
of the province of york, shall be of the same strength, force, and effect,
in all things as the said grant made by the said province of Canterburye,
and shall be taxed, certified, collected, levied, and gathered according to
the tenoure, form, and effect of this present act of parliamente, to all
intentes, constructions, and purposes, in such manner as though it were
specially, plainlye, and perticulerlye expressed and rehearsed in this act by
express words, terms, and sentences in their several natures and kinds.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
prouisos before rehearsed, contained in the said grant of the prelates and
clergy of the prouynce of Canterburye, and the like or the same provisions
hereafter to be contained in the grant of the prelates and cleargye of the
province of york, shall be good and effectual, and to be observed and kept
in every point and article, according to the true purporte and meaning of
the same.

AN ACT of a Subsidy, and one fiftene granted by the temporaltie.
The.xi. Chapter.
WE THE KING AND Queen's Majesty's Most humble, faithful, and obediente
subjects, the Lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the commons in this
present parliament assembled, calling to our remembrance the great and
manyfold charges, which their graces have all ready sustained by the reason
of this present war that their highness have had, and yet have against the
french king and the Scotts, the ancient enemies of this Realm, and
perceiuinge also that the malice of the same French king and Scotts are
such, that they have and daily do practice by all dishonorable ways and
means, with the aid and power of all their confederaties and alies, to anoye
their Majesty's, and this their Realm, and other the dominions of the same,
and by all lykelyhode, if opportunity of time and place so permit, do mind
to make some invasion into sundry parts of this realm, as well upon the Sea
cost as else where, which if it should happen, would be no small annoyaunce
as well to their Majesty's, as to the hole estate of this realm. For the wise
prevention and resistance whereof (least any such should happen to be attempted)
their highness shall be enforced, not only to mayneteyne a conueniente number,
and nauye of ships upon the narrow Seas, but also a great power and number
of soldiers, to continue in diverse and sundry parts of the borders and
frountiers of this realm, redye prepared to all purposes, to resist al such
malicious attempts or invasions, and to defend the liberty and honor
thereof, which cannot be put in order and readiness, without great Sums of
monye, to be defraied and employed for the same. And furthermore considering
that the same shall not be only for the suertye of their majesty's persons
(whom we pray to god may long raygne over us,) and likewise for the suretye
of this Realm, and their Majesty's loving Subjects of the same, but also
may be a great terroure, fear, and discourage to the said french king and
Scotts, and all their confederates, and alies, to attempt any such invasion
or other enterprise. Have granted unto our said Sovereign lady, her heirs
and Successors, one Subsedye, and one.xv. and tenth, to be taxed, rated, and
levied of our goods, cattels, lands, and tenementes in manner and form as
hereafter in this present act is limited and contained: And albeit that we
doubt not but that our said most gracious Sovereign lord and lady assure
them selves, that we their gracious most louinge subjects, know the same to
be far under the charges which their majesty's are like to sustain in this
behalf. Yet nevertheless we most humblye beseech their highness to accept
this our gift, as a declaration of our true and most faithful hearts, who
be, and by gods assistence always shall be, by all ways and means, and in all
respects, ready to serve with all conformity and obedience for the
preservation of their most royal persons, and defense and surety of this
their majesty's realm and dominions, as to the du tie of good and obedient
subjects apperteyneth.

Wherefore we the said lords and commons, for the great and vrge^t
considerations aforesaid, by one hole assent, by authority of this present
parliament, do give and grant to our said Soueraygne Lady, the queen's
highness, her heirs and successoures, toward the said great costs, and
inestimable charges, one hole.xv. and tenth, to be paid, taken and levied of
the moveable goods, cattels, and other things usual to such.xv. and tenthe,
to be contributorye and chargeable within the Shires, Cities, Boroughes,
Towns, and other places of this their majesty's realm, in manner and form
before time used, except the sum of six thousand pound thereof fullye to be
deducted of the Sum that one hole.xv. and tenth atteyneth unto, in releif,
comfort and discharge of the pore cities, towns, and boroughes of this her
said realm, wasted, desolate, or distroyed, or over greatly empouerished,
after such rate as was and has before this time been had and made unto every
Shire, and to be divided in such manner and form as heretofore for one
hole.xv. and tenth has been had and divided.

And the said one hole.xv. and tenth, the exceptions and deductions aforesaid
thereupon had, deducted, and allowed, to be paid in manner and form
folowinge. That is to say, the hole.xv. and tenth, to be paid to her assigns
in the receipte of her highness eschequer, be fore the tenth day of November
next coming.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the knights
elected and returned of, and for the Shires within this realm for this
present Parliamente, Citezens of Cities, and Burgesses of Boroughes and
towns, where collectours have been used to be named and appointed for the
collection of any.xv. and tenth, before this time granted, shall name and
appointe before the last day of Auguste next coming, sufficient and able
persons, for the Collection of the said.xv. and tenth, in every of the said
Shyres, Cities, Boroughes and towns, the said persons then having lands,
tenementes, and other hereditamentes, in his own right, of an estate of
inheritance of the yearelye value of ten pounds, or in goods worth one
hundredth pounds at the least. And also such person or persons, so by them to
be named and appointed for the collection of the said.xv. and tenth, shall be by
them severally appointed, and allotted into hundredes. Rapes, Wapentakes,
cities, boroughes, and towns. And also the said persons so named and appointed
for the collection of the same.xv. and tenth, shall be charged and chargeable
upon his or their accoumpte or accoumptes in the eschequer, to be made with all
such sum or sums of money, as the hundredes, rapes, wapentakes, cities,
boroughes and towns where he or they shall so happen to be appointed amount
unto, and of no more sum or sums.

And upon the paymente of such Sums of monye, as he shall be charged with,
shall be discharged and have his quietus est, the none accoumptinge, or none
payment of any other his fellows, or the insufficiency of them or any of
them, notwythstandynge. And the names and surnames of every of the said
Collectoures, for the said xv. and tenth together, with the place allotted to
their Collection and charge, the said knights, citizens, and Burgesses for the
Shyres, cities, and boroughes whereunto they be elected, named, and returned,
shall certify before the king and queen in their chauncery, before the.xiii.
day of October no we next folowinge, according to the tenure of this act.
And if defaulte of any such certifieng be had or made, in form as is
abouesayd, then the lord Chancellor of England for the time being, shall
immediatelye after, name and appointe Collectoures for the collection of the
same.xv. and tenth, in manner and form as the said knights of the shyre,
citizens of cities, and Burgesses of Bouroughes should have done, and as
before time have been used. The which said collectours and every of them shall
have like allowaunce upon their accoumptes, for their fees, wages, and rewards
for the collection of the said.xv. and tenthe, in as large manner and form
as any collectoure or collectoures of.xv. and tenth, have had at any season
in time paste. And that the barons of the king and queen's Eschequer for the
time being, shall and may from time to time awarde such process for the spedye
payment thereof against the collectoure and collectoures of the same, as by
their discretions shall be thought conueniente.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by the authority of this present
parliament, that the said Lord Chancellor, knights of the shyres, Citisens
of Cities, and Burgesses of Burroughes. Towns, and other places, having
authority by this present act, to name and nominate the said Collectoures,
of, or for the said fyftene and tenth, shall upon their nomination and
election had and made, take by authority of this present parliamente,
sufficient recognisaunce, or by obligation of every person so by them to be
named to be bounden to the king and Queens Majesty's in the double Sum of
their collection, and to be endorced upon such condition, that if the said
collectoure or collectoures, do truly content and pay to the use of the
king and Queen in their receypt of their Eschequer before the said tenth day
of November now next ensuynge, so much of the Sum of money, allotted and
appointed to his collection, as the same Collectoure shall have collected and
gathered. And do like wise after the said tenthe day of the month of
November, content and pay to the king and Queen's Majesty's uses at the same
receypte, the residue of his collection and charge, wtin one month next after
such time as he shall have gathered and collected the same residue, that then
the said recognysaunce or obligation to be void, or else to stand in his
full strength and virtue, which recognisaunce or obligations so taken, the
said knights of the Shyre, Citisens and Burgesses, and every of them,
taking any such recognisaunces or oblygatyons, shall certysye and deliver to
the Lord Treasurer and Baronnes of the same Eschequer, before the said tenth
day of November now next ensuynge, upon pain of forfeyture of ten pound
to the Queen for every recoguysaunce or oblygation so to be taken and not
certified.

And that every inche collectoure upon request to him made, shall make and
knowledge the same recognisaunce or obligation according lie, upon like pain
and forfeiture of ten pound to the Queen for his refusal thereof. And that
the Treasurer or Barons of the escheker upon the payment of the same
collection, or at the said day, shall cancel and deliver the said
recognisaunce or obligation to the said collectour or collectours, without any
fee, or reward to be paid to any person for the same.

And furthermore for the great and weyghtye considerations aforesaid, we the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, do by our like assente and authority of this Parlyamente, give
and grant to our said Soueraygne Lady the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and
Successors, one entyer Subsedye, to be rated, taxed, leuyed, and paid at one
hole and entyre paymente, of every person Spyrytuall and Temporal, of what
estate or degree he or they be, according to the tenure of this act, in
manner and form following. That is to say, as well of every person borne
within this realm of England, Wales, or other the Queen's dominions, as of all
and every Fraternity, Guild, Corporation, Misterye, Brotherheade, and
Cominaltye, corporated or not corporated, within this Realm of England,
Wales, or other the queen's dominions, being worth five pound, for every
pound, as well in coin, and the value we of every pound that every such
person, Fraternity, Guylde, Corporation, Mysterye, Brotherheade, and
Comynaltye, corporate or not corporate, has of his or their own, or any other
to his or their use, as also plate, stock of marchaundises, all manner of corn
and blades, householde stuff, and of all other goods moveable, as well within
the Realm as without, and of all such sums of money as to him or them is or
shall be owyng, whereof he or they trust in his or their consciences surely to be
paid (except and out of the premises deducted such sums of money as he or
they owe, and in his or their consciences truly intends to pay, and except
also the apparel of such persons, their wives and children belonging to
their own bodies, saving Iuelles, gold, silver, stone and pearl) shall pay
to and for the said Subsedy, two shillinges eight pence of every pound.

And also of every alien borne out of the Queens obeysaunce, as well Denizen
as other, inhabitinge within the Realm, of every pound that he or they have
in coin, and the value of every pound in plate, corn, grain, marchaundise,
householdestuffe or other goods Iuelles, Cattelles, moveable or immovable as
is asoresayde, as well within this Realm as without, and of al sums of monye
to him or them owyng, whereof he or they trust in his or their conscience or
consciences to be paid (except and of the same premises deducted every such
Sum or sums of money which he or they do owe, and in his or their
conscience or consciences intends truly to pay) shall pay of and for every
pound, to and for the payment of the said Subsedy five shyllinges.iiij.d. for
every pound.

And also that every alien and stranger, borne out of the queens dominions,
being denizen or not denizen, not being contrybutorye to any of the rates
abouesayde, shall pay to and for the paymente of the said Subsidy, eight
pence foreuery poll, and the master, or he or she with whom the same alien is
or shall be abidinge at the time of the taxation or taxations thereof, to be
charged with the same for lack of payment thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person
borne under the queen's obeysaunce, and every corporation, fraternity, guylde,
misterye, brotherheade, and cominaltie, corporate or not corporate, for every
pound that every of the same persons, and every corporation, fraternity,
guylde, mystery, brotherhead, and co^minaltie, corporate or not corporate, or
any other to his or their use has in fee simple, fee tail, for term of
life, term of years, by execution, wardeshyppe, or by copye of court roll.
of and in any honors, castles Manours, lands, tenementes, rentes, services,
hereditamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yearelye profyttes, of the
yearelye value of twentye shyllynges, as well within aunciente demean, as
other places pryuyleged, as else where, and so vpwardes, shall pay to and for
the paymente of the said Subsedy, four shyllynges of every pound.

And every alien borne out of the Queen's obeysaunce, in such case, to pay
at the said payment eight shyllynges of every pound.

And that all sums presented and chargeable by this act, either for goods
and debtes, or for lands and tenementes, and other the premises, as is in
this act contained, shall be at the said payment set and taxed after the rate
and portion, according to the true meaning of this act (lands and
tenementes chargeable to the dysines of the clergy, and yearlye wages due to
servants for their yearelye service (other then the king and Queen's
servants taking yearelye wages of five pounds or above, only except and
forprysed.) And that all plate, coin, iuelles, goods, debtes, and cattelles
personnalles, being in the only custodye of any person and persons, to
the use of any corporation, fraternity, Guilde, misterye, brotherhead, or
any comminaltie, being corporate or not corporate, be and shall be rated,
set, and charged by reason of this act, as the value certified by the
presenters of that certificate, to be sworn of every pound in goods and
debtes as is abouesayde. And of every pound in lands, tenementes, annuities,
fees, corrodies, or other yearly profittes, as is abouesayde. And the sommes
that are before rehearsed, set, and taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them
that shall have such goods in custody, or otherwise charged for lands as is
before rehearsed. And the same person or persons, and body corporate by
thaucthoritie of this act, shall be discharged against him or them that shall
or ought to have the same at the time of the paymente or delyuerye thereof, or
at his otherwise departure from the custodye or possession of the same,
(except and always forprised from the charge and asseassement of this
subledye, all goods, cattels, Iuelles, and ornaments of Churches and
Chapels, which have been ordained and used in Churches or Chapels, for the
honor and service of almighty God.) And this payment of the said subsedy
shall be by authority aforesaid, taxed, assessed, and rated according to
this act, in every Shyre, Rydinge, Lathe, Wapentake, Rape, City, Borough,
Town, and every other place within this realm of England and Wales, and
other the Queen's dominions, before the last day of Apryll next coming.

And the particular Sums of every Shyre, Rydinge, Burroughe, Town, and
other places aforesaid, with the particular names of such as are chargeable
for and to the paymente of the said Subsedye, to be taxed and set by the
Commissioners to the same lymitted, or two of them at the least, with the
names of the high collectoures, and in the same form shall be certified in
the king and Queens Eschequer, before the last day of May next coming,
with the names of the high Collectoures of the same. And the said Sums in
manner and form aforesaid, to be taxed for the paymente of the said
Subsidye, shall be paid in the king and Queen's Receipte of their Eschequer
aforesaid, to the use of our said Sovereign Lady, before the.xxiiij. day
of June next coming. And the Sums of and for the said Subsidy, shall be
taxed, set, asked, and demanded, taken, gathered, leuyed, and paid to the
use of our said Sovereign Lady, and her heirs and Successoures in form
abouesayde, as well within the liberties, fraunchises, Saynctuaries, aunciente
demean, and other whatsoever place, exempte or not exempte, as without
(except such Shyres, places, and persons as shall be forprised in and by
this present act) any grant, charter, prescription, use, or liberty, by
reason of any letters patentes, or other privilege, prescription, allowaunce
of the same, or whatsoever other matter of discharge heretofore to the contrary
made, granted, used, or obtained notwithstanding.

And it is further enacted by the aucthoritye of this present parliamente,
that every such person, as well such as be borne under the queens
obeysaunce, as every other person Stranger borne, denyzen or not denizen
inhabitinge within this realm, or within Wales, or other the Queen's dominions,
which at the time of the same assessinge or taxation to be had or made,
shall be out of this realm, and out of Wales, and have goods or cattels,
lands, or tenements, fees or anuities, or other profittes within this realm,
or in Wales, shall be charged and chargeable for the same, by the certificate
of the inhabitauntes of the parties where such goods, cattels, lands,
teneme^ts, or other the premises then shall be, or in such other place where
such person or his factoure deputye or attourneye, shall have his most
resort unto within this realm or in Wales, in like manner as if the said
person were or had been at the time of the said asseassynge within this
Realm. And that every person abiding or dwelling within this Realm, or
without this Realm, shall be charged or chargeable to the same Subsedye,
granted by this Act, according, and after the rate of such yearelye
substance, or valewe of lands and tenementes, goods, and cattelles, and
other the premysses, as every person so to be charged shall be set at the
time of the said asseassinge or taxation upon him to be made, and in none
otherwise.

AND furthermore be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for the
asseassinge and ordering of the said Subsedye to be duelye had, the Lord
Chauncelloure of England, or the keeper of the great Seal, the Lord
Treasurer of England, the Lord Steward of the King and Queens Honorable
Householde, the Lord president of the king and Queen's honorable Counsel,
the lord prinye Seal for the time being, or two of them at the least, whereof
the Lord Chancellor of England, or keeper of the great Seal for the time
being to be one, shall and may name and appointe, of, and for every Shyre and
Rydyng, and other places as well within this realm as in Wales, and other the
Queen's dominions, and also of and for every City and Town, being a countye
in it self, and of, and for the Isle of Wight, such certain number of
persons, of every of the said Shires, Rydinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes,
Cities, Towns, and Isle of Wight, and every other place, and other the
inhabitauntes of the same, to be Commissioners with in the same, whereof they
be inhabytauntes, and also of, and for the honorable householde of the Queen's
Majesty, and the Lady Elizabeth's grace, in what Shyres or other places, the
said householdes shall happen then to be. And the Lord Chauncelloure and
other with him before named in like manner, may name and appoynte of every
other such Burroughe, and town corporate, as well in England as in Wales, and
other the Queen's dominions as they shall think requisite, six, five, four,
three, or two of the head officers, and other sad honest inhabitauntes of
every of the said Cities, Burroughes, and Towns Corporate, according to the
number and multitude of people being in the same. The which persons if any
such be thereunto named, of the said inhabytauntes of the said Burroughes,
and Towns Corporate, not being countyes in them selfs, shall be joined and
put in as commyssyoners, with the persons named for such Shyres, and
Rydynges, as the said Burroughes, and towns corporate, not being counties in
them selves, be set and have their being, which persons so named for and of ye
said boroughes, and towns corporate, not being counties, by reason of their
dwelling in the same, shall not take upon then none of the^ to put any part
of their commission in execution for the premysses out of the said Boroughes
and Town Corporate, wherein they being so named only for the same be
dwelling. And also not to execute the said commyssyon within the Burroughe or
Town Corporate, where they be so dwelling, but at such days, and times, as
the said other commyssyoners for the same Shyre, and Riding shall thereto
lymytte and appoynte, within the same Burroughe or town corporate, not being
countye corporate, whereof they so be, and not out of such Borough or town,
and in that manner to be aydynge and assystynge with the said other
commyssyoners, in, and for the good executynge of theffecte of the said
commyssyon, upon pain of every of the said commissioners so named for
every such city Borough, and town corporate, not being a county, to make
such fine as the said other comissioners in the commission, of, and for the
said shire or riding so named, or three of them at the least, shall by their
dyscretions set and certyfye into the king and queens Escheker, there to be
leuyed to the use of her Majesty, in like manner as such or like Sommes had
been set and rated upon every such person for the said Subsedye. The
which commissyoners so named of and for the said Cities, Burroughes, and
Towns, not being countyes, and only put in the said commyssyon by
reasonne of their dwelling in the same, shall not have any part of the
portion of the fees, and rewards of the commyssyoners and their clerks, in
this act afterward specyfyed. And the lord Chauncelloure of England, and
keeper of the king and Queens great Seal for the time being, shall make and
direct out of the court of Chauncerye, under the king and queen's great
Seal, several commissions. That is to say, to every Shire, Riding, Lath,
Wapentake, Rape, city, Town, Borough Isle, and householde, unto such
person and persons, as by his discretion and other with him before named and
appointed in like manner and form as is before rehearsed, shall be thought
suffycyente for the seassynge and leuyinge of the same Subsedye, in all shyres
and places, according to the true meaning of this act. Which Commyssyon for
the paymente of the said Subsedye, shall be dyrected and delivered to the
said commissioners, or to one of them before the first day of Apryll next
coming, and to every of the said commyssyons ten Sedules, containing in
them the tenoure of this act, shall be affiled, by the which commissyon the
commyssioners in every such commyssyon, named, according to this act, and
as many of them as shall be appointed by the same commyssyon, shall have full
power and aucthorytye to put the effect of the same commyssyon in execution.

And that by the authority of this act, after such commission to them
dyrected, they may by their assentes and agrementes, sever the^ selves for the
execution of their commyssyon in hundredes, Lathes wards, and rapes,
Wapentakes, towns, parishes, and other places, within the lymyttes of their
said commyssyon, in such form as to them shall seem expediente to be
ordered, and between them to be commoned and agreed, according to the tenoure
and effect of the commyssyon to them therein dyrected. Upon which seueraunce
every person of this present parliament that shall be commissyoner, shall be
assigned in the hundred wherein he dwells.

PROVIDED always that no person be or shall be compelled to be any
commissioner, to and for the execution of this present act, but only in the
Shyre where he dwells and inhabyteth. And that every person being
assigned to the contrary thereof, in any wise shall not be compelled to put
in execution the effect of this act, or any part thereof.

AND it is also enacted by the authority of this present parliament, that the
commissioners and every of them which shall be named, lymitted and appointed
according to this act, to be commissioners in every such shyre, Ridinge,
Lath, Wapentake, Rape, City, town, Burroughe, Isle, and the same householdes,
or any other places, and none other shall truly, effectuallye, and dylygentlye
for their part, execute the effect of this present act, according to the
tenoure thereof in every behalf, and no otherwise by any other means,
without omission, favor, dread, malice, or any other thing to be attempted
and done by them or any of them to the contrary thereof. And ye same
Commyssyoners and as many of them as shall be appointed by ye same commission,
and none other for thexecution of the same Commyssyon and act, shall for the
taxation of the same payment of the said Subsidy before the, vi. day of
Apryll next coming, by virtue of the commissions delivered unto them in
form abouesayde, direct their several or ioynte precepte unto eight, seven,
six, five, four, or three or mo, as for the number of the inhabitauntes shall be
requisite, of the most substanciall discrete, and honest persons
inhabytauntes, to be named by the said commissioners, or by as many of them
as shall be appointed by the said commission, of, and in hundredes, lathes,
rapes, wapentakes, wards, paryshes, towns, and other places, as well within
lybertyes, Fraunchyses, ancient demean, places exempted, and saintuaryes as
without, within the limittes of the shires, rydinges, lathes wapentakes,
rapes, Cities, Towns, Burroughes, or Isle aforesaid, and other places within
the limittes of their commyssyon, unto the co^stables, subconstables,
Baylyffes, and other like officers, or mynysters of every of the same
hundredes, towns, wards, lathes, wapentakes, paryshes, and other places
beforesayd, as to the same Commyssioners and every number of them, or unto
three or two of them by their dyscretion in diuisyon shall seem expedient, as
by the manner and use of that parties shall be requisite. Strayghtlye by the same
precepte chargynge and commaundyng the same inhabytauntes, constables, and
other officers aforesaid, to whom such precepte shall be so directed, to
appear in their proper persons, before the said Commyssyoners, or such
number of them as they shall divide them selfs, according to the tenoure of
the said commission, at certain days and places, by the said commissyoners
or any number of them as is aforesaid, within Cities, Burroughes, and towns
Corporate, or without in any other place, as is aforesaid, by their
dyscretions, shall be lymytted there unto, to do and accomplish all that to
them on the party of the king and Queens majesty's, shall be enjoined touching
this act. Commaundyng further by the same precepte, that he to whose hands
such precept shall come, shall show or deliver the same to the other
inhabytauntes or officers named in the said precept, and that none of them
fail to accomplish the same, upon pain of fortye shillinges, to be forfeyted
to the Queen's Majesty.

AND it is further ordained by the authority of this present Parlyamente,
that every of the Commyssyoners then being, in the Shire, and having no
sufficient excuse for his absence, shall at the day and place prelyxed, for
that part whereunto he was lymytted to appear in his proper person. And
there the same Commyssyoners being present, or asmanye as shall be appointed by
the king and queens Commyssyon, shall call or cause to be called before them
the said inhabytauntes, and officers, to whom they have directed their said
precepts, and which had in commandment there to appear by the said
precepte of the said commyssyoners, and if any person so warned make
defaulte, onles he then be letten by syckenes or lawefull excuse, and that let
then be wytnessed by the oaths of two credible persons, or if any
appearing, refuse to be sworn in form following, to forfeyte to the king
and queens Majesty's, forty shillynges, and so at every time appointed by
the said commyssioners, for the said taxations, unto such time, the number of
every such persons, have appeared and certified in form under written, and
every of them, so making defaulte, or refusing to be sworn, to forfeyt to
the king and queens Majesty's, fortye shyllynges. And upon the same
appearaunce had, one of the most substanciall inhabytauntes, or officer so
being warned and appearing before the said commissyoners, shall be sworn upon
a book, openly before the commissioners in form following. I shall truly
inquire with my fellows, that shall be charged with me of the hundrede,
wapentake, ward, town or other place, of the best and most value of the
substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limittes of the
places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other, which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable
with any sum of monye, by this act of the said subsedye, and of all other
articles that I shall be charged with touching the said act, and according to
the intent of the same. And thereupon as nere as it may be, or shall come to
my knowledge, truly to present and certifye before you the names, surnames,
and the best and vttermooste substance and values, of every of them, alwell
of lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes possessions, and proffytttes,
as of goods, cattells, debtes, and other things, chargeable by the said
act, without any conceylemente, love, favor, affection, dread, fear, or
malice, as near as god will give me grace, so help me God and the holy
contents of this book.

AND every other person that shall appear there by the same precepts shall make
like oath, and upon the oath so taken as is aforesaid, by the inhabytauntes
and officers of every hundred, ward, wape^take town, or other place, the said
commissioners, shall openly there tede or cause to be red unto them the said
rates, and openly declare the effect of their charge unto them, in what manner
and form they ought and should make their certificate, according to the rates
and sums thereof abouesayde, and of all manner of persons, as well of alyens
and strangers, denizens or not denizens, inhabytyng within this realm as of
such persons as be borne under the Queens obeysaunce chargeable to this act.

AND of the possessions goods and cattels, of fraternities, guyldes,
corporations, brotherhedes mysteries, and comminaltyes, and other as is
abouesayde, and of persons being in the parties of beyond the Seas, having
goods or cattels, lands, or tenementes, within this Realm as is aforesaid.
And of al goods being in the custody of any person or persons, to thuse of
any other as is abouesayde, by the which information, and showing the said
persons should have such plain knowledge of the true intent of this present
Act, and of the manner of their certyfycate, that the same persons, shall have
no reasonable cause to excuse them by ignorance. And after such oath and the
Statute of the said Subsidy, and the manner of the said certificate to be
made in writing, conteyninge the names and surnames of every person, and
whyther they be borne without the Queens obeysaunce or within, and the best
value of every person, in every degree, as well of yearly value of lands and
tenementes, and of such like possession and profittes, as the value of goods
and cattelles, debtes, and every thing to the certificate requisite and
necessary to them declared, the said Commissioners there being, shall by their
discretions apoint and limitte unto the said persons an other day and place
to appear before the said commissioners, and charginge the said persons that
they in the mean time shall make diligente inquiry by all ways and means of
the premises, and then and there every of them upon pain of forfeyture
of.xl.s. to the king and Queen's Majesty's, to appear at the said new
prefixed day, and place, there to certify unto the said Commissioners in
wrytinge, according to their said charge and according to the true intent of
the said grant of Subsedy, and as to them in manner aforesaid has been
declared and showed by the commissioners. At which day and place so to them
prefixed, if any of the said persons make defaulte, or appear, and refuse to
make the said certificate, that then every of them so offendinge, to forfeyte
to the king and Queen's Majesty's, forty shyllynges, except only a reasonable
excuse of his defaulte, by reason of syckenes, or otherwise by the oaths of two
credible persons, there witnessed be had. And of such as appear ready to
make certificate, as is aforesaid, the said commissioners there being shall
take and receive the same certificate, and every part thereof, and the names
and values, and substance of every person so certified. And if the same
commissioners see cause reasonable they shall examen the said presenters
thereof, and thereupon the said commissioners at the said days and place, by
their agremente emonges them selfs, shall from time to time openly there
prefixe a day at a certain place or places within the limittes of their
commission by their discretion, for their further proceeding to the said
assessyng of the said Subsidy, and thereupon at the said day of the said
certificate as is aforesaid taken, the same commissioners shall make their
precepte or precepts to the constables, subconstables, Baylyffes, or other
officers of such hundredes, wapentakes, towns, or other places aforesaid, as
the same commissioners shall be of, comprisinge and conteyninge in the same
precepte, the names and furnames of all persons presented before them in the
said certifycate, of whom if the said commissioners or as many of them as
shall be thereunto appointed by the king and queen's commission, shall then have
vehement suspect to be of more greater value or substance in lands, goods,
cattelles, or sums of monye owing to them, or other substance beforesasd,
the^ upon such person or persons shall be certified, the same commissioners
shall make their precepte or precepts, directed to the constables, baylyffes,
or other officers, to who^ such precept shall be directed, co^mau^ding the same
constables, bailiffes, or other officers, to warn such persons whose names
shall be comprised in the said precept, at their ma^sions, or to their persons,
that the same persons named in such precepts, and every of them, shall
personally appear before the said commissioners, at the same new prefixed day
and place, there to be examined by all ways and means by the said
commissioners, of their greatest substance and best value, and of all and
every sums of money owing to them, and other whatsoever matter concerning
the premises or any of them, according to this Act. At which day and
place so prefixed, the said commissioners then there being, or as many of
them as shall be there unto appointed by the king and Queen's commission, shall
cause to be called the said persons, whose names shall be comptised in the
said precepte, as is beforesayde, for their examination. And if any of those
persons which should be warned as is beforesayde to be examyned, which at
any time after the warning, and before the prefyred day, shall be within such
place where he may have knowledge of his said appearaunce to be made, make
defaulte and appear not, onles a reasonable cause, or else a reasonable
excuse by the oaths of two credible persons before the said commissioners be
truly alleged for his discharge, that then every of them so making
defaulte, to be taxed to the king and Queens Majesty's, with and at the
double sums of the rate that he should or ought to have been set at for
and after the best value of his lands, or substance upon him certified, if
he had appeared, by the discretion of the commissioners there being. And
which commissioners shall travel with every of the persons so then and
there appearing, whose names shall be expressed in the said precepte or
precepts, and in whom any vehement suspecte was or shall be had, in form
aforesaid, by all such ways and means they can. And that every spiritual
person at the said taxations of the said Subsedye, shall be rated and set
according to the rate abouesayde, of, and for every pound that the same
spyrituall person or any other to his use, has by descent, bargayne or
purchase, in fee simple, fee tail, term of life, term of years, by
execution, by ward, or by copy of court roll, in any manours, lands,
tenementes, rentes, services, offices, fees, corrodies, annuities, or
hereditamentes, after the true, just, and yearelye value thereof, after, and
according as other the king and Queen's Majesty's subjects, born within this
realm be charged in sourme above remembered. So that it extend to the yearly
value of twentye shyllynges or above. And if any person certified or rated by
virtue of this act, be he commissioner or other to any manner of value, does
find him self grieved with the same presentment, seassynge, or taxinge, and
thereupon complain to the commyssyoners before whom he shall be rated, seassed,
or taxed, or before two of them. That then the said commissioners shall by all
ways and means examen perticulerly and distinctlye the person so
complaining, and other his neighbors by their disrretion, of every his
lands and tenementes above specified, and of every his goods, cattells, and
dettes, above mentioned, and after due examynatyon and perfitte knowledge
thereof had and perceived by the said commissioners, which shall have power by
the authority aforesaid, the said commissyoners or two of them, to whom
any such complaynt shall be made, by their discretions upon the oath of the said
person so complaynyng, may abate, defalke, increase or enlarge the same
assesseme^t according as it shall appear unto them just upon the same
examynation. And the same Sum so abated, defaulked, increased, or enlarged,
to be streated in form as hereafter ensues, so that he come before the
estreates of the same assessynge be delivered by the said commissioners, into
the king and Queens majesty's escheker. And if it be proved by witness, his
own confession, or other lawefull ways or means, within a year after any
such oath made, that the same person so taxed and sworn was of any better or
greter value in lands, goods or other things above specifyed at the time of
his said oath, then the fame person so sworn did declare upon his said oath,
that then every such person so offending, shall lose and forfeyte to the king
and queen's majesty's so much in lawefull money of England as the said person so
sworn was set at or taxed to pay. And al persons set, rated, and taxed as is
aforesaid, shall be bound and charged by the same, and the sum or sommes upon
him set to be due toward the payment of the said Subsedy and to be levied as
hereafter shall be specified.

And also it is enacted by the same authority, that every person, to be taxed
at the same taxation as is aforesaid, shall be rated taxed and set and the sum
on him set to be levied at such place where he and his famylye at the time of
the same presentment to be made, shall keep his house or dwelling, or where he
then shall be most conuersaunte abiding and resyaunte, or shall have his most
reforte, and shall be best known, at the time of the said certificate to be
made, and no where else. And that no commissyoner for this Subsedy shall be rated
or taxed for his goods, or lands, but in the Shire and other place where he
shall be commissioner. And that if any person chargeable to this act, the time
of the said assessyng, happen to be out of this realm, and out of Wales, or
far from the place where he shall be known, then he to be set where he was
last abiding in this Realm, or within Wales, and best known, and after the
substance and value, and other profits of every person known, by
thexamination, certificate, and other manner of wise as is aforesaid. The said
commissioners or as many of them, as shall be appointed by the king and queen's
Majesty's commission, shall after the rate aforesaid, set and tax every
person, according to the rate of the substance and value of his lands, goods,
and other proffyttes, whereby the gretest and most best sum according to his
most substance, by reasonne of this act might or may be set or taxed.

PROVIDED always that every such person, which shall be set or taxed for payment
of, and to this Subsedy, for and after the yearly value of his lands,
tenementes, and other real possessions or proffites, at the said taxations,
shall not be set and taxed, for his goods and cattels, or other moveable
substance, at the same taxation. And that he that shall be charged or tared
for the same Subsedy, for his goods, cattels, and other moueables at the same
taxation, shall not be charged taxed or chargeable for his lands, or other
real possessions, or proffits above said, at the same taxation, nor that any
person be double charged for the said Subsedy, neither set or taxed at
several places, by reason of this act, any thing contained in this present
act notwithstanding.

AND that it be ordained by the same authority of this present parlyament,
that no person having two mansions, or two places to resort unto, or calling
him self householde servant, or waitinge servant to the king and queen's
Majesty's, or other lord or lady, master or maistres, be excused upon his
saying from the raxe of the said Subsedy in nether of the places, where he may
be set, unless he bring a certifycate in writing from the commissioners, where
that he is so set in deed at one place. And if any person that ought to be
set by reason of his remouyng or resorting to two places, or by reason of his
saying that he else where was taxed, or by reason of any privilege by his
dwelling or abiding in any place not being forprysed in this act, or
otherwise by his couine or craft happen to escape from the said taxations, and
be not set, and that proved by presentment examination or informatio^ before
the same commyssyoners, or asmanye of them as shall be by the same commission
appointed, or by the Barons of the king and queen's majesty's eschequer, or two
justices of the peace of the countye where such person dwells, then every
such person that by such means or otherwise wyllinglye by couine shall happen
to escape from the said taxation or payment aforesaid, and not be rated,
taxed, or set, shall be charged upon the knowledge and proffe thereof with and
at the double value that he should or ought to have been set at before,
according to his behauour, the same double value to be taxed gathered, and
paid of his goods and catcells, lands, and tenementes, to wards the said
Subsedy, and further to be punished according to the discretyons of the barons,
justices and commissyoners before whom he shall be conuycted for his offense and
deceit in that behalf.

AND further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said
commyssioners of every commission shall according to their divisions and after
they be divided have full power and authority by this act, to set tax and
sesse every other commissioner joined with them in every such commission and
division. And shall also assesse every assessoure, within their diuysyon for
his and their goods, lands, and other the premises as is abouesayd, by the
which said commyssyon the said commissioners, shall indifferently set tax
and sesse them selfs and the said assessoures, and that as well the sums upon
every of the said commyssyoners and assessoures, so sessed, rated, and taxed
as the sums made and presented by the presenters sworn as is aforesaid,
shall be writtenne certifyed and estreated. And the estretes thereof to be made
with other the inhabytauntes of the parties, within the lymites of the same
commission and diuysyon, so to be gathered and levied in like manner as it ought
or should have been, if the said commissioner had not been in the said
commission. And that all persons of the estate of a Baron or barons, and every
estate above shall be charged with their frehold and value as is aforesaid, by the
chauncellor or keeper of the great Seal, Tresurer of England, lord president of
the king and queen's majesty's pryuy council, and lord prynye Seal, for the
time being, or other persons by the king and queen's majesty's auctorytie, to
be limited, and they to be charged for the said several paymentes of the said
Subsedye after the form of the said grant according to the taxation
aforesaid, and the sums upon them set with the names of the Collectoures
appointed for the gatheringe and payinge of the same, to be estreated,
delivered, and certyfied at days and places above specyfyed, by the lord
Chauncelor, tresorer, lord president of the council, and lord pryuy Seal for
the time being, or such other persons, as shall be limited by the king and
queen's majesty's, and after the taxes and assesses of the said simmes upon and
by the said assessynge and certificate as is aforesaid made, the said
commissioners or as many of them as shall be there unto appointed by the king
and queen's majesty's commission, shall with all speed and without delay, by the
writing estreted of the said tax thereof, under the Seal and signs manuel
of the said commissyoners, or of as many of them as shall be appointed at ye
lest to be made, shall be delivered unto sufficient and substantial
inhabitauntes constables, subconstables, Baylyffes, and other officers, jointly
of hundredes, towns, paryshes and other places aforesaid, within their
limittes, or to other sufficient persons inhabytauntes of the same only by
the discretion of the same commissioners, and as the place and parties shall
require, as well the particular names as surnames, as the remembrance of all
sums of monye, taxed and set of and upon every person as well man as woman
chargeable to this act, householder and al other inhabitauntes and dwellers
within the said parishes, towns, and places contributory to this act of
Subsedye. By authority of which writynge or estrete so delivered, the said
officers and other perfonnes so named and deputed seuerallye, shall have full
power and authority by virtue of this act immediatelye after the delyuerye
of the said writing or estreate, to demand leuye and gather of every person
therein specified, the su^me or Sums in the same wrytinge or estrete
comprised. And for none paymente thereof to distrayne the same person or
persons so being behind by their goods and cattells. And the distresses
so taken to keep by the space of eight days at the costs and charges of the
owner thereof. And if the said owner do not pay such sum of monye as shall be
taxed by this act within the same.viii. days, then the same distress to be
appraysed by four, three or two of the inhabitauntes where such distress is
taken, and also to be sold by the said constable and other collectoure for the
paymente of the said monye, and the overplus coming of the sale and keeping
thereof if any be, to be immediatelye restored to the owner of the same
distress which said officers and other persons, so deputed to ask, take,
gather and leuye the said Sums, shall answer and be charged for the portion
only to them assigned or limited, to be gathered, levied and comprysed in the
said wrytinge or estrete to them as is before said delivered, to thuse of our
Soueraygne Lady the Queen's Majesty, and her heirs and successoures. And the
said sum in that writing or estrete comprysed to pay unto the high collector
or collectors of that place for the collection of the same in manner and form
underwritten, thereunto to be named and deputed, and the same inhabitauntes and
officers so gatheryng the same particular sums, for their collection
thereof, shall retain for every twenty shillynges, so by them receued and paid
two pence, and that to be allowed at the payment of their collection by the^ to
be made, by the high collector or collectoures.

AND further be it enacted by the said authority, that the said
commissyoners or the more part of them as shall take upon them thex ecution
and besynes of the said commyssion, shall for the same payment of the said
subsedye, name such sufficient and able persons, which then shall have and
possess lands and other hereditaments, in their own right of the yearly
value of twenty pounds, or goods to the value of two hundred marks at the
least, and the persons feuerallye by the dyscresions of the same
commissyoners, in shires, ridynges, lathes, wapentakes, rapes, cities, towns
corporat, and other whatsoever places as well with in places priuileged as
without, not being forprised within this act to be high collectors, and have
the collection and receipt of ye said sums set and leuiable within the
precinct, limit, and bonds where they shall be so limited to gather and receive.
So every of the which collectors so severally named, the said commisioners or
two of them at the lest shall with alspede and without delay after the said whole
su^me of the said subsedy, be set by all the limits of the same their
commission, or in such limits as the high collectors shall be so severally
assigned, shall under their seals, and signs manuel deliver one estreat
indented in perchemente to every of the said high collectors, comprising in it
the names of al such persons as were assigned to leuy the said particular
sums, and the sums of every hundred, wapentake, town, or other place
aforesaid, with the names and surnames of the persons so chargeable according
to the estrete so first thereof made as is aforesaid, and delivered, and the
collectors so to be assigned, shall be charged to answer the hole sum
comprised in the said estreat limited to his collection as is aforesaid.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
comissioners having authority by this act to name and nominate the said
high collectors of the said subsedy, shall immediately upon the nomination and
election, take by authority of this present parliament, sufficient
recognisaunces or obligations, without any fee, or reward to be paid
therefore of every person so by them to be named to be high collectours, to be
bound to the king and queen's majesty's, in double sum of the sum of his
collectio^, and to be indorced and made upon such condition, that is to say,
for the collectio^ of ye same payment of the said subsedy, that if the said
collector his heirs or executors do truly content and pay to the use of the
queen's majesty, her heirs or executors, in receipt of the said eschequer
before the said.xxiiij day of June next cominge, so much of the said sum of
money allotted and appointed to his collection, as he shall collecte and gather,
and content and pay the residue of his collection and charge within one
month next after such time as he has gathered and collected ye same residue,
that then the said recognisaunce or obligation to be void, or else to stand
in full strength and virtue, which said recognisaunces or obligations so
taken, the said comissioners shall seuerallye certyfye and deliver into the
king and queen's majesty's eschequer, with the several certificates of the said
taxations and rates of the paymentes of the said subsedy, at and by the time to
them prescribed and appointed by this act, for the certificate of the taxation
of the said subsedye, upon pain of forfeyture of.x. pounds to the king and
queen's majesty's, for every recognisaunce or obligation not certified, and that
every such collector so elected named and chosen, upon request to him made,
shall knowledge and make the said recognisau^ce or obligation, upon like pain of
forfeiture of.x. pou^ds to the king and queen's majesty for ye refusal thereof.
And every such collector so deputed having the said estreate in perchement as
is aforesaid, shall have authority by this act, to appoint days and places
within the circuit of his collection for the payment of ye said subsedy to him
to be made, and thereof to gene warninge by proclamation or otherwise to all the
said constables or other persons or inhabitaunts, having the charge of the
particular collectio^ within the hundredes, parishes, towns, or other places
by him or them limited to make payment for their said particular collection of
every sum as to them shall aperteyne, and if at the said day and place so
limited and prefixed by the said collectour, the said constable, officer, or
other persons or inhabitauntes as is beforesayd, for the said particular
collection appointed and assigned within such hundred, city, town, or other
place, do not pay unto the said collectours the su^me within their several
hundreds towns, parishes, and other places due and comprised in the said
estreate thereof to them delivered by the said comissioners or some of them as
is aforesaid, or so much thereof as they have by any means received, ij. d. of
every pound, for the said particular collection as is beforesayde, always to
be thereof allowed, excepted, and abated, that then it shall be lawful to the
said high collectours and every of them, and to their assigns, to distraine
every of the said constables, officers, and other inhabitants, for their said
several and particular collections of the said sums comprised in the said
estreat and writing thereof, to them and every of the^, as is before expressed,
delivered, or for as much of the same sum as so then shall happen to be
gathered and levied, and be behind and unpaid by the goods and cattels of every
of them so being behind, and the distres so taken, to be kept, apraysed, and
sold as is aforesaid, and thereof to take and leuy the sums so then being
behind and unpaid, and the overplus coming of the sale of the said distres if
any be, to be restored and delivered unto the owner in form above remembered.

Provided always that no person inhabitinge in any city, borough or town
corporate, shall be compelled to be an assessour or collectour, of or for any
part of the said subsedy, in any place or places out of the said city,
boroughe, or town corporate where he dwells.

And it is also by the said authority enacted, yt if any inhabitaunte or
officer, or whatsoever person or persons charged to and for the collection or
receypt of any part or portion of the said Subsedy, by any manner of means
according to this act, or any person or persons for them selves, or as keeper,
guardian, deputy, factour, or attorney, of or for any other person or
persons, of any goods and cattelles of the owner thereof at the time of the
said asseassyng to be made, being out of this realm, or in any other parties
not known, or of and for the goods and cattels of any other person or
persons, of any corporation, fraternity, misterye, or other whatsoever
cominaltye, being incorporate, or not incorporate, and all persons having in
their rule, governance and custody any goods or cattells at the time of the
said assessyng to be made or which for any cause for and by collection, or for
him self, or for any other, or by reason that he has the rule, governance,
or custodye of any goods or cattels of any other person or persons,
corporation, cominaltye, or fraternity, guild, or mystery, or any such other
like, or as factoure deputy or attorney of or for any person, shall be taxed,
rated, valued, and set to any sum or sums by reason of this act, and after
the taxation or assessing upon anisuch person or persons as shall be charged with
the receipt of the same, happen to die or depart from the place where he was so
taxed and set, or his goods or cattels be so eloined, or in such pryuye and
couerte manner kept as the said person or persons charged with the same, by
estretes or other wrytynges from the said commissioners, or asmany of them as
shall be thereunto appointed by the said commission as is aforesaid, can ne may
leuy the same sum or sums comprised within the same estretes by distres
within the limits of their collection as aforesaid, or cannot sell such distres
or distresses as be taken for any of the same paymentes, before the time
limited to the high collectoure for his paymente to be made in the king and
Queens majesty's receipt, then upon relation thereof made, with due
examination by the oath or examination of such person or persons, as shall be
charged with or for the receypte or collection of the same before the said
commissioners, or as many of them as by the said commission shall be thereunto
appointed, where such person or persons, or other as is aforesaid, their
goods and cattells were set and taxed and upon plain certificate thereof made
in the king and queen's majesty's escheker by the same comissioners, as well of
the dwelling place, names, and sums of the said persons of whom the said
sums cannot be levied and had as is aforesaid, then as well the constables and
other inhabitau^ts appointed for the said particular collection against the
high collectors, as the high collector upon his accounte and othin the said
escheker to be discharged thereof, and process to be made for the king and
queen's majesty's out of the said escheker, by the discretion of the Barons of
the said escheker against such person his heirs or executours, so being behind
with his payment, and over that the same commissioners to whom any such
declaration of the premises shall be made in form aforesaid, from time to time
shall have full power and authority to direct their precept or precepts unto
the said person or persons charged with any su^me, of for or upon any such
person or persons, or other as is aforesaid, or to any sherif, steward balif,
or other whatsoever officer minister, person or persons of such place or places
where any such person or persons, so owing such su^me or su^mes shall have lands
and teneme^ts, or other hereditame^ts or real possessions, goods, and cattels
whereby any such person or persons so indetted, his heirs executours, or
assigns or other having the custodye, governance, or disposition of any
goods cattells, lands, or tenementes, or other hereditamentes, which ought or
may, by this act lawefully be distreined or taken for the same, has and
shall have goods, cattells, lands, tenementes, or other possessions whereof
such sum or sums, which by any such person or persons may or ought to
be levied, be it within the lymyttes of such commission where such person or
persons was and were taxed, or without, within any place within this Realm
of England, Wales, or other the queens Majesty's dominions, marches or
territors, by which precept as well such person or persons, as shall be charged
to leuye such monye, as thofficers of the place or places where such distres
may be taken, shall have full power and authority to distrayne every such
person indetted, charged and chargeable by this act, or his executours or
admynystratours of his goods and cattells, his gardians, factours, deputies,
lesses, fermers, and assygnes, and alother persons, by whosehandes or out of
whose lands any such person should have rent, fee, annuitie, or other
profytte, or which at the time of the said assessinges shall have goods or
cattels or any other thing moveable, or any such person or persons being
indetted or owing such sum, and the distresses so taken, caused to be
kept, appraysed, and sold, in like manner and form as is aforesaid, for the
distress to be taken upon such person to be taxed to the said subsedy, and
being sufficient to distraine with in the lymyts of the collectours,
inhabytantes, or other officers, charged with or for the same su^mes so upon
them to be taxed. And if any such distres for none paymente happen to be taken
out of the limit of the said persons charged and assigned to leuye the same,
the person so charged for the leuye of every such sum by dystresse, shall
perceive and take of the said dystres for the labor of every person going
for thexecution thereof, for every mile that any such person so labors for
the same two pence, and every fermoure, tenant, guardian, factor, or other
whatsoever person, being distreyned or otherwise charged for payment of any
such su^me or su^mes or any other sums by reasonne of this act, shall be of
such sum or sums of him or them so levied and taken, discharged and
acquyted at his next day of payment of the same, or at the delyuery of such
goods and cattells as he that is so distrayned had in his custody and
governance against him or them that shall be so taxed and set, any grant or
writing oblygatory or other whatsoever matter to the contrary made heretofore
notwithstanding.

And if any such person that should be so distreyned have no lands or
tenementes suffycyente whereby he or his tenauntes and fermoures may be
distrayned, or has aloined, aliened, or hid his goods and cattells whereby he
should or might be distrayned, in such manner that such goods and cattelles
shall not be known or found, so that the sum of or by him to be paid in
the said form, shall ne can be conveniently levied, then upon relation
thereof unto the commissioners, or to as many of them as by the said
commission shall be thereunto appointed, where such person or persons was taxed
and set, by the oaths of him or them that shall be charged with the leuy and
paymente of that sum or sums, the same commissioners shall make a precept
in such manner as is aforesaid, for to attache, take, and arrest the body of
such person or persons that ought to pay the said sums, and by this act
shall be charged with and for the said sum and sums, and them so taken,
safelye to keep in prison within the shyre or other place, where any such
person or persons shall be taken and attached, there to remain without bail
or mayneprice, until he have paid the same sum or sums that such persons
for him self or for any other by this act shall be charged or ought to be
charged withal, and also for the fees of every such arreste to him or them
that shall execute such precepte twenty pence, and that every officer unto
whom such precepte shall be directed, do his true diligence, and execute the
same upon every person so being indetted, upon pain to forfeyt to the king
and Queen's majesty's, for every default in that behalf.xx. shyllinges and that
no keeper of any gayle, from his gayle suffer any such person to go at large
by lettinge to bail, or otherwise to depart out of his prison before he have
paid his said det, and the said.xx. pence, for the said arreste, upon pain
to forfeyt to the king and queen's majesty's, forty shyllynges, and the same
gayler to pay unto the king and queen's majesty's, the double value as well of
the rate which the said person so imprisoned was taxed at, as of the
said.xx. pence for the fees, and like process and remedy in like form
shall be granted by the said commissioners, or as many of them as by the said
commission shall be thereunto appointed at like information of every person or
persons, being charged with any sum of money for any other person or
persons, by reason of the said Subsedye, and not thereof paid, but wilfully
withdrawn, ne the same leuiable within the limits where such persons were
thereunto taxed, and if the sum or sums being behind unpaid by any person
or persons, as is aforesaid, be levied and gathered by force of the said
process to be made by the said commissioners, or if in defaulte or for lack of
paymente thereof, the person or persons so owinge the said sum or sums
of money, by process of the same commissioners to be made as is aforesaid, be
committed to prison in form abouesayde, that then the same commissioners
which shall awarde such process, shall make certificate thereof in the said
eschequer, of that shall be done in the premises in the term next following,
after such sum or sums of money so being behind shall be levied and
gathered, or such person or persons for none paymente of the same committed
to prison. And if it happen any of the said collectours to be assigned, or
any mayer, sheriff, steward, constable, the headborough, householder, baylif,
or any other officer or minister, or other whatsoever person or persons, to
disobey the said commissioners or any of them, at the reasonable request to
them made by the said commissioners, for execution of the said commission, or
if any of the officers or other persons do refuse that to them shall appertain
and belong to do, by reason of any precepte to him or them to be directed, or
any reasonable commandment, instaunce, or request touching the premises
or other defaulte in any appearaunce or collection to make, or if any person
being suspect, or not, to be indifferently taxed as is aforesaid, do refuse to
be examined according to the tenoure of this act, before the said
commissioners, or as many of them as shall be thereunto assigned as is aforesaid,
or will not appear before the same commissioners, upon warninge to him made,
or else make resistaunce or rescues upon any distres upon him to be taken, for
any percell of the said Subsidy, or commit any misbehauour in any manner of
wise contrary to this act, or commit any wylful omission or other whatsoever
wylfull, not doing or misdoinge contrary to the tenor of this act or grant,
the same commissioners and every number of them above remembered, or two of
them at the least, upon probable knowledge of any such misdemenours had by
information or examination, shall and may set upon every such offender for
every such offense in name of a fine by the same offender to be forfeyted.xl.s.
or under, by the discretion of the same commyssioners. And further the same
commissioners and every number of them, or two of them at the least, shall have
authority by this present act, to punish every such offender by
imprisonment, there to remain and be delivered by their discretion, as shall
seem to them convenient, the said synes if any such be, to be certified by
the said commissioners that so assessed the same into the king and queen's
majesty's eschequer, there to be levied and paid by the collectoures of that
parts for the said Subsidy returned into the said eschequer, to be
therewith charged with the payment of the said subsedy, in such manner, as if
the said fynes had been set and taxed upon the said offenders for the said
Subsidye.

It is also enacted by the said authority of this parliament, that every of
the said high collectours, which shall accoumpt for any part of the said
Subsedye in the said Eschequer upon their said several accoumptes to be
yielded, shall be allowed at every of the said paymentes of the said Subsedye,
for every pound limited to his collection, whereof any such collectour
shall be charged and yield accoumpte six pence, as percell of their charge, that
is to say, of every pound thereof for such persons as then have had the
particular collection in the towns and other places as is aforesaid, specified
in his collection two pence and other two pence of every pound thereof, every
of the said chief collectours their accoumptauntes to reteyne to their own
use for their labor and charge, in and about the premises, and two pence of
every pound residue to be delivered, allowed, and paid by the said
collectoures so being thereof allowed, to such of the commissioners as shall
take upon them the business and labor, for and about the premises, that is to
say, every collectoure to pay that commissioner or comissioners which had
the ordering of the wrytinges, of, and for the said Subsedy, where the said
collectour or collectours had their collection, for expenses of the said
commissioner so taken upon them the said business and labor of their clerks,
writing the said precepts and estreates for the said collections, the same
last two pence of every pound to be divided amongst the said commissioners,
having regard to their labor and busynes, taken by them or their said
clerks in and about the premises, for the which part so to the commissioners
atteyninge, the said commissioners, six, five, four, three, or as many of
them as shall be thereunto appointed by the king and Queen's majesty's
commission, and every of them jointly and severally for his and their said
part, may have his remedy against the said collectoure or collectours, which
therofben and might have been allowed by action of debte, in the which the
defendaunte shall not wage his law, neither protection, neither iniunction, or
other essoigne shall be allowed. And that no person now being of the number of
the company of this present parliament, nor any commissioner, shall be named or
assigned to be any collectour or subcollectour, or presentour of the said
subsedie, or of any part thereof, nor no comissioners shall be compelled to
make any presentment or certificate, other then in the king and queen's
majesty's said escheker, of, for, or concerning the said subsedy or any part
thereof, and likewise that none other person that shall be named or assigned to
be commissioners in any place, to and for thexecution of this act of subsedy,
be or shall be assigned or named head collectours of any of the paymentes of the
said subsedy, neither of any part thereof. And that every such person or
persons which shall be named and appointed as is aforesaid to be head collectors of
ye said subsedy, or for any part thereof, and every of the^ be and shall be
acquitted and discharged of al manner fees rewards, and of every other charges in
the king and Queen's Majesty's Eschequer, or else where, of them or any of them
by reason of that collection, payme^ts or accoumptes, or any thing
concerning the same, to be asked, and that yfanye person receive and take
any fees, rewards, or pleasures of any such accoumptante, that then he
shall forfeit to the king and Queen's majesty, for every penny or value of penye
so taken, twentye pence, and suffer imprisonment at the king and queen's
Majesty's pleasure, and after the taxinge and ceasing of the said Subsedye,
as is aforesaid, had and made, and the said estreates thereof in parchement
unto the collectours in manner and form before rehearsed delivered, the said
commissioners which shall take upon them thexecution of this act, within the
limittes of their commission, by their agrementes, shall have metynge together,
at which metynge every of the said commissioners which then shall have
taken upon them thexecution of any part of the said commission, shall by him
self, or by his sufficient deputye, truly certify and bring forth unto the
said commissioners named in the said commission, the certificate and
presentmente made before him, and such other Commissioners as were limited
with him in one limit, so that the same certificate may be accounted and cast
with the other certificates of the other limittes with in the same commission,
and then the said commissioners and every number of them unto two at the
least, as is aforesaid, if any be in life, or their executours or
administratours of their goods, if they be then deed, shall ioyntlye and
seuerallye, as they were divided within their limits, under their seals by
their discretion, make one or several wrytynges, indented, conteyninge in it as
well the names of the said collectours by the commissioners, for such
collection and accoumpte in the eschequer, and paymente in the said receypte,
deputed and assygned, as the gross and several Sums written unto every
such collectoure to receive the said Subsidye. And also all fynes,
amerciamentes, and other forfeytures, if any such by reason of this act
happen to be within the precinct and limitte of their commission, to be
certified unto the king and queen's majesty's said eschequer, by the said
commissioners, in which writing or writings indented so to be certified,
shall be plainly declared and expressed, the hole and entyre Sum or Sums of
the said Subsedye, seuerallye lymitted to the collection of the said
collectoure, seuerallye deputed and assygned to the collection of the said
Sums, so that none of the said collectours so certified in the said
Eschequer, shall be compelled there to account, or to be charged, but only to
and for the sum limytted to his collection, and not to or for any sum
limited to the collection of his fellow, but that every of them shall be
seuerallye charged for their part limited to their collection.

And if the said commissioners joined in one commission amongst them selfs in
that matter cannot agree, or if any of them be not redye or refuse to make
certificate with other of the same Commissioners, That then the same
commissioners may make several indentures in form aforesaid, of their
several limittes, or seperations of Collectours, within the limittes of their
commission, upon and in the hundredes, wards, wapentakes, Lathes, Rapes, or
such other like divisions within theyrsayde several lymyttes of their
commyssyon, as the places there shall require, to be severed and divided, and
as to the same commyssioners shall seem good to make divisions of their limits
or Collectyons for the several charges of the same Collectoures. So that
always one Collectoure shall be charged and accoumpte for his part to him to be
limited only by him self and not for any Sum lymytted to the part of any
of his fellows, and the charges of every of the collectoures to be set and
certifyed severally upon them, and every such Collectoure, upon his account
and paymente of the Sum of monye lymitted within his collection to be
seuerallye by him self, acquyted and dyscharged in the said eschequer,
without payinge any manner fees, or rewards, to any person or persons for
the same, upon the pain and penaltye last abouesayd, and not be charged for
any portion of any other collectoure. And if any Commyssyoner after he has
taken certificate of them, that, as is aforesaid, shall before any such
commissioner be exammed, and the Sums rated and set and the books and
wrytynges thereof being in his hands, or if any collectoure, or other person
charged with any receipte of any part of the said subsedy, or any other
person taxed, or otherwise by this act charged with and for any percell of the
said Subsedye, or with any other Sums, or fynes, amerciamentes, penalty, or
other forfeyture, happen to dye before the Commissioner Collectoure or other
whatsoever person or persons have executed accomplyshed, satified, or
sufficient lie discharged, that which to every such person shall appertain
or belong to do according to this act, then thexecutours and heirs of
every such person, and al other seized of any lands, or tenementes, that any
such person being charged by this act and deceassing before he be dyscharged
thereof, or any other to his use, only had of estate of inheritance, at the
time that any such person was named commissioner, collectoure, or otherwise
charged with and for any manner of thing to be done, satisfied, or paid by
reasonne of this act, and all those that have in their possessions or hands,
any goods, or cattells that were to any such person at the time of his
death, or any lands, or tenementes, that were the same persons at the time
he was as is aforesaid, charged by this act, shall be by the same, compelled, and
charged to do and accomplish in every case as the same person so being
charged should have done and might have been compelled to do if he had been in
plain life, after such rate of the lands, and goods of the said
commissioner or collectoure as the party shall have in his hands. And if the
said Commyssyoners for causes reasonable them mouynge shall think it not
conuenyent to join in one certyfycate as is beforesayde, then the said
person or persons that shall first iome together, or he that shall first
certifye the said writynge indentyd (as is aforesaid) shall certyfye all the
names of the commissioners of that commission, whereupon such wrytinges shall be
there then to be certyfyed, with the division of the hundreds, wapentakes,
wards, tithings or other places, to and among such commyssyoners of the same
commission where such seperations and diuysyon shall be, with the gross Sommes
of monye as well of and for the said Subsedye, taxed or set of or within the
said hundredes, wards, wapentakes, or other places, to him or them divided or
assygned, that shall so certyfy the said first writing, as of fynes,
amerciamentes, penaltyes, or other forfeytures, (if any happen to be) within
the same lymyttes, whereof the same wrytynges shall be certified, and after such
wrytynges indented which as is aforesaid, shall be certyfyed and not conteyne
in it the hole and full Sums set and taxed within the lymyttes of the same
commyssyon, the other commissioners of the same before the day of payment of the
said Subsedye, shall certifye into the said exchequer, by their writing or
wrytinge, indented to be made as is aforesaid, the gross and several Sums
set and taxed within the places, to them lymitted, for the said Subsedye, and
other fynes, amercyamentes, penaltyes, and forfeytures, with the names of the
hundredes, wards, wapentakes, and other places, to them assigned, or else by
their said wriringes indented to certyfye at the said place before the said day
of paimente, such reasonable causes, for their excuses, why they may not
make such certifycate of and for the said Subsedye, which synes
amercyamentes, and other forfeytures growinge or set by reason of the causes
of their lettes or of their none certyfying as is abouesayd, or else in
defaulte thereof process to be made out of the king and queen's majesty's said
Escheker, against the said commyssyoners, and every of them not making
certificate, as is aforesaid, by the dyscresyon of the Tresurer or Barons of
the said eschequer.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that the
inhabytauntes of the Paryshe of Saint Martynne called Stamforde Baron, in the
Suburbs of the burroughe and town of Stampforde, in the Southe part of the
water there called Welland, which hereafter shall be contributorye to the
paymente of this present Subsedye, granted to the queen's majesty, her heirs
and successors, shall be assessed, rated, and taxed for this time by such
commyssyoners, which shall be appointed for the taxynge, ratyng, and sessynge of
such Subsedye or tax within the countye of Lyncolne, and shall be for this time
contrybutorye, and pay the said Subsedye, to the collectoure or collectoures,
which shall be assygned and appointed for the leuying and gatherynge of the
same, with the aldermen and burges of the said boroughe and town of Stampford.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that all and
every person and persons, having manoures, lands, tenementes, and other
hereditamentes, chargeable to the payment of the Subsedye, granted to the
Queen's Majesty, by this act, and also having spiritual possessions
chargeable to her said Majesty, by the grant made by the clergy of this
Realm, in this their convocation, and over this having substance in goods,
and cattels, chargeable by this said act, that then if any of the said person
or persons be hereafter charged assessed and taxed for the said manoures,
lands, and tenementes, and spiritual possessions, and also assessed, charged
and taxed for his or their goods, or cattells, that then he or they shall be
only charged by virtue of this act, for his and their said manoures, lands,
tenementes, hereditamentes, or spiritual possessions, or only for his said
goods, and cattels, the best thereof to be taken for the queen's Majesty and
not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them, any thing in
this act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always that this grant of Subsedy, nor any thing therein
contained, in any wise extend to charge the inhabitauntes, or dwellers within
Ireland, Iernesey, and Garnesey, or any of them, of or concerning any
manours, lands, tenementes, or other possessions goods, cattels, or other
moveable substance, which the said inhabytauntes or dwellers or any other to
their use have within Ireland, Iernesey, and Garneseye, or in any of them, or
of for or concerning any fees, or wages, which any of the said
inhabytauntes, or dwellers have of the king and queen's Majesty's, for there
attendaunce, and doing service to our said soueraygne. Lord and Lady, in
Irelande, Iernesey and Garneseye, or in any of them, any of them, any thing
in this present act, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also that this present act of Subsedy, ne any thing therein
contained, extend to any of the English inhabytauntes, or resiauntes, in any
of the countyes of Northumberlande, Cumberland Westmerlande, the town of
Barwycke the town of Newecastell upon Tyne, and the Byshopricke of Durham, nor
to any of them, of for or concerning any manoures, lands, tenementes, or
other possessions, goods, cattells, or other moveable substance, which the
same Inhabytauntes or dwellers, or any other to their use have within the said
counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerlande, or the town of
Barwicke, the town of Newecastell upon Tyne, or the Byshoprycke of Durham, or
any of them, or of for and concerning any fees, or wages, which any of the
said. Inhabytauntes, or dwellers have of the king and Queens Maiestyes, for
their attendaunce and doing service to the king and Queen's maiestyes, for or
within the said counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerlande, the
town of Barwycke, the Town of Newecastell upon tyne, and the Byshopprycke of
Durham, or any of them, to or for the said taxynge, leuying gatherynge or
paymente, but that the English inhabytauntes, and resiauntes, and every of
them, of the said cou^ties Byshopricke, and towns, and every of them, shall be
of and from the said Subsedye, and every percell thereof, and for their
manoures, lands, tenementes, fees, wages, goods, and cattells, lyinge and
being in the said counties, towns, and Byshoprycke, or any of them utterly
acquitted and discharged. Any thing in this present act before rehearsed to
the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also that all letters patentes, granted by the king or queens
majesty or any of her most noble progenitoures, to any Cities, Burroughes,
or towns, within this realm, of any manner lybertyes, pryuileges or
exemptions from the burden and charge of any such grant of Subsedyes, which
be at this present time in force and vayleable, shall remain good and
effectual, to the said Cytyes, Burroughes, and towns, hereafter, according
to the purportes thereof, though the inhabytauntes of the same, shall upon the
great and weigh tie consyderation of the grant aforesaid, be for this grant
charged and contributory, in like manner, form and sort as other Cities,
burroughes, and towns which be not in any wise pryuileged, be from such
grant of Subsedy excepted.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no
Orphant or Infant within the age of.xxi. year, borne within any of the queen's
majesty's dominions, shall be charged to any paymente of this Subsedye, for his
or her goods and cattelles, to him or her left or bequethed. Any thing in
this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also that this act nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
the goods, or lands of any college, Hall, or Ostell, within the universities
of Oxenforde, and Cambrydge, or any of them, or to the goods or lands of the
college of Wynton founded by Byshope Wyckeham, or to the goods or lands of
the college of Eton, next Wyndesore, or to the goods, or Lands, of any free
gramer scoole, within the realm of England or Wales, or to the goods of any
reder, Scolemayster, or scoller, within the said universities and colleges,
or any of them, there remaining for study, without fraud or couyne, or to
the goods and lands of any Hospytall, measondewe or Spitelhouse prepared and
used for the sustentation and releyfe of pore people. Any thing in this act
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
forasmuch as diverse and sundry the kings and Queen's Majesty's tenauntes and
other inhabitauntes and dwellers within the counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen,
Cardigan, Glamorgan, Breckenocke, Radnour, Mongomery, Denbigh, Flynt,
Merioneth, Anglesey, Carnaruan, and of the countye palantine of Chester, be at
this present time charged and chargeable with the several paymentes of diverse
great sums of monye by the name of Myse, due to their maiestyes, according
to the several customs of the said counties, for the payment whereof diverse
and sundry the gentlemen and other the inhabitauntes, be, and stand bounden to
their highness. And that also there do remain yet unpaid in diverse of the
said dominions and county palantyne, the Subsedye granted to the king and
Queen's majesty's.

Be it therefore ordained and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this
act of Subsedye, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge
any of the king and Queen's tenauntes and other inhabitauntes and dwellers
within any of the said counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Glamorgan,
Brecknocke, Radnoure, Mongomery, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, Anglesey,
Carnaruan, and the county palantine of Chester, being charged or chargeable
with the said Myse, for, or in any of the paymentes of the said Subsidye,
granted to the king and Queen's Majesty's by this act, until the several
days and times appointed and agreed for the payment of the said Myse, shall
be expired. And likewise the days and times of the said Subsidye latelye
granted to our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady be past and expyred. And that
then the payment of the said Subsidye granted by this present act, shall be
made at the receipte of the kings and queens Eschequer, before the first day
of March next folowinge, after the days appointed for the latter paymente to
be made of the said myses, and also of the payment of the said former Subsidye.

Furthermore be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that ye tenants and
dwellers of every the said counties in this prouiso remembered, shall
severally before the feast of Penthecost next ensuinge, certifye in the said
court of Eschequer, under the seals of two Justices of peace of every the
said counties, whereof one to be of the Quorum, when and what day the last
payment of the said several mises, now due in any of the said counties
shall end and expyre.

Provided also, that the said grant of Subsidy, or any other thing
therein contained, do not in any wise extend to be prejudicial or hurtefull
to the inhabitauntes or resiauntes at this present time, within the five
ports, or to any of their members, incorporate or united to the same five
ports, or to any of the same five ports, of, or for any part or percell of
the said Sommes granted in this parliament, of the said inhabitauntes now
resiaunt, or any of them, to be taxed, set, asked, levied, or paid, but the
said inhabitauntes and resiauntes in the said five ports, and their members,
be and shall be, of, and from the said grant and paymente of the said
subsedy during their resiauncy there, and no longer, clearlye acquitted and
discharged, any matter or whatsoever thing in this present act had or made
to the contrary notwithstanding.

God save the King and the Queen.
Excusum Londini IN AEDIBVS IOHANNIS CAVVODI. Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.

Anno. M.D.LVIII.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


