GOOD Conscience: OR A TREATISE SHOWING THE Nature, Means, Marks, Benefit, and
Necessity thereof.

By IER: DYKE; Minister of Gods Word at Epping in Essex.

The second Edition Corrected.

Luke 10. 42. One thing is necessary. August. de verb. dom. sermon. 18. Vniversa
inutiliter habet, qui vnum illud quo vniversis vtatur, non habet. LONDON
Printed for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the great
South-dore of Paul's. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr. FRANCIS BARRINGTON, Knight and Baronet, a Patron
and pattern of Piety and Good Conscience.
RIGHT WORSIPFV^L,
THat which the Apostle Paul speaks of a man's desire of the office of a
Bishop, may be truly spoken of every one who desires to gain men to the love
of a good Conscience, that he desires a worthy work. Yea it is the work which
is, and ought to be made the scope and drift of the worthy work of the
Ministry. And therefore it is, that he, that desires the calling of the
Ministry, desires a worthy work because of this worthy work of bringing men to
good Conscience. A work at which all work and books, should specially aim:
Conscience is a Vnicuique liber est pro pria conscientia, et ad hunc libru^
discutiendu^ et emenda^dum omnes alii inventi sunt Bern. de Cons.
book, one of those books that shall be opened at the last day, and to which
men shall be put, and by which they shall be judged. Therefore to the
directing, informing, and amending of this book, should all other books
specially tend. Yea Solomon seems to call men off from all other books, and
studies to the study of this so necessary a point, the keeping of a good
Conscience: Eccl. 1212 13.
Of making many books (says he) there is no end, and much study is a wearines
of the flesh, Let us hear the co^clusio^ of the whole matter, Fear God and
keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. As if his advise
tended to this, to neglect all studies in comparison of that study, which aims
at the getting and keeping of a good Conscience. It would be exceeding happy
with us if this study were more in request amongst us. We seem to live in
those days foretold by the Prophet, wherein the earth Isa. 11. 9.
should be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. We are blessed that live in
so clear a Sunshine of Gods truth, but yet the grief is, that through our
own default, our Sunshine is but like the winter light, all light, little or
no heat, and we make no other use of our light, but only to see by, not to
walk and work by. In the first re-entrance of the Gospel amongst Antiqua
sapientia nihil aliud qua^ facienda and vit^da praecepit, et tunc long
meliores erant viri. Postquam docti prodierunt bons desunt Sim plex enim illa
et aperta virtue t^ obscuram et solerte^ scientia^* versa est, docemurque
disputare, non vivire Sense. epist. 96.
us, how devout, holy, zealous, and men renowned for Conscience were our
Martyrs, and our first Planters, Preachers, and professors of Religion. They
had not generally the knowledge and learning, the world now has, nor the world
now the Conscience they then had. There be now better Scholars, there were
then better Men: they were as excellent for Devotion, as our Times are for
Disputation. It is an excellent sight to see such Christians as were the
Romans, Full of goodness, filled Romans 15. 14
with all Knowledge. It is pity that ever so lovely a pair should be
sundred. Yet if they be parted, it is best being without that which with most
safety may be spared. A good Conscience is sure to do well, though it want
the accomplishment of Learning, and greater measures of Knowledge and
Understanding. But take Learning from a good Conscience, and it is but a Ring
of gold in a Swines snout, or that which is worse, A thorn in a Drunkards
Prou. 26. 9
hand. Learning is to be highly apprized; Riches, Honors, and all other
earthly blessings are vile to it. But yet though it take place of all other
things, yet must it give good Conscience the wall and vpper-hand, as that which
is far before it in worth, use, and necessity. As Solomon of wisdom, so may
it be said of good Conscience, She is more precious then Prou. 3, 15.
Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her.
Gold and Rubies cannot so enrich a man as good Conscience does, and yet alas
the blindness of men, how willing are they in this case, with a wilful
poverty? Not Rubies, but handfulls of Barley, morsels of Bread, and Crusts are
preferred before the invaluable treasure of a good Conscience.

After the many worthy endeavors therefore of so many as have bin before me in
this work of laboring men to a good Conscience: I have adventured also to lend
my weak strength to the same work. If one or two witnesses prevail not, yet
who knows what an whole clowd may do? Though Eliah and Elisha be the Horsemen
and Chariots of Israel, yet the Footmen do their service in the Battle, and
Apollos may without offense water, where Paul has planted.

Now these my poor endeavors such as they are, I am bold to publish under
your Worshipful name, and to put them forth under your Patronage, entreating
you to countenance that in a Treatise which you have so long countenanced in
the practice. None so fit to be a Patron of a Treatise of good conscience, as
he that has been a religious both professor, and protector of the Practice
thereof. To have a Nail fastened in a sure place, the Antiquity Isa. 22. 23.
of a long standing Name, and Family, to be hewn out of the Quarry of the
best Stocks of Parentage, to have fair Lines, and a fair lot in outward
possessions, to be blessed with a fruitful Vine, and Olive plants, fairly
grown and planted round about a man, all these are to be held high honors,
and great favors from the God of heaven. And with all these has the Lord
honored your self. But yet your greatest honor that has given luster to all
the rest, has been your love to the Truth, Religion and a good Conscience.
Augustine repented him that he attributed more to Mallius Theodorus, D^splicit
autem illic quod Mallio Theodoro, ad quem librum ipsum scripsi, qua^vis docto
et Christiano viro plus tribui quam deberem. Aug. Retrlib. 1. cap. 2.
to whom he wrote a book, then he should have done, though otherwise he were a
Learned and Christian man. A man may easily ouershoote himself in the
commendation of a good man, especially, if a great man. It shall suffice
therefore to have said so little, and that to this end, that hereby the World
may know the reason of my choice of your Patronage of this Treatise. It would
have been an incongruity to have had the name of a person of an evil
Conscience, prefixed before a book of good Conscience. I desired a Patron
suitable to my subject. I presume the very subject shall make the Treatise
welcome to you; Be you pleased to afford your accepta^ce as I will afford you
my poor prayers, that the Lord who has already set upon your head the crown
of the elders, Childrens Children, Prou. 17. 6.
and one crown of glory here Pro. 16. 31.
on earth, Age found in the ways of righteousness, would also in his due time
give you that incorruptible crown of righteousness, and eternal glory in the
heavens, which that righteous Judge shall give to you, and to all those that in
the ways of a good Conscience wait for the blessed appearance of the Lord
Jesus.

Your Worships in all Christian observance: IER: DYKE.

The Contents of this TREATISE.
The Text contains three Maine heads.
1. Maine head. Paul's Protestation of a good Conscience, where five things
considered. 1. What Conscience is. 2. What a good Conscience is. It is good
with a twofold goodness. 1. With the goodness of Integrity, and this
Integrity is threefold. 1. When being rightly principled by the Word, it
sincerely judges and determines of good and evil. 2. When it does excuse for
good and accuse for evil. 3. When it vrges to good, and restraines from evil.
2. With the goodness of Tranquillity, and Peace. Here three sorts of Conscience
discovered not to be good. viz. 1. The Ignorant Conscience. 2. The Secure
Conscience. 3. The Seared Conscience.
3. The means of getting and keeping a good Conscience. 1. To get and keep
the Conscience good peaceably, or with the goodness of peace, three things
required. 1. Faith in Christ's blood. 2. Repentance from dead works 3. The
Conscionable exercise of Prayer.
2. To get and keep the Conscience Good, with the goodness of Integrity, and
to have it uprightly good, five things required, viz. 1. Walking before God. 2.
Framing ones Course by the Rule of the Word. 3. Frequent examination of the
Conscience. 4. Harkening to the voice of Conscience. 5. In cases of
questionable nature, to take the surest and the safest side.
4. The marks, and notes of a good Conscience; and they be seven. 1. To make
Conscience of all sins, and duties. 2. To make Conscience of small sins,
and duties. 3. To affect a Ministry that speaks to the Conscience. 4. To do
duty, and avoid sin for Conscience sake. 5. Holy Boldness. 6. To suffer
for Conscience. 7. Constancy, and Perseverance in Good.
5. The Motives to a good Conscience, and they are five. 1. The incomparable
Comfort and Benefit of it in all such Times and Cases, as all other Comforts
fail a man, and wherein a man stands most in need of Comfort. These Cases or
Times are fi^e. 1. The Time, and Case of Disgrace, and Reproach. 2. The Time of
Common fear, and Common Calamity. 3. The Time of Sickness, or other
crosses. 4. The Time of Death. 5. The Time, and day of Judgment.
2. That a good Conscience is 1. A Feast for 1. Contentment, and satisfaction.
2. Joy and Mirth. 3. Society.
2. Better then a feast for 1. The Continuance. 2. Independencie. 3.
Universality.
3. Without a good Conscience, all our best duties are naught. 4. It is the
Ship and Arc of Faith. 5. The misery of an evil one, 1. In this world in
respect of 1. Fear. 2. Perplexity. 3. Torment.
2. In the world to come.





2. Maine Head. Ananias his insolent Iniunction. Whereout is observed. 1. What
is the respect a good Conscience finds in the world. 2. The impetuous
Injustice of the enemies of good Conscience, 3. Who commonly be the bitterest
Enemies of good Conscience. 4. That Usurpers are Smiters. 5. What is a said
forerunner of a Nations Ruin.
3. Maine Head. Paul's Answer and Contestation. Whereout is observed., 1. That
Christian Patience muzzles not a good Conscience from pleading it own
Innocence. 2. The severitie of Gods Judgments upon the enemies and smiters of
good Conscience. 3. The equity of Gods administration in his execution of
Justice.

A Table of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
Chapter I. The Introduction to the Discourse following. Folio 1 Chapter II.
Conscience Described. 10 Chapter III. A good Conscience what it is. False ones
discovered. 24 Chapter IV. Peace of Conscience how gotten. 43 Chapter V.
Integrity of Conscience how procured. 56 Chapter VI. Two further means to
procure Integrity of Conscience. 69 Chapter VII. Two marks of a good
Conscience. 86 Chapter VIII. Three other* Notes of a good Conscience. 106
Chapter IX. The two last Notes of a good Conscience. 121 Chapter X. The comfort
and benefit of a good Conscience, in the case of Disgrace, and Reproach. 150
Chapter XI: The comfort and benefit of a good Conscience in the times of common
fears and calamities, and in the times of sickness, and other personal
evils. 171 Chapter XII. The comfort and benefit of a good Conscience, at the
days of Death and Judgment. 192 Chapter XIII. A second Motive to a good
conscience, That is a continual Feast. 210 Chapter XIV. A third and fourth
Motive to a good Conscience. 235 Chapter XV. The last Motive to a good
Conscience, viz. The misery of an evil one. 250 Chapter XVI. The portion and
respect, that a good Conscience finds in the world. 272 Chapter XVII. The
impetuous Injustice, and malice of the Adversaries of a good Conscience. 286
Chapter XVIII. The severitie of Gods Justice upon the enemies of good
Conscience, and the usual equity of Gods Administration in his executions of
Justice. 299
GOOD CONSCIENCE.
ACTS 23. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said; Men and brethren
I have lived in all good Conscience until this day.

2 And the high Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by, to smite him on
the mouth.

3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee thou whited wall.


CHAP. I.
The Introduction to the Discourse following

THere is no complaint so general as this, that the world is Naught. His
experience is short and slender, which will not justify the truth of this
Complaint. And what, think we, may the Cause be of the general wickedness of
our Times? Surely nothing makes Ill Times, but Ill men, and nothing makes
H^minum sunt ista no^ Temporum* Senec. ep. 98
Ill Men, but Ill Consciences. Ill Conscience is the source, and the fountain
from whence come all Iniquities, which make Times here so ill. How well should
he deserve that could amend Ill times? There is a course if it would be taken
that would do the deed, and so cease the common Complaint. Elishaes course
must be taken in the healing of the waters of Jericho. They say of their waters
as we of our Times; The water is naught, and the ground barren. 2. King. 2.
19. What course now takes Elisha for the healing of the waters? He went out
unto the spring of the waters, and cast the Salt in there, ver. 21. So the
waters were healed, verse. 22. The spring, and fountain of all actions good or
evil is the Conscience, and all actions and courses of men are as their
Consciences. Out of the heart are the issues of life, Pro. 4. 23. The Heart*
and Conscience is the fountain, every action of a man's life is an Issue, a
little rivelet, and a water passage thence. Are these waters then that issue
thence Naught? The way to heal them is to Non erit fructue bonus nisi arboris
bonae Muta Cor, et mutabitur opus. Aug. de ver. Dom. Sermon. 12.
cast the salt into the spring. Mend the Conscience and all is mended. Good
Consciences would make Good men, and Good men would make Good Times. Lo here a
Project for the reformation of evil Times.

Were this Project set on foot, and a good Conscience set up, how should we see
profanations of Gods holy Name, and Day, Injustice, Bribery, Oppression,
Deceit, Adulteries, and Whoredoms, and all other Iniquites; how should we see
all these, as our Savior saw Satan, falling down like lightning from heaven?
How should we see them come tumbling down like so many Dagons before God's Ark, yea tumbled down, and broken to the stumps? The only Arc that must
dash, and ding down these Dagons is a good Conscience.

And if we would well weigh the matter what is there equally desirable with Ecce
quid prodest plena bonis arca cum sit Inanis Conscientia! Bona vis habere, and
bonus non vis esse; tu^ quid est, quod vis habere malu^* Nihil omni no, non
vxorem, non filium, non ancilla^, villam, tunica^ postremo no^ caligam, et
tamen vis habere mala^ vitam. Rogo te* Praepone vitam tuam caligae tuae (sic
Conscientia^.) Aug. ibid. vbi supra. Ipsa ergo diuitiae bonae sunt sed istae
omnia bona a bonis and malis haberi possunt. Et cu^ bona sint bonos tame^
facere non possunt Aug. de verb. Do^ Sermon. 5.
a good Conscience? What is that men would have, but they desire to have it
Good? And yet amongst al other things they desire to have Good, what little
care to have the Conscience such? Wife children, servants, houses, lands, Air,
food, raiment, who would not have these Good? And yet that, without which none
of all these are good, nor will yield us any true good, that alone is
neglected, and whilst men would have all other things Good, yet their
Consciences, and themselves are Naught. Now alas what good, will all other
goods do us whilst this one, and this main Good thing is wanting! How
excellent is this Good above al other good things? A good wife, good children,
good land, etc. these may a man have, and yet he himself not Good, these find
men sometimes Good, but make none so; these goods may a man have and yet
himself be Naught. Not so with a good Conscience, which no evil man can
have, which whosoever has, it makes him and all he has good. So great and so
good a Good, why is it so much neglected?

Try we therefore, and let us assay if by any means, Gods good blessing giving
assistance, we may be able to stir up men, and to work them to regard so
great and so excellent a good. It may be at least some few may be persuaded,
and may set upon this work of getting a good Conscience. If but some few, if
but one be wrought upon, the labor is not in vain. If none, yet our work is
with our God, to whom we are a sweet savor in Christ, in them that are saved,
and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2. 15.

This portion of Scripture then which I have chosen for the ground of the
following Discourse consists of three parts.

1. Paul's sober and ingenious Profession, and Protestation, verse. 1. 2. Ananias
his insolent, and Impetuous Iniunction, verse. 2. 3. Paul's zealous Answer, and
Contestation, verse. 3.
1. The first is Paul's Protestation in these words; Men and brethren, I have
lived in all good Conscience until this day. With this Protestation of a good
Conscience Paul begins his Plea. And how ever to distinguish our selves from
Papists, we bear the name of Protestants, yet we shall never be sound, and
good Protestants indeed, till we can take up Paul's protestation, that our
care, endeavor, and course is to live in All good Conscience. A Protestant
with a loose and a naughty Conscience, has no great cause to glory in his
desertion of the Romish Religion. As good a blind Papist, as a halting
Protestant. The blind and the halt were equally abominable unto the Lord.

Paul was here brought forth to answer for himself before the chief Priests
and the Council: And his Preface, as I said, to his ente^ded Apology, if he had
not bin injuriously interrupted, is a protestation of the Goodness of his
Conscience. And this his good Conscience, or the goodness of his Conscience he
sets forth.

1. From his Conversation, (...); I have lived, or conversed. A good
conversation is a good evidence of a good Conscience indeed, there can be no
good Conscience, where there is not a Conversing in good. It is not some moods
and fits in some good actions, and duries, from whence Conscience gains the
reputation of Goodness, but a good conversation, godly and religious in the
general tenor thereof, proves the conscience worthy such an honor, as to be
holden Good. He may be said to have a good conscience that can be said to live
in a good Conscience. Many a man is frequently in the City, and yet cannot be
said to live there. There a man lives where he has his Converse and Residence.
A man's life is not to be measured by some few actions, in which at some time he
may be found, but by his general course and conversation. God will judge every
man not according to his steps, but according to his ways. It were ouer-rigid
censoriousnes to condemn a righteous man, and to question whether his
conscience were good, because some steps of his have bin beside^ the way. We
know for the general his way is good wherein he walks, and therefore
according to his good way we judge his Conscience good. Contrarily when we see
a man's way for the general to be evil, though some tim^ he may tread a right
step or two, an^ chance to chop into the fair road for a rod or two, for this
to judge a man Conscience good, were a bottomless^ and boundless Charity.
Every man^ Conscience is as his life is.

2. From the Generality of his care, and obedience. In all good Conscience. It
mus^ be All good, or it is no good Conscience a^ all. There be that live in
some goo^ Conscience, yea, Herod seems to have much good Conscience, he did
many things gladly, but yet Paul goes further, and lives not in some, not in
much but in All good Conscience.

3. From the Sincerity and, Integrity of it before God. Before men how many
have their Consciences exceeding good, and yet their consciences are far short
of goodness, because they are not good before God, the Judge of conscience.
Whilst conscience is made only of the Capitals of the second Table, or of the
externals and ceremonials of the first, which duty is not done out of obedience
to God and his Commandments; but a man's self either in his gain, or in his
praise is sought, and base ends are the first mouers to good duties, here the
conscience what ever applause it has from, or before men for it goodness, yet
of God shall not be so esteemed. For that is not a good conscience which is one
outwardly, but which is one inwardly, whose praise is not of men but of God.
And that has its praise of God which is before God.

4. From his continuance, and constancy, until this day. To begin a good
life, and course, and to live in all good conscience, and that before God, are
excellent things; but yet one thing is wanting to make up this goodness
complete. To be so for a day, or some days will not serve, but when a man
can say at his last day, I have lived in all good conscience until this day,
that man may be safely judged to have a good conscience indeed. Thus in these
four particulars does the goodness of Paul's conscience appear. It is not my
purpose to confine my self and to keep me within these bounds alone, but to
take a larger latitude, within the compass whereof I will bring both those
forenamed, and all other material points which this protestation does afford.

CHAP. II.
Conscience described:

THe maine subject of this protestation, and the aim of this following
discourse being concerning a good conscience, for the more orderly handling
thereof, consider these specialls.

1. What Conscience is. 2. What a good Conscience is. 3. How a good conscience
may be gotten and kept. The means of it. 4. How a good conscience may be
known. The marks of it. 5. The motives to get and keep a good conscience.
1. What conscience is: It may be thus described. Conscience is a power and
faculty of the soul taking knowledge, and bearing witness of all a man's
thoughts, words and actions, and accordingly excusing or accusing, absoluing or
condemning, comforting or tormenting the same. I know there be other
definitions given by others more succinct, and neat, but I rather choose this,
though it may be not altogether so formal to the rules of Art. The rules of
^oue and profit many times may make bold to dispense with rules of Art. So I
may be profitable, I care the less to be artificial. It may suffice that
this description is answerable to that Auditory for whose sake it was first
intended. A plain familiar description agrees well enough with such a people.
For the better conceiving of it let it be taken in pieces, and every parcel
viewed severally.

It is a faculty, or power of the soul. It is therefore called the Heart, 1.
John. 3. 20. If our heart condemn us. Eccl. 7. 22. Thine own heart knows
that thou thy self likewise have cursed others, that is thine own conscience
knows. It is also called the spirit of man, 1. Cor. 2. 11. For what man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him. And Romans 8. 16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that is, with our
conscience. Not that conscience is a spirit distinct from the substance of the
soul, as Origin mistook, but because it is a faculty of the soul, therefore
the name that is often given to the soul, is given to it. If it be asked in
what part of the soul this faculty is placed, we must know that Conscience is
not confined to any one part of the soul: It is not in the understanding
alone, not in the memory, will, or affections alone, but it has place in all
the parts of the soul, and according to the several parts thereof has
several Offices, or Acts.

Taking knowledge: Eccle. 7. 22. Thine own heart knows. Conscience is placed
in the soul as Gods spy, and man's superior and ouerseer, an inseparable
companion that is with a man at all times, and in all places; so that there is
not a thought, word, or work that it knows not, and takes not notice of. So
that that which David speaks of God himself, Psalm. 139. 3. 4. Thou compassest
my heart, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways, for there
is not a word in my tongue but lo thou know it altogether. Whither shall I
go from thy spirit! If I ascend up to heaven, etc. The same may be also said
of conscience, Gods deputy; it is acquainted with all our ways, not a motion
in the mind, not a syllable in the mouth, to which it is not privy: yea it is
thus inseperably present with us not only to see, but also to set down, to
register, and to put down upon Record all our thoughts, words, and works.
Conscience Nam quocunque me verto vitia mea me s^ quuntur, vbicu^que vado
conscientia mea menon deserit, se praesens adsistit and quicquid facio scribit.
Idcirco quanquam humana subterfugia^ iudicia, iudicium propriae consc. fugere
non vale^. Et si hominius celo qucd egi, mihi tame^ (qui noui malu^ quod gessi)
celare nequeo. Ber. de Inter. Dom. c. 31.
is Gods Notary, and there is nothing passes us in our whole life good or ill,
which conscience notes not down with an indeleble character, which nothing can
raze out but Christ's blood. Conscience does in this kind as Job wishes in
another, Job 19. 23. 24. Oh that my words were now written, Oh that they were
printed in a book, That they were graven with an iron pen, and laid in the
rock for ever. Conscience prints and writes so surely, so indelebly, yea it
writes men's sins as Judah his sin was, with a pen of Iron, with the point of a
diamond, and they are graven upon the Table of their hearts, Ierem. 17. 1.
Conscience does in our pilgrimage as travelers in their journey, it keeps a
Diary, or a iournall of every thing that passes in our whole course, it keeps
a book in which it has a man's whole life pend. In regard of this office
conscience is placed in the memory, and is the Register and Recorder of the
soul.

And bearing witness. This we find Romans 2. 15. their conscience also bearing
witness. Romans 9. 1. My conscience also bearing me witness. 2. Cor. 1. 12. The
testimony of our conscience. And this the end of the former office of the
conscience. For therefore is it exact and punctual in setting down the
particulars of a man's whole life, that it may be a faithful witness either
for him, or against him. For a faithful witness cannot lie. Pro. 14. 5. This
office it is ready to do at all times of trial, affliction, and Peccat^ mea
celare non possum quonia^ quocu^que vado consc. mea mecum est secum portans
quod in ea posui sieve bonum sieve malu^; seruat vino, restituet defuncto de
positum quod seruandum a^cepit. Ber. medit. de vot. c. 13.
most of all at the last day, the day of judgment; when it shall be more
solemnly called in to give in evidence, Romans 2. 15. 16. Their conscience
bearing witness, etc. In the day when God shall judge secrets of men. At that
day it shall especially witness either for or against a man; if our life and
actions have been good, it will then do like the true witness, Pro. 14. 25. A
true witness delivers souls. If wicked and ungodly, it will deal with it as
Job complains God did with him Job. 10. 17. Thou renewest thy witnesses
against me. It will testify according to every man's deeds. And this testimony
of conscience is without all exception, for in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall stand, and conscience (as our common saying is) is a
thousand witnesses: for it is an ey-witnesse of all our actions, yea a
pen-witnesse, bringing testimony from the authentic Records and Registers of
the Court of Conscience. Concerning this testifying office of conscience that
place is worth the noting, Isa. 59. 12. For our transgressions are multiplied
before thee, and our sins testify against us, for our transgressions are
with us, and as for our iniquities we know them. By which place we may know
the meaning of the word Conscience. Conscience is a knowledge together. How
together? First, a knowledge together with another person, namely with God,
when God and a man's heart know a thing, there is Conscience, knowledge
together. Romans 9. 1. My Conscience ((...)) Co-witnessing, witnessing together.
How together? God knows it and witnesses, and my conscience together with him
knows, and witnesses. Secondly, a knowledge joined together with another
knowledge; for there is a double act of the understanding. First, that whereby
we think or know a thing. Secondly, there is a reflecting act of the soul
whereby we think what we think, and know what we know, and this is the
action of the Conscience; and this joining of this second knowledge to the
first, gives it the name of Conscience. As here in this place, As for our
iniquities we know them, that is, we know that we have had evil thoughts,
and our knowledge tells us, and witnesses to us that we have done so. This
agrees with Bernards definition, that Conscientia est cordis scientia;
Conscience is the knowledge of the heart, namely passiuely. It is the knowing
of what the heart knows: which others in better terms have expressed thus,
Conscience is the recoyling of the soul upon it self. Suitable to that of the
Apostle. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing but my self. As if he had said, I know
not any thing that I know against my self, my Conscience does not witness
against me. And this second office of Conscience in bearing witness is also in
the memory.

And accordingly accusing or excusing, absoluing or condemning] These acts of
Conscience we find. Romans 2. 15. Their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another. Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that which he
allows. The ground of these Acts is this, conscience, before actions are to be
done, determines of their lawfulnes, and unlawfulness; judges of them whether
they be good or evil. And if it judge them good, it inuites, stirs up,
vrges, and binds to the doing of them. Romans 13. 5. Ye must be subject for
Conscience sake, that is, because conscience determines it to be good, and
vrges, and binds thereunto. Hence that phrase in common speech, my conscience
urges me to it, or he was urged in conscience to do it, and I am bound in
conscience to do it. Certainly if it judge and determine actions to be evil
and unlawful, then it binds from them. So much that speech implies, 1 Cor. 10.
27. Eat, asking no question for Conscience sake. So that Conscience has a
power to bind to, and to bind from.

Now then when a man in his particular actions does follow the Prescriptions,
Dictates, Injunctions, Prohibitions, and Determinations of conscience, and
hearkens to the incitements thereof, then conscience excuses him, acquits and
absolues him. But if in his actions he go against any of these, then
conscience accuses him of offense, and condemns him for that offense. The
accusation of conscience has respect unto a man's guilt, the condemnation of it
unto a man's punishment. Accusation is an act of Conscience passing sentence
upon a man's action, as when conscience tells him. This was ill done, this action
was sinful. Condemnation is an act of conscience, passing sentence not only
upon a man's action, but upon a man's person, as when it tells him, Thou deseruest
Gods wrath for this sin. Conscience in accusing shows what is the quality; in
condemning what is the desert of a man's action. And these actions of Conscience
are in the mind, and understanding part of the soul. The act of Conscience in
the memory determines de facto, and tells us what we have done, or not done.
The act of Conscience in the understanding determines de iure, and tells us
whether we have done well or ill, and so accordingly either excuses or accuses,
acquits or condemns.

Comforting or tormenting the same] these be the last acts of conscience
following the former. If Conscience determining, prescribing, and inciting to
good, be hearkened unto, then it excuses, acquits, and thereupon follows
comfort, joy, hope, 2 Cor. 11. 2. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
conscience. Contrarily if the dictates of conscience be not regarded, it
accuses and co^demnes, and then torments with fear, grief, despair, and
violent perturbations, in all which is that Worm. Mar. 9. 44. And these
actions of the Conscience are in the will, and in the affections. And thus
according to the diverse parts of the soul, the acts and office of Conscience
are diverse. In the Sic sic in do mo propria and a propria fam^lia habeo
accusatores testes, iudices, and tortores Accusat me conscien* testis est
memoria, volu^tas carcer, timor tortor, ablectame^tum torme^tum. Ber. med. de
vot. c. 13.
memory it has the office of a Notary, Register, and witness. In the
understanding it has the office of a Judge, and an Accuser, of a Felix and a
Tertullus. In the affections either of a Comforter, or a Tormenter.

The sum of all may be thus knit up. Conscience contains three things:

1. Knowledge practical. 2. Application of that knowledge to our particular
estates, and actions. 3. Those affections which arise thereupon.
Now the special work of Conscience consists in the second, in the applying
our knowledge to our estates and actions. Now in this application it looks on
things past, or present, simply as things, and so it witnesses of them to be
done, or not done, Eccles. 7. Super nos etiam posuit ad custodiendum si
deliquissent qui accusarent, qui testificare^tur qui iudicarent, qui puniret:
consc. quippe est accusatrix, memoria testis, ratio Iudex, timor carnifex. Ber.
hom de villi. iniq.
22. Or else it looks at the good or evil of things past, present, and to
come. If thngs past, or present, seem good it excuses; if evil it accuses,
and bites, Romans 2. 15. If things to be done seem good, it excites, vrges, and
binds to the doing thereof. If evil, it vrges, and binds there from. Now
according to these several acts there follow in us diverse affections, joy,
hope, fear, grief, and the like. The whole process of the work of Conscience
falls within the frame of a practical Syllogism, as for example.

Every one that sins in betraying innocent Conscie^tia Synteresis est, qua
victi voluptatib. vel furore ipsaque interdum rationis decepti similitudine nos
peccare sentimus. Hieronym in Eccl. cap. 1.
blood is worthy of Gods wrath. But I (says Judas) have sinned in betraying
innocent blood, therefore I am worthy of Gods wrath.
Here the Mayor is knowledge practical, the rule and law by which Conscience
keeps her Court. This is Synteresis.

The Minor that is Syneidefis, the proper Synteresis est promptuarium
princip^oru^ seu regularum practicarum: eius officiu^ est regulas legis diuinae
proferre, and co^scien subministrare vt illarum open possit censorem agere de
propriis actionib. Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 2.
work of conscience applying that knowledge, and general rule for a man's
particular estate, or action. Here Conscience witnesses concerning the fact,
judges of the quallity of it, and accordingly accuses or excuses.

The Conclusion is the sentence of Conscience absoluing or condemning, and
accordingly cheering or stinging, comforting or tormenting a man.

CHAP: III.
A good Conscience what it is: false ones discovered.

What Conscience is we have seen; The second thing considerable, is what a
good Conscience is. The Conscience that is good, must be good with a double
goodness.

1. With the goodness of Integrity. 2. With the goodness of Tranquillity
Uprightness, and Peace: these two are required to the constitution of a good
Conscience.

First, it is good with the goodness of Integrity, when it is an upright
conscience. This is that which Paul calls A pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. which
phrase a man would almost think in his conscience that the holy Ghost used on
set purpose, to stop the mouth of the iniquity of the later times, that should
seek to disgrace all good Conscience with the sarcasme of purity. Now the
Conscience is good with this goodness of Integrity, and purity three ways.

1. When it being informed and rightly principled by the word of God, the only
rule and binder of Conscience, it does truly and sincerely Judge, and determine
evil to be evil, and good to be good. As contrarily, the conscience is
sinfully evil, when it does not determine that to be evil which is evil, nor
that to be good which is good, but calls evil good, and good evil. Such as are
the Consciences of Ignorant persons, who wanting the knowledge of Gods word,
and having their consciences blinded through ignorance, are not able to judge
of good and evil, nor to discern and determine which is which. So that
knowledge is necessarily required to the goodness of Conscience. Romans 15. 14.
Ye also are full of goodness filled with all knowledge. The conscience cannot
be good where the soul is naught, and that the soul be without knowledge, it
is not good Prove. 19. 2.

2. When it does excuse for that which is good, and accuse for that which is
evil, being sanctified by the spirit of grace: for the accusation of
conscience though it follow upon sin, yet it is not sinful, and evil in it
self, but only painful and troublesome, and so opposed to the goodness of
peace, not to the goodness of vprightnes, according to that trite distinction of
Bernard of a good conscience, and not quiet, and a quiet conscience and not
good. It is the property of a Conscience uprightly good, to accuse upon any
sin committed. As contrarily, the conscience is sinfully evil, when it does
not excuse for good, nor accuse for evil. The superstitious person, omitting
his fopperies, should be excused by his conscience, whereas he rather receives
blame from his conscience, therefore his conscience is sinfully evil. The
secure persons conscience is naught, because he having committed sin, his
Conscience is silent, and lets him alone, and brings in no accusation against
him, therefore it is sinfully evil. It is a witness that has seen, and
known evil, and does not utter it, therefore it shall bear its iniquity.
Levit. 5* 1.

3. When it does incite and urge us to do good, and does stay and hinder from
evil. It is uprightly good when it spurs to good, and bridles from evil. Heb.
13. 18. For we are assured that we have a good Conscience. viz. A Conscience
that is neither silent to persuade to that which is good, or diswade from that
which is evil. If a man go about, or be ready to yield to any thing that is
sinful, how will it muster up legions of Arguments, how will it wrestle and
struggle with a man? It will say as Abner to Ioab. 2 Samuel* 2, 26. Know thou
not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? or as Abigail to David. 1 Samuel
25. 31. It shall be no grief, nor offense of heart unto thee another time, not
to have done this evil. If a man be negligent, or careless and drowsy in
good duties, it comes to him with that voice, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep; or with that Isa. 30. 21. This is the way walk in it. When it does
thus, it is uprightly good. Contrarily, it is sinfully evil when it does not
incite us to that which is good, nor hinder us from doing evil. This is a
dead, and a seared conscience. 1 Timothy 4. 2. Having their consciences seared
with an hot iron.

2. It is good with the goodness of Tranquillity. And that is when the
conscience is at Peace, and does not accuse us, because it has not wherewith
to accuse us, either because not guilty of such or such a particular fact. 1
Cor. 4. 4 I know nothing by my self; or else because it is assured of pardon,
in the blood of Christ, by which we come to have no more Conscience of sins.
Heb. 10. 2 That is, no more Conscience to accuse or condemn for sin, it
being done away in the blood of Christ. And this is the purged Conscience, Heb.
9. 14. which brings Hope, Joy, Comfort, and Confidence with it* 2 Cor. 1. 12.
This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience. Then is the Conscience
good when it is peaceable. As contrarily, then is it evil, painefully evil,
when it is turbulent, and troublesome in the accusations thereof, and binds
over to Judgment, and so leaves us in shame, fear, perplexity, and grief. 1
Ioh. 3. 20. If our heart condemn us. This is a wounded, a troubled conscience.
This is often the evil Conscience of evil men: Isa. 57. 21. There is no peace
to the wicked, faith my God. Yet may a man have his conscience uprightly good,
which is painefully evil, for a good man's Conscience may be unquiet and
troubled. Thus then we see what a good conscience is, that which is uprightly
honest, and quietly peaceable. This being so, it serves to discover the
dangerous error of diverse sorts of people, that are in a dream of having good
consciences, and yet having nothing less. There be three sorts of consciences,
which because they are in some sort quiet, and sting not, their owners would
have to go for good ones, and yet are stark naught, and they are, The
Ignorant; The Secure, and the Seared Conscience.

1. The Ignorant conscience. Men judge of their ignorant consciences, as they
do of their blind, dumb, and ignorant Ministers. Such neither do nor can
Preach, can neither tell men of their sins, nor of their duties. Ask such a
blind guides people, what their conceit is of him, and what a kind of man
their Minister is, and ye shall have him magnified for a passing honest
harmless man, and a man wondrous quiet amongst his neighbors. They may do
what they will for him, he is none of those troublesome fellows that will be
reproving their faults, or complaining of their disorders in the Pulpit; oh,
such a one is a quiet good man indeed. Thus judge many of their Consciences. If
their consciences be quiet, and lie not grating upon them, and telling them
that their courses are sinful and damnable, and that their persons are in a
dangerous condition, but rather by their silence, ignorance, and vain
pretenses do justify them, and tell them all will be well enough. Oh then
what excellent good consciences have these men. They make no conscience of
Family duties, once in the year to come to the Sacrament serves the turn;
they are common swearers in their ordinary communication; make no conscience of
sanctifiing Sabbaths, etc. and their consciences lets them alone in all these,
do not give them one syllable of ill language, oh what gentle, and good
natured consciences think these men they have? But alas what evil consciences
have they. A good conscience must be upright as well as peaceable. And an up
right conscience is enlightened with the knowledge of the Word, and by that
light judges what is good, and what is evil, and when it finds men's actions
not to be good, and warrantable deals plainly, and lets them hear of it. A
good conscience has good eyes, and is able to discern between good and
evil. Now these men's consciences are quiet, and have their mouths shut, but
whence is it? Because their eyes are shut, and they are dumb, because they are
blind. Right Idol consciences* they want mouths to speak, be^^use they want
eyes to see. So that it may be said of such consciences as the Prophet speaks
of those Watchmen. Isa. 56. 10. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant,
they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark. Their blindness bred dumbnes, and
their ignorance silence. Thus is it with ignorant Consciences. What is the
reason they bark not, but are dumb, and are thus quiet? Merely because they
are blind and ignorant.

But yet as good as men account these consciences now, the time will come that
it shall fare with the^ as it did with Adam and Eve after they had eaten the
forbidden fruit, Then their eyes were opened. So the time shall come when these
Consciences shall have their eyes opened, and then also shall their mouths by
oyened, yea wide, and loud opened, and these now quiet consciences shall both
bark and bite too. Do not therefore flatter thy self in thine Ignorance, as
if thy condition, and conscience were good, because quiet. Never account the
true Peace which is not joined with vprightnes. Integrity, and ignorance can no
more stand together, then light and darkness. Integrity of conscience may be
without Peace, Peace can never be without Integrity. Dumb Ministers go in
the world for good Ministers, because quiet ones, but the day will come that
men shall curse them for having been so quiet. So Ignorant and tongue tied
consciences go for good ones, but the time will come that men will curse this
peace of their conscience, for bringing them so quietly to hell. The Mass goes
for an excellent good service, because Missa non mordet, honest toothles
devotion, it never fastens fang in the hearers flesh. So many have Masse-like
consciences, toothlesse, and tonguelesse consciences, but yet the time will
come, that as Massemongers shall curse their toothlesse Mass, so ignorant
persons that now glory in their peace, shall curse their toothlesse conscience,
yea they shall gnash their teeth, because conscience had no teeth, and shall
gnaw their tongues for anguish of heart, because their consciences wanted
tongues to tell them of the danger of their wicked ways, that have brought
them to so miserable a condition.

2. The secure conscience. As the blind conscience was like the dumb Minister,
so the secure conscience is like the flattering Minister, that ( Ier. 6. 13.)
heales the hurt of his people with sweet words, and cries, peace, peace, where
there is no peace. This conscience wants not an eye, but only a good tongue in
the head. It sees its master to do evil, and knows it to be evil, but
either cares not to speak, or else is easily put off from speaking, sometime
it cares not to speak, being sleepy, heavy, and drowsy, like those Prophets.
Isa. 56. 10. They are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark. What was the reason?
Sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. A sleepy, and heauy-eyde Curre,
though he see one come into his Masters yard, or house, that should not, yet
barks not, as loath by his barking to disquiet himself. A sleepy secure
Conscience sees many a sin to enter the soul that should not, and yet lies
still, and says nothing, is loath to break its sleep. And yet such
Consciences men count good.

Sometimes it may be it offers to speak, as a sleepy dog may open once, or
twice at a strangers entrance, yet is soon snibd, the least word of the master
of the house makes him whist, and quiet. So secure Consciences upon the green
wound begin to smart, and upon the fresh commission of sin begin to mutter,
and to have some grudgings, but their master answers them as the friend in his
bed did his neighbor, desiring to borrow three loaves. Luc. 11. 17. Trouble me
not, for I am in bed. I pray thee be quiet, let us have no wrangling and
brawling, it shall be so no more, I will cry God mercy, I will hereafter find
a time for repentance, etc. and so Conscience being secure, is easily put of
with a few good words, and so closing her eyes, and mouth again gives her
master liberty to take his rest. And thus the secure conscience because it is
so easily hushed, and stilld, is counted a good conscience, as Nurces count them
good children which though they are ready to cry at every turn, yet are easily
quieted with some toy.

But this conscience is as far from a good Conscience, as Security is from
Integrity. Sin indeed sleeps, but yet it sleeps but dog-sleepe, yea though
it sleep soundly, yet it cannot sleep long. Genesis 4. 7. Sin lies at the
door. Sin lies a sleep in the conscience as a Mastife lies at the door. A
place where a dog cannot sleep long. The door is the common passage into, and
out of the house, every one is passing to and fro that way, and keep such a
clattering with the opening, and shutting of the door, that there can be no
sound, or at least no long sleep. No better is the sleep of secure
consciences, which at length like mad ban-dogs, and fell Mastifes, will fly in
the face of the sinner, ready to pluck out the very throat and heart of him.

The secure Conscience can be no good conscience, because it has neither
vprightnes, nor peace, both which were before required to the temper of a good
one. Vprightnes has it none, for it is not faithful in its office, it does
not witness, it does not accuse, as it becomes an honest upright conscience to
do. Peace it has none. There is a great difference between a peace, and a
truce. In peace there is a total deposition, both of Arms and Enmity, all
hostile affections are put of: In a truce, there is but a suspension and a
cessation of Arms for a season, so as during the same there is still provision
of more Forces, and a preparation of greater strength. A truce is but a
breathing time to fit for fiercer impressions. The truce being ended, the
assaults are rather fiercer the^ they were before. The secure consciences are
quiet, not because there is peace, for there is no peace to the wicked, says
my God. Isa. 57. 21. Quomodo tranquilla? cum mundi huius prosperitus alludit,
and illudit, cum laudatur peccator in desideriis animae suae. Bernard* de Consc.
But because there is some truce, the world smiles upon them, and they have
outward hearts ease, and this brings them asleep, but if any affliction,
cross, or sickness come, then they see how far they are from peace.
Conscience is sometime at truce with secure sinners, but during this truce,
conscience is preparing Arms, and Ammunition against them, is leuying of fresh
Forces against them, and as soon as the truce is ended, be it sooner or be it
later, have at them with more violence, fury, and fierceness then ever before.
And the truce once ended, it will easily appear, what a wide breadth of
difference, there is between a secure and a good conscience.

3. A Seared conscience. That which Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 4. 2. A cauterized
Conscience. That is, as Beza translates and expounds it. A conscience cut off
as it were with a Chirurgions Instrument. An arm, or a leg cut off from the
body, stab it, gash it, chop it into gobbets, do what you will with it, it is
insensible, it feels it not. Or else as our translation has it, Having their
consciences seared with an hot iron. A comparison borrowed from Chirurgerie.
When a lim is cut off, Chirurgions use to sear that part of the body from
whence the other is taken with an hot iron, and sometimes they do cures by
searing the affected parts with hot yrons. Now these parts upon their searing
have a kind of crusty brawninesse, which is utterly insensible, which though
it be cut, or pricked, it neither bleeds, nor feels. Thus is it with many men's
Consciences, commit they whatsoever sins they will, yet their hearts are so
hardened through long custom in sin, that they seele no gripings, pinches, or
bitings at all, but are grown to that dead, and dedolent disposition. Ephe. 4.
19. who being past feeling, etc. It is with such men's consciences, as with
laboring men's hands, which through much labor have a brawny hardness growing
upon them, which is without any feeling. One may thrust pins into it, pare it
with a knife, and yet without any trouble or grief at all. Such callous
Consciences have many that though they be wounded, and gashed with never such
foul sins, yet their consciences shrink not, feel not a whit. Their
Consciences are like Gally-slaues backs, so be brawned over with often
lashing, that an ordinary lash will not make them so much as once shucke in
their shoulders. You have many that can swear, not only your more civil
oaths, of faith and troth, but those ruffianly, and bloody oaths, of blood
and wounds, and it never wounds their hearts a whit. You have many that can
commit foul sins with less touch then others can hear of them. You shall
have black-Smithes that are used to the frequent and daily handling of hot
iron, hold an hot fire-coale in their hands, and langh, whilst another would
roar out. There be those that can be drunk day after day* that consecrate
whole Sabbaths to Venus and Bacchus, can give themselves up to foul villainies,
and yet not one twitch at the heart, not a snib, not a cross word from their
Consciences. Estrich-like they can concoct iron, and put it off as easily as
another weak stomach can do gelly. They have brought their hearts to that
pass the drunkards body is in; Pro. 25. 35. They have stricken me and I was
not sick, they have beaten me and I felt it not. Their seared Consciences have
no more feeling then our sotted Drunkards have in their drunkenness, who
though they have many a knock, and sore bruise, yet feel it not. To this
fearful condition, and senseless and seared stupidity of Conscience many
grow, and when they have thus crusted and brawned the same, then they have
their Consciences at a good pass, because they hear them not brawling within
them. Alas how far are such from goodness of Conscience. In some sense, those
have worse Consciences then the Devil himself, who believes and trembles,
whose Conscience yet is not so seared, but it trembles at the thoughts of his
deserved damnation.

And howsoever these seared consciences are quiet, yet there will come a day
that this seared crustinesse shall be scaled off, and those consciences which
were not sensible of sin, shall be most sensible of pain: though they were
past feeling in the committing of sin, yet they shall be all feeling in
suffering punishment for sin. God will pare off that brawninesse from their
consciences, and will pare them so to the quick, that they shall feel and most
sensibly feel that which here they would not feel. Tremble therefore at the
having of such a conscience, in which there is neither uprightness, nor peace;
neither integrity, nor tranquillity, but a senseless and fearful stupiditie.
Thus we have seen what a good conscience is.

CHAP. IV.
Peace of Conscience how gotten.

IT follows now to know how a man may get and keep a good one, which is the
third point which was propounded to be handled. A point well worth our
enquiring after. A good Conscience is the most precious thing that a Christian
can have: a thing of that esteem that where it is wanting, we account a man
without a conscience. So of a man that has an ill Conscience we use to say, he
is a man of no Conscience. Not that he has no Conscience, the Devils
themselves have a Conscience, and happy it were for them they had none, but
when a man has not a good one, we esteem of him as having none at all. There
is no greater good we can seek after then a good conscience. Let us enquire
then how we may get, and keep this so great a good.

A good Conscience then consisting in Peace and Integrity, these two being
gotten and kept, we shall get and keep a good Conscience.

First then to make the Conscience peaceably good, these things are required.

1. Faith in Christ, and his blood. The Conscience cannot be at peace til it be
purged from its guilt. An impure Conscience cannot but be an unquiet
Conscience, and every guilty Conscience is impure. Guilt is the same to the
conscience that the winds are to the seas, Isa. 27. 20. 21. The wicked are like
the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, There
is no peace to the wicked. Now that which makes the Sea so troublesome and
ragingly restless, is the violence of the blustering winds that trouble and
toss it to and fro. The winds are not so troublesome to the sea, as guilt is
to the Conscience. Therefore as the way to calm the Sea, is to calm the
winds; so the way to quiet and calm the Conscience, is to purge and take away
the guilt. Guilt is in the Conscience as Jonas in the Ship, out with him and
Sea and ship are both quiet. But how then shall the guilt be purged out of the
Conscience! That we find Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ
purge our consciences from dead works? We cannot have a good conscience till we
be freed from an evil one. The way to be freed from an evil conscience, is to
have our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10. 22. But what is
that wherewith the Conscience must be sprinkled to be made good with peace and
quietness? The same which we find 1 Pet. 1. 2. The sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, and Heb. 12. 24. The blood of sprinkling which speaks better
things then that of Abel.

So then the Conscience sprinkled with Christ's blood ceases to be evil,
becomes good and peaceable. The same Christ that calmed the rage of the Sea by
stilling the winds, Mark. 4. 39. He arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto
the Sea, Peace and be still, and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
The same Christ it is that stils the rage of the conscience, by taking and
purging away the guilt thereof, with the sprinkling on of his blood. His blood
speaks, Heb. 12. 24. And speaks not only to God, but speaks to the
conscience. The voice which it speaks, is Peace and be still, the same voice
which to his Disciples after his resurrection, Peace be with you, and then
follows a great calm, and peace makes the conscience good.

But here the conscience will inquire how it may come to get this blood
sprinkled upon it, to make it thus peaceably good, and what is it that applies
this calming blood of Christ. I answer therefore, That it is the grace of
faith, therefore it was said before, that faith in Christ's blood makes peace in
the conscience. Faith is the hand of the soul, and as the hyssop sprinckle, by
which Christ's blood is sprinkled upon our consciences, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil Conscience. And being justified by faith we have peace toward
God. Romans 5. 1. Hence that conjunction of faith and a good conscience, 1. Tim.
1. 5. of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, and v. 19. Holding faith and
a good conscience. For faith it is that makes a good conscience, by making a
quiet conscience. Faith is not only a purifying grace, Act. 15. 9. but it is
also a pacifying grace* Romans 5. 1 It not only purges our corruption, by
applying the efficacy of Christ's blood, but specially purges out guilt by
applying the merit of his blood. So that no faith, no peace; and no peace, no
good conscience. A defiled conscience can be no good conscience, and what
defiles the conscience? See Tit. 1. 15. Unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
They that be defiled have their consciences defiled, but how come they and
their consciences so? To them that are defiled and unbelieving. Therefore an
unbelieving conscience is a defiled conscience, and a defiled conscience is no
good conscience, because it can have no peace so long as it is clogged with
defiling guilt. But contrarily faith purifying not only from corruption, but
from guilt, by the application of Christ's blood makes* the conscience pure, and
peaceable both.

There can be no peace of conscience but where there is the righteousn^sse of
the person. There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. as if he should say,
an evil unrighteous person cannot have a good conscience, where the person is
evil, there the conscience cannot be good. Now faith in Christ's blood makes a
man's person good, and so the conscience becomes good. It makes the person
righteous, and the person being righteous, the conscience is at peace, for the
work of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and
assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. with which that of the Apostle sweetly suits,
Reu. 7. 2. First, King of righteousness, and after that King of peace. Our
persons must first find Christ a King of righteousness by justifying them from
their guilt. before our consciences can find him King of Salem, pacifying them
from their unquietness. Our persons once justified by Christ's blood from their
guilt, and unrighteousness, our consciences are pacified and freed from their
unquietness.

Would thou then have a good conscience? Get the peace of Conscience. Would
thou have peace in thy conscience? Get faith in thy soul; Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and get thy soul sprinkled with his blood, and then, Heb. 10. 2. Thou
shall have no more conscience of sin, thy conscience shall be at quiet, no more
accusing thee, nor threatening thee condemnation for thy sin.

2. Repentance from dead works. Though Christ's blood be that which purges the
conscience from dead works, and so works peace; yet that peace is not wrought
in our apprehension, neither do we get the feeling of this faith without some
further thing. Therefore to our faith must be joined our repentance, though not
in the making of our peace, yet for the feeling of it. Many are ready to catch
at Christ's blood, and if that will make a good conscience, they are then fafe
enough. But as thou must have Christ's blood, so Christ will have thine heart
also bleed by repentance, ere he will vouchsafe the sense of peace. A
conscience therefore that would be a conscience in having peace, must not only
be a believing, but a repenting conscience. Mat. 3. 2. Repent ye, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, the kingdom of heaven shall be yours if you
will repent, ye shall have it immediately upon your repentance. But wherein
stands this kingdom offered to repentant consciences? The kingdom of God
stands in peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Repent, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 3. 38. And what may that gift be. The
fruits of the spirit are love, joy, peace, Gal. 5. 22. Which though it be to be
understood of peace between man and man, yet also that peace which is between
God and man is the fruit of the Spirit, and the love of God shed abroad into
our hearts by the holy Ghost. Romans 5. 5. is the gift of the holy Ghost, which
he gives to all that by repentance seek to get a good conscience. Blessed are
they that mourn, that is, which repent, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.
they shall have the peace of a good Conscience, which is the greatest and
sweetest comfort in the world.

Many do trust all to their supposed faith, as a short cut and a compendious
way to a good conscience, but he whose faith does not as well purify the heart
as pacify it, has neither faith, nor a good conscience. It is idle to hope
for peace by faith whilst thou live impenitently in a sinful course. Thou
can have no peace of conscience so long as thou have peace with thy sins.
Peace with conscience will be had by war with sin, in the daily practice of
repentance. It is but a dream to think of a good Conscience in peace, whilst
a man makes no conscience of sin. They that have a good conscience by Christ's
blood, may be indeed said to have no Conscience of sin, as H^b. 10. 2. But
yet there is a great difference between having no Conscience, and making no
Conscience of sin. To have no Conscience of sin, is to have a peaceable
good conscience, not accusing for sin, being sprinkled with Christ's blood. To
make no Conscience of sin, is for a man impenitently to live, and lie in any
sin. Now let any judge whether these two can stand together, that a man may
live as he list, and make no Conscience of any sin, and yet have such peace
by faith as that he has no Conscience of sin. It is an unconscionable thing in
this sense to lay all upon Christ, an unconscionable request to have him take
away our guiltines, and yet we would wallow in our filthiness still. How shall
faith remove the sting, when repentance remooues not the sin.

Me^ seeking peace by faith in Christ's blood, and yet living and lying in their
sins without repentance, God will give them Iehues answer to Iehoram, 2
King. 9. 22. What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy mother lezebel, and
her witchcrafts are so many? So what peace of Conscience so long as thine
oaths, Sabbath-breaches, whordomes, drunkenness, etc. do remain, and remain
unrepented of, and unreformed. It is true of all sin, which is spoken of
Romish Idolatry, Apoc. 14. 11. They have no rest day nor night, that is, no
peace of Conscience to any of that religion, so of all that live in any sin,
they have no true rest day or night, that is, as Isaiah interprets it, There is
no peace to the wicked. Peace and wickedness live not together under one roof.
Would thou then have a peaceable heart? Get an humbled, a mourning, and a
repentant heart for sin. The less peace with sin, the more peace with God and
our own Consciences.

3. The constant and conscionable exercise of prayer. An excellent means to
help us to the sense of that peace which makes the Conscience good. He that
has a good Conscience will make Conscience of prayer. And prayer will help to
make a good Conscience better. Philip. 4. 7. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, and
mark what shall be the fruit thereof, And the peace of God that passes al
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. See Job
33. 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy. It is many times with men's Consciences, as it was
with Saul, he was vexed and disquieted with an evil spirit, but David's Harp
gave him ease. Prayer is a David's Harp, the music whereof sweetly calmes,
and composes a distempered and disquieted Conscience, and puts it into frame
again. As in other disquiets of the heart, after prayer David bids his soul
return unto her rest, Psalm. 116. 4. 7. So may we in these disq^iets of
Conscience do no less.

The way to get a good peaceable conscience, is to have acquaintance with God;
and when we have acquaintance with him, then shall we have peace. Job 22. 21.
Acquaint thy self now with him, and be at peace. Now acquaintance is gotten
with God by prayer. Zech. 13. 9. They shall call on my Name, and I will hear
them, I will say, it is my people; and they shall say, the Lord is my God. Lo
how in prayer acquaintance is bred between God and his people, and
acquaintance breeds lone, and peace; and peace a good conscience. Judge then
what pitious Consciences they must needs have, that make so little Conscience
of seeking God in this duty: of wicked ones the Psalm speaks, They call not
upon God, Psalm. 14. as much as Isaiah says, There is no peace to the wicked,
they are utterly void of good Conscience.

CHAP. V.
Integrity of Conscience how procured.

ANd thus we have seen how the Conscience may be good for peace. It follows
to consider how it may become uprightly good, with the goodness of Integrity.
The goodness of Integrity is gotten and kept by doing five things.

1. Walk and live as Paul in this text, Before God, Set thy self ever in all
thy ways, as in the sight and presence of God, who is the Judge and Lord of
conscience. Of Moses it is said, that he saw him that was invisible. Heb. 11.
27. Therefore it is that men walk with such loose and evil Consciences, because
they think they walk invisibly. And they think that God sees not them,
because they see not God. An upright Conscience is a good conscience, and this
is the way to get an upright one. Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be upright.
To have God always in our eye, will make us walk with upright hearts. So Psalm.
119. 168 I have kept thy precepts, and thy testimonies, that is in effect, I
have kept a good conscience, but how came he to do it? for all my ways are
before thee. Conscience as we saw before, is a knowledge together, that is,
together with God. Now then this is an excellent means to get and keep a good
conscience, to be careful to do nothing, but that which we would be content
God should know as well as our selves. Think with thy self before every evil
action. Am I content that God should know of this? But how then may a man bring
himself to this? Set thy self always in Gods presence, and see the invisible
God, and see thy self visible in his eye, and know that thou do nothing
which he takes not notice of. This well thought upon, and laid to heart, would
make men make much conscience of their ways. The contrary to this is rash
walking, Lev. 26. when a man walks so loosely, and heedlesly as if there were
no eye upon him Dirige gres sus secundu^ verbu^ tuu^. Quid est, dirige secu^
dum verbu^ tuum? Vt recti sint gressus mei, quia rectu^ est verbum tuum Ego,
inquit, distortus sum sub pondere iniquitatis, sed verbum tuum est regulae
veritatis, me ergo distortum a me corrige ta^quam adre gulam, hoc est, ad
verbum tuum. Aug de ver. Ap^. ser. 12*
to view him in his actions.

2. Frame thy whole Course by the rule, and shape it by the direction of the
word of God. Gods word is the Rule of Conscience. Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk
according to this Rule. Men must then walk by Rule, and the Word must be this
Rule. Psalm. 30. 23. To him that orders ^is Conversation, all Christians must be
regulars, and must live or derly. But what is that Rule by which their
Conversation must be ordered? That same, Ps. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy
Word. He that orders his course by that Rule, which is the rule of conscience,
shall be sure to keep and get a good conscience. He that will make good work
will work by his rule, whereas he that works by guess must needs make but ill
work Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14. 23. That is, whatsoever a man
does, and has not warrant for it out of, and from the rule of the Word, makes
a man's conscience in that particular to be evil. And therefore v. 5. Let a man
be fully persuaded in his own mind. How happy should m^n be in getting and
keeping good consciences, if they would lay their lives and actions to the
Rule. The want of this is it that makes men, men of so ill-Consciences. Some
live by no Rule; some by false Rules, and hence come men's Consciences to be so
Anomalous. Some live by no Rule but do whatsoever seems good in their own
eyes, go as their lusts lead them, and follow his beck that rules in the Air.
This is also to walk rashly. Leuit. 26. He that does things without rule goes
rashly to work. He that walks irregularly, walks rashly, and no marvel if
men have crooked ways, and crooked consciences, when they will not live by
Rule. Some again live by false rules, and that not only Popish fictitious
Regulars that live by superstitious Rules of their Dominick, Francis, etc. but
amongst our selves many have a Rule they do live by, but that rule is not the
Word, but some false Intercausas maloru^ nostroru^ est, quod vi vimus ad
exempla, nec ratione co^ponimur, sed consue* tudine abducimur. Quod si pau ci
facerent nollemus imitari, cu^ plures facere caeperu^t, quasi hone stius sit,
quia frequentius, sequimur: et recti apud nos locu^ tenet error, vbi publicus
factus est. Senec. ep. 124.
Rules of their own devising. Such as are these; Great men's practice, or some
learned man's opinion, the custom of times and places wherein they live, the
examples of the multitude, or some secret blind and selfe-conceiued principles,
which they keep to themselves, and by which they live. All which being crooked
Rules, must needs make crooked Consciences, whereas if men would live by
David's rule. Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path, and in every action would have an eye, and a respect unto the
Commandment, as he had, Psalm. 119. 6. then should they make straight paths for
their feet. Heb. 12* 13. and keep upright consciences. In every spiritual
action therefore have an eye to the Word, question it whether it be justifiable
and warrantable by the Word or no, and meddle no farther then that will
authorize, and bear thee out. If this course were taken, such a good course
would make and keep a good Conscience. And why should not men be willing to
take this course? why will we not make that Word our Rule, which must be made
our Judge? The word which I speak shall judge you in the last day. Ioh. 12.
48. The Word shall judge our consciences, therefore let it rule, and order
them. And if it have the ruling of our consciences, it will make them good
consciences, and when they are good, they need not fear what Judge they come
before, nor what Judgment they undergo. In sum, if we would have good
consciences, we must make more conscience then is commonly made of reading, and
searching the Scriptures. The ignorance and neglect of this duty is it which
banes so many consciences in the world.

3. Keep a daily and a frequent Audit with thy conscience, often examination of
the conscience conduces much to the goodness of it. The Prophet complains of
his people, Every one turned Integritatis tuae curiosus explorator vita tua in
quotidiana discussione examina. Atte^de dilige^ter, qua^ tum proficias, vel
qua^tum de ficias, qualis sis in moribus, qualis sis in affectibus, qua^
similis sis Deo vel quam dissimilis, qua^ prope vel quam long, etc. Read ergo
te tibi, and si non semper vel saepe, et sal te^ interdu^. Ber. Medit Devot. c.
5.
to his Course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. ler. 8. 6. Here were men
far from a good Conscience, but what was the reason of it? He gives it in the
former words, No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done?
There was no examination of their Consciences and Courses, what they were, nor
how they were, and from hence comes this mischief. This was David's course.
Psa. 119. 59. I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
When a man's feet are in the ways of Gods testimonies, then he walks with an
upright Conscience, and mark how David came to do so, I considered my ways,
he used to examine his Conscience.

The first step to get a good conscience, is for a mnn to know that his
conscience before reformation is evil. How shall that be known without a
search? When a search has discovered what it is that maks the conscience, and
course evil, then will Conscience be ready to labor a man to the reformation
of that which is amiss, and will not cease to urge, and ply a man till it be
done. Frequent examination as it helps to the making of scholars, so to the
making of Consciences good. Hence men's lying in so gross neglects of good
duties, in so many great evils, because men and their Consciences never
reckon. Men take not themselves aside into their closets and chambers, and
there set not up a privy sessions to make inquiry into their own hearts and
ways, and therefore are their ways and Consciences so much out of order. Many
a man thinks his estate in the world to be very good, and thinks he grows
rich and wealthy, when his estate indeed is weak, and grows every day worse
then other. Now what is it that causes fo great a mistake* Nothing but this,
that he never looks over his books nor casts over his reckonings. If he had
done this, he should have seen that his estate was not answerable to his
conceit, and the knowledge of his misconceit would have made him have lived at
a more wary, and thrifty ^ate, and have kept himself with such a compass as
might have kept up his estate, whereas now the not examining his books, puts
him into a conceit of wealth, and this conceit beggars and undoes him. It fares
no better with too many in their Consciences. Laodicea thought well of her
self, thou say I am rich. If she had examined her Conscience, she should
have seen that which Christ saw, that she was poor, blind, naked, and
miserable, and the sight of this would have made her to have sought after that
counsel which Christ there gives her. Revel. 3. Men would have far better
Consciences if they knew in what ill case their Consciences stand, and
examination would help them to the knowledge of this. If men would but
ouer-looke the book of their Conscience, and see how many omissions of good,
how many sinful commissions stand registered there, it would both make them
marveilous sollicitous how to get the^ wiped out, and wondrous wary how any
more such Items came there. Often reckonings would blot out, and keep off the
score. Here is then wisdom for such as desire to keep good Consciences. Do
with the works of thy conversation as God did with the works of his Creation.
He not only surueighed at the fixed days end the whole work of the week, but
at each days end made a particular surveigh thereof. Do thou Omni die cum
vadis cubitum examina diligenter quid cogitasti, and quid dixisti in die, and
quomodo vtile tempus and spatium quod datum est ad acqui rendum vitamaeterna^,
dispensasti. Et si been transiuisti lauda Deum, si male vel negligenter lugeas,
et sequenti die non differas confiteri. Sialiquid cogitasti, dixisti vel
fecisti quod tua^ Conscientia^ multum remordeat, non comedas antequam
confitearis, Ber form. vit honest. Suauius dormiunt qui relinquunt curas in
calceis.
so, not only at the weeks end, at thy life's end search thine heart, and
examine thy course, but at every days end look back into the day past, and
examine what thy carriage and behavior has been. This being done, a man shall
find his works either good or evil. If good, how shall his conscience cheer him
with its peace? If evil, then if conscience have any life, or breath in it, it
will make a man fall to humiliation, and to a godly resolution of watching over
his ways for the future, so shall Conscience be much helped for Integrity.

David's counsel is good. Ps. 4. 4. Examine your hearts upon your beds, and his
resolution is also good, verse. 8. of the same Psalm, I will lay me down and
sleep in peace. Who would not be glad so to sleep, and to take his rest so?
Would we sleep upon David's pillow, sleep in peace? then hearken we to David's
counsel, to examine our selves upon our beds. There is nothing makes a man's
bed so soft, nor his sleep so sweet as a good conscience. It is with Sins as
with Cares, both trouble a man's sleep, both are troublesome bed-fellowes, as
they therefore sleep sweetly that leave their cares in their shoes, so they
sleep with most peace that let not sin lie down to sleep with them, who are
so far from lying down in their sins, that by their good will, will not
let the sun go down upon their sin, but by examination ferret out the same.
This being done it may be said as Prove. 3. 24. thou shall lie down, and thy
sleep shall be sweet. Nay further, examine thy conscience upon thy bed, and
thou shall not only sleep in peace, but thou shall awake and arise the next
morning with an upright frame of heart, disposed to the more caution against
sin the day following. So much David seems to intimate in that forenamed
place. Tremble and sin not. That is, be afraid to sin, take heed ye sin no
more. But what course may one take to come to that integrity of conscience, as
to fear to sin? Take this course, Examine your hearts upon your beds.

But alas how rare a practice is this, and therefore are good consciences so
rare. Many think this an heavy burden, and a sore task, and count the remedy
a great dea^e worse then the disease, there is nothing they tremble at more
then a domestical Audit, and this reckoning with their conscience. They say of
conscience, as Ahab of Micaiah, and care as little to meddle with conscience as
Ahab with Micaiah. I hate him for he never speaks good to me. 1. King. 22. So
they think their conscience will deal with them. They know their conscience
will speak as Job says God wrote, Thou writest bitter things against me.
Conscience has such a stinging waspish tongue, that by no means they dare
endure a parley with it. It is with many and their consciences, as with men
that have shrewish wives. Many a man when he is abroad, has no joy at all to
come home, nay, he is very loath to come within his own doors, he fears he
shall have such a peale rung him, that he had rather be on the house top, as
Solomon speaks, or in some outhouse, and lodge as our Savior at Bethlem in a
cratch, or a Manger, then come within the noise of her clamorous, and
clattering tongue. So many think conscience has such a terrible shrewish
tongue, that if they shall but come within the sound thereof, they shall be
cast into such melancholy dumpes, as they shall not be able in have to clawe
off again. How much, and how seriously are they to be pitied that to prevent
a few hours, or days supposed sorrow, and sadness, by which they might come
to procure both peace and integrity of conscience, will adventure the rack
and eternal torture of conscience in Hell. Remember that there is no
melancholy to the melancholy of Hell.

CHAP. VI.
Two further means to procure Integrity of Conscience.

IN the fourth place, Deal with thy Conscience as God would have Abraham do
by Sarah, Genesis 21. 12. In all that Sarah shall say unto thee hearken unto her
voice. So here. If we would get and keep a good Conscience, in all that it
shall say unto us being enlightened and directed by the Word, hearken unto it.
Conscience being enlightened has a voice, and no man but some time or other
shall hear this voice of conscience. Conscience is Gods Monitor to speak to men
when others cannot, or dare not speak. Sometimes men cannot speak as not
being privy to other men's necessities and failings. Sometimes they may not be
suffered to speak, as Ahab will not endure Micaiah to speak to him. Sometime
if a man speak he may have rough and angry answers, as the Prophet had from
Amaziah. 2. Chro. 25. 16 Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear, why
should thou be smitten? God has therefore provided every man, even great
men which may not be spoken to, he has provided them a bosom Chaplein, that
will round them in the ear, and will talk roundly to them, one that will be
of their counsel in despite of them; one that fears no fists, dreads no
smiting, yea, one that fears not to smite the greatest, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And
David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. It may be many
there were about David that had not the hearts to smite David with a grave
reprofe, though he gives leave to the righteous to do so. Psalm. 141. Let the
righteous smite me, but yet whilst others, it may be, are fearful* and
timorous to do him that good office, conscience is at no demurre upon the
point, that fears not, but smites David for his sin.

Gods Ministers are often slighted, and light set by, Preachers cannot be
regarded, but God has given men a Preacher in their own bosom, and this
Preacher will make many a curtain Sermon will take men to task upon their
pillow, and will be Preaching over our Sermons again to them. And though many
will not be brought to repetitions of Sermons in their Families, yet they have
a Repeater in their bosom, that will be at private repetitions with them in
spite of them, and will tell them, This is not according to that you have bin
taught, you have bin taught otherwise, you have bin reproved for, and convinced
of this sin in the public Ministry, etc. Why do you not hearken and
reform? Thus then conscience having a voice, and doing the office of a
Preacher unto us, if we would have conscience good, then in all things that
conscience enlightened shall say unto us, hearken unto it. More distinctly
Conscience has a twofold voice.

1. A voice of Direction, telling us what is good or evil, what is lawful and
unlawful, Isa. 30. 21. And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, That is understood Ita enim desuper in
sile^to sonat quidda^ non auribus sed mentibus. August in Psalm. 42.
of the voice of Gods spirit in the secret suggestions thereof, and such is the
voice also of conscience within us, dictating to us, and directing us what
duties are to be done, what courses to be avoided. How many times does
conscience press us to repentance and reformation of our ways, how often does
it call upon us to settle to such and such good courses, and so with David,
Psalm. 16. 7. Our raynes do teach it in the night season.

2. A voice of correction, and accufation, checking and chiding, taking up and
snibbing us when we do amiss. So Psalm. 42. 5, 11. and Psalm. 43. 5. Why art
thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? And Psalm.
77. 10. whilst in the foregoing verses he was complaining, and using some
speeches that might savor of some diffidence, see how conscience does her
office by a correcting voice: And I said, This is my infirmity; as if he had
said, whilst I was using such diffident expostulatio^s, mine own conscience
told me, I did not do well. Conscience so speaks unto us, as the Lord to
Jonah, Iona. 4. 4. 9. Do thou well to be angry? So says conscience often,
Do thou well to be thus earthly, thus eager upon the world, thus negligent,
and formal in holy duties? Thus conscience gives her privy nips, and her
secret checks. This is that of which Job speaks, Job 27. 6. My heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live. Implying that conscience after sin has a
reproaching voice, as when it befooles a man, as fool that thou art to do
this, to lose thy peace with God for a base sinful pleasure. Thus David's
Conscience reproached him. 2 Samuel 24. 10. I have done very foolishly, yea,
Psalm. 37. 22. it puts the fool and the beast both upon him, So foolish was I
and ignorant, I was as a heast before thee. This is the smiting of the
conscience, 2 Samuel 24. 10. Conscience first points with the finger, and gives
direction, if that be neglected, it smites with the fist, and gives correction.

Now then that which I aim at is this; If we would get and keep a good
Conscience, then neglect not, nor despise Conscience when it speaks. Does thy
Conscience press thee to any works of piety, to the care of family, worship,
and private devotion, to the reading of the Scriptures, sanctification on the
Sabbath, etc. In any case be so wise as to hearken to the counsels to the
vrgings, and to the Injunctions which come out of the Court of Conscience.
Hearken in any case to this Preacher whom thou can not suspect of
partiality, malice, ill will, as thou do others, thereby giving way to
Satan's policy, that hereby stops up the passages of thine heart, that the Word
may not enter. Here can be no such suspicious; Conscience cannot be susspected
to be set on by others, though Jeremy be charged to be set on by Baruch, Ier.
43. 3. Therefore hearken to the voice of this Preacher, and this will help
thee to a good Conscience.

Again, does thy conscience rebuke thee, does it chide and check thee, does
thy* heart reproach thee for thy ways? Does it say, do thou well to live in
such and such sins? Does it punctually reprove thee for thine evils? Ideo
quantum potes, teipsum coargue; inquire in te accusatoris primu^ partibus
fungere, deinde Iudiciis novissime deprecatoris: aliquando offend te, Senec.
ep^st. 28.
Do not answer Conscience as Jonas answered God, frowardly, Yea I do well;
but even close with Conscience, and do thou accuse thy self as fast as it
accuses, acknowledge thy folly, yield promise, and covenant with thy conscience
a present and speedy reformation. This if it were done, how happy should men be
in getting and keeping a good Conscience.

But alas, how few regard the voice of Conscience, and once hearken to it, and
the very want of this duty is it which breeds so much ill conscience in the
world. Men in this case are guilty of a double wickedness. Either they deal
as the Jews with the Apostles, Act. 4. 18. and 1 These 2. 16. They either stop
Consciences mouth, and labor to silence this Preacher, or else they deal with
Conscience as the Jews did with Stephen, Acts 7. 57. They stopped their ears:
If they cannot stop Consciences mouth, they will at least stop their own
ears.

1. They labor to stop Consciences mouth. If conscience begin to take them
aside, and to say to them as Ehud to Eglon; Judge. 3. 19. I have a secret errand
unto thee: they answer, but in another sense, as he did; Keep silence. If
conscience offer to be talking to them, they shuffle it off as Felix did Paul,
they are not at leisure, they will find some other time when their leisure
will better serve. Yea many when their conscience reproaches them, they again
reproach and reproove it, and answer it as the Dauites did Micah, Judges 11.
23. What ayleth thee? and are ready to give reproachful language to their own
Conscience, that it cannot be quiet and let them alone.

2 But yet conscience will not oftentimes be thus posted and shuffled off, she
will not be gagged, or suffer her lips to be sown up, but will deal with a man
as the woman of Canaan did with our Savior, Math. 15. She would not be put off
with neglect, or cross answers, but she still presies upon our Savior, and
grows so much the more importunate. So oftentimes conscience when she sees men
shuffle, grows the more importunate, and will dog and haunt men so much the
more. Yea it deals like the blind men Math. 20. 31. who when the multitude
rebuked them, they cried the more. Now then when Conscience grows thus
clamorous, and will not be silenced, then they will stop their own ears,
that if it will needs be prating, it shall but tell a tale to a deaf man. To
this end men put a double trick upon their Consciences.

1. Saul's trick. Saul is vexed with an evil spirit, What must be the cure?
seek him out a minstrell. Thus many when the cry of Conscience is up, betake
them to their merriments and iollities. They try whether the noise of the
Harps* and Viols, and the roarings of good fellows will not drown the voice
and noise of Conscience. They will try whether the dinne of an Alehouse, or the
rattling and clattering of the Dice and Tables, cannot deaf their cares against
the clamours of Conscience. Thus do many in the accusations of Conscience, give
themselves wholly up to all manner of pleasures and delights, that so their
minds being taken up with them, there might be no leisure to give conscience
any the least audience. (...). Chrysostom. in 1. ed Cor. hom. 7.


2. Cains trick. Cain had a mark of God upon him, Gen 4 15. And what might
that mark be? Chrysostom thinks it was a continual shaking and trembling of
his body. If that were his mark, why might not that trembling come from the
horror of his guilty conscience, following him with a continual hue and cry
for murder, and reproaching him for a bloody murderer. How-euer, no question
but his Conscience continually haunted him, and the cry of blood was ever in
his ears. Now then what course takes he? ye shall see Genesis 4. 17. that he
falls a building of Cities, betakes himself to a multitude of employments,
that the noise of the sawes, axes, and mallets might be louder then the noise
of his conscience. If Conscience be out of quiet with them, and will not cease
to urge and pinch them, then have among their sheep, and oxen, that their
blea^ing, and bellowing may keep under the voice of conscience, they do so
possess their heads and their thoughts, and so overload them with much
dealings in the world, that there is no spare time wherein their care can be
free to hear the voice of Conscience. The clutter of their many businesses
make too great a noise for Conscience to have audience. They deal with their
consciences as the Ephesians dealt with Alexander, Act. 19. 33. 34. And
Alexander beckned with the hand, and would have made his defense unto the
people. But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the
space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. If Alexander
had had never so good lungs, and strong sides, he might have strayned his
voice till he had crazed the organs of language, and might have spoken till he
had been hoarse again, before he could have been heard to have spoken one
syllable, though he had spoken all the reason in the world. Such a noise of an
outrageous bellowing multitude had bin almost enough to have drowned the voice
of a Canon. Thus deal men with their conscience, if she but prepare to speak
and give but a beck with the hand, presently thrust themselves into a crowd of
business that may outcry, and ouer-cry the bawling noise thereof. It was an
hideous noise that the shriking infants of Israel made when they were offered
up alive in fire unto Moloch. Now lest their parents bowels should earne with
compassion, and be affected with the shrikes of their poor babes, therefore
they had their Drums and Trumpets struck up, and sounded in the time of
sacrifice, to make such a noise, that in no case the lamentable cries of the
infants should be heard. The same trick do too many put upon their
consciences, if they will be clamouring they will have some Drum or other, whose
greater noise may deaf their ears from hearing the cries of conscience.

But alas what poor Proiects are these? The time will come when men shall have
neither pleasures nor profits, neither delights nor business, to stop their
ears. Though now men beat upon these Drumme-heads, and with the noise of their
pleasures and profits, keep conscience voice under from being heard. Yet the
day will come, when God will beat out these Drum-heads, and then the cries, and
horrid, and hideous shrikes of Conscience shall be heard. God will one day
strip thee of all thy pleasures and employments, and will turn thee single and
loose to thy Conscience, and it shall have full liberty to bait thee, and byte
thee at pleasure. Oh how much better to be willing to hearken to the voice of
Conscience here, then to be forced to hear it in hell, when the time of
hearkening will be past and gone. Hearken to it now, and thou shall not hear
it hereafter. Hearken to the admonitions and reproves of it now, and thus
shall thou get Integrity here, and shall be free from hearing the doleful
clamours of it in hell hereafter.

5. To get and keep a good Conscience ever in cases of a doubtful and
questionable nature, be sure to take the surest side. Many things are of a
questionable nature, and much may be said on either side in such cases, if thou
would have a good Conscience take the surest side, that side on which thou
may be sure thou shall not sin. As for example. There be diverse games
and recreations whose lawfulness are questioned, yet much may be said for
them, and possibly they may have the judgment of diverse reverend and learned
men for their lawfulness. Now what shall a man do in this case? Take the sure
side. If I use them it is possible I may sin, it may be they are not sinful,
yet I am not so sure of it that I shall not sin if I use them, as I am sure I
shall not sin if I do not use them. I am sure that not to use such sports
breaks none of Gods commandments, a man may be bold to build upon that. He
that lives by this rule, shall keep his Conscience from many a flawe. He
Tutiores igitur viuimus si totum Deo damus, Non autem nos illi ex part, and
nobis ex part committimus. Aug. de dono perseu. cap. 6.
that sails amongst rocks it is possible he may escape splitting, but he is
not so sure to keep his vessel safe and whole, as he that sails in a clear
sea where no rocks are at all. It is good in matter of life and practice, to
do as Augustine speaks in case of doctrine. We live more safely, says he, if
we attribute all wholly to God, and do not commit our selves partly to God,
and partly to our selves. In doctrines it is good to hold the safest side,
wherein there can be no danger, yea, Bellarmine himself after his long dispute
for justification by merit, comes to this at last, That by reason of the
uncertainty Propter incertitudinem propriae Iustitiae and periculum inanis
gloriae tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere. Bellar de Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
of our own righteousness and the danger of vainglory, it is the most safe
way to repose our whole confidence in the mercy and goodness of God alone. Which
way soever Bellarmine is gone himself, or any of his religion, I think common
reason will teach a man so much wisdom to go the safest way to heaven, and
that the safest way is the best way. The Lord that would have us make our
calling and election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10. would not have us put so great a
matter as the salvation of our souls upon Bellarmines hazard, and confessed
uncertainty of our own righteousness. Now as in case of doctrine, so in case of
practice it is great wisdom, and a great means of keeping a good Conscience,
to do that wherein we may Tutiores vinere, and to take to that which Tutissimum
est, to follow that which is safest, and to take to that side which is the
surest, and the freest from danger.

CHAP. VII.
Two marks of a good Conscience.

THus we see how a good Conscience may be had; it follows we consider how it
may be known, and be discerned to be had. The marks and notes by which a
good Conscience may be known, are seven.

1. This in the text. In all good Conscience. 1. Nore of good conscience.
Conscience in all things.
It is a good note of a good conscience, when a man makes conscience of all
things, all duties, and all sins. There be that have natural Consciences
principled by some general grounds of nature, and it may be so far as these
rules carry them may make some Conscience, but their principles coming short,
they must needs also come as short of a good Conscience: I have lived says
Paul here, in all good Conscience, and Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a good
Conscience in all things. It is a good Conscience when a man's life, all his
life is a life of Conscience, when in all his life, and the whole tenor
thereof he makes Conscience of all that God commands, and forbids, Psalm. 119.
6. Then shall I not be ashamed (what breeds shame but evil conscience?) when
I have respect unto all thy commandments. When all are respected there is no
shame, because where all are respected there is good Conscience, and where good
Conscience is, there is no shame. That argued David's good Conscience, Psalm.
119. 101. I have refrayned my feet from every evil way.

Try men's Consciences by this, and it will discover a great deal of evil
Conscience in the world. Many a moral man makes Conscience of doing his
neighbor the least wrong, he will not wring or pinch any man, pays every man
his own, deals fairly and squarely in his commerce, there is no man can say
black is his eye, you shall have him thank God that he has as good a
Conscience as the best. These are good things, and such things as men ought to
make Conscience of, but yet here is not enough to make a good Conscience. A
good Conscience must be all good Conscience, or it is no good Conscience. Now
indeed these men may have good Consciences before men, but my text tells us that
we must live in all good Conscience before God. And Paul ioynes them two
together, Act. 24. 13. And herein do I exercise my self to have a good
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. Now be it that these
have good Conscience before men, yet what have they before God? Alas they are
miserably ignorant in the things of God, no Consciences to acquaint themselves
with his truth, no conscience of prayer in their families, of reading the
Scriptures, no conscience of an oath, and as little of the Sabbath, and the
private duties thereof. How far are these from good conscience.

Others again seem to make conscience of their duties before God, but in the
mean time no Conscience of duties of Justice in the second Table, make no
conscience of oppression, racking rents, covetousnes, overreaching, etc. these
are no better consciences then the former, neither are good because they live
not in all good Conscience. Thus may a man discover the naughty Consciences of
most. Iehu seems wondrons zealous for the Lord, and seems to be a man of a
singular good conscience in the demolishing the Temple of Baal, and putting to
death his Priests. I but if Iehu make Conscience of letting Baals Temple stand,
why does he not as well make Conscience of letting Ieroboams Calves stand. If
Iehu had had a good conscience, he would as ill have brookt Ieroboams as
Iezebels Idolatry; he would have purged the Land of all Idols.

Herod seems to make some Conscience of an oath. Mark. 6. 26. For his oaths
sake he would not reject her. It is joy of him that he is a man of so good
Conscience. I, but in the mean time why makes he no Conscience of Incest and
Murder? He fears and makes Conscience to break an unlawful oath, but makes
no Conscience to cut an holy Prophets throat. Who would not have thought Saul
to have been a man of a very good Conscience, see how like a man of good
Conscience he speaks. 1. Sam. 14. 34. Sin not against the Lord in eating
with the blood. He would have the people make Conscience of eating with the
blood, and indeed it was a thing to be made Conscience of. I but he that makes
Conscience of eating the flesh of Sheep and Oxen with the blood, like a bloody
hearted tyrant, as he was, he makes no Conscience of sucking, and shedding the
blood of fourscore and five of Gods Priests. Just the conscience of his
blood-hound Doeg. 1. Sam. 21. 7. Doeg was there that day deteyned before the
Lord. How deteyned? either out of a religious Conscience of the Sabbaths, or by
occasion of a vow, the man made conscience of going before the Sabbath were
ended, or the days of his vow finished. A thing indeed to be made conscience
of, men ought not to depart from Gods house till holy services be finished, a
duty that even the Prince must make conscience of. Ezekiel. 46. 10. Who therefore
would not judge this Edomite a conscionable Proselyte. I, but why then makes
he no conscience of lying. Psa. 25. Why no conscience of being isntrumental
to Saul's Injustice in that barbarous villainy of slaying, not only innocent
men, but innocent Priests of the Lord? Such were the consciences of the chief
Priests. Mat. 27. 6. How like honest conscionable men they speak? It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
Sure it is great conscience ought to be made of bringing the price of blood
into the Temple treasure; Are they not then men of good Conscience, It is not
lawful, ye see they will not do that which is not lawful. It is well, but
tell me, is it not lawful to take the price of blood, and is it lawful to give
a price for blood? Ought there not a conscience Qualis haec innocentiae
simulatio? pecuniam sanguinis non mittere in Arcam, and ipsum sanguinem mittere
in Conscientiam. August.
to be made of blood, as well as of the price of blood? They make a Conscience
of receiving the price of blood into the treasury, they make no Conscience of
receiving the guilt of blood into their Consciences. Just such consciences as
they had. Ioh. 18. 28. They would not go into the Judgment hall lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. Indeed a man should
make great conscience of preparation to the Sacrament, and take great heed that
he come not thither defiled; But see their naughty conscience. They make
conscience of being defiled by going into the Judgment hall, but make no
conscience of being defiled with the blood of an Innocent. Such was the
conscience of the Jews. Ioh. 19. 31. they make Conscience of the body of
Christ hanging upon the Cross on the Sabbath, but with what Conscience have
they hanged it on the Cross at all? This was just like to those that Socrates
speaks of, who made great conscience of keeping holy days, yet made no
conscience of uncleanness, that was but an indifferent thing with them. As if
Conscience were not rather to be made of keeping our vessels in holiness, our
bodies, then days holy? Remarkable in this kind is that dealing of the Jews
with Paul. 2 Cor. 11. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes
save one. If we look into the Law. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. 2. 3. it runs thus, If there
be a Controversy, etc. and it shall be if the wicked man be worthy to be
beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face according to his fault by a certain number, forty stripes he may give
him and not exceed. Now see the good conscience of these Jews, they might give
forty stripes, but not beyond that number might they go. Now they make so much
conscience of exceeding the number of forty, that they give Paul but nine and
thirty. Thus they make Conscience of the number, but no conscience of the
fact. They make conscience of giving about forty, but with what conscience do
they give him any at all. The text not only prescribes the number of stripes,
but the condition of the person, namely, that he be worthy to be beaten, and he
must be punished according to his fault. Now see these men make Conscience of
the law for the number, but make no conscience of the law, that will have only
wicked men, and such as are worthy to be beaten, to be so used. These be the
good consciences of wicked men, they make seem of making conscience in some
one thing, but make no conscience of ten others, it may be of far greater
weight, and necessity, and herein discover they the naughtines of their
consciences. The conscience therefore is not to be judged good for one, or some
good actions. Ioab turned not after Absalom, but he turned after Adoniah. 1
King. 2. 28. Whereas a good conscience that turns neither to the right hand
nor to the left, would have turned neither after Adoniah no^ Absalom. A good
conscience and a good conversation must go together. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Having a
good conscience, that they may be ashamed that falscly accuse your good
conversation. One good action makes not a good conversation, nor a good
Conscience, but then a man's conversation may be said to be good, when in his
whole course he is careful to do all good duties, and to avoid all sins, and
such a good conversation is a sign of a good Conscience.

To do some good things, and not all, Nune autem in hoc mayor offensa est quod
partem sententiae sacrae pro commodorum nostrorum vtilitate deligimus, partem
pro dei iniuria praeterimu^, ^t maxim cu^ and terrestres domini nequa quam
aequo animo tolerandum putent si iussiones suas servi ex part audiant, and ex
part contemnant. Si enim pro arbitrio suo servi dominis obtemperant, ne in iis
quidem in quibus obtemperaverint, obsequuntur, etc. Salvian de provid 2. Note
of a good conscience. Conscience of small Duties.
is no more a sign of a good conscience, then to do some things only which
his master requires, and to neglect other some, is no sign of a good servant. A
good servants commendation is to do all his masters business he enioynes him.
We would hold him but an holy day servant, and an idle companion, that when
his master has set him his several works to do, he will do which him
pleases, and leave the other undone. This were not to do his masters, but to
do his own will, and to serve his own turn rather then his masters: So for a
man to make choice of duties, and to pick out some particulars, wherein he
will yield obedience to God, and to pass by others as not standing with his
profits, pleasures, and lusts, this will never gain a man the commendation of
a good Conscience, whose goodness must be known by making conscience of all
things. Then have Gods servants good Consciences, when it can be said of them
as Shaphan speaks of Josiah his servants. 2 Chronicles. 34. 16. All that was
committed to thy servants, they doc it.

2. To make conscience of small Duties, and small sins. This also rises out
of the text. All good Conscience. If of all things, then of small things. It
might have been comprehended under the former, but yet for Conviction sake I
distinguish them. The good Conscience makes not conscience only of great
duties, and sins, but even of the least, knowing that as Gods great power and
omnipotence is the same in the making of an Angel and a worm, so Gods
authority, wisdom and holiness is the same in the least Commandments as in
the greatest of them all. It makes conscience specially of Judgment, and the
weighty matters of the law, but yet does not therefore think it self
discharged of all care in smaller things, does not thereupon challenge a
dispensation from obedience in meaner matters, as if it were needless
scrupulosity, and too much preciseness to tithe Mint, Anise, and Cummin. A
Cummin-seed indeed is but a small thing, a very toy, but yet as small a thing,
and as light as it is, yet will it lie heavy upon a good Conscience, being
injuriously and fraudulently deteyned from the Levites. The Pharisees tythed
Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but they neglected the weighty matters of the Law. It
is no good Conscience that looks to small, and neglects great duties, neither
is it a good conscience on the other side that looks after the great and
weighty duties, and makes no reckoning of Mint and Anise. Our Savior says
both ought to be done. Pharaoh could be content that the people should go
sacrifice, but he cannot abide that Moses should be so peevishly precise, that
not an hoof shall be left behind. Alas, an hoof is but a toy, not worth the
mentioning, what need Moses be so strict as to stand upon an hoof? Yet a good
Conscience will stand upon it, having Gods Commandment, and will make
Conscience as well of carrying away hoofs as of whole bodies of cattle. It is
with a good Conscience as it is with the apple of the eye, of all the parts of
the body it is the most tender, not only of some great shiues, or splints
under the eyelid, but even the smallest hair and dust grieves, and offends
it. It is so with a tender good conscience, not only beams, but also moats
disquiet the eye of a good conscience, and not only greater, and fowler sins,
but even such as the world counts venial trifles do offend it. A good
Conscience strains not only at a camel, but at a gnat also. Neither does our
Savior blame the Pharisees simply for strayning at a Gnat, but for their
hypocrisy, who would pretend Conscience in smaller things, and mean while
made none in the greater; for otherwise a good conscience indeed has a narrow
passage for a Gnat, as well as for a Camel. The least corn of gravel galls
his foot that has a straight shoe, but he that has a large wide shoe,
slopping about his foot, it is no trouble to him. It is just so with
Consciences good and evil.

A Gnat is but a small thing, yet Pope Hadrian the fourth was choakt with a
Bal. page of Popes page 97.
Gnat, and one fly though but a small thing to a whole box of ointment, yet
dead flies as small things as they are, cause the ointment of the Apothecary to
send forth a stinking savor. Eccl. 10. 1. and so does a little folly, though
but little do a great deal of hurt. And therefore a good conscience lives by
Salomons rule, Give not water a passage, no not a little. And takes not only
the Foxes, but the little Foxes, which spoil not only the Vines, but the
tender Grapes. Cant. 2. 15. It knows a little will make way for much. Pharaoh
is content that the people, the men should go Sacrifice, Exodus 10. but their
little ones should not go. he knew if he had but their little ones with him,
he should be sure enough of their return, therefore Moses will not only have
the men go, but their little ones also. And therefore a good conscience deals
with Satan as Marcus Arethusius Putantes paupere^ vel medietate^ petebant
pecuniaru^, no vissime vel paucu^ aliquid exigebant. Quibus ait, nec obolum
vnum pro omnibus da bo. Hist. Tripart. l. 6. c. 12. Ad impietatem inquit,
obolu^ confer vnum perinde valet ac si quis conferat omnia. Theodoroit. l. 3.
cap. 7,
dealt with his tormentours, who having pulled down an Idolatrous Temple, and
being urged by them to give so much as would build it up again, refused it;
They urged him to give but half, he still refused; They urged him at last to
give but a little toward it, but he refused to give them so much as one
halfe-penny, No not an halfe-penny says he, for it is as great wickedness to
confer one halfe-penny in case of Impiety, as if a man should bestow the
whole. What was a poor halfpenny, it was a very small matter; specially
considering in what torture he was, from which an halfpenny gift would have
released him. Indeed an halfpenny is but a little, but yet it is more then a
good conscience dares give to the maintenance of idolatrous worship. A good
conscience will not give so much as a farthing token to such an use, as little
a thing as it is. For he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful
also in much, and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much Luc.
16. 10. Even the least things are as great trials of a good conscience as the
greatest. A good conscience will not gratify Satan, nor neglect God, no not in
a little.

Put men's consciences now upon this trial. Who cracks not of his good
conscience, there be none if they may be believed, but they have goood
consciences. But why are they good? They can swallow no Camells. Well yield
them that, though if their entrals were well searched, a man might find huge
bunch backed camells, that have gone down their gullets. They can swallow no
camells, but what say they to gnats, can they swallow them? Tush, Gnats are
nothing, whole swarms of them can go down their throats, and they never once
cough for the matter. Foul and gross scandalls, such as are infamous amongst
mere heathen, such Camels they swallow not, but what say they to unsavory and
naughty thoughts, which their hearts prosecute with delight, what say they to
them? Gnatts do not swarm more abundantly in the fennes, then such vile
thoughts do in their hearts. The prodigious oaths of wounds, and blood, the
damned language of Ruffians, and the Monsters of the earth, oh their hearts
would tremble to have such words pass out of their mouths, but yet what say
they to the neater, and Civilified Complements of Faith and Troth, tush these
are trifles, mere Gnatts, alas, that you shall stand upon such niceties. To
rob a man upon the high way, or to break up a man's house in the night, this is
a monstrous Camel, but in buying and selling to ouer-teach a neighbor a
shilling or two, a penny or two, what say they to that, oh God forbid they
should be so strictly dealt withal, that is a small thing, their throats are
not so narrow but these Gnats will go down easily enough. To bear false
witness in a open Court of Justice, or to be guilty of pillory perjury, these be
foul things, but to lie a little for a man's advantage, or to make another man
merriment, what think they of this? This is a very Gnat, they are ashamed to
strain thereat. Tell many a man of his sin in which he lies, that his sin
and a good conscience cannot stand together, what is his answer, but as Let of
Zoar, It is not a little one. Genesis 19. 20. But the truth is, that these little
ones are great evidences of evil Conscience. It is but a dream to think our
Consciences good that make no Conscience of small sins, and duties.

The conscionable Nazarite, Now did not only make conscience of guzzling and
quaffing whole cups of wine, but of eating but an husk, and a kernel of a
Grape. What a trifle is the kernel of a Grape, and yet a good conscience will
care to please God as well in abstinence from the kernel as from the cup.
Indeed when David had defiled and hardened his conscience with his adultery,
then he could cut Vriahs throat, and his heart smites him not for it, but when
under his affliction, his conscience was tender and good, his heart smites him
but for cutting Saul's coat. 1. Sam. 24. 5. See the nature of a good
conscience, it will smite not only for cutting Saul's throat, but for cutting
Saul's coat, but for an appearance, upon a suspicion, and but a jealousy of
evil.

Paul speaks of a pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Now it is with a pure conscience
as it is with pure religion. Iam. 1. 17. Pure religion and undefiled, is to
keep a man's self unspotted of the world. It hates not only wallowing with
the Sow in the mire, but is shy of very spots; and hates not only the flesh
but the garment, not only that is grossly besmeared, but which is but spotted
with the flesh. Jude 23. according to that Ceremonial, Levit. 15. 17. And this
is that which differences civilitie and a good conscience, Civiltie shunnes
mire, but is not so trim as to wash off spots, this is the pure Religion of a
pure Conscience. Pure Religion and undefiled, is to keep a man's self
unspotted, therefore they who are not unspotted, are not undefiled, but if
their Consciences be but spotted, yet are they defiled. Men's Consciences are
as their Religion is, and pure Religion is spotless.

Yea to close this point, the greatest evidence of a good conscience is in
making conscience of small things. Whilst men fear great sins, or are careful
of Probat enim etiam in maiorib* si r^^ ^xigat executorem se ido^eum fore a qu^
minora co^pleantur. Salvi^n* de provid. l. 3.
maine duties, it may be their reputation and credit may sway them, which
otherwise would be impeached. So that in them it may be a question, whether it
be conscience or credit, that is the first moover, but in small things where
there is no credit to be had, nay, for scrupling whereof, a man may rather
receive some discredit from the world, here it is more evident that good
conscience sets a man on. This then is a note of a good conscience, to make
Conscience, as of small duties, so of small sins, as he that fears poison
fears to take a drop, as well as a draught, and men fear not only when a
firebrand is thrust into, but when a spark lights upon their thatch.

CHAP. VIII.
Three other notes of a good Conscience.

A Third note of a good Conscience may be this. It loves and likes a Ministry
and such Ministers as preach 3. Note of good conscience. To love a Ministry
that speaks home to the Conscience.
and speak to the Conscience. It likes such a dispensation of the Word as
comes home to it* whether for direction or reproof. The Word is the rule of
conscience, and a good conscience is desirous to know the rule it must live by.
The Word must judge the conscience, this every good conscience knows, and
therefore grudges not to be reprooved by it, as knowing that if it will not
abide the Words reproof, it must abide the Words judgment. Therefore a man
with a good conscience speaks as Samuel, Speak Lord, thy servant hears. He
can suffer the words of exhortation, and not count himself to suffer whilst it
is done. He is of David's mind, Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a
kindness; let him reprove me and it shall be an excellent oil which shall not
break mine head. Psalm. 141. 5. It is with good conscience as with good eyes
that can abide the light, and can delight in it, whereas sick and sore eyes
are troubled and offended therewith. A sound heart is like sound flesh that can
abide not only touching, but also rubbing and chafing, and yet a man will not
be put into a chafe thereby, whereas contrarily if the least thorn or
unsoundness be therein, a Tu scis Deus noster quod tunc de Alipioab illa
peste sa nando non cogitaverim. At ille in se rapuit meque illud non nisi
prop^er se dixisse credidit, and quod alius acciperet ad succensendum mihi
accepit honestus adolescens ad succensendum sibi, and ad me ardentius
diligendum. Aug. conf. li. 6. ca. 7*
touch at unawares prouokes a man, if not to smite, yet to angry words, and
language of displeasure. Unsound flesh loves to be stroakt, and to be handled
gently, the least roughness puts into a rage. That is the ingenuitie of a good
Conscience, which was the good disposition of Alipius, when he was unwittingly
taxed by Angustine for his Theatricall vanities; he was so far from being
angry with him, though he conceined him purposely to aim at him, that he was
rather angry with himself, and loved Augustine so much the better.

Put men's Consciences upon this trial, and we shall see what the Consciences of
most men are. Let a man preach in an unprofitable manner, let him spend himself
in idle curiosities and speculalations, let him be in combat with obsolete or
foreign heresies, so long their Minister is a fair and a good Churchman. But
let him do as God comma^ds Ezekiel to do, Ezekiel. 14. 4. Answer them according
to their Idols, preach to their necessities, let them call them and press them
to holy duties, and reprove them Scio me of fensurum quam plurimos qui
generalem de vitiis disputation^m in suam referunt contumeliam, et dum mihi
irascuntur sua^ iudicant conscientiam, multoque prius de se quam de me
iudicant. Hieron. ad Rustic. Monach.
for their unholy practices, and make known unto them what evil Consciences
they have: what then is their carriage and behavior? Even that Amos 5 10. They
hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly.
This Ministry that comes to the Conscience will not down with them. It lets in
too much light upon them, and Ahab hates Michaiah for drawing the curteines so
wide open, he cannot endure such punctual and particular preaching that
clappes so close to his Conscience. A plain sign that Ahab has a rotten and
an unsound Conscience. Michaiah could not be more punctual with Ahab then
Isaiah was with Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 6. 7. And yet what says Ezekiah? Good is
the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, as if he had said, a good Sermon,
a good Preacher, all good. Whence comes this good entertainment of so harsh a
message! Hezekiah had a good Conscience, and therefore though the message went
against the hair, yet he could give good words, Let the rightious smite me,
and it shall be a kindness, Psalm. 141. I, but that is when the righteous
smites the righteous, what if the Prophet smite Amaziah? He will threaten to
smit him again, 2. Chron. 25. 16. For bear, why should thou be smitten?
What if Paul preach of a good Conscience, and so make Ananias his Conscience to
smite him? Ananias will command the standers by to smite him on the mouth. Now
let all the standers by judge whether Ananias have any good Conscience in him,
who cannot brook the preaching of good Conscience. Let men profess they know
God as long as they will, yet if they slight the word, or swell at it, or be
disobedient to it when it is laid to their Conscience, Paul makes it a manifest
sign of a defiled conscience, Tit. 1. 15. 16. Their mind and their conscience
is defiled. How appears that? They profess they know God, but they are
disobedient. When therefore the Ministry of the Word shall charge thee with
duty, or reproove thee for sin, and then thou shall charge the Minister with
railing, and girding and that this Sermon was made for the nonce for thee, and
thou likest not that Ministers should be so particular, etc. In Gods fear be
advised to look to thy Conscience, and know it that thou have a naughty
Conscience. When the Ministry of the Word smites thy conscience, then for thee
to smite the Minister with reproachful, and disgraceful terms, to smite him
with thy mouth* How is thy Conscience better then Ananias his, that commands to
smite Paul on the mouth. He that cannot brook that Gods Ministers should not
discharge a good Conscience in preaching to the Conscience, be bold to
challenge that man for a man of an evil conscience.

4. That is a fourth note of a good 4 4. Note of a good Conscience. To do duty
for Conscienre sake.
conscience, Romans 13. 5. ye must be subject for Conscience sake. To do good or
abstain from evil merely for conscience sake, is a note of a right good
conscience indeed. Conscience as we saw before, does excite and stir up, and
bind to the doing of good, and binds from the doing of evil. Now when the
Conscience upon just information from the Word shall press, and forbid, and
then a man shall, because conscience forbids, forbear; or because it presses,
perform obedience: thus to do good, or not to do evil, for Conscience sake,
is a note of a good Conscience. It evidences a good Conscience when the maine
weight that sets the wheels on work, is conscience of Gods commandment. When
it is that, Psalm. 119. 4. that sets a man on work, Thou have commanded us to
keep thy precepts diligently. The end of the commandment is love, 1 Timothy 1.
5. And love is the fulfilling of the commandment. Romans 12. But what love? From
a pure heart and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. When conscience of the
commandment caries a man to the fulfilling of the end of it, then does such
love come from a good Conscience. Salomons description of a good man, Eccl. 9.
2. is that he fears an oath. He says not, that swearth not; but that fears
an oath. For a man not to swear may be the fruit of good education, and of the
a we a man has stood in of his Governors, but to fear an oath, argues that a
man fears the commandment, Pro. 13. 13, and to fear the commandment is the
note of a good conscience.

Here let men's Consciences be tried. Thou prayest in thy family, hear the
Word, keep the Sabbath, etc. Now search thine heart, and make inquiry what
it is that carries thee to these duties. Do thou do them for conscience
sake? Do thou find conscience to urge and press thee, and to give
satisfaction to the Conscience, and obedience to the injunctions thereof. Are
these things done? If so, it is a sign of a good Conscience. But this
discovers the naughtiness of men's Consciences, who though they be sound in
some good duties, or in the avoiding of some evils, yet is it not conscience
that works them thereto. Ye must be subject not only for wrath, that is,
for fear of the Magistrates wrath and revenge, but for Conscience sake, Romans
13. 5. It is no good Conscience when a man will be subject for his skins sake,
and least he smart by the Magistrates sword, but then a man's Conscience is
good, when in obedience to Gods Word, and in conscience of his Commandment he
subjects. The like may be said of all by-ends. Ye must do good duties, not for
profit, not for credit, not for vaineglory, not for law, but for conscience
sake; or else evil consciences ye have in that ye do. The Shechemites receive
circumcision, Genesis 34. And is not circumcision Gods Ordinance? And is it not
joy of them that they will join to the Church, and profess the true Religion?
Yes surely, if it were done for conscience. I, but it is not done for
conscience sake? Alas no such matter, but for Hamors sake the Lord of the
Town, and for Shechems sake their young Master, and for the hope of gains
sake. Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs
be ours? Genesis 34. 23. For the oxen sake, and not for conscience sake are the
Shechemites circumcised. Shechem for Dinahs sake receives the Sacrament. Oh the
zeal and forwardnes that some will profess on a sudden, What frequenters of
holy exercises? But what, is it for conscience sake? No such matter, but
Shechem is in hope of a match with Dinah, and all these shows of Religion are
neither for Gods sake, nor conscience sake, but all for Dinahs sake, all under
hope of preferment by a rich marriage. They were goodly shows of zeal, John 6.
22. 24. in seeking and following after Christ, but it was neither for Christ,
nor conscience sake, but ver. 26. for the loaves, and the bread, and their
bellies sake.

Many of the Heathens, Esth. 8. 17. turned Jews. Was not there joy of such
Proselytes? not a whit, for not the fear of God, but the fear of the Jews
fell upon them, as many frequent the public assemblies more for fear of the
statute, then for fear of the commandment. The Officers of the King helped
the Jews, Esth. 9. 3. Was it for conscience sake? Nothing less, but for wrath
sake and for fear, because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.

If the Pharisees had done all that ( Mat. 6.) for Conscience sake, which they
did for vainglory sake, they had had the glory of good Consciences. Many
preached the Gospel in Paul's days, Phil. 1. Does not so good a work argue a
good conscience? Yes, if it had been done for Conscience sake; but that was
done for contention sake, not to add souls to the Church; but to add
sorrows to Paul's afflictions.

It is a note of good Conscience when that which we do is done with a respect
unto the commandment of God Psalm. 119. 6. and not with a squint respect unto
our own private, for praise or profit. It was a good argument of those
Bohemians good Consciences in Vtrine m^ioris h^retici illine qui pictas and
lig^^as an qui aureas and argenteas imagines ^ templis exigerent, and ad
conflandam m^netam igne adorerent? Dubra* hist. Bohem. l. 24.
plucking down Images, that they beat down only painted and wooden Images,
whilst Sigismund the Emperor pulled down silver and golden ones, to melt
into money for pay for his soldiers, as they plead for themselves, when they*
were held Heretics for their fact. If they had pulled down such Images as he
did, they might have been thought to have done it for gain, and not for
Conscience sake.

How great is often the zeal of many against fashions, and such vanities? How
well it were if it were for Conscience sake, and not for envy against some
particular person, whom they do distaste, and so for the person, the vanity.
For if it be for Consciences sake, how is it that those vanities, such great
offenses to their Consciences, found in some distasted persons are yet no
trouble to their Consciences, being the very same, if not worse in their own
favorites, and associates? Judge whether such zeal come from Conscience, or
from corrupt affection, whether it be not more against the person, then against
the sin. 5 5* Note of a good conscience. Holy boldness. B^na conscientia
prodire vult, and co^spici ipsas nequitia tenebras timet, Senec. ep. 98. Qui
non deliquit decet audacem esse and confidente^r prose, and proterve loqui.
Plaut. in Aniph.


5. We have a fifth note of a good conscience in the text. And Paul earnestly
beholding the Council. Here is a mark of a good Conscience in his looks, as
well as in his words; in his face, as well as in his speech. Paul is here
convented before the Council, With what face is he able to behold them? And
Paul earnestly beholding the Council. A good Conscience makes a man hold up
his head even in the thickest of his enemies. I can look them in the faces,
and outface a whole rabble of them assembled on purpose to cast disgrace on
it. That may be said of a man with a good Conscience, which is spoken of some
of David's men, 1 Chronicles. 12. 8. Whose faces were like the faces of Lions, for
the righteous is bold as a Lion, Pro. 28. 1. Now might Paul truly have said as
David. Psalm. 57. 4. My soul is among Lions, I lie among them that are set on
fire. And now how fares he? what is he all a mort? looks he pale and blanke,
does he sneake or hang down his head, or droope with a dejected countenance:
No, Paul is as bold as a Lion, and can face these Lions, and earnestly fix his
countenance upon the best of them. A good Conscience makes a man's face as God
had made Ezekiels. Ezekiel. 3. 8. 9. Behold I have made thy face strong against
their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. As an Adamant
harder then flint have I made thy sorehead, fear them not, neither be dismayed
at their looks. Such hartening and hardening comes also from a good
Conscience. A good Conscience makes a man go, as the Lord in another sense
tells Israel he had done for them, Levit. 26. 13. I have made you go upright.
A good conscience erects a man's face, and looks, is no sneaking slinker, but
makes a man go upright. As contrarily guilt, deiects both a man's spirits, and
his looks, and unless a man have a Sodomiticall impudency. Isa. 3. 9. or an
whores forehead, Ierem. 3. 3. which refuses to be ashamed, makes him hang
down the head.

Paul fixes his eyes here, and looks earnestly upon them, but what if they had
looked as earnestly upon him? yet would not his good Conscience have been
out-fac^d. See Act. 6. 15. All that sat in the Counsel looked steadfastly on
him; namely on Steven. If but the high Priest alone had faced him, it had been
somewhat, but all that sat in the Council look steadfastly on him. Surely one
would think such a presence were able to have damped, and utterly to have
dashed him out of countenance. But how is it with him? Is he appalled? Is he
damped? They saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel, says the
text. As wisdom, Eccl. 8. 1. so a good Conscience makes the face to shine. A
good Conscience has not only a Lions, but an Angels face, it has not only a
Lion-like boldness, but an Angelical dazzling brightness, which the sick and
sore eyes of malice can as ill endure to behold, as the Isralites could the
shining brightness of Moses face. The face of a good Conscience tells enemies
that they are malicious liars. And no wonder that a good conscience has such
courage and confidence in the face, standing before a whole Council, when it
shall be able to hold up it head with boldness before the Lord himself, at
that great day of the general Judgment. Even then shall a good Conscience
have a bold face.

CHAP. IX.
Two other, and the last notes of a good Conscience.

A Sixth note of a good Conscience 6 6. Note of a good Conscience. To suffer for
conscience.
follows, namely, that which we have, 1 Pet. 2. 19. When a man for Conscience
toward God endures grief, suffering wrong. A good conscience had rather that
Ananias should smite, then it self should. Ananias his blows are nothing to
the blows of Conscience. Ananias may make Paul's cheeks glowe, but conscience
gives such terrible buffets, as will make the stoutest heart in the world to
ache. That will pinch, and twitch, and gird the heart with such griping throws,
that all the blows, and tortures that Ananias his cruel heart can invent are
nothing to them.

Now therefore a man that sets any store by a good conscience, will not part
with the Peace or Integrity thereof upon any terms. He rates the goodness of
his Conscience far above all carthly things. Wealth, liberty, wife,
children, life it self, all are vile, and cheap in comparison of it. And
therefore a man of a good Conscience, will endure any grief, and suffer any
wrong to keep his conscience good toward God. Such a good Conscience had
Daniel. Dan. 1. 8. He purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the Kings meat. That is, he was fully settled, and resolved
in his Conscience, come what would come, he would not do that which would not
stand with a good conscience. But what if he could have gotten no other meat?
Without all doubt he would rather have starved, then have defiled his
Conscience with that meat. He would have lost his life rather then have lost
the Peace, and Integrity of his Conscience. It seems a question of great
difficulty, which was put to the three Children, Dan, 3. Whether they will
give the bowing of their bodies to the golden Idol, or the burning of their
bodies to the fiery Furnace. But yet they find no such difficulty therein,
they were not careful to answer in that matter. ver. 16. Of the two fires they
choose the coolest, and the easiest. The fire of a guilty conscience is seven
times hotter, and more intolerable then the fire of Nebucadnezzars Furnace,
though it be heated seven times more then it is wont to be heated.

If the question come between life and good Conscience, that one of the two
must be parted withal, it is an hard case. Life is wondrous sweet and
precious. Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life.
I^b 2. 4. What then should a man do in such an hard case? Hear what is the
resolution of a good Conscience. Act. 20. 24. My life is not dear unto me, so
that I may fulfill my Ministration with joy. And wherein lay his Joy, but in
his good Conscience. 2. Cor. 1. 12. It is all one as if he had said, I care not
to loose my life to keep a good Conscience* A good Conscience in that passage
of the Apostle. 1 Timothy 1. 19. is secretly compared to a ship. Now in a tempest
at Sea, when the question is come to this, whether the goods shall be cast out,
or the Ship be cast away, what do the Mariners? See Act. 27. 18. 38. They
lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the Sea. The Mariners will
turn the richest Commodities over boo^d to save the ship, for they know if the
ship be cast away, then themselves are cast away. Thus it is with a man that
has a good conscience, when the case comes to this pinch, that either his
outward Comforts, or his inward Peace must wrack, he will cheerfully cast the
wheat into the Sea, will part with all earthly commodities and comforts, before
he will rush, and wrack his conscience upon any rock. He knows if the ship be
wrackt, if his Conscience be cracked, that then himself, and his soul is in
danger of being cast away, and therefore he will throw away all to save
conscience from being split upon the rocks and being swallowed up in the sands.

There is as great a difference between a good conscience, and all outward
things even unto life it, self, as is between the arm, and the head or heart.
The brain and the heart are vital parts, therefore when the head is in danger
to be cleft, or the heart to be thrust through, a man will not stand
questioning whether he were best adventure his hand, or his arm to save his
head, or his heart, but either of these being in danger, the hand and the arm
presently interpose themselves to receive the blow, and put themselves in
danger of being wounded, or cut off, rather then the head or heart should be
pierced. A man may have his hand, or arm cut off, and yet may live, but a
wound in the brain or heart is mortal. It is so in this case. A good
Conscience values its own peace above all the world, It is that wherein a
Christians life lies, therefore he will suffer the right hand or foot to be cut
off, and loose all rather then expose Conscience to danger* A man may go to
heaven with the loss of a limb, and though he halt. Mat. 18 8. but if a man
loose his life, if Conscience be lost, all is lost. A man may go to heaven
though he loose riches, liberty, life, but if a good Conscience be lost, there
is no coming thither. All things compared to Conscience are as far beneath
it, as the least finger beneath the head. He were a mad man that would suffer
his skull to be cleft to save his little finger, nay but the paring of his
nail. And yet the world is full of such mad men, that suffer conscience to
receive many a deep wound and gash, to save those things which in comparison of
good Conscience, are but as the nail parings to the head.

Try men's Consciences here, and we shall find them exceeding short. A good
Conscience will endure any grief, and suffer any wrong rather then suffer the
loss of its own peace. God commands Amaziah. 2. Chro. 25 to put away Israel,
oh! but what shall I do for mine hundred Talents? Tush, what are an hundred
Talents? A good Conscience in yielding obedience to God is a richer treasure
then the East and West Indies. And yet how many be there that will craze their
Conscience an hundred times before they will lose one Talent by obedience to
God, out of a care to keep a good Conscience. A talent? nay, that is too
deep, never put them to that cost, they will sell a good conscience, not for
gaining, but for the taking of a farthing token. God and good conscience say,
Sanctify the Sabbath. Possibly some halfepenny customer comes to a Tradesmans
Shop on a Sabbath, and asks the sale of such, or such a commodity. Now the
man's conscience tells him of the commandment, tells him what God looks for,
tells him it cannot stand with his peace to make markets on that day, etc. But
then he tells conscience, that if he be so precise, he may loose a customer, and
if he loose his customers, he may shut up his Shopwindowes. An Inne-keepers
conscience tells him that it is fitter that he should be attending Gods
service at his house on his day, the^ that he should be waiting on his guests.
But then he replies to conscience, that then his takings will be but poor,
and this is the next way to pluck down his sign. So here lies a dispute
between conscience and Gain, which of these two must be parted with. If now in
this case a man will grow to this resolution. By Gods help I am resolved to
keep a good conscience in keeping Gods Commandment, and Sabbath, I will
rather loose the best customer I have, and the best guest I have, then the
peace of a good conscience. If I beg, I beg, I I will say of my customers as
Jacob of his children. Genesis 43. 14. If I am bereaved of them, I am bereaved. I
will trust God with my estate, before I will hazard my conscience; Give me
such a man, such a Tradesman, and I will be bold to say he is a man of a good
conscience. But contrarily, when men are so set upon Gain, that so they may
have it they care not how they come by it, they will dispense an hundred times
with their obedience to God if any thing be to be had, if these have good
consciences let any judge. How would such loose their blood and lives, that
will not loose such trifling gains for the safety of their conscience. We have
not yet resisted unto blood, the more we owe to God, that know not what that
resistance means. Alas, how would those resist unto blood that set Conscience
to sale upon so base prises as they do.

Peter speaks of a fiery trial. 1. Pet. 4. 12. If God should ever bring that
trial amongst us, what a company of drossie consciences would it find out. We
have no fiery trial, we have but an ayrie trial only, and yet how many evil
consciences it discouers. Many a man could find in his heart to pray in his
family, to frequent good exercises, and company, he is convinced in his
conscience, that thus he should do, and conscience presses him to it. But why
then are not these things done? A Lion is in the way. He shall loose the good
word, and opinion of the world, he shall have so many frowns, and frumpes, and
censures, and scoffers, that he cannot buckle to this course. Many are in
Zedekiah his case; he was convinced in his conscience, that he ought, and it
was his safest course to go out to the Chaldeans; questionles his conscience
pressed ^im to it, and bids him go out. Why then goes he not? He is afraid. Ier.
38. 19. that he shall be mocked. Such consciences as will not prefer their
own good word and comfort, before the good or ill words of the world, Such
consciences as more fear the mockes and flouts of men on earth, then they do
the grinning mockes of the Devils in hell, Such as will not prefer the peace
of Conscience before all other things, are mere strangers to good Conscience.

The seventh and last note remains. 7 7. Note of a good Conscience.
And that is in the Text; Until this day. Constancy and perseverance in good,
is a Constancy in good.
sure note of a good conscience. Paul had been young, and now was old, and yet
was old Paul still, still the same holy man he was. Time changes al things but
a good conscience, and that is neither changed by Time, nor with Time. Age
changes a man's favor, but not a good man's faith, his complexion, not his
religion, and though the head turn gray, yet the heart holds vigorous still.

Until this day.] And this day was not far from his dying day. And how held
he out to his last day. Hear as it were his last and dying breath. 2. Tim. 4.
7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. He says not, I have finished my faith, I have kept my life, as many
may, but I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. He kept his faith
till he had finished his course, not only here, until this day, but there
until his finishing day. So long he kept the faith, and therefore so long a
good conscience, for as the loosing of them go together. 1. Tim. 1. 19 so the
keeping of them go together, therefore keeping the faith, he also kept a good
conscience till he finished his days.

Until this day. And yet one would wonder that he should keep it to this day,
considering how hardly he had bin used before, until, and now at this day.
The most of those things. 2. Cor. 11. 23. were before this day. Often under
stripes, in prisons often, and yet stands constant in the maintenance of the
liberty of his Conscience. verse. 24. 25. Thrice I suffered shipwreck, etc. and
yet made no shipwreck of a good conscience. verse. 26. 27. in a number of
perils, in peril of false brethren, and yet his conscience plays not false
with God, neither is it weary of going on in a religious course.

Here then is the nature of a good conscience, and the trial of it.

A good conscience holds out constantly in a good Cause without deflection, and
in a good Cause without defection.

1. In a good Cause. Let a good conscience undertake the defense of a good
Cause, and it will stand rightly to it, and neither grow weary, nor corrupt. It
will not make shows of countenancing Paul's cause till he come before Nero, and
then give him the slip, and give him leave to stand upon his own bottom, and
shift for himself as well as he can. A conscionable Magistrate, and a Judge,
who out of a conscience of the faithful discharge of his place, takes in hand
the defense of a good, or the punishment of a bad cause, will not leave it in
the suddes, will not be wrought by fear or favor, to let Innocence be thrust
to the walls, and Iniquity hold up the neb, but will stand out stiff, and
manifest the goodness of his Conscience in his Constancy.

2. In a good Course. A man that is once in a good Course, having a good
conscience, will neither be driven, nor be drawn out of that good way to his
dying day. There be tentations on the right hand, and there be tentations on
the left, but yet a good Conscience will turn neither way, Pro. 4. 27. but
keeps on foreright, and presses hard to the mark that is set before it. Try it
with tentations (...)t hand. Try it by the moc(...)s and derisions of others
whom it sees in good ways, will this stagger or stumble it, and make it start
aside? Not a whit, but it will go on with so much the more courage rather, Job
17. 6. 7. 8. 9. He has made me also a byword of the people, and aforetime I
was a Tabret. Was not this enough to shake others, to see such a prime man as
Job thus used, thus scorned and mocked? Not a whit; for all this. The righteous
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands, shall be stronger and
stronger.

Try it by mockings and derision Si reddere beneficium non aliter quam per
speciem iniuria poter^ aquissim^ animo ad honestum consiliu^ per mediam
infamiam te^dam-Nemo mihi videtur pluris astimare virtute^, nemo illi magis
esse d^votus qua^ qui boni viri famam ^erdidit ne conscientiam perderet. Sense.
epi. 82.
personal, by personal infamy and reproach, let a man's own self be
derided, be defamed, this will go nearer then the former, what will this move
him out of the way? No: He will lose his good name, before his good Conscience.
See Ps. 119. 51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I not
declined from thy law. And though Michol. 2. Sam. 6. play the flouting fool,
yet David will not play the declining fool, but if to be zealous, be to be a
fool, he will be yet more vile. And though Jeremy was in derision daily, and
every one mocked him, yea, and defamed him, yet he was rather the more then the
less zealous. Ier. 20. 7. 9. 10. The righteous, Ps. 125. 1. are like Mount
Sion that cannot be removed, but abides for ever. What likelihood that a puff
of breath should remove a Mountain? When men can blow down Mountains with
their breath, then may they scof a good* conscience out of the ways of
godliness and sincerity. Mount Sion, and a good conscience abide for ever.

But these happily may be thought lighter trials, put a good conscience to
some more smarting, and bleeding trials then th^se pe^tier ones are, and yet
there shall we find it as Constant as in the former*

Let the Lord give the Sabaeans, Chaldaeans, and Satan leave to spoil Job of
his goods, and children, will not then Job give up his Integrity, do ye not
think that he will curse God to his face? So indeed the devil hopes. Job 1.
1^. But what is the issue? What gets the devil by the trial? Only gives God
argument of triumph against him in Jobs Constancy. Job 2. 3. And still he
holds fast his Integrity. As if he had said, See for all that thou can do,
in spite of all thy spite, and mischievous malice, he holds fast his
Integrity until this day. See the terrible* trials, to which they were put.
Heb. 11. 37. They were stoned* sawne asunder, etc. and yet all could not make
them shake hands with a good Conscience. The rain, floodes, and winds, could
not bring down the house founded upon the rock, Math. 7. Notwithstanding all
trials a good Conscience stands to it, and holds it own, and speaks as one
Father Rawlins did to the Bishop, Rawlings Acts and Mon.
you left me, Rawlins you find me* and Rawlins by Gods grace I will continue.

Try yet a good Conscience farther with the tentations on the right hand, which
commonly have as much more strength in them above the other, as the right hand
has above the left, and yet we shall find the right hand too weak to pluck a
good Conscience out of its station.

It was a sore tentation wherewith Moses was assaulted. The treasures, and
pleasures, the honors and savors of the Egyptian Court, and Princess. All
these woo him, not to go to the people of God. Had that people been settled
and at rest in Canaan, yet had it bin a great tentation to prefer Egypt
before Canaan. But the people are in Egypt, in affliction, in bondage, therefore
so much the more strength in the tentation. What will you be so mad to leave
all for nothing* certain honors, for certain afflictions? who can tell but
you may be raised to this greatness to be an instrument of good to your people!
you by your favor in the Court may be a means to ease them of their bondage,
and so you may do the Church service with your greatness, etc, Here was a
tentation on the right hand, and with the right hands strength. Well and how
speeds it? Is Moses able to withstand it? See Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26. He refused
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, etc. All would not do, nor stir
him a whit. Those faithful Worthies before mentioned, could not be stirred
with all the cruelties their adversaries could invent. I, but it may be a
tentation on the right hand, might have made them draw away the right hand of
fellowship from a good Conscience. Well, their enemies therefore will try what
good they can do that ways. Heb. 11. 37. They were tempted, that is, on the
right hand, they were solicited and enticed, and allured with fair promises
of honors, favors, preferments, as B^nner used to deal with the Martyrs, he
had sometimes butter and oil, as well as fire and faggot, in his mouth. Thus
were they tempted, but yet what auayled these tentations? Just as much as their
stones, sawes, swords, prisons, all alike. They for all these tentations keep
a good Conscience to their dying day, and hold fast the faith and truth unto
the end.

A good conscience is of the mind of those trees in Iothams parable. Judge. 9.
It will not with the Olive lose its fatness, nor with the Figtree lose its
sweetness, nor with the Vine its wine of cheerfulness, to have the fattest, and
sweetest preferments and pleasures of the world, no though it were to reign
over the trees.

It was an excellent resolution of Benevolus Benevolo Iustina praecepit vt
adversus fide^ patru^ imperialia decreta dictaret Illo vero se impia verba
prolaturum abnuente celsiorem bonoris gradu^ spospondit si mandata perficeret,
cui Bonevolus. Quid mihi pro impietatis mercede altiore^ promittis gradum? hune
ipsum que^ habeo, auferte du^ integram fidei conscientiam tuear. Ac protinus
cingulum ante^pedes eius abiec^ Sigon. de ^ccid. Imp l. ^. page 200.
in his answer to Iustina the Arrian Empress, profering preferments to him to
have been isntrumental in a service which could not be done with a good
Conscience. What do ye promising me an higher degree of preferment for a
reward of impiety? yea even take this from me which already I have, so that I
may keep a good Conscience. And so forthwith he threw at her feet his girdle,
the ensign of his honor. Thus does a good conscience throw and trample honor
and preferment under foot to maintain its own integrity? Thus can nothing
corrupt a good conscience. I have been young, and now am old, and yet never saw
I the righteous forsaken, to wit, of God, Psalm. 37. David out of his
experience could have said as much in this point, I have bin young and now am
old, yet never saw I God, and godliness forsaken by the righteous, by the man
that had a good conscience. But the man that had a good conscience when he was
young, will hold out and have it when he is old. It is the great honor and
grace of a good conscience which Walden thinks he spoke to the disgrace of
Wickliffe, Ita vt Cano placeret quod inveni complacebat, He was young and old,
one and the Fox Acts and Mon.
same man. Old age decays the body, the strength, the senses, but conscience
it touches not, that holds out sound to death. As of Christ in another sense,
Heb. 13. so may it be said of a good conscience in this, Yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever. A good Conscience is no changeling, but let a man's
estate change from rich to poor, from poor to rich, or let the times change
from good to evil, or from evil to worse; or a man's days change from young
to old, let his hairs and head change, yet among all these changes, a good
conscience will not change, but holds it own until its last day.

Now put men's Consciences upon this trial, and their inconstancy either in
good causes, or courses, will discover their naugtinesse. In a good cause how
many are like Darius? His conscience struggles a great while for Daniel, he
knew he was innocent, he knows the action to be unjust, and therefore labors
all day till the setting of the Sun for his deliverance, Dan. 6. 14. but yet
overcome with the Presidents and Princes vrgencie, ver. 16. he commands him to
the Lions Den. Here was a natural Conscience standing for equity and
justice, but yet no good conscience, it holds but till Sun set, and his
Conscience went down with the Sun. His Conscience yeeldes and is overcome,
though it know the act to be iniust.

Pilates Conscience makes him plead for Christ. In his conscience he acquits
him, and thrice solemnly professes that he finds no fault in him, and
therefore cannot in conscience condemn him, yea withal, seeks to release
him, John 19. 12. Is not here now a good Conscience? Indeed it had been so in
this particular fact, if his Conscience had been inflexible, and had held out.
But when Pilate hears them say, that if he be his friend, he is no friend to
Caesar, Ioh. 19. 12. and whilst withal he is willing to content the people,
Mark 15. 15. Now that there is fear on the one side, and a desire to curry
favor on the other, Where now is his conscience? Now he presently delivers him
to be crucified, though he knows in his Conscience that there is no fault in
him. What a good conscience has many a Judge, and Lawyer* How stiffely will
they stand in, and prosecute a just cause till a bribe come and puts out the
very eyes of their Conscience. Their Consciences are of so soft a temper, that
the least touch of Silver turns their edge presently. They hold out well till
their come a tentation on their right hand, that is, in their right hand. Psalm.
144. 8. Whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood. If once the right hand be a right hand of falsehood, the mouth will
soon speak vanity, though before it spoke Conscience. Who would not have
thought Baalam to have been a man of an excellent Conscience? If Balak would
give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the
Lord my God, to do less or more, Number. 22. 18. But yet besides that faltring
in those words, I cannot go, whereas the language of good conscience would
have been, I will not go; besides that I say, before he ends his speech, see
how the hope of promotions work, and works his Conscience like wax before the
fire, verse 19. Now therefore I pray you tarry here also this night, that I
may know what the Lord will say unto me more. A faltring inference: If his
Conscience had been good it would have inferred strongly thus, Now therefore I
pray get you gone, and trouble me no longer. He knew in his Conscience the
people ought not to be cursed, and that he ought not to go, and yet comes in
with, I pray tarry all night, etc. Truly Balak needed not to have been so
lavish and so prodigal, as to offer an house full, one handful of his Silver
and Gold will frame Balaams Conscience to any thing.

The like trial may be made of men's Consciences, by their inconstancy in good
courses, and this will condemn three sorts as guilty of evil consciences.

1. Such as sometimes being convinced of the necessity of good courses, do set
upon the practice of them, and begin to look toward Religion, and religious
duties, till meeting with some of their supposed wiser neighbors, they be
advised to take heed, they may bring themselves into greater note then they are
aware of, they will incur sharper censures then they think of, etc. and so
suddenly all is dashed, all is quasht and quenched. There is a disease among
beasts they call the Staggers, and it is a disease too frequent in men's
consciences, who sometimes are on, sometimes off, one day begin, and next day
cease good courses. That may be said of many men's consciences which Jacob
speaks of Reuben, Genesis 49. 4. Unstable as water. The water mooves as the winds
blow. If the wind blow out of the East, then it moves one way, if out of the
West then it moves another, the clean contrary, and upon every new wind a new
way. So many, let them hear a conuincing, and a good persuading Sermon moving
to good duties, then they will set upon them; let them again hear either some
mocks, or reproaches for those ways, or some sage advise from one they count
wise, against the ways of conscience, they are as far off again as ever.
These staggering, irresolute, and watery consciences are far from good ones.

2. Such as in their youth, or when the world was low with them, were very
zealous and forward; But what are they now at this day? True downeright
Demasses, zealous when they were young, but now old and cold: zealous when they
were mean, but now the world is come upon them, Demas-like they have forsaken
goodness, and embraced the world, have gotten now worme-eaten, and world-eaten
Consciences. The zeal of Gods house was wont to eat them up, but now the
world has eaten up them, and all their good Conscience.

3. Those that have made good the profane Proverb, Young Saints and old Devils,
whose hatred of Religion and good conscience is greater then ever was their
love thereto, as Ammons was toward Thamar, 2 Samuel 13. 15. They were zealous
and forward frequenters of Gods house and ordinances; zealous enemies against
swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, etc. But what are they at this day? Yesterday
indeed zealous professors of holiness, but what are they to day? To day
malicious scoffers of godliness, haters and opposers of goodness, the only
swearers and drunkards in a Country. What kind of consciences have these?
None of Paul's Conscience, I have lived in all good Conscience until this day.
What then? Just the consciences of Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19.
They once made great profession of Confcience, but now enemies to Paul, and
blasphemers, men, as Paul speaks, that had put away good Conscience, they did
not through want of watchfulnes let it slip, or steal away; but as if it would
never have been gone soon enough, they put and drove it away, (...), Beza
translates it, Qua expulsa. They used their Consciences as Ammon did Thamar
after his lust satisfied, 2 Sa^. 13. 15. 17. Arise, be gone, says he to her,
and when she pleades for her felfe, he calls his servant, and says unto him,
Put out this woman, and bolt the door after her, put her out so, as she may
be sure not to come again. They dealt with their Consciences as Colleges
deal with Rake-hels, expelled them without all hope of re-entry. Thus many
profane Apostatizing back-sliders cannot be content to lose good conscience,
unless Ammon-like they may put it away with violence, and expel it. And how
can they have good Conscience that have put it away? He has not his wife that
has put her away, and given her a bill of divorse. In the days of Popery and
darkness, the Devil it seemed walked very familiarly amongst them, and hence
we have so many stories of fayries, and of children taken out of cradles, and
others laid in their rooms, whom they called changelings. Since the light of
the Gospel these Devils and Fairies have not been seen amongst us, but yet we
are still troubled with changelings. Some, Priests and Jesuits have changed,
some, the world has changed, some, goodfellowship and the Alehouse has
changed. These have played the fayries, have taken and stolen away goodly,
forward, and fervent Christians, and have laid in their rooms Earthlings,
Worldlings, Popelings, Swearers, Drunkards, malicious scorners of all
goodness. Thus have these fayries in stead of fair and comely children,
brought in these lame, blind, deformed, and wrizzled faced changelings, that
any one may easily see them to be rather the birthes of some hobgoblins, then
the children of God. If therefore we would evidence our Consciences good,
labor to hold to the last, and rest not in a youth, but labor to have age
found in the way of righteousness. This is a crown of glory, and this is
right good Conscience to live therein until our dying day. All the former six
are nothing without this last.

CHAP. X.
The comfort and benefit of a good Conscience in the case of Disgrace and
Reproach.

WE are now come to the fifth and last point which was propounded: The motives
to persuade us to get good Consciences. The motives thereunto may be many, I
will keep my self within the compass of five.

1. Motive. The incomparable and 1. Motive to a good Conscience.
unspeakable comfort, and benefit thereof in such cases and times as all other
comforts fail a man, and wherein a man stands most in need of comfort. These
Cases or times are five.

1. The Time and Case of Disgrace and Reproach. 2. The Time of Common fear,
and Common calamity. 3. The Time of Sickness or outward crosses in a man's
goods. 4. The Time of Death. 5. The Time and Day of Judgment.
In all these, or in any of these times, Interim elige socium qui cum ^mnia
subtracta* fuerint fidem servat dilectoribus suis me recedit in tempore
angustiae. Ber. de Consc.
it is good to have such a friend or companion that will stick to a man, and
be faithful to him when all other things fail him. Such a friend and such a
companion, is a good Conscience. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is
borne for adversity, Prove. 17. 17. But in some of these cases a brother and a
friend may be false and will not, or may be weak and cannot help nor
pleasure a man, but a good Conscience is better then all friends and brethren
whatsoever, when they will not, or cannot, or may not, yet then will a good
Conscience stick close to a man, and be a sure friend to him. Let us see in
the particulars the truth of it.

1. In the Time and Case of Disgrace, The comfort of a good Conscience in case
of disgrace and reproach,
Infamy, Reproach, and wrongs of that kind, the comfort and benefit of a good
Conscience is unspeakable. When a man shall be traduced, slandered, falsely
accused and condemned, then in such wrongs will a good Conscience do the
office of a faithful friend, will stick to, and stand by a man, and will
comfort and hearten him against all such injuries. Paul is here co^vented
before the Council as a malefactor, he has an whole Counsel bent against him.
What now is his comfort, and his defense against such an heap of accusers as
do affront him? This it is, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good
Conscience. As if he had said, Impeach, traduce, accuse, and condemn me as you
please, yet be it known unto you, that I have a good Conscience, and this my
good conscience is it which shall comfort, and uphold me against all your
injurious, and unequal proceedings. You may bring forth false witnesses
against me, but my Conscience does, and will witness for me, you may condemn
me, yet my conscience acquits, and absolues me. And thus does Paul shelter
himself under his good Conscience.

The like we may see in the next Chapter. Ananias, and the Elders come and
bring Tertullus, and he is feed to be Paul's accuser, and he lays heavy and
heinous things to Paul's charge. verse. 5. We have found this man a pestilent
fellow, and a moover of sedition among all the Jews thr^ughout the world, a
ring leader of the sect of the Nazarens, etc. Here be foul things, what will
Paul be able to say to all this? Will not this be enough to sink him down
utterly, to see so many banded together, and such great ones combined to
countenance such an accusation? How will he be able to subsist? Now then behold
the benefit; and comfort of a good Conscience. He holds up his former buckler,
and smites Ananias, and the rest with his former weapon, verse. 16. Herein do I
exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God,
and to wards men. Ananias, and the Elders have a mercenary Tertullus to accuse
him, Paul has no man dares be seen to plead for him, none will be retained
in his cause, but yet now Conscience steps out, and stops the foul mouth of
this slanderous Orator, and puts spirit, and heart into Paul to plead his own
Cause against them all. Conscience seems on this manner to animate him; Fear
not Paul the accusations of this Tertullus, I witness for thee thine Innocence.
I justify it to the teeth of Tertullus, that he is one, whose malice, and
Covetousness has made him set his Conscience to sale; Stand up therefore, and
speak boldly for thy self, dread them not. Well fare a good conscience yet,
that will speak comfort to Paul, and make Paul speak with courage, when none
else dare be seen in his Cause.

It was an ill case David was in. Psalm. 69. 20. 21. Reproach has br^aken mine
heart, and I am full of heavines, and I looked for some to take pity, but
there was none, and for comforters, but I found none: They gave me also gall
for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. A very hard
case indeed. Where was now David's familiar friend, his acquaintance with whom
he was wont to take sweet counsel* what was become of him now? Possibly some
of his acquaintance were at this time like a broken tooth, and a foot out of
joint. Prove. 25. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man is like a broken tooth,
and a foot out of joint. Others it may be that had professed him love, were
ready to fasten a poysond tooth in him. This was David's case, and this may be
any man's case, but now at such a time, and in such a pinch appears the
excellency, and benefit of a good Conscience. Though all a man's friends should
prove Jobs friends, like the Winter-brookes of Teman, that in Winter ouerswell
the banks, but in the scorching heat of Summer prove dry ditches, yet then,
even then well fare a good Conscience. That will heal David's heart broken with
reproach, that will cheer him up in his heaviness, that will sweeten the gall,
and take away the sharpnes of the vinegar, which his enemies have given him to
drink.

There is a generation Pro. 30. 14. whose teeth are as swords, and their
iaw-teeth as knives; and Prou. 12. 18. that generation speaks as the piercings
of a sword. There is a generation, whose words are wounds that go down into
the innermost parts of the belly. Prou. 18 8. These be dangerous generations.
But what generations are they? Generations of Vipers. Ps. 140. 3. Adders poison
is under their lips. Iunius translates it, Venenum ptyados, The poison of the
spitting Serpent. They be then generations of spitting serpents, even of fiery
serpents, that have their tongues set on fire from hell, and so they spit fiery
poison in the faces of Innocents. Now there is no man can live in this world,
at whom these adders will not spit, no man can be free from the sprikling of
their poison. The disciple is not above the master; If these snakes have hissed
at the Lord of the house; and if these spitting serpents have cast their poison
in his face, why would they fear to do it to the servants? But is there then
no balm against this poison? no buckler against these swords? Yes, there is
the sovereign balm, and the impenetrable buckler of a good conscience. It is a
balsome that will alay the poison of these Adders, that it shall never burst a
man's heart, or if these swords pierce the very innermost bowels, yet this will
so salve these wounds, that they shall not ranckle, nor become mortal. Oh! how
mortal* is this adders poison, how fatal are those swords, how ^eene their
edge, and how full of pain their wounds, where inward guilt gives strength
unto them? But Integrity, and goodness of Conscience, is a precious balm of
Gilead, that takes away the venom of this poison, and the stinging smart of
the wounds of these swords.

Let Paul live with ever so good a conscience before God, and man. Act. 24. 16.
yet Tertullus will play the spitting adder, and he will spit, yea, spue forth
his poison in his face, and in the face of an whole Court, will not spare
openly to slander him for an arrant varlet, a lewd, pestilent, and a villainous
fellow. Such drivell will the malicious world spit in the face of Godliness. But
mark now the benefit, and comfort of a good Conscience. Either a good
Conscience with Stephens Angelical face will dazzle, and shame the devils
orators. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Having a good Conscience that they may be ashamed, or
else like Paul it can shake off those vipers without swelling, or falling down
dead. Yea, if Satan's orators will needs be opening their mouths against Paul,
yet so good is his Conscience, that as John Hus appealed from Pope Alexander to
Pope Alexander, namely, from him in his anger to him in his cold blood, and
better advised, so dares Paul appeal from Tertullus to Tertullus, David from
Shimei to Shimei, from enemies to enemies, from their tongues to their hearts,
from their mouths to their Consciences, as knowing their own integrity to
be such, as that their enemies own hearts gives their tongues the lie, and
tells them that against their consciences possessed with mere malice, they are
hurried on in Satan's service. Tertullus knows he lies, and his own Conscience
tells him he lies in his throat, that Paul is an honester man then himself,
yea, and the comfort is, that Paul's Conscience comforts him, and assures him
that Tertullus his Conscience assures him all this. So unspeakably sweet is
the comfort of a good Conscience.

David complains of a great affliction. Psalm. 35. 11. False witness did rise
up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not. What should a man do in
such a case, if he had not the comfort of a good Conscience witnessing for him.
But now at such a pinch appears the benefit of a good Conscience; Let ever so
many rise up falsely to witness against him, yet his conscience will witness
as fast for him. My friends scorn me, says Job, Job. 16. 20. They witnessed
against him to be a wicked person, and an hypocrite, they censured and
condemned him, but what was Jobs comfort? That same verse. 19. Behold my
witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. That was one comfort, but that
was not all* he had also a witness on earth, and his record below. Upon whose
record, and witness, see with what solemnity and with what confidence he
stands, Job. 27. 2. 6. As God lives who has taken away my judgment, and the
Almighty who has vexed my soul, All the while my breath is in me, and the
spirit of God is in my nostrils, my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my
tongue utter deceit, God forbid that I should justify you, till I die I will
not remove mine integrity from me, my righteousness I will hold fast, and will
not let it go, mine heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. As if he
had said, As the Lord lives, whilst there is breath in my body, I Nam si in ^s
iniquibus me criminantur testimoniu^ Conscientia mea non stat contra me in
conspectu dei quo nullus oculus mortalis intenditur non solum contristari non
debeo veru^ etiam exultare and gaudere quia merces mea multa est in coelis.
Neque enim intuendum est quam sit amarum sed quam falsum sit quod audio, and
quam verax pro cuius nomine hoc audio* Aug. Contra lit. Petil l 3.
will not yield unto your accusations, nor yet acknowledge my self guilty of
that you do charge me withal. Urge me, and press me what you will, yet will I
never let go mine hold. Why what is it that makes Job thus stiff, and
resolute, what is it that supports him with such an excellent spirit? That ver.
6. Mine heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. Indeed you reproach,
censure, and condemn me, you lay heavy things to my charge. But I have
searched the records of my Conscience, I have called that impartial witness to
testify the truth, and I find conscience witnessing strongly on my side, and
therefore do what you can, you shall never bear me down. Jobs friends may
prove fickle, and false, but his own Conscience will prove true to him, that
will plead for him, animate him, and comfort him against all their calumnious,
and injurious reproaches, and give him cause of much joy and triumph. Job then
had his witness in heaven, and Job had his witness on earth, God and his own
Conscience, two witnesses beyond all exception; and in the mouth of two
witnesses every truth shall stand. Conscience is a thousand witnesses, and God
is above Conscience. And what Conscience witnesses concerning matter of fact,
God himself will Justify the same. He that has a good conscience, has a
sure friend, that will neither slinke, nor shrink at any hand. Nay he has two
good friends, and two substantial witnesses, whose testimonies, though secret,
yet are such as sweetly solace the heart of man against open reproaches,
slanders, false witnesses, and all wrongs, and injuries of that kind
whatsoever. The testimony of Conscience is full of Comfort, because of the
undoubted certainty, and the unquestioned infallibility thereof, so that it
voycing on a man's side, strangely cheares his heart. Pro. 27. 19. As in water
face answers to face, so does the heart of a man unto man; That is, as some
expound it, As a man may see his face by looking in the water, so a man may see
himself, and what he is by looking into his conscience. If a man should be
told that he had some filth or bloach on his face, if he would go look In
speculo Conscientiae status interioris hominis, and exterioris cognoscitur Non
immerito Conscientiam speculo comparavit, quonia^ in ea tanqua^ speculo
rationis, oculus tam indecens qua^ quod decens in se est claro aspectu
apprehendere potest Bern. de Consc.
into the water, or especially into a looking-glass, he should easily see
whether it were so or no. And if looking into the water, or glass, he could
not see any such filth in his face, though an hundred should offer to bear him
down to the contrary, yet would he believe his own eyes before them al. So
here, when at any time foul mouths are open, and spare not to cast aspersions
upon Innocence, and to lay ^candalous things to a man's charge, then a man by
looking into his conscience can see himself, and can find whether he be
guilty or not, and seeing himself in that water, or in that glass, to be
clear from that filth and dirt which malice would cast in his face, it so
fills his heart with comfort, and confidence, as makes him tread all reproach,
and false Judgment of man under his foot. Non ideo bona est co^scientia mea
quia vos illam laudatis. Quia enim laudatis quod no^ videtis? Aug. de ver dom
ser. 49. Si autem non aurem solam perculit ^racund^a criminantis veru^ etiam
conscientia^ mordet veritus criminis quid mihi prodest si me* continuis
laudibus totus mu^dus attollat* Ita nec malam Conscientia^ sa^at praconiu^
^audantis nec bona^ vulnerat convictantis opprobrium. Aug. contra lit. Petil.
l. 2 In omni quod dicitur semper tacit occurrere debemus ad mentem and
interiorem testem, and iudicem requirere. Quid enim prodest si omnes laudans
and co^scientia accusat? aut poterit obesse si omnes derogent, and solae
Conscientia defe^dit? Greg. sup. 125. hom, 6,


This appears by the contrary. Let a man be praised, and magnified ever so,
let ever so much good be spoken of him, and ever so much worth be attributed to
him, yet if his own heart tell him, that all is falsely spoken of him, and
there is indeed no such matter in him, he has at all no true comfort in all
the good words of the world. Pro. 27. 21. As the fining pot for silver, the
furnace for gold, so is a man to his praise, that is, a man is to try his
praise that is given him, and if his conscience tell him it is undeserved, he
is to separate this dross of flattery from himself. All the commendations, and
admirations of the world, what comfort can they yield, whilst a man's
Conscience tells him, that they are all but lying and glavering flatteries.
What though the poor multitude feeling the sweet, and refreshment of a
Pharisees alms, do canonize a Pharise for a Saint, yet what is he the better,
or what comfort has he the more, whilst his own conscience reproaches, and
reproues him, and tells him that he is a vainglorious hypocrite, and that
though these whom he feeds, send him to heaven, yet he shall have his portion
with hypocrites, and unbelievers. What is a man the better for a flattering
Funeral Commendation, whilst in the mean time he is under the reproach, and
torture of his conscience, in the place of torment. How many a man is there
that has the good word of all men, no man but speaks well of him, but yet in
the mean time, his own heart gives him bitter words, and rates him to his
face. How well contented would such an one be, and what an happy exchange
would he hold it, to have all the world rail on him, and slander him, so his
own conscience would but speak friendly and kindly to him. So he could find
honey from his Conscience, he would not care what gall he had from the world.

Experience lets us see that such as have bin malevolent and injurious against
others innocence, though they have bin abetted and born out by their vmpires,
and advocates, that for handfuls of barley, and scraps, and crusts, have
labored to maintain ill causes, and worse persons, yet they have had no peace
nor rest of heart. Their advocates have bid them sit down with rest, and
victory, the day is theirs, they have cheered them, and strived to deserve
their fee, and yet their guilty clients being netled with the inward guilt of
their Consciences, have still bin haunted with a restles and perplexed unquiet
spirit, whilst others made guilty, and censured for offenders by such
mercenary vmpires, have possessed their souls in patience, and have bin
cheerful and merry-hearted, from the comfort of their own innocent and clear
Consciences.

So that look as the naughty conscience can speak no comfort, though all the
world speak well of it, so contrarily though all the world reproach, censure,
slander, etc. yet a good conscience can, and will speak peace, and comfort to
a man's heart.

The Corinthia^s did exceedingly slight Faelix conscientia no^ sibi in aliquo
conscia, quae no^ proprium iudiciu^, nec alienum veretur. Bern de Consc. Beata
plane quae non alienis aestimatur* iudiciis sed domesticis percipitur sensibus
ta^quam sui iudex. Neque enim populares opiniones pro mercede aliqua requirit,
neq, prosupplicio pauet. Ambros* de offic. l. 2. c 1. N^n possu^t aliena verba
crimen affigere quod propria non recepit Co^scia. Ambrin Ps. 38.
Paul, He was this, and he was that, but how was he affected with it? See how,
1 Cor. 4. 3. 4. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, I know full well what your censures are, and what sentence you pass upon
me, but know ye that I no whit at all regard the same, I make no reckoning
thereof at all. Why? might the Corinthians say, do ye count us so silly, and so
iniudicious? Nay says Paul, I speak it not as if you were sillier then others,
with me it is a small thing to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, let them
be the most wise, and judicious that are in the world, or of man's Day, though
by men convened in solemn manner for judgment; I pass not what their censure
is, I regard not their mis-iudgings of me. I, but what makes Paul thus slight
men's judgment of him? That in the fourth verse, I know nothing by my self,
mine own Conscience judges me not, nor sentenses me, that lays no such thing
to my charge, and therefore so long as my Conscience is on my side, I regard
not a whit what the world judges.

Now then see what a motive this is to get and keep a good Conscience. As we
would be glad to have comfort and confidence against the malice of opprobrious
tongues, as we would have a counter-poyson against their venom, so get a good
Conscience. Here is that which may make us in love with a good Conscience.
Reproach must full often be the portion of Gods dear children. Israelites
shall be for ever an abomination to Egyptians. And though the Egyptian dogs
moved not their tongues against Israel. Exodus 11. 7. yet dogged Egyptians will
move their tongues, and their teeth too. The Apostles must be counted the filth
of the world, and the offscowrings of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. The Lord Jesus
himself drank of this cup, Psalm. 22. 6. 7. I am a worm and no man, a
reproach of men, and despised of the people, All they that see me laugh me to
scorn, etc. The way to heaven is a narrow way, and this narrow way is beset
with snakes, spitting adders, barking, and biting, and mad dogs, and a man must
pass to heaven through good and evil report. 2. Cor. 6. 8.

Well then it being so hard a passage, Currentem attrites super aspidas and
basiliseos declinare senem vipera non poterit. prosp. dc Aug. Conscia men's
recti famae mendaci^ ridet, Sed no^ in vitiu^m credula treba famus. Ovid.
how may a man get himself so armed that he may pass cheerfully through all
these; get a good Conscience, and thou shall regard these snakes, serpents,
vipers, and dogs, no more then a straw under thy foot. If thou have a good
Conscience thou shall laugh at the reproaches of enemies, as Eliphaz speaks of
destruction. Job 5. A good conscience will say unto thee, Go on cheerily in
the ways of God, what ever discouragements the devil rayses by reproaches and
slanders, fear them not, Behold I acquit and excuse thee, I will bear thee
out, I will witness at Gods tribunal for thee. Lo, I give thee balm against
their poison, a buckler against their swords. Let them curse, yet I will bless
thee; let the^ reproach, yet I will (...)fort* let them condemn, fame thee, yet
I will be thy compurgator: let them cast dirt in thy face, yet I will wash it
off; let them disquiet, yet behold, I am ready to cheer thee. Oh the sweet and
inconceivable comfort that a good Conscience will speak, even in the middst of
the cruel speakings of ungodly men, Jude 15. that will speak comfortably when
they speak cruelly, and most comfortably, when they speak most cruelly. Such
is the benefit of a good Conscience in case of reproach and disgrace.

CHAP. IX.
The comfort and benefit of a good Conscience in the times of common fears and
calamities, and in the times of personal evils, as sickness, and afflictions,
for Conscience sake.

IN the second place, let us see what the benefit and comfort of a good (...)
and Common calamities. When the 2 fort of a good Conscience in the times of
common fears and calamities.
world is full of scares* and dangers, and calamities break in, how fares it
then with an evil conscience, in what taking are they that want a good
conscience? They are absorpt with fears, and the very tidings puts them to
much perplexity, Isa. 7. 2. Aha^ is told of a confedracy between Syria and
Ephraim, and see in what fears he and his people were, His heart was moved,
and the heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.
So deeply do reports and evil tidings affect them, the trees in the wood are
not so shaken with the blustering winds, as evil Consciences are with evil
tidings. When ill news and ill Consciences meet, there is no small fear. The
signs that prognosticate sorrowful times, see how deeply they affect evil
Consciences, Luke 21. 25. There shall be signs in the sun and the moon, and
in the stars, and upon the earth, distress of Nations with perplexity, men's
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth. But when calamity indeed comes, and not ill news, but
ill times, and ill consciences meet, how are they then? They are then either
in the case the Egyptians were in the famine, Genesis 47. 13. They were at their
wits end; or as those in a storm at Sea, Psa 107. 26. 27. Their soul is
melted because of trouble, They reele too and fro, and stagger like a drunken
man, and all their wisdom is swallowed up. Excess of fear puts them into as
great distempers as excess of wine, it utterly stupifies them, and they by
fear are as much bereft of the use of their senses, wit, and wisdom, as a
drunkard is in his drunkenness. Yea, their fears make them not only drunk,
but stark mad. Deuteronomy. 28. 34. Thou shall be oppressed and cursed always, so
that thou shall be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see. The
perplexities of an evil conscience in evil times, are unspeakably grievous.
Isay does exceeding lively describe them. Isa. 13. 7. 8. 9. Therefore shall all
hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt, And they shall be afraid,
pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman
that travells, they shall be a mazed one at another, their faces shall be as
flames, etc. Hence that same strange question of the Prophets, Ier. 36. 6. Ask
ye now, and see whether a man does travel with child? A strange question,
what should make the Prophet ask it? Because he foresaw such strange behavior
amongst them, carrying themselves in the same fashion in the day of calamity,
that women use to do in the extremity of the pangs of childbirth. Wherefore
do I see every man with his hands on his loins as a woman in travel, and all
faces are turned into palenesse? Alas, for that day is great, so that none is
like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble. When such woeful days befall a
man, all his riches will not yield him a jot of comfort, Pro. 11. 4. Riches
avayle not in the day of wrath. No that will no whit cheer a man at such a
time, They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be
removed, etc. Ezekiel. 7. 19. This shall be the miserable pickle a man shall be
in at such a time, that wants a good Conscience.

But now look upon a man with a good Conscience in such times, and how fares
it with him? Let evil tidings and times come, how is he affected therwithall?
He will not be afraid of evil tidings, for his heart is fixed, Psalm. 112. 7.
fear he may, but yet his Heart shall be free from those restless, and
perplexing distractions wherewith all others are vexed, Luke 21. 9. When ye
shall hear of wars and commotions be not terrified. And Prou. 3. 25. Be not
afraid of sudden fear. There is nothing so arms and resolves the heart
against fears and evil tidings, as does the peace and integrity of a good
Conscience. For let there be outward peace abroad in the world and freedom
from all fears of wars and combustions, yet little joy and comfort can a man
have therein, whilst his conscience proclaims war against him, and as Gods
Herald summons him to battle, Those inward wars, and rumors of wars,
woefully distract him in the midst of his outward peace. So co^trarily, let
there be peace within in the Conscience, and all wars, and fears of wars
hushed there, and then what ever fears and troubles are like to be without,
yet there will be a calm, a serenitie, and a sweet security within.

Becarefull, and so fearful, for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. To be fearful in
nothing, is indeed an excellent happiness of a well composed mind. How might
one attain thereto? How might a man bring his heart to that fixed and stablisht
temper? See verse 7. The peace of God that passes all understanding shall
guarde your hearts and minds. (...), shall keep with a guard, as Kings have
their guards about them to save their persons from violence; shall guard your
hearts, that is, your affections, that they run not into extremity of
impatience, distraction, desperation, when fears and terrors shall come, ye
shall not be transported with such distracting thoughts as shall deprive you of
the freedom of your minds, but that you shall have them to attend upon God in
the greatest of your dangers. So that a man with a good conscience in the
midst of all fears and combustions can sing with David, Psa. 116. 7. Return
unto thy rest, O my soul. The peace of a good Conscience is like the ballast
of a Ship. Let a Ship go to Sea without ballast in the bottom, and every
blast of wind is ready to ouerturne it, but being well balasted, though the
winds blow strong, yet it sails steddily and safely. Every blast of ill
news, and tidings of fear, how full of terrible apprehensitions it filles an
ill conscience, it miserably vnsettles and distracts it, whilst a good
Conscience, what blasts soever blows, has its heart steady and at good command.

Methinkes when I consider Noab in his Cabine, or nest in the Arc, with what
security and quiet of heart he sits there, notwithstanding the clattering of
the raines upon the Ark, the roaring of the waters, and the hideous howlings
and outcries of those that were drowned in the flood, I see the Emblem of a
good conscience. Tubalcain, Lamech, Iabal, Iubal, with what horrid perplexities
are their souls distraught. Some climb up this house top, some this high
tree, others flee to some high mountain, and there in what horror and
amazement are they, whilst one sees his children sprawling, another his wise
struggling for life upon the face of the merciless waters, but especially
whilst they behold the waters rising by little and little, and pursuing them
to the house tops, and threatening to sweep them off from the heads of the
Mountains, to which they had betaken themselves. These fears and amazements
were worse then an hundredth deaths. But now all this while how is it with
Noah, he sits dry in his cabin, and literally was the saying of the Psalm
verified of him, Surely in the floods of great waters they came not nigh unto
him. Psa. 32. 6. He has his Ark pitched within, and pitched without, neither can
the raines from above beat in, nor the waters from beneath leake in, let all
fountains of the great deep be broken up, and the floodgates of heaven be
opened, yet not one drop of water comes at him, and though the waters prevail
fifteen cubits above the high hills and mountains, so that they be covered,
yet Noah he is out of all fear, let them rise as high as they will, yet shall
he keep above them still. Just such is the condition, and happiness of a man
with a good Conscience in sad times. Whilst the high hills and mountains are
covered, the great and brave spirits of the world are overwhelmed with fear,
are possessed with dreadful apprehensions, so as they know not which way to
look, nor which way to take, even then a man with a good conscience has a
strange quiet of heart, is full of sweet security and resolution, and amids all
the shrikes, howlings, and wringing of hands of earthly men, by patience
possesses his soul, is master of himself, and composes his soul to rest. His
Ark is pitched within and without. The peace of God, and the peace of a good
Conscience, keeps the waterfloods from coming into his soul. The rain and
the waves they beat upon the Arc, but yet they pierced it not. A man with a
good Conscience may fall into, and may be swept away with common calamities:
yet how ever it fare with his outward man, yet his soul is free from that
horror, and those madding perplexities wherwithall wicked ones are overtaken.
The peace of a good Conscience shall keep off these distracting fears from his
mind, Though he cannot be free happily from the common destructions, yet shall
he be free from the common distractions of the world. There be two things in
common calamities, The sword without, and terror within, Deuteronomy. 32. 25. and the
latter of the two is the worse by far. Now here is the benefit of a good
Conscience, though it do not save always from the sword without, yet it
delivers always from the terror within, which gives a terrible edge to the
sword, and which being removed, the sword is nothing so terrible. When the
Canaanites were destroyed by Israel, there was a double sorrow and smart upon
them. The sword of the Israelites, and Gods Hornet, Josh. 24. 12. What was that
Hornet? Nothing else but that distracting and perplexing fear and terror
wherewith God filled their hearts, as appears, Exodus 23. 27. 28. There is no
Hornet can so vex with his sting, as these terrors vex evil Consciences in
evil days. Now here is the privilege of good Consciences, though they may
smart with the sword, yet this hornet shall not sting them, nor fill their
hearts with that throbbing anguish, that these terrors in times of calamity
put evil Consciences to.

A sweet motive to make any in love with a good Conscience. Whilst we look
upon the evils of the times, we cannot but look for evil times. Look we upon
our sins, and Gods administration abroad; upon the malice and policies of the
adversaries of Gods grace, and what do these but prognosticate heavy things.
Now suppose a flood should come, would we not be glad of an Arc, and such a
cabin therein as should keep out the wa^ers from our souls? Get then the
pitch of a good Conscience, and thou shall sit like Noah, if not free from the
waters, yet free from the fears of Lamech, and Tubalcain, which are worse then
the waters. For the fears of such evils are more bitter and insufferable then
the evils themselves. Suppose, I say, a flood should come, who would not give a
kingdom for an Arc well pitched? Suppose calamity should come, who would not
give a world for a good Conscience then? Iabal Genesis 4. 20. he is busy in
building of tents, and he is among his flocks and cattle, and Iubal, Genesis 4.
21. he is wholly upon his merry pins, at his Harp and Organs; He and his take
the Timbrel, and the Harp, and rejoice at the s(...)d of the Organ, Job. 21*
12. And these jolly ioviall laddes give poor Noah many a dry flout, many a
scornful scoff whilst he is building his Arc, and ask what this
brainsicke and mad fellow means to make such a vessel, whether he meant to
sail on the dry land, or to make a Sea when he made his Ship? I, but when the
flood is come, and the waters begin to be chin deep, then ask Iabal whether
building of tents or building of an Ark be the wiser work, then whether is
better Noah's Arc, or Iubals pipes? Now that the flood is come, and these come
perhaps wading middle deep to the Arc side, and bellow and howl to Noah to
open the Arc to them: Now would not Iabal give all his tents, and all his
cattle, but to be but where Noah's dog lies, would not Iubal now give all his
pipes and merriment, to have but the place that an hog had in the Arc. Now
Iubal let us hear one of your merry songs, pipe now and make your self merry
with gybing at Noah's solly, in making a Ship to sail on dry land. What aylest
thou Iubal to howl and wring thine hands thus? where is thine Harp and Orga^s
now? cheer up thy soul now with these vanities. Now the flood is come, now
Noth is in the Arc, now Sirs, you that are such men of renown, Genesis 6. 4. you
that were the brave gallants of the earth, now tell me, who is the fool, and
who is the wise man now?

How many in the days of peace make light of a good Conscience, yea if they
see others to be but careful in rigging of this Ship, and pitching, and
trimming up such an Arc, how ready are they to spend their biting scoffs, and
their tart jests upon them; but if ever times of trouble and calamity, and a
fire-flood of Gods wrath. Nah. 1. 6. 8, should break in, then would a good
conscience hold up the head with much comfort and resolution, whilst those
that formerly made a jest of a good Conscience, should have a king, and
quaking (...) of those unmeasurable fears that shall cease upon them. A good
Conscience will make a man music, when Iubal shall be glad not only to put up,
but with indignation and anguish of heart to throw away and curse his pipes.
Well fare a good Conscience in evil days. Pitch and trim up this Arc, there
is no such provision against evil days, as is a good Conscience. It will do
a man service, and support him, when all the brave spirits of the earth shall be
blank, and at their wits end.

In the third place, the benefit and 3 The comfort of a good Conscience in
Time of Sickness.
comfort of a good Conscience, is Conspicuous in the time of Sickness, or a
man's private and personal crosses in his estate, etc. A sick man with an
hayle Conscience, is a cheary and a comfortable man, Pro, 13. 14. The spirit of
a man will sustain his infirmity; that is, the spirit it self being hayle,
and sound, it will enable him to bear any bodily sickness. But a wounded spirit
who can bear, yea a wounded or a sick body, who can co^fortably (...) But let
the Conscience be good and sound, and it helps a man with great ease and
comfort, to bear the sickness of the body. It is a shrewd burden to bear two
sicknesses at once, to have a sick body, and a sick Conscience. A man shall find
enough of the easiest of them single and alone. But yet an bail conscience in
an infirm body, sweetly helps our infirmity. Let a man have ever so hayle and
healthful a body, yet if the conscience be naught, and withal awakened, falls
to galling, and griping, he shall find but little joy in his bodily health; so
contrarily, let a man's Conscience be good, and though his body be sick, and
weak, yet is it a great deal of sweet refreshment that it shall receive from
the conscience.

Sickness in it self is exceeding uncomfortable, and in the time of sickness
commonly all bodily comforts, the comforts of meats, drinks, and sleep
fail; yea but then here is the benefit of a good conscience, that will not then
fail, but as it is said, Eccl. 10. ^9. Money answers all things, so a good
conscience answers all things, the comfort of it supplies the want of all other
comforts. When in sickness the comfort of meat, drink, and sleep is gone,
they are all found again in the comfort of a good Conscience, that will be
meat, drink, that will be rest and sleep, that will make a man's sickbed
soft, and easy, that shall be as the Angels were to Christ in his hunger in
the Wilderness, they ministered unto him, and so will a good conscience minister
comfort in the want of all other comforts, so that a man may say of a good*
Conscience, as we use to say of some solid, substantial dish, that there are
Patirdge, Pheasant, and Quails in it; so though outward comforts cease their
office, and their work be suspended, yet a good conscience comes in their
room, and in it are meat, drink, sleep, ease, refreshment, and what not? A
good conscience is an Electuary, or a Cordial that has all these ingredients
in it. There is no such Cordial to a sick man, as the Cordial of a good
conscience. All Physicians to this Physician are but such Physicians as Jobs
friends. Job 13. 4. Ye are Physicians of no value. A motive of great weight to
make men in love with a good conscience. Who can be free from sickness, and how
tedious and wearisome a time, is the time of sickness. Now who would not make
much of a Cordial that might cheer him then, of a receipt that might feed
him then? As then we would be glad of a cheerful, and comfortable spirit up on
our sick beds, so make much of a good Conscience. Whence is it that most men
in their sicknesses have such drooping spitits, lie groaning altogether under
their bodily pains, or lie sottishly and senselesly, no sense of any thing but
pain, and sickness? Merely from the want of a good Conscience, they have laid
up no Cordial, no comfortable Electuary for themselves in their health time
against the day of sickness. Indeed you shall have the miserable comforters of
the world on this manner chearing them; Why, how now man, where is your heart?
Pluck up a good heart man, never fear for a little sickness, etc. True indeed,
they should not need to fear, if they could pluck up a good heart. But they
that will pluck it up when they are sick, must lay it up when they are well. He
that has a good conscience to get when he lies upon his sickbed, is like a
man that has his Aqua vitae to buy when he is fallen into a swoune; A wise man
that fears swouning, would have his hot-waterbottle hanging always ready at
his beds-head. But as in other crosles by sickness and the like, so is the
comfort of a good conscience, never more sweet, then when a man is under the
cross for conscience sake, and suffers affliction and vexation to keep a good
conscience. Then above al other times will conscience do the office of a
Co^forter, and will stand to him that will stand for it. When Nebuchadnezzar
heates his Furnace seven times hotter then at other times, then a good
Conscience will speak comfort seven times sweeter then at other times.

Are Gods Saints for good Conscience Fox Acts and Mon. Omnis nobis vilis est
poena, vbi purae comes est conscientia Tiburt apud Baron An 168.
sake in prison? Good Conscience will make their prisons delectable hortiards,
So does Algerius an Italian Martyr date a comfortable Epistle of his, From the
delectable hortyarde of the Leo nine prison, a prison in V^nice so called. So
that as he said, that he had rather be in prison with Cato, then with Coesar in
the Senate house, so in this regard it was more comfortable to be with Philpot
in the Cole-house, then with Bonner in his Palace. Bonners Conscience made his
Palace a Cole-house, and a Dungeon, whilst Philpots made the Cole-house a
Palace.

Are Gods Saints in the Stocks? Better it is, says Philpot, to sit in the
Stocks of the world, then in the Stocks of a damnable Conscience. Therefore
though they be in the Stocks, yet even then, the righteous does sing and
rejoice, yea, even in the Stocks, and prison; Paul and Silas sang in the
Stocks. Sing in Hinc est quod e contrarioinnocens etiam inter ipsae tormenta
fruitur Co^scientiae securitaete, et cum de poena metuat de innocentia
gloriaetur. Hierony. ad Demetri* ad ep. 1.
the Stocks? Nay more, they can sing in the flames, and in the midst of the
fires. Is. 24. 15. Glorify God in the fires. And worthy Hawks could clap his
hands in the midst of the flames. So great and so passing all understanding is
the peace and comfort of a good conscience. So that in some sense, that may be
said of it which is spoken of faith. Heb. 11. 34, By it they quenched the
violence of fire. Gods servants were so rapt, and ravished with the sense of
Gods love, and their inward peace of Conscience, that they seemd to have a kind
of happy dedolency, and want of feeling of the smart of outward torments.

Who knows what trials God may bring him to? We have no patent for our peace,
nor this free liberty in the profession of the Gospel. Suppose we should be
called to the stake for Christ's sake. Would we be cheerful, would we sing in
the flames? Get a good Conscience. The cause of Christ is a good cause, now
with a good cause get a good conscience, and we shall be able with all
cheerfulnes to lay down our lives for Christ, and his Gospel sake.

CHAP. XII.
The comfort and benefit of a good Conscience in the days of Death and
Judgment.

IN the fourth place, The time of 4 The Comfort of a good Conscience at the day
of Death,
death is a time wherein the benefit and comfort of a good Conscience is
exceeding great. Death has a ghastly look and terrible, able to daunt the
proudest and brauest spirit in the world, but then has it a ghastly look
indeed when it faces an evil conscience. Indeed sometimes, and most commonly,
Conscience in many, is secure at the time of death. God in his justice so
plaging an affected security in life, with an inflicted security at Death. And
the Lord seems to say as once to the Prophet, Go make their Consciences
asleep at their death, as they have made it asleep all their life, least
Conscience should see and speak, and they hear, and be saved. God deals with
conscience as with the Prophet. Ezekiel. 3. 26. I will make thy tongue cleave to
the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb; Therefore they die though not
desperately as Saul, and Achitophel, yet sottishly without comfort, and feeling
of Gods love, as Nabal. But if conscience be awakened, and have its eyes, and
mouth opened, no heart can imagine the desperate, and insufferable distresses
of such an heart Terrors take hold of him as waters, Job. 27. 20. Terrors
make him afraid on every side. Job 18. 11. Then is that true. Job 25 23. 24.
He knows that the day of darkness is ready at hand. Trouble and anguish shall
make him afraid, they shall prevail against him as a King ready to the
battle. And no wonder, for he is now brought unto the King of Terrors, as
Death is called. Job 18. 14. A man that has an ill Conscience, if his eyes be
opened, and his Conscience a wakened, he sees death in all the terrible shapes
that may be. Sometimes he sees death coming like a merciless Officer, and a
cruel Sergeant, to arrest, and to drag him by the throat to the prison and
place of Torment. Ps. 55. 15. Let death cease upon them; They see it coming
like that cruel servant in the Parable to his fellow, Math. 18. catching them
by the very throat.

Sometimes he sees death in the shape of some greedy Lyo^, or some ravening
Wolf ready to devour him, and to feed upon his carkase. Ps. 49. 14. Death
shall feed in them, even as a ravenous beast: shall feed upon his prey.
Imagine in what a terrible plight the Samaritans were in, when the Lions set
upon the^. 2. Kin. 17. and by it imagine in what case an ill conscience is,
when it beholdes the face of death. It puts an ill Conscience into that case in
good earnest that David was in, in the case of trial. Ps ^^. 4. 5. My heart is
sore pained within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me,
fearefulnes* and trembling are come upon me, and horror has over whelmed me.

Sometimes again he sees death as the Israelites the fiery Serpents with mortal
stings; Sometimes as a merciles Landlord, or the Sheriff coming with a Writ
of Firmae eiectione, to throw him out of house and home, and to turn him to
the wide Common, yea he sees death as Gods executioner, and messenger of
eternal death, yea, he sees death with as much horror as if he saw the
Devil. In so many fearful shapes appears death to an evil conscience upon
the deathbed. So as it is indeed the King of Terrors to such an one that has
the Terrors of Conscience within. There is no one thought so terrible to such
an one, as the thought of death, nothing that he more wishes to avoid. Oh! how
loath, and how unwilling is such an one to dye.

But come now to a man that has lived as Paul did in all good conscience, and
how is it with him upon his deathbed? His end is peace; so full of joy and
comfort; so is he ravished with the inward and unspeakable consolations of his
Conscience, that it is no wonder at all that Balaam should wish to dye the
death of the righteous, the death of a man with a good Conscience.

The day of a man's marriage is the day of the joy of a man's heart, Cant. 3. 11.
and the day of marriage is not so joyful a day, as is the day of death to a
good conscience. There are but few that can marry with that joy wherewith a
good conscience dies.

It enables a man, not only to look Ananias and the Council in the face, but
even to look death it self in the face, without those amazing terrors, yea,
it makes the face of death seem lovely and amiable. He whose conscience is
good, and fees the face of God reconciled to him in Christ, he can say as Jacob
did when he saw the face of Joseph, Genesis 46. 30. Now let me dye, since I have
seen thy face. It is the privilege of a good Conscience alone, to go to the
grave, as Agag did to Samuel, and to say that truly, which he spoke besides
the book, 1 Samuel 15. 32. He came pleasantly, And he said, Surely the
bitterness of death is past. He was deceived, and therefore had no such cause
to be so pleasant, but a good Conscience can, yea, cannot choose but be so
pleasant, even when going out of the world, because the gilt of sin being
washed away in Chists blood; it knows that the bitterness of death is past, and
the sweetness of life eternal is at hand.

A man whose debts are paid, he dares go out of doors, dare meet and face the
Sergeants, and the conscience purged by the blood of Christ, can look as
vndau^tedly on the face of death. He that has gotten the sting, that is, the
guilt of conscience, taken away by faith in Christ, he looks not upon death as
the Israelites upon the fiery Serpents, but looks upon it as Paul does, 1.
Cor. 15. O death where is thy sting? Who fears a Be, an Hornet, a Snake, or a
Serpent, when they have lost their sting. The guilt of sin is the sting of
Conscience, is the sting of death that stings the conscience. The sting of
death is sin. 1 Cor. 15. Pluck then sin out of the conscience, and at once
the conscience is made good, and death made weak, and is disarmed of his
weapon. And when the conscience sees death vnstingd and disarmed, it is freed
of fear, and even in the very act of death, can joyfully tryumyh over death,
oh Death where is thy sting?

A good Conscience looks upon death, as upon the Sheriff that comes to give
him possession of his Inheritance, or as Lazarus upon the Angels that came to
carry his soul into Abraham's bosom, and therefore can welcome death, and
entertain him joyfully. And whereas an ill conscience makes a man see death as
if he saw the Devil, a good conscience makes a man see the face of death, as
Jacob saw Esaues face, Genesis 33. I have seen thy face, as, the face of God;
they see the face of death with unspeakable joy, rauishment of heart, and
exultation of spirit.

Well now, what a motive have we here, to make us labor for a good conscience.
Even Balaam himself would feign make a good end, and dye in peace, and who
wishes not his deathbed may be a Mount Nebo, from whence he may see that
heavenly Canaan? Lo here, Balaam, the way to dye the death of the righteous, I
have lived in all good Conscience unto this day. They that have conscience in
their life, shall have comfort, at their death; They that live conscionably,
shall die comfortably; They that live in all good Conscience til their dying
day, shall depart in the abundance of comfort at their dying day.

There will come a day wherein we must lay down these Tabernacles, the day of
death will assuredly come. How lamentable a thing will it then be, to be so
destitute, and desolate of all comfort, as to be driven to that extremity, as
to curse our birth day? oh! what would Comfort be worth at our last hour, at
our last gasp, whilst our dearest friends shall be weeping, wringing their
hands and lamenting, then, then what would inward comfort be worth? Who would
not hold the whole world an easy price for it then? Well then, would we then
have Comfort and Joy, oh then, get a good conscience now, which will yield
comfort, when all other comforts shall utterly fail, and shall be life in the
midst of death. How happy is that man, that when the sentence of death is
passed upon him, can say with Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 3. Remember now O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Indeed the Text says, that
Hezekiah wept sore but yet, not as fearing death, for he could not fear
death, who had thus feared God, but because the promise was not yet made good
to him in a son and Heir of his kingdom, hence came those tears. It is
otherwise an vnspeak able joy, that such a Conscience as Hezekiahs was, will
speak to a man upon his deathbed.

Every one professes a desire to make a good end: Here is the way to make good
that desire, to live in all good conscience. Alas how pitiful, and miserable
a condition live most men in. All the days of their life's, and healths, they
have no regard of a good Conscience. Notwithstanding that men are pressed
continually to this one care, by the instancy and importunity of Gods
Ministers, yet how miserably is it neglected? Well, at last the day of death
comes, and then what would they not give for a comfortable end? If the gold of
Ophir would purchase comfort, it should fly then. Then poast for this Minister,
and run for the other, as in the sweatingsicknesse in King Edwards days,
then for Gods sake but one word of comfort, then O blessed men of God, one word
of peace. Now alas what would you have them do? Are they or your own courses
in fault, that you want comfort at your death? What would you have us do? We
must refer you to your own Consciences, we cannot make oil of flint, nor
crusse sweet Wine out of sour Grapes, we dare not flatter you against your
consciences. If you would give us a world, we cannot comfort you when your own
Consciences witness against you, that such comforts belong not to you. Do not
idly in this case hope for Comfort from Ministers, be it known unto you, you
must have it from your own consciences. Many on their deathbed cry to the
Minister, as she did to the King, 2 Kings 6. 26. 27. Help my Lord, O King.
But mark what he answers, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help
thee, out of the barne-floore, or out of the wine press? So we must answer
to such as cry, Help, help O man of God; If God and your own Consciences
help you not, whence shall we help you? If there had been Corn within the
barnes, the King could easily have helped her, but he could not make Corn. So
if men have carried any thing into their Consciences, if they thems^lues have
Inned any provision and comfort, by being Conscionable in their lives, then we
can help and comfort them, but otherwise do not think that we can make
comforts, and make good Consciences upon your deathbeds. If your Consciences
can say for you, that you have bin careful in your life time to know God, to
walk holily and religiously before him, etc. then we dare be bold to comfort,
and cheer you, then dare we speak peace confidently to you But if your
Consciences accuse you of your ignorance, your oaths, Sabbath breaches*
worldliness, rebellion, uncleanness, oppression, drunkenness, etc. and
finally impenitency: What is it you would have us to do? What can we say, but
as the Prophet to Zedekiah, Ier. 37. 19. Where are now your Prophets that
prophesied unto you, saying, The King of Babylon shall not come against you.
So, where be those that in your life time told you, ye need not be so
careful, and precise to keep good Consciences, less ado will serve the
turn, now what think ye of them? now what peace have you in those ways,
what comfort can these give you now? Or else what can we say when men in
anguish of Conscience lie tossing on their beds, but what Reuben said to his
brethren when they were in distress, Genesis 42. 21. 22. Did not I warn you,
saying, Sin not, etc. So must we* what do ye call to us for comfort, Did not
we warn you many a time and often, saying, sin not, nor live in those
dangerous courses? Did not we warn you? Oh to have our Consciences and Gods
Ministers thus to grate upon us, what an uncomfortable condition will this be?
Would we then prevent such sorrow, and be cheerful, and cheered at our latter
ends, lay up a good Conscience then, lay in somewhat for Conscience, and Gods
Ministers to work upon, and from which they both may be able to raise comfort
to you. Get a good Conscience, and live in it all thy days, and then though
thou should want the benefit of a comforting Minister, yet thy Conscience
shall do the office of a comforting Minister, and shall be the same unto thee
that the Angel was unto Christ in his agony, Luke 22. 43. and shall minister
such comfort unto thee, as shall make thee ready to leap into thy grave for
joy. This shall be as another Jacobs staff for thee to lean and rest upon,
when thou shall be upon thy deathbed. If men knew but the worth of a good
Conscience at the hour of death, we should need no other motive to work men's
hearts to be in love therewith.

Fifthly and lastly, the benefit and comfort 5 The comfort of a good Conscience
at the day of Judgment.
of a good Conscience is great at the day of Judgment. Oh the sweet comfort
and confidence of heart that a good Conscience will yield unto a man at that
day. What will become of all the Gigantean spirits, and the brave fellows of
the earth then? Alas for their yellings, and cursings of themselves, and their
companions? What howling and crying to the mountains, as they did, Revel. 6.
Hide us, cover us, yea, dash and quash us in a thousand pieces. When an ill
Conscience is awakened, it is not to be imagined how small a thing will gastre
it. The sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, and they shall fly as flying
from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursues. Levit. 26. 36. A dreadful
sound is in his cares, Job 15, 21. He hears nothing, but he thinks he hears
always some terrible and dreadful noise. Now then if a shaken lease shall
chase, and shall put them into a shaking fear, what case will such be in, when
as Job speaks, Job 26. 11. The pillars of heaven shall tremble, and when the
powers of heaven shall be shaken, Luke 21. 26. When the heavens shall shake,
and flame above them, when the earth shall quake, and tremble under them, what
case will they be in then? If mere imaginations fill their ears with
dreadful sounds where there is no sound at all: Oh what a dreadful sound
shall be in their ears when the Sea shall raore, Luke 21. 25. when the last
trumpe shall sound, 1 Cor. 15. when they shall hear the shout and voice of an
Angel, 1 These. 4. 16, What dreadful sounds will these be in the cares of ill
Consciences? How will these dreadful sounds confound their souls with horror
and amazement.

But now for a good Conscience, how is it with it then? Even amidst all these
dreadful sounds it looks up, and lifts up the head, Luke 21. 28. and enables
a man with a cheery confidence to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21. 36.

The malefactor who looks for the halter, how dreadful is the judges coming
to the Assizes, attended with the troops of halberds, in his eye; but the
prisoner that knows his own innocence, and that he shall be quit and
discharged, his heart leapes at the Judges approach, how terribly soever he
come attended to the bench, it glads his heart to see that day, which shall be
the day of his liberty and release. An hypocrite shall not come before him, Job
13, 16. much less, shall look up, and lift up his head, or stand before him,
Psa. 1. 5. But the righteous, and the man with a good Conscience, he shall
hold up, and cheerfully lift up his head, when all the surly, and proud
Zamzummins of the earth, that here lifted up their heads and nebs so high,
shall become howling and trembling suitors to the deaf mountains to hide them
from the presence of the Lamb on the throne. Oh! they that fear the Lamb on
the throne, how dreadful unto them will be the Lion on the throne.

It will be with good and evil Consciences at that day, as it was with
Pharoahs Butler, and Baker, on Pharaohs birthday. The Butler he knew he
should be restored to honor, and go from the prison to the palace, therefore
he comes out of the prison full of joy, and iollity, he holds up his head, and
out-faces the proudest of his enemies. But the Baker he knows his head shall
be lift from off him, and therefore when Pharaohs birthday comes, wherein all
others are in iollity, yet he droopes and hangs down the head, he knows it
would prove an heavy day of reckoning with him.

Such will the apparition of Christ unto judgment be, unto good and evil
Consciences, as was the apparition of the Angel, Math. 28. 2. 3. 4. 5. There
was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, his
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow. Here was a
terrible sight, but yet not alike terrible to all the beholders. For, for fear
of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men. But the Angel said unto
the women, fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus. So at the last day
when Christ shall come to judgment, evil Consciences shall be as the Keepers,
whilst all good Consciences shall hear that comforfortable voice, Fear not
ye, for I know that you have sought for God, and all your days ye have
sought to kpepe a good Conscience. How effectual a motive should this be, how
strongly should this work with us. As we would be glad to hold up our heads,
when the glorious ones of the earth shall hang them down, to leap for joy,
when others shall howl for bitter anguish of spirit, so now whilst we have
the day of life and grace, labor we to get and keep good Consciences.

CHAP. XIII.
A second motive, A good Conscience is a continual feast.

THus have we seen the first motive, The second motive to a good Conscience.
from the benefit and comfort of a good Conscience, in such cases, and times,
as a man stands most in need of comfort. A second motive follows, and that is
that we find, Prove. 15. 15. A good Conscience is a continual feast. 1. It is
a feast. 2. Better then a feast. It is a continual feast.

1. It is a feast. The excellency of a good Conscience is set forth by the same
thing, by which our Savior sets forth the happiness of heaven. Luke 14. Quo
enim melius epulantur animi quam bonis fact is, aut quid aliud iam facile
potest explere iustorum mentes qua^ boni operis conscientia. Ambr de offic. l.
1. c. 31
And well may both be set forth by the same metaphor, considering what a near
affinity there is between heaven and a good Conscience, and that there is no
feasting in heaven, unless there be first the feast of a good Conscience here
on earth. But why a feast? A feast for three regards.

1. For the self sufficiency, and sweet satisfaction and contentment that a
good Conscience has within it self. Feasting and fasting are opposite. In
fasting upon the want of food there is an emptiness and a griping hunger,
which makes the body insatiably to crave. But at a feast there is abundance,
and variety of all dishes and dainties, ready at hand to satisfy a man's
appetite to the full, he can have a mind to nothing but it is before him. The
very best of every thing that is to be had is at a feast. A feast of fat
things, Isa. 25. 6. of fat things full of marrow. Such is the sufficiency of
satisfaction, the abundance of sweetness, and contentment that is to be found in
a good Conscience. It is a table richly furnished with all varieties, and
dainties. There is no pleasure, comfort, or contentment that a man's heart can
wish, but it may be abundantly had in a good Conscience; as at a feast there
is a collection of all the dainties and delicacies that sea and land can
afford.

2. For the mirth, and joy of it. A feast is made for laughter, Eccles. 10. 19.
At a feast there is mirth, music, and delight in the comfortable use of the
creatures. Heaviness of heart, pensinenesse, and sorrow, these are banished
from the house of feasting. Fasting and feasting are opposite, in fasting
indeed there is weeping, mourning, and sorrowing, but in a feast contrarily,
there is mirth, merriment and joy.

There were under the Law appointed so lemne holy feasts anniversarily to be
celebrated, and at those solemn feasts were the silver trumpets sounded, Number.
10. 10. and the sound of the trumpets was a joyful sound. Psalm, 89. 15. For
their festivities were to be kept with special joy. Deuteronomy. 16. 10. 11. 13. 14.
15. Thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord. etc. and thou shall
rejoice before the Lord, etc. Thou shall observe the feast of Tabernacles seven
days, etc. And thou shall rejoice in thy feast etc. Therefore thou shall surely
rejoice. And that extraordinary feast on the fourteenth and fifteenth of Ader,
in memorial of their deliverance from Hama^, see how it was kept, Est. 9. 19.
22. They kept them days of gladness and feasting, of feasting and joy. Even
such is the excellency of a good Conscience. All the merriment and music,
wine and good cheer, will not make a man's heart so light and so merry, as the
wine which is drunk at the feast of a good conscience will do. This takes
away all heaviness and sadness of spirit, and has the like effects with
natural wine. It makes a man forget his spiritual poverty, and remember that
misery no more, Pro. 31. 7. Nay, as wine not only takes away sadness, but
withal brings a natural gladness with it. Psalm. 104. 15. Wine that makes glad
the heart of man, so does this wine at this feast. Psalm. 97. 11. 12. Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Rejoice in the
Lord ye righteous. None so glad an heart, as the upright in heart. Nay, such is
the vigor and strength of this wine, at this feast, that it not only glads a
man's heart, but makes a man as not able to contain, even to shout for joy,
Psalm. 32. 11, Shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart, yea shout alowd
for joy, Psalm. 132. 16. That look as it is said of the Lord, Psalm. 78. 65.
The Lord awaked like a mighty man that shouts by reason of wine. So such is the
plenty, abundance, sweetness, and strength of the wine of this feast, that it
makes men in a holy iollity, even to break forth into shouting, and singing.
This wine being liberally drunken, wherein there is no excess, fills a man's
heart with such an ouerflowing exuberancy of joy, as he cannot hold, but he
must needs show it in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs; and hence it is,
that the righteous do sing and rejoice, Pro. 29. 6. So that what joy a feast
can yield, that can a good conscience yield much more, 2. Cor. 1. 12. This is
our rejoicing the testimony of our Conscience. Yea and that joy commanded,
Deuteronomy. 16. At the feast of Tabernacles what was it but a type of that spiritual
joy, that the faithful under Christ should have in keeping the feast of a good
conscience? The feast of a good conscience is the true feast of Tabernacles, in
which as in the other, there shall need no charge to rejoice, and be merry,
this feast will put such spirit and life into a man, as shall make him sing,
skip, and shout for joy.

The feast of a good conscience is not like a funeral feast, where mirth and
joy are unseemly, and unseasonable guests, there are heavy hearts and looks,
tears, and mourning (which by the way how well they suit with feasting, let
the world judge) but the feast of a good conscience is a nuptial feast, a
marriage feast, and the day of marriage is the day of the joy of a man's heart,
Cant. 3. 11. Such a feast, even a joyful marriage feast does a good conscience
make.

Oftentimes these bodily feasts are but heavy feasts, many for all their good
cheer, company, and music, cannot put away the heavines of their hearts, but
even in their feast are sad hearted, and Sampsons wife wept all the days of
the feast, Judge. 14. 17. yea though a marriage feast. But in this feast of a
good conscience here is no sorrow, heaviness, or sad melancholy, but all joy
and gladness.

3. For the society and company. A feast is a collection, and a convention of
many good friends together, whose society and fellowship is sweet each to
other. There is no feast can afford the like company that a good conscience
has. Woe to him that is alone. Eccl. 4. that is the woeful and solitary
condition of evil consciences. But a good conscience has ever good company,
is not alone, for the Father is with him. Ioh. 16. 32. yea, the Son is with
it, and Christ, and the man with a good conscience, they suppe, and feast
together. Reu. 3. 20. Yea, and the Spirit is with it. 1. Cor. 13. 13. The
Communion of the holy Ghost be with you. What feast in the world ca^ show such
company? And good company is the chief thing in a feast. Thus a good
conscience is a feast.

2. It is better then a feast. And that in three regards.

1. In regard of the continuance, and perpetuity of it. A continual feast.
Nabal made a feast, a feast like a King. 1. Sam. 25. but that feast lasted but
one day. Sampson at his marriage had a feast that lasted seven days. Judge. 14.
17. but yet that feast had an end, Ahashuerosh his feast was the longest feast
that ever we read of. Esth. 1. 4. He made a feast many days, an hundred and
fourscore days. But yet, verse. 5. it is said, And when those days were
expired. So this long feast had an end. It was continued for many days, but
yet no continual feast, it had an end. The feast of a good conscience is not
like an University Commencement feast. Great exceedings, and extraordinary good
cheer and company for one night, but the next morrow to their bare Commons
again. Not like the feast of the Nativity, at which time there is great
feasting, and great cheer every where for twelve days, but when those days
are over, many a man is glad of bread and cheese, glad to skip at a crust. But
this is a continual feast all the year long, all a man's life long. Therefore
1. These. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore, keep open house, and feasting all the year
long. The joy of a good conscience was figured by the joy at the feast of
Tabernacles. That feast lasted seven days. The joy must be as long. Seven the
number of perfection, denoted the whole course of a man's life, and so their
seven days joy, the continual joy and iollity of this continual feast of a
good conscience.

Conscience, and a wife as they agree in many things, be they good, be they
ill, so in this also. If the conscience be evil, it is like an evil wife, and
she is a continual evil. Pro. 27. 15. A continual dropping in a very rainy
day, and a contentious woman are alike. The contentions of a wife are a
continual dropping. Pro. 19. 13. A shrewish waspish wife, is a continual
vexation, and disquiet. Such is an evil Conscience* a continual sorrow.
Contrarily, a good Conscience is like a good wife. A good wife is a continual
comfort, a comfort in health, in sickness, in peace, in distress. Prove. 31.
1^. She does him good and not evil all the days of her life. Not some good,
and a great deal of evil withal, but all good, good and not evil. Not good
at sometime, and none at other times, but all the days of her life, she is a
continual comfort. Such is the comfort of a good conscience. It keeps holy
day, and feasting every day; It is all feast; a feast for ever; there is no
Lent, nor fasting days that interrupt this feast. This is the peculiar
privilege of this feast to be continual; belly feasting cannot be so: for

1. A man cannot always feast though he would, a man's revenewes would be
exhaust, his expenses would soon sink his estate. Continual feasting would
soon beggar and undo a man of good estate, Pro. 21. 17. He that loves Wine
and Oil shall not be rich. It is not so here; the revenew of a good Conscience
is bottomless, it cannot be spent, and therefore is able to keep a rich, and a
full furnished Table all the year long. Here is a mystery in this feast, the
larger expenses to day, the more laid in to keep the feast the better to
morrow; a man grows rich by feasting.

2. Suppose a man might be able to feast always, or might feed at another
man's Table continually, yet would it Voluptas tunc cum maxim delectat extin
guitur. Nec multum loci habet itaeque cito implet et taedio est, and post
primum im petum marcet Senec de vit beat. cap. 7.
weary a man beyond measure. It would but gugge and cloy a man. All earthly
pleasures have a satietie, and breed a loathing by frequent use. But this is
the admirable excellency of this feast of a good conscience, here a man may
feed, and cat with continual delight. At this continual feast, here is a
continual fresh appetite, and fresh delights; here is continual feasting
without loathing and satietie.

3. Neither may belly-feasting be continual. There be sometimes wherein it is
inconvenient, and unlawful. To speak with the fairest, that day which God
has fanctified for his service, is not so convenient for feasting. It may be
no less dangerous to devour sanctified time, then sanctified things. And in
this case has that saying a truth, It i^ not meet that we should leave the
Word of God, and serve Tables. Act. 6. 2. But now this feast without any doubt
may be on the Sabbath, yea, it is the special festival, and high day of the
week, wherein this feast is best kept. Again, there be times wherein God
calls to solemn fasting and humiliation, as when the Church is either in
danger, or distress, but this feast is not hindered by fasting, it will stand
well with it, and many a special dainty dish is served into this feast from a
fast.

4. Suppose a man could and might feast always, yet were it a brutish thing,
and hog-like always for a man to be cramming and crowding in belly cheer,
always to be paunching and gutting. It is that for which the rich Glutton is
taxed, Luke 16. that he fared deliciously every day. But here to feast at this
Table every day, is that which makes a man every whit as Angel-like, as
belly-feasting every day makes a man swine-like. Here it is a man's happiness
to be an holy Epicure.

2. It is better then other feasts, in regard Nunquam credideris faeilcem qui
adventitio laetus est, exibit gaudium quod intravit. Senec. ep. 99.
of the Independencie of this feast upon any other outward thing. This feast is
able to maintain it self of it self, and within it self. A man that has a
good conscience, has a feast, though he have nothing else but it. A good
Conscience, though it have nothing but brown bread and water, yet this hard
fare marres not the feast; For this feast stands not in meats, and drinks, but
in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Quietness and
a dry morsel is better then an house full of good cheer with strife, Pro. 17.
1. Though it be but outward quietness, when a man is free from unjust vexations,
and the molestations of froward and contentious dispositions, even such
quietness makes a dry morsel good cheer, makes a feast of a crust. But when
there is inward quietness of a good Conscience, and a man's heart is at quiet
from his peace with his God, what excellent cheer is a dry morsel, then?
Though a man have ever so good fare, yet to have it sawced with the bitterness
of contention, and to live in a continual wrangling with peevish people, what
poor content would a well furnished Table afford such a man? And what poor
cheer, especially, would all the feasts in the world make, where there is
brawling and contention from the conscience? Here then is the excellency of
this feast above all other feasts. This feast is able to subsist, and to
maintain it self without other feasting; other feasting is nothing without
this of a good conscience. Other feasting often hurts and hinders this feast,
whilst men by their vain and licentious carriage therein, Feasting without al
fear, Jude 12. do make the Conscience fast and sterue, and whilst their
Quails are between their teeth, leanness enters into their soul. Psalm.
106. 15. So far is bodily feasting from helping, that it hinders this
feasting rather. Conscience, can have mirth enough without a feast, but little
is the comfort and content that a feast can give, where the Conscience is not
good. Men may set a Sed non est ista hilaritas long a observa: videbis eosde^
intra exiguum te^ pus acerrime ridere, et acerrime rudere. Senec. ep. 29.
a face upon it and brag, laugh, and be jolly in their feasting, but yet in
the midst of that laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14. 13. Conscience awakened even in the midst of
the greatest iollitie, gives men many a bitter twitch at the heart, and in the
midst of all their revillings, gives them Vinegar and Gall to drink. A good
Conscience is it that sweetens and seasons all the dishes of a feast, that is
the sauce that makes meat savoury, the sugar that sweetens Wine, that is the
music that makes a man's heart dance.

But let a man go to the most sumptuous, and delicious feasts without a good
conscience, and how is it with him then? Just as with Belshazzar, Dan. 5. where
the handwriting on the wall, marred all his mirth; or else it is in such a
case as it was with Haman. The fool brags that he alone is invited to Esthers
banquet with the King, Esth. 5. 12. Oh, how happy a man was he, under how
fortunate a Planet was he borne, to be the King and Queens Favorite both? But
see what little reason he had to brag. Chap. 7, 2. Even at the banquet of
Wine, Esther gives him a cup of gall at the banquet of Wine. Does she accuse
Haman to the King. Oh! how many glory in their banqueting, and their feasting,
but how often do their Consciences put Easthers trick upon them, even accuse
them to God, and gall and girde them in the middst of their wine. Conscience
serves many, as Absoloms villainies served Ammon; when his heart was merry at
Absoloms feast, then they stabd him to the heart. Conscience deals with them
as the Isralites were dealt withal in their Quayle feast. They had their
Quails, and their daynties, but a man would rather want their good cheer,
then have their sauce. Their sweet meat had shrape sauce. Whilst the flesh was
between their teeth, Gods anger brake in upon them. So whilst many are
chewing their dainties, conscience fills their mouth with gravel, and so
sawces and spices their dishes, that they find but little content therein. So
miserable are all feasts and merryments of this world, when a man wants the
imdependent feast of a good Conscience. So happy also are they that have the
feast of a good Conscience, although they never taste bitt of other feast
whilst they live, although they be denied the crummes that fall under the
feasting Gluttons Table.

3. It is better in regard of the Universality of it. As for belly-feasts, it
stands not with every man's condition, and purse, to make them. It belongs only
to the richer and abler sort to feast. Feasting is a matter of charge and cost,
and so is out of the reach of the poorer sort. But here is the excellency of
this feast. The poorest that is may make it, and the poor have as good
privilege to make it as the rich, and the poor in this respect may keep as
good an house as the best Nobleman, yea, for the most part the poorer sort keep
this feast best. Nabal makes a feast like a King, but wretched man, in the
mean time what feast keeps his Conscience? It may be many a poor Carmelite
neighbor of his, that went in a poor russet coat, and lived in a poor
thatcht cottage, kept that feast abundantly, and richly, whilst he poor sot
had not the crumbs that fell from their Tables. Lazarus could not have the
crummes that fell from the gluttons table, but how happy had it been with the
glutton, if in stead of his delicious fare he might have had but the
reversions of Lazarus board. Lazarus may not come to his feast, no nor yet to
his fragments, neither will Lazarus condition permit him to feast it as the
glutton did, but yet this feast of a good Conscience, Lazarus may make as well
as he, and can, and does keep it, whilst the glutton feels many an
hunger-biting gripe. What an excellent feast is this, above all other feasts,
wherein the russet has as much privilege as the velvet, the beggar as the
King, the poor tenant, as the rich Landlord? The rich Landlord often so feeds
upon, and eats up his poor tenant by oppression, that the tenant is kept low
enough for feasting; It is well with him if he have food, he had not need
think of feasting. But lo now the excellent feast of a good Conscience; Here
may the tenant keep as good cheer as the Landlord, yea, and it may be may
feast, whilst the rich Landlord is ready to sterue for want of this provision.

Now then all this considered, what a Motive should it be to make us in love
with a good Conscience. How powerfully should this persuade us thereto? When
God would persuade men to come to the joys of heaven, he uses no other
argument then this, to invite them to a feast, as in that Parable. Luke 14.
Behold, here is the same argument, ^o move you to be in love with a goo^
Conscience, behold the Lord invites you ^o a feast, and to a feast where ^e
shall have sufficiency, without want, or loathing, where ye shall have wine,
^^rth, music, and good Company to ^he full. The twelve days feast of the
Nativitie, how is it longed for before hand, and how welcomed when it is come?
And what may the reason be? But only because it is a feasting time. This is
counted a blessed good Time. And why a blessed good Time? As Christ was a
blessed good man, and the Prophet that should come into the world, and
therefore should be made a King, because he had fed, and filled their bellies.
Ioh. 6. So the most make that a blessed time, not for the memorial of Christ's
Incarnation, but because of the loaves Christ shall be a King, and because of
the feast, the Time is blessed. Well then, and is the world so desirous, and so
glad of feasting? Are feasting Times such blessed Times? Lo then I invite you
to a feast, to a blessed good feast indeed, that will make you blessed and
truly happy. Not to a feast of twelve days, but to a feast that lasts all the
twelve months of the year, to a continuing, and a continual feast. How glad
are many when they may go to a feast? Lo a way to make feasts for your
selves. What a credit is it counted in the world for a man to keep a good, and
a great house, to keep feasting and open house for all comers, during the
Feastivitie of the twelve days. Would we have this credit of good
housekeeping, not for twelve days, but for all the year long, Get good
Consciences, keep good Consciences. There is no such good houfe-keeper, as is
the good Conscience-keeper; for, a good Conscience is a feast, a continual
feast.

There is nothing that men desire more then to live merrily, and how many
stumble at Religion, and keeping of a good Conscience, under an idle conceit
that it is the way to mar all their mirth, and to make a man lumpish and
melancholy. Do not believe the devil, do not believe his lying agents. It is
a profane Proverb, that Spiritus Calvinia^us est spiritus melancholicus. A
good Conscience is a feast, a feast with all dainties, music, and wine. Can a
man be melancholy at a feast, at so joyful, and so sweet a feast? Does
feasting make men melancholy, or make men merry? Make men weep, or laugh? If
a man should cry down feasting with this argument, That it makes men
melancholy, would not all men laugh him to scorn? And why then should a man
fear melancholy more from a good Conscience, then from a feast? There is none
lives so merry a life as he that keeps a good Conscience, he is every day at a
feast, he is always banqueting. Yea, the worst dishes of this feast, even
those at the lower end of the Table, are better then the most choice rarities
of other feasts. The very tears that a good conscience sheds have more joy and
pleasure in them, then the worlds greatest joys. And if the tears of a good
conscience be such, what is the mirth, and laughter of it? If weeping be so
sweet, what is singing? If the courser dishes be so dainty, what are the best
services? Would we then live merrily, and pass our days Iocundly indeed? Get
a good Conscience, and thou keep a continual feast, and that continual
feast will keep thee in coutinuall mirth, and continual joy. Yea though thou
be in affliction, and under crosses, so as thy days unto the world may seem
exceedingly evil, yet shall thou live merrily as at a feast. Yea, this is the
scope of that Scripture, All the days of the afflicted are evil, namely, in
the eye and judgment of the world: but a good Conscience, namely, to the
afflicted is a continual feast. A good conscience feasts then, and turns
fasting days into feasting, days. A good conscience feasts a man in his
poverty, in his sickness, in the prison, and cheeres up a man with many a
dainty bit. The wine of this feast makes them forget all their sorrow.

Now then that we would be so wise as to hearken to Gods invitation to this
feast, Let us keep the feast with the bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.
8. Take heed now that we put not off God as these did, Luke 14. invited to the
feast, with the excuses of Farms, Oxen, and the like. So do many, urge them
to the keeping of a good Conscience, and their answer is, If they should be so
precise how shall they live, they shall have but poor takings if they take
such a course, I pray have me excused, I must live. Thus they answer, as many
good husbands, when invited to frequent feastings, do; No believe me it will
not hold out, if I go every day a feasting, I may go one day a begging, I must
follow my business and let feasting go. And so say men here. But take heed of
putting off God thus. The time will come that thou would give all thine Oxen
to have but the scraps and crumbs of this feast, and thou shall not have them,
God will serve thee as he did them, Luke 14. 24. None of those men which were
bidden shall taste of my supper. Those that care not to keep the feast of a
good Conscience, shall never come to Gods feast in heaven. If you refuse to
come to this feast now, God will at the last day thrust you our of doors, when
you will be pressing and crowding in, and shall say to you Get you hence ye
despisers of a good Conscience, you scorned the feast of a good Conscience, and
therefore now the feast and guests of heaven scorn you, here is no room for
such to feast here, who have made their consciences fast heretofore.

CHAP. XIIII.
A third and a fourth motive to a good Conscience.

COme we now to a third motive, The third motive to a good Conscience.
that may yet help to stir up our minds to this necessary duty of getting
and keeping of a good conscience. Besides what has been said, it is worthy of
our consideration, that without a good Conscience all our actions, yea, our
very best services to God are ^o far from goodness and acceptance, that they
are abominable and distatefull unto the Lord. The formal goodness of every
man's actions is to be judged, and esteemed by the goodness of his Conscience,
which being evil and defiled, makes all a man's actions to be such, 1 Timothy 1.
5. The end of the commandment is love. But what kind of love does the
commandment require, will any shows or shadows of obedience serve the turn,
will the bare duty doing pass for current? No, but such love to God and man,
and such performance of obedience as proceeds from a pure heart and a good
Conscience. So that let a man do all outward actions of obedience, yet i^ a
good Conscience be wanting all is nothing, For the end of the Commandment is
love out of a good Conscience. As is a man's conscienc^, so are all his works,
and therefore nothing acceptable that a wicked man does, be cause he does it
with an ill conscience. To the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled
their Conscience is defiled, and that being defiled, it defiles all it meddles
with, as under the Law the Leper defiled all he touched. The best meat, disht
and dressed with defiled and dirty hands, is lo^n some to us.

The honest works of a man's calling are good works in themselves, but no good
works to him that does them without a good conscience, Pro ^1. 4. An high
look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is sin. The calling
of husbandry is counted the most honest calling of all others, yet where a good
conscience is wanting, a man's very plowing is sin. Come to holy duties of
Religian and Gods service, and how is it with a man wanting a good Conscience
in them? That curse of Davidss Psalm. 109. 8. Let his prayer be turned into
sin, lies upon the services of all evil consciences. See Pro. 15. 8. The
sacrifice of the wicked, that is, of him that has an evil Conscience, is an
abomination, but the prayer of the up right, that is, of a man that has a good
and upright Conscience, is his delight. Observe the opposition, He says not
the prayer of the wicked, and the prayer of the upright, nor the sacrifice of
the wicked, and the sacrifice of the upright, but the sacrifice of the wicked,
and the prayer of the upright. A sacrifice had prayer with it, but yet it was
more sumptuous and more solemn then fingle prayer. Now who would not think
but such cost should make a man welcome, yet the single prayer of the upright
is accepted, whilst this sacrifice is an abomination, yea, and that a vile
abomination, Isa. 66. 3. A man of evil Conscience delighting in his
abominations, makes his holiest services such. Let such an one come to the
Sacraments, and how will it be with him there? even as in the former, To the
impure, even the pure Sacraments are impure. Simon Magus rather defiles the
waters of baptism then they cleanse him, and it is not carnal baptism that
avayles any thing without the answer and stipulation of a good Conscience, 1
Pet. 3. 21. And for the Sacrament of the Supper whether does it profit an
vncleance Conscience, or such a Conscience pollute it? It may be judged by a
like case, resolved, Hag. 2. 11. 14. The unclean p^^son by a dead body
touching the Bread, or Wine, or Oil, makes these to be unclean. The
ceremonial uncleanness by the touch of a dead body, typified the moral
uncleanness of an evil conscience, unpurged from dead works. God looks
specially at the Conscience in all our services, and if he finds that foul
and filthy, he throws the dung of men's sacrifices in their faces, that come
with the dung of their filthy Consciences before his face. See therefore how
Paul serves God, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
Conscience. It is an impure service that is not performed with a pure
Conscience, as slight as the world makes of purity. How much more shall the
blood of Christ purge your Consciences from dead works. Heb. 9. 14. But to
what end are they purged? To serve the living God. Therefore mark, that till
the Conscience be purged and made good, there is no serving of God. So Heb.
10. 22. Let ve draw near, that is, in prayer, and the like duties; But how?
Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Otherwise it is but a
folly for us to draw near. for God will not be near when a good conscience is
far off. And therefore we are bid to purify our hearts, when we are bid draw
nigh to God. Iam. 4. 8.

Behold here then a special motive to make a good Conscience beautiful in our
eye. As we would be loath our services of God, our prayers and holy
performances; should be abominable in Gods eye, so labor for good consciences.
As we would have comfort. in all our duties of obedience, so labor to make our
conscience good. It is a great deal of confidence that silly ignorant ones
have in their good prayers, and their good serving of God, as they call it, yea
it is all the ground of their hope of salvation, when they are demanded an
account of their hope: Now alas your good prayers, and your good serving of
God! Why what do you talking of these things? Has Christ purged your
Consciences from dead works? Have you by faith got your Consciences sprinkled
and wrinced in Christ's blood, and so have ye made them good? If not, never
talk of good prayers, and good serving of God: your prayers cannot be good
whilst your Consciences are naught. An evil Conscience before God, and a good
service to God cannot stand together. But would you have your prayers good
indeed, and your service acceptable indeed? Then let your first care be to make
your Consciences good.

Fourthly, let this work with us as a The fourth motive to a good Conscience.
maine motive to a good Conscience: That is the Ship and the Arc wherein the
faith is preserved. The faith is a rich commodity, a precious freight, and a
good Conscience is the bottom, and the vessel wherein it is carried. So long
as the Ship is safe and good, so long the goods therein are safe, but if the
Ship split upon the Rocks, or have but a leake therein, then are all the goods
therein in danger of being lost and cast away. So long as a man keeps a good
conscience, there is no fear of loosing the faith, the integrity and
sounduesle of the doctrine thereof. Constancy in the truth, is a fruit of good
conscience. Psalm. 119. 54. 55. I have kept thy Law, he had not declined from,
nor forsaken the truth of God, but what held and kept him? This I had because I
kept thy precepts. Keeping of a good conscience will keep a man in the truth:
It is that which is the only preservative to save from all errors, heresies,
and false doctrines. The better Conscience, the sounder Judgment, the sounder
heart, the sounder head. As the better digestion in the stomach, the freer the
head is from ascendent fumes that would distemper, and trouble the same. John
7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it
be of God. How shall a man come to have a sound and a good judgment, to be
able to judge what is truth, and what is not? Let him get a good Conscience,
and make conscience of doing the will of God, John 14. 21. He that has my
commandments, and keeps them, etc. such a man has, and keeps a good
Conscience. And what benefit shall such a one have by keeping a good
Conscience? I will love him, and I will manifest my self unto him. And Psalm.
50. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation
of God. God does communicate himself and his truth to such as make Conscience
of their ways. The pure in heart shall see God, and the secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him.

So that he that has a good Conscience, has the only Antidote, the most
excellent Amulet, and plague-cake at his breast that is in the world, to save
him from the pestilence, and infection of Popery, Arminianisme, Brownisme,
Anabaptisme, etc. So long as the ship of Conscience is whole, so long the
Jewel of faith is safe. Paul would have a Bishop to hold fast the faithful
Word, and to be sound in doctrine, Tit. 1. 9. But yet mark it, that he would
first have him be a man of a good Conscience, in the two foregoing verses. And
1 Timothy 3. 9. he would have the Deacons hold the mystery of the faith in a pure
Conscience.

Contrarily nothing so endangers the loss of the faith and truth, and soundnes
of doctrine, as does the loss of good Conscience. A corrupt Conscience soon
corrupts the judgment. 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith and a good Conscience which
some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. If the ship of
Conscience crack, how soon will the merchandise of faith wrack? If once the
Conscience crack, the brain will soon prove crazie; and an unsound
Conscience makes a fearful way for an unsound and a rotten judgment. 2. Tim.
3. 8. They resist the truth, there is their corrupt Conscience: what follows
upon it? Men of corrupt minds, unsound in their judgment concerning the
faith. How frequent a thing is it in experience to see men when they loose good
Conscience, together with it either to loose their gifts, as the unprofitable
servant his masters talent, or else, to loose the truth, and to fall into
pestilent and dangerous errors. So those Prophets that made not Conscience in
faithful and holy execution of their office, see what was the fruit of their
evil Conscience. Mic. 3. 5. 6. 7. Therefore night shall be unto you that ye
shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you that ye shall not
divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
dark ^ver them, etc. Their darkness in life should be plagued with darkness
in judgment. To which purpose that is notable, Zach. 11. 17. Woe to the idol
shepherd that leaves the flock. There is an unconscionable shepherd, a man
that makes no Conscience to attend his ministry. What becomes of him? The
sword shall be upon his right eye, his best eye. And his right eye (shall not
be pore-blinde, or dimmed, but) shall be utterly darkened. The loss of good
Conscience brings upon men of knowledge and learning, that reproach that Nahash
the Ammonite would have brought upon all Israel. 1 Samuel 11. 2. It thrusts out
their right eyes. Ill Consciences not only make men look a squint, but it
blindes them, and takes away their sight.

And what is the reason that Popery gets ground so fast, and so many turn
Papists so easily? Surely it is no wonder, how should it be otherwise, when men
either having lost all good Conscience, or making no Conscience of their ways,
but living loosely, viciously and licentiously, have thereby prepared a way for
Antichrist and his religion, to enter with all success. No wonder that men
turn Papists so fast, when long since they have turned good conscience going.
For that which Bellarmine speaks is in the general Cum areae ventilari
incipiunt, non frume^ta sed paleae vento abripiente separantur ab area* Ita
prorsus cum Ecclesia per Ethnicorum persecutiones, vel Haereticorum
deccptiones, Deo permittente, cribratur, aut ventilatur a sotana: non viri
sancti, and graves sed improbi leves, curiosi, lascivi ab Ecclesia a volantes
ad Ethnicos h^reticosue transfugiunt, nec fere solet accidere, vt ante circa
fidem aliquis naufraget, quam naufragare* coeperit circa mores, Bellar. Orat.
prefix. tom. 4.
certainly true, though by him falsely and maliciously applied, That they be
not holy and grave men, but wicked, light, curious, wanton ones, that turn
Ethnicks, or Heretics, and that it seldom comes to pass, that any man makes
shipwreck concerning the faith, that first makes not shipwreck concerning
manners. See the truth of it in many of our backsliders to popery, especially
such as have been zealous propugners of the truth. Where began the first
declension, where the first flawe? Had not their Consciences first brusht upon
some rock? was not the first leake there? and when they had first put away
good Conscience, then there was a speedy banishing of truth, and a ready
entertainment of error. And for the common sort of their converts, consider if
many times they have not bin the very riffe-raffe of our Church, swearers,
gross profaners of the Sabbath, unclean and debauched drunkards, such as our
Church was sick of, and desired even to spue forth, and then when they have
become a prey to all vicious courses, through want of Conscience, through Gods
just judgment they have become a prey to Romish locusts, whose commission is
only to hurt such, and not those whom the sap of a good Conscience keeps
fresh and flourishing as the green grass, and trees of the earth. Apoc. 9. 4.
For as Solomon speaks of the bodily harlot, Eccles. 7. 26. so it is true of
that spiritual whore of Babylon. Her heart is snares and nets, her hands as
hands, her delusions strong; who so pleases God, and has a care to keep a
good conscience shall escape from her, but the sinner, and he that makes no
Conscience of his ways, shall be taken by her.

Well, let us think well upon this motive, we live in dangerous and declining
days, wherein men with a greediness turn to their Romish vomit again.
Besides, the factors of Antichrist are exceeding busy and pragmaticall to draw
men from the faith of Christ, and the holy Ghost tells us they shall come with
strong delusions. Now then all you that be the Lords people, save your selves
from this dangerous generation, all you that have or would be known to have
the soale of God on your foreheads. Save your selves from the seduction of
these Locusts. I, but how may that be done? The delusion is strong, and it may
be, we are weak. Lo then here is a remedy against their danger. Get, and
keep a good Conscience, live as Paul did, in all good Conscience, and thou
shall be safe from all their delusions. I have kept the faith, says Paul, oh!
let it be the care of us, that that may be our closing voice at our last day,
and if we would keep the faith, let us keep a good Conscience; He that in
his life time can say, I keep a good Conscience, he at his death shall be able
to say, I have kept the faith. Faith, and a good Conscience are both in a
bottom. Hold one, and hold both.

As therefore thou would fear to turn Papist, or any other heretic; so,
be sure to hold a good Conscience, to hold on a good, honest, and a
conscionable man. So long as thou stand upon that ground, thou art
impregnable, and the gates of hell shall not be able to draw thee from the
faith of the Lord Jesus. Pro. 6. 20. 22. 24. My son keep thy Fathers
commandment, etc. And it will keep thee. So I may say here, Keep a good
Conscience, and it will keep thee, it will keep thee sound in the faith, it
will keep thee from being drawn away by the error of the wicked, and it will
keep thee from the Wine of the fornications of the Whore of Babylon.

CHAP: XV.
The last motive to a good Conscience; The misery of an evil one.

THe last motive remains, and that The fifth motive to a good Conscience.
is, The horror and misery of an evil Conscience. If men did but truly know
what the evil of an evil Conscience were, and how evil a thing, and bitter
it will be when Conscience awakens here, or shall be awakened in hell, a
little persuasion should serve to move men to live in a good Conscience. We may
say of the evil Conscience, as Solomon speaks of the drunkard. Pro. 23. 29.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has wounds, but not
without a cause? Even the man whose Conscience is not good, even he that lives
in an evil Conscience.

An evil Conscience, how miserable it is, we may see by considering the misery
thereof, either in this world, or the world to come.

1. In this life. When an evil Conscience is awakened in this life, the
sorrow, and smart, the horror, and terror is as the joy of a good Conscience,
unspeakable. An evil Conscience in this life is miserable, in regard of
fear, perplexity and torment. To live in a continual fear, and to have a
man's heart always in shaking fits of fear, is a misery of miseries. And such
is the misery of an evil conscience. Pro. 28. 1. The wicked flees when none
pursues. Only his own guilt pursues him, and makes him flee. His own guilt
causes a sound of fear in his ears. Job 15. 21. Which Proprium autem est
nocentium trepidare. Male de nobis actu^ erat, quod multa scelera legem and
iudicem effugiunt, and scripta supplicia, nisi illa naturalia and grauia de
praesentibus solverent, and in locu^ patientiae timor cederet. Senec, ep. 98.
makes him shake at the noise of a shaken leaf, Lev. 26, 36. yea, that so
scares him that terrors make him afraid on every side, and drive him to his
feet. Job. 18. 11. Yea, there are they in great fear where no fear is. Psalm.
53. 3. So that a man with an evil Conscience awakened, may be named as Pashur
is. Ier. 2^. 3. Magor-Missabib, fear round about, as being a terror to
himself, and to all his friends. verse 4.

An evil Conscience, even makes those fear fearful fears, of whom al other
stand in fear. How potent a Monarch, and how dreadful a Prince was Belshazzar,
who was able to put him in to any fear, whom all the earth feared? And yet when
his guilty conscience looks him in the face, awakened by the palm writing on
the wall, see where his courage is then. Dan. 5. 6. Then the Kings countenance
was changed and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Who would have had his
fear, to have had his kingdom? Let him now cloth himself with all his
Majesty, let him look and speak as terribly as he can, let him threaten the
vilest vassal in his Court, with all the tortures that tyranny can inflict,
and let him try if he can for his heart, put his poorest subject in* to that
fright and fear that now his Conscience puts him into, in the ruff, and
midst of his iollitie. But I pray what ails he to be in this fear, in this
so extraordinary a fear? He can neither read, nor understand the writing upon
the wall. Indeed it threatened him the loss of his kingdom, but he cannot
read this threatening, he knows not whether they be bitter things that God
writes against him, why may he not hope that it may be good which is written,
and why may not this hope ease, and abate his fear. No, no. Though he cannot
read no^ understand the writing, yet his guilty conscience can comment
shrewdly upon it, and can tell him it portends no good toward him His
Conscience now tells him of his godles impieties, in profaning the vessels of
the Temple of the true God, and that for this his sacrilegious impropriation,
and abuse of holy things, God is now come to reckon with him. Thus can his
Conscience do more then all his wise men. All the wise men came in, but they
could not read the writing, nor make known to the King the interpretation
thereof. Dan. 5. 8. But his Conscience is wiser then all his wisemen, and when
they are all puzzeld, that interprets to him, that this writing means him no
good, and though he cannot read the syllables, yet his conscience gives a
shrewd near guess at the substance of the writing, and therefore hence comes
that ex^asie of fear, and those paroxysmes of horror.

It was no better with Adam after his fall. After his sin committed, we find
him in a great fear, Genesis 3. 8. 10. and he hides himself for fear. Now
observe how his fear is described, from the circumstance of the time. They
heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of the day.
Luther lays the Emphasis of the aggravation of his fear, upon this word, the
wind or cool of the day. The night indeed is naturally terrible, and darkness
is fearful, whence that phrase. Ps. 91. The terrors of the night. But the day
and the light, is a cheerful, and a comfortable creature, Eccl. 11. 7. Truly
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the
Sun. How is it then, that in the fair day light, which gives courage and
comfort, that Adam fears, and runs into the thickets? Oh* his Conscience was
become Grauis mal^ Conscientiae, lux est. Senec. ep. 123.
evil, and full of darkness, and the darkness of his conscience turned the
very light into darkness, and so turned the comforts of the day into the
terrors of the night. So that in this sense, it may be said of an evil
Conscience, which of the Lord is said in another. Psalm. 139. 12. Unto it the
darkness, and the light are both alike. As full of fear in the light, as in the
dark. And besides, the Lord came but in a gentle wind, the cool breath of the
day, now what a small matter is a cool wind, and that in the day time to, to
put a man in a fear? Such small things breed great fears in evil
consciences. In what a woeful plight would Adam think we have bin, if the
Lord had come to him, at the dead, and dark midnight with earthquakes,
thunder, and blustering tempest?

We may see the like in Gain. After he had defiled his Conscience with his
brothers blood, in what fears, yea, what idle fears lived he? He is so
haunted with fears, that though he had lived in Paradise, yet had he lived in
a land of Nod, in a land of agitation, yea, of trepidation. Judge what case his
evil Conscience made him in by that speech. Genesis 4. 14. It shall come to
pass, that every one that finds me shall slay me. Surely, there could not be
many yet in the world, and those that were in the world, were either his
parents, brethren, sisters, or near kindred. His fear seems to imagine
multitudes of people that might meet him, yea, and that every one he meets
would murder him. What will his Father or Mother be his executioners? What if
any of his sisters meet him, shall they slay him, is not such a swash-buckler
as he, able to make good his party with them? Lo what fearful, and terrible
things a guilty conscience proiects.

As an evil Conscience is miserable in its fears, so in those perplexities
which this fear breeds. These perplexities do miserably, and restlesly
distract a man. Is* 57. 20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. What is the reason of these
troublesome perplexities? The want of the peace of a good Conscience, verse. 21.
There is no peace says my God, to the wicked. The winds make the sea restles,
and stir it to the very bottom, so as the waters cast up mire and dirt. See
in the troubled Sea, the emblem of a troubled Conscience.

But the Torment exceedes all, and the main misery of an evil conscience lies
in that. It is a misery to be in fear, a misery to have inward turbulencies
and commotions, but to be always on the rack, always on the Strapado, this
is far more truly the suburbs of Hell, then is the Popish Purgatory. Oh! the
gripes, and girds, the stitches, and twitches, the throws, and pangs of a
galling, and a guilty Conscience. So sore they are, and so insufferable, that
Judas seeks ease with an halter, and thinks hangging Poena aute^ vehemens, et
multo saeuior, illis Quas et Ceditiu^ grauis invenit and Rhadama^ thus.
ease, in comparison of the torture of his evil Conscience. All the rackes,
wheels, wild horses, hot pincers, scalding lead powered into the most tender,
and sensible parts of the body, yea, all the merciless, barbarous* and
inhumane cruelties of the holy Nocte dieque suum gest are in pectore testem.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 3.
house, are but flea-bitings, mere toys, and May-games, compared with the
torment that an evil conscience will put a man to when it is awakened. It is
no wonder that Judas hangs himself, it had been a great wonder rather if he
had not hanged himself.

The Heathens fabled terrible things Noliteenim putare quemadmodum in fabulis
saepenumero videtis, eos qui aliquid impie scelerateque co^miserint, agitari,
and perterreri furiarum taedis arde^tibus Sua quemque fraus, et suus terror
maxim vexat suum quemque scelus agitat, a menti^que afficit. Suae malae
cogitationes, Conscientiaeque animi terrent. Hae sunt impiis assiduae,
domesticaeque furiae, quae dies noctesque parentum poenas a consceleratissimis
filiis rep^tant. Circer pro Rosc. A mer. Suum quemque facinus, suum scelus,
suae audatia de sanitate, ac mente deturbat. Haec sunt impiorum furiae,
flammae, hae faces Id. m L. Pison.
of their hellish Furies, with their snakes and fiery torches, vexing and
tormenting heinous, and great offenders. These their Furies were nothing else,
but the hellish torments of guilty Conscience, wherewith wicked persons were
continually haunted, as some of the wiser of themselves have well observed. All
snakes, and torches, are but idle toys, and mere trifles, to the most
exquisite torment of a guilty and accusing Conscience.

The sting of Conscience is worse then death it self. Apoc. 9. 5. 6. Their
torment was as the torment of a scorpion when he strikes a man; And in those
days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye,
and death shall flee from them, Popish ones tormented in their consciences, by
the terrible and uncomfortable doctrines of satisfactions, Purgatory fire, etc.
which those Locusts should so terrify them withal, should rather choose death
then live in such uncomfortable condition: The sting of death not so smart, as
the sting of a Scorpion in the conscience. The sting of an accusing Conscience,
is like an Harlot, Prove. 7. 26. More bitter then death. And as Solomon there
speaks of the Harlot, so may it be said of a tormenting Conscience, Who so
pleases God shall escape from it, but the sinner shall be taken by it.

Gods dear children themselves, many of them are not freed from trouble in
their Consciences, but they have their hells in this life, Ion. 2. 2. Out of
the belly of hell I cried unto thee. God for their trial speaks bitter things
to them, and not only denies them peace but, causes their consciences to be at
war with them. Now when God puts his own children to these trials, and
disquiets of Conscience, they are so bitter, and so biting, that had they not
the grace of God to uphold and preserve them, even they could not be saved
from dangerous miscariages. Job was put to this trial, and his Conscience
apprehended Gods anger, and we shall see what a case he was in. Job 6. 8. 9. O
that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing I long for,
even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand,
and cut me off. Nay, worse. Job 7* 14. 15. Thou scarest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me through visions, so that my soul chooses strangling, and death
rather then life. Gods grace preserues his Saints from selfe-murder, but yet
not always from impatient wishes; Job wishes strangling, and chooses it of the
two, but goes no further. What wonder then that Judas does strangle himself,
when his Conscience stares him in the face, when as Job, with whom God is but
in jest in comparison, chooses strangling. If Job wish it, what wonder that
Judas does the deed. Conscience does chastise the godly but with whips, but it
lashes the wicked with scorpions. Now if the whips be so smarting to Job, as
makes him choose strangling, what wonder that the scorpions be so cutting, as
makes Judas seek relief at an halter.

Yea, and that which adds to the misery of an evil Conscience, being
awakened, it is such a misery as no earthly comfort can assuage, or mitigate.
Diseases and distempers of the body, though they be terrible, yet Physic,
sleep, and rest upon a man's bed, yeeldes him some ease, and some comfort.
Sometime in some griefs the comforrable use of the creatures, yields a man
some refreshments. Prou, 31. 6. 7. Give wine unto those that be of heavy
hearts, let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more. But Conscience being disquieted, finds no ease in these. Darius against
his Conscience suffers innocent Daniel to be cast into the Lions den. What
cheer has he that night? He passed the night in fasting, Dan. 6. 18. Not in
fasting in humiliation for his sin, but conscience now began to gall him, and
he having marred the feast of his conscience, Conscience also marres his
feasting, none of his dainties will now down, his wine is turned into gall and
wormwood, no joy now in any thing. He had marred the music of his
conscience, and now he brooks not other music. The Instruments of music
were not brought before him. His guilty conscience was now awakened, and now he
cannot sleep; His sleep went from him. So Job in his conflict of Conscience
hoped for ease in his bed, Job 7. 13. My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall
ease my complaint. But how was it with him? Either he could not sleep at all,
verse. 3. 4. Wearisome nights are appointed unto me, when I lie* down I say
when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro
unto the dawning of the day. Needs must he toss, whose conscience is like the
Sea waves tossed with the winds, or else if Job did sleep, yet did not
Conscience sleep, verse. 14. but even in his sleep presented him with ghastly
sights and visions, When I say my bed shall comfort me, then thou scarest me
with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.

At other times when conscience has been good, Gods people though their
dangers have been great, yet neither the greatness, nor neerenes of their
dangers have broken their sleep. Psa. 3. 5. 6. I laid me down and slept, I
will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against
me round about. And yet if we look to the title of the Psalm, A psalm of
David when he fled from Absalom his son; one would think David should have
had little list, or leisure to have slept. Peter thought to have bin executed
the next morrow by Herod, and though he also lodge between a company of
ruffianly Soldiers, that happily one would fear might have done him some
mischief in his sleep, yet how soundly sleeps he that night. Act. 12. And
holy Bradford was found a sleep, when they came to fetch him to be burnt at
the stake. These fears brake not these men's sleep. How might this come to
pass? They did as Psalm. 4. 8. I will lay me down in peace, and sleep. He that
can lie down in the peace of Conscience, may sleep soundly, whatsoever causes
of fear there be otherwise. But contrarily, he that cannot lie down with, the
peace of conscience, will find but little rest and sleep, though his heart be
free from all other fears. Evil conscience being awakened will fill the heart
with such fears, as a man shall have little liberty to sleep. Oh the sweet
sleep that Jacob had, and the sweet dream when he lay upon the cold earth, and
had an hard stone under his head for his pillow. An hard lodging, and an hard
pillow, but yet sweet rest, and sweet communion with God. A good conscience
makes any lodging soft and easy, but down-beds, and down-pillowes, if there
be thorns in the Confcience, are but beds of thorns, and beds of nettles.
The bitterness of an evil conscience distastes all the sweets of this life,
as when the mouth and tongue is furred in an hot Ague, all meats and drinks
are bitter to the sick party. This is the misery of an evil conscience
awakened in this life?

2. But it may be many never feel this misery here, there is therefore the
more misery reserved for them in hell, in the world to come. Indeed more by
many thousands go to hell like Nabal, ^han like Judas; more die like sots in
security, then in despair of Conscience. Death it self can not awaken some
consciences, but no sooner come they into hell; but Conscience is there
awakened to the full, never to sleep more; and then she lashes and gashes to
the quick, and lets men learn that forbearance was no payment. Tell many men
of Conscience, and they are ready to flap one on the mouth with that profane
proverb, Tush, Conscience was hanged many years ago. But the time will come,
that they who have lived in evil Conscience, shall find that Conscience which
they have counted hanged, shall play the cruel hangman and tormentor with
them. They shall find Conscience vnhanged when it shall hang them up in hell,
when day and night it shall stretch them there upon the rack.

The torments which an evil Conscience puts the damned to in hell, are beyond
the expression of the tongue, and the comprehension of man's conceit. There be
two special things in the torments of hell, we have them both thrice repeated
together. Mark. 9. 44. 46. 48. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. There is an ever-living worm, and never-dying fire. And mark that
in all the three verses the worm is set in the first place, as it were to
teach us, that the prime and principal torment in hell is the worm, rather
then the fire. And what is the worm, but the guilt of an evil Conscience,
that shall lie eternally gnawing and grapping, twiching, and gryping, the heart
of the damned in hell. Men talk much of hell fire, and it were well they would
talk more of it; but yet there is another torment forgotten, that would be
thought on too. There is an Hell worm, as well as there is an hellfire. And
it may be a question whether of the two is the greatest torment. And yet no
great question neither. For as the Heaven of Heaven, is the peace and joy of a
good, so the very Hell of Hell, is the guilt and worm of an evil Conscience.
A man may safely say, it is better being in Hell with a good conscience, the^ to
be in heaven if that might be, with an evil one. Heaven without a good
conscience, what is it better the^ Hell? Paradise was an Heaven on earth, but
when Adam had lost the Paradise of a good conscience, what joy did Paradise and
the pleasures of the Garden afford him more, then if he had been in some sad
and solitary Desert? A good conscience makes a Desert a Paradise, an evil one
turns a Paradise into a Desert. A good Conscience makes Hell to be no Hell,
and an evil one makes Heaven to be no Heaven. Both the happiness, and misery
of Heaven and Hell, are from the inward frame of the Conscience. The Hell of
Hell, is the worm of Hell, and that worm is the worm of an evil Conscience,
which if it be not wormed out, and so the conscience in this life made good,
it will be an immortal worm in hell.

The hellish despair wherewith the damned are overwhelmed, comes rather from
this werme, then from the fire. Whose worm dies not, and whose fire is not
quenched. The fire of Hell never quenches, because the worm of Hell never
dies. If the worm of Hell would die, the fire of Hell would go out. For if
there were no guilt there should be no punishment. So that the very Hell of
Hell, is that selfe-torment which an evil conscience breeds.

Now then all this considered, how powerfully should it move us to labor for a
good conscience. Thou that go on in thine evil courses, and hate to be
reformed and reclaimed, do but bethink thy self if God should awaken thy
Conscience, in what misery thou should live here, what an Hell to have a
palsy Conscience? what an Hell on earth to be always under the accusations,
indictments, and terrors of Conscience, and to live Cainelike in a land of Nod,
in a continual restless agitation. Vt ex cruditate febres noscuntur, et
vermes quando quis cibu^ sumit intempera^ter, it a si quis peccata peccatis
accumulet. nec decoquat eae poenitentia sed misceat pec cata peccatis,
cruditatem contrahit veteru^ and recentiu^ delictorum igne adu retur proprio,
et vernibus consumetur. Ignis est quem generat moestitia delictorum, vermis est
eo quod irrationabilia animi peccata, mentem pungunt, et viscera exedant,
vermes ex vnoquoque nascuntur tanqua^ ex corpore peccatoris, hic vermis non
morietur, etc. Amb. lib. 7. in Luk-c. 14.


But especially as thou fear that everliving, and evergrabbing worm, so
have a care to get a good Conscience. Green and raw fruits breed Chestwormes,
which if heed be not taken will eat the very maw through. A dead body and a
putrified corrupt carcass, breeds worms that lie gnawing at it in the grave.
The forbidden and raw fruits of sin, are those which breed chest-wormes in
the Conscience. The corruptions of the soul, and dead works, are those that
breed this living worm, take heed therefore of meddling with these fruits that
will breed this worm, and get thy conscience purged from dead works, get this
worm killed with the soonest, for if thou let it live till thou die, it
will never die at all, and will put thee to those exquisit torments, from which
to be freed thou would willingly suffer ten thousand of the most cruel
deaths that the wit of man were able to invent.

As then I say thou fear this worm of Hell, so get a good Conscience.
Drink down every morning a hearty draught of Christ's blood, which may make
this worm burst. And when once this worm is burst and voyded, and the
conscience well purged by Christ's blood, take heed ever after of eating those
raw fruits that will breed new worms. Lead so holy, so upright, and so
conscionable a life, that thou may not by thy fresh sins clog thy Conscience
with fresh guilt. Get thy Conscience purged by Christ's blood, and thy
conversation framed by Gods Word. Thy words were found by me, and I did eat
them. Ier. 15. 16. Do thou so, eat no more the unwholesome and worm breeding
fruits of sin; but drink Christ's blood, and eat Gods word, and they both
shall purify and scour thy Conscience from all such stuff, as may breed and
feed the Hell-worme of an evil Conscience.

CHAP. XVI.
The portion and respect that a good Conscience finds in the world.

ANd thus have we hitherto seen Paul's Protestation. The second point follows,
namely, Ananias his insolent and impetuous Iniunction. Verse 2. And the high
Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him, to smite him on the mouth.

Paul had begun his defense in the former verse, and that by authority and
special command, as appears in the former Chapter, at the 30. verse. But he
had no sooner begun, but he is interrupted aad cut off, and has not only his
mouth stopped, but stopped with Ananias fists, He commanded to smite him on the
mouth. Out of which carryage and violence of his, we may observe diverse
things. First learn;

Reward and portion of a good Conscience from the world. It is the portion of a
good Conscience full often to be smitten, either on the mouth, or with the mouth.
Blows either with the fist, or with the tongue. To be smitten one way or
other, is full often the lot of a good Conscience. Smite him on the mouth,
sares Ananias. But let us a little expostulate the matter with Ananias. Smite
him on the mouth? But yet as Pilate speaks in Christ's case? But what evil
has he done? or what evil has he spoken? Smite him on the mouth? But as our
Savior answers, John 18. 23. If he have spoken evil, take witness of the
evil, and proceed legally and formally: If he have spoken well, or no manner
of evil, Why command thou him to be smitten? What has he spoken any treason
against Caesar, or the Roman government? If he have, then as the towne-Clerk
of Ephesus speaks, Act. 19. 38. The law is open, and there are Deputies, let
the^ accuse him, and bring him to his answer. It is a base usage of any
ingenuous person, to be smitten on the mouth in a Court of Justice, a
dishonorable usage of a Roman. Surely it should seem by such base and bitter
usage, that Paul has some way or other fowly forgotten and over-shot himself,
that Ananias his spirit is thus embittered and provoked against him. What has
Paul given him any exasperating and disgraceful terms, has he given him any
open and personal girds, before the whole Council? No, no: No such matter at
all. Why what the^ is the matter that Paul must be thus basely and thus
despitefully used? Will ye know the cause? Men and brethren I have lived in all
good Conscience. Lo here is the quarrel. He has made a profession of a good
Conscience, and for his good Conscience sake are Ananias fists about his ears.
There is nothing so mads men of wicked Consciences, as the profession and
practice of a good conscience does. The very name and mention of a good
conscience makes Ananias half mad, and like one besides himself, he falls
not only to foul words, but to blows also, and Paul must have on the mouth
for his good conscience sake.

Paul might have blaphemed the blessed name of Christ, and rayled upon the
odious Sect of the Nazarens, he might have been a drunkard, an adulterer, or
a murderer, and none of all these things, would have stirred Ananias his
blood, for none of all these should Paul have been smitten; but let him but
once speak, or treat of, or any way meddle with good Conscience, and Ananias
his blood is presently up, he cannot hold his hands, but Paul must have on
the mouth, there is no remedy. So odious a thing is good Conscience and the
profession of it to wicked men. Therefore this is that which a good Conscience
must expect, even Ananias his dole, fistes, blows, smiting, hard and iuiurious
measure, from the world.

This is no new thing. It was our Saviors casc before it was Paul's, Ioh. 18.
22. And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stoodby stroke Jesus
with the palm of his hand, etc. Luke 22, 63. 64. And the men that held Jesus,
mocked him, and smote him, And when they had blinfolded him, they stroke him on
the face. He felt the weight of their fists for the same quarrel that Paul
did. So it was foreprophecyed of him, Isa. 50. 6. I gave my back to the
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. It was the kindness
that Zidkiah could afford Micaiah 1. Kin. 22. 24. He went near and smote
Micaiah on the cheek, and it was the thanks the Prophet was like to have for
the discharge of a good conscience. 2. Chr. 25. 16. Forbear, why should
thou be smitten? It is that of which Job complained so long since, Job 16. 10
Mine enemy sharpens his eyes upon me, they have gaped upon me with the mouth,
they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully.

The same portion did the Prophet Jeremy meet withal, Ier. 20. 2. Then Pashur
smote Jeremiah the Prophet. What was the quarrel? That in the former verse. He
heard that Jeremiah had prophesied these things. Only for discharging his
conscience, for the conscionable dispensation of Gods truth. And as sometime
they smote him on the mouth, so sometime they smote him with the mouth. Ier.
18. 18. Come let us devise devices against Jeremiah, come let us smite him with
the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. And why would they
smite him with the tongue? Only for his Conscience, and fidelity in his
Ministry.

There is mention made of two false Prophets, against whom an heavy judgment
is threatened. Ier. 29. 21. 23. Ahab, and Zedekiah, two base scandalous
debauched persons, who committed villainy in Israel, and committed adultery with
their neighbors wives. The Prophet Jeremy he out of conscience fulfills his
Ministry, and see how lightfingred Pashur is, he has fists for Ieremies face,
and stocks for his heels; but in the mean time Ahab and Zedekiah they may
whore, and play the villains, and they feel not the weight of his little
finger. If his fingers must needs be walking, there is work for them, there he
may strike, and stock with credit. But there is no such zeal against them. No
such dealing with them. Zedekiah and Ahab may be in good terms of grace with
Pashur, whilst Jeremiah must have on the face. and lie by the heels. So well
can wicked men brook villainy, and any wretched courses better then they can a
good conscience: Pashur can better endure an adulterous whore master, then an
honest conscionable Prophet. Villains may walk at liberty, whilst a good
conscience shall sit in the stocks. Here then is the portion a good Conscience,
may look for from the world. The better Conscience, the harder measure. For
which of my good works do ye stone me, says our Savior, Ioh. 10. 32. A
strange recompense for good works, and yet ost-times the best recompense, and
reward that the world can afford good works, and a good Conscience, stones
and strokes. And if so be that fear of law, and happy government bind their
hands, yet then will they be smiting with the tongue: and if the law keep
them in awe for smiting on the mouth, yet then will they do what they dare,
they will smite with the mouth.

Luke 14. 28. Sit down first and count the cost, and whether thou be able to
endure that cost or no. Ananias has a fierce spirit, and a foul heavy fist,
Pashur is a club fisted fellow, and the spitting adders of the world will smite
their sting deep. Suppose a good conscience may speed better, as having the
protection of Chrian government, yet this it must reckon upon, and it must
account of the hardest. Therefore think before hand before you meddle with it,
how you can bear the fists and blows of smiters, if ever you should come
under them.

I may say here as our Savior did to the sons of Zebedeus, Mat. 20. 20. 21.
22. Ye knov not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink of, and to be baptized which the baptism that I am baptized with? Many
say they desire to enter the courses of good Conscience, but do not well know
nor well weigh what they desire. Consider with your selves, Are ye able to
drink of the cup that a good conscience shall drink of? Can ye be baptized
with the baptism that a good conscience must be baptized with? Can ye endure
the smart of Ananias blows? Can ye bear the load of Pashurs club-fist? Think
upon this before hand, and weigh it well, this is that you must make account
off, that will set upon the courses of a good conscience.

Ephesians. 6. 15. Grow marveilous resolute, to harden thy self, and to harden
thy face against all enemies fists, and blows whatsoever, that though Ananias
should dash thee on the face, yet he might not dash thee and thy good
Conscience out of Countenance. Thus did our Savior. Isa, 50. 6. I gave my
back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid
not my face from shame, and spitting. But how was he ever able to endure all
this? See verse. 7. I have set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not
be ashamed. So must thou do that meanest to keep a good Conscience. Get a
face, and a forehead of flint, that enemies may as soon crack a flint with
their knuckles, as by their violence and injuries drive thee from a good
Conscience. Get an Ezekiels face. Ezekiel. 3. 9 Make thy forehead as an Adama^t,
harder then a flint. Steel, and flint thy face with all heroical resolution.
A face of flesh will never endure, but a face of flint will hold Ananias fists
tack, let him strike while he will, he shall sooner batter a flint with his
fist, then stir a resolved conscience out of its station.

But believe me, these be hard things to undergo, who will be able to abide
Quaest.
such hard measure, how therefore may one grow to such resolution, to abide the
worlds fists, and the smart of their smiting.

Ananias. 1. Sam. 24. 5. and 2. Sam. 24. 10. David's heart smote him. And what
are Ananias his blows on the face, to the blows of Conscience at the heart?
One blow on the heart, or with the heart is more painful then an hundred on
the face, and as Rehoboam speaks of himself. 1 King. 12. 10. so Consciences
little finger is thicker, heavier, and more intolerable then both Ananias his
hands, and loins. Now then here is the case. If Paul will stand to his
Conscience, then Ananias his fists will be about his ears. If Paul do forsake
or flawe good Conscience for fear, or for the favor of Ananias, then will
consciences fists be about his heart. Now then if no remedy but a man must
have blows, it is good wisdom to choose the lightest fist, and the softer
hand, and to take the blow upon that part that is best able to bear it with
most ease* The face is better able to abide blows then the heart, and Ananias
his blows are but fillips to the clubbing blows of Conscience. We would
scarce judge him a wise man, that to avoid a cuffe on the ear, would put
himself under the danger of a blow with a club. Here is that then that may
make us to compose our selves to patience, and to grow to an hardines, and a
Christian resolution. Better ten blows one the face* then one on the heart.
Better an hundred from Ananias, then one from Conscience, that will lay on
load; let the world smite, yet mine heart smites not, yea, that strokes and
comforts, whilst the world strikes and threatens. Therefore being smitten in
case of conscience, rather then give out, do as our Savior bids in another
case. Mat. 5. 39. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him
the other also.

2. Consider that in the next Verse, God shall smite thee. God has smiting
fists as well as Ananias. Let him smite, but yet there will come a time that
God shall smite him: God will call smiters to a reckoning.

3. Consider that of David. Psalm. 3. 7. Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon
the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. God will not only
smite the enemies of his people, but will smite them with disgrace, as it is a
matter of vile disgrace to have a box on the cheek, and he will give them
such a dust on the mouth as shall dash out their very teeth; he will lay heavy
and disgraceful judgments upon them, as he did upon Absalom, of whom David
speaks.

May it ever be thy lot to see good Conscience under the fists of smiters, be
not discouraged, start not, stumble not at it. Be not ready to infer; It is
in vain to cleanse a man's conscience, and wash his hands in innocence. But
consider, that this has been ever the worlds madness, and the ancient lot of
a good Conscience, either to be smitten with adversaries hands, or varlets
tongues.

CHAP. XVII.
The impetuous injustice, and malice of the adversaries of a good Conscience.

AS we have seen the entertainment a good Conscience meets withal in the
world, so we may here further see the inordinate violences that the enemies
and haters of good Conscience are carried with. Therefore out of this insolent
Iniunction of Ananias, we may in the second place observe:

The heady violence, and impetuous injustice of the adversaries of good
Conscience. Smite him on the mouth. A man would not imagine that hatred, and
malice against goodness, should so transport a man, as to make him run into so
much, so open, so gross Injustice. Do but examine the fact, and you shall see
a strange deal of injustice therein.

1. Who is he that bids smite? The high Priest. He had a better Canon to live
by. Mal. 2. 6. He walked with me in peace and equity. So Leui walked, and so
should Gods Priests walk also. And that Canon of Paul for the Ministry of the
Gospel, held no less good for the Ministry of the Law, That he should not be
soon angry, no striker. Tit. 1. 7. How haps it then that the high Priest is
thus light fingred. Smite him on the mouth? Oh! shame that such a word should
come out of a Priests, especially the high Priests mouth.

2. Who must be smitten? Paul an Innocent. Foul injustice. Questionless if
Paul had offered such measure but to Ananias his dog, to have smitten him for
nothing, but out of mere spite, Ananias would have judged him a dogged
fellow. And will Ananias use an innocent person as he would be loath a man
should use his dog.

3. Where must this blow be given? In open Court, where they were all Convened
to do^ justice. Still the worse. If he had commanded him to have been smitten
in his private parlour, it had bin unjustifiable, but to smite him in open
Court, and to do injustice in the place of Justice, this is deep injustice.
The place he sat in, the gravity of his person, Gods high Priest, the
solemnity of the administration of justice, all these might have manacled his
hands, and have a little tempered, and bridled his spirit. A foul indignity
for the Judge of Israel to be smitten on the cheek. Mic. 5. 1. As foul an
iniquity for a Judge of Israel to smite on the mouth wrongfully, and in an
open Court of Justice. What an indecent thing for a Judge to go to cuffes on
the Bench? What an intemperate, and a vindictiue spirit argues it? But what is
the Indecency to the Injustice? And what injustice to that which is done upon
the Bench? Of all wormwood that is the most bitter, into which justice is
turned.

4. For what is the blow given? For a good Conscience. What? And has Gods high
Priest no more Conscience then so? His place teaches him to be a protector,
defender, and an incourager of good conscience. His whole office is matter of
Conscience, and will he that should teach, maintain, and encourage good
Conscience, will he smite men for good conscience. What is this but Isa. 58.
4. To smite with the fist of wickedness?

5. When is the blow given? When he is beginning to plead his own innocence,
and to speak in his own defense. More Injustice yet. Did not Nicodemus speak
reason. Ioh. 7. 51. Does our law judge any man before it hear him. Nay, if
Ananias have no regard to Gods law, as it seems he has but a little, that
will smite a man for good Conscience, yet what will he say to Caesar's law? Act.
18. 25. Is it lawful for you to scourge, and so to smite, a man that is a
Roman and uncondemned, and unheard? To judge and condemn a man unheard, is
deep Injustice, but far deeper to punish, and execute him. Will he hang a
man, and then try him? Lo here indeed a right unrighteous Judge, that fears
neither God, nor man, that regards neither Gods law, nor Caesar's.

To have done by Paul as Gallio did. Act. 18. 14. 16. When Paul was about to
open his mouth, to drive him and the rest from the iudgement-seat, this had bin
injustice, but when Paul opens his mouth to speak for himself, for Ananias to
stop his mouth, and to stop it with his fists, to stop his mouth, and smite him
on the mouth both, when he was to speak in his own defense, what greater
depth of Injustice can we imagine? An hundred to one but Ananias was one of the
Sanhedrim, which at that time when the officers not having apprehended Christ,
fell a cursing the people, Ioh. 7. 49. This people that knows not the law is
cursed. Upon which speech Nicodemus seems to meet kindly with them, V. 51.
Does our law judge any man before it hear, and know what he does. As if he had
said, Do you glory in the knowledge of the law, and are they cursed that know
not the law, what then are they that knowing the law go directly against it?
Are the people, Ananias, cursed that know not the law, what art thou thy self
then who know both Gods law and Caesar's, and yet through malice against
Paul, sinnest against both? Unjust and malicious proceedings, God will not let
them have the honor so much as of the color of formality, and legality in
their courses. But they shall so be carried, that the madness and malice of
the^, may lie manifestly open to the view of all the world.

6. By what authority is the blow given? Ananias commanded them. Yea, but Mal.
2. 7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law
at his mouth. And should they that should seek the law at his mouth, against
all law at his command, smite men on the mouth? It was too much that Gallio
did, and the holy Ghost leaves a deep disgrace upon him for it. Act. 18. 17.
that he would suffer others to smite Softhenes, and not to care for it. It was
too much that Ahab suffers Zidkiah to smite Micaiah, and to break the Kings
peace in the Kings presence, he should have condemned him at least to loose his
hand, for striking before the King. But here is a worse matter, he not only
suffers it, but commands it to be done. Ananias commanded to smite. Injustice
suffered by authority is too much, but injustice commanded by authority, that
is far worse.

Paul's phrase. Non est crudelior in orb terrarum ira, qua^ Ecolesia
sanguinariae and hypocritarum: Nam in politica ira est aliquid humani reliquu^.
Nullus tum immanis latro ad supplicium rapitur, quin aliqua commiseratione
tanguntur homines: Sed cum falsa illa, et sanguinarid ecclesia in filium verae
ecclesiae inciderit, non satis ei est effudisse sanguinem, etiam maledicit,
execratur, de vouet, and in miseru^ cadauer saeuit itaque ira falsa ecclesiae,
and furor phaerisaicus est furor plane diabolicus-Luther in Genesis cap. 4. Use 2.
2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Unreasonable men, or absurd men. Malice against the truth, and
the Gospel, so hurries adversaries, that it transports them beyond all bounds
of common equity, common honesty, the gravity of their persons, and places; so
as neither law of God, nor law of man can restrain their violence, and
impetuousnes. No bounds can keep a malicious spirit within compass. It makes
men forget common civility, and carries men beyond all Decorum, even that
Decorum their place, and office calls for. Bonner cannot content himself to
judge, and condemn Gods servants to the fire, it satisfies him not to be their
Judge, but he must be taking the Beadles, or the Hangmans office out of his
hand to, and he must be whipping them with his own hands; And malicious Story
forgetting the gravity of his Doctourship, must be throwing Fagots at the faces
of the Martyrs, when bound to the Stake to be burned. What is to be absurd,
and unreasonable, if this be not? Murderers, and bloody cut-throates shall
find more legal and formal proceedings at their hands, then the maintainers
of the Gospel, and Gods truth shall do at their tribunals. To be sure
Barabba^ shall find more favor, and less hatred then Christ.

Judge by this what may be looked for, if ever the Romish Ananias should get
head amongst us again. Ananias his spirit lives still in that chair of
pestilence. If ever therefore we should come under his fingers, look neither
for law nor reason, honesty, nor equity, look for nothing but the weight of his
fists.

Thus have we seen enemies impetuousnesse in this point, and we may yet see
it a little more in the next. Therefore further in the third place observe.

Ananias commands to smite Paul. A false Priest to smite a true Apostle. Never
do Gods faithful servants suffer harder measure then from such. Who smites
Micaiah, but that counterfeit Enthusiast Zidkiah? 1. Kin. 22. Well might he
come in with his horns. They were emblematicall, and better sigues of the
malice of his heart, then of the truth of his Prophecy. There be no such
horned beasts that push so dangerously against Gods true Prophets, as Satan's
false Prophets are. Ier. 20. Jeremy is buffeted and stocked, and who is the
deed-doer? Pashur the Priest. See Ier. 26. 8. 11. 16. The Prophet finds more
reason and fair dealing from the Princes, and the people, then from the
Priests and the Prophets. These were fiercely bent against him, and nothing
would quench the Wolves thirst, but the Prophets blood. Pilate can find no
fault in Christ, yea seeks to deliver him, but the chief Priests and the
Elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy
Jesus. Mat. 27 20. How woeful a case was it, that more Iuftice and equity
should be in an heathen Pilate, then in the Priests? How well would it have
become them to have sticked, and stood for Christ, if Pilate had sought his
life, rather then that an heathen should plead for him, whilst those that
glory that they are the Priests of God, should seek the murder of Gods Son.
What a pitiful case that Pilate should be the Jew, and the Priests the
Heathens? Therefore is Paul's Preface in his answer before Agrippa worth the
noting. Act. 26. 2. I think my self happy King Agrippa, because I shall
answer for my self this day before thee, Why, what was Agrippa? He was an
Heathen man. Why then should he think himself happy to answer before him?
Had he not been happier if he might have answered the matter before the high
Priest? No; for Agrippa gives him liberty to speak for himself, Act. 26. 1.
Then said Agrippa to Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self. But
Ananias the high Priest lays him on the mouth when having leave he begins to
speak for himself. There is more hope of reason, and fair proceeding from
heathen Agrippa, then from Ananias. There be no such virulent, and violent
enemies against Gods truth and servants, as are degenerate, and counterfeit
friends, and amongst those still they be the bitterest, whom it behooued to be
the best. The bitterest enemies against the Church, are those within her own
bowels.

Ananias was an usurper of the office of the Priesthood, and mark how he
carries himself in the place. He commands Paul to be smitten. Usurpers
commonly are smiters, and usurpation is usually attended with violence. Such as
the entrance, such the administration. We see it true in Abimelech, and
Athaliah. That as it is said of Pope Bonif. the eight, that he entered like a
fox, reigned Integritas praesidentium est salus subditorum, principatus aute^
que^ ambitus occupavit, etiamsi moribus, atque actibus non offendit ipsius
tamen initii sui est pernitiosus exemplo: and difficile est vt bono peraguntur
exitu quaemalo sunt inducta principio ex Decret. Doct. 5.
like a lion, etc. So was it with Ananias, he had a foxes entrance, he came
not to the Priesthood by an hereditary succession, but as the fashion then was,
by simony, bribery, and flattery, and now see how he raigns like a Lion, and
commands Paul to be smitten on the mouth. An ill entrance into any place of
office in Church, or Commonwealth, cannot promise any good in the
administration thereof.

See what woeful times here were, what bitterness, what madness against a
good Conscience. And these were the times that did a little fore-run the fatal
and fearful ruin and desolation of Jerusalem, and the Nation of the Jews.
Ananias his deadly hatred of goodness, and a good Conscience was a bud of the
fig tree that the particular judgment of Jerusalem was even at the doors.
When the rod is blossomed, and pride has budded, and violence, specially
against good conscience is risen up into a rod of wickedness, then may it truly
be said, Behold the day, behold it is come, The time is come, the day draws
near. Ezech. 7. 10. 11. 12. By Bid describing the ancient destruction of this
kingdom Odium in veritatis professoris tanquam subversores omnia tela and
odium in hos. Bed. hist gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 14.
of Britain, this is made a forerunner thereof, The hatred of the professors
of the truth as of subuerters, all the the spite and hate was against them. Our
Savior tells his Disciples, Luke 21. 11. of fearful sights and great signs
that should be from heaven, before the destruction of Jerusalem: And so there
was a fearful comet, and many other prodigious things before the same. Now if
the Jews had had hearts to have considered it, this cordial malignity on
every hand against good Conscience was as sad a Prognosticator of their
approaching ruin, as any blazing star, or terrible sight whatsoever. It is an
ill presage of a Nation going down, when once good Conscience is fisted down.

CHAP: XVIII.
The severity of Gods justice upon the enemies of good Conscience, and the
usual equity of Gods administration in his executions of justice

THus have we seen Paul fisted, and laid on the mouth. How does Paul now take
this blow at Ananias hands? He smites not again, nor offers to repel one
violence with another; he had learned of Christ rather to have turned his other
cheek to him. But yet though he smite him not with the fist, yet he smites
with a check and a just reproof for his violence. And so may a man smite
without transgression, and without revenge. Ps. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite
me, it shall not break mine head. So may a man smite, and yet be a righteous
man. These blows are not to break heads, as Ananias his blows are, but these
are to break hard hearts. Thus Paul smites without transgression of the bonds
of meekness and patience. And so we are now come to the third main point in
the Text, Paul's zealous answer, and contestation.

Verse 3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee thou whited wall.

The contestation is contained in the whole verse. And in this contestation we
have a denuntiation of judgment, and that happily by a Prophetical and an
Apostolical spirit, prophesying to him what should befall him; not an
imprecation out of a private spirit stirred with a desire of revenge. God
shall, or will smite, not, I pray God smite, or I hope to see the day when God
shall smite, but God shall smite. As if he had said, well Ananias thou have
smitten me, hear now what thy doom from God is, I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings, God will call thee to a reckoning for this blow, and Gods hand is over
thine head to pay thee in thine own kind. So then from the whole learn thus
much.

Christian patience though it bind a man's hands, yet does it not always bind
a man's tongue. Though it lay a law upon a man to forbear violence, yet lays
it not a law upon him always to enjoin him silence. Though a man in Paul's
case may not strike, yet he may speak. Though Religion pinion a man's arms
from striking, yet does it not sow and seal up a man's lips from speaking.
Ananias has smitten Paul on the face, and if please him to have another blow
he will not resist him, he has his other cheek ready for him, if his fingers
itch to be doing, but yet for all this, though Paul hold his hands, he does not
hold his peace. Indeed Christ's precept is well known, Matthew. 5. 39. Turn the
other cheek also, but yet for all that see what his practice was when he was
smitten, Ioh. 18. 23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil bear witness
of the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? And yet his precept and
practice do not interferre, nor cross shinnes. For though by his precept he
forbids us to retaliate, or recompense injury with injury, out of the heat of
a vindictiue spirit: yet by his practice he warrants us in cases of injury to
make a manifestation both of our own innocence, and others injustice. Religion
binds no man to be a Traitor to his own innocence, and the justice of his
cause, and by silence to abet others injustice. With a good Conscience may a
man speak, so long as he speaks as Paul did before Festus, Acts 26. 25. The
words of truth and soberness. So a man answer truly, soberly without tackes
of gall, and impatient touches of revenge. Christ and Religion say to man
convented, and injuriously proceeded against, as Agryppa did to Paul Acts 26.
1. Thou art permitted to speak for thy self. This in general, more
particularly, in this Denunciation, Consider the judgment denounced, that is
this, God shall smite thee. From which we may observe two things. First:

See Gods judgments, and the severity of his justice against the enemies of a
good Conscience, and his faithful servants. Ananias smites Paul, and for his
good Conscience, and what gets he by it? God will smite him, and give him as
good as he brings. God will smite smiters. Ananias smites Paul, and God will
smite Ananias; yea, and God did smite Ananias, for he was afterward slain by
Manaimus, one of Captains of the Jews.

It is a dangerous thing, not to smite when God commands, 1 King. 20. 35. 36.
He that would not smite a Prophet when God commanded, was smitten with an heavy
judgment. It is no less dangerous to smite when God forbids smiting. God has
an heavy hand for those that are so light fingred, and he will give them blow
for blow that will be smiting his for a good Conscience.

Touch not my anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 15. He that
touches them, touches the apple of Gods eye, Zach. 2. 8. So he that smites
them, smites the apple of his eye. The eye is a tender place, and sensible of a
little blow. God will not take a blow on the eye, nor bear a blow on his face
at the hands of the proudest enemies of them all, and though we must turn the
other cheek, rather then smite again, yet the Lord to whom vengeance belongs,
will take no blows at their hands, but if they will be smiting, they shall be
sure to hear of him to their cost.

You find Exodus 2. 11. an Egyptian smiting an Israelite. It becomes none
better then Egyptians to be smiting Israelites. Moses spies an Egyptian smiting
of an Hebrew. What gets the Egyptian in the end? See verse 12. God stirs up the
spirit of Moses to smite him, and to slay him. Thus will God teach Egyptians to
be meddling. Pashur smites Jeremy, Ier. 20. 2. What got he by it? The heavy
stroke of Gods hand upon himself, and all his friends, verse. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Herod was a smiter too, Acts 12. 1. 2. He stretched forth his hands to vex
certain of the Church, and he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And what became of him in the end? See ver. 23. The Angel of the Lord smote
him, and he was eaten up of worms, and he gave up the Ghost. It is said of
Jonas his gourd that a worm smote it, and it withered Ion. 4. That was much
that a worm should so soon smite the gourd. But when men will be smiting Gods
people, and his Prophets for a good Conscience, and when Herod will be so busy
as to smite Apostles, God can send not only an Angel, one of his most
glorious creatures, but even a base worm, even one of the weakest creatures to
smite Herod, and eat him both. Jeroboam stretches forth his arm against the
Prophet, 1. King. 13. and his arm withers, he does but threaten to smite, and
God smites him. How much more when Herod stretches forth his hands to vex the
Church, and to smite Gods Ministers, will God not only wither them, but smite
him as Sampson smote the Philistims, hippe and thigh, and make them a rotten,
and a stinking spectacle to all malicious smiters to the worlds end.

Thus is that true which the Prophet implies in that speech, Esa. 27. 6. Has
he smitten him as he smote his smiter? Mark then Gods dealing, he uses to
smite smiters.

Neither is this true only of smiters with the fist, and with the sword, but
it is also true of those smiters, Ierem. 18. 18. Come, and let us smite him
with the tongue. Even such smiters will God smite also, as we may see there,
verse 21 22. 23. Thus God met with Nabal. David sends for relief to him upon
his festival day, and he instead of an alms falls a railing on him, and calls
him, in effect, a Rogue, a Vagabond, and a runne-away. Thus he smote David with
his tongue. What follows? See verse. 38. And it came to pass about ten days
after, that the Lord smote Nabal. And how smote he him? That he dyed. So Zach.
14. 12. Their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. What might the reason
be of that judgment? Because happily many that cannot, or dare not fight with
their hands, for fear of the law, yet fight against Gods Ministers and his
servants with their tongues: Well, God has a plague to smite such smiters.
Though they smite but with the tongue, yet God will smite them, and give them
their portion with the rest of the adversaries of the Church. And if God will
not spare such smiters, how much less will he spare such as smite with the
sword?

Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? So said Iezabel to Iehu, and so may it
be said in this case. Search the Scriptures, search the Histories of the
Church; Had ever any smiter peace which lifted up either hand, or tongue
against any of the Lords people? Did smiters ever escape scot-free? Had they any
cause to brag in the end? Had they ever any cause to brag of the last blow? Did
Herod prosper that smote James with the sword* Did Ananias prosper that smot
Paul? Did the Egyptian prosper that smote the Hebrew? Did Doeg prosper who was
a tongue-smiter as well as an hand-smiter, Psalm. 52. Oh consider this you that
dare lift up your hands and tongues against a good Conscience, and be afraid of
Gods smiting hand, tremble to meddle in this kind. Learn to hold your hands
and tongues, unless ye long to feel Gods smiting hand. Especially take heed
of smiting Gods Ministers in any kind. Deuteronomy. 33. 11. Levi has a strange
blessing, Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of his hand, smite
through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him,
that they rise not again. God saw that of all others Levi would be most
subject to the blows of fists, and tongues, and therefore he is fenced with a
blessing for the nonce, to make smiters fear to meddle with him, or if they
will needs meddle, yet to let them see that it were better to wrong any other
Tribe then that, God would smite them, and smite them to the purpose, that
shall offer to smite him.

Pet. 2. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. It is best leaving them to the Lords
hand. Pray for thy smiters, that God would give them smiting hearts, that their
hearts may smite them for their smiting, pray to God if he see it good they
may be so smitten. This is a revenge will stand with charity. Yet if not, leave
them to God who best knows how to smite smiters.

Ananias, that scarlet whore that animates and sets a work those smiters. It
was low with David when he fled from Absalom, and was glad to receive relief
from the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 17. 27. But chap. 18. Ioab smites Absalom
with three darts, and David returns in peace, and Psalm. 3. 7 blesses God for
smiting his enemies upon the cheek bone. How did the Egyptians oppress, and
smite the poor Israelites, Exodus 2. 11. and Exodus 5. 14. But at last Exodus 12.
God smites the land of Egypt, and the first borne, and Exodus 15. 6. dashes in
pieces these smiters. See how hardit went with Israel, 1 Samuel 4. 10. 11. And
the Philistims fought, and Israel was smitten and there was a very great
slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen, and the Ark of God was taken. Behold what a terrible blow here was given: The Priests slain,
and the Arc captived, as if God himselse had been taken prisoner, and yet at
last, 1 Samuel 5. 6. God smites these smiters, But the hand of God was heavy upon
them, and smote them with Emerods, yea as David sings, Psalm. 78. 66. He smote
his enemies in the hinder parts, he put them to a perpetual reproach. He
smites them reproachfully. Sometimes he smites enemies on the cheek bone,
Psalm. 3. 7. Sometimes he smites them in the hinder parts, both are
disgraceful and reproachful, but the latter the worse, a disgraceful thing
to be scourged and whipped like boys. Antichristian smiters do prevail, and
happily may yet much more, and may give yet sorer blows, but yet as in
Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 2. 34. 35. The stone cut out without hands smote
the Image upon the feet, and brake them to pieces, so that the iron, brass,
clay, gold, all became like the chafe of the summer threshing floores; So will
Christ in his good time smite these smiters, so that their place shall be no
more found.

God shall smite thee. Observe the marvelous equity of Gods administration in
the executions of his justice. God fits his punishments to men's sins. Here we
see the truth of that, Math. 7. 2. With what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you again. If Ananias smite Paul, God will smite Ananias. Smiting
was his sin, smiting shall be his punishment. Paul says not God shall judge
thee, or plague thee, but God shall smite thee, to teach that God does not only
justice upon sinners, but that there is a retaliation in Gods justice, a
recompensing with the like. That look as amongst the Judicials of the Jews
there was a law of retaliation, Eye for eye, tooth for troth, hand for hand,
That if a man wronged another with the loss of an eye, he was not only to be
punished, but to be punished in the selfsame kind, to loose an eye himself;
so the Lord for the most part follows the same course in dispensation of
Justice. If men smite, God will not only punish, but smite.

That look as it is in the case of obedience, so is it in the case of sin.
When men yield obedience to God, he not only rewards their obedience with a
recompense, but with a recompense of Retaliation. Prove. 3. 9. Honoring God
with the increase of the fruits, is honored from God with recompense of the
increase of the fruits. Abraham spares not his seed, therefore God will
mul^iply his seed. Genesis 22. 16. 17. It was in David's heart to build God an
house, therefore God will build him an house 2 Samuel 7. 2. 5. 11.

Thus it is also in the case of sin; this is the rule the Lord proceeds by
often in his Justice, to meet with wicked men in their kind. As with the
merciful he shows himself merciful, so with the froward he will show
himself froward. Psalm. 18. 25. 26. And if men will walk contrary unto him, he
will walk contrary unto them. Leuit. 26. And he will cross them that cross
him. And those that will not hear when he calls, he will not hear when they
call. Pro. 1. 24. 28. For the better clearing of this point, we may see the
truth of it in diverse particulars.

1. Gods punishments are in the same manner. The same manner of sin, the same
manner of punishment. Ananias smites Paul in a barbarous and a malicious
manner, he himself was cruelly smitten, and slain. The sin of the Sodomites
was a ^inne against nature, their punishment was after the same manner, fire
descended from heaven. It is unnatural for fire to come downwards. They sin
unnaturally, fire comes down unnaturally. The Philistims not only smite
Israel, but they do it with a spightfull heart, and merely for Vengeance.
Ezekiel. 25. 15. Therefore ver. 17. I will execute great vengeance upon them with
furious rebukes. Vengeance for vengeance, manner for manner. Such was the late
remarkable Justice of God upon that popish Conventicle in the City, many of
that crew were fallen from God, and fallen from the truth; the Lord slaughters
them by a fall. A fall was their sin, a fall was their death, there was a
fall for a fall.

2. Gods punishments are in the same kind. Look in what kind the sin is,
of the same kind is the punishment. Sodoms sin was in fiery lusts, they were
in their sin set on fire from hell. Their punishment was of the same kind.
God raines down fire from heaven upon them. A fiery sin, and a fiery
punishment. Memorable in this kind was the Justice of God upon that notorious,
and fiery persecutor, Stephen Gardener, who would not sit down to dinner till
the news came from Oxford Act and Mon.
of the fire set to Ridley, and La^imer, but before his meal was ended, God
kindled a fire in his body, which ere long dispatched him, and made him thrust
his tongue black out of his mouth. Such was Gods Justice upon Adonibezek.
Judge. 1. 7. in the cutting off his thumbes, and his great toes. Threescore and
ten Kings, having their thumbes, and their great toes cut off, gathered their
meat under my Table. As I have done, so God has requited me; God has met
with me in mine own kind, he has paid me with mine own coin. Thus was
Gods Justice diverse ways upon the Egyptians. They threw the Israelites
children into the waters, and stained the waters with blood, therefore God
turns their waters into blood. To which that place alludes. Apoc. 16. 4. 5. 6.
And the third Angel powered out his vial upon the waters, and fountains of
waters, and they became blood. And ^ heard the Angel of the waters say,
Righteous art th^n O Lord, etc. because thou have judged thus, for they have
shed the blood of Saints and Prophets; and thou have given them blood to
drink. Where not only the Justice of God, but also the equity thereof is
magnified, not only because God had Judged, but because he had judged thus.
Again, the Egyptians destroy the males of the children, God meets with them
in their kind, he smites the firstborn through out all Egypt. The Egyptians
drown the Israelites Infants in the waters, God pays them in their kind, he
drowns the Egyptians in the waters of the re^ sea, there is drowning for
drowning, and waters for waters, Nadab and Abihu, sin by fire, and Levit. 10.
2. there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them.

How many fires has the Whore of Babylon kindled, wherein she has consumed to
ashes the Saints of God, God will plague her with an end, suiting with her
sin, Apoc. 17. 16. she her self shall be burnt with fire; They shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire. There is fire for fire, Apoc. 9. 12. She
there darkens the light of the truth, with the smoke of heresy, and
superstition; There arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great
furnace, and the Sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the
pit: And Apoc. 18. 9. 18. there we find the smoke of her burning. There is
smoke for smoke. God will make her smoke in the end that has brought such a
deal of spiritual smoke into Fumo pereet qui fumum vendidit.
his Church. And as that Emperor said, Let him perish with smoke that s^lde
smoke; so shall she perish with smoke at the last, that has put out the eyes
of so many thousands with the smoke of heresy and superstition. This was that
Justice of God which the Papists Powder-Martyrs, Catesby, and some others of
them were forced to acknowledge, when they who had thought to have* blown up
the State with Powder, were themselves spoiled with Powder, a spark of fire
flying into it, as they were drying it, and preparing for their defense.

Such is that Justice of God threatened. Heb. 2. 15, 16. Woe unto him that
gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him
drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness, Thou art filled with
shame for glory, drink thou also, and let thy fore* skin be uncovered, the
cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing
shall be on thy glory. A good place for drunkards to think upon, especially
such whose glory is their shame, whose glory is to make others drunk. They
shall have cup for cup, nakedness for nakedness, spuing for spuing, As
they have made others spue and vomit, through oppression by drink, so will God
give them such a draught of the bitter dregs of the cup of his wrath, that
shall make them spue their very hearts out, as Ier. 25. 27. Drink, and be
drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will
send amongst you. Of this kind was that Justice of God upon David himself. He
killes Vriah with the sword, therefore the sword shall not depart from his
house; He defiles the wife of Vriah,, therefore his Concubines are defiled by
Absalom. This is that Justice, Apoc. 13. 10. He that leads into Captivity,
shall go into Captivity; he that kills with the sword, must be killed with
the sword. It was the most righteous hand of God upon Saul, that he that puts
Gods Priests to the sword should fall upon his own sword; and just with God
that Elymas the Sorcerer, that would have kept the Deputy in spiritual, should
himself be smitten with bodily blindness.

3. Gods punishments are often in the same part, and member of the body,
wherewith men have offended. That look as renowned Cranmer dealt with himself
at his Martyrdom; That hand wherewith he had subscribed to the six Articles,
that hand he first put in the fire, in an holy revenge upon himself; even so
deals the Lord very often in his Justice; That which men have made the
instrument of their sin, God makes the subject of his Judgments. Absaloms
pride, and his weakness lay where Sampsons strength was. Absaloms hair was
Absaloms pride, therefore Absaloms hair, as it is conceived, was Absaloms
halter, and whilst he will needs spare the Barber a labor, he also spares
the Hangman a labor, Such was Gods Justice upon Sampson himself. He can find
none to be the pleasure of his eyes, as the Prophet speaks of his wife, Ezekiel.
24. but Philistims. Judge. 14. 1, 2, 3. and Chapt. 16. 1. and so in the love of
a Philistim, Dalilah, he abuses his eyes. What is the issue? At last the
Philistims put out his eyes. God punished the abuse of his eyes with the loss
of his eyes, and those eyes that loved Philistims, were plucked out by
Philistims.

Memorable in this kind was Gods justice upon that French King Henry the
second, who in a rage against a Protestant Counselor, committed him into the
hands of one of his Nobles to be imprisoned, and that with these words, That
he would see him burned with his own eyes. But mark the justice of God
within a few days after, the same Noble man with a Lance put into his hands
by the King, did at a Tilting run the said King into one of his eyes, whereof
he dyed.

Of this kind was the Justice of God, upon Zachary, Luke 1. Offending with his
tongue in that question, How can this be, he is punished with the loss of the
use of his tongue, and speech for a time. The rich gluttons tongue had denied
Lazarus a crum, therefore it is denied a drop of water. The same glutton had
abused his tongue in gluttony, and therefore his tongue has a peculiar torment
in hell. So those Zach. 14. 12. had their tongues consumed in their mouths,
like enough as with their hands so with their tongues they had fought against
Jerusalem.

Such was Gods Justice upon Iere boam, he stretches forth his arm against the
Prophet, and the Lord withers it. He with his arm threatens to smite, and God
smites him in his arm. Like that justice which was done upon the Emperor
Aurelianus, who when he was ready to subscribe, and se^ Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 29.
his hand to an Edict for the persecution of the Christians, was suddenly
cramped in his knuckles, and so hindered from it by the judgment of God.

I may not here omit that notable instance of Gods Justice upon Rodolph, Duke
of SVEVIA, he whom the Pope stirred up against his lawful Lord and Soueraign,
against his Oath to usurp his Ctowne, and Empire. This Rodolph in his Wars
for the Empire, was wounded in the right hand, of which wound he dyed, and at
his death acknowledged Gods Justice in these words; You see, says he to his
friends, here my right hand wounded, with this right hand I swear to Videtis
manum dexteram meam de vulnere sauciam. Haec ego iurauis Domino meo Henrico vt
non nocere^ ei nec insidiar^r gloriae eius. Sed iussio Apostolicae,
Pontificu^que p^titio n^e ad id adduxit, vt turamcntt transgressor honere^ mihi
indebitum vsurpare^. Quis igitur finis nos exceperit, videtis quiain manu vnde
iurame^ta violaui mortale hoc vulnus accepi, etc Morn. Mist ^niq p. 256
my Lord Henry the Emperor. But the command of the Pope has brought me to
this, that laying a side the respect of mine Oath, I should usurp an honor
not due to me. But what is now come of it? In that hand which has violated
mine Oath, I am wounded to death. And so with anguish of heart he ended his
days. An example so much the rather to be marked, that men may see how God
blesses the Popes blessings, and his dispensations with Oaths, especially,
when they are given to arm men to rebellion against their lawful Sovereigns.

4. The equity of Gods Justice appears in that. Prou. 26. 27. Who so digeth a
pit shall fall therein, and he that rolls a stone, it will return upon him.
Such was Gods Justice upon Haman, he made a gallows for his own neck.
Hitherto we may refer the justice of God, when God turns men's beloved sins
into their punishments. Whoredom was the Levites Concubines sin. Judge. 19.
2. and Whordome was her death, verse 26. The Lord Deu. 28. 27. threatens the
botch of Egypt, and how frequently is the sin of uncleanness smitten with
the French botch, the fruit of the sin? How frequent are the examples of Gods
Justice upon drunkards, drunkenness their sin, and drunkenness their death.
And so that Proverb is often verified. Prou. 5. 22. His own iniquities shall
take the wicked himself, and he shall be bolden with the cords of his sins.

5. The equity of Gods Justice appears in this, when he makes the place of
sin, the place of punishment. We have frequent examples of this in
Scripture. This was threatened Ahab. 1 King. 21. 19. In the place where dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood. And this was made good.
2 King. 9. 26. In Tophet the place where they had slain their Sons, and
Daughters, would God slay the Jews Ier. 7. 31. 32. And as their houses were
the places of their sins, so should their houses be the places of their
punishment. Ier. 19. 13. And because the Sabbath was profaned in the gates of
Jerusalem, therefore in the gates thereof would God kindle a fire. Ier. 17. 27.
And remarkable is that, Ezekiel. 6. 13. Their slain men shall be amongst their
Idols round about their altars, and under every thick Oak, the place where
they did offer sweet savor to all their Idols. Such was the Justice of God in
that late blow upon that Popish Company. In the very place where they used to
dishonor God, the hand of God was upon them, they were slain, and their
carkases crushed in the place of their Masse-worship, the first floor falling
into their Massing place, and so they and their Crucifixes, and Images, all
dashed together, God doing with them as with the Egyptians. Numb. 33. 4. Not
only smiting them, but also executing judgments upon their gods; yea, not
only so, but executed them and their gods, in the selfsame place, where God
had been by them so much dishonored.

6. The equity of Gods justice is to be seen in the time of his punishments.
God often makes that time wherein men have sinned the time of his judgments. At
the time of the Passe-over did the Jews crucify Christ, and at the time of
the Passe-over was Jerusalem taken. Heavy is the calamity that is befallen the
Churches beyond the Seas, the time wherein the first blow was given, is not to
be forgotten. The first blow was upon the Sabbath, upon that day was Prague
lost. What one thing have all those Churches failed in more, then in that point
of the religious observation of that day? That day they neglected to sanctify
by obedience, upon that day God would be sanctified in his justice upon them,
and in the time would have them read one cause of their punishment. Neither is
the time wherein God did that late justice upon those Popish persons to be
forgotten. It is somewhat that after their Roman account, it was upon their
fifth of November, God would let those of that Iesuited brood see how good it
was to blow up Parliament houses, and happily would have them learn more
loyalty and religion, then to scoff at our new holyday.

Of this kind was Gods justice upon one Leaver, who railing on that worthy
Martyr and servant of Christ, Mr. Latimer, saying, that he saw that evil
favored knave Latimer, when he was burned, and that he had teeth like an
horse, his son the same hour, and at the same time as near as could be
gathered, wickedly hanged himself. And the same was Gods Justice, ceazing upon
Steven Gardener, the same day that Ridley and Latimer were burned.

Since then there is such an equity in Gods administration of justice, let it
be our care and wisdom to observe the same. Learn to Coment upon Gods works
of Justice, and to compare men's ways, and Gods works together. God is to have
the praise and glory of his Justice upon others, as well as of his mercy to
ourselves. Now we shall then be best able to give God this glory, when we so
observe his administration, that we may be able not only to say, The Lord is
just, but the Lord is just in this, and that particular, when we can say, as
Revel. 16. 5. not only Righteous art thou O Lord that iudgest, but righteous
art thou O Lord that iudgest thus. Thus they sinned, and thus are they
punished. It is good to observe all the circumstances of Gods Justice, that so
not only the justice, but the wisdom and equity of Gods Justice may be
seen; and this is to trace the Lord by the foot, Psalm 68. 24. Especially we
should be thus wise in personal evils that befall our selves, that by our
punishment, and the circumstances thereof, we might be led to the
consideration of our sins, and so might say as Adonibezek; As I have done, so
has God rewarded me.

God the praise of his equity as of his justice. So does David, Psalm. 7. 15.
16. 17. I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness.

Tremble and sin not. Take heed how, and wherein we sin, least by our
sins we teach God how to punish us* Take heed of abusing thy tongue in
swearing, railing, scoffing, least God lay some terrible judgment upon thy
tongue here, or some peculiar torment upon thy tongue in hell hereafter. Take
heed what measure thou measure to others, least thou teach God to measure the
same to thy self. Take heed that thou make not thine house a den of spuing
drunkards, least God make thine house to spue thee forth. Take heed how thou
use thy wits, thy strength, take heed of sinning in thy Children, or any thing
else thou have, least God make the matter of thy sin, the matter of thy
punishment.

FINIS.

