A Ballad Entitled, a New well a day /
As plain master Papist, as Donstable way.

Well a day well a day, well a day woe is me
Sir Thomas Plomtrie is hanged on a tree.
Among may news
As touching the Rebels
their wicked estate,
Yet Sir Thomas Plomtrie,
their preacher they say,
Has made the North country, to cry well a day.
Well a day, well a day, well a day, woe is me,
Sir Thomas Plomtrie is hanged on a tree.
And now many fathers and mothers be theare,
are put to their trialles with terrible fear,
Not all the gaye Crosses nor gods they adore,
will make them as merry, as they have been before,
Well a day, well a day, etc.
The widows woeful, whose husbands be taken
the childerne lament them, are so for saken,
The church men yt chaunted the morrow mass bell
Their Pardons be granted they hang very well.
Well a day well a day. etc.
It is known they be fled, that were the beginers
it is time they were ded, poor sorofull sinners
For all there great haste, they are hedged at a stay
with weeping and waylinge to sing well a day.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
Yet some hold opynon, all is well with the highest
they are in good saftie where freedom is nieste
Northumberland need not, be doutefull some say,
and Westmorlande is not, yet brought to the bay.
Well a day, well a day etc.
No more is not Norton, nor a number beside,
But all in good season, they may hap to be spide,
It is well they be wandered, whether no man can say
But it will be remembered, they cry well a day.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
Where be the fine fellows, that carried the crosses,
Where be the deuisers, of Idols and Asses,
Where be the gaie Banners, were wont to be borne
where is the devotion of gentle John Shorn.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
Saint Pall, and Saint Peter, have laid them a board
and say it is feetter to cleave to Gods word
Their Beads, and their bables, are best to be burnd
and Moises tables toward them to be turnde.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
And well a day, wandreth still to and froe,
be wailinge the wonders, of rumors that go,
Yet say the stiff necked let be as be may,
though some be sore checked, yet some skape away
Well a day, well a day. etc.
And such some be sowers of seeds of Sedicion,
and say the popes pardon, shall give them remission
That keep them selves, secret and preeuilie say,
it is no great matter for this well a day.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
You shall have more news er Candelmas come
their be matters diffuse yet lookte for of some,
Look on, and look still, as ye long to here news
I think Tower hill, will make ye all muse.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
If they that leave tumbling begin to war climing
for all your momblinge and merry pastimeing.
Ye will then believe, I am sure as I say,
that matter will meene, a new well a day.
Well a days, well a day. etc.
But as ye be faithless, of God and his law,
so till ye see hedles, the Traitors in straw,
You will be still whisperinge of this and of that,
well a day, woe is me, you remember it not
Well a day, well a day. etc.
Leave of your lying, and fall to true reason,
leave of your fond spieng, and mark every season
Against God and your contrie to taulke of revelling
not Sir Thomas Plumtrie can bide by ye telling
Well a day, well a day. etc.
And such as seduce the people with blyndnes,
and bid them to trust the Pope and his kyndnes
Make work for the tynker, as proverbs does say,
by such popish patching, still comes well a day.
Well a day, well a day. etc.
And she that is rightful your Queen to subdue ye,
although you be spitfull has given no cause to ye
But if ye will vex her, to try her hole force,
let him that comes next her, take heed of her horse
Well a day, well a day. etc.
She is the Lieftennante of him that is stowtest,
she is defender of all the deuowtest,
It is not the Pope nor all the Pope may,
can make her astonyed, or singe well a day.
Well a day, well a day.
God prosper her highness, and send her his peace,
to govern good people, with grace, and increase,
And send the deseruers, that seek the wrong way
at Tyborne some Caruers, to singe well a day.
well a day, well a day. etc.
W. E.

Finis.
Imprinted London in Fleestrete beneath the Conduit, at the sign of S. John
Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.

blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms


