BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for making current certain French Coin.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty for the Portion of his dear Confort
the Queen, has lately received some good sums of money of the Coin of
France, which his Majesty gave order should have been new stamped and coined
in his Highness Mynt within the Tower of London, but by reason of the
infection of the Plague in and about the City of London, which has also taken
hold of many of the Workmen in the Mynt, the same cannot be so speedily
performed as His Majesty's most public, and pressing occasions, especially
the furnishing of His Royal Fleet and Army do require; His Majesty upon
mature deliberation with His Privy Council, has found it necessary to make
use of the said Coin in Specie as he received it from his good Brother the
French King. And to that end and purpose does hereby publish and declare, That
the silver Coin of France called the Cardecue shall be from henceforth current
within his Majesty's Dominions at the value of Nineteen pence half penny, being
the selfsame value at which it is current in the Country of France.
Nevertheless for avoiding of such inconvenience as might ensue to His
Highness and his loving Subjects by bringing in and uttering light Coin, His
Majesty does straightly forbid, That no person or persons do at any time
hereafter import into this Realm, or any his Majesty's Dominions any of the
said Coin called Cardecues upon pain of confiscation of the Coin so to be
imported: the one moity thereof to His Majesty, and the other moity to him
that shall seize the same. And does also straightly charge all Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, and other Officers of His Highness Ports, to make
diligent search and seizure of all such Coin as shall be imported contrary to
His Majesty's Royal Proclamation.

Given at the Court at Tichfeld the fourth day of September, in the first year
of His Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Printed at Oxford by I.L. and W.T. for BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXV.


