A proper new ballad sheweing that Philosophers Learnynges, are full of good
warnynges.
And song to the tune of my Lord Marquis Galyarder? or the first traces of
Que passa.


Philosophers learnings, are full of good warni^gs,
in memory yet left, to scoole us,
So be there contained, in Poietries fained
great Documentes, to rate and rule us,
As well for continuance, of life health and substance,
whose vanities the world requires,
As for the derection of life by correction
from lyberties that lust desires.
Menander being asked what life was, he answered,
a misery, that never cease
Tormenti^g minds worldly, for goods goton hardly
with contraries as time increases,
Where in is no surance of hope nor in duraunce
but Ieoberdies as fortune sendyth,
Now sickly now helthie now poorly now welthy,
with casualties as life contendith.
Of Chilo thus reed we, whose council most need we
no memory ought more to move us,
Then for to know throwly, our selves and our dewty,
to notify what does behoue us,
And as we seem faulty, reiecte folyes noughtie
with practesinge all ways to shone them,
So may we triumphi^g, give praise to each good thing,
Recomfortinge that we have done them:
Excess that delights as Plutarche well writes
in greedines that life requires,
In surfeitinge disshes ill workinge ill wishes
such filthiness as flesh desyrethe,
withdraw, with their pleasurs, dame natures dew measures,
whose governance is so defaced,
What man can dispose them, when lust over throws them:
to temperaunce, that should be placed.
Periander of living good counsel once geuinge,
said merrily look well within thee,
If conscience accuse thee, ill rest will abbuse thee
no liberty has leave to win thee,
Keep co^cience then clearly, that life may live chearly
as Socrates does wisely will thee,
No corzye shall grieve thee, sound sleeps shall reliue thee
Unquietness, can no way spill thee.
If fortune displease us, whose wrackes may disease us,
Let Sophacles his doctrine skoole us,
Who writes that no surety, on earth gets victrye
But patience in pains to rule us,
In such points presisely good counsel most wisely,
Exuperate blind fortunes scourges,
As the Mariner steareth, the Ship when he fears
The violence of salt Sea sourges.
Ten thousand and ten to, of thease and like men to,
Like Documentes have left behind them,
Methinks that these pagons, may counsel good Christians,
Since life has no suertie, nor long time of puertie
nor accedence that can prevail us,
Let wisdom now win us, to plant virtue in us,
With penitence ear life does fail us.
quod W. Elderton.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fleetes;treet beneath the Conduit, at the sign of
Saint. John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.










