A SERMON, Preached at Paul's Cross, the 3. of November 1594. entreating of the
second coming of Christ, and the disclosing of Antichrist. With a confutation
of diverse conjectures concerning the end of the world, contained in a Book
entitled, The second coming of Christ. Newly perused, corrected, and the
second time imprinted. Preached by John Dove.

Reu 1. Behold, he comes in the Clouds, and every eye shall see him.
Imprinted by V. S. for William Iaggard, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet in Saint Dunstans Churchyard.

To the most virtuous and Noble Gentleman, Master Frances Gorges.
Whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema maran atha, had in
execration even to the death. But I know that you have loved him from your
cradle, for so much as you have bin norished up in the words of faith, and
wholesome doctrine, which you have continually embraced. Wherefore, in him, whom
you have thus loved, (so long as you cease not to love him) I also love you as
my soul, and tender your salvation as mine own. The God, even the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whom you serve, and who is blessed for evermore,
knows that I lie not. And, howbeit, the preaching of the cross is
foolishness to them that perish: yet seeing it has pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, you must suffer a little
this my foolishness, which am gealous over you with a godly gealosy. Therefore!
charge you before God, and the L. Jesus Christ which shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom, that you decline not to the
right hand, nor to the left, neither to schism nor popery, but hate them both,
as hitherto you have done, with a perfect hatred. And though you be young in
years, yet be not a child in understanding, carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the deceit of men, and with craftines, whereby they lay in wait to
deceive: but follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him which
is the head, that is Christ. And so doing, assure your self, that he which
has begun this good work in you, will perform it, until the day of Jesus
Christ. God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten you again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of his son from the dead to an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, bless you and
guide you with his holy spirit, that you may increase in wisdom in stature, in
favor with God and man, and so multiply his graces upon you, that you may go
forward from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace, and grant that at the
length we may meet together unto a perfect man, and to the measure of the age
of the fullness of Christ.

Yours in the Lord, John Dove.

A Sermon of the second coming of Christ, and the disclosing of Antichrist.
1. John, 2, verse 18. Little children, it is the last hour, and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists: whereby
we know that it is the last hour.
A Brief admonition, concerning the final consummation and end of the world.
In which admonition I observe these two things: first a bare and simple
affirmation, that it is not only in the staggering and declining age, but,
which exceeds dotage, at the very vpshot, and like a sick man which lies
at deaths door, ready to breath out the last gasp, in these words: Little
children, it is the last hour. Secondly, an argument for proof and
confirmation thereof, which is the coming of Antichrist; in these words: Ye
have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists,
whereby we know that it is the last hour,

Little children it is the last hour Besides the common and usual
signification, an hour is diversely understood in the holy scriptures,
sometimes for the fear and horror of death, our Savior being in his agony
prays to his father in this manner: My soul is troubled: John. 12.
father save me from this hour, and that portion of sorrow which in Saint
Matthew is called a cup, is also called an hour, Father if it Mar. 14.
be possible let this hour pass away from me: Sometimes for the last period
of man's life: John 13. Romans 13.
He knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto
his father: Thirdly for any opportunity and fitness of time: now the hour is
come that we should awake out of sleep for our redemption draws nearer then
when we first believed. Fourthly, for any small moment, or instant, far
shorter than an hour, as, when he sent his Disciples as sheep among wolves,
he armed them with patience, saying: When they Matt. 10.
shall deliver you up, take no thought, how, or what ye shall answer, for,
vobis dabitur in illa hora, It shall be given you in that hour. But, in this
place it is taken more largely, for hours, days and years, and all distance
of time, between the first coming of Christ in humility, and his second
coming in majesty. For since this epistle was written, 1500, years are
already expired, and yet the hour not ended, which time seems to man a date
very long, Which dwells Job. 4.
in a house of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who shall be destroyed
before the moth, whose flesh is clothed with worms, and whose memory may he
compared to ashes: who never lives the third part of the years of the Heart,
which brayeth after the water Psalm. 41. Mat. 24. Psalm. 39.
brook, or the raven which preyeth upon the dead carkas, nay rather, Whose
life is but a span long, and as nothing before God. To man I say, it seems
long, because his life is very short, but to God which is everlasting, a
scantling very brief, and therefore fitly called an hour. For, what is one
drop of water to the Ocean sea? one grain of Wheat to all the corn
threshed on the barn floare after harvest? one grape to all the clusters
pressed in the winefatte at the time of vintage? one acre of ground in the
view of the map of all the world? the life of the abortiue and untimely
fruit of a woman, to the age of Methusalem, the thoughts of a fool to the
wisdom of Solomon, which had a large heart as the sands of the sea, the
knowledge of new born babes to the experience of Noah, which saw two worlds,
the old and the new: the center of the earth, to the Circumference of heaven a
right line to a circle: one hour to many thousand years: the same is this
last period of the world, being compared with eternity, which never began,
and never shall end. As also for two other reasons, that considering the time
is so short, it may be an incitement to stir up the godly, and a consolation
to comfort the afflicted: to make the godly watchful; for so writes Peter:
the end of all things is at hand, be ye 1. Pet. 4
therefore sober and watchful in prayer, to arm the afflicted with patience,
seeing they have but a little tribulation to endure, so says our Savior: When
you see these things begin Luc. 21.
to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption
draws near. And rebuking the drowsinesse of Peter, James, and John, he
draws argument of reprehension from the brevity of the time, saying: could
ye not have watched with me one Mar. 14.
hour? Seeing it is but an hour, we must not be heavy, as the Apostles which
slept, nor loose as Satan, which the nearer he is to his judgment, the more
he rages: nor envious as the evil tenant, which when his lease is almost
expired, makes wast and hauock: but patient like travelers, which are less
weary being almost at their iourneys end: and vigilant as the faithful
servant, which when he is near his freedom, is more dutiful in his service,
because he has but a short time to serve.

But for my better proceeding, and your edifying, in my two hours discourse of
this one and last hour, concerning the first part, these four points in
particular by Gods gracious assistance, and your christian patience are to be
discussed. First, of the weakness of their arguments which hold this
conclusion; that the world shall never have an end. Secondly, their rashness
is to be discovered, which make a show of divinity, but in deed set abroch
their own conceits, and private fantasies, and so unadvisedly take upon them
to demonstrate when the world must have an end. Thirdly, how far we may be
bold to determine, having first with judgment and sobriety looked into the
state of this question. Fourthly, after it shall be made evident, that the
kingdom of God is not now e longinquo, but e propinquo not a far off, but even
at our doors, how we ought to behave our selves in the mean time, expecting
the most blessed coming of our Savior Christ.

Concerning the first point, two sorts of men deny that the world shall have
an end, Philosophers and Atheists: The Philosophers Phys. l. 8.
draw their proofs from natural reason, the Atheists from Divinity, both are
controlled by this place. The Philosophers argue out of Aristotle, that the
world shall have no end, because it had no beginning; that it had no
beginning, because it was always in motion; that it was always in motion,
because God in whom all other things have their being and moving, ever moved
it, for nothing else could be moved by him if the world were not, and if he did
not alwais move as now he does, he is not constant, and permanent in one
estate, but subject to change, which is an absurdity, and may not be
granted. But, because, such curiosity does not edify, and I am not to play
the Philosopher in this place, and faith is not agreeable to natural reason, I
answer Aristotle the mirror of human wit, not by wit or human reason,
for that I can not, but against him I oppose the doctrine of Saint Paul: Where
is the disputer? 1. Cor. 1.
has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishness? seeing the world by
wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God through the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Christ says, that which
is John 3.
flesh is fleshly. Aristotle, though the wisest among the Gentiles, was a
sensual man, and therefore understood not the things which were of God.

I come to the Atheists; which (as Beza In anotat. in Pet. 2. Pet. 8.
writes) are in the courts of Princes. Of the^ says Peter. This first
understand, that there shall come in the latter days mockers, which shall
willbe after their own lusts, and say: where is the promise of his coming?
for since the fathers slept, ad things have continued alike from the first
creation. In the which words, they draw a weak argument from the long
continuance of the world, to prove the perpetuity of the same, and conclude
this enthymem: The world has ever continued alike from the first Creation,
therefore it shall always so continue. The Apostle makes answer to the
antecedent two manner of ways. First, he denies it to be true by a notable
instance, for once (says he) the world was destroyed by a deluge of water,
therefore all things have not continued alike from the first creation.
Secondly, Genesis 7.
besides that the long continuance of the world, if it were granted, were no
argument to prove the perpetuity of the same: he answers by a distinction,
that this long continuance were long in respect of men only, and not of God, so
that these 5500 years, which are commonly reckoned from the first creation
until this age, are but as five days and an half in the sight of God, a
very short time, which saint Peter proves by the authority of the Prophet,
Psalm. 90.
who affirms that a thousand years are with God as short as one day, even as
one day with God, is as long as a thousand years with men.

Having answered the objection of the Atheists, the Apostle disputes against
the^ by an argument a simili in this manner. Even as the old world (meaning the
earth) which was of the water, and by the water, had her being and continuance
by the word of God, and by the same word of God, and the same waters it
perished: so the new world (meaning both heaven and earth) are by the same word
kept in store and reserved to fire. As Much as if he had said: before the flood,
the world continued long, yet at length it was destroyed by the same thing of
which it consisted, which was the element of water, so after the flood it has
continued longer, yet it is the second time to be destroyed of the other
element of which it consists, which is fire. When the flood had ceased, the
Lord gave the rainbow for a token of his covenant between Genesis 9.
him and us, but in the rainbow are especially to be observed two things, the
figure there of, and the colors whereby it is made visible unto our eyes: the
figure is like a semicircle cut off in the middle by our Horizon, so that to
our sight it seems to reach from the highest arch of heaven, to the lowest
foundation of the earth, to signify, that for as much as man which dwells in
the lowest earth, offended him which fitteth in Psalm. 2.
the highest heaven, Gods mercy pierced the clouds, and descended from the
highest heaven to the lowest foundation of the earth unto the sons of men.
But the colors where with it is beautified, are principally two; the one is a
Sea-colour, which betokens Water, where with it was drowned, the other
fiery, betokening the other Element, whereunto the world until the day of
judgment is reserved.

The Philosophers and Atheists being gainsaid, which affirm that the world
shall never have an end: it follows that we touch the second kind of men,
which are Christians, but of two sorts, Protestants and Papists, which both
expect the acco^plishment of this last hour, but err in this, that they go
another way too far, and seeming to know that which they know not, enter into
the secrets of God: the Protestants directly, and the Papists by a necessary
consequent, do define and determine when the world shall have an end. And
therefore as the Apostle says: (...), Romans 1.
when they professed themselves wise, they became foolish. Some Protestants
have published a book greatly esteemed of amongst the common people, in which
is maintained this argument: That the frame of Heaven must needs be dissolved
The second coming of Christ.
within a certainty of days: and the principal reasons whereby they undertake
the proof of their fantasies, are these five which follow.

The first is a blind prophecy which they father upon Elias, not read of in
the scripturs but in the Rabbis and Talmud of the Jews, that the world could
last but six thousand years after the first creation, two thousand under
nature, two thousand under the law, and two thousand under grace. The time of
nature they define to be from the first creation to Abraham, to whom the law of
circumcision was given: the time of the law from Abraham to the preaching of
John the Baptist, which began in the 30. year of the incarnation of Christ:
the time of grace from the preaching of John to the day of judgment. And (say
they) as Elias lived after the first 3000. years were expired, and then was
taken up alive in his fiery chariot, so after the other 3000. years shall be
accomplished, those that shall be found at that time quick on the earth, must
be taken up in the clouds to meet our Savior coming to judgment. For
answer whereof, besides that they err in their computation of years, which
is manifest to them which are conversant in the Histories of the bible, we
utterly deny, and renounce the authority of the Rabbis and Jewish Talmud as
superstitious and false, not giving credit to any thing which is written of
Elias in them, more than may be proved out of the most holy scriptures, and so
consequently denying that Elias ever writ any such prophecy, we displaye the
weakness of that argument, in this manner. It is a rule Logic, that a
similitude must not hold in all things, but only in that whereto it is
applied. Wherefore forasmuch as Paul writes: That we shall not all sleep, 1.
Cor. 15.
because, as it is in the article of our Creed, Christ shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead, true it is that Elias which was taken up quick,
was a lively tipe of them which shall be found quick at the day of judgment:
for, as he was taken up alive, so they must be taken up alive without tasting
of death, only their corruptible bodies being changed: but it is no good
consequent, either in Logic or Divinity, that because Elias was a type of
them in this one thing, therefore as Elias was taken up after the first 3000.
years, therefore they must also be taken up, when the other 3000. years be
ended. The insufficiency of this argument I will show you by the like. Henoch
was a type of them which shall be found quick at the day of Judgment, as
well as Elias, But Henoch was taken up alive, and translated to a better life,
in the 987. year of the world: if therefore the former argument drawn from
Elias be good, this also must follow, that the day of judgment should have
bin nine hundred eighty seven years after the translation of Henoch, so that
the world should not have endured in all, two thousand years after the first
creation. Furthermore, they affirm, that some part of the last thousand years
must be defalcated and cut off, for the elects sake, which is a mere
contradiction to that which went before, for then can not the prophecy which
they father upon Elias be true, that the world should continue 6000. years.
And this defalcation of years they prove by the answer of the Angel vriel,
which being asked whether the time to come were shorter then the time past?
answered: As the 2. Esd. 4.
rain is more than the drops, and as the fire exceeds the smoke, so the
portion that is past has the upper hand. Whereas, in deed, there is no proof
of defalcation, for, besides that this Scripture is Apocrypha, and therefore no
sufficient proof, and they err with the Papists, affuming that it is
Canonical: and their arguments which they borrow of Theodorus Bibliander,
against Saint Ierom, a man of greater authority than himself, to prove that
it is Canonical, because it teaches the everlasting kingdom of Christ, the
reprobation of the Gentiles, and election of the Jews, are not sufficient
proofs, because the works of men do teach the same things, whereas no works of
men are Canonical. Esdras lived about 3600 years after the creation, so that
then the time to come might be shorter than the time past, without any
defalcation of years or days.

Secondly, they dispute in this manner: A thousand years with God, are as one
day. Psalm. 90. 2. Pet.
But as God labored six days and rested the seventh: so shall God be in action
(as it were) for the preservation of the same, and gathering together of his
Church six thousand years, proportionably to those six days, and then shall
be a perpetual Sabbath. And as in time past they began the celebration of the
Sabbath, at the midst of Exodus 20.
the sixth day, making half holy day, and so labored the week days but five
days and an half: so half of the last thousand years must be cut off. It
shall not be needful to answer the presumptions of men, which are not grounded
upon scripture nor sound reason, but the weakness of that argument shall appear
by the like, 1500. years before god, are not so much as one hour. For so
writes the Apostle: Babes, it is the last hour. Fifteen hundred years are
expired, and yet the hour 1. John 2
is not ended, but 24. hours make one day, so that if 1500. years be reckoned
but for one hour, six and thirty thousand years are but one day before god,
so that, if the world continue six days, it must endure, by that computation,
two hundred and sixteen thousand years. This is as good a reason out of Saint
John, to prove the continuance of the world two hundred and sixteen thousand
years, as that is out of S. Peter, to prove that it shall stand 6000. years.

Thirdly, thus they conclude: Christ was manifested 1. Pet. 1 Heb. 2
in the flesh in the last time. And, He was offered once in the end of the
world. But, if the^ were the end of the world, the middle was past, therefore
but 2000. years were behind. If they take the middle for that which is
intermedium, whatsoever is between the beginning and the ending, as commonly
it is taken, then it was the middle immediately after the creation, and the
middle shall continue until the last consummation, and, in that sense the
middle is not yet past: but if they take it strictly, as in Geometry it is
defined: Medium est id quod aeque distat ab extremis, that which is of equal
distance between the beginning and the ending: if the middle were but then
past, when four thousand years were expired, it is a necessary
demonstration, that there could be no less than four thousand years to
come after Christ's passion, because there must be as great distance of time
from the middle to the end, as was from the beginning to the middle.

Fourthly, all the signs and tokens, which go any distance of time before the
day of judgment, are already come to pass, that now no sign can be looked
for, but only those which must be showed immediately upon his coming to
judgment. But besides that the accomplishment and fulfilling of al these
prophesies, cannot show unto us how near it is to the end, we deny that all
these tokens and signs are come to pass, for there is yet one prophecy to
be fulfilled, which is the last and general conversion of the Jews. That
they must be converted, Saint Paul proves by eight reasons. The first is
from the end of their Romans 11.
reiection, which is, not that they should perish, but seeing the conversion of
the Gentiles, be provoked to emulation. The second a minori, if their fall be
riches to the world, how much more shall their reconciliation be life to the
dead? The third from the condition of the Patriarch Abraham, if the first
fruits be holy, so is the lump, if the root, so are the branches. The fourth
from Gods omnipotency which is able to receive them again. The fifth a
verisimili, if God ingrafted the wild olive contrary to nature, how much
more shall the natural branches be ingrafted into their natural olive? The
sixth, from the authority of Esaias and Jeremy, which affirm the same. The
seventh, from a distinction, concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for our
sake, but touching the election, beloved for their fathers sake. The
eightreason is, ab analogia, as the Gentiles were first rejected for unbelief,
yet afterward received, so, the time shall come when the rejected Jews shall
believe, and so be received again, (...) and all Israel shall be saved.

But, that they shall be turned or converted so generally, being in number so
many, in places so dispersed, in religion so backewarde, in one moment, or a
short time, I think no man of judgment will suppose, much less affirm.

Lastly, Henoch and Elias were the seventh from Adam, Henoch in generation,
Elias in computation of lives. But there is a proportion between them and the
ages of the world, for as the death of the body reigned over these six, Adam,
Seth, Enos, Kenam, Mahaleel, Iared, but the seventh which was Henoch, never
died, but was translated, and likewise in computation of lives, Adam lived unto
Methusalem, Methusalem unto Sem, Sem unto Jacob, Jacob unto Amram, Amram unto
Ahia, Ahia unto Elias, which being the seventh died not, but was taken up; so
death must reign over the world six thousand years, and then shall be
everlasting life. But, to this, and such like, their presumptions, and human
conjectures, because they urge us with the answer of the Angel vriel, I will
refute them with the answer of the same Angel in the same place. Weigh me the
weight of the fire measure the blast of the wind, 2. Esd. 4
or call again the day that is past, but if no man borne can do that, how
shall thy vessel be able to comprehend the ways of the most highest?

The Papists, not directly, but by a necessary co^sequent, take upon them to
point at, not only the year, but rather the day and hour of the last
judgment. For Sanders in one of his demonstrations, holds that Antichrist
after he is reveled must reign but three years and six months, and then
be destroyed forty and five days before the coming of Christ, which, if it
were true, Antichrist being once revealed, it were no cunning to define the
day and hour of the appearance of our Savior Christ, which is a secret, not
revealed to the Angels in heaven. This doctrine refuteth it self, therefore I
let it pass, and come to the third point, which shows how far we may be
bold to determine of the propmquitie and neernes of the appearance of our
Savior Christ.

The Angel Vriel says to Esdras: If I should ask thee how deep
dwellinges 2. Esd. 4
are in the midst of the Sea, or how great Springes are in the beginning of
the depth, or the stretching out of the Heaven, or which are the borders of
Paradise, peradventure thou would say to me: I never went down to the
deep, I never descended down into Hell, nor clymed up into Heaven: but
now, I asked thee of fire and wind, and of the day whereby thou have passed,
and from whence thou can not be separated, and yet thou can give me no
answer of them. How then shall thy vessel be able to comprehend the ways
of the highest? Why should foolish man, which is made of the Genesis 3.
basest mould enter into the secrets of his God, who is wise in heart, mighty
in Job. 9.
strength, who remoueth the earth out of her place, causes the pillars thereof
to shake, commands the sun and it rises not, closes up the stars as
under a signet, creates Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the climates of the
South, spreads out the heavens, walks on the Job. 11.
height of the Sea, whose perfection is higher than heaven, deeper than hell,
longer than the earth, brother than the Sea. Our savior Christ says: Watch ye
therefore, because ye know not what hour your Master will come: And to Mat.
24.
that end may we not know, because we should always watch. We are taught by
the Scriptures, that God has two books, and both of them are written for us
to read, and in those books are contained al things concerning this argument,
which are either convenient for us to know, or lawful for us to search. The
one is the book of grace, which is the volume of the old and new Testament,
though ever lying open, yet sealed up to many wise, learned, and discreet men
of the world, because reading they understand not, for, they read as did the
Eunuch the prophecy of Esaias, but it is very easy to be understood of all
believers, Acts 8.
for whose salvation it was written by the holy Ghost, which is the finger of
gods Exodus 8.
hand. The other is the book of nature, that great frame and engine of the
world, always lying open to the view of natural men, and never shut up,
because it is nothing else, but epistola scripta ad humanum genus, a long
letter or a large epistle written, not to the faithful only, but to al
mankind, to all which be illuminated by the light of nature, not such a letter
as is sealed up with his privy signet Multi vocati, pauci Matt. 20 2. Tim. 2.
electi, many are called and few are chosen, and solus deus nouit suos, only
God knows his; but his letters patents, wherein is written, Domini est terra
and plenitudo eius, the Psalm. 24 Psalm. 8
earth is the Lords and all that therein is, and Quid est homo quod memor es
illius? what is man that thou art so mindful of him? always lying open that
every man may read, and written in folio, that standing a far off they may
read, and in great capital letters, that running they may read. And upon more
than we can find written in these two books, we may not presume. But, as for
the third book which is called the book of life, and the book sealed up
Phil. 4 Dan. 12 Exodus 32 Apoc. 22 Apoc. 5
with seven seals, which is the secret will of God, it is not revealed to
Angels, much less to men: in that book are written gods secret counsels,
concerning the election of Jacob, and reprobation of Esau, the calling of the
Gentiles, and rejecting of the Jews, which go beyond the capacity of man, and
finally of this last and dreadful judgment, the time whereof the Apostles
desired to know, but no directer answer was given them than this: Of the day
and hour Mat. 24
knows no man, etc: And it is not for you to know the times and seasons
which the Acts 1
Father has appointed in his own power. Daniel desired to know, but it was
said Dan. 12
unto him: But thou, O Daniel shut up the words and seal up the Book till
the end of the time.

Now out of the book of nature, concerning this time, though we cannot
discipher unto you the hour, day, month or year, because it is not there
revealed, yet in that book we do read that it is very near. For, nature
begins generally to intermit her woonted course, the mother Elements of the
world, whereof things in this lower world are made, do loose their qualities
and natural vigor which they had before, the Stars and Planets of heaven
wax dim and old, not so well able to preserve our earthly bodies, the
celestial spheres be almost weary of their woonted motions and regular
volubilitie, the prince of the lights of Heaven, which Psalm. 19
before came as a bridegroom trimmed out of his chamber does not look upon
us with so cheerful an aspect, and that giant, which before did run his
unwearied race, does as it were by a languishing faintness begin to stand
and rest himself, the times and seasons of the year doc blend themselves with
disordered and confused mixture, the winds are in a readiness to breath out
their last gasp, our mother the earth defeated of that abundance of heavenly
influence which at the first she had, is out of heart, waxes barren and dead
like the womb of Sara: the herbs and simples which are appointed Gen: 11 Romans
4
for medicines for man's body, have almost lost their operation and virtue, and
man himself, whom all these things do serve, is of lower stature, less
strength, shorter life than at the first he was, so that there is a general
decay of natures, and in every leaf of that book it is written, that the
frame of that heavenly arch erected over our heads must very shortly lose and
dissolve it self. In the other book, which is the holy Bible, are many
prophesies concerning that last hour, and all the signs and tokens which in
these prophesies are foretold to go any distance of time before the day of
judgment, are already come to pass, only one excepted, which is the last and
general vocation of the Jews, which when, and in how short space it shall be
fulfilled, the Lord only in his wisdom knows. But among all those tokens,
this is principally to be noted, which Christ foretold. As the days of Noah
were, so shall the coming of the son of man be. In the days of Noah I note two
things, Matt. 24 Genesis 6.
first, great oppression, in that there were giants upon the earth, secondly, a
general corruption of all flesh, insomuch that God repented him that he had
made man upon the earth, and he was sorry in his heart. And by that prophecy it
is plain, that the son of man now stands knocking at our doors, because
the like times to the days of Noah are come again. Touching the first, the
giants are now more in number, prouder in heart, loftier in their looks,
stouter in their gate and pace, than they were in the days of Noah: for almost
every rich man is a giant in the place where he dwells. The potters vessel
said to the brazen caldron. Tua mihi vicinitas non placet soror: I will not
come nigh thee for fear of a knock, neither dares the poor man dwell by the
rich for fear of a check. It is not safe for the poor man to contend with the
rich though his cause be good, no more than it is for the earthen pitcher to
iustle with the brazen cauldron swimming down the stream, lest it be broken
all to potsherds. Better it is to lose his right, with peace and quietness.
Report is made of an Emperor which desired to marry his own daughter, he asked
counsel of the lawyers, whether the marriage were lawful or not? they
answered, that they knew no law in particular which allows a father to marry
his daughter, but nevertheless they had found out a law in general which
would permit the same, because every mighty man might do what him listed. I
wish that all men to who^ the sword of justice is committed, would remember the
prophecy of the poet Chaucer.

When faith fails in in priests sawes,
And Lords hests are holden for laws,
And robbery is holden purchase,
And lechery is holden solace,
Then shall the land of Albion,
Be brought to great confusion.
We read of Nimrod which was a great hunter upon the earth. But I fear least
in Genesis 10
our days, in stead of that one, we have many Nimrods, which hunt as the Lion
did with foxes and asses, which when they had taken their prey, the Lion being
able by force to take all to himself, would seem very just, and take no
more than by right was due unto him, and to impart the rest to his fellow
hunters. Wherefore, because it is a rule: Cuius est partitio, eius non est
electio: The same may not be both a diuider and a chooser, he caused the Ass
to divide the spoil. The Ass like a simple animal, as an Ass would do,
divided it very justly into three equal portions, the Lion misliking the
division, tore the Ass in pieces, then he bid the Fox mend the division; the
Fox allotted the greatest part to the Lion, and little or nothing to himself:
whereupon, the Fox was commended to be the best geometrician. As for the
second, God may now repent him, as he did in the days of Noah, that he made
man upon the earth, for the prophecy of Christ is fulfilled: Charity waxes
cold, Luke 13 Mat. 24
iniquity does abound: faith is not found upon the earth. There is a ripeness
of sin, Apoc. 14
and what can be expected but an harvest, that the Angel thrust his sharp
sickle on the earth and cut down the clusters of the Vineyard, and cast them
into the great wine fat of the wrath of God. Sin is not now Peccatum
habitans, but regnans, not making his abode with us, but reigning over us, it
has gotten a longer and larger jurisdiction over the world, than Julius Caesar
had over the Senate, which obtained Perpetuam Dictaturam: An everlasting
Dictatorship, the like not heard of before. The sins which now reign are so
general, that it may well be said: Vir bonus est animal rarum: He which will
find a just and upright man upon the earth, must take a candle at noone days,
and seek in the rushes as it were for a pin or a needle that is lost, and
say with Diogenes: Quaero hominem, I seek a man. And which is more, they be
Clamantia peccata, Crying sins, because the cry of them ascends up into
Genesis 4.
heaven, as did the blood of Abell for vengeance against us, and the souls of
the martirs under the altar, usury, simony, briberie, Apoc. 6 Genesis 3 Psalm. 32
and contempt of the ministers of God, and pride which was the first cause of
the fall of man. The prophet David said, beati quoru^ iniquitates sunt tectae,
etc: Blessed are they whose iniquities are covered, and to whom the Lord has
imputed no sin, but now it is become a proverb among us, Happy is that child
whose father goes to the devil. The Jews which were accounted the extremest
usurers in the world, took interest only of strangers, and not of their own
nation, but our countrymen worse than Jews, spare none, and which is the
greatest hypocrisy, no man makes more account outwardly of them which preach
against usury, than does the usurer, and those which will hear 3. Sermons in a
day, think thirty pounds interest in the hundred to be too little. And,
howsoever they seem outwarly zealous, yet have they within them, that I may
use the speech of the apostle, conscientiam cauteriatam, a conscience feared
with an hot iron, 1. Tim. 4
and, notwithstanding their diligence in frequenting sermons, and reading the
Scriptures, they forget what is written there, that it shall be harder for any
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, than it shall be for a camel to
pass through the eye of a Luke 18
needle, but, that no usurer shall dwell in the Lords tabernacle, nor rest upon
his holy hill. Psalm. 15
William Rufus, once king of England, is noted for pride, which pride in
respect of these days were great humility. His chamberlain brought him in
the morning a new pair of breeches, the best that could be gotten, the price
was four shillings. The king swore no small oath, that he would have a pair
which should cost him a mark in silver: no breeches were the^ of so high a
price, the chamberlain to satisfy the kings mind, brought a worse pair then
the first, affirming that they cost a mark. I mary, quoth Rufus, here are a
pair of breeches for a king. Four shillings the^ sufficed for a pair of
breeches for a king, but I fear shortly it will be a proverb: 500. pounds for
a pair of pantaples for a subject. Every man can be content to go in soft
raiment, as they do in Luke 16
the courts of princes, and to be clothed with purple, as was the rich glutton
which is buried in hell, every man can take delight in the Babilonian garment,
which is framed according to the fashion of this world, but few will put on the
wedding garment, which is Mat. 12
charity, and a good conscience; men will be clothed like women, and women
like men, not regarding the curse denounced of the Lord. But as for the girdle
of truth, the breast Deuteronomy. 22 Ephe. 6
plate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, the
sword of the spirit, and the shoes of peace, they are laid aside as old
shoes, and never come within our Wardrops. You will not be clothed as the
kings daughter which is glorious Psalm. 41
within, but like painted sepulchers which are fair without, and within are
full of dead men's bones.

Offices are commonly sold, and therefore it is no marvel though the
officers be corrupt. Whosoever can be entertained in the service of a noble
man, is in reputation for his masters sake, be he never so base; but the
ministers of Gods word, which serve the king of kings and Lord of Lords, whose
service is perfect freedom, in whose house it is better to be a door keeper,
than to dwell in the tabernacles of princes, even him whom all other kings and
lords ought to serve, are despised for their service sake, be they never so
nobly descended. But I have text for them: Whosoever Mat. 10 John 10 Luke 13
Luke. 21
hears you, hears me: and whosoever despises you, despises me, and he
that despises me, dispiseth him that sent me. Our Savior Christ told his
Apostles that they should be hated of all men for his sake, and at that time it
was no great marvel, because they lived among Jews and infidels; but now we
are in manner hated of christians, and most of al of them which make the
greatest show of zeal, and profession of religion, and are the greatest
frequenters of sermons. They are as cruel as Pharao of Egypt which Exodus 5
would compel the children of Israel in their bondage to make brickes and
tyles, but denied them straw and mortar to work withal, so they call upon us
for hospitality, but detain from us our tithes and commodities, which are as
due to us as their lands are to them, and without which it is as impossible to
keep hospiralitie, as it was for the Hebrews to work without straw. I deny
not, but in some sort, the revenues of the church are competent, but they are in
the hands of lay me^ to maintain their pride: we bear the name, and they reap
the commodity, and yet slander us, because we keep not hospitality. Will.
Rufus was wont to say, that the Church bread was sweet bread, and Julian the
apostata would rob the ministers pretending conscience, because so much living
was a burden unto them, and an hinderance unto their ministry, we have many
as hungry as Will. Rufus, and as conscionable as Julian the Apostata, upon whom,
though God does not presently show tokens of his wrath as he did upon them,
which caused one to be stricken with a dart upon earth, and the other with an
arrow from heaven, yet, there is an heavy judgment reserved for them, and
their damnation sleeps not. I beseech you pardon me though I refrain not to
speak, for I fear least being silent, I should be guilty of their sins, and
incur the reprehension of the prophet David: When thou saw a thief, thou
Psalm: 50
did run with him. Solomon though a king, not ashamed to be a preacher,
shows us that all things have a time. But one thing especially I note, where
he says: There is a time to gather stones, and a time to cast stones away.
Eccle. 3
The time of gathering stones was a time of devotion, and it continued in
England about 900. years, and now that time is ended, the time of casting away
stones is gaped after, to suppres that in one age which was, not erected in
many: which time, in vain do they look for, as long as our most gracious lady
and mistress, our dread sovereign Queen Elizabeth reigns, and most humbly I
beseech God, that if it be his most blessed will, she may reign over us to the
worlds end. But, when that time shall come, it will be manifest to all the
world, that iniquity has got the upper hand, that nothing can then be
expected, but fire and brimston to rain from heaven as it did upon Sodom, or
else, it will be high time for us to cry: Etia^ Genesis 19. Apoc. 22.
veni Domine Jesus, venicito, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. I know my sharp
reprehension does offend them which be guilty, but I consider that I am sent
as a sheep to hunt after wolves, and I know the worst that ravening wolves can
do; they can but devour. I must do my masters message, and if you Matt. 10
Acts. 12. and 8
regard it not. I shake the dust off my feet against you, and your blood be
upon your own heads, I am clear, I fear not man which has power over the
body only, but God which is able to destroy both body and Matt. 10
soul in hell fire. The crying sin of simonie reigns every where, and
patro^s of benefices choose their ministers, not as the gods chose their trees
into their patronage for good qualities: Jupiter the oak, because it was good
for building: Neptune the pine because it served to make ships: Apollo the bay,
because it was green: Hercules the popple, because it was straight and tall
like himself, notwithstanding all these trees were without fruit, because the
gods were honorably minded, and would not Fructu honore^ vendere, sell
promotions for commodity: but as the goddess Minerua, which chose the olive
tree, because it was fat. At the first the patronage of benefices was committed
to Gentlemen upon trust, because great confidence was in them reposed, but now
they have gotten it into their hands, they do as it was said of pope Alexander:

Vendit Alexander claues, altaria Christum.
Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest.
They account the lords portion their own fee simple and inheritance, they
bought the patronage, and therefore they will sell the presentation, so that they
which upon especial trust reposed in the^ above other men were chosen patro^s
and defenders, are become robbers and spoilers of the church. They cry out for
a learned ministry, whereas in deed they pick but quarrels with us, intending
nothing les tha^ a learned ministry, for they will willingly present none, but
such as are base, ignorant, and beggarly, because such persons will easily
accept of benefices upon unlawful co^ditio^s. Many painful stude^ts do
earnestly desire to enter into the lords harvest, but they cannot be set a
work, for they know no way but one, to be set over a flock, which is in
right, the gift of the holy ghost, but by the sorcery of St. Magus, whose art
magic is so common throughout the land, that there be few patrons which are
not bewitched with the same, they have forgot the text: he that takes counsel
of a sorcerer shall die the death. Leui. 20
The voice of Judas to the high priests, when he sold Christ, is common in
their mouths, Mat. 24
quid mihi dabitis, and ego trada^ vobis? What will you give, and I will give you
the presentation, but they remember not the answer of Si. Peter to Si. Magus,
thy money perish with thee, Acts 8
which think, etc. This corruption will be the decay of al religion. Wherefore
it is now high time that Moses assist his brother Aaron. But have ye not hard
the fable of the horse and the ass, which were loded together and ready to go
their iourny? the ass being ouerladen made his moan to the horse that he would
ease him, but was neied at by the horse that carried the lighter burden: the
Ass tired and died by the way: whereupon the husbandman laid the dead asses
pack upon the horse, so that whereas before he bore but I. burden, he was
constraind to carry 2, and when his back was broken, he could but lament his
misery. The horse betokens the nobility, because he is fit for war, and is
generosum animal, a noble beast. The sily ass because he is simple, fit by
nature to bear heavy burdens, beaten, kicked, and spurned at by every one,
does represent the clergy, which are sore loaded with slanders and manifest
wrongs, being strooken on the right cheek turn Mat. 5
the left, being robbed of their cote, give also their cloak, being cursed,
they bless, reviled, revile not again. I need not tell you the moral of this
fable, for Verbum sapienti dictum sat est, A word spoken to a wise man will
suffice.

Ye have heard how the son of man stands knocking at your doors, and that
now it is not an hour to his coming to judgment, and come he will suddenly
when he is not looked for. What then? Shall the foolish Mat. 25
virgins slumber in the dark while the bridegroom passes by? Shall Sampson
snort in Dalilaes lap in the midst of the Philistines? Iud. 16 Mat. 3 Luke 12
Shall the disciples suffer Christ to sleep while the ship is covered with
waves? shall the covetous man enlarge his barnes and say to his soul take thy
rest for many years, whereas that night his soul shall be taken from him?
shall Loath build stately towers in Sodom being warned by the Angel to depart
thence with speed, because it shall be destroyed with brimstone from heaven? why
then do we purchase lands as if we would dwell alone, and lay up money as if
we would live alone upon the earth? why do we erect such lofty buildings, the
groundworke whereof is laid of strife and discord, the mortar whereof is
tempered with the tears of widows, the windows beautified with the spoil of
Orphans, the beams and supporters, of the fall of good yeome^? Why do we say
(with the Idumea^s) of gods house, Down with it, down with it, to the ground.
Psalm. 137
Raze it up, raze it up to the pauement, and raise our own houses as high as
the walls of Troy, or rather, if it might be, as the tower of Babel? seeing that
we cannnt enjoy them longer than an hour. Galen makes mention of a melancholy
man, which reading in poets, how Atlas supported heaven with his shoulders,
received so deep an impression of the same in his mind, that he was in a
bodily fear least Atlas should faint, and let heaven fall upon our heads. And,
shall we which be Christians live in such carnal security, that when we see,
as it were with our eyes, and hear daily with our ears, that heaven cracketh,
have so little feeling as to think heaven would stand for ever? let us rather
with Noah enter into the arc, let us with Lot depart speedily out of Sodom,
and that as Lot himself did, which went forward, not as his wife which looked
back, and was turned into a pillar of salt, let us with Ezechias prepare our
selves to die, and bid the world adue. Let us as Christ wills us gird up our
loins, have our lamps lighted in our hands, that we may be ready to meet the
bride. Let us rather follow the example of sir Tho. More, of whom it is said,
that being offered a petition by a woman, as he went to his execution,
answered: Woman, I am now going about the kings business, I have no leisure to
read petitions; than of Richard the third in Bosworth field, who being him
self as a deadman, prepared to execute the L. Standlies son, his friends told
him, it was not then any time to do execution, but high time to look to
himself. I wish that the great Politicians and Wizards of this world, who
intend as much sacrilege as he did murder, would begin to be as wise toward
God, as they are toward the world, and at the last consider, that it is now
no time to commit sacrilege, but it is high time for them to think on their
own salvation. S. Peter puts them in mind of two godly meditations far more
fit for these times, and most profitable for the health of their souls, Frst,
says he, Seeing all those things 2. Pet. 3
must be dissolved, what manner of persons ought you to be in holy conversation
and godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God, by
the which the heavens being on fire must be dissolved, and the elements shall
melt with heat? Secondly, we must look for a new heaven and a new earth,
according to his promise, wherein righteousness does dwell: land seeing that we
look for such things, we must be diligent, that we may be found without
spot or blameless.

Some what remains to be spoken of the second part, which is, of the coming
of Antichrist, whose coming the Apostle takes for a most sure ground to
prove that it is the end of the world, where he says: Ye have heard that
Antichrist shall come: even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know
that it is the last hour. In my discourse of the coming of Antichrist, first,
because that name has many significations, I will by four distinctions take
away the ambiguitie of the word. Secondly, I will define what Antichrist is.
Thirdly, I will descend to particulers, to discover unto you that man of sin,
and to point out who is that Antichrist whom the Apostle means in this place,
which shall be a sufficient proof against our countrime^ of Rhemes, that his
coming is not now to be expected, but that he was 900. years since reveled to
us. Such as have learned the rudiments of Grammar, are not ignorant, that this
proposition (...), signifies these things: likeness and equality, in which
sense no man can be Antichrist, because no man can be like him, or equal with
him: any one which is in the place and steed of another, according to which
signification the pope falsely takes upon him that he is Antichrist, which is,
Christ's deputy, or vicar general over his Church: contrariety, and so every
one is Antichrist, which is an adversary unto Christ, and of this Antichrist
only the Apostle speaks, which maintains doctrine contrary to that which
our savior Christ has taught, and therefore is an adversary unto him. And
this Antichrist which is Christ's adversary, is taken two manner of ways in the
scriptures, as Saint John has distinguished in this place, either generally
for any adversary of the truth, or more especially for such an enemy as is
capital, and notorious above the rest. For, where he says, Even now there are
many Antichrists, he speaks not of any one person, or state, or succession,
or kingdom, above the rest, but generally of all, which oppose themselves
against any point of Christ's doctrine. But, where he says: Ye have heard that
Antichrist shall come, he speaks (...), of one which is eminent, and
notoriously opposes himself, not in one point, but in the chief questions of
Christian religion.

Again, this famous and notorious Antichrist, is either political, or
ecclesiastical, for Apoc. 13 1 John. 4. Apoc. 13 Apoc. 17
the old empire of Rome under the heathe^s, which John calls a beast with
seven heads and ten horns, is the political Antichrist, which flourished in
the Apostles time, of which he said: he is now already in the world, but the
ecclesiastical Antichrist, which is called by 3. names, as the beast asce^ding
out of the earth with 2. horns, and, the harlot sitting upon the first beast,
and the beast that was, and is not, is the eight, and is one of the seven,
which 3. names signify one thing, that is, the state of Popes reigning in the
place of the Emperors (for, that is to sit upon the beast with seven heads) and
they are called a beast for their cruelty, a woman for their Ezec: 23 Hosea. 2
2. These. 2
pride, an harlot for their idolatry, which is spiritual fornication. And
this Ecclesiastical Antichrist is taken also two manner of ways by S. Paul,
either properly, or figuratively, properly for an whole body, or kingdom, or
state, which is opposite to Christ, where he says: There must come a departure
or a reuoltment first, and, the mystery of iniquity does already work. In
which words he speaks of a general Apostacy from sound religion. For, in
Divinity contrary to the rules of Logic, indefinite propositions in matter
contingent, are almost universal, not to be understood of some few, but
either of all, or else of the greatest part, as for example: Iniquity shall
abound, Luke 18 Matt. 24
charity shall wax cold faith shall not be found upon the earth: not the
iniquity, or faith, or charity of a few, is to be understood, but almost of
all the inhabitants of the earth. Again, with the whore have committed
fornication Apoc. 17
the inhabitants of the earth, the proposition is indefinite, yet generally to
be understood, for so it is interpreted in the Chapter following: All nations
have drunk Apo. 18
of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. But, where he says: An
adversary that exalts himself above all that is called God, and sits as
god in the temple of god, by the figure Synechdoche, he means only the head
and prince of that Apostacy and reuoltment from Christ: Wherefore, Antichrist
is to be understood in this place, in the first division, according to the
third signification, only for him that is opposed against Christ, and an
adversary unto his truth, not every adversary, but one more singular and
notorious than the rest, not political, but Ecclesiastical, not in the proper
signification, for the whole body or kingdom, but by a Synechdoche, for the
head and prince of that Antichristian Apostacy and rebellion.

Having by distinctions unfolded unto you the ambiguitie of this name
Antichrist, and showed how it is to be understood in this place, I define him
in this manner: Antichrist is a succession of Bishops, disciphered out by
certain notes and marks in the holy Scriptures, which professing the name of
Christ, do oppose themselves against him in many chief points of Christian
religion. That he is not one particular man but an whole succession of many
men, I prove by these two reasons: first, it was prophesied that Antichrist
that purple harlot, should make drunk with the wine Apo. 18
of her formicatio^, all the nations of the earth. And that Antichrist, that two
horned beast. should give life to the Image of the beast Apoc. 13
which was destroyed, that is, he should restore the decayed state of the Roman
Empire, by setting up new Emperors in the West, which in respect of the former
Emperors are but Images, and very shadows: that he should make many peoples
and kingdoms subject unto himself. But these things could not be brought to
pass in one man's age, therefore Antichrist is not one man, but a succession of
many. Secondly, no one Methusalem could live from the Apostles time unto the
end of the world, but Antichrist is described in the Scriptures to be such a
one as must live from the Apostles time until the end of the world, as it is
evident by S. Paul. For, of his beginning, he says, The mystery of iniquity
does already work, so that albeit he was not then revealed, These. 2. 2
because that same (...) that obstacle or hinderance, which was the Roman
Emperor, was not then removed from Rome to Constantinople, that he might give
place to the Pope, the time was not accomplished when the head of iniquity
should be joined to the body, and so made perfect: yet S. Paul does acknowledge
that he was already come, when he himself lived: and, of his end, he faith:
He must be consumed with the breath of Gods mouth, and abolished with the
brightness of his coming. But, the breath of Gods mouth is his word, and the
preaching of the Gospel.

Sibilla the prophetess, foretold that he should be destroyed with linen, and
paper (you know) is made of rags of linen, and the Gospel is written in
paper, and this Gospel weakeneth his kingdom, but he is not to be utterly
abolished, but by the presence of Christ. Therefore he is (...) not one man,
but an whole succession. The Papists of Rhemes argue against us out of this
very text, where he says (...), that Antichrist, to prove that he is but one
particular man, and not a succession, as though this article: should
necessarily point at one, and demonstrate some certain man. But I will show by
two instances, how their argument does not follow. First, this article: does
not always demonstrate, for it is used three manner of ways in the holy
Scripture, either (...), or (...), or (...), demonstratiuely to point at one
particular, or emphatically, as in this place, or idly, and to no purpose, as
it is often and in every page of the Greek text. Let one example among a
thousand suffice, (...). 2. John. 3
He that sins is of the devil not any one in particular, but every one in a
generality that sins. Secondly if it were granted, (as it is denied) that
this article does necessarily import some one special man, according to the
Grammatical sense, yet does it not follow, that one man therefore were to be
understood, because it is the manner of the scriptures to speak of whole
successions as if it were but of one. Daniel Dan. 7
describes three Monarchies, every one co^teining diverse successions of
kings, by the names of three beasts, the Empire of the Babylonians by one Lion,
of the Persians by one Bear, of the Macedonians by one Leopard, he speaks of
many as if he spoke but of one: wherefore, although his manner of speaking
imports but one, not one, but many are to be understood.

That Antichrist is a succession of Bishops, not of Turks or Pagans, or
secular princes, it is plain out of the text, he must 2. These. 2.
sit in the Temple of God, not in the material temple of Solomon, which is now
no more a temple, but the spiritual temple which is the Church, as S.
Augustine does interpret De ciuit: Dei. li. 20 cap. 19
it: and he must assume unto himself Ecclesiastical authority, to
excommunicate, to teach the word, to ordain Ministers, which no succession of
secular princes ever did. The marks and tokens whereby Antichrist is
disclosed, are to be discussed in the particularizing and discovering unto you
who is Antichrist that son of perdition, of whom the Apostle speaks.

Littleton, a common lawier, in an Epilogue annexed to his book, disableth
himself, and detracteth from his own learning, saying, that he cannot warrant
all to be law which he has written. Howsoever I have not attained unto that
measure of knowledge in Gods book which he had in the laws of this land, yet
I am more confident and I dare warrant you against all papists in the world, my
soul for yours, that albeit some learned protestants being overmuch modest,
make a doubt whether Antichrist be yet revealed or not, affirming that if he be
revealed, he is the Bishop of Rome: this doctrine which I shall deliver you, is
sound and current divinity, that the succession of the Bishops of Rome, which
has continued about nine hundred years, is that Antichrist which is mentioned
in the holy scriptures. For confirmation of this conclusion, I will allege no
other proofs than the authority of the Scriptures, which do sufficiently set
down all the mysteries of his reueation. As for the Fathers, though far
learnedder than any which live in our days, their judgments are different one
from another, that no certainty can be gathered out of their writings,
neither could they attain to any certain knowledge hereof, for as much as
Antichrist which has already disclosed himself to us, was not revealed when
they lived, and it was impossible to know him but by the eue^ts of things which
now are, but then were not come to pass. Wherefore I admit no interpretation
of scriptures concerning this prophecy, but only the event which is the most
faithful interpreter of all prophesies. For, I am sure there cannot be a more
evident demo^stration than this: we see it already come to pass, that all
the prophecies concerning the revelation of Antichrist, are fulfilled in the
Bishops of Rome, and can al be verified of none else, therefore the Bishops of
Rome are Antichrist. My antecedent I prove in this manner: All the prophecies
wherein he is described, are contained in the 2. These. 2. and the Revelation of
S. John. As for Daniel, though some of the learned have allegorically applied
his prophecies unto antichrist, which are properly meant of Antiochus, I deny
that he ever writ of antichrist at all. As for S. Paul, he prophesies in this
manner: That day shall not come, unless there be a departure first, and that man
of sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an adversary, and
exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that
he does sit as God in the temple of God showing himself that he is God, and now
ye know what withholds that be might be revealed in his time, for the
mystery of iniquity does already work, only that which withholds shall hinder
still, until it be taken away, and then shall the wicked one be revealed, whom
the Lord shall destroy with the breath of his mouth, and abolish with the
brightness of his coming, euan him, whose coming is by the work of a Satan,
with all power and signs, and lying wonders. In which words, I observe 4.
things which disclose antichrist unto us; his pride, He exalts himself above
God, a Esaias 14
Lucifer did; his seat; He sits in the temple of God, as if he were God, the
time when he should begin to reign, when that which with holds should be
taken away, which was the political Antichrist, the Roman Emperors should
depart from Rome: the manner how he should establish his kingdom, by signs and
delusions of Satan, and lying wonders. But that the Bishops of Rome take upon
them to be gods, and which is more, take to themselves authority above God, it
appears by the Laterane Counsel holden under Leo the tenth. wherein thus we
read: In Papaest omnis potestas supra ownes potestates tam caeli quam terrae,
the popes power is above all powers both in heaven and earth. That he sits
in the Temple of God, it cannot be denied, because his seat is Rome. The
Rhemists can not prove unto us that the material temple of Solomon is here
to be understood, for that temple is destroyed, and that temple with the use
whereunto it was ordained, is utterly abolished by the law of God, so that if
it were reedified, it were no more the temple of God, but a place of idolatry
and abomination, and if any suspect that that temple may be builded again, let
him call to remembrance how the Jews once obtained leave of Julian the
Apostata to reedifie it, but God showed manifest signs of his displeasure,
which caused the foundation thereof to be shaken a sunder with Ruff. li. 10 38.
and 39.
earthquakes, and that which was builded in the day, to be burnt up with
lighthing from heaven by night, Wherefore the temple which is the seat of
Antichrist is spiritually to be understood, as also, by reason of the words
which go before, where he speaks of an Apostacy and reuoltment from true
religion, which could not be among the Jews, among whom true religion then
was not, and now is not professed, so that Antichrist sits in the church,
and indeed he has chosen that Church for his seat, which was then most
famous for the profession of the Gospel, as S. Paul himself gave testimony,
when he writ to the Romans, that their faith was heard of Romans 1
through the whole world. And, which is more than that, he sits in the
Church of God, as if he were God, intituling himself Christ's vicar general
over the earth, which belongs only to the holy Ghost which is God, whom
Christ did substitute in his room at his departure from us, that he might
continue with us, during the time of his absence, saying: The Comforter which
is the holy Ghost, the father will send in my name, John 14
he shall teach you al truth: the Father shall give you a Comforter which shall
abide with you for ever. As for the time of his revelation, he was then to be
revealed, when the hinderance was taken away, which hinderance was the abode of
the Emperors at Rome, which the Apostle spared to express in writing for
these two reasons: first, because he made it sufficiently known by word of
mouth unto the faithful: secondly, because it might have bin dangerous to the
church, for the Emperors taking offense there at, would have persecuted the
Christians as busi-bodies in matters of state. But the hinderance was the
Roman Emperors, which were first to depart from Rome, and give place to the
Popes, because both Emperors and Popes could not reign together in one city.
And that hinderance was taken away long since, when Constantine the great,
translated his imperial seat to Constantinople, and endowed the Popes with
the city of Rome, and a great part of Italy lying about it. The emperors then
being far off, and by reason of continual wars with Saracens and enemies
in the East, not able to maintain their own right in the West, the Popes
incroched upon them too far, and usurped so much authority, that they
discarded them clean in Italy, and at their pleasure set up other Emperors in
the Weast, but such as would take an oathe to be subject to the Apostolic See
of Rome, and acknowledge the Popes to be universal Bishops. So the hinderance
was taken away when Constantine removed to Constantinople, and Antichrist was
manifestly disclosed not long after, when Boniface the third obtained the title
of universal Bishop, which was 900. years ago, for as Gregory Lib. 4. epist.
38.
says: none but Antichrist would assume unto him such a title. As for the
power of satan, and signs, and wonders, whereby his kingdom was established,
and the ignorant people deceived. I refer you unto their own legends of
lies. All the prophecies of saint John, concerning the disclosing of Antichrist,
are comprehended in the 13. and 17. chapters of his Revelation. In his 13.
chapter he describes two Antichrists, the one Political, which flourished in
his time, the other Ecclesiastical, which was not then disclosed, but now
reigns, and began his dominion when the political Antichrist was taken
away. The political Antichrist he describes in this manner: By the figure
Senecdoche, taking Rome which was caput imperij, the chief City for the whole
Empire. He calls it a beast, following the example of Daniel, which called 4.
Dan. 7.
Monarchies four beasts.

This beast has the shape of a Bear, a Leopard, and a Lion, because it
consisted of three other Empires, of the Persians Macedonians, and Babilonians
before destroyed, which by these three beasts were represented. This beast had
ten horns, and seven heads: the ten horns are interpreted in the seventeenth
chapter to be ten kings or kingdoms, into which the old Empire was to be
divided after the decay thereof, which afterward came to pass: the number of
ten, which is certain, being used for an uncertain number, according to the
manner of the Scriptures. The seven heads, chapter seventeen, are interpreted
to be seven hills, and seven kings or orders of supreme Governors. But Rome
has seven heads, whether you take them for hills or Kings, The hills which it
was builded upon, are these, Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus, Celius,
Exquilinus, Viminalis, Quirinalis. The orders of Governors by whom it was
ruled at several times by reason of alterations, were Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemuiri, Triumuiri, Emperors of the ancient Nobility of Rome,
and lastly, Emperors of strange families. Upon those heads, whether ye talk
them for hills or Kings, were the names of blasphemy: for, upon the hills were
builded Temples, dedicated to Minerua, Saturn, and heathen gods, and the
Governors or Kings themselves, were heathens, and worshipped Idols of the
Gentiles.

One of the seven heads, which was the race of the Emperors of the ancient
Roman Nobility, was wounded in the person of Nero: which being the last of
the Family of Julius, flue himself; after whose death, the whole estate of the
Empire was in ieopardy, by reason of disention among them that did affect the
Empire. But that deadly wound was healed again by Vespasran, which appeased
all strife, and himself sustained the burden of the Empire: Five of those
kings, says the Angel, are fallen, one is, the other is yet to come, and when
he comes, he must continue but a short space. Those five which were fallen,
were Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Triumuiri, Decemuiri: which order of Governors
were abrogated before S. John's time: the sixth, which was of the Emperors of
the ancient Nobility of Rome, was then remaining when S. John lived, Domitian
being Emperor; the seventh, which was of the Emperors of strange families,
was then to come: and when it came, it continued not long after the departure
of Constantine into the East. To which he adds, The beast which was and is
not, is the eight, and is one of the seven, and shall go into destruction. By
which eight, he means the order of the Popes. Of the beast, meaning the
whole Empire, he speaks in this manner: The beast which thou saw, was and
is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit: meaning that the Empire
was, and it was not. In the time of Domitian, it was, because it stood, and it
was in the power of the Roman Nobility, but it was not in the same state in
which it was before, because, from Julius to Nero, it was hereditary, and tied
unto one family, but Nero the last of that family being dead, it was deuolued
to Emperors of an other stock and kindred: and it was to ascend out of the
bottomless pit, not in the former state under the Emperors, but in another
state, under the Popes.

Lastly, he shows the destruction of the political Antichrist, saying: If any
lead away captive, he must be led into captivity, if any kill, he must be
killed. Wherefore, now that hinderance is taken away which Paul speaks of 2 Thessalonians. 2. the Emperors give place to the popes, and the Ecclesiastical
Antichrist is described in this manner: I saw another beast with two horns
ascend out of the earth, etc. This beast with two horns, is all one with the
purple harlot, Apocal. 17. for both be token the state of the popedom, the
ecclesiastical Antichrist. This beast ascends out of the earth, that is, it
comes of base parentage, has two horns like like the lamb, for Antichrist
takes upon him to be Christ's vicar: speaks like the dragon, for he teaches
lies which proceed from the old dragon the devil, which was a liar from the
beginning: gives life to the image of the first beast: for, notwithstanding the
ancient emperors are deceased, the popes have ordained new emperors in the
west, which keep the same name and title, although being compared with them,
they be but images or rather shadows. And the number of the name of this
Antichrist is 666. which number, both in Greek and Hebrew, does agree with the
bishops of Rome. In the Hebrew name Romijth, is the same number, for Resh
signifies 200 Vau, 6 Mem, 40. double Iod, 20. Tau, 400, which being put
together, make the number of the beast 666. Likewise, the Latin name Romanus
written in Hebrew characters, makes the same numbers, for Resh signifies 200.
as it did before, Mem, 40. Gnaiin 70. Nun 50. Vau 6. Schin 300, which make 666.
Likewise, in Greek, this name (...), (which also is the name of the Bishops of
Rome) by adding to, according to the manner of the Greeks, in such names as are
made Greek, as (...), for Casarea, (...), for Nepthalim, signifies 30. a 1. t
300. (...) 5. (...) 10. (...) 50. o 70. (...) 200 which make 666. Lastly,
concerning the place where this Ecclesiastical Antichrist does reign, that
same beast with two horns, Which is called the whore, Apo. 17 (which whore in
the same place, is interpreted to be a great City, which reigns over the
Kings of the earth) sits upon the beast with seven heads and ten horns,
which represents the Empire of Rome under the old Emperors: wherein it is
manifest, that the Ecclesiastical Antichrist, succeeds the political, and
sits in the place of the Roman Emperors: so that Antichrist further than
Rome is not to be sought for.

Thus have you heard, how all the prophesies concerning the disclosing of
Antichrist are fulfilled in the Bishops of Rome, and, that all those prophesies
can not be verified of any else, it is most evident for as much as no other
Bishops or secular Princes take upon them to be Christ's Vicars general over
all the world: which is, to sit as God in the Temple of God. No other States
ascribe unto themselves power above all powers in heaven and earth, which is,
to exalt themselves above God. No other States have set up Emperors in the
West, which is, to give life to the image of the beast. Finally, no States
bear sway in a City builded upon seven hills, which City reigns over the
Kings of the earth, but they. Therefore I may safely make this conclusion: The
succession of the Bishops of Rome, which has been since Boniface the third,
and continued these nine hundred years, is that Antichrist which Saint John
speaks of in this place. Wherefore, seeing the coming of Antichrist, is an
argument of the latter end of the world, and this great and notorious
Antichrist has been revealed unto us so long ago: what remains, but that
now we lift up our heads, for our Redemption draws near? and that we look
for a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the holy city new Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a beide trimmed for her husband?
Against which coming, God grant we may be ready, our nakedness being clothed
with wedding garments, our loins girded, our steps lightened with our Lamps in
our hands, for the Lamb Christ Jesus his sake, to whom with the father and the
holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, power, and glory, both now and evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

