FOOL UPON FOOL, OR, Six sorts of Sottes.

A flat Fool, and A fatt Fool, A lean Fool, and A clean Fool, A merry
Fool, and A verrie Fool.
Showing their lives, humors, and behauiours, with their want of wit in
their show of wisdom. Not so strange as true.

Omnia sunt sex.
Clonnico del mondo Snuff.
LONDON

Printed for William Ferbrand, dwelling in Pope's Head Allie near the Royal
Exchange. 1605.

TO THE READER as much health as to my self.
Sweet Signior, I salute thee kindly, how unkindly so ever you salute my
labor; desiring thy love, not thy dislyke: Me thinks it were of all things
more then strange, that men living, should live grieuing, and one to repine at
an others prosperity: it may be thou will wonder that I do well; yet I wonder
not that thou think ill: for the common course is such, the more is the
pity. What, is it a new Book says one? I, says another; it is called Fool
upon Fool: Nay like enough (says the first) Fools write as their wit
works. Why, do we not know that sometimes the air purges with uncomfortable
sleete, as profitable rain? Are all Wits ever prosperous? no, times are
leaden, dull: Age weakens, and Wits must needs decline. Every one then save
one, and do what a can, not what a would: But I am tedious to thee and to my
self: bid my Book welcome, it may be I may live to make thee amends: if not,
no more but this; such a one died in thy debt.

Adieu, and read true.

How Jack Oats playde at Cards all alone.
Jack Oats sitting at Cards all alone, was dealing to himself at Vide-rusfe
(for that was the game he ioyed in) and as he spide a Knave: Ah knave art
there, quoth he? When he spide a King, King by your leave, quoth he: if he
spied a Queen Queen Richard art come, quoth he? and would kneel down and
bid God bless her Majesty (meaning indeed the then Queen, whom he heard Sir
William Hollis his Master so much to pray for:) But here is the Jest, Jack
as I say, being at Cards all alone, spying a Knave and saying, Ah Knave art
there? A simple Seruingman being in the Hall waighting his masters coming,
walking by, and hearing him say so, thought he had called him Knave, took the
matter in dudgin, and miscalled the Fool: another Seruingman more foolish then
both, took Iackes part, so that in short time they two fell together by the
ears; who being parted, Jack Oats gives them each one a Knave, and so takes
them into the Buttry to drink: the Knight comes in, seeing the Hall not yet
quiet, asked the matter? Jack comes, I Will tell thee Willy, quoth he: As I was a
playing at Cards, one seeing I won all I playde for, would needs have the
Knave from me; which as very a Knave is he seeing, would needs bear him
Knave for company: so to bid them both welcome to thy house, I have bin to
entreat the Knave thy Butler to make them drink. I says Sir William, and you
like a Knave made them fall out. I answered Jack, and your drink Sir knave
made them friends. Sir William laughing, departed.

How Jack hit a Nobleman a box on the ear.
News came to Sir William that such a Nobleman was coming to his house, great
provision was made for his welcome: and amongst all Jack Oats put on his now
Motley coat, a clean Muckender, and his new shoes. Much preparation was
made, which were too long to tell, for I Will assure ye it was one of the greatest
Earls in England, unfit to name here: but the Knight and his Lady met him at
the gate to entertain him: Sir William with a low congy saluted him, the good
Lady, as is the Courtly custom, was kissed of this Noble man: Jack Oats seeing
him kiss his Lady, on the sudden gives the Earl a sound box on the ear:
knave (quoth he) kiss Sir Willies wife? the good Knight amazed at this, caused
him to be whipped: but the kind Noble man knowing simplicity the ground of his
error, would not suffer it, but putting it up, left him and entered the house.
Jack seeing they were sad, and he had done amiss, had this wit in simplicity
to shaddowe it: he comes after and asked the Earl where his hand was? Here
(quoth he) with that he shakes him by it, and says, I mistook it before,
knowing not your ear from your hand being so like one another: Jack thought
he had mended the matter, but now he was whipped indeed, and had his payment
altogether. Thus fools thinking to be wise, become flat foolish, but all is
one, Jack never repented him.

How a Minstrell became a fool artificial, and had Jack Oats his reward for
his labor.
AT a Christmas time, when great logs furnish the Hall fire: when Brawne is in
season, and in deed all Reueling is regarded: this gallant knight kept open
house for all comers, where Beef, Beer, and Bread was no niggard. Amongst
all the pleasures provided, a Noise of Minstrelles, and a Lincolnshire Bagpipe
was prepared: the Minstrels for the great Ceamber, the Bagpipe for the Hall:
the Minstrels to serve up the Knights meat, and the Bagpipe for the common
dancing. Jack could not endure to be in the common Hall, for indeed the
fool was a little proud minded, and therefore was altogether in the great
Chamber at my Ladies or Sir Williams elbo one time being very melancholy, the
Knight to rouse him up, said, hence fool hence, I Will have another fool, thou
shall dwell no longer with me: Jack to this answered little, though indeed ye
could not anger him worse: A Gentleman at the board answers, if it please you
sir I Will bring ye another fool soon: I pray ye do (quoth the knight) and he
shall be welcome. Jack fell a crying, and departed mad and angry down into
the great Hall: and being strong armed (as before I described him, caught the
Bagpipes from the piper, knock them about his pate, that he laid the fellow
for dead on the ground, and all broken, carries the pipes up into the great
Chamber, and lays them on the fire. The Knigt knowing by Jack, that some
thing was amiss, sends down to see: news of this jest came, the knight angry
(but to no purpose, for he loved the fool above all, and that the household
knew, else Jack had paid for it, for the common peoples dancing was spoiled)
sent down Jack, and had him out of his sight: Jack cries hang sir Willy,
hang sir Willy and departes.

Sir William not knowing how to amend the matter, caused the Piper to be carried
to bed, who was very ill: and said I would now give a gold noble for a fool
indeed to anger him thoroughly: one of the Minstrels whispered a Gentleman in
the ear, and said, if it pleased him he would, whereat the Gentleman laughed:
the Knight demanded the reason of his laughing, I pray you tell me (quoth he)
for laughing could never come in a better time, the fool has madded me. If it
please you (says the Gentleman) here is a good fellow will go and attire him
in one of his coats, and can in all points behave himself naturally like
such a one: it is good (says the Knight) and I prithee good fellow about it,
and one go call Jack Oats hither, that we may hold him with talk in the mean
time.

The simple Minstrill thinking to work wonders, as one ouerioyed at the good
opportunity threw his Fiddle one way, his stick another, and his case the third
way, and was in such a case of joy, that it was no boot to bid him make have,
but proud of the knights favor away he flings, as if he went to take
possession of some great Lordship, but where ere he got by it, I am sure his
fiddle with the fall fell a pieces, which grieved his master so that in love
and pity he laughed till the water ran down his cheeks: beside this good
Knight was lik to keep a bad Christmas, for the Bagpipes and the Music went
to wrack, the one burnt, and the other broken.

In comes Jack Oats, and (being merry) told the Knight and the rest, that a
Country-wench in the Hall had eaten Garlic, and there was seventeen men
poisoned with kissing her: for it was use to jest thus: by and by comes in a
messenger (one of the Knights men) to tell him that such a Gentleman had sent
his Fool to dwell with him. He is welcome says the Knight, for I am weary of
this Fool, go bid him come in, Jack bid him welcome: they all laughed to see
Iackes color come and go, like a wise man ready to make a good end: What say
you to this, says the Knight? not one word says Jack. They cinged with a
knife at the bottom of a glass, as toulling the bell for the Fool, who was
speechless and would die (then which, nothing could more anger him:) but now
the thought of the new come Fool so much moved him, that he was as dead as a
door nail: standing on tip-toe looking toward the door to behold his
arrival, that he would put his nose out of joint.

By and by enters my artificial Fool in his old clothes, making wry mouths,
dancing, looking a squint: who when Jack beheld, suddenly he flew at him, and
so violently beat him, that all the Table rose, but could scarce get him off:
well, off he was at length, the Knight caused the broken ones to be by
themselves. My poor Minstrill with a fall had his head broake to the skull
against the ground, his face scratcht, that which was worst of all, his left
eye put out, and withal so sore bruzed, that he could neither stand nor go:
the Knight caused him to be laid with the Pyper, who was also hurt in the like
conflict, who lackt no good looking to, because they miscarried in the Knights
service: but ever after Jack Oats could not endure to hear any talk of
another Fool to be there, and the Knight durst not make such a motion. The
Piper and the Minstrill being in bed together, one cried, O his back and face
the other, O his face and eye: the one cried O his Pipe, the other, O his
Fiddle. Good Music or broken consorts they agree well together: but when they
were well, they were contented for their pains: they had both money and the
Knights favor. Here you have heard the difference twixt a Flat fool natural,
and a Flat fool artificial, one that had his kind, and the other who
foolishly followed his own mind: on which two is written this Rhyme.

Natural Fools, are prone to self conceit:
Fools artificial, with their wits lay wait
To make themselves fools, likeing the disguyes,
To feed their own minds, and the gazers eyes.
He that attempts danger, and is free,
Hurting himself, being well cannot see:
Must with the Fiddler here wear the Fools coats,
And bide his penance signed him by Jack Oats.
All such say I, that use flat foolerie,
Bear this, bear more; this flat Fools company.
How Jack Oats eat up a Quince Pie, being of choice provided for Sir William.
Jack Oats could never abide the Cook, by reason that he would scald him
out of the Kitchen. Upon a time he had a great charge from his Lady to make her
a Quince Pie of purpose for Sir Williams own eating, which the Cook endeavored
to do, and sent to Lincoln of purpose to the Apothecaries for choice Quinces:
Jack being at this charge given, thought to be even with the Cook, and waited
the time when this Pie was made: it happened so the Cook could get no Quinces,
my Lady (for it was the Knights desire to have one) sent about to Boston, and
all the chief towns, but al in vain, the season served not: but rather then
sir William should be unfurnished, sent to Lincoln again to buy up many
Quinces ready preserved at Pothecaries, which she had, though with great cost.
The Knight asking his Lady for his Pie, she told him with much ado she had
prevailed, but with no little pains in seeking Quinces, for she was feign to
buy the^ ready preserved, and to make a virtue of necessity that way. Sir
William seeing it was so, said it should be as well eaten, and sent for his
friends, Gentlemen, and others of no small account. There was other great
cheer provided to furnish up this sumptuous Feast, and as he invited them, he
told them it was a Quince Pie, which he would have eaten: the day drew on, and
the Gentles were come, and all was in a redines, and still Jack forgot not the
Pie, but stood faintly sick, and refused his meat: the Knight sorry that his
best dish failed him, made no small account of his welfare, asked him: Jack,
says he, Where lies thy pain? In my mouth says he (meaning in deed his
mouth hung for the Quince Pie:) a Barber was sent for from a Market town hard
by, who searched his mouth and could find no cause of pain: but sir William
thinking the Fool wanted wit to tell his grief (though not wit to play the
chief) bade the Barber depart, asking Jack what he would eat? He said
nothing: What he would drink? He said nothing: which made sir William doubt
much of his health, refusing his liquor, when it was usually his practice, and
the Knight ioyed in it too: asked him if he would walk? he said no: if he would
lie down? still answering no; but would stand by the Kitchen fire. The Knight
that knew he never came there but he did some exployte, forgetting that, led
him by the hand (so much he made of him) and bad the Cook see he wanted
nothing. Jack standing still, groand and said: If he dyed, he would forgive all
the world but the Cook. Hang Fool (says the Cook) I care not for thee, die
to morrow if thou will, and so followed his business. They knocked to the
Dresser, and the dinner went up* Jack had a sheep eye in the Oven: anon the
second course came, the Pie was drawn, set by, and among other backed meats
was to be sent up, but wanting Sugar, stepped aside to the spicerie to fetch it,
and Jack in the mean time catches the Pie and claps it under his coat, and
so runs through the Hall into the Yard, where was a broad Moate, and as he
ran, the hot Pie burnd his belly: I says Jack, are ye so hot Sir Willies
Pie, I Will quence ye anon sir Willies Pie says he, and straight very subtly
leapes into the Moate up to the arme-pits, and there stood eating the Pie. The
Cook comes in, misses the Pie, withal misses Jack, cries out, the Pie: sir
Williams Pie was gone, the Author of that feast was gone, and they all were
undone: a hurly burly went through the house, and one comes and whispers the
Lady with the news: she tells sir William how Jack Oats had stolen the Pie.
Jack was searched for, and anon found in the Moate. It was told the Knight
where the Fool was eating it: Gentlemen (quoth he) we are disfurnished of our
feast, for Jack my Fool is in my Moate up to the arme-pits eating of the Pie.
They laughed and ran to the Windows to see the jest: there they might see Jack
eat, the Cook call, the people hallow, but to no purpose: Jack fed, and
feeding greedily (more to anger the Cook, then disapoint sir William) ever as
he burnt his mouth with haste, dipped the Pie in the water to cool it: O says
the Cook it is Sir Williams own Pie sir: O says Jack hang thee and sir
Willy too I care not, it is mine now: save Sir William some says one, save my
Lady some says another: by James not a bit says Jack, and eat up all, to
the wonder of the beholders, who never knew him eat so much before, but drink
ten times more: at length out comes Jack dropping dry, and goes to get fire
to dry him: the knight and the rest all laughed a good at the jest, not knowing
how to mend it. Sir William sends for the Cook, who came up with a sorrowful
heart, and lamentably complaining, said: it was the Knights fault for placing
him in the Kitchen, where he never was, but he did the like villainy. The
Knight not satisfied with the Cooks answer, presently discharges him of his
service, and sent him to live elsewhere: go says he, trusse up your trinkets
and be gone: the Cook seeing no remedy departed.

Jack being dry up he comes, and knowing he had offended, tells a jest (for it
was the manner so to do) how a young man brake his codpeece point and let all be
seen that God sent him, or such fooleries, but that was not enough, and to
chide him, was to make worse of things then it was, and to no purpose neither.
Sir William demanded why he eat the Pie? because I had a stomach says
Jack: would naught else serve, says the Knight but my Pie? O no Willy, says
he, thou would not be angry then, and the Cook had not been turned away: but
all is well, thou art rich enough to buy more. The Knight perceiving the fools
envy, sent for the Cook, and did let him enjoy his place again. So all
parties well pleased, but the young big-bellied women, who perchance longed for
this long looked for Pie, but if they did, though long look for comes at last,
yet they shoot short that aim to hit this mark, for Jack Oats had eaten
the Pie and served himself. This was a flat fool, yet now and then a blind
man may hit a Crow, and you know a fools boult is soon shot: out it goes
hoppen how it will: had Jack kept his own counsel the Cook had been still
out of service, and had been revenged, but now being in his place again may
live to cry quittance for the Quince Pie.

A Fat Fool
The Description of Iemy Camber, A Fat Fool Natural.
THis Fat fool was a Scot borne, brought up,
In Sterlin, twenty miles fram Edinborough:
Who being but young, was for the King caught up:
Served this Kings Father all his life time through.
A yard high and a nail no more his stature,
Smooth faced fair spoken, yet unkind by nature.
Two yardes in compass and a nail I reed
Was he at forty years, since when I heard not,
Nor of his life or death, and further heed,
Since I never read, I look not, nor regard not,
But what at that time Iemy Camber was,
As I have heard I Will write, and so let pass.
His head was small, his hair long on the same,
One ear was bigger then the other far:
His forehead full, his eyes shinde like a flame,
His nose flat and his beard small, yet grew square.
His lips but little, and his wit was less,
But wide of mouth, few teeth I must confess.
His middle thick, as I have said before,
Indifferent thighs and knees, but very short:
His legs be square, a foot long and no more,
Whose very presence made the King much sport.
And a pearl spoone he still wore in his cap,
To eat his meat he loved, and got by hap
A pretty little foot, but a big hand,
On which he ever wore rings rich and good:
Backward well made as any in that land,
Though thick, and he did come of gentle blood.
But of his wisdom ye shall quickly hear,
How this Fat Fool was made on every where.
How Iemy Camber this Fat Fool, gave his Chain of Gold from his neck to
warrant his life.
WHen the King and Nobles of Scotland had welcomed Iemy Camber to the Court,
who was their Countryman borne in Sterlin, but twenty miles from
Edinborough, this Kings birth town, as Greenewich was our late Queens. They
reasoned with him to understand his wit, which indeed was just none at all, yet
merry and pleasing, whereat the King reioiced: and seeing he was so fat, caused
his Doctors and Physicians to minister to him, but Physic could not alter
nature, and he would never be but a S. Vincents Turnip, thick and round.
Wherefore the Doctors persuaded his grace, that the purging of the Sea was good
for him: well, nothing was undone, that might be done to make Iemy Camber a
tal little slender man. When yet he looked like a Norfolk dumpling, thick and
short. Well to Leeth was he sent, which is the harbor town of such ships as
arrive at Edinborough: near they cannot come, which is some mile from the
City. To Sea they put in a ship, at whose departure they discharged
Ordinance, as one that departed from the land with the Kings favor: the Earl
Huntley was sent with him to Sea, to accompany him, so high he was esteemed
with the King. Who hearing the Ordinance go off, would ask what they do now?
Marry says the Earl, they shoot at our enemies: O says he, hit I pray God.
Again they discharge, what do they now quoth he? marry now the enemy shootes
at us. O miss I pray God (says Iemy Camber:) so ever after it was a jest in
the Scottish Court hit or miss quoth Iemy Camber: that if a maid had a barn,
and did penance at the Cross in the high Town of Edinborough: what has she
done? did she hit or miss? she has hit says the other, better she had mist
says the first: and so long time after this jest was in memory, yea I have
heard it my self, and some will talk of it at this day. Well to sea they put on
a fair sunshine day, where Iemy stood fearful of every calm billow, where it
was no boot to bid him tell what the ship was made of, for he did it devoutly:
but see the chance, a sudden flaw or gust rose, the winds held strong East
and by west, and the ship was in great danger, insomuch as the Earl, Master,
and all began to fear the weather: by and by a stronger gale blew and split
their maine Mast, and gave their ship a mighty leake, insomuch as the crack
made them all screeke out: which Iemy hearing was almost dead with fear: some
fell to pumping, others on their knees to praying. But the Fat fool seeing
themselves in this danger, thought there was no way but one with them, and was
half dead with fear, in the end the wind turned, and the raging of the Sea
began to cease: I warrant thee now (quoth the Master) Iemy we shall not be
drowned: I, will ye warrant us, says the fool? I, says the Master, I Will give
thee my ship for thy chain if we be drowned: bear witness my Lord says he,
a plain bargain, and with that threw the Master his chain, who would have
given it to the Earl, but joy of their escape made him delight in the jest, and
therefore the Master enjoyed his bargain: With much ado they attained
thither again, where the King fearful before, awayted their landing now, and
seeing Iemy not a jot less of body then he was, (only lightened of his
chain) how now, quoth he, how do thou man? O says Iemy, well now King, but
ill had not the Master been, who warranted our lives for my chain, the best
bargain that ever I made, for no way could I have been a looser: how, says the
King? marry I Will tell thee King, quoth he, say we had bin drowned, his ship was
forfeit to me for my chain, Earl Huntley was a witness to the bargain: and
now we are not drowned, for my chain did warrant our lives of the Master:
nay, says the Earl, not our lives, none but yours Iemy: our lives were as
safe unwarranted without a chain. With this the fool had some feeling of
sense and on the sudden cried out mainely for his chain again, which was
restored to him by the Master, but he lost nothing by that, for he attained to
a suit, as the story says, that he had been three years above. Thus the King
and Nobles went to Edinborough merrily talking of their fear and welfare.

How Iemy Camber gave five French Crowns for a Sallet of an atchison price,
which in our money was three farthings.
IEmy this Fat fool used every day to go from the Abbey in the low town, up
the hill into the City of Edinborough, and one evening above the rest, he met
with a broken Virgin, one that had had a barn (as there they are known by
their attire) wearing a loose kerchiffe hanging down backward, she I say cried
Sallets as thus: buy any Cibus Salletea. Iemy desirous of Sallets, calls her
to him: less says he, what shall I give thee for a good Sallet? fair sir
says the wench (for she knew him for the Kings fool, and she could not
please him better then to call him fair sir) you must give me an atchison:
now he having nothing but six French Crowns about him, can thou change
me a Crown says he? yea sir says she: he gives her a French Crown, and
she gave him a Sallet for it, and she went her way.

Iemy thinks it was mutch to give a crown for that, for which she did demand
but an atchison: which in our money is but three farthinges, he runs after
and says, she had his fairest crown, but says he give me that and take your
choice of these: thinking by that devise to get the first Crown again. Will
ye change says the less? I says the fool: so she takes all the five and
gives him one again, and so laughing at his folly, goes her way, it was in
vain to exclayme, for they will hold fast what they get: but my fat fool goes
home to eat his Sallet, and inuites the King to a dear dish, and made him
laugh heartily at the jest: The King calls for Viniger to his Sallet, because
his sweet meat should have sower sauce, and persuaded him it was well bought,
otherwise if the fool had repented his bargain, it was his manner to cry for
his money again, and without it all the Court could not quiet him.

How Iemy this fat Fool, swet almost to death, and never knew the reason.
BEtwixt Edenborough Abbey the Kings place and Leeth, there stands an even
plain green Meddow, in which the King used most of his sports: amongst which
he rode thither one day to run at the Glove, or the King, as his Grace should
please. With him rides Iemy Camber on a trotting Mule: it was then a marvelous
hot day. O (says Iemy) how cold the weather is (so wise he was that he scarce
knew hot from cold.) No says the King, it is hot, look how I sweat. No, says
Iemy the Sun blows very cold. No, says the King, the winds shines very
hot. The Fool was almost angry to be crossed, and said, he would be hanged at
night if he did sweat that day: with this merry talk they rode on: but one of
the Kings Footmen hearing this, told the King at their return he would make
his Grace laugh heartily: so the King very gallantly ran that time, and never
mist the glove, and so did the Lords: which Iemy seeing, said it was nothing to
do: The King bad him run, he did so: but the Glove lay still, and Iemy could
not do it.

The Kings footman (that watched to do him a good turn) said, Iemy could do it
better blindfolde: what can he q. the King, I will never believe it? you shall
see else quoth he: whereat Iemy marueiled much, that without sight a man could
do that which with all his might and sight he could not do, was desirous to
make trial, so was blinded with a scarf, while another took up the glove,
and was ready for the jest: Iemy runs, ah for my Master says he, they all
shout alowd and cry rarely well done, and one vnblindes him, while another puts
the glove on the spear. So simple he was, that he thought it was strange, and
bragged all that day not a little: the King did alight and went to drink wine
at the Lord Hunnes house, and Iemy went with him, while the foote-man had time
to work his will, and mingling a conceit with butter (which I will not name,
least some one should practice the like) clapped it under the saddle, and as they
rode home to Edinborough, says the King, what say you to the weather now Iemy?
me thinks it is hotter then it was? nay it is colder says he, for I begin to
sweat.

The trotting of his Mule made the mingled confection lather so, that it got
into his breeches, and workt up to the crown of his head, I to the sole of his
foot, and so he sweat profoundly: still he wipt and he wipt, sweating more and
more, they laughed a good to see him in that taking: now you must be hanged,
quoth the King, as your bargain was, for you sweat very much: what remedy,
says he, I am content to be hanged, but while I live after, I Will never believe
cold weather will make one sweat: no more will I says the King, but hot
weather will. Hot or cold, says Iemy, I am warm now I am sure, I would I were
over head and ears in some River to cool me. So simple he was, that he knew
not whether it was the Sun or the wind made him sweat: at night the King
caused him to be washed, and perfumed, yet he was scarce sweet twenty days
after. Thus this fat Fool chaft, but not in his own grease.

How this fat Fool Iemy Camber, ran with the Kings best Foote-man for a
wager, and won it.
IEmy, who was as you have heard, a tall low man, and was swift of foot, on a
time challenged the Kings best Foote-man, for a wager to run with him from the
Abbey up the hill to Cannegate, (which stood euering to Edenborough, as Ludgate
does to London, and the Kings place about Temple bar:) the King being told of
this challenge, thought it would be good sport to see it performed, still
persuaded Iemy to dare his Foote-man, who before denied him, and knew Fools
would talk any thing, though far unfit to perform any thing. Still the King
would say he was made nimble to run, and asked every Noblemans judgment, who
likewise soothed the King: it was so that they made him believe he was swift of
foot, that I think Iemy in the end persuaded himself, that none but fatt men
could run well, and nimble men being light, would fall soonest, considering
that light things being of small substannce, not feeling themselves, would
surely fall. But here is the sport, the Footman seeing it was the Kings
pleasure to see the wager tried, dared him, which made Iemy mad, that he would
run with him from Edenborough to Barwicke (which was forty miles) in one
day, as a thing impossible as to pull down a Church in one houer, and to
build it again in an other: for Iemy was lost in the Kings company once of
purpose, but five mile from the City, at the Earl Mortons castle at da Keth,
and they thought he would never have come home again: when the King heard
every hour he was coming, and still as he increated every passenger to let
him ride: by the Kings watch in the high way, they had warning given to the
contrary: for he was seven days going five mile: then judge how long he would
be a running forty? you will muse how he did for meat all the time: I Will tell
you he fasted all day, and went supperlesse to bed, but being in his first
sound sleep, meat was brought and laid by him and a Choppin of Wine (for so
they call it theere) which made him at his coming to court tell the King,
Heaven was gentler then Earth, for earthly men would show him no favor,
neither to ride nor feed him, when he was every night cast into a sound
sleep, and then when he wakt was sure of meat from heaven to feed on: when
the meat came from the Kings Kitchen at Edenborough Abbey.

But to go forward with our challenge, the King said the first word should
stand, and on Iemyes head he laid a thousand marks: the Lady Carmichell that
laughed to hear all this, wagered as much on the Footmans head: the day was
appointed the next morrow being Thursday, to begin at five a clock in the
after noone, in the cool of the evening, and every one to his race must make
him ready. Iemy as he had seen the Kings Footman do, washed his feet with
Beer, and soakt them in Butter: so all that night, and the next day, there was
nothing but Iemy and his provision to that great journey. The time came, Iemy
was stripped into his shirt, trust round for the purpose: the Footman and he
begins to run: the Footman makes great show of labor, and the Fool made the
substance, for he was quickly in a sweat: they puffed and they blowd, they
ran as swift as a pudding would creep. Iemy thought himself no small fool
to outrun the Footman, and did in his mind assure himself to win: the King
laughes to see the toil he made, and the Footman made great show and little
pains. By and by Iemy calls for drink, and the King loath he should have
any harm with labor, caused him to have a mixed drink to cast him into a
sleep: who when he had drunk, as he ran on his wager, he dropped down in the
street, as heavy as if a leaden plummet that makes a Jack turn the spitte,
and fallen on the earth dab: there he slept, and was carried by command to the
top of the hill, and laid down again: there he slept half an hour, and
when he wakt, he remembered his journey: seeing people still about him, up he
gets, away he iogs, and never looks behind him: and seeing Cannegate so near
him, had not the wit to wonder how he came there, but laid hold on the ring
of the gate, and stayde to be seen. By and by the Footeman comes sweating,
with water powered on his face and head: O my heart says he: O my legs! says
Iemy, I will not do so much for all Scotland again. Well, Iemy cries
victory, victory: and there was the Kings Coach at hand to carry him home,
for of himself he could never have gone, had his life lain on it. But when he
came home, the bragges he made, the glory he got, how he out-ranne the
Footeman (and ran so easily as if he had been asleep) was wonderful: I, it
was sport enough for the King a month after to hear him tell it. Well, the
King won the wager he thought, and that was honor sufficient for him: not
three days after he bad the King put away all his Footmen, and he would serve
his turn to any place. The King thanked him for his good will, and said when
his need was great, he would make bold to use him: so Iemy this fat fool
ever bragged of this wager.

How this fat Fool Iemy was stung with nettles, and how after unknown to
himself, helped to make his own grave.
THere was a Laundres of the Town, whose daughter used often to the Court, to
bring home shirtes and bands, which Iemy had long time loved and solicited,
but to no end, she would not yield him an inch of her maidenhead: now Iemy
vowed he would have it all. Well, she consented at last, and to be short,
soon at night at nine a clock, being in the winter, when she knew her mother
to be gone to watch with a sick body, he should come and all that night lie
with her: Iemy though witless, wanted no knauish meaning in this, thought long
till it was night. But in the afternoon, the maid goes up to the Castle, and
gathers a great basket of Nettles, and coming home, strawes them under the bed.

Night comes, nine a clock strikes, Iemy on his horse comes riding forward,
sets him up and knockes at the door, she lets him in, and bids him welcome
bonny man: to bed he goes, and Iemy never was used but to lie naked, for it is
the use of a number, amongst which number she knew Iemy was one, who no sooner
was in bed, but she herself knock at the door, and herself asked who was
there, which Iemy hearing was afraid of her mother: alas Sir (says she) creep
under the bed, my mother comes. Iemy bustled not a little, under he creepes
stark naked, where he was stung with Nettles: judge you that have feeling of
such matters, there he lay, turning this way and that way, here he stung his
leg, here his shoulder, there his buttocks: but the maid having locked the
door to him, went to bed and there lay he in durance (as they say) till
morning: when the day broke up gets the maid, to Court she goes, and tells the
Kings chamberlain of the matter, and he told the King, who laughed thereat
rigt heartily.

The Chamberlain was sent to see him there, who when he came, found him fast
asleep under the bed stark naked, bathing in Nettles, whose skin when he
wakened him, was all blistered grievously. The Kings Chamberlain bid him arise
and come to the King. I will not, quoth he. I will go make my grave. See how
things chanced, he spoke truer then he was aware: for the Chamberlain going
home without him, told the King his answer. Iemy rose, made him ready, takes
his horse and rides to the church yard, in the high town, where he found the
Sexton (as the custom is there) making 9 graves, three for men, three for
women, and three for children, and who so dies next, first comes first served:
lend me thy spade, says Iemy, and with that digs a hole, which hole he bids
him make for his grave, and does give him a French crown, the man willing to
please him (more for his gold then his pleasure) did so: and the fool gets
upon his horse, and rides to a Gentleman of the town, and on the sudden
within two hours after dyed: of whom the Sexton telling, he was buried there
indeed. Thus you see fools have a guess at wit sometime, and the wisest could
have done no more, nor so much. But thus our fat Fool fills a leave grave with
his carcass, upon which grave the King caused a stone of Marble to be put, on
which the Poets did write these lines in remembrance of him to this day.

He that guard all men till ieare,
Iemy a Chamber he ligges here:
Pray for his sale, for he is geane,
And here a ligges beneath this steane.
A Lean Fool
How Leanard a lean Fool, playde at slide groate by himself after dinner,
when his belly was full.
IN the merry Forest of Shearewood dwells a kind Gentleman, whose name I omit,
fearing I too much offend in meddling with his fool: but I trust he will pardon
me, for sithence he is so well known there abouts, I think it not amiss to
tell it at London, that people seeing the strange works of God, in his
differing creatures, we that have perfect resemblance of God, both in sense and
similitude, may the btter praise his name, that we differ from them whose
humors we read, see, and hear, are not so strange as true. I say again, this
Gentleman has yet a Fool, Leanard they call him: lean of body, looking like
envy, whose conditions agree with his countenance: one time above all other,
he locked himself into a Parlour, where all alone he played at slide groate, as
his manner was, pieces or counters he had none: yet casting his hand empty from
him, fly says he, short with a vengeance: then play says he (to his fellow)
when in deed there is none but himself: but thus with supposes he plays
alone, swaggers with his game fellow, out-sweares him with a thousand oaths,
challenges him the field to answer him if he be a man, appoynts the place and
all, that if any not knowing his conditions, should stand without and hear
him, would think two swaggerers were swearing God from heaven.

To his play again he falls, seven up for twelve pence, for that is his game
still: well, they fall out, they go together by the ears, and such a hurley
burley is in the room it passes: at the last the Stools they fly about, the
Pottes they walk, the Glasses they go together, nay the Prayer books they fly
into the fire, that such a noise there was, that the whole house wondered at his
folly, persuasions were to no purpose, doors would he open none, till they
violently brake them open, though they wear of gold, and so they did, and
entered the Parler, found all this level coil, and his pate broken, his face
scratcht, and leg out of joint, as a number say to this hour, that a is a
play fellow for the devil, and in game they cannot agree: but that is
otherwise, for in the great Hall, at the serving men's request he will play by
himself, if they will not play with him: and who so plays with him, though
they play for nothing and with nothing, al is one they must fall out, and if
others be not by to part them, mischief may be done, for he will lay it on,
take it off who will: so that at his first coming he endaungered many, and
now take heed is a fair thing, for few will come need him. Thus you may see
fools that wants wit to govern themselves well, have a wilful will to go
forward in folly.

How this lean Fool Leanard, eating his belly full, was revenged of one that
clapped corziars wax to his head.
THis lean greedy fool having a stomach, and seeing the butler out of the
way, his appetite was such, as loath to tarry, breaks open the Dairy house,
eats and spoils new cheese-curdes, cheese-cakes, overthrows cream bowls,
and having filled his belly, and knew he had done evil, gets him gone to
Mansfield in Sherwood, as one fearful to be at home: the Maids came home
that morning from milking, and finding such a masaker of their Dairie, almost
mad, thought a years wages could not make amends: but O the fool lean
Leanard, they cried, he did this mischief, they complained to their Master,
but to no purpose, Leanard was far enough off, search was made for the fool,
but he was gone none knew whither, and it was his property having done
mischief, never to come home of himself, but if any one entreated him, he
would easily be won.

All this while the fool was at Mansfield in Sherwood, and stood gaping at a
Shoomakers stall: who not knowing him, asked him what he was? go look says
he, I know not my self: they asked him where he was borne? at my mothers back
says he: in what country quoth they? in the country, quoth he, where God is a
good man: at last one of the three Iourneymen, imagined he was not very wise,
and flouted him very merrily, asking him if he would have a stitch where there
was a hole? (meaning his mouth) I quothe fool, if your nose may be the needle:
the Shoemaker could have found in his heart to have took measure on his pate
with a Last insteede of his foot: but let him go as he was.

A Country Plow Iogger being by, noting all this, secretly stole a piece of
Shoomakers wax off their stall, and coming behind him, clapped him on the
head, and asked him how he did: the fool seeing the pitch ball, pulled to have
it off, but could not but with much pain, in an envious spleen smarting ripe,
runs after him, falls at fifty cuffes with him, but the fellow belabored the
fool cunningly, and got the fools head under his arm, and bobd his nose: the
fool remembering how his head was, strikes it up, and hits the fellows mouth
with the pitched place, so that the hair of his head, and the heir of the
clownes beard, were glude together: the fellow cried, the fool exclaimed, and
could not suddenly part: in the end the people (after much laughing at the
jest) let them part fair the one went to pick his beard, the other his head:
the Constable came, asked the cause of their falling out, and knowing one to be
Leanard the lean Fool, whom he had a warrant from the Gentleman to search
for, demaundes of the fellow how it happened? the fellow he could answer
nothing but vm, vm, for his mouth was sealed up with wax: do thou scorn to
speak, says he, I am the Kings Officer knave: vm, vm, quoth he again,
meaning he would tell him all when his mouth was clean: but the Constable
thinking he was mocked, clapped him in the stocks, where the fellow sat a long
hour farming his mouth: and when he had done and might tell his grief, the
Constable was gone to carry home Leanard to his Master, who not at home, he
was enforced to stay supper time, where he told the Gentleman the jest, who
was very merry to hear the story, contented the Officer, and bad him to set
the fellow at liberty, who betimes in the morning was found fast asleep in
the stocks: the fellow knowing himself faulty, put up his wrongs, quickly
departed, and went to work betimes that morning, with a flea in his ear.

How Lean Leanard eat up his Masters Hawke, and was almost choked with the
Feathers.
THe Gentleman with whom this Leanard dwelt, having bought a goodly fair
Hawke, brought her home, being not a little proud of his pennyworth, and at
supper to other Gentlemen, fell a praising of her, who soothing up his humor,
likewise failed not to ad a toarch of fire to increase more flame, for indeed
the bird was worthy of commendations, and therefore did merit praises. Leanard
standing by with his finger in his mouth, as it was his custom, often hearing
them praise the goodness of the Hawke, hought in deed they had meant for
goodness being far better meat then a Turkey or a Swan, was very desirous to
eat of the same: and unknown goes down, and suddenly from the Perch
snatched the Hawke, and having wrong off her neck, begins to besiedge that good
morsel, but with so good a courage, that the feathers had almost choakt him:
but there lay my friend Leanard in a lamentable taking. Well, the Hawke was
mist, and the deed was found, the Master was fetched, and all men might see the
Hawke, feathers and all not very well disgested: there was no boot to bid run
for drams to drive down this vndisguested moddicome: the Gentleman of one
side, cried hang the Fool: the Fool on the other side cried not, but made
signs that his Hawke was not so good as he did praise her for: and though the
Gentleman loved his Hawke, yet he loved the Fool above: being enforced rather
to laugh at his simplicity, then to vex at his losses suddenly: Being glad
to make himself merry, iested on it ever after: upon whose Hawke a Gentleman
of his, very wisely writ these lines, and gave unto his Master.

Fools feed without heed, unhappy be their feeding,
Whose heed being in such speed, attempted without heeding
May they choke that provoke, appetite by pleasure,
When they eat forbidded meat, and feed so out of measure.
The Gentleman laughed at this rhyme, yet knew not whether was the more fool: he
for writing, ye other for eating, or he for loosing. Well, putting the Hare to
the Goose-gibblets, seeing there was no remedy, make himself pastime, pleased
himsefe, and did rest contented.

How the Lean Fool set fire on the Wheele-barrow that he loved so, unknown
to himsalfe.
He that mischiefs many, sometimes wrongs himself: as harken to this jest.
Leanard of all things loved his Wheele-barrow, he would work al day and carry
dung in it, yet would sleep in it at night: he would set up meat for his
belly in it, I what did he without it? Once at a Christmas time, when the fire
in the Hall was full, and Leanard was sore a cold, he got coals out of the
Scullery, and put them into his Barrow, and set them on fire, and so sat him
down to warm him, quite forgetting it was made of Wood, and Wood would burn:
so in the end being warm, goes for a Jack of Beer, bringes it, and sets it
on the fire to warm, so that the inside melted, and he drank the drink
notwithstanding: but on the sudden he seeing the Wheele-barrow flame that he
so loved, aloude he cries O me, O me, O me, and takes it up flaming, and
trundles it into the Hall among the people to show: the young men and maids
tumbled over one another for fear: some had their faces burned, others their
legs: the maids their smockes, yea one set fire on another, for their
Aproues burned, and being many people, the flame increased rather then
decreased: Leanard seeing no one would help him, runs (for fear least the
Gentleman should know it) and thrusts it into the Barn to hide it, which some
seeing, runs after, and had they not come at that time, the Hay and Straw had
been all burnt, for it was already of a light fire, but being quenched out, all
was well: such is the envy of Fools, who seeing none would help him, thought
to do them mischief, which he did, but not much.

A Clean Fool
How Jack Miller simply burned the hair of his head and face.
IN a Gentleman's house where Jack Miller resorted, as he was welcome to all:
it chanced so there was a Play, the Players dressed them in the Gentleman's
Kitchen, and so entered through the Entry into the Hall. It was after dinner
when Pyes stood in the Oven to cool for supper: Jack had not dyned, and
seeing the Oven stand open, and so many Pyes there untold (he thought because
they seemed numberless) O says Jack, for one of them p. p. pies, for so he
stamered in speking (the Players boy being by, and in his Ladies Gown) could
have found in his heart to creep in clothes and all: but he persuaded Jack to
do so, to which he was willing, and very nimbly thrustes in his head into the
hot Oven, which being but newly opened, on the sudden he was singed both of
head and face, and almost not a hair left on his eyebrows, or beard: Jack
cries, O I burn, and had not the wit to come back, but lay still: the
Gentlewoman boy took him by the heels and pulled him out, but how he looked I
wish you to judge that can discern colors. O Jack was in a bad taking with
his face poor soul, and looked so ugly, and so strangly, that the Lady of the
Play being ready to enter before the Gentiles to play her part, no sooner
began, but remembering Jack, laughed out, and could go no further: the
Gentleman inuzed at what he laughed: but such a jest being easily seen, was
told to the Gentleman, who sent in for Jack Miller, who came like bald Time, to
tell them time was past of his hair: but he so strangely looked as his
countenance was better then the Play. But against night ye Players dressed them
in another place, and at supper Jack Miller sung his song of Dirries fair,
with a barmy face to take out the fire, and looked like the Pater of the Alefat
it was no boot to bid Jack stut and stammer, poor fool as clean as he was,
he was now but beastly faced, for he looked like a man that being ashamed to
show his face, had hid it in a dry lome wall, and pulling it out again, left
all the hair behind him.

How the clean fool was loath to foul his shoes, or foul his band.
Jack, on Newyeeres day in the morning, was to carry a Newyeres gift to a
gentleman a mile off; and as he stayed to have it delivered to him to bear,
asked which was the cleanest way thither? A fellow knowing his cleanliness,
sends him over a durty marsh: and so he folded up his band (then clean) for
fouling, yt at the gentleman's door he might put it on. The Present came, which
Jack seeing, made legs to ye gentlewoma^, forgetting his band was in his hose,
carried a stif neck to and fro to the gentlewoman, and what ere she spoke, or
where ere she stood, Jack would look but one way, as though his neck had bin
starcht: and remember, says the gentlewoman, you abuse not my message, nor my
gift. No fo fo forsooth, says Jack: and away he goes, and thought he would see
what it was: and as he went, he lift up the basket lid and looked: Ah ha, quoth
Jack, I see now it is Almond bu bu butter: along he goes, and seeing the marsh
wet and durty, thought to leap a little ditch, and so to go a clean hye way:
but (O poor Jack) he, basket and all, lay in ye middle of the ditch, up to the
armpits in mud; which Jack seeing, gets out, and goes to a river by, and
washes himself first, his band next: where, if it had bin about his neck as it
should, it had been labor well saved: but last his basket of Almond butter, he
washed ye dirt off so long, that the butter was washed away; which he perceiving,
in that woeful taking comes back, and calls for more bu bu butter. The
Gentlewoman seeing how things went, rather laughed then vexed, because she was
so simple to trust a Fool with matters of trust, and bade him get in to the
fire to dry him, and said, Next time she would stay her servants leisure (who
then were abroad) rather then to trust to a rotten staff. Jack stood singing
Derries fair by the fire, with a Jack of good beer: and while he dried
himself without, wet himself within: and there is all the thought he takes.
Thus clean fools light still on beastly bargaynes.

How Jack Miller the clean fool, ventred over the Seuerne on foot in great
danger.
IN the town of Esam in Worcestersh Jack Miller being there borne, was much
made of in every place: It happened that the Lord Shandoyes Players came to
town, and used their pastime there, which Jack not a little loved, especially
the Clown, whom he would embrace with a joyful spirit, and call him Grumball
(for so he called himself in Gentlemen's houses, where he would imitate plays,
doing all himself, King, Clown, Gentleman, and all: having spoke for one, he
would suddenly go in, and again return for the other: and stambring so beastly
as he did, made mighty mirth. To conclude, he was a right innocent, without any
villainy at all.)

When these Players as I speak of had done in ye town, they went to Partiar,
and Jack swore he would go all the world with Grumball, that he would: it was
then a great frost new begun, and the Haven was frozen ever thinly: but here
is the wonder, the gentleman yt kept the Heart (an Inn in the town) whose
backside looked to the way that led to the river side to Partiar, locked up Jack
in a chamber next the Haven, where he might see the players pass by; and they
of the town loath to lose his company, desired to have it so: But he, I say,
seeing them go by, creeps through the window, and said, I come to thee,
Grumball. The players stood all still to see further. He got down very
dangerously, and makes no more ado but ventures over the Haven, which is by
the long bridge, as I guess, some forty yards over: tut he made nothing of it;
but my heart aked to see it, and my ears heard the ice crack all the way. When
he was come unto them, I was amazed, and took up a brickbat (which there lay
by) and threw it, which no sooner fell upon the ice, but it burst. Was not this
strange, that a fool of thirty years was borne of that ice, which would not
endure the fall of a brickbat? yes, it was wonderful me thought: but every one
rated him for the deed, telling him it was dangerous. He considered his fault,
and knowing faults should be punished, he entreated Grumball the Clown, whom
he so dearly loved, to whip him; but with Rosemary: for that he thought would
not smart. But the Players in jest breecht him, till the blood came, which he
took laughing: for it was his manner ever to weep in kindness and laugh in
extremes. That this is true, mine eyes were witnesses, being then by.

How Jack the clean fool sung his song of Derries fair in diverse places,
where he made good sport.
Jack Miller welcomed to all places, and barred of none, came to a Gentleman,
who being at dinner, requested him for mirth, to make him a play, which he did,
and to sing Derries fair, which was in this manner: First, it is to be noted,
he stutted hugely, and could neither pronounce b nor p, and thus he began: As I
went to Derries fair, there was I ware of a jolly beggar,
Mistress Annis, master Thomas, under a tree mending of shoone,
Mistress Annis, master Thomas, hight brave beggars every one.


And so forward: but the jest was to hear him pronounce brave beggars: and his
quality was, after he began his song, no laughing could put him out of it. One
standing by, and noting his humor, that b and p plagued him, bade him say this
after him, which Jack said he would do.

Buy any flawne, pasties, pudding pies, plumb pottage, or pescods? O, it was
death to Jack to do it: but like a willing fool he fell to it: Buy any, buy
any fla flawne, p p p pasties, and p p p pudding p p pies, p p p etc.

And ever as he hit on the word, he would pat with his finger on his other
hand, that more and more it would make a man burst with laughing, almost to see
his action: sometime he would be pronouncing one word, while one might go to
the door and come again. But ever after, Gentiles would request him to speak
that, where before Derries fair was all his song.

He came not long after (to this I am witness, because my ears heard it) to a
Gentleman's not far from Vpton upon Seuerne: where at the table (amongst many
gallants and Gentlewomen, almost the state of the country) he was to jest and
sing, especially they entreated him for his new speech of the pees: which he
began in such manner to speak, with driueling and stuttering, that they began
mightily to laugh: insomuch that one proper Gentlewoman among the rest, because
she would not seem too immodest with laughing: for such is the humor of
many, that think to make all, when God knows they mar all: so she strayning
her self, though inwardly she laughed heartily, gave out such an earnest of
her modesty, that all the Table rung on it. Who is that, says one? Not I,
says another: but by her cheeks you might find guilty Gilberto, where he had
hid the brush. This Jest made them laugh more, and the rather that she stood
upon her marriage, and disdayned all the gallants there, who so heartily laughed,
that an old gentlewoman at the table took such a conceyt at it with laughing,
that had not the fool bin, which stood (by fortune) at her back, and was her
supporter, being in a great swound, she had fallen to the ground backward: but
down they burst the windows for air, and there was no little boot to bid
run: she was nine or ten days ere she recovered that fit on my knowledge.
Thus simple Jack made mirth to all, made the wisest laugh but to this day
gathered little wit to himself.

A merry Fool
A description how this merry Fool, being Will Summers (the Kings natural
Iester) was, as report tells me.
WIll Summers, borne in Shropshire, as some say,
Was brought to Greenwitch on a holy day,
Presented to the King, which fool disdayn'd
To shake him by the hand; or else ashamed,
How e're it was, as ancient people say,
With much ado was won to it that day.
Lean he was, hollow eyde, as all report;
And stoop he did too, yet in all the Court
Few men were more beloved, then was this fool,
Whose merry prate kept with the King much rule,
When he was sad, the King and he would rhyme.
Thus Will exiled sadness many a time.
I could describe him, as I did the rest;
But in my mind I do not think it best:
My reason this, how e're I do descry him,
So many knew him, that I may belie him.
Therefore to please all people one by one,
I hold it best to let that pains alone.
Only thus much, he was a poor man's friend,
And helped the widow often in the end:
The King would ever grant what he did crave;
For well he knew Will, no exacting knave:
But wished the King to do good deeds great store,
Which causde the Court to love him more and more.
How the merry fool, Will Summers, brought his uncle to the King, and got him
twenty pound a year.
WIll Summers, in no little credit in the Kings Court, walking in the Park at
Green which, fell a sleep on the style that leads into the walk, and being
many that would have gone that way, so much loved him, that they were loath to
disease him, but went another way, I, the better sort: but do I make a wonder
at that? who sooner then the better sort? for now adays beggars are the
gallants, while Gentles of right blood seem tame Ruffians: but note the love
that Will Summers got: A poor woman seeing him sleep so dangerously, either to
fall backward, or hurt his head leaning so against a post, fetched him a cushen
and a rope; the one for his head, and the other to bind him to the post, for
falling backward: and thus he slept, and the woman stood by, attending as
groom of his chamber.

It chanced so, that upon great occasion, as you shall after hear, Will Summers
uncle came out of Shropshire to seek him in the Court: a plain old man of
threescore years, with a buttoned cap, a lockram falling band, course, but
clean; a russet coat, a white belt of a horse hide, right horse-coller
whit-leather, a close round breech of russet sheeps wool, with a long stock
of white kersey, a high shoe with yellow buckles, all white with dust; for
that day the good old man had come three and twenty miles on footbacke and
horseback.

This kind old man coming up in his countries behalf, and coming into
Greenwitch, asked the way to the Court: every one directs him: but one villayne
Page directs him by the Court gate, to cross in a boat over to Blackwall, and
told him that was the Court. The silly old man willingly paid his penny before
hand, and was going over: but some that ouer-heard their talk, hindered his
journey, and laughed at the jest yet pitied his simplicity, and sets him the
right way. When he came in and saw such a place, he was amazed and stood
gazing: which the Guard and Gentlewomen in their windows had much sport to see:
at last one asked him what he was?

The old man answers, A poor Shropshire man, and demands if there were not a
Gentleman in the Court dwelling, called by the name of M. William Summers? (for
the Country hearing him in favor in the Court, said he was so at least.) The
Courtier answered, Here is such a one indeed. For fault of a worse, says he,
I am his uncle, and wept with joy that he should see him. Mary, says the man,
I Will help you to him straight: for I tell you, not any in the Court durst but
have sought him, which this man did, and it was told them, he was walked into
the Park, while the King slept that hot day: thither went they to seek him.

All this while my friend William was in counsel with the post, and the cushen
stood as arbitrator betwixt them; and the woman by as a witness what was said
and done: At last, came these two and wakened him. William feeling his head
soft, What soft post is this, quoth he? A post of mine own making, says the
woman. But she lost nothing by her good will: for ere she left Will Summers,
she got him to get her sons pardon of the King, who was to he hanged three
days after for piracy: but by Will Summers means he deceived the hangman.
Thus and many good deeds he did to diverse.

The fool being wakened, looks about him, when he had thanked the woman, asked
what news? Says the man, Sir, here is your uncle come out of the country to
see you. God a mercy, cousin, says Will Summers, I thank thee for thy labor,
you cannot uncle me so. Yes truly, sir, I am your own dear uncle, M. William,
and with that wept. Are you my uncle, says Will? I sir, says he. Are you my
uncle, says he again? I sure, and verily too. But are you my uncle indeed? By
my vows I am, says the old man. Then uncle, by my vows, welcome to the
Court, says Will Summers: but what make you here uncle? He up and tells his
coming to him. William takes him by the hand, come, says he, thou shall see
Harry, uncle, the only Harry in England, and leads him through the Court,
through the great Hall, and up the great Chamber, to the Chamber of Presence,
and ever and anon cries, Aware, room for me and my uncle Williams, and knaves,
bid him welcome. You are welcome, sir, says one: you are welcome, sir, says
another, that the old man thought himself no earthly man, they honored him so
much.

But Will ready to enter the Presence, looks on his uncle, and seeing him not
fine enough to look on the King: Come uncle, says he, we will have this gear
mended: leads him to his chamber, and attyres him in his best tools coat,
simply God wot, meaning well to him, and the simple old man as simply put it
on, cappe and all.

Out they come, and up they came, and to the King they go, who being with the
good Lord Treasurer alone merry, seeing them two, how Will had got an other
fool, knew there was sport at hand. How now, says the King, what news with
you? O Harry, says he, this is mine own uncle, bid him welcome, my own
flesh and blood. Well, said the King, and he is welcome. Harry, says he, hear
me tell thee a tale, and I will make thee rich, and my uncle shall be made rich
by thee. William tells the King, how Terrils Frith was enclosed. Terrils Frith,
says the King? what is that? Why, the Heath where I was borne, called by the
name of Terrils Frith: now a gentleman of that name takes it all in, and makes
all the people believe it is his; for it took the name from him: so that,
Harry, the poor pine, and their cattle are all undone without thy help.

And what should I do, says the King? Mary, says William, send to the Bishop
of Hereford, he is a great man with Terrill, command him to set the Frith at
liberty again, who is now imprisoned by his means.

And how shall I be rich by that, says the King? The poor will pray for thee,
says Will So^mers, and thou shall be rich in heaven, for on earth thou art
rich already. All this was done, and Williams uncle went home, who while he
lived, for that deed, was allowed Bailey of the Common, and his place was better
then twenty pound a year.

How this merry fool Will Summers, to make the King merry, asked him three
questions.
Howsoever these three things came in memory, and are for mirth inserted into
stage plays, I know not; but that Will So^mers asked them of the King, it is
certain, there are some will affirm it now living in Greenwich. The King upon
a time being extreme melancholy and full of passion, all that Will Summers
could do, would not make him merry. Ah, says he, this cloud must have a good
shower to cleanse it; and with that goes behind the Arras. Harry (says he) I Will
go behind the Arras, and study thee three questions, and come again: see
therefore you lay aside this melancholy muse, and study to answer me. I (quoth
the King) they will be wise ones, no doubt. At last, out comes William with his
wit, as the fool of the play does with an antic look, to please the
beholders. Harry, says he, what is that the lesser it is, the more it is to he
feared? The K. mused at it: but to grace the jest the better (for he was in
that humor to grace good will, the excellentest Prince on the earth) the King
made answer, he knew not. Will made answer, It was a little bridge over a
deep river: at which he smilled, knowing it was fearful indeed. What is the
next, William, says the King? Mary this is next, What is the cleanliest trade
in ye world? Mary, says the King, I think a Comfitmaker: for he deals with
nothing but pure ware, and is attyred clean in white linen when he sels it.
No Harry, says Will, you are wide. What say you then, quoth. the King? Mary,
says Will, I say a durt-dauber. Out on it, says the King, that is the
foulest; for he is durty up to the elbowes. I, says Will, but then he washes
them clean again, and eats his meat cleanely enough. I promise thee (Will)
says the K, you have a pretty foolsh wit. I, Harry, says he, it will serve to
make a wiser man the^ you a fool, me thinks. At this the King laughed, and
demands the third question. Now tell me, says Will, if you can, what it is,
that being borne without life, head, nose, lip or eye, and yet runs terribly
roaring through ye world till it dies? This is a wonder, quoth. the King, and no
question, and I know it not. Why, quoth Will, it is a fart. At this the King
laughed heartily, and was exceeding merry, and bids Will ask any reasonable
thing, and he would grant it. Thanks, Harry, says he, now against I want, I
know where to find, for yet I need nothing: but one day I shall: for every man
sees his latter end, but know not his beginning. The King understood his
meaning, and so pleasantly departed for that season, and Will lays him down
amongst the Spaniels to sleep.

How Will Summers the merry fool borrowed ten pounds of Cardinal Wolsey, to
pay where the Cardinal owed it.
ON a time appointed, the King dyned at Windsor, in ye Chapel yard, at
Cardinal Wolseys, at the same time when he was building ye admired work of
his tomb: at whose gate stood a number of poor people to be served of alms.
When dinner was done within, and as Will past by, they saluted him, taking him
for a worthy personage, which pleased him.

In he comes, and finding the King at dinner, and the Cardinal by attending: to
disgrace him that he never loved, Harry, says he, lend me ten pound. What to
do, says the King? To pay three or four of the Cardinals creditors, quoth
he, to whom my word is past; and they are come now for their money. That you
shall, Will, quoth he. Creditors of mine, says the Cardinal? I Will give your
Grace my head, if any man can justly ask me a penny. No, says Will? lend me
ten pounds, if I pay it not where thou owe it, I Will give thee twenty for it.
Do so, says the King. That I will, my Liege, says the Cardinal, though I know
I owe none. With that he lends Will Summers ten pound. Will goes to the gate,
and distributes it to the poor, and brought the empty bag: there is thy bag
again, says he, and thy creditors are satisfied, and my word out of danger.

Who received it, says the King? the Brewer, or the Baker? Neither (Harry)
says Will Summers: But (Cardinal) answer me in one thing: To whom do thou
owe thy soul? To God (quoth he.) To whom thy wealth? To the poor, says he.
Take thy forfet (Harry) says the fool, open confession, open penance: his
head is thine; for to the poor at the gate I paid his debt, which he yields is
due: or if thy stony heart will not yield it so, save thy head by denying thy
word, and lend it me: thou know I am poor, and have neither wealth nor wit,
and what thou lendest to the poor, God will pay thee ten fold: he is my surety,
arrest him; for by my troth hang me when I pay thee. The King laughed at the
jest, and so did the Cardinal for a show, but it grieved him to jest away ten
pound so: yet worse tricks then this Will Summers served him after; for indeed
he could never abide him; and the forfeiture of his head had like to have been
paid, had he not poisoned himself.

How this merry Fool Will Summers eat a mess of Milk without a spoone.
THere was in the time of Will Summers, an other artificial Iester or fool in
the Court, whose subtilty heapt up wealth in rewards and gifts given him, which
Will Summers could never abide him for: but indeed, lightly one fool cannot
endure the sight of another, as Jack Oats did the Minstrell in the flat
fools story; and one beggar is woe, another by the door should go.

This Iester was a byg man of a great voice, long black locks, and a very big
round beard. On a time (of purpose) Will Summers watched to disgrace him, when
he was iuggling and jesting before the King. Will Summers brings up a mess of
milk and a manchet: Harry (says he) lend me a spoone. Fool, says the Iester,
use thy hand: help hands, I have no lands; and means that saying would warrant
his gross feeding. I, says Will Summers, beasts will feed so, and beasts
will bid other do, as they will do themselves. Will, says the King, thou
know I have none. True, Harry (says he) I know that, therefore I ask thee:
and I would (but for doing thee harm) thou had no tongue to grant that
fool his next suit: but I must eat my cream some way. The King, the Iester,
and all gathers about him to see him eat it. Will begins thus to ryme over his
milk: This bit, Harry, I give to thee, and this next bit must serve for me,
Both which I Will eat apace.
This bit (Madam) unto you, and this bit I my self eat now,
And all the rest upon thy face,


Meaning the fool, in whose beard and head the bread and milk was thick sown,
and his eyes almost put out. Will Summers he gets him gone for fear. This lusty
Iester forgetting himself, in fury draws his dagger, and begins to protest.
Nay, says the King, are ye so hot, clap him fast: and though he draws his
dagger here, yet let him put it up in another place. The poor abused Iester
was iested out of countenance, and lay in durance a great while, till Will
Summers was feign to (after he had broke his head, to give him a plaster) get
him out again: but never after came my Iuggler in the Court more, so near the
King, being such a dangerous man to draw in the presence of.

A very Fool
How John of the Hospital, the very fool, walked and preached in Paul's Church,
and was bidden to dinner.
THis innocent Idiot, that never harmed any, before I enter any further, I will
let you understand in two words, how he came to be of the Hospital of Christ's
Church: Some certain years since (but not a few years) there dwelt a poor
blind woman in Bow lane in London, called by the name of blind Alice, who had
this fool of a child to lead her, in whose house he would sit, either on the
stairs, or in a corner, and sing Psalms, or preach to himself of Peter and
Paul, because he delighted to go to Sermons with blind Alice, and heard the
Preacher talk of them. It chanced the Worshipful of the City (good Benefactors
to the poor) to take her into Christ's Hospital, with whom John went as a
guide to lead her; who being old, after she dyed, he was to be turned out of
door: but the City more desirous to pity, then to be cruel, placed him as a
fostered fatherless child; and they did well in it too, seeing he was one of
Gods creatures, though some difference in persons.

Well, to go forward in what I promised you: John went to S. Paul's Church in
London, to meet with M. Nowel the Deane, whose bounty to him was great, and
the tool knew it well enough, whom he would duly attend after his preaching;
for ever he gave him at their meeting a groat, and he would bring it to his
Nurse: Well, M. Deane preached not that day: whereupon John stands in a corner
with boys flocking about him, and begins to preach himself, holding up his
muckender for his book, and reads his text.

It is written (says he) in the 3. chapter of Paul to the Corinthians,
Brethren, you must not swear (for that was lightly al his text) then thus he
begins: Whereas, or whereunto it is written: for because you must believe it:
for surely else we are no Christians. Write ye sermon (boy) says he (as the
Hospital boys do:) and then one must write on his hand, with his finger, and
then he would go forward thus: The world is proud, and God is angry if we do
not repent. Good friend give me a pin, or good friend give me a point, as it
came in his mind: and so sucking up his driuell and breath together, would pray
and make an end: which being done, who bids me home to dinner now, says John?
The boys yt knew his qualities, answers, that do I, John. Thank ye (friend)
says he, and goes home to his own dwelling at Christ's Church. But at this
time one wealthy Merchants son, to make his father merry, bade him home to
dinner indeed, and will be, or nill he, he must go with him: with much ado
John went, and coming into the house, simply sits him down (as his use was)
in the chimney corner. It was in Lent, when pease pottage bare great sway, and
when every pease must have his ease. John beholding pease pottage on the fire,
thoughr on his Nurse; for he was all saving for her: and when the room was
empty, forgetting what his pocket was made of, though of leather, yet not
sufficient; but a good help from further harm, as you shall hear: he seeing
no body by, stopped to the pot, and put a great ladle of pottage into his pocket,
and pittiously burnt his thigh; and but that the leather was thick, it had bin
worse: for if it had been Canuas, it had spoiled all.

John feeling something burn, leapt and cried: they ran in to see the matter
why he cried, but more and more he exclaimed, I burn I burn, and got out of
doors, and never leaves till he came to his Nurse, who quickly shifted him,
and mended what was amiss. But the jest was to see the folks of the house, who
wondering what he ayled, could not devise what the matter was: but a beggar in
the entry, who beheld all, told the truth of the matter, who lost a good alms
for his labor. But thus simple John by his own folly, dyed the inside of his
pocket, pease pottage tawny, and set a good scarlet red upon his thigh.

How John towled the Bell for his Nurses Chicken.
GAffer Homes being Sexton of Christ's Church, would often set John a work, to
towle the bell to prayers or burials, wherein he delighted much: it chanced so,
yt coming through the church, and having nothing to do, seeing the bell so easy
to come by, towles it. The people (as the custom is) repaires to church (as
they used) to know for whom it was. John answers them still, For his Nurses
chicken. They said, Wherefore towles the bell, John? I know not. When dyed he?
Even now. Who, John? who? My Nurses chicken, quoth he, and laughes. This jest
was known to every neighbor thereabouts, who sent to bid him leave towling:
but it was not his custom, till good man Homes took the rope from him, that
gave the rope to him: though goodma^ Homes gave him one rope, he had forgotten
that Iacks wit was not so good, to remember any thing.

Well, there stood Jack towling from four a clock to six, goodman Homes being
from home, who was not a little vexed at John's diligence: but he laid the rope
ever after, where John could not reach it.

How this very fool John of the Hospital, sold a gentleman's pair of boots for
a groat, that cost the Cobbler five shillings.
John was of this humor, ask him what his coat cost him, he would say a
groate: what his cap, band or shirt cost, all was a groat: ask what his beard
cost, and still a groat: So one Friday morning there was a Gentleman to ride
down into Warwickshire, about payment of twenty pound upon a bonds forfeyture:
the time was next day by Sun set, it was no boot to bid him pull on his
boots and be gone. Well, he made haste, and went to do it without bidding too,
and yet for all his haste, his boots were seame-rent, and must have a stitch or
two needs: he sends them to a Cobbler, next to Christ's Church gate in Newgate
market, who was diligent to mend them straight: and as he had done, comes John
of the Hospital to him (as his use was) to carry home his work, and he sends
John home with the boots: As John was going through Iuy lane, a Country fellow
that knew him not, meets him, and seeing the boots, What shall I give thee for
them, says he? John (who sold every thing for a groate) asked a groate, The
fellow turns them and winds them upon that reasonable price, and seeing it was
a good pennyworth, gives him a groat suddenly, and departs with the boots.
John, who used to take a great of M. Deane, and would carry it to his Nurse,
did so now with his money. She asked him where he had it? He said, For boots:
but she not knowing his mind, forgot the jest, and tell to work again as he
found her.

The forfeiture of twenty pound so hammered in this Gentleman's head, that he
thought every hour two, till he had his boots, and mused they came not from
me^ding, sends for them presently. One comes sweating, zoones (Cobbler) the
boots; and being at work very busy, I, says he, they are mended and carried
home. Another comes, Boots, boots. Would the boots were in your belly, quoth
the Cobbler, once again they are gone home. By and by comes the gentleman in
his white linen boot-hose ready to the purpose. A pox of lazy Cobblers, says
he, my boots; shall I forfet a bond for your pleasure? The Cobbler puts off his
considering rap, why sir, says he, I sent them home but now. By whom, says
he? By John, blew John, says the Cobbler. The gentleman he runs home one way,
the Cobbler he another way: well, no boots were to be had: the gentleman he
stayed, and the Cobbler he prayed; but all this while the boots delayed and came
not.

The Cobbler seeks John at his Nurses, thinking he forgot himself, and went
home? well, true it was, and there he was indeed, who after the matter was
examined, the boots were known to be sold by John for a groat. The Cobbler
seeing no remedy, because ye gentleman was in haste, gives him five shillings
with a heavy hey he, and lost four shillings eight pence by the bargayne: but
the Cobbler would never let John carry home his ware more: nay, says the
Cobbler, if my money can be booted and ride post it by five shillings at a time,
it is no boot for me to say. Vtinam: but the next boots I Will make a page of my
own age, and carry home my self: for I see fools will afford good
pennyworthe.

How this very fool John, lost himself on Easter Monday at the Spittle
Sermon, amongst all the people.
ON Easter Monday the ancient custom is, that all the children of the
Hospital go before my Lord Mayor to the Spittle, that the world may witness
the works of God and man, in maintenance of so many poor people, the better
to stir up living men's minds to the like good, if God should call them:
amongst which, the children of ye Hospital leads on; before whom, as chief
Captayn, goes John; whom to behold the people flock apace, and the weather
being hot, their thrusting made John in such a hot temper, that he was
extreme dry. John considering he was like to fast till dinner, yet keeps on his
rank till he came to the Spittle, where the cannes did walk apace by his
nose, but never came at him, which made him the more eager of drink. Well,
while the children were placing, John stood to make water, and seeing a
Gentleman's door open, slips in, and the household without, standing to see my
Lord Mayor pass by, not regarded him: but he, whole nose had wit to smell good
beer, got down into the Seller, and fell to it tipple square, till he was
lost and quite drunk, and laid himself to sleep behind two barrels; and
unseen slept all that day. In the Sermon time he was mist, sought and not
found, inquired after, but he was a more fool that sought the fool. The
afternoon came, the gentleman's Butler with other good fellows fell to
carrouse soundly, till the Butler was laid up too: here was a Seller well
fraught with fools: but all this while the Beadles failed not to search up and
down the city; yea, the crier cried a man child of the age of two and thirty
years; for at least he was so old, yet one says he had not wit enough to
look to himself.

But return we to the Seller: the two drunkards wak't both together. John he
calls, Nurse, Nurse: which the Butler (half awake) hearing, thought the devil
had bin playing bo peep with him: but when he looked and beheld him, he was
amazed at it, immagining how it was, and so secretly sent him to the Hospital,
lest he were blamed for his negligence in looking to the door no better the day
before.

A number of things more John did, which I omit, fearing to be tedious: not
long after he dyed, and was old; for his beard was full of white hairs, as his
picture in Christ's Hospital (now to be seen) can witness: buried he i^ is,
but with no Epitaph. Me thinks, those yt in his life time could afford him his
picture, might with his grave yield so much as four lives, that people may see
where he lies, whom they so well knew: and if I might persuade, his Motto should
be thus, and to this effect: Here under sleeps blew John, that gives
Food to feed worms, yet he not lives:
You that pass by, look at his grave,
And say, your selves the like must have.
Wise men and fools all one end makes:
Gods will be done, who gives and takes.


Thus (Gentlemen) as the kind Hostess salutes her ghestes, saying, You see
your cheer, and you are welcome: Even to say I, desiring that you will pardon
my folly, in writing of folly: which folly can no way be excused but by your
favor: so as Caesar said, Veni, vidi, vici: I am bold to busy your brain
with any dark Enigma. Wherefore if my pardon may be purchased, then so: if not,
the worst is, you will say the Author may keep his six fools company.

FINIS.

