THE CASE OF THE Ancient Borough OF Knaresborough, In the County of YORK, In
the Return of THOMAS FAWKES Esquire; to Serve as one of the Representatives of the
said Borough, in this CONVENTION.
THE Proprietors of Burgage-Houses within this Borough, and none other, Elect
by Prescription, and the Return is made by the Bailiff of the said Borough for
the time being, who has Returned as follows:

Pursuant to His Highness the Prince of Orange's Letter to me directed, and
hereto affixt, I do certify the Clerk of the Crown of the High Court of
Chancery, That the Burrough-men of the ancient Borough of Knaresborough, in
the County of York, on the twelfth day of this Instant January, with an
unanimous Consent, have freely chose William Stockdale Esquire; to be one of their
two Representatives in the Convention to be held at Westminster, the
Twenty-second of this instant January.

And the Lord Viscount Latimer by the majority of the Ancient and New Votes
together.

Or Thomas Fawkes Esquire; by the majority of the Ancient Votes, who has been Sworn
in Court, and relief'd for their Burrough-Houses, according to the Custom of
the Borough, to be the other of their two Representatives in the said
Convention.

The ancient Votes for Mr. Fawkes, agreed on all sides to be good, were
Twenty-five.

The Ancient Votes for the Lord Latimer agreed on all sides to be good, were
Nineteen; and the New Votes transferred lately, but otherways good, were
Eighteen. To the truth of this Pole I have hereunto set my Hand, and the Common
Seal of the said Borough, the Twelfth of January, Anno Dom. 1688.

Note, That the New Votes in the Return above-recited therein, said to be
transferred lately, were transferred (if at all) by a pretended assigning of
Burgages, after the Date and Receipt of his Highness's Letter (by the said
Bailiff) and after the Court called by him for the said Election; which was
done colourably only, and on purpose to serve a Turn. So that the said New
Votes ought not to have been taken Notice of, and by consequence the said Mr.
Fawkes was Legally Elected by a Majority of Votes, according to the Custom of
the said Borough.


