AN ACCOUNT Of the Last Thursdays Sea Engagement between the Dutch and French
Fleets near the Coast of Breast, With the Total Routing of the French Fleet.
AN Hambrough Merchant coming into Dover to take in fresh Water, being homeward
bound, brings the following Account, as by the particulars of a Letter sent to
Esquire P -- an Eminent and worthy Merchant in London.

This Hambrough Merchant came by the two Fleets, when they were Actually
Engaged, the occasion how this Grand Engagement happened to fall out, was as
follows. Thirty Six Sail of Stout Dutch Ships lying some Leagues off of
Breast, to secure the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, from the French Capers, as well as to
Watch the Motion of the late King James, who was at Breast, with Sixteen Sail of
French Men of War (from Thirty to Seventy Guns, each as Fire Ships) with many
small Craft to carry Land Forces, Ammunition, and Four Cart Loads of Money, and
Plate, etc. with a design to Succor Ireland, for the Romish Interest. On
Tuesday last the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, past by the Dutch Men of War, under their
Safeguard, and are come into the Channel, to pursue their Course safely for
Holland. And on Wednesday in the Afternoon, (as it is thought) or at least on
Thursday Morning, the French Fleet put to Sea, from the Porr of Breast, (the
Wind favoring them) for the Coast of Ireland directly, but so it fell out,
that the Wind tacking about, by which the Dutch Fleet (who lay ready waiting
their Motion) was driven directly upon them, and the French Fleet could not
make any part, but the English Coasts; a most desperate Fight ensued. And when
this Hambrough Merchant came away, he left them hotly Engaged, and since (as
it is generally reported) the King this day received an Express, that the French
Fleet are Totally Routed. A great many of their Men of War Sunk, and others
taken, with a great number of their small Craft-men that had their Land
Soldiers on Board, among which were the Marshal Luxemburgh, and many others of
their greatest and best Officers: And it is g^nerally said about the Town, that
the Late King James, with many of the English Nobility, are made their
Prisoners of War. You may expect in our next, a more full and particular
Account, of this Great, Glorious, and most happy Engagement. Happy not only to
these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; but happy to the Confederate
Princes, and States of Europe; who are at present Engaged, in a common and no
less just War, with the comm^^ Enemy of Christianity, and Mankind, (...) King.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1689.


