An Account of the Burning the Pope at Temple Bar in London, November 17. 1679.
THE horrid Designs and Contrivances of the Papists for many years last past,
for rooting out the Protestant Religion from under Heaven in this Kingdom as
well as in all the Protestant Countries in Europe, has raised such a just
indignation in the breast of every good Christian and True Englishman, That the
people of this Nation have upon all occasions endeavored to discover their
generous Detestation of those cursed Invaders of their Religion and Civil
Liberties; but never more apparently, then upon the 17th. of November 1679.
that being the day on which the unfortunate Queen Mary died, and that Glorious
Princess Queen Elizabeth, that True Defender of the Christian Protestant Faith,
ascended the English Throne, and thereby dispelled those thick Clouds of
Egyptian Popish Darkness, which had so long overspread these Kingdoms.

Upon the said 17th. of November, the Bells began to ring about Three a Clock
in the Morning in the City of London; and several Honorable and Worthy
Gentlemen belonging to the Temple, as well as the City (remembering the burning
both of London and the Temple, which was apparently Executed by Popish Villainy)
were pleased to be at the charge of an Extraordinary Triumph, in commemoration
of that blessed Protestant Queen, which was as follows:

In the Evening of the said day, all things being prepared, the Solemn
Procession began, from Moregate, and so to Bishops-gate-street, and down
Hounsditch to Aldgate; through Leaden-Hall-street, Cornhil, by the Royal
Exchange, through Cheapside to Temple Bar, in Order following,

1. First marched six Whifflers in Pioneer. Caps and Red Wastcoats. 2. A
Bellman ringing his Bell, and with a dolesome voice, crying all the way,
Remember Justice Godfrey. 3. A dead Body representing Justice Godfrey in the
habit he usually wore, and the Crevat wherewith he wa^ murdered, about his
Neck, with spots of Blood on his Wrists, Breasts and Shirt, and White Gloves on
his Hands, his Face pale and wan riding upon a White Horse, and one of his
Murderers behind him to keep him from falling, in the same manner as he was
carried to Primrose Hill. 4. A Priest came next in a Surplice, and Cope
Imbroidered with Dead men's Sculls and Bones, and Skeletons, who gave out
Pardons very plentifully to all that would murder Protestants, and proclaiming
it Meritorious. 5. A Priest alone with a large Silver Cross. 6. Four C^^melite
Friars in White and Black Habits. 7. Four Gray Friars in their proper Habits.
8. Six Jesu^^s carrying bloody Daggers. 9. Four wind Mu^^ck, called the Waits,
playing all the way. 10. Four Bishops in Purple, with Lawn sleeves, and Golden
Crosses on their Breasts, and Crosier Staves in their hands. 11. Four other
Bishops in their Pontificalibus, with Surplices and Rich imbroidered Copes, and
Golden Miters on their Heads. 12. Six Cardinals in Searlet Robes and Caps. 13.
Then followed the Popes Chief Physician with Jesuits powder in one hand, and an
Urinal in the other. 14. Two Priests in Surplices, with Two Golden Crosses.
Lastly, The Pope in a Glorious Pageant, or Chair of State, covered with
Scarlet, the Chair being richly Embroidered and bedeckt with Golden Balls and
Crosses; at his Feet was a Cushion of State, and Two Boys sat on each side the
Pope, in Surplices with White Silk Banners, painted with Red Crosses, and
bloody Consecrated Daggers for murdering Protestant Kings and Princes, with an
Incense Pot before them, Censing his Holiness. The Pope was arrayed in a rich
Scarlet Gown, lined through with Ermines, and adorned with Gold and Silver
Lace, with a Triple Crown on his Head, and a Glorious Collar of Gold and
precious stones about his neck, and St. Peter's Keys, a great quantity of Beads,
Agnus Dei's, and other Catholic Trumpery about him. At his Back stood the
Devil, His Holiness Privy Councillor, Hugging and Whispering, him all the way,
and oftentimes instructing him aloud to destroy His Majesty, to contrive a
pretended Presbyterian Plot, and to fire the City again, to which purpose he
held an Infernal Torch in his hand; The whole Procession was attended with an
Hundred and Fifty Torches and Flambeaus by Order, but there were so many came
in Volunteers, as made the number to be several Thousands. Never were the
Balconies, Windows and Houses more filled, nor the Streets more thronged with
multitudes of People, all expressing their Abhorrence of Popery with continual
Shouts and Acclamations, so that in the whole progress of their procession, by
a modest computation it is judged there could not be less then Two Hundred
Thousand Spectators.

Thus with a slow and solemn state in some hours they arrived at Temple Bar,
where all the Houses seemed to be converted into Heaps of Men, Women and
Children, who were diverted with variety of Excellent Fireworks: It is known
that Temple Bar since its rebuilding is adorned with Four stately Statues of
stone, Two on each side the Gate, Those toward the City Representing Queen
Elizabeth and King James, and the other Two toward the Strand, King Charles the
First, and our present Gracious Sovereign; Now in regard of the day, the Statue
of Queen Elizabeth was adorned with a Crown of gilded Laurel on her Head, and
in her hand a Golden shield with this Motto inscribed thereon, The Protestant
Religion, Magna Charta; several lighted Torches were placed before her, and the
Pope being brought up near the Gate, the Song following was sing in parts,
between one who represented the English Cardinal Howard, and another the People
of England.

Cardinal Howard.
From York to London Town we come
to talk of Popish Ire,
To Reconcile you all to Rome,
And prevent Smithfield Fire.

The People Answer.
Cease! Cease! thou Norfolk Cardinal,
See yonder stands Queen Bess,
Who saved our Souls from Popish Thrall,
O Queen Bess, Queen Bess, Queen Bess,
Your Popish Plot and Smithfield Threat,
We do not fear at all,
For Lo! beneath Queen Besses feet,
You fall, you fall, you fall.
Now God preserve Great CHARLES our King.
And eke all Honest men;
And Traitors all to Justice bring,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

Then having entertained the thronging Spectators for some time with the
Ingenious Fireworks, a very great Bonefire was prepared at the
Inner-Temple-Gate, and his Holiness after some Complements and Reluctancies was
decently tumbled into the Flames, the Devil who till then had faithfully
Accompanied him, left his Holiness in the Lurch, and laughing, gave him up to
his Deserved Fate. This last Act of his Holiness Tragedy was attended with such
a prodigious Shout of the joyful Spectators, that it might be heard far beyond
Sommerset-House, and we hope the sound thereof will reach all Europe. The same
Evening there were Bonfires in most streets of London, and universal
Acclamations, Long live King Charles, and let Popery perish, and Papists with
their Plots and Counter-Plots be for ever Confounded as they have hitherto
been. To which every honest English Man will readily say, Amen.

The Discovery of the Popish Plot
J Hulitt sculp
Guy Fawkes is arrested by two guards under the House of Lords. A third guard
carries a torch.

Spaina mea

Maria matter Anglicana

^ra Iu^^i est eclesia

Vanitas

Romana incr^ia noviera

Familia mea

Maria (...)

Fixus adversa Sperno
Hammerton family blazon or coat of arms Roman Catholic clerics watch a man
return to the Protestant church.

Here to the Church, one of her youngest Sons,
Prostrate presents, these Lucubrations,
He Fears not her harsh, Censure for he knows,
Mothers are kind, and she the best of those,
Her Benediction, if she please to give
T'evill make the Author, and his Lines to Live,
Then though Rome Curse, t'shall never trouble him,
Though Rome be Eball, here is his Gerizim,



