AN ACCOUNT OF THE Defeat of the REBELS By Their Majesty's Forces In
Queens-County in IRELAND, May 4, 1691.
Published by Authority.

UPON Intelligence that a Party of Rapperies were troublesome about
Castle-Cuff, Major Wood, who is Garisoned at Mountmelick on the Fourth of May
went out with a Party of 300 Foot, Detached out of Colonel Lloy^'s, and Lord
George Hamilton's Regiments, and 50 Horse of Colonel Byerly's Regiment, the
Rapperies, upon their approach, took the Bog: Major Wood divided his Foot into
several Parties to scour the Woods and Bogs, and he, with his Horse, secured
the Skirts of the Bog to prevent their escape. By this means they killed 70
Rapperies, and brought off a considerable Prey of Cattle, and having with his
Horse advanced upon the Togher of Mallyhone, on Castle-Cuff side of the River,
and from thence sent the Cattle homewards, under a guard of 30 Foot, and was
returning with the rest of the Party, when he discovered two Bodies of the late
Kings Army, each computed to be 400 Men, coming on our Party, as they supposed
privately between the Wood and the Mountain; but perceiving we espied them,
they Beat their Drums. The Major drew up his Party in a Plowed Field, and was
ready to receive them, having then with him but 110 Foot, and 34 Horse, the
rest being a Rapperee-Hunting in the Woods: The Enemies Granadiers came over
the Hedges toward us, but perceiving our Men stand firm, advanced no further.
Their first Body were all this while making toward the Wood, which the Major
perceiving, and supposing his Men, who were guarding the Prey, were not yet got
clear of the Wood, and might there be exposed to their Numbers marched his
Horse and Foot through the Bog; which as soon as he had passed, he understood
by their Shooting, they were really engaged, and bravely maintained the Fight,
under the Command of Lieutenant Ellis, against the great Body. By this time the
continual Firing brought in two Parties of ours of about 40 Men each, the one
commanded by captain Dixie, and Ensign Russel, the other by Major Rider, and
Lieutenant Barton, Adjutant to the Lord George Hamilton's Regiment. Major Wood
commanded both Parties to march on each side the River, which was but shallow,
and himself with the Horse marched near the River betwixt both Parties: Coming
near the Enemy, the Major, thinking the Horse might do most Service in falling
upon their Rear, immediately Gallopt (fetching a little compass) to do so; the
Enemy perceiving his Design, (and being hard enough pressed by our Foot) began
to make an orderly Retreat; which the Major seeing, fell immediately on their
Flank, which put them first into great Confusion, and soon after to a perfect
flight: The Major then with some Horse, Galloped to stop them, which he did
effectually, and the Foot so well seconded him in the Rear, that they killed
and took Prisoners the Persons in the annexed List; and this, to Admiration,
with the loss only of one private Man, and two others wounded.

There were killed and taken Prisoners in this Action, the Persons following;
Viz. Killed,
Captain Chales, Two Lieutenants, and about 150 Common Soldiers.
Prisoners,
Major John Fitz-Patrick, who Commanded the Party. Captain Michael Forister, of
Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of Foot. Captain Edmond Butler, of
Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of Foot. Lieutenant Daniel Magraph,
of Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of Foot. Lieutenant William
Dormer, of Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of Foot. Lieutenant
Oliver Purcell, of Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of Foot.
Lieutenant Michael Blanchfield, of Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment
of Foot. Ensign John Magraph, of Colonel Butler of Ballyraggath's Regiment of
Foot. Captain Michael Cheevers, of Colonel Robert Grace's Regiment of Foot.
Lieutenant James Caddel, of Colonel Robert Grace's Regiment of Foot.
Lieutenant Nicholas Deal, of Colonel Robert Grace's Regiment of Foot.
Adjutant Farrell, of Colonel Robert Grace's Regiment of Foot. Lieutenant
Collumb Dunn, of Coll. Charles Moore's Regiment of Foot. Lieutenant Alexander
Reach, of Coll. Charles Moore's Regiment of Foot. Ensign Loughlin Moore, of
Coll. Charles Moore's Regiment of Foot. Captain John Coughlan, of Coll. Simon
Luttrel's Regiment of Dragoons. Captain Patrick Warren, of Coll. Simon
Luttrel's Regiment of Dragoons. Lieutenant Morris Fitz-Gerrald, of Sir Maurice
Eustace Regiment of Foot.



Besides 105 Private Soldiers of the Army Dragoons and Foot of which are 6
Sergeants, 17 Corporals, 1 Surgeon, 3 Drums, and about 150 Muskets.


Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


