A FUNERAL ELEGY On the unfortunate death of that worthy Major EDWARD GRAY,
July 26. 1644.
Anagram.
Regard I die.
No longer J shall foil the Cavalry:
But be ye watchful, stout, regard, I die.
SAd Prodigy I Can famous valiant Gray
Thus silently slide to his bed of Clay?
Return our sorrows, sigh we forth a Verse,
May deck the Pomp, and mournings of his Hearse.
But 'twere detraction to suppose a Tear,
A Sigh, or Blacks, which the sad Mourners wear,
Our loss could value: He that names but thee,
Must bring an Eye, that can weep Elegy:
Who in his face must wear a Funeral,
Clouded with grief for thy untimely fall.
What ill aspected Planet then did lowre?
Which then transcendent in that fatal hour?
The splendent Sun could not look on and shine,
But's clouded, whiles thy glory did decline.
Has irefull Mars his spightfull influence bent
Against his own son? He Is still malevolent.
Thy part t'hast acted well; but Tragedy
Ill proved, having a sad Catastrophe.
Thy sable Curtain was too soon o'respread,
Even at thy noone to bring thee to thy bed.
Unlucky hand, and heart with fury fired,
Which passage made whereby thy soul expired.
Yet we applaud the wisdom of thy fate,
Which knew to value thee at such a rate,
That for thy fall an Hecatombe it cost,
Colonel Mynne shine the same day.
And Mynne was offered to appease thy ghost.
Thou needst no gilded Tomb, whereon to engrave,
The name of worthy Gray, which thou shall have,
So long as Glouc'ster shall that name retain,
Besieged erst by Britains Charlemaigne.
Thy conqueting Arm made thy stout foe to yield;
Thy Sword had won the Trophies in the field.
Thy Coat speaks thy high birth, but thine own praise
Shall crown thine Arms with never-fading Bays.
See the Argent-Lyon which has Rampant stood,
Now Couchant lie in Field of Gules and Blood.
The Crescent Or, Greys second House does mark,
Of famous ancestry the House of Work:
But now decrescent is, it is Or's or'espread
With Color Sable, Or is turned to Lead.
Farewell heroicke spirit, who art to be
Of public sorrow the epitome;
All sigh forth groans, meethinkes the Coats of Blew
Are strangely changed into a Sable hew.
But sorrow stops me, and my griefe's undrest,
And rude in language I Will sigh out the rest.
J. A.

EDWARD GRAY, Major. Anagrams III
I.
Though just reward amongst men I never may
Attain, yet sure God's Mi rewarder ay.
II.
For of Eternity I Am not discarded,
Though hence-from men I may go irrewarded.
III.
Though great I was, now in the dust I lie.
Great ones your selves, regard, a Worm I die.
Respice sinem. Psalm. 22.6. Job 25.6. Chronog. stren VVs, and eXpert Us Mayor
Gray CaDIt and eXpIra VIt. 1644.

J. A.

Printed at London for (...) the old Baylie. 1644.


