AN ANNIVERSARY POEM ON The Sixth of May, His ROYAL HIGHNESS miraculous
Deliverance, then at Sea, from the Shipwreck of the GLOUCESTER.
Jamque Dies (ni fallor) adest quem semper acerbum
Semper honor atum (sic Dii voluistis) habebo.
NO Art, no change of Pencils can display
The Checkered Fate of this important Day;
Nor knows the Muse what Numbers to employ
Sufficient for its Grief, and for its Joy.
Consulting Heaven determined to restore
Our Royal Hero to the longing Shore,
Which fixed Decree no Chance could countermand,
Nor Wind, nor Wave, nor more destructive Sand,
Nor all the crying Guilt and impious Rage
Of a most factious and ungrateful Age:
Which yet in part the Blessing did destroy,
Nor could our Crimes admit the perfect Joy;
But while we triumph in his wished Return,
Are forced his Follow'rs dismal Wreck to mourn.
Vain were the Muse would labor to express
That fatal Hours unspeakable distress;
Besides if any Words such Grief could fit,
At best 'twere impious Art, and cruel Wit,
'Twere sin to bring the mournful Scene in view,
And wound our pious Heroes Heart anew.
Too much the pangs that then did rend his Breast,
Even by his savage Foes must be confessed!
Such Agony that minute seized his mind,
He thought the Care, that saved his Life, unkind!
Ye mighty Spirits, you that then expired,
With Minds for any brave Adventure fired,
Let not your Ghosts repine that you did yield
To such tame Fate, without a Foe in Field,
Without a Price for such Heroic Breath,
And Standards seized to signalize your Death,
Without the Trophies of the Soldiers Toil,
Whole Groves of Ensigns gained, and Hills of Spoil;
Let no such thought, great Souls, your joys suppress,
Or make the happy Fields delight you less,
Such Honors were to former Worthies known,
And every Age has Spoils and Trophies shown;
But this new silent Method of your Fate,
Renown yet unrecorded does create.
While you from thence unequalled Glory claim,
And stand unrivaled in the Roll of Fame.
Let then, bright Minds, Applause so vast as this,
Reach to your World of Joy, and raise your Bliss.
Rest pleased, that ere you perished, you could see
Your Royal Master from the Wreck set free,
That you his safety hailed with latest Breath,
And had his Tears to consecrate your Death.
Next for the scattered Remnant scarce secured,
From that sad Lot their Noble Mates endured,
While laboring Heaven no Miracles did spare
To second their indulgent Masters Care,
Let Angels sing the Goodness he expressed,
Condol'd their Sufferings and their Wants redrest;
While such Supplies his Bounty did convey,
As almost healed the Ruins of the Day.
Such Virtue did Aeneas Breast employ,
Once more preserving the Remains of Troy,
His scattered Troop collecting on the Shore,
Saved now from Floods, as from the Flames before.
O for a Maro of this Age, to raise
With equal Verse our equal Heroes praise!
Nor shall succeeding Times the Work disclaim,
That speaks great JAMES his Sufferings and his Fame.
How do I curse the Muse my Youth withdrew
From gainful Science to the Chiming Crew:
Yet when on his loved Name she lends her Aid,
I bless my Lot, and think my Griefs repaid!
Soon as you please, ye Powers, my Frame confound,
Blend me with Brother-Insects in the Ground;
Dissolve your Wretch, the Times and Fortunes Slave,
O'r-prest with Wrongs, and stretching for the Grave:
For ever shroud me in the silent Clay,
No more the Scorn of Fools, and Villains Prey;
Forgetting and Forgotten by Mankind,
Given All to Fate, no Atom left behind,
But oh! whatever Songs of mine are graced
With JAMES his Deeds, let their Remembrance last!
To them, kind Heaven, immortal Ages give,
Let me be lost, but let those Numbers live.
LONDON: Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhil.


