AN ABSTRACT OF THE Bloody Massacre IN IRELAND.

Acted by the instigation of the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, who were chief
Promoters of those horrible Murders; Prodigious Cruelties, barbarous
Villainies, and inhumane Practices, executed by the Irish Papists upon the
English Protestants, in the Year 1641. And intended to have been acted over
again, on Sabbath Day, December the 9th 1688. But by the wonderful Providence
of God was prevented.

To the Haters of Popery, by what Names or Titles soever dignified or
distinguished.
THus 'twas of old, when Israel felt the Rod,
When they obeyed their Kings, and not their God
When they went whoring after other Lovers,
To worship Idols in new Planted Groves:
They made their Gods of Silver, Wood and Stone,
And bowed and worshipped them when they had done.
And to complete their Sins in every way,
They made'em things called Priests, Priests did Isay
A crew of Villants more profane then they.
Hence sprung that Romish Crew, first spawned in hell,
Who now in Viee their Pedagogues excel:
Their Church consists of vicious Popes, the rest
Are whoring Nuns and bawdy buggering Priests.
A Noble Church! daubed with Religious Paint,
Each Priest's a Stalion, every Rogue's a Saint.
Come you that loath this Brood, this Murdering Crew;
Your Predecessors well their mercies knew.
Take Courage now, and be both bold and wise?
Stand for your Laws, Religion, Liberties:
You have the Odds, the Law is still your own,
They Are but your Traitors, therefore pull'em down.
They struck with Fear, seek to destroy your Laws,
They Are raving mad, you see they fix their Paws;
Because from them they fear their fatal Fall,
And by those Laws, they know you will hang'em all.
Then keep your Laws, the Penal, and the rest,
And give your Lives up, e're you give the Test.
And thou great Church of England hold thy own,
Force you they may, otherwise give up none;
Robbers and Thieves must count for what thiy've done
Let all thy mighty Pillars now appear
Zealous and brave, void both of Hate and Fear,
That Popish Fops may Grin, Lie, Cheat and Whine?
And curse their Faith, while all admire thine.
And thou brave Oxford, Cambridge and the rest,
Great Hough and Fairfax, that durst Beard the beast
Let all the Just with Thanks record their Name;
O standing Pillars of Immortal Fame!
Let God arise, and his Enemies Perish.

The Hierogliphick, being a Synopsis of the whole Year, by way of Conclusion.
COme Painter, take a Prospect from this Hill,
And on a well-spread Canvas show thy Skill;
Draw all in Colors, as they shall appear,
And as they in Merit place 'em there.
Draw, as the Heralds do, a spacious Field,
And as directed, so let them be filled.
First, Draw a Popish Army brisk and gay;
Fighting, and beat, destroyed and run away.
Then draw a Hearse, and let it stand in view,
The Mourners more, far more then they are in show
Cursing their Fate, their Stars, and in this Fear,
Show if thou can, how these damned Sots prepare
To run, or stay, and Sculk in Holes alone,
By them this Motto, Gallows claim thy own.
Now to the Life, let thy brick pencil show
Distinctly, who they are, and what is their due.
Now draw a Crowd of priests prepared to run,
Like broken Mirchants when their stocks are gone,
Some howling out their prayers forget and say;
Save us St. Ketch, are all our Saints away?
Draw 'em in Hurry, running to and fro,
Posting to Dover, Portsmouth, Tyburn too
Next draw a Crow'd of Lords this Label by,
The Great Design is lost. Alas! they cry
Who'd serve a Cause of such cursed destiny?
Now draw Four Priests, show how they Rome adore,
And each Man's Scarf hang to be seen before.
T^^ brace of Bishops fallen to despair,
Armed Cap-a-Pe, but going God knows where.
Now show the Judges, and with them thy Skill,
That all who see it done may say, it is well.
In Caps and Gowns, as they in order sat,
'Twixt Heaven and Earth do thou 'em elevate,
Their Learned Noddles can dispense with that.
Now draw the little Rogues, the Scoundrel Crew,
Knights, Knaves, and Beggars they must have their due
Gadbury, Butler, Ay, and Roger too.
Amidst this Crowd, on a fit Spot of Land,
To crown the work, let a large Gallows stand;
All Trembling by, armed with Guilt and Fears,
Kneel to this Image, and pour out their Prayers.
And then dye by Association.

An Abstract of the bloody Massacre in Ireland, by the Instigation of the
Jesuits, Priests and Friars, etc.
WHen their Plots were ripe for Execution, we find their first Proceedings
against the English various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling
them; others murdering Men, Women and Children without Mercy; all resolving
universally to root out all ye Protestants out of Ireland; so deeply malicious
were they against the English Protestants, that they would not so much as
endure the sound of their Language.

The Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish, upon condition they
should neither spare Man, Woman, nor Child of the Protestants. One Halligan a
Priest, read an Excommunication against all those, that from henceforth should
relieve or harbor any English, Scottish or Welch-man, or give them Alms,
whereby many were famished to death. The Friars exhorted them with Tears, not
to spare any of the English; they boasted, that when they had destroyed them in
Ireland, they would go over into England, and not leave the Memorial of an
English Man under Heaven.

They openly professed, that they held it as lawful to kill a Protestant as to
kill a Dog. One of their Priests said, That it was no more pity to take their
Lives from them, then it is to take a Bone out of a dogs Mouth.

The Day before this Massacre began; the Priests gave the People a Dismiss at
Mass with liberty to go out, and take Possession of all their Lands, as also to
strip, rob and despoil them of all their Goods and Cattle; the Protestants
being, as they told them, worse then Dogs, for they were Devils, and therefore
the Killing of such was a Meritorious Act, and a rare Preservative against the
Pains of Purgatory; and this causes some of these Murderers to boast, after
they had slain many of the English, that they knew, that if they should die
presently, they should go straight to Heaven.

The Irish, when the Massacre began, persuaded many of their Protestants
Neighbors to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them, and hereby
they got abundance peaceably into their Hands, whereof they cheated the
Protestants refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the
Protestants at first of them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had,
and dug up their best things that were hidden in the Ground, and deposited
them into their Custody. They also got much into their Hands by fair Promises,
deep Oaths and Engagements, that if they would deliver them their Goods, they
would suffer them, with their Wives and Children, quietly to depart the
Country; and when they had got what they could, they afterward murdered them.

Having thus seized upon their Goods and Cattle, ransackt their Houses, got
their Persons, stripped Man Woman, and Child naked, and so turned them out of
doors, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great penalties, not to give them
any relief; by means hereof many miserably perished through cold, nakedness and
hunger.

In the Town of Coleraine, many of these poor people that fled thither for
succor, many thousands dyed in two days, so that the living could not bury the
dead, but laid their Carcasses in ranks in waste and wide holes, speling them
up, as if they had been Herrings.

One Magdalen Redman deposes; that she, and diverse other Protestants, among
whom were two and twenty Widows, were first robbed, and then stripped naked, and
when they had covered themselves with straw, the bloody Papists threw in
burning straw among them, on purpose to burn them; then they drove them out
into the Woods in Frost and Snow, where many of them dyed with extreme cold,
and those that survived, lived miserably by reason of their many wants.

Yet though these bloody Villains exercised such inhumane cruelties toward the
poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, That these were bu^ the beginning
of their sorrows, for indeed they made it good; for having disarmed the
English, robbed them of their goods, stripped them of their clothes, and having
their persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of
abominable Cruelties, horrid Massacres, and execrable Murders.

For there were multitudes murdered in cold blood, some as they were at Plough,
others in their Houses, others in the high ways; all without any provocation,
were suddently destroyed.

In the Castle of Lisgool, were about one hundred and fifty Men, Women and
Children consumed with fire. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to
Mac Guire, upon composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as
he and his entered, they began to strip the People, and most cruelly put them to
the Sword, murdering them all without mercy.

At Lissanskeach, they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scottish
Protestants. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were
more numorous, their murders were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty.

Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissanskeach desired to speak with Mr.
Middleton, who admitted him in, he first burnt the Records of the County, then
demanded One thousand pounds, which was in his custody of Sir William Balfores,
which as soon as he had, he caused Mr. Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear
that he would never alter from it, and then hanged him up with his Wife and
Children: hanging and murdering above one hundred persons besides in that
place.

At Poradown Bridge, there were one thousand Men, Women and Children, carried
in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River. Yea in that
Country there were one thousand persons drowned in several places.

In one place an hundred and forty English were taken and driven like Cattle
for many miles together, other companies they carried out to a place fit for
execution, and then murdered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women and
Children, they sent with Sir Philem Onea^ pass till they came to Portadown
Bridge, an^ there drowned them.

At another time one hundred and forty Pr^testants being thrown in at the same
place, as any of them swom to the Shore, the bloody Villai^^ with the But-end
of their Muskets knocked o^ their brains.

At Ardmagh O Cane got together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to
conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were a days journey they were all
murdered, and so were many other though they had Protections from Sir Philemy
O^ aneal. The Aged people in Ardmagh were carried to Charlemont, and there
murdered.

Presently after, the Town of Ardmagh was burnt, and five hundred persons
murdered and drowned. In Killoman, were forty eight families murdered, in one
house twenty two Protestants were burned. In Kilmore all the inhabitants were
stripped and Massacred, being two hundred families: the whole Country was a
common Butchery; many thousands perished by sword famine, fire, water, and
other cruel deaths tha^ rage and malice could invent.

At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loath some Dungeon, kept them
twelve weeks in gr^^ misery: Some they barbarously mangled, and left them
languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice, others they buried alive.

In Queens County, an English man, and his wife five Children and a Maid, were
all hange^ together. At Clownish, seventeen men were burie^ alive; some were
wounded, and hanged upon Tenter-hooks. In Castle Cumber, two Boys wounded, and
hung upon Butchers Tenters. Some hanged up, and taken down to confess money,
and then Murdered. Some had their Bellies ripped up, and so left with their Guts
about their heels.

In Kilkenny, an English Woman beaten into a ditch where she died; her Child
about six years old, they ripped up her belly, and let out her Guts. One they
forced to Mass, then they wounded him, ripped his Belly, took out his Guts, and
so left him alive.

A Scottish man they stripped, and hewed to pieces, ripped up his wifes belly so
that her Child dropped out; many other Women they hung up with Child, ripped their
bellies, and let their infants fall out; some of the Children they gave to Dogs.

In the Country of Ardmagh, they robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of
Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the Sword, some they
hanged, some they starved to death; and meeting Mistress Howard, and Mistress
Frankland with six of their Children, and themselves both with Child, they
murdered them all, ripped open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out their Children
and threw them into a ditch. A young Scottish Woman's Child they took by the
heels, and dashed out its brains against a Tree; the like they did to many other
Children.

Ann Hill going with a young Child on her back and four more by her side, they
pulled the Child off her back, trod on it till it dyed, stripped her and the
other four Children naked, whereby they dyed of cold.

Some others they met with, hanged them u^ upon a Windmil, and before they were
half dea^ cut them in pieces with their Skeins.

Many other Protestants, especially Women an^ Children, they pricked and
stabbed with Skein^ Forks, and Swords, slashing, cutting, and mangling them in
their Heads, but left them wallowing in their own blood, to languish, starve
and pine to death.

The Castle of Lisgoole, being set on fire by these merciless Papists; a Woman
leapt out at a Window to save her self from burning, whom they presently
murdered; many fled to Vaults and Celars, where they were all murdered. One
Joan Addit they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quarter old to her Breast,
and bid it Suck English Bastard, and so left it to perish.

One Mary Barlow had her husband hanged, her self with six Children stripped
naked, in Frost and Snow, after which, sheltring themselves in a Cave; they had
nothing there to eat for three weeks, but two old Galf skins, which they beat
with stones, and so eat them hair and all.

In the cold weather, many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and
Sexes, being turned out naked, perished of cold and hunger; thousands of others
were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs, and Turf-pits: multitudes miserably
burnt in houses; some that lay sick of Fevers they hanged up; some Men, Women,
and Children they drove into Boggy Pits, and knocked them on the heads.

Some Aged Men and Women these barbarous ^aeipsts enforced their own children
to drown them; yea some Children were compelled unnaturally to execute their
own Parents, Wives forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their
own Children into the Waters, after which themselves were murdered. In Sligo,
they forced a young man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up, in another
place they forced a Woman to kill her husband, then caused her Son to kill her,
and then hanged the Son: yea such was their malice against the English, that
they ^aught their Children to kill English Children.

The Irish Women that followed the camp, cried out, Kill them all, spare
neither Man, Woman, nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Sorattan, being
about twelve years old, and boiled him in a Cauldron. One good wife Lin, and
her Daughter, they carried into a Wood, first hanged the Mother, and then the
Daughter in the hair of her Mothers head.

In some places they plucked out the eyes, and cut off the hands of the
Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women in
some places, stoned the English Women and Children to death. One man they shot
through his thighs, dug a hole in the ground, set him in upon his feet,
filled up the hole, left out only his head, where he languished to death.
Another man they held his feet in the fire till he was burnt to death.

In Munster, they hanged up many Ministers in a most barbarous manner. One
Minister they stripped naked and drove him through the Town, pricking him with
Darts and Rapiers, till he se^ down dead.

These barbarous Villains vowed, That if a^^ Parents dug Graves to bury
their Children i^ they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one
William Loverdon naked, then killed hi^ before his Wife and Children. Diverse
Ministe^^ bones that had been buried some years before the dug up, because
they were, as they say, Patrons of Heresy.

Poor Children that went out into the field to eat weeds and grass, they killed
without a pity.

A poor Woman whose husband was taken by them, went to them with two Children
at (...) feet, and one at her breast, hoping to beg he husband, but they slew
her and her sucking Child brake the neck of another, and the third hardly
escaped; and all this wickedness they exercise upon the English, without any
provocation given them. Alas who can comprehend the fear terrors, anguish and
bitterness, and perplexity that siezed upon the poor Protestants, finding them
selves so suddently surprised without remedy and wrapped up in all kind of
outward miser^ which could possibly by man be inflicted on humane creatures?
What sighs and groans, trembli^^ and astonishment, what skrieks, cries, and
bitt^^ lamentations of wives, Children, Servants a^^ Friends, howling and
weeping, finding themselves without all hope of deliverance from their present
miseries. How inexorable were their barbarous Torments, that compassed them in
on every side, withour all bowels of compassion, or the least commiseration or
pity; yea they boast^^ upon their success, That the day was their own, ^^d that
e're long they would not leave one Protestant ^^gue living, but would utterly
destroy every one ^^at had a drop of English Blood in them. There Women crying
out, Slay them all, the English ^^e fit meat for Dogs, and their Children are
^^stards.

These merciless Papists having set a Castle on ^re, wherein were many
Protestants, they rejoic^ng said, O how sweetly do they fry!

At Killkenny, when they had committed many ^ruel murders, they brought seven
Protestants ^eads, on the head of a reverend Minister, all which they set upon
the Market-cross, on a Market day, triumphing, flashing and mangling them; they
put a gag in the Ministers mouth, sit up his cheeks to his ears and laid a leaf
of a ^^ible upon it, and bid him preach, for his mouth was wide enough.

At Kilmore, they put many Protestants, Men Women, and Children into a thatched
house, and there burnt them. They threw Mrs. Maxwell into the river when in
labor, the child being half born when the mother was drowned.

In one place they burnt two Protestants Bibles, and then said, It was Hell
fire they burnt. Other Bibles, they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them,
saying, they would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. They took the Bible of a
Minister, called Mr. Edward Slack, and opening it, they laid (...) in a Puddle
of Water, and then stamped upon (...), saying, A Plague on in it, this Bible
has ^red all the Quarrel.

At Glastow, a Priest, with some others, (...) about forty English and Scottish
Protestants (...) reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then (...) them, They
were in a good Faith, and for fear (...) should fall from it, and turn
Heriticks, he w^^ his Companions presently cut all their Throats.

In the County of Tipperary, near the S^^ Works, some of these barbarous
Papists met w^ eleven Englishmen, ten Women, some Children whom they first
stripped, and then with Sto^^ Pole-axes, Skeins, Swords, etc. they most (...)
barously Massacred them all.

In the County of Mayo, about sixty ^^^testants whereof fifteen were Ministers,
(...) upon covenant to be safely conveyed to Gal^^ by one Edmund Burk, and his
Soldiers; (...) by the way, this Burk and his Company be^ to massacre these
poor Protestants, some they (...) to death, some they stabbed with Skeins, so
they thrust through with their Pikes, some the drowned; the Women they stripped
naked, (...) lying upon their Husbands to save them, w^ run through with Pikes,
so that very few (...) them escaped with Life.

In the Town of Sligo, forty Protestants (...) stripped and locked up in a
Cellar, and about M^^ night, a Butcher provided for the purpose, (...) sent in
among them, who with his Ax butche^ them all.

In Tyrawly, thirty or forty English, who (...) yielded to go to Mass, were put
to their Choi^^ whether they would die by the Sword, or be drowne^ they chose
the latter; and so being driven to the Seaside, these barbarous Villains, with
the^ naked Swords, forced them into the Sea; the Mothers, with their Children
in their Arms; wading to the Chin: were overcome by the Waves, where they all
perished.

The Son of Mr. Montgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his
Schoolmaster, withdrew his Skein at him, whereupon the Boy said Good Master
whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless Tiger
barbarously murdered him without all pity.

In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates,
then cast into Goal, and about Midnight were all stripped naked, and were there
most cruelly and barbarously murdered with Swords, Axes, Skeins, etc. some of
them being Women great with Child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs
at their wounds, after which execrable Murders these Hell hounds laid the dead
naked Bodies of the Men upon the naked Bodies of the women, in a most immodest
Posture, where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish,
who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard, great with Child, hearing
the lamentable Cries of those that were murdering, ran out into the Streets,
where she was murdered, and the next day was found with the Child's feet
coming out of the Wounds in her sides; many others were murdered in the Houses
and Streets.

About Dungannon, were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like
barbarous manner murdered: about Charlemont, above four hundred: about Tyrone
two hundred and six.

One Mac Crew, murdered thirty one in one Morning.

Two young Villains murdered 140. poor (...) men and Children that could make
no resistance. An Irish Woman, with her own Hands, mu^thered forty five.

At Portadown Bridge, were drowned above three hundred. At Lawgh were drowned
above two hundred in one day. In the Parish of Killamen, there were murdered
one thousand and two hundred Protestants.

Many young Children they cut in Quarters; eighteen Scottish Infants they
hanged upon Clothiers Tenterhooks; one fat Man they murdered and made Candles
of his Grease; another Scottish Man, they ripped up his Belly, took one end of
his small Guts, tied it to a Tree, and forced him round about it, till they had
drawn them all out of his Body, saying, That they would try whether a Dogs or a
Scottish Man's Gu^s were the longest.

By the Command of Sir Philem O Neal; Mr. James Maxwel was drawn out of his
Bed-being sick of a Fever, and murdered his Wife being in Childbirth, the
Child being half born, they stripped naked, drove her about a flight shot, and
drowned her in the black Water; the like, or worse, they did to another English
Woman in the same Town. One Mr. Watson they reasted alive. A Scottish Woman
great with Child, they ripped up her Belly, cut the Child out of her Womb, and so
left it crawling on her Body.

Mr. Starkey, Schoolmaster at Ardmagh, being above one hundred years old, they
stripped him naked, then took his two daughters, being Virgins, whom they also
stripped naked, and then forced them to lead their aged Father to a Turs-pit,
where they drowned them all three.

To one Henry Cowel a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, if he would
marry one of their Trully; or go to Mass; but he chose death rather then to
consent to either.

Many of the Protestants they buried alive, solacing themselves, whilst they
were digging down old ditches upon them.

They brake the back bone of a Youth, and left him in the Fields; some days
after he was found, having eaten the grass round about him: neither then would
they kill him outright, but removed him to better Pasture, wherein was
fulfilled that saying, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty.

In the County of Antrim, they murdered nine hundred fifty four Protestants in
one Morning: and afterward about twelve hundred more in that County near
Lisnegarvy, they forced twenty four Protestants into a House, and burnt them
all.

Sir Philem O Neal boasted, that he had slain above six hundred at Garvah, and
that he had left neither Man, Woman nor Child alive in the Barony of
Munterlong. In other places he murdered above two thousand Persons in their
houses, so that many houses were filled with dead bodies.

Above twelve thousand were slain in the highways, as they fled toward Down.
Many died of Famine, many died for want of Clothes being stripped naked in a cold
season; some thousands were drowned, so that in the Province of Ulster, there
were about one hundred and fifty thousand murdered by sundry kinds of torments
and deaths.

The Popish English were no whit inferior, yea rather exceeded ye natural
Irish in their cruelty against the Protestants that lived amongst them, within
the Pale; being not satisfied with their Blood till they had seen the last drop
thereof.

Ann Kinnard testified, That fifteen Protestants being Imprisoned, and their
Feet in the Stocks, a Popish boy being not above fourteen years old, slew them
all in one night with his Skein.

An English Woman, who was newly delivered of two Children, some of these
Villains violently compelled her, in her great pain and sickness, to rise out
of her Bed, and took one of the Infants that was living and dashed his Brains
against the Stones, and then threw him into the River of Barrow; The like they
did by many other Infants. Many others they hanged up without all pity.

The Lord Mont Garret, caused diverse English Soldiers, that he had taken about
Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray before their death.

One Fitz Patrick, an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant that was a
Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his house, promising safely to keep them,
and to re-deliver them to him; but when he had gotten them into his possession,
he took the Merchant and his Wife and hanged them both, The like they did by
diverse others. Some English men's heads they cut off, and carried them to
Kilkenny, and on the Market Day set them on the Cross; where many, especially
the Women stabbed, cut and slashed them.

A poor Protestant Woman with her two Children, going to Kilkenny, these bloody
miscreants baited them with dogs, stabbed them with skeins, and pulled out the
Guts of one of the Children, whereby they died; and not far off they took
diverse Men, Women, and Children, and hanged them up; one of the Women being
great with Child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the Child
fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down
till their bowels were torn out.

How many thousands of Protestants were thus inhumanely butchered by sundry
kinds of deaths, we cannot ascertain.

In the Province of Ulster, we find about 150000. murdered, as before; what
the number of the slain was in the three other Provinces, I find not upon
Record, but certainly it was very great, for you have these passages in a
general Remonstrance, of the distressed Protestants in the Province of Munster,
We may (say they) compare our woe to the saddest Parallel of any Story, Our
Churches are prophanded by Sacrifices to Idols; Our Habitations are become
ruinous heaps; No quality Age or Sex, privileged from Massacre, and lingering
deaths, by being robbed, stripped naked, and so exposed to cold and famine, The
famished Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our Streets, and for want of
food, perish before our faces etc. And all this cruelty that is exercised upon
us, we know not for what cause, offense, or seeming provocation it is inflicted
on us, (sin excepted) saving that we were Protestants, etc. Who can make it
manifest, that the depopulations in this Province (...) Munster do well near
equal those of the whol^ Kingdom.

And thus in part you have heard of the merciless cruelties which the bloody
Papists exercised toward the Protestants: Let us now consider at least, some
of God's Judgments upon the Irish whereby he has not left the Innocent blood
(...) His Servants to be altogether unrevenged.

These bloody Hell Hounds, themselves confessed, That the Ghost of diverse of
the Protestants which they had drowned at Portadown Bridg^ were daily seen to
walk upon the River, sometimes singing of Psalms, sometimes brandishin^ naked
Swords, sometimes shreeking in a mo^^ hideous and fearful manner. So yt many of
ye P^pish Irish which dwelt thereabouts, being affrig^ted therewith were forced
to remove their H^^bitations further off into the Country.

Katrine Cook testified upon Oath, That wh^^ the Irish had barbarously drowned
one hundred and eighty Protestant Men, Women, and Children, at Portadown
Bridge; about nine days (...) she saw apparition of a Man bolt upright in (...)
River, standing breast high, with his hands li^^^ up to Heaven; and continued in
that Postu^^ from December to the end of Lent, at which ti^^ some of the
English Army passing that way, sa^^ it also, after which it vanished away.

Elizabeth Price, testified upon Oath, That (...) and other Women, whose
Husbands and Children were drowned in that place, hearing of the^ Apparitions;
went thither one evening, at which time thy saw one like a Woman rise out of
the River, breast high, her hair hanging down, which with her Skin, was as white
as Snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge Revenge, which so affrighted them,
that they went their way. Diverse Protestants were thrown into the River of
Belterbert, and when any of them offered to swim to the Land, they were knocked
on the head with Poles after which their Bodies were not seen of six weeks; but
after the end thereof the murderers coming again that way, the bodies came
floating up to the very Bridge where they were.

Sir Con Mac Gennis with his Company slew Mr. Turge, Minister of Newry with
diverse other Protestants, after which the said Mac Ginnis was so affrighted
with the Apprehension of the said Mr. Turge his being continually in his
presence, that he commanded his Soldiers not to slay any more of them, but
such at should be slain in battle.

A young Woman being stripped naked there came (...) Rogue to her, bidding her
Give him her money, or he would run her through with his Sword. Her answer was,
You cannot kill me except God give you leave; Whereupon he ran three times at
her ^aked body with his drawn Sword, and yet never pierced her Skin, whereat he
being consounded went his way and left her. This was ^^tested by Diverse Women
that were Present and saw it.

As for the Protestant Ministers whom they surprised, their manner was first to
strip them, and after bind them to a Tree or Post, where they pleased, and then
to ravish their Wives and Daughters before their faces (in sight of their
merciless rabble) with the basest Villa^ they could pick out, after they hanged
up the Husbands and Parents before their faces, a^ then cut them down before
they were half d^^ then quartered them, after dismembered the and stopped their
mouths therewith.

They basely abused one Mr. Trafford, a M^ster in the North of Ireland, who
being assa^ by these bloody Wolves of Romes brood (...) know not God, nor any
bowels of mercy. T^ distressed Minister desired but so much time to call upon
God, before he went out of World: but these merciless wretches would mit no
time, but instantly fell upon him, (...) and hewed him to Pieces.

Sir Barck Dunstan's Wife ravished before (...) flew his Servants, spurned his
Children till (...) dyed, bound him with a Match to a board (...) his eyes
burst out, cut off his ears and nose, ^^ed off both his cheeks, after cut off
his arms legs, cut out his tongue, and after run a re^^ Iron into him. These
Particulars with (...) more were Attested before the Commissioners pointed for
that purpose.

FINIS.

