Pack Mayor,
Thursday the 27. of March, 1655.
ORdered that Dr. Annesley be desired from this Court to print his Sermon at
Paul's, on the last Lord's Day, together with his former Sermon there the last
year.

SADLER.

Communion with God. IN TWO SERMONS Preached at PAUL'S: The first, Sept. 3.
1654.

The second, March 25. 1655.

By SAMUEL ANNESLEY L. L. D. Minister of the Gospel at JOHN Evangel. LONDON.

EPHESIANS. 3.19. That you might be filled with all the fullness of God.

London. Printed by Evan Tyler, and are to be sold by Nathanael Web and William
Grantham, at the sign of the Black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER PACK, LORD MAYOR of LONDON, And the Right
Worshipful ALDERMEN of the same Famous City.
My Lord,
AS you had nothing besides the naked amiablenes of the subject, to render
these Sermons acceptable, so I have nothing but my Obedience to Magistracy to
preface their publication. Must I not by your eyes see, and by your faith
believe, these truths thus clouded in their discovery, profitable? But seeing
you Surprise me with an Order, Give me leave to follow your Order, further,
then perhaps you think it leads me, and that is, to retort it back upon your
own consciences.

Your commands (for such are your desires) (all superiors desires being
commands enameled with humility) give a Solemn avouchment of the Truths you
heard, and therefore if you do henceforth in the least depart from God, or
prefer any thing, I speak the word again, Any thing, before him, you
transgress not only Gods laws, but your own, and such kind of Sinning against
your own concessions, is more heinous then barely to sin against God.

Your order (Virtually) recommends these truths to others, I cannot sufficently
assert, and therefore entreat you to enquire what will be the aggravation of
walking contrary to them.

Iehosaphat sent his Princes to teach (that is, to encourage the Ministers to
teach) in the Cities of Judah, and by such Orders as these, you preach to the
world, what is preached to you at Paul's.

Let me crave leave to be plain. You may easily be ensnared by casting your eye
upon this subject; for, if you read no more, you have read too much: if you
read on, expecting embroydery, you lose your labor; if with neglect, your
souls Either embrace such truths heartily, or abjure them speedily; be not
deceived, God will not be mocked; the more gracious his condescension for
acceptance, the more grievous his indignation for refusal; and your refusal
of God can neither be more nor less, then a [Choise rejection] I beseeh you
therefore, resolve upon something, and let not our resolutions come to nothing.
As you are Christians, make Religion your business, that you may enjoy God;
and as you are Magistrates, walk as becomes (if I may so speak, Earthly
deities, as) those that are called Gods.

I do not charge you in the least, but humbly prompt your consciences to demand
of you an Account: what have you done like Gods, and for God since you came
into places of Authority? When you stood upon lower ground, did you not think
magistrates might do more then they did? do you now do, what you then thought?
If you say you have performed the commandment of the Lord; a by-stander will
perhaps reply, What mean then the Blasphemous swearing, the roaring
drunkenness, the [common] whoredoms, the rambling Sabbath-breaking? etc. may
these Sons of Belial plead liberty of conscience? If you cannot reach those
that pull the crown from the head of Christ in way of Spiritual wickedness:
pray hold their hands, that would stab the heart of Christ by moral
wickedness. If reason of state leave God to vindicate his own glory in matters
of religion, let not Laws of state lie dormant at your doors for want of
execution. If you cannot do what you would, do what you can: do something, and
something which may proclaim you [Deservedly-renowned Christian-Magistrates.]

No more words but wishes, that I could tempt you, or fright you into Communion
with God. it is the very desire of

MY LORD and Gentlemen, Your Soul-Servant, SAMUEL ANNESLEY.
Apr. 11. 1655.
The First Sermon.
PSALM. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee.

My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.


WEre Phylacteries in use among Christians, I would recommend this Scripture to
be bound about your necks, or written upon the table of your hearts.

This is a Scripture whereon we may well say AMEN, to Augustines Confessions. O
the wonderful depth, my God, the wonderful depth of thy Word! though there be
superficies blandiens, an outside sweetness, tempting us to taste it: There Is
an inside excellency forcing us to admire it; its matter of horror to view its
dimensions, but it is horror honoris, tremor amoris, an horror of honor, and a
trembling of love. For,

Whom have I in heaven but thee?] q. d. who is there in heaven for me to trust
in, or call upon besides God? or thus, What is there, that is precious in
heaven, which I desire without thee, or before thee? Whom have I in heaven but
thee?

And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee?] Tecum nolui in terra
[lo caphatsti,] the word is used of Shechem, Genesis 34.19. he had delight in
Jacobs daughter. So, (q. d.) can I so much as wish, much less dote upon any
thing on earth? nothing less, my acquiescence in God renders all things
without him nothing worth, there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

My flesh and my heart fails,] here he interweaveth his former complaint with
his present comfort: q. d. my body and spirit are almost overwhelmed with
grief, when I see my self so variously miserable, and the wicked so
triumphantly happy.

But God is the strength of my heart,] in Hebr. it is the rock of my heart, a
rock implies strength, and safety: q.d. Though my trials be so great that no
human strength can prevent or sustain them, yet God is my Rock, the Rock of
ages: In him I have never failing support, and safety. God is the strength of
my heart.

And my portion,] it is a Metaphor taken from the ancient custom of dividing
inheritances, whereby every Heir had his allotted portion: q. d. Let the men
of the world share the world among them, let the Ziba's of the world take all,
so I may have God to be my portion.

My portion for ever,] not for a time, but for ever, tantum habeo, and nunquam
non habeo, I have so great a portion, and I shall never not have it. Whatever
befalls me, this is enough to uphold me, God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

And thus you have the words singly opened. I must confess I am loath to make
any further division; because our happiness is bound up in their strict
conjunction. Therefore without any more ado, this Observation smiles upon you.
That,

D.

God alone is, beyond comparison, more desirable then any thing, then all
things in heaven and earth.

When Israel had sinned, Exodus 33.13, 14. Moses first begs their pardon, he
then begges counsel, and then protection; you have all answered in this, I will
be with thee; but when he has this, he craves more of it, Lord show me thy
glory, v. 18. Might we think any thing strange in a soul's restless impatience
of the least absence, after some enjoyment of God, we might wonder at Peter
when Christ had been but a prayer time absent, he would venture to walk upon
the raging Sea; and at another time, to throw himself into the Sea, and all to
enjoy him a few minutes sooner. But I need not call in Scriptures, unless for
illustration.

For Explanation we enquire first,

Qu. 1. What is there in heaven that may take up the heart? (might we not
rather ask, what is not there that the heart can desire?) I answer,

First, Privatively, bear with the expression, for I know not how else to word
it. There Is a double privation.

1. Of sin and all things attending it, Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more plague, for the former things are
passed away. The wicked shall never grieve the godly more. There shall never
rise an unruely thought, or disorderly affection more. Sin shall not only be
pardoned, but abolished; there shall be an happy privation of sin. And, 2. Of
Fear, there shall never be the least fear of being dispossessed, 1 John 4.18.
Perfect love in heaven casts out all fear of hell. We must while we live, With
fear and trembling work out our salvation: But then, our salvation, will in a
moment, work out our fear and trembling. Thus privatively.
Secondly, Negatively, and here again, I should excuse the expression, were it
not, that what the heart of man did never conceive, the tongue of man can never
express. Therefore Negatively,

1. There Is nothing that a carnal heart can any way fancy. There Is no Elysian
fields, no Turkish paradise, there is no such rest as the lazy dream of, nor
such honor as will satisfy the ambitious, nor such a treasure as is suitable
to the covetous. In a word, whatever a carnal man thinks of heaven, he thinks
amiss. Not only so, but,

2. Those that are in heaven, have more glory then they can stand under. That
though their bodies shall be like the glorious body of Christ, and their souls
like Angels; yet all that we hear from them, like a complaint is, that their
Crowns of Glory are too heavy for them. In Revel. 4.4. you have a vision of
the Church Representative, Sitting, and having on their heads crowns of gold;
but ver. 10. They fall down before him that sat upon the throne, and cast
their crowns before him, as being willing their Crowns should make God a
footstool. Their work is to hand off Glory from themselves to God unto
eternity. Plainly, there is no creature in Heaven, able to bear so much Glory,
as is there to be had. And thus you see Negatively what there is not in Heaven.

Thirdly, Positively. What have I in Heaven but thee? Whom have I in heaven but
thee? We will enquire first into the what, and the whom, and leave the [But] to
be opened afterward. What is there in Heaven?

1. Grace glorified, or Grace perfected; we see now darkly sub integumento
symbolerum, but when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness, that is,
I shall be as like God as my soul can desire. I shall never need to pray for
Grace more, never strive more to grow in Grace, our poor rivulets of Grace
shall be swallowed up in the Ocean of Glory.

2. Happiness shall be completed, our inheritance is incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not a way, 1 Pet. 1.4. that is, it is not compounded
of corruptible ingredients. It is not subject to sinful pollution. It is beyond
possibility of withering, unto the days of eternity. And such a Rest there
remains for all the people of God, such honor have all the Saints. This is
the enjoyment, the What; we come to the company, the Whom. Whom have they in
heaven?

1. The society of all Saints. Those whom we have loved, and prized, with whom
we have wept, and prayed: whose company on earth has been refreshing. How
welcome will a never-parting-meeting be in Heaven? Aye, those whom we have
admired, though we never saw them, we shall then see, and enjoy for ever,
Matthew. 8.11. Many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. How sweet will it be
to discourse with Moses, when your face shall shine as well as his? To converse
with Solomon, when your wisdom shall exceed whatever is recorded of his? To
join in the consort of praises with that sweet-singer of Israel, when you shall
be persons after Gods own heart, without a but in your commendations?

2. Angels shall be your companions, We read in Matthew. 28. of a guard of
Roman-Souldiers, that even fainted away at the sight of an Angel; and so soon
as they came to themselves, they run from their charge; but the same Angel said
to feeble women, fear not. They tell us now, they are our fellow servants? but
Christ has told us more, we shall be their equals, Luke 20.36. though not in
nature, yet in qualities: we shall be no more subject to sin then they: we
shall want earthly enjoyments no more then they: we shall be happy as long as
they. And thus you have the answer to the first Query. The second is,

Qu. 2. What is there on earth to enter the lists of comparison with the
enjoyment of God? May we not see the farthest end of all worldly perfection? I
will represent the world in its fairest dress; and name not only what [of the
world.] most men think the best; but what [in the world,] good men know the
best. And though they appear in Troops, yet in the midst of worldly sufficiency
you will be in straits.

1. Take the world in the Scripture-distribution, 1 John 2.16. All that is in
the world, is either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride
of life; pleasures, profits, or honors. Had you such delight in the creature,
as that you could say, this is the gift of God: So much money as to answer all
things: so much honor, as to cause your terror in the land of the living. You
may read one Text that shall grant this to be a kind of happiness, but with
the next, breathblast it, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is the people that is in such a
case; yea, happy is the people whose God is the Lord, in such a case; what case
is that? that has victory over enemies, v. 10. that is honorable; Relative
comforts, v. 12. that is delightful; all manner of store, v. 13. that is treasure
enough. But will ye see how they shrink? Happy is the people whose God is the
Lord; as if he corrected himself for calling any thing else an happiness.

2. Suppose a speedy deliverance from all grievances, and an assured security
in all earthly desirables. These will seem to warrant such language, Soul take
thine ease, Heart take thine ease; for, God has dealt bountifully with thee;
sit down and wish, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and
enlarge my coast, and that thou would keep me from all evil, that it might
not grieve me. Should God say, Be it unto thee even as thou will; yea, give
thee more then heart can wish; and give thee to enjoy the good of all thy
labor, that thou take under the Sun, all the days of thy life, to enjoy
riches, and wealth, and power, to take thy portion, and to rejoice in thy
labor, this is a rare gift of God, Eccles. 5, 18, 19. yet for all this, Psalm.
73.20. When thou awakest, thou shall despise their Image. When thou awakest
them, they shall see they have been all this while but in a dream: all their
greatness and supposed felicities, were but an imaginary, a vain and
despicable thing. All the pageant of worldly pomp, and pride, and life it self
is but an image, a thing to look upon: good for nothing else. It Is valuable
only for the outward appearance Though it be drawn to the life, it can have no
reality of life. Take one instance of a man, who had as thriving a plentiful
estate, and as quiet a long life as any we read of; I mean Isaac, he was a
great heir, and in one year, he sowed and received a hundred fold, Genesis 26.12,
13. The man waxed great, and went forward and grew, until he became very
great. Yet this great man is so little taken with all this, that out of choice
he dwells in a tent, (a house which he might carry in a wagon,) he looks for
something better; a City that has foundations, where he may dwell with God.
And you know that wise and learned Moses counts the worst of Christ, to be more
worth then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. and Christ is but a means to the
enjoyment of God: the end is always more excellent then the means, so that the
least enjoyment of God, is beyond any thing of the world incomparably excellent.

3. Grace with all its noble operations: Grace in its utmost earthly
perfection: quickening Grace: sanctifying Grace: saving Grace. This is without
all peradventure deservedly desirable: We are by nature dead, and Grace
quickens us: By nature in darkness, and Grace enlightens us: By nature Rebels,
by Grace Children, Brethren of Christ, Heirs of a Kingdom, what not? Take
Grace in the very flower and beauty of it, Full assurance of Heaven, when a
soul does assuredly believe in Christ, and is certainly persuaded, that all the
promises, spiritual and temporal, shall be made good to a tittle: that the
heart is comforted in all the riches of full assurance, which is a condition
very rarely attained. Yet if you will believe an experienced man, he will tell
you, that though in nothing he came behind the very chiefest Apostles, yet he
is nothing, 2 Cor. 12.12. He knew whom he had believed, and that there was laid
up for him a Crown of Glory. And yet he complains that he is got no further
then a life of faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith and not by sense. He
professes that to be with Christ is far better, (...), much more better, Phil.
1.23. But perhaps you will say, this comes not up to the proof: Well then, to
speak directly; could we abstract Grace from God, the soul would find as
little satisfaction in Grace, as it does in Sin; you shall see, that though the
soul be under a distemper, not having such high and prizing thoughts of God, as
at other times; yet when it begins to get from under that neglect, nothing on
this side God himself, can give any satisfying satisfaction, Cant. 5.5. I rose
up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with
sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock. Whether we understand by
hands dropping with myrrh, actions anointed with the grace of the Spirit, or
the grace of Christ which he left behind, as a sweet odor to allure her when
he put in his hand; either, or both these, clearly show, that it is not Grace
that will serve the turn, but the God of Grace that is sought after. Further
yet, to enjoy Christ, barely to enjoy Christ, his Presence, his Teaching, his
Prayers, and whatever you will name on this side the enjoying of God in him, it
is nothing. Judas had a greater privilege this way, then we can any of us hope
for; But it is God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, that is
incomparably desirable. And this puts us upon the Great Enquiry, which is the

3. Query. What is it to enjoy God? A tempting, sinking, chearing Query. What
is it to enjoy God? a desirable tempting Query. Who does not itch with desire
to hear it answered? A sinking Query: whosoever thinks I shall not fall
infinitely short in this discovery: I must speak it to their reproach, They have
lower thoughts of the enjoyment of God, then are fit, (I had almost said, then
are possible) to be harbored in a gracious heart. But yet, it is a chearing
Query, we may possibly climb by a winding staire, to have a comfortable
glimpse of this enjoyment. It is counted a princely sport to see a Faulcon
mount after a Heron; his towering flight deserves an ecce. But oh then! what is
it for a poor soul, that has lain among the pots, in the sculleonry of the
world, to be winged by that Dove that lighted upon Christ; and to be enabled to
say, Return unto thy rest, O my soul? Well then, what is it to enjoy God?

I answer, The enjoyment of God, it is the restless turning, and the constant
resting of the soul Godward: You may perceive the description referres to the
Lodestone, you know the Needle of the Compass is still trembling toward the
North. And why so? here we must betake our selves to the refuge of our
ignorance, in saying no more, but it is from an occult quality. Just so it is
here, the soul once touched with a peculiar taste of Gods distinguishing love,
is still working, and trembling Godward, and cannot rest any where else. And
why so? From an occult quality, insensibly conveyed by the communication of the
Divine Nature. I call it a restless turning, for heavenly rest is still in
motion. And a constant resting, because all the rest the soul has, it is in
God. And then I term it rather Godward, then, in God: to meet our distance,
before we arrive at a full enjoyment; and though the distance will be less
afterward, yet 'twill in a sense be infinite for ever. But this short
description is too long, and unwieldie. Let Us therefore take it in pieces, and
consider the enjoyment of God in four Periods of Duration. Time I cannot call
them, because the last of them is Eternity.

1. In this life. But do not mistake me, as though the enjoyment of God here,
is more worth, then that which was spoken to in the first query, viz. better
then what there is in Heaven, unless you take it precisely, and abstractly: as
if you conceive Heaven to be enjoyed, without the enjoyment of God. And then
that poor pittance of enjoyment of God, which we may have here, is more worth
then Heaven would be to eternity: Heaven would be a burden to us, were it not
for the enjoyment of God there. And therefore John 17.21. Christ prays that
They all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us. There Is not equality, but there is similitude, there is
reality, dignity, union, communion.

The enjoyment we have of God in this life, is either in Ordinances, or in
Duties, or in Graces, and all through Christ. I might speak of these
distinctly, but I forbear, because they do sweetly coincidere. The same thing
may be an Ordinance in regard of Gods appointment: A Duty in respect of our
management: And a Grace through the Spirits influence. e. g. Prayer as God
requires it, it is the Ordinance of Prayer; as we perform it, it is the Duty of
Prayer; as the Spirit assists us, it is the Grace of Prayer. Now there is a
common presence of God in Ordinances: which is as the outward Court, open for
all comers, and alas most persons go no further. But there is the secret of his
presence, within the Veil for his own, and nothing less will satisfy them,
Psalm. 63. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thy power and thy glory as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary. My soul follows hard after thee.

2. The second period of our enjoyment of God, is between our dissolution and
resurrection. And now we begin to launch out into the Deep. You know Peter
speaks excellent things of Faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. by believing in him whom we never
saw, We rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. But what is Faith to
Fruition? what is hearing to vision? we must now go softly, least our feet
stumble upon the dark mountains. Consider therefore particularly, what the body
enjoyes of God, while it lies in the grave, and then what the soul enjoyes of
him at the same time.

1. The body, the body? what is a dead body capable of? what should we speak of
a piece of putrefying, rotten, stinking clay? though 'twas never so lovely
while living, yet we say of it when dead, as Abraham of Sarah, Remove it out of
my sight. Aye, but God will not say so: he counts the dust of Jacob: he that
loved us when we were nothing, does not love us less for our rottenness.

1. The body has rest in the grave, and peace there, and sleep there, never
better in beds of down, Isa. 57.2. They shall enter into peace, they shall rest
in their beds, every one that has walked uprightly. 2. The body in the grave
is still united unto Christ, 1 These. 4.14. the body sleeps in Jesus. As one
that draws a sword, and holds the scabberd in one hand, and the sword in the
other, has both in his hands, though separated. So when Christ draws out the
soul: never shall any man, or devil pluck the body out of his hand. Is not this
enough for a carcass?
2. What then does the soul enjoy, if the body has so much? the soul is
capable of much more, the body can have but a senseless happiness; which
though it should be without, it could not complain of want. But the soul
lives, and is free from that clog, which inevitably hindered it in its highest
activity. It is now at liberty, and enjoyes,

1. A long-desired-freedom from sin. I might have said as much of the body; but
the body is not sensible of its freedom; and though it be pura massa in the
hand of Christ, who will present it without spot or wrinkle, yet it is the soul
only that understands its freedom, and apprehends its happiness, it being
among the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.

2. The soul enjoyes an immediate glorious knowledge of God, Christ, Truth, and
what not? it is said of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.29. He had wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the
Seashore. But it may be applied to every soul in Heaven, A greater then
Solomon (was upon earth) is here. The Riddles of Grace shall then be opened:
Your creeping apprehensions of God shall then be elevated: Your distance from
God shall then be shortened.

3. That which the soul enjoyes there is so great, that if it should come from
Heaven to declare it on Earth, neither could that soul express it, nor we
understand it. Read a lecture of civil-policy to the wild Indians, and tell
them the excellency of a well ordered Kingdom, they cannot understand it,
though you speak in their own language: neither can you fully express it, a
lecture is too short to contain it. We read of Lazarus, whose soul Christ
returned into his body, whom much people of the Jews came to see, purposely to
hear stories of the other world; but not a word from him of any such matter.
Paul's rapture may satisfy with the reason of it, 2 Cor. 12.4. he there heard
(...), worldlesse words, that is, words that cannot possibly be repeated on
earth. Our old bottles are not able to hold that new wine. And yet all this is
but the second step to the full enjoyment of God.

3. The third period is at the Resurrection, and during the time of the last
judgment. God has appointed a day wherein he will perfect all his. Camero
says, It Is no curiosity to affirm, that the Saints and Angels in Heaven, had
a new glory by the exhibition of Christ: the great mystery of the Incarnation
being thereby better known. We may then safely affirm, that both Saints and
Angels shall have a new glory at the Resurrection: They shall then see the
solemnity of Heavens-Glory.

1. The body shall then be raised by him, in whom it slept; By him with whom
its life was hid, and that with singular qualities, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. the
body when 'twas laid to sleep in the earth, was subject to infirmity,
filthiness, putrefaction. But when it shall be raised, these grave-clothes,
these rotten rags shall be left behind: Gods presence with it shall render it
incorruptible. The Sun in its shining does but shadow forth its glory; It shall
be unweariedly serviceable to the soul in its highest workings.

2. Soul and body shall be united with excellent majesty: I told you, the soul
in its separation has an immediate enjoyment of God: fruitur insigni gloria,
sed quae plena non est; it enjoyes very great glory, but not fullness of glory.
The soul is but a part of man, and so cannot have its complete perfection till
its divorce from the body be canceled. Now then suppose the body as before
instanced, and the soul as now completed, united together, what must needs be
the result? The body to be spiritualized, and the soul's capacities to be
unconceiveably extended: Surely then, and there will be fullness of joy in Gods
presence. Psalm. 16.11.

3. Soul and body thus united, shall then be absolutely and eternally freed
from any possibility of sinning: Till the general Resurrection, this is not
completed: For, should a dead person be restored to live again upon earth,
that person would sin again. This is easily proved, for we read of Elijah,
Elisha, and Christ, that raised persons from the dead; but all which were
raised, ( I except only those that rose at Christ's Passion, or Resurrection,
for I affirm nothing of them; but all the rest) sinned. And that they sinned
again it is clear, for they died again; and death passes upon none, but those
that have sinned, Romans 5.12. once an absolute freedom from sin, and for ever
an absolute freedom from death. Now that they died again, it is clear, for, 1
Cor. 15.20. Christ's Resurrection was the fruits of them that slept: That this
freedom is a privilege of the first magnitude, you have a brighter evidence
then a cloud of witnesses, Isa. 6.3. The fiery Seraphim cry one to another,
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts. How many hundred years after do you find
the Ministers of the Gospel, that lead the Gospel Worship, ecchoing back the
same celebration; Holy, Holy, Holy Lord, God Almighty, Rev. 4.8. What other
attribute do you find thus admired?

4. Union with Christ shall then be perfected. There Is a very near, strong,
excellent union here; it is expressed by several metaphors: Physically, by head
and members: Politically, by Husband and Wife; Corporally, by food and body:
But then comes the (...), then shall the Saints be his fullness that fills
all in all. Then, and never till then shall the fullness be mutual.

5. Soul and body thus united unto Christ, shall be caught up to him, and then
shall the Saints in their own persons sit with him in his last most glorious
work of judgment, they shall judge the world, aye, they shall judge the God of
the world. The principalities and powers that captive wicked men at their
pleasure, are themselves reserved in everlasting chains to be judged by those
whom they formerly foiled, 1 Cor. 6.3. plainly they shall appear in the glory
of Christ's Kingdom, having thrones with him in the air during the time of the
judgment.

6. All that ever the soul enjoyed before, in being with God in Heaven till the
Resurrection, shall be swallowed up with what it shall enjoy at the
Resurrection: All before shall be as nothing, though far greater then can be
expressed, 2 These. 1.10. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, in
the glory of his power: in that day he shall be admired in all them that
believe. Admiration is at some strange thing: So, that his glory then will
exceed all former apprehension. And there will be never a Believer to whom
Christ will not be admirable.

And now we are come to the very threshold of Glory: But one step further, and
then you are in the last period.

4. In Glory, in Glory? and what has this been all this while? on earth, if
you will believe Scripture, Believers are Princes in all lands, Psalm. 45.16.
not like worldly Princes that are but subjects in another Kings Dominion; No,
they are higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. In death, it may in
some sort be said of all, what was said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.5. he died secundum
os Domini, so from the Hebr. God did by him, as a fond nurse by her babe, kissed
him, and laid him down to sleep. At the Resurrection we shall meet the Lord in
the air. And do you not call this Glory? is there more yet? aye, yet. All that
has been spoken, is but a few green ears rubbed in your hands; the full crop,
the harvest is yet behind. I am now beginning to tell you what it is to enjoy
God in Glory.

1. All the enjoyments of God upon earth are but earthly, when compared with
the perfection of heavenly enjoyments. It is true, Grace in the abstract is
beautiful and glorious: Faith whereby we have communion with God, it is a
precious Grace: But Grace in the concrete, Grace as it is in us, is almost
contemptible: Faith as it is in us, our faith, what bracks and flawes, and
sick-fits has it. But the Text I refer you to, is, John 3.12. Christ calls
Regeneration it self an earthly thing, when compared with those heavenly
things, which he would afterward communicate.

2. We shall see God; you know God is said to speak to Moses face to face, that
is, Visions affrighted the other Prophets, the state of their mind was
changed, they were wrapped with ecstasies; but it was not so with him, though
compassed with the divine splendor: Yet God says to this Moses, Thou can
not see my face: And he favors him so far as to tell him the reason of it,
There shall no man see me and live, (q.d.) no man in this life shall see me; he
must first die, and be changed, and then he shall have a peculiar Revelation of
the Divine Majesty: then, 1 John. 3.2. We shall see him as he is: But how that
is, I know not. The two amazing mysteries shall then be unveiled, the Trinity
and Incarnation. We shall for ever take in glorious apprehensions of God,
without cloying: and for ever give out glorious admirations of God without
weariness.

3. There shall be a nearer union between God and the glorified Saints then,
then ever there was between Christ and a gracious soul before. The truth is, we
may say that of this union, which Paul does of the peace of God, It passes all
understanding: that is, before a person feel it; he is unable to feign what it
is, and when he feels it, he is unable to express how excellent it is; They
shall be filled with all the fullness of God. Our union with God shall be
nearer then Gods with Angels, for the humane nature is advanced to greater
dignity, then all the glory of the Angels put together, by reason of Christ's
assuming our nature. Christ is not ashamed to call us Brethren, Spouse,
Co-heires: where does he say so of Angels? But this particular I will turn
over to the next to be more fully cleared.

4. Our communion with God shall be immediate, without so much as a Mediator:
We shall go straight unto God, and immediately participate his Glory and
Happiness. There can be no immediate communion between God and the Creature,
while sin or any of the effects of it remain: but when sin shall be abolished,
then God shall be all in all, as before Christ was all in all: Christ shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, when he shall have put all enemies
under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24. and onwards. And when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all. Christ as man constitutes a part
of the Church (yet he is still the Head of the Church; as Adam is part of
mankind, yet still the head of mankind,) but there will be no further need
of a Mediator, e. g. Suppose you saw a company of Crystal Globes, placed in a
parallel line, and a single Globe by the middle of them, to transmit the
Sunbeams unto them, because their positure will not admit the Suns immediate
beams; but when the Sun shall so come about, as that they may immediately
receive its beams, there is no further use of the single Globe. So here, while
we through our distance from God, are incapable of immediate enjoyment, there is
a necessity of Christ's mediation; but when all things that cause that distance
are removed, and we brought into the Presence Chamber, no such necessity of a
Mediator.

5. The enjoyment of all this shall be in God unto eternity. God shall be to
the whole man then, what the soul is to the body now: totus in toto, not to
inform it; but a person may as soon cease to live, as to live out of God. As a
fish in the Sea has a larger space to sport in, then ever it can make use of;
but let it swim where she will, she is still in the Sea, and cannot live out of
it. So a Saint has infinitely more in God, than can be comprehended, but yet
still he abides in God. Never will the eye be off him: nor the tongue be weary
of his praises: never will the thought wander after any other object. There Is a
passage, 1 Cor. 14.15. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also: He opposes the spirit to the understanding so affected, as
that it cannot distinctly explain what it has conceived; but it shall be
otherwise, when we shall sing the perpetual hallelujahs. And then there is an
eternity: in Rev. 5.13, 14. all the Devils in hell shall be forced to roar out
blessing, honor, glory, and power unto God; but it is the Saints shall
undertake it for ever and ever.

(6.) All this, and infinitely more, shall be exhibited in so much glory, that
it is a mercy it is not discovered to us. Read but the tenth of Daniel, and this
will be no Paradox. Daniel had kept an extraordinary fast to entreat God for
his people: well, v. 6. and so on, Christ himself with one Angel comes to give
him an answer of his prayers: but alas good man, he is not able to bear it, v.
8. his spirits are dispersed and spent, and there he lies in a swound, more like
a carcass then a man: Christ and the Angel have much ado to keep life in him:
they speak affectionately, touch him effectually; and all little enough; he is
not able to bear the brightness of their Glory, but as soon as he recovers his
speech, his lips make shift to quiver out, O my Lord, by the vision my sorrow
is turned upon me, and I have retained no strength: for how can the servant of
this my Lord, talk with this my Lord, (much less then with that my Lord
yonder, who is the Lord of Angels, v. 16, 17.)?

A suitable discourse of the enjoyment of God in Heaven, would overwhelme us
while we are on Earth. Should all the wits in the world, men of the choicest
parts: and all those of whom the world is not worthy, men of the highest
graces, join together in a description of the enjoyment of God; when they have
said their utmost, if the whole space to the Firmament were filled with sand,
and the space above the Firmament were filled with water, and we had the number
of all those sands, and of all those drops: multiply the description by every
single sand, and every single drop, and then let every single sand, and every
single drop be multiplied by the whole number of both, yet this would fall
short, infinitely, superinfinitely short of a perfect description, what it is
to enjoy God in glory. For there will be,

First, Some shadow of communication of incommunicable Attributes. There are
two Attributes of God which we call incommunicable, viz. his infiniteness, and
incomprehensiblenesse.

1. For Infiniteness; if a Philosophical description of it might be admitted
in Theologia beatorum, in Heavens Divinity, our glory would be infinite: for
that is infinite, extra quod aliquid potest capi, infiniteness is that, of
which when you have said what you can, there is more beyond it: And this we may
say of our enjoyment of God. 2. For Incomprehensiblenesse; if the Apostles say
of Gospel-excellencies on this side Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; What shall we say of Glory?
Secondly, There will be what at present is inconsistent, and impossible, As,
1. A piece of clay shall enjoy more of God then, then an immortal soul can now.
Plainly, our bodies shall enjoy more of God then, than our souls can now. I
have already mentioned Daniels fainting, in a comparatively poor vision: but,
Go thy way Daniel, thou shall rest, and stand in the lot at the end of the
days, Dan. 12.13. (q.d.) Thoushalt rest in thy grave, and stand up at the
general resurrection, and thy body shall even stare upon greater visions, then
those at which thy Spirit now shrinks. 2. Those graces whereby we have now most
Communion with God, shall (as they are now) then cease. 1. Cor. 13.10. and so
on. Faith shall then be swallowed up in triumph. Hope in enjoyment. And we
shall want nothing to pray for. 3. Everlasting work, and everlasting rest
shall for ever meet, and give perfection to each other. Heb. 4.9. compared with
Rev. 19.1. there is the eternal quiescent work of praise. And thus I have with
a coal drawn a landship of heaven. I come now to the reasons, why God alone
is beyond comparison more desirable, than any thing, than all things in heaven
and earth.


Reas. 1. The uncertainties, mixtures, and finitenesse of all things on this
side God, fully evidence that God is singularly more desirable. In the book
of Ecclesiastes, you have Solomon's inventory, and at the foot of every page of
the Account, the sum is vanity, and the total sum, vanity and vexation of
Spirit. Will you know what vanity is? Vanity is that which has no true
Soliditie of essence, stabilitie of lastingnes, nor power to bring any
happiness. Will you know what vexation of Spirit is? Ask your own hearts. And
truly, for graces themselves, as they are hampered and clogged in us, the soul
may even long to be rid of them. I mean to be perfected, that what they have
but in part, may be done away.

2. What ever excellency there is in any thing, it is originally, eminently in
God. Romans 11.36. of him, and through him, and to him are all things: of him, as
the first Author: through him as the Preserver: to him as the last scope. Every
thing has its degrees of perfection, according to what of God is communicated.
1 Cor. 3.23. All things are yours, ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: that
is, the world is yours for your use: ye are Christ's as his peculiar: and Christ
personally as Mediator, for the glory of God essentially, that all may be
swallowed up of Deity.

3. There is nothing can enlarge, and satisfy the souls capacities, but God
alone. Poor low-spirited creatures may have some kind of satisfaction in the
world, as Esau, I have enough my brother: but then the capacities of the soul
are not enlarged. Others may have their capacities enlarged; but then the eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; (and these are but the
most capacious senses) but in God enlargedness, and satisfaction meet. Psalm.
81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it: that is, let thy just desires
be never so large, thou shall have them.

4. The design of Gods work, and the order of his working, renders a
restlessenesse in all things, on this side himself: 'twas never Gods
intention, that any enjoyment should be any more than an encouragement; that
any grace should be any more than a means to bring us to himself; when his
people grow fond of any thing, he withdraws it. There Is a worm at the root of
our comfortable gourds. There Is a Canker in our best graces. We read of Lots
purity, Moses his meekness, Jobs patience, Peter's forwardness, Paul's
raptures; but if these will glory, it must be in the Lord; for we read also of
Lots incest, Moses his passion, Jobs fretfulnesse, Peter's denial, and Paul's
thorn in the flesh. Those that have great graces, have also great corruptions,
and corruptions in those things wherein consists their excellency. I should now
come to the application, but that I am obstructed, by the doubts, and
objections of tender Christians. Yet I shall pass by all but one, and that I
must speak to for the honor of my Master.

Some may object, Will not what was hinted of immediate enjoyment of God in
heaven, be derogatory to our ever adored Mediator: and we dare not entertain
any diminishing thought of him?

I answer first. It is not that the Father personally, but that the Diety
essentially may be All in All. Why Christ should continue his inferiority when
his work is done, cannot be imagined. He shall be honored for his mediation,
but with an addition. Might I say, any person in the Trinity receives more
honor than other, Christ should have most. Rev. 5.13. Every Creature which is
in Heaven heard I, saying, blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Particularly,
unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

2. This will exceedingly advance Christ in the thoughts of all, while 'twas
necessary he veiled his Deity: and when his work shall be done, he still
continues his humanity, to converse freely with his brethren in his Fathers
house. Oh the intimacie there will then be, between Christ and Christians! the
Apostle tells us, we shall ever be with the Lord Christ. Oh what communication
of glory will there be to each other! Rev. 3.4. These shall walk with me, for
they are worthy. Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb to receive honor and glory, and
blessing. Oh the mutual rejoicing, and delight in each other! Prove. 8.31. from
eternity Christ rejoiced in the habitable part of his Earth: to eternity will
his habitable earth rejoice in him, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. In a word, the eye can never be off Christ as mediator and God now, the
eye shall never be off Christ as God and mediator then.

This objection answered, and Christ's honor vindicated, we may the more boldly
crave his help for the improving of the Doctrine.

(Use.)

The first use shall be of information. There are three lessons I would have
you learn by heart, that you may rather from your own hearts, than from
discourses, and books be inwardly persuaded of these truths.

1. That Heaven is extremely subjected to carnal mistakes in the thoughts of
most men, it is made a flexible imaginary, fancyed -- I know not what: most men
conceive it to be a place of sensual happiness. That base Wizard can wish,
Number. 23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his. Alas, he understands not what he wishes; there is nothing in Heaven
suitable to his covetous double-heart. Those that desire heaven, do it most as
a reserve upon some peevish discontent, and wearines. Elijah himself is
frighted into the wilderness, and then presently, it is enough, now O Lord take
away my life. 1. Kings. 19.4.

2. If God be thus incomparably desirable, then all the time of our life, that
is not spent, either directly, or at least by reduction, to promote the
enjoyment of God, it is lost time: the enjoyment of God is worth all our pains,
that you will grant. And that our time is little enough to be employed about
it: this you cannot deny. But what then? should we turn Votaries, and bring up
a new Religious Order, when there is more than a good many already? No; I
therefore added the word Reduction, that though all our actions be not strictly
Religious, yet they must all be reducible to Godliness. e.g.

1. Food and raiment are things naturally necessary, and he that provides them
not for his Family, is worse than an infidel: he that provides them not for
himself, is that, and more; for he is worse than a madman. But stay a little;
never was text more wrested by wordlings, than that of the Apostle, pray
therefore take another to keep it straight. Mat. 6.23. Seek you first the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. And his righteousness, mark that; you
must rather seek Conformity to God, than food and raiment. 2. Relative comforts
sweeten our lives. But yet brethren, this I say, the time is short, it
remains, that those that have wives be as though they had none, and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as if they possessed
not, for the fashion of this world passes away. Why, what would you have us to
do? I would have you without carfulness, that you may be holy, both in body
and Spirit, that you way please the Lord. 1. Cor. 7.29. etc. we must mind God
more than relative comforts. 3. Higher yet. The time you spend in Gods
immediate worship, even in extraordinary worship, it is lost time, if you cannot
answer Gods searching question. Zach. 7.5. When you fasted, and mourned, even
those seventy years (that is longer than most men live) did you at all fast
unto me, even unto me? Once more. 4. The most noble accomplishments, eminent
services, unparaleld sufferings, are nothing, if love to God be not in us the
primum mobile: the very impulsive cause. 1. Cor. 13.1.2.3. Aaron's bells,
Ministers preaching, will be like tinkling cimbals, childrens rattles, if we do
it not in love. Martyrdom it self, may go, for a kind of self murder, if
flaming love do not kindle the fire. And that love to God is principally meant,
it is clear, because it is that love which is more excellent then faith. So
that now you see. All the time that is spent, in earning our bread: in the
enjoyment of our comforts: in the worship of God: in the highest services and
sufferings: it is all lost, if the enjoyment of God in all these be not
principally aimed at.
3. Religion is a very sublime business. As it is generally (abusively) managed
it is nauseous. Oh how many have been hardened against it by those that profess
it: but accordingly to its undeniable Principles, it is not only amiable, but
Majestic. Judge of the piece by a pattern: constantly and reverently to use
every Ordinance, and yet to look thorough them, as having no worth at all, but
as they tend to God. Psalm. 84.1.2. How amiable are thy tabernacles O Lord of
hosts! my soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord.
Passionate expressions: but does he rest here: no, no. My heart and my flesh
cries out for the living God.

Again, To be contented with every thing, yet satisfied with nothing. Phil.
4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, but
verse. 19. no less than riches of Glory will supply all his wants.

Again, humbly to take denial of degrees of grace, and yet restlesly to strive
to be above them. 2. Cor. 12.10. I take pleasure in infirmities, for when I am
weak, then am I strong. Christ's strength is most seen in my weakness, aye but
Phil. 3.11. I would if it were possible be as holy now, as I shall be at the
resurrection of the dead.

In a word, to live in heaven upon earth, Phil. 3.20. our conversation is in
Heaven. These are some of the Principles of the oracles of God. Is not Religion
a more heroic business than most men think it?

(Exortation)

Be exhorted therefore, to account no pains too much to take; no time too long
to write, no thing too much to suffer, so you may manage Religion according to
the worth of it, and enjoy God in all ways communicable. Let your eyes be ever
toward the Lord.

1. Be not envious at the prosperity of the wicked: never so much as tamper
with any of their ways of getting, that which they call happiness. Suppose,
says Cyprian, thou was placed on the top of some Mountain, whence thou
might safely behold, fluctuantis mundi turbines, the unquiet world that
cannot rest; among the wicked it is a crime to be innocent. Pleasures are
surfeiting?

Honor's blandientium virus occultum, the poisonous breath of flatterers. And
riches, O nominum quanta diversitas, how are they mis-called? we call them
goods, and they are almost constantly made use of to evil. Suppose you saw
(with a heart to consider) such a prospect, would this tempt you, to fall in
love with it? But now look back again (for alas while you are gazing on the
world, you have your back upon God) you may hear a voice behind you, Prove.
23.17.18. let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord
all the day long. For surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall not
be cut off. More need pity, then envy those that have their portion in this
life: they must pay dear for every moments beggarly happiness. The unclean
person for every motion of burning lust, shall lie millions of years in
everlasting burning. The intemperate for every sip of generous wine, shall have
no other drink then rivers of brimstone. In a word, these whom God now
beseeches by us, whom we pray, in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God, but
in vain; they shall never be troubled with these entreaties more; but as they
love a distance from God, they shall be set at an eternal distance: And as
they laugh now at ministerial reproofs, God will laugh then at their
destruction: And those that complement with God in an empty profession, God
will profess he knows them not, and deny them Salvation. Consider this you
that forget God: now draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: but you
must first cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double
minded. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up. Jam. 4.8, 9, 10.

2. Seriously set your selves to find out experimentally, what it is to enjoy
God, to have communion with God: Long for it, you shall never lose your
longing. Pant after it, God understands the Rhetoric of your breathing, as
well as of your cry. If, says Augustine, I desire nothing else but thee, I
beseech thee Father, let me find thee: if I do desire any thing superfluous,
do thou thy self cleanse me: and make me fit to see thee. Christians, rouse
up your spirits: what is it that makes you so low spirited, as to have the
least contentment in the greatest enjoyment on this side God? Do you not know
the worth of Communion with God? whose fault's that? Hos. 6.3. You shall know,
if you follow on to know the Lord, you have a promise, that your knowledge
shall increase, from the morning of Regeneration to the noone day of glory.
What yet hinders? Is it variety of fears? Worldly fears: your hearts are tossed
to and fro with worldly business: doubting fears, you have more to object,
than ever you have hopes to be answered. Trembling fears, alas you dare not
think of such an enjoyment. To all these. God the Father bids you cast your
cares upon him; the earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it, and he knows
what things you have need of. Christ bids you bring your doubts unto him; have
you any doubt that Christ cannot answer? and if he can, surely he has done and
suffered enough, to persuade us of his willingness: there is in him Voluntas
Omnipotens as Bernard expresses it, his will is Almighty. And let those that
are of a trembling heart, go to the Comforter, it is his Office to pray in you,
as it is Christ's Office to pray for you; He is the God of all Grace: what grace
then can you want? Dear Christians, I would be an importunate wooer, and take
no denial, no excuse, no delay. Commune with your own hearts, and deal
ingeniously: is there any lust worth keeping, to the losing of God? and you
cannot keep both. Psalm. 139.23, 24. When God shall search you who knows your
hearts; when God shall try you, who knows your thoughts; if he see any wicked
way in you; how can you expect that he will lead you in the way everlasting?
Deal ingeniously, Christians, is there more strictnes required then you are
willing to practice? Speak (conscience) is it even thus? And shall the Commands
of Christ be grievous? did Christ stick at Nothing? Nothing. though the terms
were very hard to work our reconciliation, that we might enjoy God. And shall
we streine at what we are commanded for the applying of that reconciliation?
God forbid. I beseech you, beloved, do not plead any thing, which your selves
upon the review cannot but judge unreasonable. Be persuaded to walk closely
with God. Act faith, and strengthen it with obedience, that you may be able
comfortably to say, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon
earth that I desire? etc.

The Second Sermon.
This Exhortation was rather touched then handled and therefore you may expect
some necessary enlargements.

It Is pity this Doctrine should want persuasive directions, how to improve it.
I begin therefore with Conviction.

ANd, Oh that I could rouse the sluggish, and startle the careless Christian!
It Is heart-work I shall this day attempt. And therefore be it known to you
(that your expectations may not be frustrated) be it known to every one of you,
that come rather to see a Sermon, then to hear a Sermon; rather to be tickled
with notions, then wounded with convictions; I have nothing will please such
curious hearers. I cannot scratch your itching ears; Pray abserve my theme; It
is the enjoyment of God, Communion with God. Is this a subject fit for Quibles?
is this a business to be jeasted with? Nothing less.

It Is true in one respect, my subject requires that I should rifle all the
Rarities of Nature, and gather up all the Flowers of Retorick; that I should
borrow (were it possible) the tongue of Angels, and speak words only fit for
heaven. But on the other side, it is more necessary to speak in the simplicity
of the Gospel, and to set forth truth as it is in Jesus.

And therefore, Christians, if your consciences be asleep, I beseech you waken
them a little. I have an Errand from God unto you: I speak, at present, to
those of you that worship God, and yet are Atheists; that profess Christ, yet
are not Christians; if you will not give me leave, I will take it, to break in
upon your consciences, and to charge you, as you will answer it at your
eternal peril, to make true answer to this searching demand.

What is it you make your Idol? in whatsoever you promise your selves
satisfaction, and happiness, that is your God. Now what is it? Is it the
world's Trinity. (1. John. 2.16.) Profits, Pleasures, Honors? In short, what
ever it is on this side God, you must be infidels both to Divine and Pagan
writings, or you must charge your selves with folly and madness.

In Eccles. 1.2. Solomon gives you the result of his curious enquiries into the
utmost of creature-excellencies: vanity of Vanities, says the preacher, vanity
of vanities, all is vanity. Consider he was furnished above all other men, with
all variety of requisites, critically to anatomize the worlds happiness. He
does it, and when he has done, he gives account of his unparalled
experiments: All is nothing but very vanity; and not only vanity, but vanity of
vanities, that is, extreme vanity; and he doubles the duplicat, to note the
unquestionable certainty of it. Every thing severally, all things jointly are
comparatively vanity, when put in the balance with God: miserable vanity in
respect of man's sin: unprofitable vanity, in order unto happiness. All
things are deceitfully vain in regard of trust, and constantly vain in their
instability. Thus Solomon.

But if any are more taken with a wise Heathen, then a Divine Oracle: would
they but be true to that: Seneca (who wrote a book of a happy life) does
expressly persuade men to place their happiness in God, to follow God, Obey
God; he can want no earthly thing, whose desire is placed above these things.
Thus Seneca.

But if this truth ( viz. that there is no true happiness on this side God) be
not sufficiently confirmed in the mouth of these two witnesses, I will endeavor
to produce a third, and that shall be your selves. And that thine own
concessions may be a selfe-conviction, I shall change the use into an

(Expostulation.)

And, Oh that I could prevail upon your hearts in Gods behalf!

1. What satisfaction did you ever find in any thing on this side God? or to
speak in Scripture language, Romans 6.21. What fruit have you ever had in those
things whereof you have cause to be now ashamed? This is a question which
deserves the answer of a good Conscience unto God, that is, Commands such a
conscientious answer, wherewith you maydare to appear in the presence of God.
And Christians, I speak to every one of you, but chiefly to those that are hot
in the chase of some worldly excellency; that strongly fancy (if your projects
should not be abortive, and your designs broken) that you can as easily reach
happiness, as a child thinks he can play with the setting Sun, if he were but
on the top of the next hill he sees.

I suppose you have often heard of the Philosophers stone, that has filled men
with hopes of a golden age; but they could never yet find it: the most
unwearied, and expensive search has left them to sit down with shame and
disappointment: aye, and just so will all your dreams of earthly happiness. I
remember Augustine asks those that have a confluence of wealth and honor,
that think themselves happy, but are void of true happiness, what comfort do
these things bring you? it is better not to want them, then to abound in them;
when they are gotten, they do as much torment you with fear of losing, as they
did before with care to get them: Such good things (says he) do not make us
good men. But

2. How many times already have you shifted your mark? and changed your
thoughts about happiness, and yet are as far to seek as ever: one while you
thought, if you could but get such an estate, such a competency (as you called
it) then you should be happy. When men are low, they think if they were but
Somebody in the worlds account, they should be happy; when they are advanced,
they are more unsatisfied then before. How many here, that once thought if they
should be worth but so many Hundreds, as they are now Thousands, they should be
happy? and do not these very persons, in their own apprehension want more now
then they did then to purchase happiness? What more ordinary, then for single
persons to think, were their condition changed, they should be happy? and when
it is so, they are as far from happiness as before. The reason of all this
is, because men expect that in the creature, which God never placed there.

God never intended the creature should be thy God. What is only to be enjoyed
in God, it is in vain to expect it in the creature. Men may be so childish, as
to think their Counters to be Gold, and they may lock them up for such, in
their Chest; but when they come to make use of them, they shall then be forced
to be sensible of their mistake. So you may at present, please your selves with
your enjoyments; but your Gold is not current money in heaven: your Jewels are
not worth the setting in the crown of Glory: your Titles will not be
acknowledged in the true Court of Honor. What will you then enjoy when your
present enjoyments shall shrink to nothing?

3. What have you to object against the ways of God, wherein you may get
acquaintance with him, and climb up to communion with him? Christians, poor
Ministers that love your souls, would feign have you to live in the light of
Gods countenance; to have all your enmity to God done away. Believe it, Sirs,
we do not only many a time appear upon our knees to God for you, but could be
content, to come upon our knees from God to you, to beseech you not to stand in
your own light; Is it not enough to make ones heart to ache to think men need
entreaties in such a business? what then, to see men will not be entreated?
Will you but bring forth your strong reasonings, why you will not mind Religion
more seriously; that being the only way of obtaining communion with God?

You do not like so much strictness. And why, I pray you? It is a dull and
mopish business. Did you ever try it? if not, you are not a competent Judge.
I cannot believe that man ever tasted honey, that says it is not sweet. David
says, Psalm. 119.72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of
Gold and Silver. And he had more thousands of Gold and Silver, then ever you
will have. But you do not like such preciseness. Why do you not like it? if
you have no reason for your contempt, you are worse then brutish, if you have
any reason, produce it. Why those that make such a bustle about religion, they
are as worldly, and they are every way as base as others: suppose this to be
true of too many professors; yet is it their religion, or their want of
religion, that they are thus? But thou know not how to make a distinction,
thou think they are all thus, and they learn it by going to so many
sermons, and making so many prayers, and keeping so many fasts. Stay, friend,
do thou speak as thou think? did thou ever hear a sermon where men
were taught to be Hypocrites? did thou ever hear a prayer wherein these sins
of professors were not bewailed? No, that is true: they are too cunning to do
these things openly, but under the color of religion they do all manner of
abominations. Well, I will not contradict thee any further: but grant all this
(though it is an absurd slander, but) I will suppose what thou say to be true.
What Is the ergo? the consequence, the conclusion of these premises? Therefore
Religion in the Power of it is most excellent and desirable. For that which is
counterfeited is unquestionably excellent: you never knew any one counterfeite
lead, and brass, but silver and gold: you never knew any one counterfeit
peebles, and Bristow-stones, but precious stones, and diamonds. Certainly,
would men but act rationally; they must turn all their prejudices against
Religion, into motives to be Religious. Yet further

4. If God himself shall expostulate with you; are you resolved against all his
entreaties? Oh, that I could put your consciences to a stand; That you would
but consider, God does, as it were, make it his request unto you, That He, and
You may be each others Portion!

Suppose there were a company of leprous beggarly rebels, under the sentence
of death, and ready to be dragged to execution; spare them, they are never like
to do their Prince any considerable service; let them perish, and their Prince
can be no loser in his Honor, nor be censured as over severe, they having
brought all manner of miseries upon themselves by their rebellion. Suppose in
this case, the Prince should send one Officer after another, and above all his
only Son, to entreat and beseech them to accept of a pardon, and to accept of
Court preferment: what ever they can say aginst this, he will answer their
objections: what conditions they cannot perform, he will give them assistance:
though they are defective in the performance of easy conditions, yet they
shall have acceptance: they shall never come to him for any thing but they
shall have audience: he will do more for them, then for those that never
offended him: they shall share in the glory of his Kingdom: only he entreats
them to be friends with him. If these Rebels obstinately and scornfully refuse
this offer, what may they expect?

Hearken every one of you, that is unconverted, this is thy case: Thou art the
sin-sick Rebel: He that believes not, is condemned already. Brimstone is
scattered upon thy habitation. God needs not thy service, yet he sends one
Ambassador after another, to urge thee with terms of Peace. I do now in my
Masters name beseech thee to receive a pardon upon thy bare Homage. God offers
to make thee higher then the Kings of the earth, his subjects are altogether
Kings. God does, as it were, tempt thee with glory: And will thou not for all
this be persuaded? Perhaps thou do not think God thus entreats thee; consult
that place, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be you reconciled unto
God. Observe here, the Ministers of the Gospel are not only Legati Dei, but
Surrogati Christo: this is that, wherein the least of the Ministers of the New
Testament excel the greatest of the old: The Prophets they were Gods
Ambassadors to the people, but 'twas not for Christ, nor in Christ's stead. To
make this plain to you: When a Prince sends a Messenger unto another, that
Messenger is only an Ambassador, the Prince being not bound to carry the
message himself: But now Jesus Christ, he is the Fathers Ambassador, and
Christ is thereby bound to bring the message of Peace; but being necessarily
employed elsewhere (in the same design of grace) he constitutes us his
Officers: so that we do not only come in the name of God, but in the place of
Christ, to do that work which is primarily his. John. 20.21. As the Father
has sent me, even so send I you. And this was the commendation of the
Galatians, Gal. 4.14. That they received the Apostle Paul even as Christ Jesus.
Now do but consider, how low God stoops to take you up into communion with
himself. And will thou not sign the Articles of agreement? shall some base
inconsiderable lust [which thou art ashamed to plead for, while thou huggest
it] shall such a lust stand in competition with God? lay claim to thy heart,
and carry it. And will thou never turn to God? If at all, why not not now? Is
it fit for God to hold the candle of his grace for thee to sin by? But if you
will not by all this be persuaded, I must turn to those that will: and to them
I come with a use (I hope they long for, it is a use) of

(Direction)

How to obtain communion with God. Is not this the use your souls desire? The
plain truth is. This is the use for which I did in some sort make it a case of
conscience to treat of this Text a second time. Having endeavored heretofore
to show you the Glory of Glory. I cannot but think this to be the question that
lies uppermost in every gracious heart: how shall I obtain this matchless
privilege?

Give me leave to premise but one Caution, and you will be the better able to
take the following directions. The

Caution is this. Do not mistake the nature of communion with God, either in
the doctrine of it, or in the enjoyment of it; do not fancy it to be what it is
not, (have patience a little, and I shall tell you what it is by and by.)

The only way I shall prescribe to prevent this mistake is this, [Learne to
know, infallibly, the difference between the motions of the Spirit of grace,
and of the Spirit of delusion] you know all communion with God, is by the
Spirit of grace; and all manner of Spiritual delusion pretends high to
special communion with God. In short, you may know the difference thus.

The motions of the Holy Ghost are always Sanctifying motions, and Humbling
motions, and Orderly motions; whatsoever is contrary to any of these
qualifications, they are at the best, but gilded delusions. The Spirit of God
in all his operations advances holiness; holiness does necessitate the heart
into an humble frame: and both these are always orderly, that is, the Spirit
of God never puts upon one duty, when we are in another: the Spirit of God
never ravisheth the heart with comfort, to divert it from service: the Spirit
of God never puts persons to act out of their calling, nor beside the rule of
Scripture. This caution premised, take these Directions.

1 Learn to know what it is to enjoy God. Communion with God is nothing else
but the communication of grace between God and the Soul; it consists in special
influence of grace and favor from God to the soul, and special returns of
grace and honor from the soul to God. As the sun dissolves the clouds in
leasurely drops of water upon the earth, and the earth returns its vapors
upon the influence of the sun.

The reason why I name this, and why I name it first, is this. Christians are
ready to think, that all communion with God consists in the comforts of the
Holy Ghost: whereas Christians may as really and as advantagiously enjoy God in
secret conveyances of grace: in inward Supports: in a concealed acceptance of
service: in the drawing out of the soul Godward, as in the more open, and
confortable manifestation of God unto the soul. Communion with God is a
familiar friendship (pray let reverence on our part be supposed) you know it is
said of Moses, Exodus 33.11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a
man speaks unto his friend. Do we not as usually go to a friend for counsel,
and advice, to scatter our confused, and perplexed thoughts, as for comfort and
chearing to raise our hearts? in a friends bosom we entrust our sorrows as
well as our joys, and friendly communication gaudia conduplicat, marores
dimidiat, doubles our joys, and halves our sorrows. But.

Suppose a soul, even spiritually overwhelmed, betakes it self to God: The
heart is ready to break, till it has vent before the Lord: if afterward the
soul has no more ease, then by the bare launching of the sore, God poures in
no balm, only gives support, nay, suppose God add gall to the wormwood: will
you say, this soul, in this case, has no communion with God? you will betray
your ignorance that you know not what communion with God means. In Gods Secret
visits of the soul, and the souls restles groping after God, though nothing but
darkness be apprehended, yet that soul lives in the light of Gods countenance:
The sun shines, though a cloud interposeth; God smiles, though the soul do not
perceive it. But that you may have the joys of Gods presence, take a further
direction.

2. Be careful to remove the hindrances of Communion with God. I am ready to
believe, that every gracious soul may find out what it is that hinders his
Communion with God: And if so, they may then probably procure rational comfort,
though not spiritual comfort; they may get into the way of comfort, though they
get not the use of comfort; they may set themselves against the obstructions of
their comfort, and that very attempt puts them into the way of peace.

Examine therefore, whether thy trouble be through ignorance, or through
melancholy; or whether some sin do not lie at the bottom. If it be through
ignorance, knowledge will scatter it; If through melancholy, the Physician must
answer that case of conscience. But the greatest danger is when sin lies at the
bottom: and that Christians should passionatly abhor. I remember Athenagoras,
in his Apology for Christians, thus bespeaks the Heathen Emperors: There is an
infamous rumor spread abroad of us, as if we were guilty of several
wickednesses; if there be any truth in it, spare neither Sex nor Age, but
destroy us, our wives and children. It seems Christians then, thought that
Christian unworthy to live, that did any thing scandalous. And Augustine in his
directions to Paulina, enquiring how God is to be seen; tells her in this
search, plus valere vivendi, quam loquendi modum; she might better learn it by
her own holy living, than by his best counsel. Cyprian says, We live, not
speak great things. In short, that Christian that would get and maintain
Communion with God, must be very curious in his conversation. We must look upon
sin as God looks upon it, and then we cannot think any sin to be small. If thou
be drowned, what matters it whether thou lie twenty fathoms, or but an inch
under water? If thou be killed, what matters it whether thou be chok't with a
hair, or shot with a Cannon bullet? The least sin indulged, hinders Communion
with God. And let this be minded: There Is no sort of sins, sins of infirmity;
that is, thou can not say all sins of such a kind, are sins of infirmity. e.
g. Vain thoughts are not all of them sins of infirmity, for some speak the
heart to be wicked, Ierem. 4.14. All roavings in prayer are not sins of
infirmity; for where the heart is not tended, roavings are abominable. All
sinful dreams are not sins of infirmity, for where the heart burns with lust,
it steams forth sleeping and waking. In a word, Psa. 5.4. Thou art not a God
have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. Remove
obstructions if you would have Communion with God.

3. Resolve upon a diligent patience, if you would enjoy God. Do not think that
sensible Communion with God, is to be given so soon as ever thou have stepped
over the threshold of conversion. Study an Active, Believing Patience: that is,
do not make strange conclusions against thy self, if thou do not presently
find the fruit of thy endeavors. This is the gallant temper of a Christian,
when he can unquestionably believe God will make good his word, and therefore
he will humbly and obediently wait, though it be to his dying day: when the
soul can faithfully believe, that every ordinance of God has grace (as it
were) annexed to it, and therefore he will wait though he have not the sense of
it. To believe that God will subdue his corruptions; yet if God see it meet,
that he shall run up his time in struggling and contesting with sin (though he
would be heartily glad of more comfortable service, yet) he will through grace
keep his standing: he will proclaim Gods Soveraignity, and freedom, that he may
give what grace he pleases, and set upon what work he pleases, he is resolved
humbly to wait and speak well of God. Is not such a person excellently
quallified for Communion with God?

4. Give every ordinance of God its due observance. Let not some Ordinances
swallow up the rest. There Is no Law of the Creation for the greater Sea-fishes
to eat up the lesser: much less is there any Law of Grace, for the greater
Ordinances of God to justle out the lesser. Christ said, These things you ought
to have done, but not to leave the other undone.

The hypocrite he employes himself about the exterior, and more pompous work
of Religion, with a secret hatred of inward sanctity: the unwary Christian is
busy about the Essentials of Christianity, and too much neglects those
circumstantials, whereby others seeing their good works, might glorify their
Father which is in heaven: But those Christians that do give every Ordinance of
God its due respect, that do not interfere in Acts of worship, are most likely
to receive the benefit of every Ordinance. Divine Ordinances are social means
of Communion with God. One string untuned, hinders the harmony: one Ordinance
neglected, makes a flaw in our enjoyment.

Apostasy you know is directly opposite to the enjoyment of God. If those that
are now turned rank Apostates, would but ingenuously confess their way of
declining, they must tell you 'twas by disliking and undervaluing some
Ordinances of God, as if they might well be spared. e. g. How many have
stumbled first at the singing of Psalms? then what need Scripture be read
publicly, they can read that at home? then why should they instruct their
children, they cannot relish what they learn? then why should they baptize
their children, they know not what is done to them? then why should they attend
upon their Ministers that preach by Office, others can do as well as they? then
why should they pray but when the Spirit moves them, and so they pray but by
fits, etc. And so on, who knows whither? I dare appeal to their consciences,
whether these, or such as these, are not the degrees, whereby the Sun of
Righteousness has gone backward in their Dial. Christians, if ever you would
have Communion with God, do not think that God will suffer any of his
Ordinances to be tried at your bar, and not to be current without your
approbation. Must Jesus Christ consult with you what Laws to give his people?

5. Have a special regard to the secret workings of your hearts in secret
duties: the faces of men, and the faces of duties, are no more than Porticibus
picturae, the Title page of a book cut with pictures. Men may take a pride in
frequenting the best Lectures, and in being acquainted with eminent Christians,
and in proposing of remote cases of Conscience: There are very many persons
take a great deal of pains to work out their damnation with fear and trembling;
but now, what is the inward worship of thy heart in public worship? what is
thy hidden service of God in common service? does thy heart melt and bleed at a
Sermon, when those that sit in the pew with thee, can read no such matter in
thy countenance? what are thy inward thoughts? thy secret prayers? thy private
resolves? thy retired meditations? yea, let me ask thee further, what are the
most secret workings of the inner man? In those things wherein Communion with
God does principally consist, a man can hardly be an Hypocrite. e. g. Take an
instance in secret prayer. When thou art dull, and can not express thy self:
How does thy heart heave, and work, and tremble, and throb within thee! What
longing, and breathing, and hankering after spiritual enlargement! At another
time when thy heart is enlarged, How do thou find the pouring out of thy
heart? is i^ not like the pouring out of liquor from a narrow mouthed vessel;
thou do but bulpe out thy desires! Are not the thoughts of thy heart like a
crowd pressing one upon another! And when the discovery of Communion with God
is most spiritual, thou think it not spiritual enough: this is the way to
insinuate thy self into Gods bosom. But yet this is not all.

6. Observe the relation Christ stands in for the bringing you unto God, and
lay hold on Christ that he may bring you to his Father. Jesus Christ, he
intercedes with the Father, and does as it were say, Father, here are a company
of Rebels, justly fallen under thy displeasure, they deserve to be set at an
eternal distance from thee, but I must needs have them pardoned, and received
into thy bosom: make thine own terms, let Justice require never so great
satisfaction, I will pay the utmost farthing, give them what Laws thou
please, I will undertake they shall observe them: Thus Christ acts with the
Father in our behalf. And then he comes to the poor sinner, on the Fathers
behalf, and brings down the terms of reconciliation; He brings the sinners bond
in his hand ready canceled, the Covenant of peace ready sealed, and he
persuades the sinner to come unto him, that they might have life. Go therefore
unto Christ, and make him thy ladder to climb up unto God. Do not idly say thou
can not, but go on till thou meetest with a stop, that thou can go no
further. Wash thy hands from lazy security, and beg strength. It is an
excellent problem for a Christian's study, to find out the over-powring work of
special grace, and the concurrent subserviency of man's will.

Christians, this is a ponderous direction, and must be seriously observed.
Justin Martyr relates, that when in his discourse with Tryphon, he mentioned
the knowledge of Christ as conducing to our happiness and perfection, Tryphon's
friends laughed at it. I hope none here are such kind of persons; but that you
will rather ask what is it to fetch strength from Christ? briefly thus,

The fetching strength from Christ, is the finding out of a fit promise, and
applying it to our purpose, by a resting upon Christ, for the performance of
it, in a conscientious minding of the condition on our part, e.g. In the
present business, Ephesians. 2.18. through Christ we have access by one Spirit unto
the Father: But how shall I come to Christ? Mat. 11.29. by taking his yoke upon
you, and learning of him: but how shall I learn? and how shall I be sure of
success? Prove. 8.34. by continual attendance upon him, thou shall learn, and
thou shall be blessed.

7. Make use of each Person of the Trinity to each other for the enjoyment of
Communion with Deity. Every person of the Trinity works both jointly and
severally in the bringing of the soul unto God. The Father he effectually draws
the soul to Christ, John 6.44. And he gracioufly accepts of that which is no
way suitable to his infinite holiness. The Son as Mediator discharges all that
is requisite for the reconciling of us unto the Father. The Holy Ghost does
immediately work the soul to all spiritual good. Now then, do you learn to make
use of every persons peculiar work.

Can there be a more pleasing, a more profitable, a more honorable work, than
to fearch how the Father draws to the Son, and promises to send the Holy
Ghost? Yet it is the Son that engages the Father, by the working of the Holy
Ghost; and yet it is the Holy Ghost which works the heart to close with
Christ, and thereby we have access unto the Father. How sweet is it to unriddle
these mysteries of Grace! The very untying of these knots, and the picking out
the kernels of these seeming contradictions, must needs be advantageous unto
the soul.

Christians, will you bring your case to a Point? Is there a necessity of
acquainting thy self with God, or not? Can thou patch up an happiness to
serve thy turn, without Communion with God? if not, what do thou resolve upon?

Alas, this business is beyond my strength, I cannot change mine own heart;
though there are encouragements and helps, I know not which way to go, nor how
to plead them. Well, but is the Spirit of God able to quicken thee, and to
teach thee, and to enable thee? he stands especially engaged, it is his
immediate work to prevail upon the heart, Go to the Spirit, and beg of him,
that he would lead thee to the Father, and to Christ, that thou may have
fellowship with the Father and the Son.

Alas, I cannot go unto the Spirit, I have so long resisted him, so often
grieved him, with what face can I go? I am unworthy of his guidance. Well, but
Jesus Christ stands engaged; and never speak of Merit, that day thou speak
of Christ. Go to Christ, and beg that he would send his Spirit into thy heart.
Jesus Christ is thy Kinsman, he knows how to pity thee; and the Spirit of
Grace is at his dispose. Oh then go to Christ.

Alas, I cannot go to Christ, I have no ability to go, nor so much as a will to
move toward him. I cannot go to Christ.

Well, but the Father is engaged to draw thee, though thou can not go; a man
may be drawn, which has no natural willingness of his own. The father stands
engaged to change the will, and absolute promises are theirs that lay claim to
them (provided they do not overthrow their own claim.) Go therefore and tell
the Father thy case.

Oh, I cannot, I dare not go unto the Father; his justice must needs smoke
against me, his holiness will never bear with me; It would argue impudence in
me to venture into his presence. Oh I dare not go unto the Father. Then go back
to Christ, he has satisfied the Fathers Justice, and wrought our
reconciliation. God the Father was in Christ the Son reconciling the world unto
himself: And Christ has obtained Reconciliation for thee if thou will accept
the word of Reconciliation. Go therefore unto Christ.

Oh, I cannot go unto Christ, there is something required on my part, though not
as a Price, yet as a Qualification; I must have some inherent righteousness, or
else no Communion with God. Then go back unto the Spirit, it is his business to
work thy heart into a conformity unto God; God does not only require thou
should be holy, because he is holy; bu^ the Holy Ghost is ready to make thee
holy. The wind now blows, do thou spread the sails.

Oh, but I never shall, I never can have any holiness to bear any kind of
proportion to the holiness of God, and therefore it is in vain -- I have
experience more than enough of my heart. And I may by this time know what to
expect. Then go back unto the Father; he graciously condescends to accept of a
little, the breathings of the soul, the trembling of the heart Godward is not
rejected by him.

Christians, did your souls but thus walk in the spiritual immensities of
Deity, how would you be filled with all the fullness of God? How would you take
the Apostle John's counsel, while you are learning to take it, 1 John 2.28.
Abide in God. Abide in God, by this direction you may enjoy the End in the
Means, and have much of heaven while you are upon earth.

Is it needful after all this to be particular in an Use of Consolation?

Has not every true Christian a Natural-spiritual instinct to run unto God
what ever ailes him? And certainly, if there be any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort in the love of God, and in the fellowship of the Holy Ghost. If
there be (as most certainly there is) profit in observing Gods Ordinance, and
walking mournfully before God, then this Doctrine will afford unspeakable
comfort in all cases, when flesh and heart fails, then may the soul that has
interest in God shout unto him with the voice of triumph.

1. When the flesh fails, when the outward man is in an afflicted condition,
and who can tell the benefit of afflictions? garlic among rose-trees, makes
the roses the sweeter, and those roses which are made by art to grow without
prickles, lose their sent. Affliction with the enjoyment of God is infinitely
better than prosperity without it. But what is thy affliction? is it bodily
weakness? thy vile body shall ere long be changed. Art thou poor and despised?
riches of glory will make full amends. What need I name particulars? take one
Text which is so plain, the meanest may understand it, yet so full, there is
none able to explain it, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18, For which cause we faint not, but
though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day; for
our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

2. When the heart fails, when the spirit is tossed, and ready to be
overwhelmed; Christians in this case will grant, that enjoyment of God is
abundantly able to bear up the heart in soul-trouble: but this is the trouble
of their souls, they neither do (and they fear) they never shall enjoy God.

To those that make this mournful complaint, I have one general request, before
I undertake their particular comfort; that is, That they would observe from
this very Text* That enjoyment of God may consist with soul-trouble. Grant but
this, and I hope though thou art a trembling Christian, full of spiritual
jealousies; yet thou shall see ere we part, that thou may, and that thou
do enjoy God in thy soul-trouble. Suppose I should peremptorily assert it:
what have thou to say to the contrary?

1. This is for Christians of the highest form, Gods special presence is only
fit for heights of grace, and that I have no hopes of: To this I answer.

1. By way of concession. it is very desirable to have abundance of grace, to be
strong men in Christ, able to digest strong meat; that is, the more secret
mysteries of grace. But

2. Bare weakness never yet made any breach between God and the soul, nor
hindered Communion with him. Art thou less indulgent to thy child, because he is
a sick child, and a weak child? Psa. 103.13, Like as a Father pittieth his
children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. But

2. It is not weakness so much as wickedness; corruptions are prevalent, and
such corruptions as many times I am afraid are inconsistent with grace, and
therefore I may sadly expect to be set at an eternal distance: To this I answer
also. 1. By way of concession; It is a just and a sad cause of complaint to
have conscience fly in thy face because of sin: our sins are called our debts:
we may easily run into debt, but it is hard to get out; we may easily fall into
sin, but not so easily recover our standing. But

2. If sin be discerned, it is thereby weakened. A penitential eye has a kind of
fascination. It is in sin as in treason, if a treason be discovered before it
break out, the treason it self is th^reby broken. That soul that is truly
sensible of its danger, is past it; though God may deal by thee as David by
Absalom, keep thee for a while at some humbling distance, yet thou may beg
of God, more confidently than Absalom did of David, that thou may see his
face, because thou art not able to bear his estrangement, and thou shall not be
denied, but shall have either comfortable fruition, or profitable support.

3. But yet, more but's yet? aye and yet: alas my heart is not in a posture fit
for the enjoyment of God; there should be some suitableness in the subject for
so great a privilege, but alas I am -- I know not what I am, I am every way
worse than you can imagine me to be. To this, if I should give the answer
wherewith it is said, some body confuted Bellarmine, in saying, Bellarmine thou
lie: perhaps this answer would be remembered longer than a fine one. And it is
your profit my soul desires. God knows, I had rather any one, though the
meanest in the Congregation should say the Sermon did me good, than that every
one should say, 'twas a good Sermon. Well then, take this rude answer, Thou^l
-- and pray observe how I demonstrate it. If thou do not believe thy self in
what thou say, then thy complaint is an hypocritical untruth; for to say
thus of thy self, in proud humility is base hypocrisy. If thou do think as
thou speak, then it is a comfortable mistake, and that which does evidence
height of grace; for those that are vilest in their own eyes, are persons in
whom God delights. You never read in Scripture of any that bespattered
himself as Paul did: but are not those passages his beauty-spots? had Paul ever
the less Communion with God for all that? Thou that lickest the dust of Gods
feet, he will take thee into his arms, and lay thee in his bosom. And whence
have thou at present thy constant support? whence have thy (though but seldom)
revivings? is it not God that upholds thy soul in life? art thou not hid in the
secret of his presence? well then, Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, he shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the Lord.

To speak all in a word; I have endeavored to bring you unto God, and there I
would leave you.

FINIS

