AN ACCOUNT Of the Behavior of Sir John Fenwick, at his Execution on
Tower Hill: with the Copy of the Paper delivered by him to the Sheriffs of
London, etc.
SIR John Fenwick, on the Day of his Execution, arose at Four a Clock in the
Morning, and was private until Seven: At Ten he came out of Newgate into a
Mourning Coach, was received by the Sheriffs and Guards, and conducted to
Tower Hill; in his passage he fixed his Eyes on a Prayer Book, and spoke not a
word to any person. So numerous were the Spectators that it was past Eleven
half an Hour before he came upon the Scaffold; where it was observed at first,
that he seemed to be somewhat surprised, and for a few Moments stood
Speechless, but soon after appeared with great composure of mind; and after
saluting those on the Scaffold, desired Dr. White to pray with him: Which being
over, he thanked the Sheriffs for their Civilities, and delivered them a Paper,
desiring them to do him that Justice as to give it the King. He then prayed
again, and having for given the Executioner, prepared himself for the Block,
and the Sign being given, the Executioner, at one blow, severed his Head from
his Body; which was brought in a Hearse to one Mr. Metcalfs, an Upholster, at
the Helmet, in Fleet Street, and thence, that Night, privately Interred in the
Church of St. Martins in the Field. The Sheriffs, according to his desire,
delivered the Paper to the King; Which is as follows.

SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent; I shall therefore give a very short.
but faithful Account. First, Of my Religion; and next, What I suffer most
innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may reasonably ex^ect my Enemies will
cast upon me when Dead, since they have most falsely and ^aliciously aspersed
me, whilst under my Misfortunes.

As for my Religion; I was brought up in the Church of England, as it is
^stablished by Law, and have ever professed it; tho, I confess, I have been an
^nworthy Member of it, in not living up to the strict and excellent Rules
thereof, ^or which I take shame to my self, and humbly ask forgiveness of GOD.
I come ^ow to Die in that Communion, trusting, as an humble and hearty
Penitent, to (...) received by the Mercy of GOD, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ my ^^VIOUR.

My Religion taught me my Loyalty, which I bless God, is untainted; and I h^^^
ever endeavored, in the Station wherein I have been placed, to the utm^^^ of
my power, to support the Crown of England, in the true and lineal course (...)
Descent, without interruption.

As for what I am now to Die, I call GOD to witness, I went not to the Meeting
in Leaden-Hall-Street with any such intention, as to Invite King Jam^^ by Force
to Invade this Nation; nor was I my self provided with either Honor Arms, or
engaged for any number, of Men, or gave particular consent f^^ any such
Invasion, as is most falsely Sworn against me.

I do also declare, in the presence of GOD, that I knew nothing of King Jam^^
his coming to Calais, not of any Invasion intended from thence, till it was
pu^lickly known; and the only Notion I had that something might be attempt^^
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

I also call GOD to witness, that I received the knowledge, of what is
contained in those Papers that I gave to a Great Man that came to me in the
Towe^ both from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me,
wh^^ I read them to him, that the Prince of Orange had been acquainted with
most those things before.

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was Instrumental
saving his Life; for when, about April 95, An Attempt formed against hi^ came
to my Knowledge, I did partly by Disswasions, and partly by Delay prevent that
Design; which, I suppose, was the reason that the last Villaino^^ Project was
concealed from me.

If there be any Persons whom I have Injured in Word or Deed, I heart pray
their Pardon, and beg of God to Pardon those who have Injured m^ particularly,
those who with great Zeal has sought my Life, and brought t^^ guilt of my
Innocent Blood upon this Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those Noble and worthy Persons who ga^^
their Assistance, by opposing this Bill of Attainder; Without which, it had be
Impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of death. God bless them a^^
their Posterity; though, I am fully satisfied, they pleaded their own Cause wh^^
they defended mine.

And now, O GOD, I do with all humble Devotion commend (...) Soul into thy
Hands, the great Maker and Preserver of Men, a^^ Lover of Souls; beseeching
thee, that it may be always dear and precio^^ in thy sight, through the Merits
of my SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST Amen.

Printed at London, for John Salusbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill.

And Reprinted at Glasgow, 1697.


