A NEW Prognostication, For the Year of our Redemption, 1678 Being the second
after Bissextile, or Leap Year.

Most Curiously and Artificially Calculated, for all North-Brittain; but more
Especially, (and even according to TYPOGRAPHER'S very bound Duty,) for the
Latitude and Meridian of our most Famous CITY of BON-ACCORD.

Which stands upon a pleasant LONE, Whose gallant Dykes, are DEE and DONE.

By A. R. A. M. an expert Mathematician.

print of astologer holding model of cosmos

Wherein is contained the whole Fairs exact^y, with the 4 Seasons ^^ the Year,
and four Termly Quarters, the exact Changes of the Moon, and daily Disposition
of the Weather; A^ also, several other excellent things of Note, so fa^ as
this Volumn could permit Printed in ABERDEEN by JOHN FORBES, PRINTER to the
TOWN and COLLEGES, 1678.

The moveable Feasts and Terms 1678.
The Golden Number, is 7 The Epact 17 The Dominical, or, Sundayes-Letter F
Fast^ns Even, which in England, is called Shrove-Tuesday, Februar 12 Ash
Wednesday, on the morrow, Febr. 13 The first Sunday of Lent, Februar 16 Easter,
or Pasch-Sunday, March 31 Whitsunday May 19

And betwixt Candlemas-day, and Fastens-Even's-day this Year, are but nine
days. and therefore a good Yea^

A Short Chronology of remarkable things
Year Since the Birth of King CHARLES the First, of Blessed Memory, 1600. 7^
Since the Birth of our Gracious King CHARLES the II, May 29. Anno 1630. 4^
Since the Bridge of Dee foughten by Montrose, against James Lord of Aboyn, and
Colonel Gun, June 9. 1639. 3^ Since the Battle of Tippermuir, Sept. 1. 1644.
3^ Since the Battle of Aberdeen, Sept 13. 1644. 3^ Since the Battle of
Inverlochie, Febr. 2. 1645. 3^ Since the Battle of Old-Erne, May 9. 1645. 3^
Since the Battle of Aldford, July 2. 1645. 3^ Since the Battle of Kilsyth,
August 15. 1645. 33 Since the Battle of Philiphaugh, 1645. 33 Since the Battle
of Preston, commonly called the Unlawful Engagement, 1648. 3^ Since the Death
of K. Charles I. Ianuar 30. 1649. 29 Since the Marquis of Huntly, was executed
for Layalty at Edinburgh, March 1649. 29 Since the Marquis of Montrose, was
executed at Edinburgh upon the same account May 1650. 28 Since the Englishes
entered Scotland, July 22. 1650. 28 Since the Battle of Dumbar, Sept. 3. 1650.
28 Since the Castle of Edinburgh was rendered up to the Englishes, December 24.
Anno 1650. 28 Since the Town of Stirling was taken in by General Monk, July
29. 1651. 27 Since the strong Castle of Stirling, was rendered up to the
Englishes, Saturday, August 16. 1651. 27 Since the Town of Dundee was taken in
by the English-Army, on Monday, September 1. 1651. 27 Since the Battle of
Worcester, Sept. 3. 1651. 27 Since the Englishes came to Monross, Sep. 3. 27
Since the English-Army came first to Aberdeen, after Dundee fight, on sunday
Sept. 7. 1651. 27

Of the Eclipses this Year, 1678.
print of partially eclipsed man-in-the-moon

WE shall have but only one Eclipse which will be seen of Us in Britain, and
that of the Moon, falling out upon Saturday, the 19 day of October. 8 ho. 17
min. at night. The digits Eclipsed will be 22. and 18 seconds, at which time
the Moon is into the 1 degree of Taurus, Therefore it being altogether needless
to mention any more Eclipses, seeing the^ cannot effect Us, let other Nations
then observe (...) Rest.

For, there is some reason to judge, that this ^^ar,
All Things shall be Cheap, but Money sha^ be dear.
The four Seasons of the Year, 1678.
First,

THe Spring-Season, begins on Sunday, March 10. 50 min past 2 morning. Making
our days and nights equal.

Second,

SUmmer. Season, begins on Tuesday, June 11. at which time, our days are at
the longest, and the nights at the shortest.

Third,

AUtumn, or Harvest-Season, begins on Thursday September 12. 22 min. past 5
afternoon. which makes the day and night equal again to Us.

Fourth,

VVInter-Season, begins on Wednesday, the 11 day of December, 10 min. past 10
forenoon, which makes the shortest day, and longest night.


Thus much for the four Seasons of the Year, which the Vulgar, through
ignorance terms the four Quarters.

Of the four Termly Quarters of the Year, Never before Insert into any
Almanacks.
The first Termly Quarter, begins upon Saturday, the second day of Februar,
called Candlemas day, and continues till the first day of May, being three
months just.

The second Termly Quarter, begins on Wednesday, the first day of May, tho
commonly the Vulgar reckon from the 3 day of May, called Rood-day, which
Quar-lasteth till the first day of August.

The third Quarter begins on Thursday, August 1. called ^^mbas-day, and
continues till November 1 day

The ^^urth and last Termly Quarter, begins on Friday Nov^^ber 1. day, which is
called Hallow day, so that Hallo^. Even, this Year, is on thursday at night
before: which Quarter lasts till the 2 day of February again.

^e exact day, hour and minut of the New Moon, her Full and Quarters; with the
daily disposition of the Weather; and whole known Fairs in Scotland, for the
year, 1678.
xxxi* January begins on Tuesday.
^t quarter 6 d. 40 min past 4 in the morning. ^^ moon 12 d. 19 min. after 8 at
night. ^^t quarter 19 d. 17 min. past 3 afternoon. ^ll moon 27 d. 37 min. past
6 in the evening.
This year begins with hail, snow, and strong frost the middle of the month,
and from thence foggy ^ather.

The first Fair in the year, is at Kilsyth the 1 day. S. Naugh^s, at the Kirk
of Betheny, in Gerry, upon the 7 day. S. Mungo Glasgow the 13 day a Fair, and
at Dunkel and Kilwin^ng, the 21 day.

xxviii. February begins on Friday.
^ast quarter 4 d. 41 min. past 3 in the afternoon. ^ew moon 11 d. 2 min. past
9 in the morning. first quarter 18 d. 24 min. past 5 in the morning. ^ull moon
26 d. 53 min. past 11 in the forenoon.
The i, and ii, frost: thence to the vi. snow and all: from the vi. to the x.
cold North-east winds: hence to the xx more calm: the rest of the month old
showers now and then.

At Abernethy and Forres in Murray-land, called S. Brides ^ay 1. On Candlemass
day in Bamff, Dunkell, Dingwall the day. In Cowper of Fife the first wednesday
of the month. Valantines day at Linlithgow the 14 day, and at Forfa^ 15day
holding eight days. Ash wednesdays Fair beginnet^ Fastens even, at Lanerk the
same day; at Valley-field the ^

xxxi. March begins on Friday.
Last quarter 6 d. 13 min. past 6 in the morning. New moon 12 d. 39 min. past 4
afternoon. First quarter 20 d. 47 min. past 1 in the morning. Full moon 28 d.
26. min. past 3 in the morning.
The first viii days nipping frost: thence to ^ xii more warm: from xii to
xviii variable, the^ to the xxv some showers with sunshine, the rest ^ the
month nipping frost.

S. Monnence in Aberdeen, Dumfermling, Abercherder, ^ Marnoch Kirk and
Strathaven the 1 day, at Petten-weem^ S. Duthos in Tain of Ross the 9 day, in
Auchtertuil the ^ day, S. Causnan the 11 day. A fair at Durie the 15 day of t^
month, with a weekly market. S. Patrick in Dumbartan, and ^ the Kirk of
Strageeth and at Kirkaldy, a fair of Horse, Ne^ and Sheep, etc. the 16 day in
S. Johnstoun the 19 day, C^^bert in Langtoun of the Mers the 20 day, Lady day
in We^ Weems, Bamff, and Auchtermuchty the 25 day, Palmsund ^ at the Kirk of
Forrig, and in S. Johnstoun, and Skeirtburs^^ Fair is upon thursday before
Goodfriday, at Cowper of Ang^ otherwise Monks Cowper. A Fair in Forres, called
S. Mar* fair, the first tuesday after Easter.

xxx. April begins on Monday.
Last quarter 4 d. 31 min. past 8 in the morning. New moon 11 d. 36 min past 3
in the morning. First quarter 18 d. 19 min. past 8 at night. Full moon 26 d. 34
min past 4 afternoon.
From the beginning of this month to the vii d^ e^pect cold winds witb sharp
showers now and the^ thence to the xiv more calm: from the xiv to t^ and foggy
weather.

A fair at Lesly on tuesday before Easter: in Corstorphine t^ first tuesday
after Easter a fair, S. Donald fair at the Kirk ^ Achtheles 17 day. Mark
Evangel in Dysert the 23 day, (...) day the first, the 26 day, a fair at
Rugland the 28 day con^^^^ing four days, at Leeven the 29 day, and in Kilreny
the 30 (...).

Whiles in March and whiles in April.
Skeirethursday before Pasch in Glasgow, Dumbartan, Cowper of Angus, Elgin of
Murray, Pasch-mun day in Cowper of Fife, Lanerk, and Irwing, Lowsunday after
Pasch in Killimure, and all the week after at the Senzie of St. Andrews.

xxxi. May begins on Wednesday.
Last quarter 3 d. 54 min. past 1 afternoon. New moon 10 d. 6 min. past 3
afternoon. First quarter 18 d. 3 min past 2 afternoon. Full moon 26 d. 36 min
past 2 in the morning.
This month begins fair and clear to the viii day? thence to the xvii, some
thunder and rain; thence to the xx, foggy and missy: the rest pleasant weather.

The first day of May, called S. Philip a fair in the Grange within the
Sheriffdom of Linlithgow.

Holy-Crossday the second Beltan, in Monross, Kinrocher and in Peebles the 3
day, at Carlouck and Drymen in the Lenox (with a weekly market every thursday)
the 10 day, at Bamff and at Kirkaldy, a fair of Horse, Neat, and Sheep, etc.
the 16 day, and in Stirling a Fair, 10 days before Whitsunday. Ascension day
at the Burgh of Annan. A fair at Durie the tuesday before Whitsunday, with a
weekly market.

Whiles in May and whiles in June.
Whitsunm^^day in Glasgow, Dumbartan, Lanerk, and Jedburgh, Whitsuntuesday
called Pardon day, in the Chanry of Ross, and at the Kirk of Ninians above
Kirkaldy, Trinity-munday in Edinburgh and Brichen 8 days, in S. Andrews one
day, in Bruntiland one day. A fair in Kilsyth the friday before Whitsunday. A
fair in the Burgh of Linlithgow, the first thursday after Whitsunday. Trinity
tuesday in Rugland lasting 2 days. Trinity thursday in Falkland.

xxx. June begins on Saturday.
Last quarter 1 d. 3 min. past 8 at night. New moon 9 d. 23 min. past 3 in the
morning. First quarter 17 d. 41 min past 5 in the morning. Full moon 24 d. 59
min. past 10 in the forenoon.
^he first ^ days exceeding warm: thence to ^^ some soft showers; from the x^
to the end of the month, kindly summer weather.

A Fair in Kinross the first tuesday of June, in Longnewton 5 day, and
Stramiglo, Aberdour, and Ennerkeithing 6 day, a weekly market in Forfar,
beginning the 8 of June, of Neat, Sheep, Horse, etc. continuing to the first of
October, a fair in Drymen the 9 day, in Forgondenny the 10 S. Barnabie in
Lawder and Dysert, S. Laurence at Grinnock 11 day, the same day there is a fair
at Dirleton, with a weekly market every wednesday: also there is a fair at
Preston-Pans the same day, with a weekly market every tuesday, S. Margaret in
Abernethie, Ceres in Fife 13 day, Midsummer on St. John's day in St. Johnstoun
five days, in Air four days, in Wigton, Bamff, Athelston and Meiklour in
Perth-shire, (with a weekly market every wednesday) the 14 day, in Auchtertuil
and Clackmannan 15 day, at Strathaven 16 day, Scoon the 16, 17, 18 days, with
a weekly market every thursday. A fair at the Burgh of Annan, the third tuesday
of June, S. Margaret in Dumfermling and at Moffat 18 day, in which place there
is a weekly market every friday, Earlestoun 19 day. Monro his fair holden at
Colrain in Ross-shire the 20 day, Methil, near Leevens-mouth 22 day, Midsummer
day in Forres the 24 day, and at Townyettam on the Border, the 24 day of Horse,
Neat, and Sheep, etc. with a weekly market. In Alathy in Angus, called S.
Emagola, and at the town of Nicolson the 25 day. S. Peter's day at Forfar 26
day, holding four days. As also in Faulkland, Bruntiland, Bamff, Kelso, 26
day, Galashiels 27 day, in Peebles 29 day, S. Sheriff fair the last tuesday of
this month, S. John Baptist day a fair in Fraserburgh 24 day.

xxxi. July begins on Monday.
Last quarter 1 d. 31 min. past 1 in the morning. New moon 8 d. 11 min. past 5
in the afternoon. First quarter 16 d. 20 min. past 8 at night. Full moon 23 d.
38 min. past 5 afternoon. Last quarter 30 d. 37 min. past 9 in the morning.
The first xi days exceeding hot; from the xi to the xviii some thunder and
rain; thence to the end calm and clear, with some showers.

A fair at Edzerstoun in Teviotdale the 1 day of this month. A fair in the
Stow, the first day of this month, holding 2 days, in Culross the 1 day,
Abernethy and Auchtermuchty 2 day. S. Martine of Bulzeon 4 day, S. Thomas 5
day, S. Paladius in Forden in the Mernes 6 day. S. Andrew in Glasgow the 7 day,
a fair in the Burgh of Annan the second tuesday of this month, in Kilwin. the
12 day, the 13 S. Margaret in Killimure, 6 days at the kirk of Forrig, the
third tuesday in this month: Moffat and at Kirkaldy, a fair of Horse, Neat,
and Sheep, etc. the 18 day, a fair in Stirling the 20 day, Magdalene day in
Lawder 22 day, with a weekly market every Friday, Mary Magdalene in Linlithgow,
Petenweem, and Path-bead 22 day, in Airth the 24 day, S. Christina in
Corstorphine a fair the same 24 day, S. James in Forfar, Cowper of Fife,
Lanerk, and Roxburgh, Kinghorn, Alloway, Elgin in Murray, and in Musselburgh
the 25. Pollinar fair in Inverury, and Lambas fair in Turref both on the last
tuesday. The last thursday of July a fair in Lesly, and at White-horn two days.

xxxi. August begins on Thursday.
New moon 7 d. 14 min. past 8 in the morning. First quarter 15 d. 28 min. past
8 in the morning. Full moon 22 d. 3 min. before 1 in the morning. Last quarter
28 d. 26 min. past 9 at night.
This month begins with some showers, till the viii day; thence to the xii
seasonable weather; from the xii to the xvi windy; the rest of the month good
Harvest weather.

Lambasday in Atturfe 3 days* long and in Melrois, Ennerkeithing, S. Andrews,
and in Dumbartan the 1 day, Lawrence fair in Rane the first tuesday, and
thursday after in Faulkland, in Kilsyth 5 day, in Meiklour the 7 day, S.
Lawrence in Selkirk, Auchtermuchty and in Forres 10 day, in Rane 2 days before
Kilmahug, and at the burn of Campsie, Lady day in Dundee, Bamff, Mernes,
Vallefield, the 15 day, the 20 day a fair at Rugland 4 days, the 22 a fair at
Scoon 3 days, with a weekly mer^at every thursday, S. Colms in Drymen the 23
Bartholemew Apostle in Linlithgow, Kincarn of Neil, and in Clakmannan, and
Peebles the 24 day, S. Zephirinus in Corstorphine the 26 day a fair. Samarevis
day in Forres 27, and S. John's day in St. Johnstoun and in Lawder the twenty
ninth day.

XXX. September begins on Sunday.
New moon 6 d. 29 min past 1 in the morning. First quarter 13 d. 45 min. past 6
at night. Full moon 20 d. 22 min. past 9 in the morning. Last quarter 27 d. 12
min. past 1 afternoon.
The first ten days pleasant Harvest weather, then^e to the middle of the
month fair and clear; the rest of the month variable.

Saint Gilles in Elgin 1 day, in Moffat 2 day, in Skirlin 4 d. Latter Lady day
in Stirling, Dundee, and Bamff 8 day, Rude day in Carill, Jedburgh,
Dumfermeling, Dumfries, and Athelston 24 day, at Longnewton 25 day, in
Auchtertuil and Salan the 11 day, a fair at Forfar the 15 day, holding eight
days. A fair at Kirkaldy of Horse, Neat and Sheep, etc. the 20 day. A fair in
the Stow 23 day, with a weekly market every friday, Mat. Apostle in Linlithgow
21 day, a fair at Colrain in Ross-shire called S. Georgies fair 25 day. A fair
at Leeven and at Nicolson the 27 day, a fair at Tranent the same day with a
weekly market every Saturday. S. Michael in Haddington, Leslie, Air, S.
Andrews, Crief, Kirkud bright, Gallashiels, and at the Kirk of Forrig the 29
day. A fair at the Burgh of Annan, the same day, S. Jerome in Bamff the last
day. A fair at Durie the 27 day of this month, with a weekly market.

xxxi. October begins on Tuesday
New moon 5 d. 18 min past 5 in the afternoon. First quarter 13 d. 22 min. past
3 in the morning. Full moon 19 d. 1 min past 8 at night. Last quarter 27 d. 22
min. past 8 in the morning.
This month begins with raw frost to the x day, from the x to the xx rain now
and then, thence to the en^ wind and frost.

The 1, 2, 3 days a fair in Salt-Preston: a fair in Middle-Calder, the first
tuesday of this month. S. Francis in Abernethy and Valley-field 4 day in
Meiklour the 5 day, at Edezrstoun in the border 2 miles from the Red-squire 5
day. in Cowper of Fife the 6 day, a fair at the town Lon-head of Lesswaid the 8
day, Dionise in Peebles, Earleston, Kirkintilloch, Aiton, Auchtermuchty, Ceres
in Fife, in Killimure, Moffat the 9 day, Dalkeith, and Tillibole 10 day, at
Ennerkeithine and Straithaven the 12 day. Fenduck at Dunning 13 day, in
Forgondennie and Drymen the 15 day, at Musselburgh the 16 day. S. Luke in
Lawder, Kinross and Rugland 18 day, Townyettam on the Border 20 day of horse,
neat and sheep, etc. with a weekly market. S. Irena in Corstorphine and at the
Kirk of Carlouck 20 day with a weekly market every wednesday, Mary Salamine in
Stirling and Kelso 22 day, a fair at Forfar 24 day, holding 8 days, in
Linlithgow 24 in Kilrenie and Stramiglo 25. Fowls fair in Pasley, and Falkirk
26 day, Simon and Jude in Rostine, (with a weekly market every Saturday)
Dysert, Falkirk, Cockany, and at Kirklistoun 28 day, in Alloway and at Nicolson
the 29 day. The last thursday of this month, a fair in White-horn, holding two
days.

xxx. November begins on Friday.
New moon 4 d. 38 min. past 8 in the morning. First quarter 11 d. 54 min past
10 in the forenoon. Full moon 18 d. 1 min. past 9 in the morning. Last quarter
26 d. 20 min. past 7 in the morning.
This month begins with frost and snow to the vii day; the viii ix and x thaw;
thence to the xvi frost; the rest of the month kindly winter weather

Hallowday in Edinburgh 8 days, in Faulkland, Dumblane, Fordyce 1 day, in
Alathie 2 days, in Kilwinning 3 day, Leonard in Lanerk, in Forres and in Largo
the 6 day, also there is a weekly market in Largo every friday, S. Matthew. in
Dumbar Melrois, Martins-Kirk, Strabogie, Cowper of Fife, Hamilton, Culross,
Killmahug 11 day, a fair at Kilsyth the 12 day. S. Clement in Dundee, 13 day,
S. Helins day at Grinock 15 day, afair at Down in Monteith 15 day, Margretmass
in Dumfermeling and Lawder 16 day, S. Mucharmuch in Taken and Auchtertuil 22.
Bruntiland 23, S. Andrew in S. John^tou^, Peebles, and Chirnside 30 day.

xxxi. December begins on Sunday.
New moon 3 d. 40 min past 11 at night. First quarter 10 d. 45 min. past 7 at
night. Full moon 18 d. 32 min. before 1 in the morning. Last quarter 26 d. 46
min. past 2 in the morning.
This month begins roughly to the x day, thence to the xviii black frost; from
the xviii to the xxiii cold easterly winds; the year is likely to end with
frost and snow.

S. Nicholas in Aberdeen 7 day, Lady day in West-weems 8 day, S. Dustane in
Bamff and at the Kirk of Diere 14 day, S. Cuthbert in the Grange, within the
Sheriffdom of Linlithgow, the 7, 8 Day. The 14 day a fair at Durie, with a
weekly market. S. Thomas in Glasgow the 15 day, a fair at Dounin Mon teith 15
day, S. John's day in Bamff, Forres, Methil near Leevens mouth 17 day.

A brief and easy Table of the Tides, betwixt Buchan-ness and the Skare-heads.
AT Buchan-ness, at the Change of the Moon, or Height, it is full Sea at 12
hours. At Aberdeen, 12 hours and 3 quarters: at Stonhyve, Montross, Barwick and
Holy-Yland, it is full Sea at 2 hours and a quarter: at Broughtie, Dundee,
Leith and Brunt-Yland, at a quarter past 2 a clock: at the Isle of May,
Queens-Ferrie, and Fairn-Yland, at 3 a clock: at Preston Panns, and so alongs
the coast of Dumbar, at 3 a clock, etc.

The whole Fairs of the Kingdom of Scotland.
April, S. Mark the Evangelists fair, into the town of Dysert, in Fiffe shire,
on the 23 day, belonging to the Noble Earl of Weems Belran-day the first, on
the 26 day. a fair at Rugland, on the 28 d. continuing 4 days. a fair at
Leven, the 29 day: a fair at Kilreny in Fiffe shire on the 30 day.

May, S. Phillip in the Grange, within the shire of Linlithgow, also, a fair at
the new kirk of Kilpatrick, both on the 1 day, Holy cross fair on the 2 day:
Beltan fair into the town of Monross, into Angus shire: and at Kinrocher, and
Peebles: also s. Congalls ^air at the kirk of Doors, in Mearns shire, all on
the 3 day Fumuk fair at Fumuck-kirk, into the parish of Pittrifnie, within the
shire of Bamff, on the 3 day, belonging to James Anderson, Lord of Wasterton:
a fair at Ranfrew the 9 d. a fair at Carlouk, and at Drymen in the Lennox, both
on the 10 d. B^andon fair at Bamff, and a fair into the town of Kirkaldy in
Fiffe shire, both the 16 day.

Markets or Fairs, whiles in May, and whiles in June.
A market into the town of Stirling, ten days before Whitsunday Whitsundays
market into the town of Stonhyve, into the Shire of the mearns, upon tuesday
before Whitsunday Ascention-day at the Burgh of Annan. Whitsunmundays market in
Glasgow, Dumbartan, Lanerk, and Iedburgh a special market into the town of
Borrowstonness, within the sheriffdom of Linlithgow, on tuesday after
Whitsunday, belonging to his Grace, my Lord Duke Hammilton a market also into
the town of Linlithgow, and at Dumblain, both on the same day. Whitsun tuesday
called Pardon-day at Chantie, in Ross-shire, and at the kirk of Ninians above
Kirkaldy. Trinity mundays market at Edinburgh, and at the town of Briechen,
into the shire of Angus, holding 8 days. Trinity-mundays market into the town
of st. Andrews, and Brunt*Yland, both into Fiffe shire, one day Trinity
tuesday in Rugland, Trinity thursday in Falkland, both lasting two days.
Whitsundaies market upon the moor of Dun, within the shire of Angus, upon the
second wednesday after Whitsunday, continuing the whole week, and belongs to
the right honorable, the Lord of Dun June, A market ar Kinross, the first
tuesd. in Long-newton 5 d. Bernard market 2 tuesd. a market at Monifeeth, into
the shire of Angus 2 tuesd. belonging to the right honorable, Sir James Maul o^
Balumbie. s. Colms market in Stramiglo, Aberdour, and Ennerkiething 6 d. at
Drymen 9 d. in Forgondeny 10 d. s. Barnabie in Lawder, Dysert, Douglas, s.
Lawrence in Grinnock, and at Preston-pans, and at Dirleton, all upon the 11 d.
s. Margaret in Abernethy, and Ceres in Fiffe both on the 13 d. Mid-summer on s.
John's day, in St. Iohnston holding 5 days, and in Air 4 days, at Wigton,
Bamff, Athelston, and at Mieklour in Pearth-shire, all upon the 14 d. at
Auchtertuile, and Clackmannan, and at Bocklyvie, in the parish of Kippen, all
on the 15 d. a fair into the town of Scoon in Pearth-shire on the 15 d* holding
3 days, beginging on tuesday thereafter, belonging to the right noble the
Viscount of Stormonth. at Strathaven, the 16 d. at the burgh of Annan the 3
tuesd. s. Margarets fair at Dumfermling, and at Moffat the 18 d. at Earleston
the 19 d. Monro's market holden at Colrain in Ross-shire, the 20 d at Methil,
near Levens mouth the 22 d. Midsummer in Forres, in Murray-shire, and in
Hawick, and at Townyettam on the border, all on the 24 d. at Alathie in
Angus-shire, called s. Emagola, and at the town of Nicolson, both on the 25 d.
s. Peter's market at the town of For far in Angus-shire holding 4 days, and in
Falkland, and Brunt-Yland, both in Fiffe shire, and at Bamff, and Kelso, all on
the 26 d at Gallashiels the 27 d and in Peebles the ^9 d. Pe^er market at
Migell in Pearth shire, belonging to the right honorable the Lord of Foulerton
of that Ilk: and also at Haddington, both on the last day, if it fall not upon
sunday.

July, A market at Cuross, and at Stow the 1 d. at Abernethie, and
Auchtermuchtie, 2 d. s. Martin of Bulzeon, 4 d. sed ubi nescio. a new market
into the good town of Dundee first tuesd. s. Thomas in Langnewton 5 d. Padie
market at the kirk of Forden, in Mearns shire 6 d. s. Andrew's market at
Glasgow, and at Innerness the 7 d. and at bonnie Borrowstonness, into the shire
of Linlithgow 2 tues. belonging to his Grace, my Lord Duke Hammilton. at the
burgh of Annan the same day. s. Lawrence at Grinnock 11. d. at Kilwinning 12 d.
s. Margaret in Killimure, into the shire of Angus, and at the kirk of ^oi^g,
both on the 13 d. in Moffat, and at Kirkaldy both on the 18 d. at Stirling 20
d. Mary Magdalen into Lawder, Linlithgow, Pe^tenweem, and Path-head, all on the
22 d, in Airth, and s. Christiana in Corstorphine both the 24 d. s. James at
Forfar in Angus shire, at Kinghorn, and Cowper, both in Fiffe shire, and at
Lanerk, Roxburgh, Alloway, Musselburgh, and into Elgin in Murray shire, all on
the 25 d. an excellent new fair at Kinloch Ranoch in Athol, into Pearth shire
belonging to the right worshipful Allexander Robertson of S^rowan, the last
tuesd. at Whithorn same day ^ August, Lambsday in Atturff, Melrois,
Ennerkiething, s. Andrews, and into Dumbartan, all on the 1 d. at Falkland 1
thu^sd. Lawrence fair in the Mearns shire upon Lawrence moor, a little ^bove
the p^ace of Hawkerton, upon the 2 tuesday, holding four ^hole days, and
belongs to my Lord Hawkerton. at Iedburgh the ^ thursd. at Kilsyth 5 d. s.
Lawrence at Solkirk, Auchtermuchtie, ^orres, and Cranwath, and at Dumblane, all
on the 10 d. Ladie-^ay the first, at Dundee, 15 d. at Bamff, Mearns,
Wallayfield, and Marimass fair in Innerness, all on the 15 d. at Rugland, 20 d.
another good fair into the town of Scoon, in Pearth-shire, upon the ^2 day,
holding 3 days, belonging to the right noble Viscount of ^tormonth, with a
weeklie mere at s. Bartholomew in Linlithgow, Clackmannan, and at Peebles, all
on 24 d. s. Zephirinus in ^or^orphin 26 d Semarivis fair in Forres 27. d. s.
John's fair in S. Iohn^on, and at Lawder both on the 29 day.

September, s. Giles fair in Elgin 1 d. Semarivis fair in Kieth the first
tuesd. latter Lady day in Dundee 8 d. a fair at Stirling, and ^t Bamff, the 8
d. at Auchtertuil, and Salane 11 d. Rood fair into Innerness, and at Iedburgh,
14 d. at Forfar 15 d. holding 8 days. ^. Monans at the kirk of Doors, in Mearns
shire, 3 tuesd. belonging ^o Sir Alexander Fraser. at Kirkaldie 20 d Rude fair
in Caril, Ied^urgh, Dumfermling, Dumfries, and Athelston all on the 24 d. s.
George at Colrain in Ross shire, 25 d. at Tranent 27 d. s Michael ^n
Haddington, Air, s. Andrews, Crief, Kirkubright, Gallashiels, and at the kirk
of Forrig, and Ranfrew, and at the burgh of An^an, all on the 29 d. s. Ierom in
Bamff the^ last d.

October, A fair at Salt Preston first 3 days, at Dundee first tuesd. ^t
Kinloch Rannock in Athol, with in the shire of Pearth, first tues. ^lso,
belonging to the right worshipful, Alexander Robertson of ^rowan. at Cowper in
fiffe shire 6 d. at the kirk town of Monifeeth ^^ Angus shire, the second
tuesd. belonging to the right hono^able Sir James Maul of Ba^umbie, s. Dionise
in Peebl^^, Earleston, ^irkintilloch, Aiton, Auchtermuchtie, Ceres in fiffe
shire, and ^t Killimure in Angus shire, also at Moffat, and s. Dinne^ into the
^ own of St. Iohnston, all on the 9 d. at Dalkieth, and at Tilliboll. ^o d. at
Ennerkiething, and at Strathaven 12 d a fair at Borrow^onnes, into Linlithgow
shire, the 16 d. belonging to his Grace, ^y Lord Duke Hammilton. and at
Musselburgh, the same 16 d. Luke in Lawder, Kinross, and at Rugland, 18 d. at
the new kirk ^f Kilpatrick 21 d. Marie Salamin in Stirling, and at Kelso, 22 d.
the town of Forfar, in Angus shire, holding 8 days, the 24 d. at Linlithgow,
the 24 d. Fowls fair i^ Pasley, and at the town ^ Falki^k, 26 d Simon and Jude
into Dysert, in fiffe shire, belonging to the noble Earl of Weems, and at
Cockan^e, Kicklisto^ Hawick, Migell in Pearth shire, and at Rosline, all the 28
d. ^ Alloway, and Nicolson 29 d. at Whithorn the last thursd.

November, Hallow day in Edinburgh, and at Falkland, Du^blane, and Fordice, all
the first d. at Alathie 2 d. at Kilwinnin^ the 3 d. at Iedburgh first tuesd. s.
Leonard into Lanerk, Forres, at Largo, all the 6 d. Martinmas fair in Innerness
10 d. s. (...) into Dumbar, Melrois, Martins*kirk, Cowper in fiffe shire,
H^^milton, Culross, and at Kilmahug, all on the 11 d. Martin^^ fair at Stonhive
in the mea^ns shire, on tuesd. before martin^^ at Kils^th 12. d. s. Clemens in
Dundee, 13 d. s. Helen at Gri^n^ and at Down in Montieth, the 15 d.
Margaretmass into Dum fernling, and Lawder, the 16 d and at Borrowstonnes, into
the shi^ of Linlithgow, the same 16 d. belonging to his Grace, my Lo^ Duke
Hammilton s. M^charmuch in Tain, and Auchtertuil, t^ 22 d. at Brunt. Yland 23
d. s. Andrew into st. Iohnston, in Pe^^shire, and at Peebles, and Chirn-side,
the last day.

December. A Fair at Ransrew the 6 d. Ladie-day in We^^ Weems, belonging to the
noble Earl of. Weems, the 8 d. at B^^ and at Rothe may, both the 14 d. s.
Thomas at Glasgow, an^ Do^n in Montieth, the 15 d. s. Cuthbert in the Grange,
into shire of Li^ltihgow, the 17 d. s. Thomas in Innerness the 20. ^ John's
sair in B^mff, Forres, and at Mothill, near Levens mou^ all upon the 27 day.

Advertisement,
Thus my loving Contrymen, you have the fairs of our anti^ Kingdom of
Scotland, set down to you more promptly and plain, t^ ever they were before;
And as our Nobility and Gentry, within t^ our Nation, (who are therein
Concerned) does give me Yearly m^ information, you shall receive the same from
my hands, into our Ab^d^ens yearly Almanac^s (which I hope are the exactest of
any) af^ a most plain way, whereby any person, may travel through our Kin^dom,
to any of these Fairs with great ease I doubt not but there are many more Fairs
then are here insert, and therefore humbly desires, ^ our Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, to send me a perfect Note of their Fa^ and weeklie merca^s, with
their Tyeles and Designations, as also w^ Shire, Town or Parish they are into,
and so I shall [according to the Generos^ie] be always most careful of their
Concerments.

Ergo, FINIS, pro Tempore.

