THE PRENTICES Answer to the WHORES PETITION.
SAd was the day although clear was the weather
When the rude rout against you met together,
Though boys were said to be the first beginners
It Was men on mischief bent that were the Sinners.
The Prentices it is known are not so rude,
It Was but the scum of a rude multitude,
Who under that same Name of Prentices
Would have pulled down houses and Pentices
In every place, it was they that were the hollowers,
Such as were Naples Massanelle's followers,
It Is truth we will not your base actions own,
But let the truth unto the world be shown;
Though you by your loose actions foully deal,
We scorn to plunder, or to rob or steal
But it is our griefs we should be so base fitted
Under our Names such things should be committed.
We are full sensible such rude beginnings
Can be to you and us but fatal winnings,
No, those who in such desperate actions deal,
Are such who only mind to rob and steal,
Men of as wicked lives as you can be,
Who spurn the rope, kick at the Gallow tree
Who would, and have no doubt with you drove trades,
We scorn their acts, and hate such dirty Jades:
Who a right Prentice is does scorn base Actions
And under fair pretenses head rude factions,
We know the consequence of such distasters
What us when as the rabble becomes masters;
"When men on freedom given do make intrusion
"What follows but disorder and confusion.
Yet let us tell you too you are not blameless
Your damned impudence has made you shameless,
You at your doors do stand Poxed and Painted
Perfumed with powder yet with all vice tainted.
You with your becks and damned alluring looks
Are unto men just like to tenter hooks
To pull them in, and truck with such base Jades
And so to make work for the Surgeons trades
It is your cursed acts and dealings base
Makes pocky Bills so thick in every place,
A man cannot piss but if he casts his eye
A two or three of them he shall espy,
All this occasioned by your base Jading
For why, so long as Rogues and Whores are trading,
The Surgeons will have work, who in such wars
Gain more by Venus, then they do my Mars.
It Is known that most of us we are well bred
And scorn a giddy multitude to head,
We know we shall Masters become in time
And that Rebellion is a scurvy crime,
It Was such as bad as you this harm has done you,
For us, we scorn to foul our fingers on you,
Now think the Proverb right falls to your lot
That what upon the Devils back is got
Is spent under his belly, all men believes
You got your wealth by Rogues, lost it by Theives.
Then for our selves we to the world appeal
If in this case we do not fairly deal;
Let the right Horse the saddle have on's back,
Let us not blamed be you went to wrack
We know you not nor did we know your houses,
We scorn such Pocky Jades, such dirty Blowses,
We partly do believe that it is true
It Was some you clapped before, that now clapped you.
Next unto them let us speak, who in our Names
By their base facts do murder our good fames,
We wish you hence forth for to have a care
Least that the Halter do fall to your share,
For those who do such acts, it is their lot,
Ar last to fall in Squire Duns Porridge-pot;
Such Rope ripe Actions will cause you to wear
A Riding knot an inch below your ear.
And all men know it is a dangerous thing
At the Tiburnian Tree to take a Swing.
Let our advice to so much goodness win ye
As not to stir, unless the Devils in ye,
For if you in proceedings further sink
The more you stir, the worser will you stink.
You and whoever shall be your partaker
Will by that means make work for the Rope-maker,
For though you think much by it may be won
By doing thus you are sure to be undone,
For what so ere by such things you may hope
The final end of Tumults is a ROPE.
London, Printed 1668.


