The Apothecaries Vindication In Answer to an Abusive Book Entitled The Family
Physician and House Apothecary.
NOw Machiavel's revived, he does defame
Bodly such who are of an unstained Fame:
Bavius and Maevius, a Quack of one Litter,
Have took a Glister and do foulely squitter.
A Scavenger his dung does fling abroad,
Bespattering such as pass by in his Road.
Just so a Scribbling Quack with his Goose-quill
Men in their good names strive to wound or kill.
The Press is over-prest with fools in print
Where they their envy and their malice mint.
He fomes and fumes, reviling Learned Men,
In Gaul and Vinegar who dips his Pen.
If Housewife Physic would serve the turn,
The Learned Doctors might their Books soon burn,
A Pedlar for his Books may give some pins,
Yet still complain that by them he naught wins.
Phlebotomy is fit, as I can tell;
To bleed his tongue that is set on fire of Hell.
Midsummer Moon is past, Madmen are pent,
In close dark Rooms, great mischiefs to prevent.
Oh Quack, if yet one shaving of thy Wit
Be left, that Bedlam thou may escape, it is fit
To give thee counsel to take Pills,
To purge thy Head, which with Chymaera's fills.
Let Apothecaries alone, mind thy Quacking Trade,
If I could but on thee thus prevail,
Then I might hope that thou would leave to rail.
Abimelech fighting by a Woman fell,
And Female Empyricks cause many a knell.
Doctors of Physic will keep their renown,
When Quacks and Mountebanks shall be trampled down.
Why should this Momus envy Artists gains,
Rewards are due to Learned and their pains;
Returns are slow, and many Druggs are lost,
Good Gains are to be allowed for Charge and Cost.
Forbear, O Momus, Learned to abuse,
And the Apothecaries Falsely to accuse.
One foul Disease is seldom or never Cured,
If thou have got it thou wilt not be Endured.
Wash first thy Heart, afterward thy Tongue,
And so thou will not do thy Neighbors wrong.
What? from a Doctor, a Quack to turn;
His Lying Books the Hangman soon may burn.
Momus and Ignoramus join together,
Hang choice there is, if you take one of either
Foam at the top, and at the bottom Dreggs;
Such are his Books, which stink like rotten Eggs.
Leave off to Lie, least Artists take some Pains
To give thee Hellebore and purge thy Brains.
Thou Lyon-like walks abroad and roars,
But there stands open for thee Bedlam doors:
I wish thou come not there, but to thy Self
Wiser to be, and not a peevish Elf.
Thus I have paid thee off in thine own Coin,
None will thee Bail by Wager or Essoyn.
FINIS.

