ADVICE To a Wavering FRIEND.
THough 'twere a Sin to doubt a Righteous Cause,
Supported by what all but Rebels awes,
A Peaceful Prince, and Uncorrupted Laws;
Yet since some Sons of Darkness dare invade
It, with what Subtle Arts has specious made,
Pretended Zeal dressed up in Masquerade;
It Is but an Act of Goodness to advise
All that their own, or Countries Safety prize,
To shun the Fiend, though in the Saints disguise,
You are too young more than by Rumor to
Know, what their Bloody Ancestors did do,
When they their Sovereign to a Scaffold drew;
But those that saw those Dismal Times can tell,
Their Actions then and now run Parallel;
If different, these in Villainy excel.
Those Sandy Props of State, the Common Rout,
Were then, as they are now, hurried about
With Fears and Fancies till the Flame burst out.
They then, as now, unjustly did complain
Of Popish Prelates, Arbitrary Reign,
And all that might the Royal Ermins stain.
But here our Modern great Projectors have
Got some Advantage; here is a Plot to save
The Presbyter from being the only Knave.
A Real Plot, by Subtle Jesuits drew,
Whose Ruin Faction but pretended to,
Whilst they erected One more strange and new.
Here the White Devil puts on Innocence,
Makes Zeal and Loyalty the false Pretense,
As his Friends Ruin were the Kings Defense.
The Popish Lords with Caution lain aside,
As if their twisted Interest would divide,
Should they before more Loyal Men be tried.
Those Sons of the Earth they brought (the Devil knows whence)
To be the Kings Undoubted Evidence,
Will swear to what they say in either sense.
For though the Blinded People will not see
What it is they drive at, there is no Good Man free
From Danger, where the Crime is Loyalty.
There is no Means their Sovereign to annoy,
Nor Bishops Lands again to re-enjoy,
Lest His Great Council do His Good destroy;
Impeach His Loyal Lords, Bishops suspend,
And ruin him that to the Crown's a Friend,
And then Rebellion has its wisht-for End.
They they will discover what is now The Intent,
That a Damned Faction only strives to rent
Religions Veil, and Civil Government:
A Private Stab which brings Authority
From Rome's dark Conclave of no use will be,
When the King's made His Kingdoms Enemy.
When the Deluded Rout Their Own they have,
Let Him but Grant what they are bold to Crave,
They Will Lop that Head, they now pretend to Save.
The Zealous Veil they will then cast off, and in
Their Native Colors to the World be seen,
As Black without, as they are now within.
What now you're flattered to, you then will hate;
Perhaps turn Convert, but 'twill be too late:
You may repent; but not retrieve your Fate.
Return in time then, and forsake that Way,
Which these False Guides direct thee to, whilst they
Their King, their Country, and the Church betray.
When Black Rebellion bursts into a Flame,
And Treason's known by 'ts own Prodigious Name,
Though pale with Sorrow, then you will blush for Shame.
Blush that thy easy Faith did ever consent
To favor Those that Ruin Government:
Be wise in time then, and the Ill prevent.
FINIS.

