Air ss.
At a Quarter-Session, held at Air, the 5th day of February, 1657.
By his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector his Justices, assigned to keep the
Publick-Peace in the Shire of Air.
HIS Highness Justices of Peace for the said Shire, in the pursuance of the
Trust reposed in them, and for remedy of several abuses, not formerly
rectified, have ordered as follows: I. That the Constables in their
respective Towns and Parishes within the said Shire, shall call for two or
three best knowing and skilful men, in the discerning of the sufficiency and
insufficiency of Meal, Malt, Fleshes, and Shoes, And to survey and sight the
same each Mercat-day in time of Market, or any other day and place of the
selling of the foresaid Commodities; and if any insufficient Goods be found, to
bring the seller thereof before the nearest Justice of Peace, to be punished as
the said Justice shall think fit. II. That no Veals be killed or sold under
fifteen days old; And if any be found to contravene this Order, the Constables
are authorized to bring the killers and sellers thereof before the nearest
Justice of Peace, to be punished in manner foresaid. III. That the Constables
in their respective Towns and Paris;hes, with the Surveyors or Visiters
aforesaid, are to take notice and make diligent search of all insufficient Ale
and Beer that is vended and sold, and to bring the venders and sellers thereof
before the nearest Justice of Peace, to be punished and fined at his
discretion. IV. That no White-bread be sold by the Bakers and sellers thereof,
above twelve penies Scots, at twelve ounces weight, it being good and
sufficient Bread, of good and sufficient flower, which is to be surveyed and
sighted in manner aforesaid; And if it be found above the said price, or under
the said weight, or made of insufficient flower, that they shall be convened
and punished in manner foresaid. V. That no insufficient Shoes, made of
insufficient Leather, be sold, which is to be surveyed in manner foresaid; And
if it be found otherwise, that the makers and sellers thereof are to be
convened and punished as said is. VI. That all sorts of Measures and Weights
made use of by Merchants, sellers and buyers, to be conform to the Act of
Parliament, which is to be surveyed and sighted in manner foresaid; And if
found otherwise, to bring the owners and havers of the same, before the
nearest Justice of Peace, to be punished as he thinks fit: And in the mean time
to take the wrong Measures and Weights from them, and to dispose thereof at the
said Justice his order: Always this being without prejudice of Measures
betwixt Masters and Tennants for uplifting of their yearly Farms and Rents, as
has been formerly in use and wount. VII. That no Smith take any more for
working of each pound weight of Plow-Irons, or of any other rough work
whereupon the File comes not, but ten penies Scots, and no more: And the
givers and takers of more to be punished in manner foresaid. VIII. That the
Weavers are to have for weaving each Ell of Harden or round Linen, under ten
heers in the pound (being sufficiently woven) but twelve penies Scots and no
more, without bountieth. And for each here of Yarn above ten heers in the
pound, one penny Scots and no more: And the givers and takers of more to be
punished in manner foresaid. As also, it is ordered, That the Weavers not only
make good and sufficient Cloth upon the respective prices aforesaid; but
likewise that they work it timously, and keep their Agreements with all
persons. As also, That no Weaver refuse to take in Webbs upon the prices here
set down, in contempt of the foresaid Order: And who ever shall be found to
contravene the same, shall be punished in manner foresaid. And as for the price
for weaving of Woollen-Cloath, Serges, Camlets, Floured-Stuffs, Coverings, and
such like; together with the breadth of the foresaid Linen-Cloath, is to be
taken to consideration at the next Quarter-Session. IX. That the Candle-makers,
or sellers thereof, take no more for each pound of good and sufficient Candle,
nor four shillings Scots: And the givers and takers of more to be punished in
manner foresaid. X. Whereas there is no particular price of Herds Fees set
down in the late printed Acts made anent Fees, etc. Therefore it is ordered,
that the Justices in their several Divisions shall have power to determine
therein as they think just. XI. Ordered, That no Women be permitted to travel
with Men through the Shire, under pretext of Marriage, without having a
Certificate of their Marriage, and a Pass from two or more of his Highness
Justices of Peace. XII. That no Men nor Women that are fit for service, or have
used to serve for Fees or Wages, be permitted to live alone in houses by
themselves, or in the family of others not in actual service with them, in any
place of this Shire; but that they be caused to serve for the Fees that are
appointed; and if they refuse, to be punished as aforesaid. XIII. That the
persons foresaids, called for by the Constables to be assisting to them in
surveying the whole particulars abovementioned, are to make faith for their
faithful discharge of their Trust, as Surveyors or Visiters, before the nearest
Justice of Peace in that Division; And if any of them refuse to accept of the
Office in manner foresaid, the Constables are to bring them before the nearest
Justice of Peace, to be fined and punished at his discretion. XIV. Whereas
there are many strange, strong, sturdy and idle Beggars, whereof some are lame
Soldiers, others Vagabonds and idle persons; as counterfeit Egyptians, and
such like, still haunting and begging within this Shire; through which several
Thefts and Robberies are committed, notwithstanding of several Acts of
Parliament made to the contrary: It is therefore ordered, That all such persons
shall forthwith be apprehended, and brought before the nearest Justice of
Peace, to be punished conform to the Act of Parliament made there-anent. XV.
Whereas there are several poor Orphans that have no livelihood, as also many
indigent weak and aged persons begging through the Shire, not confining
themselves to their respective Parishes where they were born, or have
cohabited, contrary to the Act of Parliament made there-anent; It is therefore
ordered, That all such persons shall forthwith return to their said respective
Parishes, and there give up their names to the Constables, and others
authorized for that effect within the said Parish; And the names so given up,
are to be brought in to the Clerk of the Peace betwixt and the next
Quarter-Session held after the publication hereof, to the effect some regular
course may be taken for their maintenance in all time coming; And in the mean
time ordains the respective Parishes to maintain their respective Poor until
that be done; And if any fail or neglect to give up their names, as said is,
they shall be holden as strangers and vagabonds, and extruded the Shire. XVI.
That if any Parish wherein any Theft or Robbery is committed, do not answer the
Hue and Cry raised upon the committing thereof, and follow the Constable in the
pursuit till he return, such Parish shall be liable for payment of the Goods
and Geir robbed and stolen, or so much thereof as the said Justices shall find
cause for.


ORdered, That the several Articles concerning the particulars abovementioned,
be forthwith Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Crosses, and respective
Parishes within the said Shire. The several Constables of each Town and Parish
are hereby ordered to see the same done accordingly.

Mr. WILLIAM CALDWELL, Cl. of the Peace.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1657.


