The A, B, C. OR, A CATECHISM for young Children.

Appointed by Act of the Church and Council of SCOTLAND, To be learned in all
Families and Lector Schools in the said Kingdom.

PROVE. 22.6. Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he
will not depart from it.

Printed by Authority. 1644. Cum Privilegio.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U X Y Z.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z and sh ss ff si fi.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10.

A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t u v w x y z. and a^ e^ o^ u^ st sh
ss ff si fi sl fl () ye you ye:,. =?;

ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud an en in on un ap ep ip op up ar
er ir or vr
royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

A Catechism for Young Children.
1 Qu. WHo made man?

A. God.

2 Qu. In what estate made he him?

A. Perfytly holy in body and soul.

3 Qu. How fell he from the good estate?

A. By breaking of the Commandment of God.

4 Qu. What punishment followed their upon?

A. Death and condemnatione to him and his posterity.

5 Qu. How are we deliuerid their frae?

A. By Gods free mercy in Jesus Christ.

6 Qu. What kind of person is Jesus Christ?

A. He is very God and very Man in one person.

7 Qu. Why call ye him very God?

A. Because he is the eternal Son of God, of one and the self same Godhead
with the Father and holy Ghost.

8 Qu. Why call ye him very man?

A. Because he is like us in all things, sin only except.

9 Qu. Why was he without sin?

A. That he might be ane unspotted sacrifice for sin.

10 Qu. What hes he done for ws?

A. He dyed for our sins, and rose for our righteousness.

11 Qu. Ar all men that perished in Adam saved be Christ?

A. No, but only those that has true faith in him.

12 Qu. What call ye true Faith?

A. It is the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, with assurance of saluatione in
him.

13 Qu. Rehearse the Articles of your Faith.

A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

2 And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

3 Who was conceived of the Holy Ghost: borne of the Virgin Marie:

4 Sufferid under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended
into hell:

5 The third day he rose again from death.

6 He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty:

7 From that place fall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

8 I believe in the Holy Ghost.

9 The holy Church universal.

10 The communion of Saints,

11 The forgiveness of sins,

12 The resorrection of the body, and life everlasting.

14 Qu. Be what means does Gods Spirit work this faith in you?

A. By the word of God.

15 Qu. What call ye the word of God?

A. The holy Scripture of the old and new Testament.

16 Qu. Be what means does Gods Spirit confirm this faith in you?

A. By the same word, and by the Sacraments.

17 Qu. What call ye the Sacraments?

A. They are visible signs and seals ordained of God for the confirmatione of
my faith.

18 Qu. How do they confirm your faith?

A. By receiving them as pledgis, that Christ crucefied (represented and
offered in them) is given to me in particular to be my Savior.

19 Qu. How many Sacraments is their?

A. Two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

20 Qu. Why was ye baptized being ane Infant?

A. That thereby I might be ingraft in Christ, and enterit in his Church, which
is his mystical body.

21 Qu. What profit have ye by Baptism now?

A. It seals up the remissione of my sins in Christ's blood; and aduances the
renovation of my heart in his Spirit: which are my spiritual watching.

22 Qu. What call ye the Lords Supper?

A. It is the Sacrament of my spiritual nourishment on the body and blood of
Christ.

23 Qu. How do ye eat his body and drink his blood?

A. By believing assuredly that his body was broken and his blood was shed for
me.

24 Qu. What thankfulness owe ye to God for giving his Son to shed his blood
for you?

A. I ought to deny my self, and walk in his Commandments all the dayis of
my life.

25 Qu. Rehearse the Commandments.

A. HEarkin and take heed Israel, for I am the Lord thy God who hes brough^
thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage:

1. Thou salt have none other Gods but me.

2. Thou salt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the water under
the earth: Thou sall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hates me, and
shows mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

3. Thou salt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: six days sall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God: in it thou salt do no manner of work, thou nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid servant, thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and restid the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God has given thee.

6. Thou salt do no murder.

7. Thou salt not commit adultery.

8. Thou salt not steal.

9. Thou salt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou salt not covet thy neighbors house, thou salt not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these Laws in our hearts, we beseech
thee.

26 Qu. Which is the sum and effect of all these Commandments?

A. Thou salt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind, and strength, and
thy neighbor as thy self.

27 Qu. Is any man able to do these things perfitly in this life?

A. None at all.

28. Qu. Why so?

A. Because no man is perfitly sanctified in this life.

29 Qu. Yet must not we prease to a perfectione in fulfilling of Gods
Commandments?

A. Doubtless, for otherway is their is nather faith nor fear of God in us.

30 Qu. What must we do then when we break any of these Commandments?

A. We must run to God by repentance and prayer.

31 Qu. What call ye Repentance?

A. It is the turning of my heart to God with unfeigned sorrow for offending his
Majesty, and a constant resolutione to amend my life.

Qu. What call ye prayer?

A. It is ane incalling of God in the name of Christ for things belonging to
Gods glory and our necessity.

33 Qu. Why is it not lawful to pray to creatures, as to Angels and Saints
glorified?

A. Because God hes commandit us to worship himself alone.

34 Qu. Why must we pray only in Christ's name?

A. Because he is our only Mediator and intercessor.

^5 Qu. How then sold we pray?

A. According to that pattern of prayer that our Master hes set before us,
laying, when ye pray, say:

Our Father which art in heaven:

1. Hallowed be thy Name.

^ Thy kingdom come.

^ Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

^ Give us this day our daily bread.

5 And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us.

6 And lead us not into tentatione, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

36 Qu. How ar ye assured that God will hear your Prayers?

A. By Christ is own word, promising that what ever we ask the Father in his
name, it fall be given us.

37 Qu. What is the fruit of all this your religione and of serving God.

A. Hereby God is glorified, and I am saved, through Jesus Christ my Lord, to
whom be everlasting praise and glory. Amen.

Prayers and Graces for young Children.
Morning Prayer.
MY gracious God, I bless thee with m^ whole heart for thy fatherly providenc^
watching over me this night. And (...) beseech thee to continue thy mercy with
me bo^^ this day and the whole course of my life; to the end, and in the end:
that being always guided by thy grace, and guarded by thy providence, I may
spend this time of my pilgrimage in thy fear, and end it in thy favor,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

Evening Prayer at going to bed.
IT is of thy undeserved mercy (O God) that I have passed this day in safety
without some notable inconvenience in those infinite dangers wherein I
continually cast my self through my folly. Now I beseech thee (good Lord) let
it please thee of thy gracious goodness protect me also this night; and grant
me quierest in soul and body, that I may better serve ^hee in both, through
Jesus Christ my gracious Lord and Savior. Amen.

I will both lay me down in peace and sleep: for thou Lord only makes me dwell
in safety. Ps. 4.8.

Grace before Meat.
Psalm. 145.15.
THe eyes of all wait on the (O Lord) and thou give them their meat in dew
season: thou openest thy hand and satisfies the desire of every living thing:
(good Lord) bless us and those gifts which we receive of thy large
liberality, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

Ane other.
PArdon our sins (O God) and give us thy blessing with thy benefits, that
they may have strength to nourish us, and we may have grace to serve thee our
gracious God in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
THe God of glory and peace, who he creatid us, redeemed us, and presently
hes led us, be blissed for now and ever. So (...) it.

Ane other.
MOst mighty Lord and most merciful ^ther, we yield the hearty thanks for o^
bodily sustentation requiring also most entire thy gracious goodness so to
feed us with (...) food of thy heavenly grace, that we may wort^ly glorify thy
Name in this life, and after partakers of thy everlasting glory, throu^ Jesus
Christ our Lord So be it.

Ane other. Matthew. 4.4.
LOrd thou hes said it and we believe it, the man lives not by bread only but
by ever word that proceed is out of thy mouth: Therefore give us (we beseech
thee) thy blessing w^ thy benefits, that in the strength of thy blessi^ this
life being entertained we may spend t^ thy holy service, till we a^tain to life
everl^sting, through Jesus Christ our Lord and one^ Savior. Amen.

To any of these or the like Graces that fall be sa^ after meat, let these or
the like prayers be adde^ for the Church and for the King, etc.
GOd save the Church universal, God comfort the comfortless. Lord increase o^
faith, O Lord, for Christ thy sons sake, by me^cifull to the common wealths
whair thy Go^pell is trewly preached and barbary grant^ to the afflicted
members of Christ's body, (...) illuminate according to thy good pleasure all
nations with the brightness o^ thy word. God save our most gracious King
Charles, our Queen Marie the hopeful Prince Charles: The Lady Elizabeth, and
her Princely Progeny, guide thou their hearts (O God) by thy grace that they
may rule thy people aright to the terror of evil doers, and the comfort of
all those that fears the and loves thy truth. Amen.

A brief of the Commands.
HAve thou none other Gods bot me.
Unto no image bow thy knee.
Tak not the name of God in vain.
Do not the Sabbath day profane.
Honor thy father and mother to.
And sie that thou no murder do.
From whoredom keep the pure and clean.
And steal not though thy state be mean.
Sie that thou no false witness bear.
And covet not thy neighbors gear.
O Lord our souls to the convert,
And write thy laws into our heart.
FINIS.
blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


