ANTHEMS, To be Sung At the Celebration of DIVINE SERVICE, IN The Cathedral
Church of the Holy and Undivided Trinity in DVBLIN.

Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
with Grace in your hearts to the Lord,

COL. 3.16. Printed Anno Domini, 1662.

An Alphabeticall Table.
A
Anthem 4 Almighty God, which by the leading of a Star, Page 3 Anthem 43 Arise
O Lord, Page 28
B
Anthem 1 Behold I bring you glad tidings, Page 1 Anthem 21 Behold thou have
made my days, Page 13 Anthem 26 Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, Page
17 Anthem 25 Bow down thine ear, O Lord, Page 16
C
Anthem 9 Christ rising, Page 6
D
Anthem 10 Deliver me O God, Page 7 Anthem 24 Deliver me from mine enemies,
Page 15
E
Anthem 27 Everlasting God. Page 17
G
Anthem 14 Glorious and powerful God, Page 9
H
Anthem 6 Hear my cry, O God, Page 4 Anthem 16 How long? Page 10 Anthem 22 Hear
my Prayer, O God, Page 14 Anthem 29 Hear me when I call, Page 18 Anthem 30 Hear
me O Lord, Page 19 Anthem 28 Hear my Prayer O God, Page 18
I
Anthem 32 I will magnify thee O Lord, Page 28 Anthem 34 If ye be risen again
with Christ, Page 22 Anthem 33 I will magnify thee O Lord, Page 21 Anthem 35 I
will sing the mercies of the Lord, Page 22
L
Anthem 36 Let God arise, Page 23
O
Anthem 2 O clap your hands all ye people, Page 1 Anthem 8 O Lord thou have
searched me out, Page 5 Anthem 11 O Lord of whom I do depend, Page 7 Anthem 18
O Lord turn not away thy face, Page 12 Anthem 19 O Lord consider my distress,
Page 13 Anthem 23 O Lord let me know mine end, Page 15 Anthem 31 O Lord in thee
is all my trust, Page 19 Anthem 38 O God the King of Glory. Page 24 Anthem 37
Out of the deep. Page 24
P
Anthem 41 Praise the Lord, Page 26 Anthem 17 Preserve me O God. Page 11
S
Anthem 13 Soul awake. Page 9
T
Anthem 12 Teach me O Lord. Page 8 Anthem 7 Thou art my King O God. Page 5
Anthem 15 Thou God that guidest, Page 10 Anthem 20 The secret sins, Page 13
Anthem 39 The King shall rejoice. Page 25
W
Anthem 3 What Child was be? Page 2 Anthem 5 Who shall ascend into the Hill of
the Lord? Page 3 Anthem 40 We praise thee O Father, Page 26 Anthem 42 When
Israel came out of Egypt. Page 27
Anth. I. Behold! I bring you glad tidings.
Ver. BEhold! I bring you glad tidings, glad tidings of great joy, of great
joy, glad tidings of great joy.


Cho. Glad tidings of great joy.


Ver. That shall be to all thy people; that unto us, that unto us a Child is
born.


Cho. That unto us a Child is born.


Ver. Unto us a Son is given, a Savior which is Christ the Lord, a Savior
which is Christ the Lord.


Cho. Unto us a Son is given, a Savior which is Christ the Lord, which is
Christ the Lord, which is Christ the Lord, which is Christ the Lord, which is
Christ the Lord, which is Christ the Lord, which is Christ the Lord.


Ver. Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, and in earth peace: good
will toward men, good will toward men.


Cho. Glory be to God on high, glory be to God on high, glory be to God on
high, glory be to God on high, on high: and in earth peace, and in earth peace,
good will toward men, good will toward men, toward men.


M. Gibbons.

Anth. II. O Clap your Hands.
Ver. for 2 means O Clap your hands together all ye People, O sing unto God, O
sing unto God, O sing unto God, O sing unto God with the voice of Melody, of
Melody, with the voice of Melody, of Melody, with the voice of Melody, of
Melody.


Cho. For the Lord is high and to be feared, and to be feared; He is the great
King, He is the great King upon all the earth, upon all the earth, upon all the
earth,


Ver. three parts. He shall subdue the people under us: and the Nations under
our feet, the Nations under our feet.


Cho. He shall choose out an heritage for us, even the worship of Jacob, even
the worship of Jacob, of Jacob whom he loved, he loved.


Ver. for 2 Means God is gone up with a merry noise, God is gone up with a merry
noise, with a merry noise, with a merry noise: And the Lord with the sound of the
Trumpet, with the sound of the Trumpet, with the sound of the Trumpet, with the
sound of the Trumpet, of the Trumpet.


Cho. With the sound of the Trumpet, with the sound of the Trumpet.


Ver. two tenors. O sing praises, sing praises, O sing praises, sing praises
unto God, O sing praises unto God, sing praises unto God, sing praises unto God.


Cho. O sing praises, sing praises to our King: O sing praises, sing praises to
our King.


Ver. For God is the King of all the earth, for God is the King of all the
earth, sing praises, sing praises, sing praises, sing praises, sing praises,
sing praises, sing praises, sing praises, with understanding, with
understanding.


Cho. With understanding, with understanding, A-men, A-men, A-men, A-men.


Anth. III. What Child was he?
Ver. WHat Child was he? whose Birth did Angels glad, whose guide was Grace,
whose youth all knowledge had, whose youth all knowledge had: 'Twas Jesus
Christ, 'Twas Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Son of God: who darkness, death,
despair; with light, with life, with light, with life, with joys, with bliss
repaires.


Cho. Then let us praise him most and love him best, by whom alone we most are,
by whom alone we most are loved and blessed, by whom alone we most are loved and
blessed, are loved and blessed, and blessed.


Ver. What man was he whom sin did never defile, whose heart, whose tongue,
whose hands, whose heart, whose hands were void of guille.


Ver. 'Twas Jesus Christ our saving health, our saving health, who Sin and
Satan bound by scorns, by stripes, by scorns, by stripes, by death, and
bloody wounds, by death, and bloody wounds, by death and bloody wounds.


Cho From us all love and glory he deserves, who for us, love and glory thus
preserves, who for us love and glory thus preserves, who for us love and glory
thus preserves.


Ver. What one was he from grave his body raised, and now in Heaven by Saints
and Angels praised, by Saints and Angels praised? It Is Jesus Christ our Lord
and King, our Lord and King, that sits at Gods right hand, before whose Throne,
before whose Throne, shall all for Judgment stand.


Cho. This Jesus grant us mercy, love, and grace, that we in Heaven with him,
that we in Heaven with him may have a place, that we in Heaven with him may
have a place, that we in Heaven with him may have a place; in Heaven may have a
place. A-men, A-men.


Anth. IIII. Almighty God, which by the leading of a Star.
Ver. for 2 Means ALmighty God, which by the leading of a Star, of a Star,
did manifest, did manifest thy only begotten Son, begotten Son to the
Gentiles.


Cho. Did manifest thy only begotten Son to the Gentiles, thy only begotten
Son to the Gentiles, to the Gentiles, to the Gentiles.


Ver. two parts. Mercifully grant, mercifully grant, mercifully grant.

three parts. That we which know thee now by Faith, which know thee now by
Faith, which know thee now by Faith.


Cho. Which know thee now by Faith, which know thee now by Faith, which know
thee now by Faith, which know thee now by Faith, which know thee now by Faith.


Ver. six parts. May after this life, may after this life, may after this life,
this life, may after this life, may after this life, may after this life have
the fruition of thy glorious Godhead, through Christ our Lord, through Christ
our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our
Lord, through Christ our Lord, our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through
Christ our Lord.


Cho. May after this life have the fruition of thy glorious Godhead, through
Christ our Lord, our Lord, through Christ our Lord, our Lord, through Christ
our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our
Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our Lord, through Christ our
Lord, through Christ our Lord, our Lord, A-men.


Doctor Bull.

Anth. V. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord?
Ver. for 2 basses WHo shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? who shall ascend
into the Hill of the Lord; or who shall rise up in his holy place, in his holy
place, in his holy place.


Ver. Mean. Even he, even he, he that has clean hands and a pure heart, and
has not lifted up his heart unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor,
nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.


Ver. Cou^ter-tenor and bass. He shall receive the blessing of the Lord, the
blessing of the Lord, the blessing of the Lord, of the Lord: and the
righteousness from the God of his Salvation.


Cho. Lift up your heads, O ye Gates: and be ye lifted up ye everlasting
Doors, ye everlasting Doors.


Ver. tenor. And the King of glory shall come in.


Ver. bass. Who is the King of Glory? who is the King of Glory?


Ver. Mean. It is the Lord, strong and mighty: mighty in battle, mighty in
battle, mighty in battle.


Cho. Lift up your heads O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting Doors,
ye everlasting Doors.


Ver. tenor. And the King of Glory shall come in.


Cho. And the King of Glory shall come in, shall come in.


Ver. Who is the King of Glory? who is the King of Glory? who is the King of
Glory?


Cho. Even the Lord of Hoasts he is the King of Glory, he is the King of Glory:
even the Lord of Hoasts he is the King of Glory, he is the King of Glory.


Mr. Hutchinson.

Anth. VI. Hear my cry, O God.
Ver. HEar my cry O God, hear my cry O God, give ear unto my Prayer, from the
ends of the earth will I call unto thee, from the ends of the earth will I call
unto thee: when my heart is oppressed, bring me upon the rock that is higher then
I, that is higher then I, that is higher then I, that is higher then I, then I.


Cho. Bring me upon the rock that is higher then I, that is higher then I.


Ver. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle, in thy Tabernacle for evermore, and my
trust shall be under the covering of thy wings.


Cho. For thou, O God, have heard the desires, thou have given an heritage to
those, thou have given an heritage, thou have given an heritage to those that
fear thy Name.


Ver. Thou shall give the King a long life.


Cho. Thou shall give the King a long life.


Ver. His years shall be as many ages, as many ages, as many ages.


Cho. His years shall be as many ages.


Ver. He shall dwell before God for ever, O prepare, O prepare thy loving mercy
and faithfulness, that they may preserve him, that they may preserve him,
preserve him.


Cho. So will I always sing, so will I always sing praises unto thy Name,
praises unto thy Name: in performing daily my vows, in performing daily my
vows, A-men.


Anth. VII. Thou art my King O God.
Ver. THou art my King, O God, Thou art my King, O God, O God send help unto
Jacob, send help unto Jacob, send help unto Jacob.


Cho. Send help unto Jacob, to Jacob: send help unto Jacob, unto Jacob.


Ver. Through thee will we overthrow, will we overthrow our Enemies, our
Enemies: and in thy name, and in thy name I will tread them down, I will tread
them down, I will tread them down that rise up against me, that rise up against
me, that rise up against me.


Cho. That rise up against me, against me, that rise up against me.


Ver. For I will not trust in my bow, for I will not trust in my bow: It is not
my sword that shall help me, that shall help me: But it is thou, but it is thou
that savest us from our Enemies, from our Enemies; And puts them to confusion
that hare us, and puts them to confusion that hate us, to confusion that hate
us.


Cho. We make our boast of God, of God.


Ver. All the day long, all the day long.


Cho. All the day long, all the day long.


Ver. And will praise thy Name.


Cho. And will praise thy Name.


Ver. For evermore.


Cho. For evermore.


Ver. For evermore.


Cho. For evermore, for evermore. A-men, A-men.


Mr. Tompkins.

Anth. VIII. O Lord thou have searched me out.
Ver. O Lord thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down
sitting, thou know my down sitting, and mine up rising. Thou understandest
my thoughts long before, thou understandest my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spyest out all my ways: for
lo, for lo there is not a word in my tongue, but thou O Lord know it
altogether, but thou O Lord know it altogether.


Cho. Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me,
and laid thine hand upon me, upon me, thine hand upon me.


Ver. Whither shall I go then from thy presence. If I climb up into Heaven,
thou art there, thou art there: If I go down, if I go down into hell, if I
go down into hell, into hell, thou art there also, thou art there, thou art
there also.


Cho. It I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the Sea, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea, of the Sea, of the Sea.


Ver. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


Cho. As it was in the beginning, and is now, and ever shall be, world without
end: and ever shall be world without end, world without end, world without end,
A-men. A-men.


M. Batton.

Anth. IX. Christ rising.
Ver. two Means. CHrist rising, Christ rising again from the dead, now dies
not, now dies not, now dies not.


Cho. Death from henceforth, death from henceforth has no power upon him.


Ver. For in that he dyed, he dyed but once to put away sin, to put away sin.


Cho. To put away sin, to put away sin, to put away sin.


Ver. But in that he lives, he lives unto God, he lives unto God, he lives
unto God.


Cho. And so likewise count your selves, count your selves dead unto sin, but
living unto God, unto God.


Ver. In Christ Jesus our Lord, our Lord.


Cho. In Christ Jesus our Lord, In Christ Jesus our Lord.


Ver. Christ is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep, of them that
sleep.


Cho. Christ is risen again, again, Christ is risen again, the first fruits of
them that sleep, of them that sleep.


Ver. For seeing that by man came death.


Cho. For seeing that by man came death, that by man came death.


Ver. By man also, by man also, comes the resurrection of the dead, of the
dead.


Cho. For as by Adam; Adam all men do die, all men do die, do die.


Ver. So by Christ so by Christ all men shall be restored, all men shall be
restored to life, shall be restored to life, to life, to life, to life, life.


Cho. So by Christ, so by Christ, by Christ all men shall be restored to life,
all men shall be restored to life, all men shall be restored to life, shall be
restored to life, restored to life, restored to life.


M. Bird.

Anth. X. Deliver me, O God.
Ver. DEliver me, O God, Deliver me, O God, from all my soes that be, and me
desend, and those withstand that rises against me, that rises against me,
that rises against me.


Cho. And me defend, and those withstand that rises against me, that rises
against me


Ver. Deliver me also from those that wicked be, from such as thirsts after
blood: good Lord deliver me, good Lord deliver me, good Lord deliver me, good
Lord deliver me.


Cho. From such as thirsts after blood: good Lord deliver me, good Lord
deliver me.


Ver. Mine enemies be strong, mine enemies be strong, thou Lord the same do^e:
without offense upon my part, they still do trouble me, they still do trouble
me.


Cho. Without offense upon my part, they still do trouble me, they still do
trouble me.


Ver. My self, my Cause, and all I do commit to thee, from traps and snares and
bloody hands, good Lord deliver me, good Lord deliver me, good Lord deliver me,
good Lord deliver me.


Cho From traps and shares, and bloody hands, good Lord deliver me, good Lord
deliver me, A-men.


D. Bull.

Anth. XI. O Lord of whom I do depend.
Ver. O Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart, and when thy will
and pleasure is, release me of my smart,


Cho. Release me of my smart.


Ver. for 2 Means Thou see my sorrows what they are, my grief is known to
thee, and there is none that can, that can remove or take the same from me, or
take the same from me.


Cho. And there is none that can, that can remove, or take the same from me.


Ver. But only thou, whose aid I crave, whose mercy still is pressed to heal all
those that come to thee for succor and for rest: wherefore this is yet once
again, my suit and my request, to grant me pardon for my sin, that I in thee
may rest, that I in thee may rest.


Cho. So grant me pardon of my sin, that I in thee may rest.


Ver. Then shall my heart, then shall my heart, my tongue and voice, be
instruments of praise, be instruments of praise: and in thy Church and house of
Saints, sing Psalms to thee always, sing Psalms to thee always, sing
Psalms to thee always.


Cho. And in thy Church and house of Saints, sing Psalms to thee always, to
thee always.


D. Giles.

Anth. XII. Teach me, O Lord.
Ver. TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes: and I will keep it unto the
end.


Cho. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea, I shall keep it
with my whole heart.


Ver. Make me to go in the parth of thy Commandments, for therein is my delight.


Cho. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies; and not to covetousness.


Ver. O turn away mine eyes, least they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in
thy truth.


Cho. O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may sear thee, may fear thee.


Ver. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


Cho. As it was in the beginning, and is now: and ever shall be, world
withoutend, A-men.


M. Bird.

Anth. XIII. Soul awake.
Ver. SOul awake, why sleep thou so long? Come let us Music and Chaunt some
holy Song: My heart and voice shall with the strings accord, my heart and voice
shall with the strings accord, to sing the praise of Christ my King and Lord,
the praise of Christ my King and Lord, to sing the praise of Christ my King and
Lord, to sing the praise of Christ my King and Lord.


Cho. My heart and voice shall with the strings accord, to sing the praise of
Christ my King and Lord.


Ver. God that art, yet did our nature take, enduring bitter smart a peace
for us to make: thy Cross, thy Wounds, thy Death, thy Grave; Our sinful Souls
from endless death do save.


Cho. Thy Cross, thy Wounds, thy bloody death, thy Grave, our sinful Souls from
endless death do save.


Ver. Glorified thou now in Heaven do reign, and for thy Saints provide a
place there to remain: where King is three in one, and one in three, Law,
perfect love, and Term eternity.


Cho. Glorified thou now in Heaven do reign, and for thy Saints provide a
place there to remain: where King is three in one, and one in three, Law,
perfect love, and term eternity, eternity, A-men.


Anth. XIV. Glorious and Powerful God.
Ver. GLorious and Powerful God, We understand thy dwelling is on high above
the starry sky: thou dwell not in stone Temples, made with hands, but in
the flesh hearts of the sons of men, to dwell is thy delight, near hand though
out of sight.


Cho. Thou dwell not in stone Temples made with hands, but in the flesh
hearts of the sons of men: to dwell is thy delight, near hand though out of
sight.


Ver. We give of thine own hands, thine acceptance is very life and blood to
all actions good. Our supplications from pure and with unfeigned hearts to thee
ascend, be present with thy grace, show us thy loving face, thy loving face.


Cho. From pure and with unfeigned hearts to thee, ascend, be present with thy
grace, show us thy loving face, thy loving face.


Ver. O down on us, O down on us full showers of mercy send, let thy loves
burning beams dry up all our sins: our sins, streams arise O Lord, and come
into thy rest, both now and evermore, thy name be blessed founder and foundation
of endless habitation.


Cho. O down on us, O down on us full showers of mercy send, let thy loves
burning beams dry up all our sins: streams arise O Lord, and come into thy
rest, both now and evermore, thy Name be blessed, founder and foundation of
endless habitation, A-men.


Anth. XV. Thou God that guidest.
Ver. THou God that guidest both Heaven and Earth, on whom we all depend,
preserve our King in perfect health, and him from harms defend.


Cho. Preserve our King in perfect health, and him from harms defend, from
harms defend.


Ver. Conserve his life in peace to Reign, augment his joys with all, increase
his friends, maintain his cause, and hear us when we call.


Cho. Lord hear us when we call.


Ver. So shall all we that faithful be, rejoice and praise his Name.


Cho. Rejoice and praise his Name.


Ver. O God, O Christ, O Holy Ghost.


Cho. O God, O Christ, O Holy Ghost.


Ver. Give ear, and grant the same.


Cho. Give ear, and grant the same.


Ver. O God, O Christ, O Holy Ghost, give ear and grant the same.


Cho. O God, O Christ, O Holy Ghost, give ear and grant the same: O Holy Ghost,
give ear and grant the same, A-men.


Anth. XVI. How long!
Ver. How long will thou forget me, O Lord; O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me?


Cho. How long shall I seck Counsel in my heart, and be so vexed in my Soul, in
my Soul: how long shall mine enemies triumph over me, how long shall mine
enemies triumph over me.


Ver. Consider, and hear me, O Lord: O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, that I
sleep not in death.


Cho. That I sleep not in death.


Ver. four parts Least mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him: For if I
be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoice at it, will rejoice at it, at
it.


Cho. They that trouble me will rejoice at it, will rejoice at it.


Ver. four parts. But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyful in thy
salvation,


Cho. I will sing of the Lord, because he has dealt so lovingly with me: Yet,
I will praise the Name of the Lord the most high.


Ver. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


Cho. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As if was
in the beginning, and is now,


Ver. And ever shall be, world without end.


Cho. And ever shall be world without end, A-men: And ever shall be, world
without end, A-men, A-men.


Mr. Morley.

Anth. XVII. Preserve me, O God.
Ver. PReserve me, O God, from those that seek to destroy me: for trouble is
hard it hand, for trouble is hard at hand; and there is none to deliver me.


Cho. Let not mine Enemies rejoice, let not mine Enemies rejoice to see me
fall; Let not those that hate me, be Lord over me, be Lord over me, be Lord
over me.


Ver. Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, in the time of trouble: O deliver
me, O deliver me, O deliver me for thy Names sake.


Cho. O deliver me, O deliver me for thy Names sake.


Ver. Thou art my King, my strong defense, my help, my stay, my beart danceth
for joy, my heart danceth for joy, my heart danceth for joy: and in my song
will I praise thee, and in my song will I praise thee and in my long will I
praise thee.


Cho. I will not fear what man does unto me, though ten thousand encompass me
round about, though ten thousand encompass me round about, round about: thy
right hand shall save me from all that hate me, from all that hate me, A-men.


Mr. Wilkinson.

Anth. XVIII. O Lord, turn not away thy face.
Ver. O Lord, turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate, lamenting
sore his sinful life, before thy mercy Gate; which Gate thou openest wide to
those that do lament them of their sins; shut not thy Gate against me Lord, But
let me enter in.


Cho. Shut not that Gate against me Lord: But let me enter in, but let me enter
in.


Ver. O Lord, Thou know what things be past, and eke the things that be:
Thou know also what is to come, nothing is hid from thee; before the Heavens
and Earth were made, thou know what things were then: as all things else
that have been since, among the sons of men.


Cho. As all things else that have been since among the sons of men, of men,
among the sons of men.


Ver. So come I to thy mercy Gate, where mercy does abound: requiring mercy for
my sin, to heal my deadly wound.

O Lord, O Lord, I need not to repeat, what I do beg or crave, Thou know O
Lord, before I ask, the things that I would have, the things that I would have.


Cho. Thou know O Lord, before I ask, the things that I would have, the
things that I would have.


Ver. Mercy good Lord, mercy good Lord I ask, this is the total sum, this is
the total sum: for meacy Lord is all my suit, Lord let thy mercy come, Lord let
thy mercy come.


Cho. For mercy Lord is all my suit: Lord let thy mercy come, Lord let thy
mercy come.


Anth. XIX. O Lord consider my distress.
Ver. O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed, and now with speed some
pity take, some pity take, some pity take: my sins deface, my faults redress,
good Lord for thy great mercy sake, good Lord for thy great mercy sake.


Cho. Wash me, O Lord, and make me clean, from this unjust and sinful Act, and
purify yet once again, and purify yet once again, my my heinous crime, my
heinous crime, my heinous crime, and bloody fact.


Ver. Remorse and sorrow does constrain me to acknowledge mine excess, My sins
alas do still remain before my face without release, without release.


Cho. Yet cast me not our from thy face, but speedily my torments end, but
speedily my torments end: Take not from me thy spirit and grace, which may from
danger me defend.


Ver. For sake not thy Jerusalem, thy Jerusalem, build up her walls, preserve
her peace: on Sion let thy mercy fall, let thy mercy fall, and let thine anger
cease.


Cho. On Sion let thy mercy fall, let thy mercy fall, from Judah let thine
anger cease, from Judah let thine anger cease, from Judah let thine anger
cease, A-men.


Anth. XX. The secret sins
Ver. THe secret sins that hidden lies within my pensive heart, procures great
heaps of bitter thoughts, and fills my soul with smart: and yet the more my
soul does seek some sweet relief to find, the more does sin with vain delight
alas still keep me blind.


Cho. The more does sin with vain delight alas still keep me blind, alas still
keep me blind.


Ver. Thou see O God, what strife there is betwixt my soul and sin; Thy grace
does work, but sin prevails, and blinds my soul therein: wherefore sweet
Christ, thy grace increase, my faith augment withal: and for thy tender mercy
sake, Lord hear me when I call.


Cho. And for thy tender mercy sake, thy mercy sake: Lord hear me when I call,
when I call, A-men.


Anth. XXI. Behold thou have made my days!
Ver. Counter^. BEhold thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine
age is even as nothing in respect of thee: and verily every man living is
altogether vanity


Cho. And verily every man living is altogether vanity.


Ver. For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, he
heapeth up riches, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell, and cannot tell who
shall gather them; And now Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in
thee, truly my hope is even in thee, my hope is even in thee.


Cho. And now Lord, what is my hope, truly my hope is even, is even in thee,
truly my hope is even in thee, in thee.


Ver. Hear my prayer O Lord, hear my prayer O Lord, and let thine ears
consider my calling, consider my calling: hold not thy peace at my tears, at my
tears, for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were: O
spare me a little me a little, O spare me a little, that I may recover my
strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen.


Cho. O spare me little, O spare me a little, O spare me a little, a little,
that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen.


Anth. XXII. Hear my Prayer, O God.
Ver. for a Mean. HEar my Prayer, O God, hear my Prayer, O God, and let thine
ear consider my calling, hold not thy peace at my tears.


Cho. Hold not thy peace at my tears, hold not thy peace at my tears, hold
not thy peace at my tears, hold not thy peace at my tears, at my tears.


Ver. For I am a stranger, for I am a stranger, for I am a stranger with thee,
and a sojourner as all my fathers were.


Cho. And a sojourner as all my fathers were, as all my fathers were, and a
sojourner as all my fathers were, as all my fathers were, as all my fathers
were, and a sojourner as all my fathers were, my fathers were.


Ver. O spare me a little while, a little little while: that I may recover
strength, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and be no more seen.


Cho. O spare me a little while, O spare me a little while, that I may recover
my strength, before I go hence, before I go hence and be no more seen, before I
go hence and be no more seen.


Ver. My strength has failed, my strength has failed, my strength has failed
and is gone, woe, wo-e unto me, woe unto me, woe unto me that I have sinned.


Cho. My strength has failed, my strength has failed, my strength has
failed, my strength has failed and is gone; woe unto me, woe unto me that I
have sinned, woe unto me, woe unto me, woe unto me that I have sinned, woe unto
me that I have sinned, I have sinned.


Anth. XXIII. O Lord, let me know mine end.
Ver. for a Tenor and a Bass. O Lord, O Lord, let me know mine end, and the
number of my days, and the number of my days, that I may be certifyed how
long I have to live.


Cho. That I may be certified how long I have to live, how long I have to live.


Ver. Behold, behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine
age is nothing, and mine age is nothing in respect of thee: and verily every
man living, and verily every man living is altogether vanity, is altogether
vanity.


Cho And verily every man living is altogether vanity.


Ver. tenor and bass For man walks in a vain shadow, for man walks in a
vain shadow, and disquieteth himself, and disquieteth himself in vain: He
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who sha^ gather them; And now Lord, And now
Lord what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee, in thee.


Cho. And now Lord, and now Lord, and now Lord, what is my hope, my hope, what
is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee, truly my hope is even in thee,
A-men, A men.


Anth. XXIV. Deliver me from mine enemies.
Ver. two Means. DEliver me from mine enemies, O God, defend me from them,
defend me from them that rise up against me. (Tenor.) O deliver me, O d^liver
me from the wicked doers, and save me, and save me, and save me from the blood
thirsty and deceiptful man.

a Bass. For lo, Lo, they lie waiting for my soul, lo, they lie waiting for
my soul. (Mean) The mighty men are gathered against me. (Mean and Bass.) The
mighty men are gathered against me without a cause, o God, o God.


Cho. Stand up o Lord, o Lord God of Hosts, stand up o Lord, o Lord God of
Hosts: and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness.


Ver. They go to and fro, to and fro, to and fro, to and fro in the evening,
They grin like a dog, they grin like a dog, and r-un about, and run about the
City. (Tenor,) Behold they speak with their mouth but swords are in their lips,
for who does hear? But thou o Lord, but thou o Lord, shall have them in
derision.


Cho. My strength will I ascribe unto thee, for thou art the God of my refuge,
God has showed me his goodness plenteously, and God shall let me see my desire
upon mine enemies, mine enemies.


Ver. parts. For the sin of their mouth, for the words of their lips, they
shall be taken in their pride; And why? Their preaching is of cursing and lies;
Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, consume them that they may perish, and
know it is God that rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the earth.


Cho. As for me, as for me, I will sing of thy power, I will sing of thy power,
or thou art the God of my refuge, and my merciful God, and my merciful God,
A-men.


Anth. XXV. Bow down thine ear, O Lord.
Ver. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, Bow down thine ear O Lord, and hear me, and
hear me, for I am poor and in misery, for I am poor and in misery. Preserve
thou my soul, for I am holy, for I am holy, O my God save thy servant, thy
servant. (3 parts) O my God save thy servant that puts his trust in thee, that
puts his trust in thee, that puts his trust in thee, in thee.


Cho. O my God. Save thy servant that puts his trust in thee, in thee.


Ver. Be merciful, be merciful unto me O Lord, for I will call daily upon thee,
for I will call daily upon thee: Comfort thy servant, comfort thy servant,
comfort thy servant, comfort thy servant, for unto thee O Lord do I lift up my
soul; Teach me thy way, teach me thy way, thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in
thy truth, and I will walk in thy truth, O knit my heart unto thee, O knit my
heart unto thee, my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name, may fear thy
name, that I may fear thy name; Then will I praise thy name for evermore, then
will I praise thy name for evermore. (3 parts.) For great is thy mercy toward
me, toward me, for great is thy mercy toward me; Then will I praise thy name
for evermore, then will I praise thy name for evermore. (3 parts.) For great is
thy mercy toward me, toward me, for great is thy mercy toward me.


Cho. Then will I praise thy name forevermore, for great is thy mercy, for
great is thy mercy, for great is thy mercy toward me, So be it So be it.


R. Iewet.

Anth. XXVI. Blessed are all they that fear the Lord.
Ver. BLessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways, and walk
in his ways, for thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, O well is thee, and
happy shall thou be.


Cho. For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, O well is thee, and happy
shall thou be.


Ver. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful Vine upon the walls, the walls of thine
house, Thy children like the Olive branthes, round about thy rabble; round about
thy table, round about thy table, round about thy table; Lo, thus shall the man
be blessed, lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord, that
fears the Lord.


Cho. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, lo thus shall the man be blessed, that
fears the Lord, that fears the Lord.


Ver. 3 parts. The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee, that thou shall
see Jerusalem in prosperity all thy life long, yea, that thou shall see thy
childrens children, and peace upon Israel, and peace upon Israel.


Cho. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, as it was
in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, and ever shall
be world without end, and ever shall be would without end, A-men.


M. Orlando Gibbons.

Anth. XXVII. Everlasting God.
Ver. Everlasting God, which have ordained, have ordained and constituted the
services of all Angels and Men, of all Angels and Men, In a wonderful order, in
a wonderful order.


Cho. In a wonderful order, wonderful order.


Ver. Mercifully grant that they which always do thee service in heaven, may by
this appointment succor and defend us in earth, defend us in earth, defend us
in earth.


Cho. May by this appointment succor and defend us in earth.


Ver. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Cho. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Ver. Who lives and reigns with thee, who lives and reigns with thee.


Cho. Who lives and reigns with thee.


Ver. One God world without end, one God world without end.


Cho. One God world without end.


M. Rogers.

Anth. XXVIII. Hear my Prayer, O Lord.
Ver. HEar my Prayer, O Lord.


Cho. Hear my prayer, O Lord.


Ver. Hear my prayer O Lord.


Cho. Hear my prayer O Lord.


Ver. And consider my desire, and consider my desire.


Cho. And consider my desire, and consider my desire.


Ver. And consider my desire.


Cho. And consider my desire.


Ver. Hearken unto me, hearken unto me, for thy truth and righteousness sake.


Cho. Hearken unto me, hearken unto me for thy truth and righteousness sake.


Ver. And enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight, shall no
man living be justified.


Cho. And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight, shall no
man living be justified, be justified.


M. Bird.

Anth. XXIX. Hear me when I call, O God.
Ver. HEar me when I call, O God of my righteousness, for thou have set my
heart at liberty when I was in trouble, when I was in trouble. (2 Bases.) O ye
sons of men how long, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, will ye blaspheme
mine honor, and have such pleasure in vanity, and follow after leasing.


Cho. O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, and have such
pleasure in vanity, and follow after leasing, after leasing.


Ver. Know this also, that the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is
godly, the man that is godly. When I call upon the Lord he will hear me.


Cho. When I call upon the Lord he will hear me, when I call upon the Lord he
will hear me.


Ver. Stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own hearts, and in your
chamber be still, and in your chamber be still. (2 Bases) Offer to God the
Sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord, and put your trust
in the Lord.


Cho. Offer to God the Sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in the
Lord, in the Lord, your trust in the Lord, and put your trust in the Lord, in
the Lord.


M. Rogers.

Anth. XXX. Hear me, O Lord.
Ver. HEar me, O Lord, hear me O Lord, and that soon, and that soon, for my
spirit waxes faint, for my spirit waxes faint. Hide not thy face from me,
least I be like unto them that go down into the pit, that go down into the pit.


Cho. Hide not thy face from me, thy face from me, least I be like unto them,
least I be like unto them, unto them that go down into the pit, into the pit,
into the pit.


Ver. two parts O let me hear thy loving kindness, thy loving kindness betimes
in the morning, in the morning; for in thee is my trust, for in thee is my
trust.


Cho. Show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul, for I
lift up my soul unto thee, for I lift up my soul unto thee, my soul unto thee.


Ver. two parts. Deliver me, O Lord from mine enemies, from mine ene-mies, mine
enemies: for I fly unto thee to hide me, to hide me.


Cho. For I fly unto thee to hide me, for I fly unto thee to hide me, for I fly
unto thee to hide me, to hide me.


Ver. Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, that pleases thee: for thou
art my God, for thou art my God, for thou art my God.


Cho. Let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land, into the land, the
land, into the land of righteousness.


Ver. two parts. Quicken me O Lord for thy names sake, quicken me O Lord for
thy names sake: and for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble,
bring my soul out of trouble, bring my soul out of trouble, out of trouble.


Cho. And for thy righteousness sake, bring my soul out of trouble, bring my
soul out of trouble, bring my soul out of trouble, bring my soul out of trouble.


Anth. XXXI. O Lord, in thee is all my trust.
Ver. O Lord, O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry,
refuse me not that am unjust, but bowing down thine heavenly eye.


Cho. But bowing down thine heavenly eye.


Cho. Behold how I go, still lament my sins wherein I thee offend. O Lord for
them shall I be shent, O Lord for them shall I be shent, sees thee to please,
sees thee to please I do in-tend.


Cho. O Lord for them shall I be shent, sees thee to please, sees thee to
please I do in end, I do intend.


Ver. two parts. No no not so, thy will is bent, to deal with sinners in thine
ire, to deal with sinners in thine ire, thou grant'st with speed their just
de-sire, thou grant'st with speed their just de-sire.


Cho. Thou grant'st with speed their just desire.


Ver. To thee therefore still shall I cry, to wash away my sinful crime: thy
blood O Lord is not yet dry, but that it may help me in time, in time.


Cho. Thy blood O Lord is not yet dry, but that it may, but that it may help me
in time, help me in time.


Ver. three parts. Have thee O Lord, have thee I say, to power on-me, to power
on-me the gifts of grace; that when this life must fleet a-way, in Heaven with
thee I may have place.


Cho. In Heaven with thee I may have place.


Ver. Where thou do reign eternally with God, which once did thee down send:
Where Angels sing continually, to thee be praise world without end, world
without end, world without end.


Cho. Where Angels sing continually, to thee be praise world without end, A-men.


M. Hooper.

Anth. XXXII. I will magnify thee, O Lord.
Ver. I Will magnify thee, O Lord, I will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou halt
set me up, for thou have set me up, and not made my foes triumph over me. O
Lord my God, I cried unto thee, I cried unto thee, I cried unto thee, and thou
have healed me, and thou have healed me. (2 Basses) Thou Lord have brought my
soul out of hell, out of hell; thou have kept my life from them, thou have kept
my life from them, from them that go down into the pit, from them that go down
into the pit, into the pit, into the pit, (4 parts.) Sing praises, sing praises
unto the Lord O ye Saints of his.


Cho. Sing praises unto the Lord O ye Saints of his.


Ver. And give thanks unto him, unto him.


Cho. For a remembrance of his holiness, his holiness.


Ver. for 2 Means For his wrath endures but the twinkling, twinkling of an
eye, and in his favor is life, heaviness may endure for a night, for a night,
but joy comes in the morning, but joy comes in the morning; what profit is
there in my blood, what profit is here in my blood, when I go down into the
pit, when I go down into the pit, into the pit.


Cho. Shall the dust give thanks unto thee, shall the dust give thanks unto
thee; or shall it declare thy truth, or shall it declare thy truth?


Ver. Hear O Lord, hear O Lord, and have mercy upon me, and have mercy upon me:
Lord be thou my helper, Thou have turned my heaviness into joy, thou have put
off my Sackcloth, and girded me with gladness,


Cho. Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise, therefore shall every
good man sing of thy praise without ceasing, O my God, I will give thanks unto
thee for ever, for ever, A-men.


M. Hutchinson.

Anth. XXXIII. I will magnify thee, O Lord.
Ver. for 2 basses I Will magnify thee, O Lord, I will magnify thee O Lord, I
will magnity thee o Lord, for thou have set me up, for thou have set me up, for
thou have set me up, and not made my foes to triumph over me, and not made my
foes to triumph over me, and not made my foes to triumph over me.


Cho. And not made my foes to triumph over me: and not made my foes to triumph
over me.


Ver. O Lord my God, o Lord my God, o Lord my God I cried unto thee, to thee, I
cried unto thee, and thou have healed me, and thou have healed me, and thou
have healed me, and thou have healed me.


Cho. And thou have healed me, and thou have healed me, have healed me.


Ver. for 2 basses. Which sits in the Heavens over all, which sits in the
Heavens over all, over all, from the beginning, from the beginning, from the
beginning; Lo he does send out his noise, yea, and that a mighty voice, a mighty
voice, a mighty voice; Sing unto God, sing unto God, to God, all ye Kingdoms
of the earth, all ye Kingdoms of the earth, the earth; O sing praises unto the
Lord, o sing praises unto the Lord, o sing praises unto the Lord, unto the
Lord; Blessed be God, blessed be God, blessed be God, blessed be God.


Cho. Sing unto God, sing unto God all ye Kingdoms of the earth, of the earth,
all ye Kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the Lord, o sing praises
unto the Lord, o sing praises unto the Lord, o sing praises unto the Lord, unto
the Lord, unto the Lord; Blessed be God, blessed be God, be God, blessed be
God, A-men, A men.


M: Martin Peerson.

Anth. XXXIV. If ye be risen again with Christ.
Ver. for 2 means If ye be risen again with Christ, If ye be risen again with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits, sits on the
right hand of God, sits on the right hand of God, where Christ sits,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God, of God.


Cho. If ye be risen a-gain with Christ, seek those things which are above,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God.


Ver. three parts. Set your affections on heavenly heavenly things, and not on
earthly things, for ye are dead, for ye are dead, for ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God, and your life is hid with Christ, with Christ
in God.


Cho. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, with Christ in
God, and your life is hid, and your life, and your life is hid with Christ in
God.


Ver. for 2 means Whenever Christ which is our life, which is our life, which
is our life, shall show himself, then shall ye also appear with him, then shall
ye also appear with him in glory.


Cho. Then shall ye also appear with him in glory, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory, ye also appear with him in glory, So be it, So be it, So be
it, So be it; So be it.


M. Gibbons.

Anth. XXXV. I will sing the mercies of the Lord.
Ver. I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever, I will sing the mercies of
the Lord for ever, with my mouth will I make known, will I make known thy
faithfulness unto all generations, unto all generations.


Cho. For I have said, mercy shall be set up, set up, for ever, for ever, thy
truth shall thou establish in the heavens, establish in the heavens


Ver. Arise O Lord, arise O Lord into thy rest, arise O Lord, arise O Lord into
thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength, of thy strength: Let thy Priests be
clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints, and let thy Saints sing, sing
with joyfulness, sing with joyfulness.


Cho. Let thy Priests be clothed, be clothed with righteousness, with
righteousness, and let thy Saints sing, and let thy Saints sing, sing with
joyfulness.


Ver. The dead praise not thee O Lord, the dead praise not thee O Lord: Neither
all they that go down, that go down into silence, but we will praise the Lord,
but we will praise the Lord, from this time forth, from this time forth for
evermore, from this time forth for evermore, praise the Lord.


Cho. twice over. But we will praise the Lord, we will praise the Lord, from
this time forth for evermore, for evermore, praise the Lord.


M. Mudde.

Anth. XXXVI. Let God arise.
Ver. LEt God arise, Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, be
scattered, be scattered; let them also that hate him, that hate him, fly --
before him, fly -- before him, fly -- before him; But let the righteous be
glad, and rejoice, and rejoice, and rejoice, and rejoice and rejoice before
God, let him also be merry and joyful, and joyful, and joyful.


Cho. Let them also be merry and joyful, be merry and joyful, be merry and joyful,
and joyful.


Ver. O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his Name, magnify him that rides
upon the Heavens, upon the Heavens, praise him in his Name, in his Name, praise
him in his Name, in his Name, yea, and rejoice, and rejoice before him.


Cho. Praise him in his Name, praise him in his Name, praise him in his Name,
yea, and rejoice, and rejoice before him.


Ver. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and sing praises from the end of the
earth, ye that go down, that go down, that go down, ye that go down, that go
down, that go down, that go down, that go down to the Sea, let them give glory
to the Lord, let them give glory to the Lord, and declare his power, and
declare his power, his power.


Cho. Ye that go down, that go down, Ye that go down, that go down, that go
down, that go down unto the Sea, let them give glory to the Lord, let them give
glory to the Lord, let them give glory to the Lord, let them give glory to the
Lord, give glory to the Lord, and declare his praise, and declare his praise,
declare his praise.


M. Ward.

Anth. XXXVII. Out of the deep.
Ver. for 2 basses. OVt of the deep, out of the deep have I called unto thee O
Lord, have I called unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice, Lord hear my voice,
Lord hear my voice.


Cho. O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint, the voice of
my complaint, the voice of my complaint.


Ver. If thou Lord should be extreme, to mark, to mark what is done amiss,
what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it, O Lord who may abide it, who may
abide it.


Cho But there is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared, therefore
shall thou be feared.


Ver. I look for the Lord, I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him, my
soul does wait for him; in his word is my trust, in his word is my trust, is my
trust; my soul fly-eth unto the Lord, my soul fly-eth unto the Lord, flies
unto the Lord before the morning watch, I say before the morning watch; O
Israel, Israel, O Israel, Israel, trust in the Lord, the Lord, for with the
Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption,
and with him is plenteous redemption, redemption,


Cho. And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.


Ver. From all his sins.


Cho. From all his sins, from all his sins, his sins, A-men.


M. Hutchinson.

Anth. XXXVIII. O God the King of Glory.
Ver. O God the King of Glory, which have exalted thy son Jesus Christ, with
great triumph, with great triumph into thy kingdom in heaven


Cho. Which have exalted thy son Jesus Christ into thy Kingdom in Heaven.


Ver. two parts We beseech thee leave us not comfortless, not comfortless, but
send down thine holy spirit to comfort us, and exalt us unto the same place,
unto the same place, whither our Savior Christ is gone before.


Cho. We beseech thee leave us not comfortless, but send down thine holy spirit
to -- comfort us, and exait us unto the sam^ place, whither our Savior Christ
is gone before, is gone before.


Ver. Who lives and reigns with thee, who lives and reigns with thee:
ever one God, ever one God, ever one God, ever one God, ever one God, world
without end.


Cho. Ever one God, one God, ever one God, ever one God, one God, world without
end, A-men.


R. Iewet.

Anth. XXXIX. The King shall rejoice.
Ver. THe King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, in thy strength, O Lord,
exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation, exceeding glad shall be be of thy
salvation, Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the
request of his lips, for thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness,
and shall set a Crown, a Crown of pure gold up-on his head. (2 Means) He asked
life of thee, and thou gav'st him a long life for ever, for ever, and ever.


Cho. He asked life of thee, and thou gav'st him a long life, even for ever,
even for ever and ever.


Ver. or 2 Tenors His honor is great in thy salvation, glory and great worship
shall thou lay upon him, glory and great worship, and great worship shall thou
lay upon him, and why, and why, and why? (2 Basses) Because the King puts
his trust in the Lord, in the Lord, And in the mercy of the most highest, he
shall not miscarry, miscarry, he shall not miscarry, miscarry, he shall not
miscarry, miscarry, he shall not miscarry.


Cho. And in the mercy of the most highest he shall not miscarry, he shall not
miscarry, miscarry, he shall not miscarry.


Ver. All thine enemies shall feel thine hand, thy right hand shall find out
them that hate thee; For they intended mischief against thee, and imagined such
a device, a device as they were not able to perform: for they intented mischief
against thee, and imagined such a device, a device as they were not able to
perform.


Cho. Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise
thy power, and praise thy power, so will we sing and praise thy power, and
praise thy power. (2 Basses) So be-it, So be-it, So be-it, So be-it, So be it.


Randall Iewet.

Anth. XL. We praise thee, O Father.
Ver. three parts. WE praise thee, O Father, for the glorious Resurrection of
thy Son, the glorious resurrection of thy Son Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ, Jesus
Christ, our Lord, our Lord.


Cho. We praise thee, O Father, for the glorious Resurrection of thy Son, the
glorious Resurrection of thy Son Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ, our
Lord, our Lord.


Ver. For he is the very paschal Lamb, who was offered up for us, and has
taken away the sins of the world, and has taken away the sins of the world,
and has taken away the sins of the world.


Cho. For he is the very paschal Lamb, which was offered up for us, and has
taken away the sins of the world, and has taken away the sins of the world,
and has taken away the sins of the world, and has taken away the sins of the
world.


Ver. Who by his death has destroyed death, and by his rising to life, to life
again, has restored us, has restored us to everlasting life, to us
everlasting life.


Cho. Who by his death has destroyed death, and by his rising to life, to life
again, has restored us, has restored us to everlasting life, to us
everlasting life.


Ver. Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and with all the company of
Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, thy glorious Name, we laud and
magnify thy glorious Name.


Cho. Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and with all the company of
Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, thy glorious Name, we laud and
magnify thy glorious Name, Amen.


Anth. XLI. Praise the Lord.
Ver. PRaise the Lord, the God of might and power, for all the wonders he has
done. O magnify the Son our Savior. Give laud unto that holy one, give laud
unto that holy one, proceeding from the Father and Son.


Cho. With instruments of melody, with instruments of melody; sing praises to
the Trinity, the Trinity, sing praises to the Trinity, to the Trinity.


Ver. The God that Heaven and earth has made, the God that Heaven and earth
has made, and all things in the world of naught; The Son that it redeemed and
saved, and us from hell and darkness bought, He that our hearts has newly
wrought.


Cho. With instruments of melody, with instruments of melody, sing praises to
the Trinity, to the Trinity, sing praises to the Trinity, to the Trinity.


Ver. That Godhead which these three conjoynes, that Godhead which these three
conjoynes. Our King, Queen, Prince, preserve and bless. Bless them all that
spring from their loins, Bless-hem all that spring from their loins, them all
that spring from their loins Keep them in peace from trouble and distress. Bear
up their friends, their foes depress, their foes depress.


Cho. So shall we all sing joyfully, so shall we all sing joyfully, Praise to
his holy Majesty, praise to his holy Majesty, praise to his holy Majesty, to
his Majesty, A-men, A-men.


Anth. XLII. When Israel came out of Egypt.
Ver. WHen Israel came out of Egypt, of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from
among the strange children.


Cho. And the house of Jacob from among the strange children.


Ver. Judah was his sanctuary, his sanctuary, and Israel, and Israel his
dominion.


Cho. The Sea saw that, and fled, the Sea saw that and fled, Jordan was driven
back, Jordan was driven back, Jordan was driven back, was driven back.


Ver. The mountains skipped like Rams, the mountains skipped like Rams, the
mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills, and the little hills, and
the little hills like the young sheep.


Cho. And the little hills like the young sheep, like the young sheep, and the
little hills like the young sheep.


Ver. What ayleth thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? that thou fleddest.


Cho. And thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back, that thou wast driven back,
wast driven back.


Ver. Ye mountains, that ye skipped like Rams, that ye skipped like Rams, and
ye little hills, and ye little hills like the young sheep, like the young
sheep, like the young sheep.


Cho. And ye little hills, and ye little hills, and ye little hills like the
young sheep, and ye little hills like the young sheep.


Ver. Tremble thou earth, Tremble thou earth.


Cho. Thou earth.


Ver. At the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.


Cho. At the presence of the God of Jacob, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
A-men, A-men.


Anth. XLIII. Arise, O Lord.
Ver. ARise, O Lord, into thy rest, into thy rest, Thou, and the Arc of thy
strength. Let all thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy
Saints sing loud with joyfulness. Deck all thy Priests with health, and let thy
Saints rejoice.


Cho. Let all thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints
sing loud with joyfulness; Deck all thy Priests with health, and let thy Saints
rejoice.


Ver. Lord, for thy Servant David's sake, thy David's sake, turn not away thy
face from thine anointed. The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and
will not turn from it, and will not turn from it; The fruit of thy body shall
sit upon thy Throne, upon thy Throne


Cho. The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and will not turn from it,
and will not turn from it; The fruit of thy body shall sit upon thy Throne,
upon thy Throne.


Ver. For I the Lord, for I the Lord have chosen Zion, and I will, and I will
make the horn of David to flourish, and I will bless her victuals with
increase, and daily satisfy her poor with bread; All his foes with shame shall
fall, but on his head shall his Crown flourish, all his foes with shame shall
fall, but on his head shall his Crown flourish.


Cho. For I the Lord, for I the Lord have chosen Zion, and I will, and I will
make the horn of David to flourish, and I will bless her victuals with
increase, and daily satisfy her poor with bread; All his foes with shame shall
fall, but on his head shall his Crown flourish, all his foes with shame shall
fall, but on his head shall his Grown flourish, A-men.


Anth. XLIIII. O Lord my God in all Distress.
Ver. O Lord my God in all Distress, My trust is still in thee: Preserve me
from those deadly foes, that rise, that rise and trouble me. As thou art just
defend me Lord, and rid me from all fear: send me thy help, and do my suit, and
humble prayer hear.


Cho. Send me thy help, and do my suit and humble prayer hear, and humble
prayer hear, and humble prayer hear.


Ver. Be thou my rock whereto I may, for aid all times resort, thy promise is
to help allway; Thou art my fence and fort, thou art my fence and fort,: save
me O God, save me O God, from wicked men, and from their rage and power: from
men unjust, and eke from them, that would my life devour, that would my life
devour.


Cho. From men unjust, and eke from them, that would my life devour, that would
my life devour, devour.


Ver. For thou have kept me since I was born, from dangers many one, from
dangers many one: Therefore all praise and thanks I give, to thee O Lord alone,
alone, to thee; to thee, O Lord alone, O Lord a-lone.


Cho. Therefore all praise and thanks I give, to thee O Lord, O Lord, to thee
alone, to thee alone, to thee alone. Amen, A-men, Amen.


Doctor Giles.

Anth. XLV. The King shall rejoice, O Lord.
Ver. THe King shall rejoice, O Lord, The King shall rejoice in thy strength,
Exceeding grad shall he be of thy salvation: Thou have given him his hearts
desire, desire; and have not denied the request of his lips, for thou do
prevent him with the blessings of goodness, the blessings of goodness, with the
blessings of goodness, and have set a Crown of pure Gold upon upon his head.


Cho. And have set a Crown of pure Gold upon his head, his head; and have set a
Crown of pure Gold upon his head, a Crown of pure Gold upon his head.


Ver. He shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, in thy Tabernacle for evermore, and his
trust shall be under the covering, under the covering of thy wings.


Cho. For thou O God have heard his desires, thou have given an heritage to
those, thou have given an heritage, thou have given an heritage to those that
fear thy Name.


Ver. Give O Lord, the King a long life.


Cho. Give O Lord, the King a long life.


Ver. Let his years be as many ages, as many ages, as many ages.


Cho. Let his years be as many ages.


Ver. He shall dwell before God for ever.


Cho. He shall dwell before God for ever.


Ver. O prepare, O prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulness, that they may
preserve him, that they may preserve him, preserve him.


Cho. So will we always sing, so will we always sing praises unto thy Name,
praises unto thy Name, in performing daily our vows, in performing daily our
vows. A-men.


Anth. XLVI. I will magnify thee, O Lord. For a treble.
Ver. A Treble I Will magnify thee, O Lord, I will magnify thee O Lord, for
thou have set me up, for thou have set me up, and not made my foes to triumph
over me, and not made my foes to triumph, to triumph, to triumph, to triumph
over me.

A Mean O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord my God, O Lord my God, I have cried unto
thee, I have cried unto thee, and thou have healed me, and thou have healed me,
and thou have healed me.

A Mean Thou Lord have brought my soul out of Hell, thou have brought my soul
out of Hell, thou have kept my life from them that go down, from them that go
down into the pit, from them that go down into the pit, into the pit.


Cho. 4 Parts. Sing praises unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his.

Sing praises unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his.


Ver. And give thanks unto him.


Cho. And give thanks unto him, unto him, for a remembrance of his holiness,
for a remembrance of his holiness, of his holiness, for a remembrance of his
holiness.


Ver. Contraten. Hear O Lord, hear O Lord, hear O Lord, and have mercy upon me:
O be thou my helper, O be thou my helper.

a Treble. Thou have turned my heaviness into joy, thou have put off my
Sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, with gladness, with gladness.


Cho. Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing, O my
God, I will give thanks unto thee, O my God, I will give thanks unto thee, O my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for evermore, for evermore, Amen, Amen.


Anth. XLVII. Lord, in thy wrath reprove me not,
Ver. Lord, in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire, Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord I thee desire.


Cho. Ne yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord, O Lord, o Lord I thee desire.


Ver. For I am weak, therefore o Lord, of mercy me forbear, and heal me Lord
for why thou know my bones do quake, my bones do quake, do quake for fear,
do quake for fear.


Cho. And heal me Lord for why thou know, for why thou know my bones do
quake, my bones do quake, do quake for fear, do quake for fear.


Ver. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed, and vexed vehemently: but Lord
how long, how long will thou delay, how long, how long will thou delay to cue
my misery?


Cho. But Lord, but Lord, how long will thou delay, how long will thou delay to
cure my misery?


Ver. Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace, my silly soul up take, my filly
soulup take, o save me, o save me not for my desert, but for thy mercy sake.


Cho. O save me not for my desert, but for thy mercy sake, but for thy mercy
sake, thy mercy sake. A-men.


Anth. XLVIII. In thee O Lord, put I my trust.
Ver. In thee O Lord put I my 'trust, answer for me, answer for me, o Lord my
God, answer for me, answer for me, o Lord my God: for I am brought, I am
brought into so great misery, great misery, misety and trouble; That I go
mourning, that I go mourning all the day long, all the day long.


Cho. I am feeble and sore smitten, I have roared, roared: I have roared, I
have roared for the very disquietness of my heart, of my heart. I have roared,
I have roared for the very disquietness of my heart, I have roared for the very
disquietness of my heart, for the very disquietness of my heart.


Ver. Lord thou know my desire, my groaning is nothid from thee, is not had
from thee, is not hid from thee, is not hid from thee, is not hid from thee, is
not hid from thee, is not hid from thee: My heart pants, pants, my heart
pants, my heart pants, and my heart fails me, fails me: Forsake me not
o Lord my God, my God, be thou not far from me, from me: Haste thee to help me,
haste thee to help me, haste thee to help me, haste thee to help me, haste thee
to help me, o Lord God my salvation.


Cho. O Lord God my salvation, so be it, so be it, so be it, so be it.


Anth. XLIX. I heard a Voice from Heaven!
Ver. I Heard a Voice from Heaven! Saying unto me, from henceforth blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, for they shall rest from their labor, and
their works follow them.


Cho. For they shall rest from their labors: and their works follow them


Ver. And they sung the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and miraculous are thy
works, great and miraculous are thy works Lord God Almighty; Just and true are
thy ways, just and true are thy ways, thy ways, o King of Saints.


Cho. Great and marvailous are thy works O Lord God Almighty, Almighty; Just
and true are thy ways O King of Saints, thy ways O King of Saints.


Ver. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


Cho. As it was in the beginning, and is now, and ever shall be, world without
end, Amen; without end Amen, world without end, A men, A men.


Anth. L. After the Consecration. Quum denuo exaltavit Dominus Coronam.
Treble NOw that the Lord has Readvanc't the Crown
Which thirst of Spoil, and Frantic Zeal pulled down;

Tenor, Now that the Lord the Miter has restored,
Which with the Crown lay in the dust abhorred.

Treble. Praise him ye Kings,


Tenor. Praise him ye Priests,


Chorus, All Sing. Glory to Christ our High Priest, Highest King.


Treble May Judah's Royal Scepter still shine clear;

Tenor May Aaron's Holy Rod still Blossors bear.

Treble and Tenor Scepter and Rod rule still, and guide our Land;
And these whom God anoints, feel no rude hand;
May Love, Peace, Plenty, wait on Crown and Chair;
And may both share in Blessings as in Care.

Chorus Angels look down, and say to see,
Like that above, A Monarchy;
Angels look down, and joy to see,
Like that above, An Hierarchy.

^ICH. HOSIER.

Anth. LI. O God that art the wellspring of all Peace.
Ver. 2 Means. O God, O God that art the wellspring of all Peace,

Make all thy gifts, make all thy gifts in CHARLES his Reign increase.

England preserve, Scotland protect, make Ireland in thy service perfect, Make
Ireland in thy Service perfect.

That all these Kingdoms under Great Britains King, That all these Kingdoms
under Great Britains King.

May still be watered with the Gospel Spring. May still be watered with the
Gospel Spring, May still be watered with the Gospel Spring, May still be
watered with the Gospel Spring, with the Gospel Spring.


Cho. That all these Kingdoms, that all these Kingdoms under great Britains
King.

May still be watered with the Gospel spring, May still be watered with the
Gospel spring, May still be watered with the Gospel spring.


Ver. 2 Means. Oh never let unhallowed breath have space, to Blight / Blast
those blooming buds of union, to blight those blooming buds of union; But let
us all, but let us all with mutual love embrace, one Name, one King, and one
Religion.

Ah let this Peace be thought the only Gemme,
That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem.
That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem.
That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem.

Cho. And let this Peace be thought the only Gemme,
That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem.
That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem.
King CHARLES his Diadem. That can adorn King CHARLES his Diadem. Halelujah,
Halelujah, etc.


Ver. Halelujah, Ha^elujah.


Cho. A-men.


John Holmes.


