ARSY VERSY: OR, The Second Martyrdom of the RUMP.
To the Tune of, The Blind Beggar of Bednall-green.
1.
MY Muse, to prevent lest an after-clap come,
If the wind should once more turn about for the Bum,
As a preface of honor, and not as a frump
First with a Sirreverence ushers the Rump.
2.
I shall-not dispute whether Long-tailes of Kent,
Or Papists this name of disgrace did invent;
Whose Legend of lies, to defame us the more,
Has entailed on us Rumps never heard on before.
3.
But not on its Pedigree longer to think,
(For the more it is stirred the more it will stink)
It Is agreed the Rump's first report in the Town
Did arise from the wooden invention of Brown.
4.
Old Oliver's nose had taken in snuff,
When it sat long ago, some unsavory pu(...)
Then up went the Rump, and was ferkt to the qu^ck,
But it settled in spite of the teeth of poor Dick.
5.
Then the Knight of the Pestle, King Lambert, and Vane
With a Scepter of Iron did over it reign:
But the Rump soon re-setled, and to their disgrace
Like Excrements voided them out of the place.
6.
It did now, like a Truant's well-disciplin'd Bum,
With the Rod of affliction harder become;
Or else like the Image in Daniel it was,
Whose head was of Gold, but whose tail was of Brass.
7.
It endured the first heat, and proved no starter,
But sung in the midst of the flames like a Martyr
And whisk'd the tail like a terrible Farter,
And sounded most cheerfully, Vive Sir Arthur.
8.
But the next fire Ordeall put into a dump,
Sir Orlando the furious chief joint of the Rump,
That he looked like the picture of Richard the Third,
Or like an ejected and frost-bitten t --
9.
It Is said that his Durindana he drew,
And a Wight on the Road most manfully slew;
But, pardoned by Charles, made good what they tell us
How ill'tis to save a thief from the Gallows.
10.
Being now to be burned, he soon did expire,
For he was but a flash, and would quickly take fire,
So that their fuel upon him to spend,
What was it but Coals to Newcastle to send?
11.
To bring 'em to the stake as in order they lie,
Harry Martin the next place must occupy;
'Twas expected in vain he should blaze, for he swore,
That he had been burnt to the stumps before.
12.
Tom Scot for the Bum most stiffly did stand,
Though once by a Bum he was foully trapand;
But Time and his Office of Secretary
Had learnt him his business more private to carry.
13.
Some thought he arrived at his dignity first,
By being so well in iniquity verst,
The mystery of which he has practiced of late
In his function, which was, to be Baud to the S(...)
14.
Hob Morley in silence did suffer the loss
Of his Rump, and with patience took up the C(...)
That to see him so findg'd and so scorcht you w(...)ear
No Camel more meekly his burden could bear.
15.
The Speaker was thought to the Rump to be true
Because like a Part at the first he burnt blew,
But straight he was cunningly seen to retire,
For fear to endanger the Rolls in the fire.
16.
St. John a mortal of flesh and of blood,
Swore by St. He has a great kindness for that Saint, not because of his Keys,
(which he knows he shall never make use of) but in reference to Peterborough
Minster, the stones of which built his new House.
Peter the example was good:
So facing about and shifting his station,
He turned over a new leaf in St. John's Revelation.
17.
Harry Nevill that look's lik a Mahomet's Pidgeon,
Accused to be of a State-man's Religion,
Is left to his choice what Process he will have,
To be burnt for an Atheist, or hanged for a Knave.
18.
Now stop thy nose, Reader, for Atkins does come,
That shame to the Breeches as well as the Bum:
To wish he were burnt were an idle desire,
For he comes provided to shite out the fire.
19.
But least he without a Companion should be,
Here Is Lisle that comes next stinks worser than he;
So foully corrupt, you may placed in your Creed,
Such a Rump (...) alone such a Fistula breed.
20.
Poor Ludlow was bogg'd in Ireland of late,
And to purg-him self came to the Rump of the State;
But gravely they told him he had acted amiss,
When he sought to betray the Rump with a kiss.
21.
Ned Harby was sive an herb John in the pot,
Yet could he not escape the dysasterous lot:
Scarce Church'd of the Gout was the trusty old Squire,
But he hopt from the drying pan into the fire.
22.
Robin Andrews was laid on last as they tell us
For a Log to keep down the rest of his fellows;
Though he spent on the City like one of the Roysters
Each morning his Some Authors hold it was but three halfpence, but Poetry
will not admit of broken numbers.
twopence in Sack and in Oysters.
23.
Next Praise-God, although of the Rump he was none,
Was for his Petition burnt to the Bare-bone:
So Praise-God and Rump, like true Joseph's together,
Did suffer; but Praise-God lost the more Courteous Reader, he is a
Leather-seller
Leather.
24.
There Is Lawson another dag-lock of the tail,
That the fire to avoid to the water did sail;
And in godly simplicity means (as they say)
To manage the Stern, though the Rump's out of play.
25.
But Overton most with wonder does seize us,
By securing of Hull for no less than Christ Jesus,
Hoping (as it by the story appears)
To be ^ere his Lieutenant for one thousand years.
26.
Lord Monson? Oh Venus! what do you hear?
I little thought you were a Rumper I swear:
But an(...) Lord will thus far avail,
He w(...) cloak to cover the tail.
27.
To (...) Mr. Salsbury's come,
With (...) Gold that fall from the Bum;
^ure 'twas (...)eccor, for I must tell ye,
It smell as were turning to the Alderman's jelly.
28.
Brother Pembrock comes last, and does not disdain,
Though de^pis'd by the world, to bear up the train;
But after new lights so long he did run,
That they brought him to Bethlehem before they had done. Not Bethlehem in
Judea, (for he is none of the Magi.)

29.
Thus the Foxes of Sampson that carried a Brand
(...) their ^ to destroy and to burn up the Land;
(...) the flam(...)ey had kindred themselves do expire,
(...) the D(...)ive them brimstone unto their fire.

