VERSES made by the Honorable Lord Arundel of Warder.
Persecution no loss.
WHat can we lose for him, when all we have
Are but the Bounties which his favor gave;
And which when Sufferings force us to restore,
God only takes them but to give us more;
And by a happy change does kinder prove,
He takes our Fortune, but he gives his Love.
How vainly should that Beggar chide his Fate,
That quits his Dunghill for a Chair of State?
So fares it with Us, when God does displace
The Gifts of Fortunes for the Gifts of Grace:
God did on sufferings set so high esteem,
He that was chose the lost World to Redeem,
And when his Love and Nature were at strise,
He valued more his Sufferings than his Life:
And shall Opinion have more power to move,
Then his Examples, Doctrine, or his Love?
Love makes Afflictions easy; to complain
Lessens our Merit, and augments our Pain.
Let Us humbly then submit to his Design,
And give that freely that we most resign;
So shall our Losses prove the best increase,
Of future Glory, and of present Peace;
-- Which grant for thy Passion.
God chastises those he loves.
IF then the earnest of thy Favors be
Afflictions, good God, let them light on me;
I Glory more in such a kind distress,
Then in all Comforts, where thy Love is less;
And by my Misery I will make it known
In spite of all the world how much I Am thy own;
No fruitful showers shall by the thrifty plant
Be kindlier entertained, then scorn and want,
Or loss of Honor, Fortune, or Delight,
Shall be by me, that which once did fright,
And filled my troubled mind with care and grief,
Shall be my future Honor and Relief:
I never more will court a smiling Fate,
Since he is so happy that is desolate;
Afflictions shall be easy, for they come
Like friendly showers to drive us sooner home;
Then by thy love such charms are in them found
To cure the Heart which they intend to wound;
Such strange Effects does Grace in us produce,
As change as well their Nature, as their Use.
Considerations before the Crucifix.
WHen I behold thee on that fatal Tree
Sweet Jesus, suffering! and it is for (...)
When I consider in that purple flood,
My Sins rubbed out, but with thy Life and Bl^^^
When I reflect how dear my Soul has cos^
I Am moved to wish it rather had been lost:
For how can that life please, that does destr^^
The life of him of whom we life enjoy?
And to wish thou had not suffered so,
Were to reproach thy Love and Wisdom too
And if we joy in what thy Death has brou^^^
We must allow the Pains by which 'twas wrou^^^
So that our Joy and Grief united lie;
Nature's life is, to have her Maker die.
It is thy Will dear Lord must be obeyed,
And in that Duty both those Debts are paid.
O let my Soul in a due measure find,
A Joy becoming a mourning mind;
A true Joy in thy Will, even whilst it made
Sun shine in Nature, by thy Godhead shad^
A grief to see the Torments Sin did merit;
A Man deserved God should himself inherit,
That so divided 'twixt thy Pain and Will,
I may Rejoice, and Joy, and yet grieve sti^^
Adoring the Triumph of thy great Love,
That weeping here, we may rejoice above.
Upon the Pains of Hell.
O Restless Groans! O sloathful Tears!
O vain Desires of fruitless Tears!
One timely Sigh had eased that Flame,
Which Millions now do seek in vain;
Eternal Penance now is thy Fate,
For having wept and sighed too late:
That short remorse that thou did fly,
Is changed into Eternity;
Neglected Mercy has no room,
When Justice once has fixed his Doom.
Prevent then timely by thy care,
That endless Penance of Despair;
And weep betimes, your Tears here may
Turn Night into Eternal Day;
It Is only they have power to move,
And turn Gods Blessing into Love;
If by the virtue of his Grace,
Thou show them a proper place;
Which grant we may for Christ's sake.

