An Address to my Lord Mayor.
MY mobbl'd Muse on such Gay days
Turns up her hoods to show her face,
And can no more forbear to write
Than can the Vulgar keep from sight;
Although not often I write in Rhyme
My Muse must have her Teeming time,
And no longer might she tarry
Since this day is her Ann'versary.
The impatient Crow'd that thrust and hunch,
And Nuts must crack, or plumb-cake munch,
Until long-look'd-for Show pass by
To cram their ever-greedy eye.
This way some few may be supplied
That Pence can spare for this Cheap Side.
It Is true, it will not stuff their Guts,
Nor is here Wit to crack like Nuts.
Noe: ye as easy on it may nabble,
As he that reads Poor Robins rabble;
It Is not fit task here to expound,
Like Jack of All-Trades turning round;
To point out Pageants one by one,
Like Puppet show of Whittington,
To tell which late were Liv'ry Sachellers,
And which ere new become Budg-Batchellors:
Nor yet 'bout Streamers to make sport,
Like Drayton in his Agincourt;
When I might tell you somewhat stranger,
Which might prevent you too from danger:
Of Giants, Satyrs, and Wild men,
Such as ha'nt bin the Lord knows when.
But if I should by Tale prevent ye,
What after comes would scarce content ye.
For if fine things we too much praise,
When seen they prove to great allayes;
What means this Rhimer then? faith no harm,
I have'em prove a powerful charm,
To keep quiet then until --
Children of Cheap Side sit ye all still,
And mind the fire works while I
My self more soberly apply.
To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Hanson, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
IF from the PEN there any praise be due
Unto men's merits, than how much to You?
What need I flourish than t'adorne a Name,
So fairly written in the scrow'l of Fame,
Whose Noverint universi may suffice
To set your Virtues forth to all men's eyes;
While you the honor of the Pen assume
And I the leave to sing Vive le Plume.
The Month of your Election to your State
Bears Libra's badge, best for a Magistrate,
Whose influence we trust will never slack
To Attend you through your Twelve months zodiac.
Humility and goodness free from pride,
Like your two Sheriffs attend you on each side,
Which to your Triumphs adds a greater grace
Observed by all to whom you turn your Face.
May you improve the Pittance of your time,
So as beyond all president to climb,
That when your faithful Sword you back surrender
You may be styled Londons true Rights defender.
And still our KING, as often as he shall deign
To grace the Triumphs of the entering Reign
Of every years Lord Mayor, may please his eyes
To view his Cities growing glory rise,
To such a pitch of splendor and renown,
That times to come may not mourn its Burning down.
(...) at the Sun and Bible in the Poultry, 1672.


