ARTICLES Exhibited against CLONELL Edward King, FOR HIS Insolences and
Misdemeanors in the County of LINCOLN, to the Honorable, the House of Commons
in August 1644.

BY Master Mussenden, Master Wolley, and diverse others of the Cmmittee of
LINCOLN.

London Printed 1644.

(...)

Articles exhibited, Against Colonel EDVVRD KING, for his Insolences and
Misdemeanors in the County of LINCOLN, to the Honorable, the house of
Commons, in August 1644. by Mr. Mussenden, Mr. Wolley, and diverse others of the
Comittee of Lincoln.
IMprimis, That to the Great discragement of the County he does openly
declare, his slighting of all men's good affections to the Parliaments service,
by expressing that he va^ueth not, that men should do the Parliament service
volunta^ily, but than he would by his power force them to serve.

II. That he does pay those great sums of money raised by him out of the
Country only to whom he pleases, against all Equity and Justice,
notwithstanding my Lord Manchesters Order to the contrary.

III. That he has publicly declared his slighting the Ordinance of
Parliament, and done very many Ty^annicall and arbitrary Actions, by
imprisoning diverse of ^ersons at his pleasure, and exacting great sums of
money, at such time when necessitin could be no plea, with many other
particulars.

IV. When he was before Newarke he sent for a Captain, who kept Crowland, who
obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of the danger that town was in, and
therefore ^esired his second pleasure, which was, that he should march, who
acordingly did, the Gentlemen of the Country fearing the Enemy procured Major
Ireton to send 100 Musketeers to keep Crowland, which he hearing of, took ill
that without order from him, any should come into his Liberties, and commanded
them to be gone, who accordingly departed; the Enemy presently surprised the
Town, and those few that he had left in it, by which means he betrayed the Town
unto the Enemy, which was not regained without much charge, hazard, and loss
of many men's lives.

5 That he gives protections for securing both person and goods, to those who
are professed enemies to the Parliament.

6 That he imployeth such Officers, as are altogether unfit for the Countries
service,

7 That he does most grossly and unworthily affront and abuse the
well-affected Gentry of the Country.

8 That he does encourage desperate Malignants and animateth them against the
well affected.

9 That he and his Officers have imprisoned men well affected to the
Parliament, and caused their houses, chests, truneks, etc. to be searched for
pewter, brass, and linen, and threatened that they would make it cost one of
them his whole estate, and that one of his Officers would not take three
hundred pounds for his own satisfaction.

10 That at the siege before Newark, such provision as the Country had
voluntarily and freely sent in to Col. Kings quarters at Winthorp, for the
maintenance of the soldiers, his Officers would not deliver without money,
although they had not pay, to the extreme oppression and discouragement of the
Country.

11 That he sent three warrants to Capt. Bushey at Tattershall, to take away a
great quantity of wool, which wa^ bought by Mr. Rawson one of the Committee,
and paid for with hit own money, and so the said Rawson is likely to los^ his
estate, although he has been a sufferer both for Church and Commonwealth this
twenty years, and has made him a Malignant, both in his words and letters, as
much as in him did lie.

12 That when the Enemy took Grantham, they being beaten from one part of the
town, wheeled about to fall upon the other side, at a place called Spittle-gate,
which Major Sarvill being then Major of the Town perceiving, commanded Col.
King being then Capt. of a Company there, to march with his Company to defend
that place, Colonel King answered, that he scorned to be commanded by him, and
rather then he would be commanded by him, he would take his Company and let
the Enemy into the Town, and he delayed so long before he would go, that the
Enemy was entered at the said Port before he came thither, by which means he
betrayed that Town.

13 That when Commissary James had brought in certain sheep from a malignant
for the relief of the siege at Newark, being then in great want, Colonel King
caused the said sheep to be restored to the malignant, and told the Commissarie
that he deserved to be hanged, with diverse other threatening and reviling
speeches; notwithstanding he had order from Sir John Meldrum and the Committee
for the taking of them.

14 That Colonel King havidg promised the Lord of Manchester to raise a great
number of Horse and Foot, the said King, as did appear, not knowing how to
raise so great a number, did to the great discouragement of the Country, take
this course; In the first place he cashiered Major Syler, with him three
hundred Volunteers, which served on their own charge, who with the Townsmen
had always defended the Town of Boston, that he might press them to serve
under him for pay; and secondly, he did seize upon and detain four or five of
the Foot Companies belonging to the Lord Willoughbie, and did cashiere some of
the Captains, because they refused to forsake my Lord to serve under him.

XV. That the Troopers of Colonel Cromwell which were lost at Coleby and
Waddington, were treacherously or ignorantly betrayed by Colonel King.

XVI. That to the great discouragement of the Country he does oppose and
quarrel with such as have been most serviceable to the Country, and such in
whom the power of Religion is most eminent (viz.) Lieutenant General Cromwell,
Mr Ram and others, and that he imprisoned diverse other uery godly men, and that
for exercising the very power of Godliness, which he did in a very scornful
and vile manner, and still continues an utter enemy to such men, as namely
Lieutenant Colonel Berry, Major Lilborne, Captain Chambridge and others.

XVII. That to the great discontent and discouragement of the Country, he and
his Officers did quarrel with, and slight the Committee at Lincoln, which was
settled by Ordinance of Parliament, who were men of the best estates quality and
Integrity, and such as were especially commended to serve the Country; and
publicly vilifying them, and their actions, and assuming their power without
any Authority.

XVIII. That before this war began he was an open and public persecutor and
scoffer of Religious men.

XIX That he is a man of a turbulent and factious spirit, of mean condition
and estate for so absolute a command, that he has received vast sums of money
amounting to about 20000.l. much of which he has levied in an illegal and
obscure way, and issued out accordingly, for which it is desired he may give a
speedy Account, and likewise of the rest of his actins.

XX. That in a factious and seditious manner he did employ some agents to
deliver blue Ribbonds to such as would stand for him, and show themselves his
frinds, to the great terror and discontent of the Country, and the hazard of
raising a dangerous mutiny.

XXI. That he kept about twenty men to wait on him whom he called his life
guard, to whom he gave extraordinary pay, though they were exempted from all
duty, except it were to wait upon him advance his reputation, and awe and
affright the Country.

XXII. That he did awe and gain the Country wholly after him and that he might
with better color dominere, falsely style himself Lieuetenant General of the
County of Lincoln.

Articles against Colonel King, presented to the Commit of the House of
Peers, by Mr. Smith, of Lincolneshire, Sep. 1644.
IMprimis, That the said Colonel King has at sundry times openly contemned
and slighed several Ordinaces of the Lords and Commons now in Parliament
Assembled, to the great discouragement of the Committee and other Officers of
Parliament, within the County of Lincoln, and to the manifest retarding of
the public service, (viz.) The Ordinance for the King, Queen, and Princes
Revenue, with diverse others.

II. That the said Colonel King has not only heretofore been a violent
persecutor of able Ministers, as Mr. Hinshley, and other godly and well
disposed people, for not conforming to Ceremonies, but has persevered therein,
and in a tirannicall manner sithence his command from the Right Honor. the E.
of Manchester, imprisoned diverse religious and godly people in prisons, and a
Dungeon without any fit accommodations, calling them, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Witches, Conjurers and Devils, or words to that effect, threatening them that he
would ship them away, and seize their estates, only for Christian meetings,
which he said was worse then the sin of Witchcraft, and has very much abused
able and godly divines, as Mr. Ram of Spalding, and others that spoke well of
them to him, in their behalf, and has often declared that he would root all
such of his Regiment, which he has done by Arbitrarie and ungodly ways and
practices.

III. That he has diverse times summoned the Country to be and appear before
him and his Officers, which metings he termed Courts and therein showed himself
most intolerable imperious and ^^solent and has therein done very many
tyrannical and Arbitrary actions, Fining diverse persons (as Mr. Wallet, Mr.
Hargrave, and others we^l affected) grievously, and insupportably in the said
pretended Court, for small or no offense, and has sent his agents, Officers
and soldiers who have levien the said fines upon their goods.

IV. That he has received vast sums of money much of which he has raised by
unjust and illegal ways, and wilfully neglecting the preservation of the
County, has done very little or no service with it (before the unhappie Siege
at Newarke) save his defending the town of Boston, which before he commanded
there, was as well defended by voluntires, with little or no charge to the
County, which volunteers were Cashired by him, to the great damage of the
Country.

V. That in a proud and insolent manner, he has exceeded the limits of his
Commission, granted him from the righ^ Honorable the Earl of Manchester, by
assuming to himself the title o^ ^enenerall of the County, and raising men
and horses at his pleasure throughot the whole County, and keeping at the
Countries charge about twenty men to wait on him, which he called his
lifeguard, and usually called the Countries forces is Army, and does direct
his letters to his Father with title of right honorable

VI. That there has been diverse blue ribbons dispersed in the Country by him
or his Agents, to such as would show themselves for him, and procure of set
their hands to petitions for the restoring him to his former commands, and
those who have refused to set their hands contrary to their consciences, have
been threatened, and evil entreated by his said Agents, and he himself did
tell Mr. Tilson and others of the Committee at Boston, in a threatening manner,
when they would not obey his unwarrantabe desires and commands, that troue Blew
was a good color, which has hazarded the raising of a dangerous mutining
among the Souldiedrs and Country men.

FINIS.

