A DECLARATION OF THE COMMANDER in Chief of the Forces in SCOTLAND, And of the
OFFICERS of the Army under his Command, In Vindication of the Liberties of the
PEOPLE, and the Privileges of PARLIAMENT.
HAving, to the great grief of our hearts, been informed of a most unhappy
difference lately fallen out betwixt the Parliament and some Officers of the
Army at London, which has occasioned the displacing of sundry of the said
Officers; And also the interruption of the Members of Parliament in the
discharge of their Duty, We therefore, having earnestly besought the LORD to
direct us in this great and weighty Affair, wherein the Liberty and Peace of
these Nations, and the Interest of the Godly and Faithful therein is so nearly
concerned, do find it our duty to Declare, and we do hereby Declare,

That we shall use our Christian endeavors to the utmost for the begetting of
a Right understanding and Reconciliation betwixt the Parliament and the said
Officers of the Army. And we do also Declare, That we shall, through the
strength of God, assert and maintain the Freedom and Privileges of the present
Parliament, the so often, and lately acknowledged Supreme Authority of these
Nations, and not suffer the Members thereof to be illegally interrupted or
molested in the discharge of their Duties; And we do solemnly avow to all the
world, that our only intention in doing this, is to preserve the Rights of our
Country, and to protect and encourage all the Godly and Faithful therein,
according to our Declaration to the Churches, lately emitted and published; and
likewise to establish the Peace of these Nations, and the Government of a
Free State or Commonwealth, To which we stand obliged by several Vows and
Engagements, made before GOD and many Witnesses: And as we have within us the
Testimony of sincere hearts and unbyassed consciences to encourage us in these
our Undertakings, so we doubt not of the concurrent assistance of all the
unprejudiced Faithful in the Land, for whose sakes principally we are drawn
forth to this Engagement.

And we therefore invite all our Brethren of the Army, and of the Militia, and
all others that profess love to GOD and His People, and to their own and their
Posterities Liberties, to come and give us their cheerful aid in this Work,
whereunto the Lord has called us, lest they be made a Prey to the Lusts of
Men, and then bewail the loss of this opportunity which God has put into
their hands.

Linlithgow, October. 21. 1659. Signed in the Name and by the Consent of the
Commander in Chief and the Officers of the Army in Scotland. WILLIAM CLARKE,
Secretary.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1659.


