An Extract OUT OF A Pastoral LETTER OF THE Bishop of Angers IN FRANCE
CONCERNING, A late Miracle done in the Parish called in French, Des Vlmes de
St. Florent. near to the Town of Saumur, on the second day of June 1668. at
what time those of the reformed Church (as they call themselves) held their
Sinod in the said Town of Saumur.

PARIS, Printed in the Year MDCLXVIII

An Extract out of a Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Angers in France,
concerning a late Miracle done in the Parish called in French Des Ulmes de St.
Florent. near to the Town of Saumur, on the second day of June 1668. at what
time those of the Reformed Church as they call themselves) held their Synod in
the said Town of SAUMUR.
The Bishops words are as follows.
THe Curate of that Parish, having informed us, that on the Saturday within the
Octave of the Blessed Sacrament, happened a miraculous Apparition in his
Church; and that our Savior JESUS CHRIST had visibly manifested himself in the
holy Host: We presently Ordered the Curate of the Town of Saumur to go to
the place, and take exact information of it; which being performed with great
prudence and exactness; he having sent us the Depositions of the Curate, and of
the Vicair, and of several Parishioners, suitable to the first advice sent us,
We Judged it fitting to take our selves the account of the truth of this
Miracle from the Mouths of the Witnesses. Wherefore on the 20th. of this Month
we went thither with our Promoter; and having celebrated the Mass of the Holy
Ghost, for obtaining light necessary for the clearing of so important a Verity;
We Visited that same Host, which yet remained in the Remonstrance where the
apparition was made: And after we had examined most exactly, and were certified
that it could not be done by any Artifice, nor by reflection of light; nor by
any ordinary means of nature; We heard separately the Curate and the Vicair,
and the Parishioners that were nearest to the Altar; as also two Inhabitants of
the Town of Saumur, who had met there, and by their Depositions We understood,
that on the 2d. day of this Month, which was Saturday within the Octave of the
Blessed Sacrament, in time of the Salve, when the Curate sang these words,
Verbn n Caro, Panem Verum, there appeared in the Remonstrance, in place of of
the Host, the form of a Man, his hair falling on his Shoulders, and of a
bright-brown color, his face glittering, his hands crossed, the right hand
over the left; his Body vested with a white garment, in form of an Albe. And
that this Apparition lasted more than a quarter of an hour: as well upon the
Tabernacle where the Sacrament was exposed, as upon the Alter: after the Curate
had taken it down, to show it the people nearer at hand. After which, appeared
a small cloud about it, which being soon dissipated, the Host appeared in its
ordinary shape as it was before this Miracle happened.

This is the Substance of what the Witnesses deposed, who all agreed in the
same thing; so that there is reason to believe, That the Savior of the World
did visibly manifest himself in this Parish, which is one of the poorest of the
Diocese.
The Bishop after a short Pastoral Exhortation, ordained as follows.
THat the same Host in which the Apparition was made, shall be preciously kept
within the same Church Des Vlmes de St. Florent. in a Window, firm and decently
adorned, which shall be made for that purpose near the high Alter on the Gospel
side; and that yearly on the Saturday within the Octave of the Blessed
Sacrament, the Anniversary of this Apparition shall be solemnly celebrated in
the said Church.

Given under the Hand and Seal of the Bishop of Angers, the 25th. of June,
1668.
FINIS.

