A Catalogue Of Books printed for Thomas Basset, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the George near Cliffords Inn in Fleet Street.
Various Histories and Miscellaneous Discourses, etc.
1. COsmography in four Books, containing the Chorography and History of the
World, and all the principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, and Isles thereof. The
5th. Edition corrected and enlarged. By P. Heylin. In Folio, price 20 s. 2. The
Voyages and Travels of the Ambassadors sent by Frederick Duke of Holstein to
the Great Duke of Muscovy and the King of Persia, begun in the Year 1633, and
finished 1639: containing a Complete History of Muscovy, Tartary, Persia, and
other adjacent Countries. Also the Travels of Mandelslo from Persia into the
East Indies, containing a Description of Indosthan the Mogul's Empire, the
Oriental Islands Japan, China, etc. In three Books. The whole illustrated with
Maps and Figures. Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the
Embassy. Englished by J. D. The second Edition. In Folio, price 18 s. 3. An
Historical Account of the Romish State, Court, Interest, Policies, etc. and the
mighty Influences of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other Christian
States, not hitherto extant. Written originally by Monsieur de Sainet Amor,
Doctor of Sorbonne. Englished by J. D. In Folio, price 14 s. 4. The History of
Philosophy, by Tho. Stanley, Esquire In Folio, price 3 l. 5. The History of the
Caribby Islands, viz. Barbados, Saint Christophers, Saint Vincents, Martinico,
Dominico, Barbouthos, Monferrat, Mevis, Antego, etc. in all 28: containing the
Natural and Moral History of those Islands. Illustrated with Sculptures
representing the most considerable Rarities therein described. Rendered into
English by J. D. of Kidwelly. In Folio, price 10 s. 6. Bentivolio and Urania in
six Books, by Nath. Ingelo, D.D. In Folio, price 12 s. 7. Advertisements from
Parnassus; with the Politic Touchstone. Written originally in Italian by that
famous Roman Trojano Boccalim. Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of
Monmouth. In Folio, price 10 s. 8. Londinopolis: An Historical Discourse or
Perlustration of the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Courts of
Justice, Antiquities, and New Buildings thereunto belonging. By James Howell.
In Folio, price 5 s. 9. The Complete Body of the Art Military: Being plain and
perfect Directions for the right ordering and framing of an Army both of Horse
and Foot: together with the manner of Fortifications, and the Art of Gunnery.
By Richard Elton, Lieutenant Colonel. In Folio, price 8 s. 10. The History of
the late Wars in Denmark, comprising all the Transactions (both Military and
Civil) during the differences betwixt the two Northern Crowns, in the Years
1657, 1658, 1659, 1660. Illustrated with several Maps. By R. Manley. In Folio,
Price 6 s. 11. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France,
upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy. In Folio, price 30 s. 12. Ecclesia
Restaurata: or the History of the Reformation of the Church of England,
containing the beginning, progress, and success of it; from the first
preparations to it by King Henry VIII. until the Legal settling of it under
Queen Elizabeth. By Peter Heylin, D.D. The second Edition in Folio, price 10 s.
13. Aerius Redivivus: or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the
beginnings, progress, and successes of that Active Sect, etc. By Peter Heylin,
D.D. In Folio, price 12 s. 14. The History of England extending to the Conquest
of so much of Britain as was subjected by the Romans. Written in the Year 1666,
in Folio, pricee 3 s. 6 d. 15. The Use of the Pen and Pencil, or the Art of
Painting. By William Sanderson, Esquire in Folio, price 2 s. 6 d. 16. Cyprianus
Anglicus: or the History of the Life and Death of William Land Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury; containing also the Ecclesiastical History of the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the first rising till his death. By
Peter Heylin, D.D. The second Edition in Folio, price 10 s. printed 1671. 17.
The History of Romish Treasons and Usurpations: together with a particular
account of many gross Corruptions and Impostures in the Church of Rome, highly
dishonorable and injurious to Christian Religion: with a large Preface to the
Romanists. By H. Foulis, B.D. in Folio, price 20 s. printed 1671. 18. The
Merchants Map of Commerce, wherein the Universal manner and matter of Trade is
compendiously handled. By Lewis Roberts, Merchant. The second Edition in Folio,
price 16 s. printed 1671. 19. Resus^itatio: or bringing into public light
several pieces of the Works Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological,
(hitherto sleeping) of the Right Honorable Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam,
Viscount Saint Alban. In two parts. The third Edition, according to the best
corrected Copies, together with His Lordships Life. By W. Rawley, D.D. His
Lordships Chaplain. In Folio, price 14 s. printed 1671. 20. Fodinae Regales: or
the History, Laws, and Places of the chief Mines and Mineral Works in England,
Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland. As also of the Mint and Money. By Sir
John Pettus, Knight. In Folio, price 5 s. 21. The Art how to know Men.
Originally written by the Si^ur de la Chamber, Counselor to His Majesty of
France, and Physician in ordinary. Englished by J. D. In Octavo, price 3 s. 22.
Various Histories written orginally by Claudius AElianus, rendered into English
by Tho. Stanley. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. 23. Scarrons Novels, viz. The
Fruitless Precaution, the Hypocrites, the Innocent Adultery, the Judge in his
own Cause, the Rival Brothers, the invisible Mistress, the Chastisement of
Avarice. Rendered into English with some Additions by J. Davies. In Octavo,
price 3 s. 24. Hippocrates Aphorisms reviewed and rendered into English, and
digested into an exact and methodical form. In Octavo, price 1 s. 25. Arnaldo,
or the Injured Lovers. A new Romance. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 26. Poems on
several subjects. By Edward Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbery. In Octavo, price 1
s. 27. A further Discovery of the Mystery of Jesuitism, representing the
Humors, Designs, and Practices of those who call themselves The Society of
Jesus. In Twelves, price 2 s. 6 d. 28. Modern Policies taken from Machiavel,
Borgia, and other choice Authors: to which is added Regi Sacrum. By Sir William
Blois, Knight. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 29. Lux Lillio, or Observations upon
these two parts of Grammar, Orthographie and Etymology. By Tho. Seriven, M.A.
In Octavo, price 1 s. 30. Epietetus Junior: or Maxims of Modern Morality, in
two Centuries. Collected by J. Davies of Kidwelly. In Twelves, price 1 s. 31.
The Complete Writing-master: A Copy-book furnished with all the most useful
Hands now practiced by the best Artists in London, with such plain directions
for young Learners, that they may in a short time fit themselves for any Trade
or Employment whatsoever. Invented, written, and engraven, by E. Co^ker. In
Quarto, price 1 s. 32. A Persuasive to Conformity, by way of a Letter to the
Dissenting Brethren, by Jo. Hinckley, M.A. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 33. The
Ceremonies of the Vacant See, or a true Relation of what passes at Rome upon
the Popes death, with the Proceedings in the Conclave for the Election of a new
Pope, according to the Constitutions and Ceremonials; as also the Convocation
and Cavalcade Out of the French by J. Davies. In Octavo, price 1 s. printed
1571. 34. The Life of General M^rk, Duke of Albe^, (...) with Remarks upon his
Actions. By T. G^, D. D. one of his Chaplains. In Octavo, price 4 s. printed
1671. 35. A Help to English History, containing a succession of all the Kings
of England, the English Sa^, and the Brita^s; the Kings and Princes of Wales,
the Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight; as also of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Bishops thereof; with the Description of the places from
whence they had their Titles: together with the Names and Ranks of the
Viscounts, Barons, and Baronets of England. By P. Heylin, D. D. and since his
death continued to this present year 1671, with the Coats of Arms of the
Nobility Blazoned. In Twelves, price 4 s. 36. A Geographical Description of the
four parts of the World, taken from the Notes and Works of the famous Monsieur
Sanson, Geographer to the French King and other eminent Travelers and Authors.
To which are added the Commodities, Coins, Weights, and Measures of the chief
places of Traffic in the World; compared with those of England (or London) as
to the Trade thereof. Also a Treatise of Travel and another of Traffic. The
whole illustrated with variety of useful and delightful Maps and Figures. By
Rich. Blome. In Folio, price 20 s. 37. Titles of Honor. By J. Seldom, Esquire In
Folio, price 20 s. printed 1672. 38. The Egyptian History, treating of the
Pyramids, the Inundation of the Nile, and other Prodigies of Egypt, according
to the Opinions and Traditions of the Arabians. Written originally in the
Arabian Tongue by Murtadi the Son of Gaphiphus. Rendered into French by
Monsieur Vattier, Arabic P^ofessor to the King of France: and thence
faithfully done into English by J D. of Kidwelly. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6. d.
printed 1672.
PLAYS.
39. THe English Princess: or the Death of Richard III. A Tragdy written in the
year 1666, and Acted at the Duke of York's Theater. In Quarto, price 1 s. 6 d.
40. The Roman Generals, or the Distressed Ladies. By J.D. of Grays Inn, Gent.
In Quarto, price 1 s. 41. The Slighted Maid. A Comedy Acted at the Duke of
York's Theater. In Quarto, price 1 s. 42. The Marriage Night. Written by the
Lord Viscount Faulkland. In Quarto, price 1 s. 43. The Spanish Gypsy, as it
was Acted at the Private House in Drury Lane and Salisbury Court. Written by T.
Middleton and W. Rowley, Gent. In Quarto, price 1 s.
DIVINITY.
44. THirty six Sermons: XVII. Ad Aulam, V. Ad Clerum, VI. Ad Magistratum,
VIII. Ad Populum.
By the Right Reverend Father in God Robert Sanderson late Lord Bishop of
Lincoln. The fifth Edition, corrected and amended. In Folio, price 18 s. 45.
S^intilia Altaris: Primitive Devotion in the Fasts and Feasts of the Church of
England. By Edward Spark, D.D. The fourth Edition, consisting of Prose, Poems,
Prayers, and Sculptures on the several occasions. In Octavo, price 7 s. 46. The
Worthy Communicant: or a Discourse of the Nature, Effects, and Blessings
consequent to the Worthy receiving of the Lords Supper; with Devotions fitted
to every part of that Ministration. By Jeremy Tailor, late Lord Bishop of Down
and Connor. In Octavo, price 4 s. 47. The Holy Court. In five Tomes. Written in
French by N. Caussin. Translated into English by Sir T. H. and others. In
Folio, price 30 s. 48. A Summary of Devotions, compiled and used by William
Laud, sometime Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. In Twelves, price 1 s. 49. The
Chief Interest of Man: or a Discourse of Religion, clearly demonstrating the
Equity of the Precepts of the Gospel, and how much a due observance thereof
does conduce to the happiness aad well-being as well of Humane Societies as of
particular persons. By H Lakin. In Twelves, price s. 50. Corporal Worship
discussed and defended in a Visitation Sermon, April 21. 1670. in Saint
Saviorus Southwark. Published to prevent further calumny. By W. Bassett. In
Quarto, price 6 d. 51. Sculptures, the exactest exstant, designed and suited to
every Feast and Fast throughout the Year in the Book of Common Prayer. By Edw.
Spark, D. D. In Octavo, Twelves, and Twenty four.
LAW.
52. AN Abridgment of the Common Law, Alphabetically digested. By Hen. Roll,
Sergeant at Law. Published by the Lord Chief Justice Hali, and approved of by
all the Judges. In Folio, price 40 s. 53. The Reports of Sir George Croke,
Knight, of such select Cases as were adjudged in the times of Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and King Charles I. Collected and written in French by himself,
revised and published in English by Sir Harbottle Gramston, Baronet, Master of
the Rolls. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the Original. In three
Parts. In Folio, price 45 s. 54. All the four Parts of the Institutes of the
Laws of England. I.A Commentary on Littleton. II. An Exposition on Magna
Charta, and other Statutes. III. Concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of
the Crown. IV. Concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. All with necessary Tables
not heretofore printed. In Folio, price 45 s. 55. Brief Animadversions on,
Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to the Fourth Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. By W.
Pryn Esquire In Folio, price 12 s. 56. The Reports of the Learned Edmund Anderson
Knight, late Chief Justice of the Common Bench, of many prncipal Cases argued
and adjudged in the time of the late Queen Elizabeth. In two Parts In Folio,
price 14. s. 57. Reports and Cases taken in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
and seventh Years of the late King Charles, as they were argued at the Common
Pleas Bar. By Sir Tho. H^tley, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and appointed by the
King and Judges for one of the Reporters of the Law. In Folio, price 5 s. 58.
The Reports of Sir John Bridgman, Knight, sometime Chief Justice of Ch^st^r, in
the time of King James. In Folio, price 5 s. 59. The Reports of Judge Owen. In
Folio, price 5 s. 60. Reports of diverse Resolutions in Law, arising upon Cases
in the Court of Wards, and other Courts at Westminst^r, in the Reigns of the
late King James and King Charles. By Sir James Ley Knight and Baroner In Folio,
price 4 s. 61. The Pleader, containing Presidents and Forms of Declarations,
Pleadings, Isiues, Judgments, and Proceedings in all kinds of Actions, Real,
Personal, and Mixed. Collected and published by Jo. H^. In Folio, price 16 s.
62. The Statutes at large. By Ferdinando Palton; and continued to the Year
1670, by T. Manby of L^ I^. In Folio, price 50 s. 63. A Collection of Entries,
etc. by W. Rastall, Esquire Newly amended, and much enlarged with many good
Presidents of late times, whereof diverse are upon sundry Statutes, and noted in
the end of the Table. In Folio, price 3 l. 64. A Book of Entries, containing
Presidents of Courts, Declarations, Informations, etc. By Sir Edward Coke,
Knight. In Folio, price 3 l. 65. Officium Vicecomitu^^: the Office and
Authority of Sheriffs, gathered out of the Statutes and Books of the Common
Laws of this Kingdom. Corrected and very much enlarged by Much. Dalton, Esquire To
which is added a Supplement, containing a Collection of the Statutes touching
Sheriffs made since Mr. Daltons writing, which are in force at this day. In
Folio, price 12 s. 66. The Practical Counselor in the Law touching Fines,
Common Recoveries, Judgments, and the execution thereof; Statutes,
Recognizances, and Bargain and Sale. Collected out of the many great Volums of
the Law. By W. S^eppard, Esquire In Folio, price 12 s. 67. The twelveth and
thirteenth Parts of the Lord Coke's Reports. In Folio, price 7 s. 6 d. 68. B^
J^ialia. In Folio, price 10 s. 69. (...). In Folio, price 6 s. 70. Actions on
the Case for Slander. By W. S^^ppard. In Folio, price 6 s. 71. La^^^'s Reports.
In Folio, price 6 s. 72. Pla^ita Latire Reliviva. A Book of Entries, containing
perfect and approved Presidents of Counts, Declarations, etc. not heretofore
published in Print. Collected out of the Manuscripts of Richard Brownlow, Jo.
Gulston, Rob. Moyl, and Thomas Cory, Esquires; and digested into an exact
method. by R. Aston of Farnivals Inn. In Quarto, price 6 s. 73 The Grand
Abridgment of the Law continued. By W. Hughes. In three Volums in Quarto, price
50 s. 74. The Complete Clerk: containing Forms of all sorts of Presidents for
Conveyances and Assurances; and other Instruments now in use and practice. The
second Edition, very much enlarged. In Quarto, price 12 s. 75. A Treatise of
Forest Laws. By Jo. Manwood. The third Edition, corrected and enlarged. In
Quarto, price 6 s. 76. An exact Book of Entries, of the most select Judicial
Writs used in the Common Law. By Robert Moyle, Esquire late one of the
Prothonotaries of the Court of Kings Bench. In Quarto, price 3 s. 77. An
Abridgment of all the Statutes from Magna Charta until the Year 1670, By E.
Wingate. In Octavo, price 6 s. 78. The Terms of the Law, with Additions. In
Octavo, price 4 s. 79. The Principles of the Law reduced to practice. By Will.
Phillips. In Twelves, price 1 s. 80. The Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tithes
much enlarged throughout the whole Book. By W. Sheppard, Esquire In Twelves, price
1 s. 81. The Complete Attorney: showing the Office of an Attorney in the Courts
of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Pleas in the Exchequer, and the manner of
their Proceedings; together with Instructions for the Solicitation of any
Cause in Chancery, Exchequer Chamber, Duchy Chamber, etc. carefully revised
and enlarged. In Octavo, price 3 s. 82. Littleton's Tenures in French and
English. In Twelves, price 2 s. 6 d. 83. Perkins of the Laws of England. In
Octavo English, price 2 s. 84. The Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and
Administrations. Collected out of the Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws; as
also out of the Customs, Common Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom. By Geo.
Meriton. In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. 85. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens,
etc. according to the several Additions and Alterations of the Law till the
22th. Year of His Majesty's Reign. The third Edition. Collected by Geo.
Meriton. In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. 86. Parsons Law: or a View of Avowsons.
Wherein is contained the Rights of Patrons, Ordinaries, and Incumbents, to
Advowsans, of Churches and Benefices, with Cure of Souls, and other Spiritual
Promotitions. The second Edition, enlarged. By W. Hughes. In Octavo, price 2 s.
6 d. 87. The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England asserted against Sir Ed.
C^kes Articuli Admiralitatis in Chap. 22. of his Jurisdiction of Courts. By R.
Zouch. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 88. The Grounds of the Laws of England. By M.
Hawke. In Octavo, price 3 s. 6 d. 89. The Common Law epitomized. By W. G^son
and A. Gulson, Esquires. In Octavo, price 3 s. 90. The Ancient Legal Course and
Fundamental Coustitution of the Palace Court or Marshalsea: together with the
several Charges of all Proceedings there. In Twelves, price 8 d. 91. The
Complete Justice: being an exact Collection out of such as have treated of the
Office of Justices of the Peace. In Twelves, price 2 s. 92. Justice restored:
or a Guide for His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, both in Sessions and out of
Sessions. The second Edition, enlarged. In Twelves, price 1 s. 93. The Justice
of the Peace his Clerks Cabinet: a Book of Presidents or Warrants fitted and
made ready to his hand, for every Case that may happen within the compass of
his Masters Office. By W. Sheppard, Esquire In Octavo, price 1 s. 94. A Vade mecum,
or Table containing the substance of such Statutes wherein any one or more
Justices of the Peace are enabled to act as well in as out of the Sessions of
the Peace. By W. Young, Esquire In Twelves, price 1 s. 95. A Catalogue of the
Common and Statute Law Books of this Realm, and some others relating thereunto.
Alphabetically digested under proper heads: with an Account of the best
Editions, Volums, and Common prices they are now sold at. In 12. pr. 1 s. 96.
The Law of Conveyances. By Jo. Herne. In Octavo, price 2 s. 97. An Abridgment
of Sir Fra. More's Reports. By W. Hughes, Esquire In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. 98.
Plowden's Quaere's in English. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. 99. An Abridgment of
three Volums of Sir Geo. Crokes Reports. By W. Hughes. In Octavo, price 6 s.
100. The Young Clerks Tutor: being a Collection of the best Presidents of
Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale, Warrants
of Attorney, etc. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 101. Landlords Law: A Collection
of several Cases in the Law concerning Leases, and the Covenants, Conditions,
Grants, Provisoes, Exceptions, Surrenders, etc. of the same: and several other
matters which often come in debate between Landlord and Tenant. The third
Edition. By Geo. Meriton, Gent. In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. 102. An Abridgment
of the Doctor and Student. In Octavo, price 1 s. 103. Reports or Causes in
Chacery. Collected by Sir G. Carry. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 104. Formulae
Been placitandi. A Book of Entries, containing variety of choice Presidents of
Counts, Declaration, Informations, Pleas in Bar and Abatement, Replications,
Rejoynders, Issues, Verdicts, Judgments, Utlaries, and Avowries: and diverse
other Pleadings in Real, Personal, and Mix Actions. Collected from the
Manuscripts as well of some of the late Learned Prothonotaries of the Court of
Common Pleas, as of diverse eminent Practisers in the Court of Kings Bench.
Never before extant in Print. Methodically digested under apt Titles, with an
exact Table. By W.B. a Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas. In Folio, price 12
s. printed 1671. 105. The Lord Dyer's Reports: with a Table never before
printed with it. In Folio, printed 1671. 106. Cowels Interpreter. Corrected and
very much enlarged. By Tho. Manley. In Folio, printed 1671. 137. The Complete
Solicitor. Corrected and enlarged. In Octavo, price 3 s. Printed 1672.
Now in the Press.
108. The Lord Coke's Eleven Volums of Reports in French, with a Table never
before printed with them. In Folio. 109. A new Dictionary in English and
Latin. By Thomas Holy-Oake. In Quarto.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by R. Battersby for Thomas Bassett, Bookseller at the George
near Cliffords Inn in Fleetstreet. 1672.


