MINERVA's Check to the Author, Attempting to write an VIVIT POST-FVNERA VIRTUES

blazon or coat of arms ELEGY Upon the Right Honorable and much to be Lamented
ROGER First Earl of ORRERY, Who departed this Life at CASTLE-MARTER in the
County of CORK in IRELAND, 16 Octobris Anno 1679.
THat News has Wings, we every day do find,
And Ill does ever leave the best behind:
Admire not then the death of ORRERY,
Renowned all is days, should in a moment fly,
Both far and near the World to terrify.
At Cork, at Dublin, London, and at Paris
Too soon't arrives, and ROME, but there never tarries,
Till at both Indies, or where ever more far is.
Amongst the Worlds Treasuries, it there declare,
Than any theirs, a Pearl more rich, more rare
W' have lost; thus ranging all the World about,
Finds many zealous mournful Poets out:
But still I thought the Muses triple Trine,
And Learned Crew concerned, must have design
Some Eagles Quill should make the worthy Pen,
To write their Dictates on the best of Men;
But chanced to view a mournful Elegy
Upon his Death, enough to stupifie
The Reader, whilst the Poet did invite
Each Poetaster on him Distichs to write.
This Author took I for good warrant to it,
To be as bold as any Errant Poet:
But quick as Thought Minerva said in haste,
Hold, hold, poor man! don't Time and Paper waste;
He was my Foster Child, 'twas my good hap
The Babe to dandle first upon my Lap,
Who kindly took my Breasts, and throve so well,
That in the Liberal Arts he did excel.
Thy groveling Fancy, and too low pitched Eye,
Cannot reach up unto the Poets Sky:
Be not like those that to shoot up are-bold,
At what their dazzled sense cannot behold:
Thine hand to the Stars thou may extend as well,
As ORRERY's due praise conceive, or tell:
His Noble Birth, Life, Death, is a fit Story,
Reserved to Crown some Poet Laureat's Glory:
His Dust is Sacred, therefore do not dare
The Muses Darling, and the Graces Dear,
With thy rude Rhimes, devoid of Time and Measure,
Once to profane, (a Sacred Poet's Treasure.)
I blessed him young thus 'bove thy reach, and stature,
Besides what Mars bestowed on's Noble Nature.
Thou fain would tell how the Graces still invite him
Their Guest, when Mars does cease to excite him
Brighter in Arms, than's Arts ere-while to shine,
In God's and's King's cause still defending thine.
His care to breed brave Horses thou would write,
In Peace for Pleasure, and in War for fight:
Thou fain would talk on' s Victory at Knockny Clarshy,
And give him (next to God) the God-a-mercy;
While thousands yet alive would with thee say,
His Prowess (under God) obtained that Day.
But what is this to all that he has done,
To the Towns and Castles he by force has won?
Thou Would find an endless Task on 't, to declare
His Peaceful Virtues, or 's exploits in War.
In general terms I know thou would praise thus far,
Prudent in Counsel, prosperous in War:
But home to speak his praise, and to descend
Unto particulars, there were no end.
Singly admire his prudence in the thing,
So well contrived that did restore the King,
Whose constant Loyalty since the Restoration
'S a worthy pattern to the unstable Nation.
Thou kenst not of the Knots, or the Meanders
Of State-Intrigues, displayed amongst bold Commanders.
Then lay thy Pen by, don't in the least Eclipse
A General's Glory by thy Pen, or Lips.
Let England, Scotland, Ireland, mourning say,
For threescore years and more enjoyed have they,
In ORRERY an Atlas, lost this day.
His death's a loss unparalled, the King
A grave wise Counselor, and most loving
Subject has lost, the Church a Gracious Son,
The Realm a Peer, yea, and a Peerless one;
The Court a Pillar, the Army a Commander
Of high Conduct, as was great Alexander;
The Countries loss as great yea greater rather,
In ORRERY is lost a most dear Father.
The have company enough, who, than to mourn,
Cannot other glory add unto his Urn.
I tell thee still thou need'st not, can not write
Great ORRERY's due praise, who Shines too bright
His Sacred Poems now but in the Press,
Will speak his noble praise in fairer dress:
His Wit and Worth were 'bove thy Ken or Story,
Who therefore's wrapped into immortal Glory.
But 'cause thou had a mind to do thy best,
Thou, with his Coat of Arms, a Mourner rest.
Thou art forewarned (she said.) Now farewell Friend.
So ere I had begun, I made an END.
T. B.

LONDON: Printed for Rowland Reynolds, at the Middle-Exchange in the Strand.
1680.


