BETHLEHEMS BEAUTY, LONDONS CHARITY, AND THE CITIES GLORY.
A Panegyrical Poem on that Magnificent Structure, lately Erected in
Moorfields, vulgarly called New-Bedlam.
Humbly Addressed to the Honorable Master, Governors, and other Noble
Benefactors of that Splendid and most useful Hospital.
Licensed

September 16. 1676. Roger L'Strange.



STory no more shall Ancient Fabrics boast,
The mouldering Pyramids on Egypts coast;
Sol's vast Colossus, or those mighty Things
Which with Mortality upbraided Kings:
All these could but vain Ostentation yield,
Whilst we for Use and Charity do Build.
When LONDON did in Funeral Ashes lie
But Ten years since, The Grief of every Eye,
Where Desolation Triumphed in each Street,
Trampling our Stately'st Structures under Feet.
Who durst Predict, or hope so soon to see
Her thus Rebuilt, with greater Majesty?
Houses! whose height and strength seem to Conspire,
To o'retop Thunder, and defiance Fire;
The Sun beholds not a more Brave Exchange,
Nor spacious Streets that in like order Range;
Whose lofty Fronts harmoniously Advance,
As if (like Thebs) their Building were a Dance:
Her Public Halls as Palaces appear,
And outvie Princes Courts sometimes for Cheer:
Her Sacred Temples in a Decent State,
Teach us with Awe and Reverence to wait
There on our Glorious Maker, at once free
From profane Filth, and gaudy Pageantree;
Nor doubt I, Aged Paul's! Thy Reverend Pile
To see Restored, The Glory of our Isle,
And for Rare Works, as well as Faith, become
Superior far to Peter's Fane at Rome.
But to speak these Glories, needs an abler Muse,
Ours only dares a Suburb Wonder choose:
BEDLAM! That shall a lasting Witness be
Of this great Cities generous Piety:
Magnificent Foundation! such as shows
The greatness of their Souls by whom it Rose;
So Brave, so Neat, so Sweet it does appear,
Makes one Half-Madd to be a Lodger there;
And those poor Souls, whose Crazed Brains advance
Their Roving Fancies to the Extravagance
Of being Princes, needs must think it True,
When they shall such a Towering Palace View.
Since, Strangers that Survey the Galleries,
Find the Vast Length wearies their Traveling eyes;
And some cry-out, "If such a Place befits
"Madmen, Henceforth who will Study to be Wits?
A hundred Rooms in curious order stand
Each with its Bed and Furniture at hand.
The Approaching Air, in every gentle Breeze,
Is Fan'd and Winnow'd through the neighboring Trees,
And comes so Pure, the Spirits to Refine,
As if the wise Governors had a Design
That should alone, without Physic Restore
Those whom Gross Vapors discomposed before;
But this Conceit is stifled by their Care,
The best of Arts Assistance to prepare,
What e're Galenick or Hermetick Skill
Offers in Natures Aid, is ready still.
Convenient Diet's liberally bestowed,
And all meet Helps from time to time Allowed:
Though many here their Reason do Regain,
Yet none has ever Reason to Complain.
Here that mischeivous Hagg, black Melancholy,
Mother of Discontent, and Nurse of Folly
Circe's Transforming Magic strangely Apes,
And changes Men into a Thousand shapes,
Some Raving Wild, and some like Statues fixed,
Democritus with Heraclitus mixed.
One Fancies still his Cruel Mistress by,
To'ther upbraids her Friends Inconstancy,
He, Weaves Straw-Bracelets, which he calls her Hair,
And She, of the Wall writes Letters to her Dear,
The only True Lovers, now adays are here.
One still makes Almanacks, and those as True,
I dare engage, as most that Print them, do.
Another Rails at Rome, with as much Sense
As some abroad for Conventicle Pence.
Thus do fond Love, wild Zeal, fierce jealousy,
Immod'rate Studies, pinching Poverty,
All Clubb to People this sad Colony.
What Objects then more claim our Charity,
Than these that know not their own Misery;
And where such poor Distracted Souls are fed,
How fitly is it called, The House of Bread.
Thrice Noble Patriots, you have made it so,
Immortal Thanks we to your Bounty owe,
Whose Liberal Hands and Contributions raise
This Mighty Work, which the next Age must praise,
Ours only can Admire; may Heaven bless
Your Brave Designs with suitable Success.
May every Wretch comes here his Sense obtain,
To pay your Costs with Grateful Prayers again,
That when full Ripe with Honor, and with Years,
Your happy Dissolution day appears.
Perfuming Earth with your Exemplar Fames,
The Eternal Book may Register your Names,
Free Citizens of the New Jerusalem,
To Reign with Him was Born in Bethlehem.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Sear in Sweethins Ally near the Royal Exchange,
1676.


