The battle of Bodwell-bridge, OR, The KINGS CAVILEERS TRIVMPH.
To be sung with a pleasant New Tune.
HEarken and take head, I will tell you a thing,
How that the Whigs soldiers all did conveen;
From Irwin to Air, to Glasgow they came,
And marched like men in good order;
They marched throw Glasgow with pipe and with drum
The gallant brave Soldiers they kept their ground
Thinking the Kings Cavileers for to Gainstand,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
They marched by day, so did they by night,
And their Master Welsh, he led them full right,
Of the Bodwell-Bridge they got a full sight,
And planted their tents on the border.
On Sunday at morn when Phoebus did rise,
The Whigs thought the Cavileers for to surprise,
But ere they wist well they wakned them thrice,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
That false Rebel Welsh, a Chiftan not good,
Where into his cause there was spilt miekle blood,
But yet the Kings Caveleers lited their weed,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
They came to the Bridge without a gainstand,
Our noble Kings-Reed Coats lay ready at hand;
Their false Chiftan left them to flee or to stand,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
There was the Duke-Monmoth and Generall-Deyell,
With Canons and Muskets the Whigs for to fell,
The silly poor Whigs got many a knell,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
The Second Part,
To the same Tune.
To the Bodwell Bridge, these Conventicles yed,
Our noble Kings Caveleers came with good speed,
They hewed down the Whigs-men, and spilt miekle blood,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
And when the Whigs Cannons began for to style,
They thought the brim battle to win by a wyle,
But ere they wist well, they got a beguile,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
Our noble good Chiftan brave Generall-Deyell,
Commanded his men on their faces to fall,
The Reed-Coats escaped the Whigs Cannon ball,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
The stout English Caveleers of great renown,
They styled their Cannons the Whigs to ding down,
The silly poor Whigs got many a wound,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
Their was not a man slain on our side at all,
But only two men with the Whigs Cannon ball,
And for these two men two thousand did fall,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Earl of Ligthgow, and brave Earl of Mar
Themselves and their Regements like brave men of war
They dang down the Whigs-men and gave them a char
From the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Earl of Athol and gallant Montrose,
They pulled the Whigs-Piriweegs over their nose,
Their Captains and Chiftans did sleep in their hose,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Captan Clavers, with his good Draguns,
He scattered the Whigs through the south Country bounds,
He gave them many sore deadly wounds,
When they came to the Battle of Bodwell.
And when the Whigs sojors began for to flee,
The good Captain Clavers after them would be,
And no man with him but his own Company;
When they ran from the Battle of Bodwell.
But the good Duke Monmoth would not let them gang,
For fear that the Whigs had done them much wrong,
The Whigs they were scattered through all the land,
When they ran from the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Earl of Marischall both valiant and keen
He gathered his Regement at New Aberdeen,
But ere he wist well the fighting was done,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Earl of Aboyne, without all delay,
He gathered his Regements and so went away,
With all his brave Trowpers in Battle array,
For to fight at the Battle of Bodwell.
A gallant Horss-Randevouze their did conveen,
Of Nobles and Gentles at New-Aberdeen;
But ere they wist well the fighting was done,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
She stout Earl of Erroll of good great renown,
^^e drew up his Regement at Aberdeen's Town
^ut ere they wist well the fighting was done,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
The good Lord of Grant, with his brave men of wear
Like gallant brave Trowpers well dressed in their gear
They went to the Whigs without any fear,
For to fight at the Battle of Bodwell.
They marched throw Brichen with loud trumpet sound
Like gallant brave Troupers they kept their ground
But ere they wist well the fighting was done,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
Both he and Lord Duffus came in by White stane,
Lord Duffus had footmen both valiant and keen;
But ere they wist well the fighting was done,
At the place of the Battle of Bodwell.
Of all these good Chiftans I Will now make an end,
Hoping all good Christians not to offend,
I wish never such fighting be seen in this land,
As was the brim Battle of Bodwell.
FINIS.

