THE Dreadful, and Terrible, Day of the LORD GOD, to overtake this Generation
suddenly; once more Proclaimed.
CLouds and darkness are round about him, he comes with Clouds, and every eye
shall see him; and they that have peirced him shall mourn bitterly. Howl, howl,
howl ye Inhabitants of the Earth; who have made a Covenant with Death, and with
Hell are at an Agreement, the Overflowing Scourge comes; all your Lies shall
be swept away suddenly; as in a moment, naked and bare must you appear, and
stand before the Lamb the Judge of the whole Earth, of the Quick and the Dead.
Oh! oh! what will you do in that day, ye Scoffers, ye Mockers, ye Ranters, ye
Wantoners, ye Gamsters, ye Sporters, ye Cheaters, cozeners, deceivers,
oppressors, covetous, unrighteous; Tyrants over the witness, and witnesses of
God, who make merry over it. The Terrible, terrible, terrible, dreadful day of
the Lord God is at hand: Oh who shall deliver you, and whether will you run, or
fly, while your only Refuge, will be your Judge, Pursuer, Condemner, will mock
at your destruction, when your fear comes as a whirlwind. Hear, hear, hear, O
ye Inhabitants of the Earth; The great and terrible day of the Lord God,
wherein he will arise to Judgment, breaks forth upon you suddenly: Oh what
will you do ye Hypocrites, ye dawbers, ye painters, ye persecutors, ye whose
Silver is become Brass, and Brass, Iron; whose Heavens are become Brass, and
Earth Iron. Ye deceivers, Inchanters, benighting, and being benighted: Oh the
dreadful day that is to overtake you suddenly. Behold I will arise says the
Lord, as upon Mount Perizim, and will be wrath as in the valley of Megiddon, and
will bring forth my work; and behold vengeance is in my heart, and I will
execute it in behalf of the meek, and such as have no helper in the Earth. Oh!
oh! oh that men might in time hear, and fear, and consider; But men in honor
not understanding are like the Beasts that perish.

I. S.

Friends and people every where that mention the name of the Lord in this the
day of his mighty power, in which he will work wonders.

Thus says the Lord God, keep to the measure of my spirit manifested in your
hearts, every one to your own, and be still, be still retired, keeping low, in
the dread and true humillity, of mine Eternal, single spirit of Judgment and
truth alone: Feel me the living God your habitation, your strength, your peace,
your Rock, your Iustifier in all thing; for behold I will sweep, I will sweep,
I will fan, I will sift the Nations to the bottom to the ground I will crush, I
will break I will scatter, I will demolish I will desolve all flesh (that has
corrupted its way,) all Mountains, all Ceaders, all strong holds; I will break
through, as he that breaks through gates of Brass, and bars of Iron, I will
toss and whirl the Mountains and hills in my fury, as he that tosseth a Ball, I
will overturn Towers, and fenced places, as he that turns up the mowen grass,
I will dry up Rivers and deeps, and I will bring up deeps to light, which has
not been known, behold I will work wonders, and miracles, and signs, in Heaven
and Earth, and the Sea, to the astonishment of all flesh (which shall fail
before me) for I am a jealous God, a mighty, terrible, and dreadful God,
rewarding every one according to his doings.

Tremble ye Inhabitants of the Earth, for I will shake all nations, dread, and
quake, and tremble before me, ye Kings, and Princes, and all ye great men and
Rulers of the Earth, your strength is as Stubble before me, I am come in my
fury and zeal, to render a recompense for all your doings.

Tremble ye careless daughters, weep and howl ye women that are at ease, for
behold the day of your mourning is at hand, in which you shall be as Widows,
and all you daughters of Music, you shall wail and sigth bitterly: Cry out
and roar like Bears, all ye deceivers, all ye profane hierlings, changeable
Priests, Bishops, Friars, Deans, Monks, Popes, Cardinals, and all ye unclean
birds of prey, which have caused the people to Err for lack of knowledge, my
terrible, notable, and dreadful day of vengeance is coming upon you; I Will shake,
I Will astonish, I Will confound you, ye deviners, ye Inchanters, ye dreamers, ye
Sorcerers, ye liars, ye Murderes, ye Whore-mongers, ye bewichers, I Will make you
mad, I Will amaze you, I Will distract you, I Will strike you with blindness, and
madness, and astonishments; and you shall curse your Gods, and your Kings, and
you shall fret your selves, and gnaw your tongues for pain and vexation.

Cry roar, howl, tremble, and be ye horribly Confounded, all ye Idolaters,
Superstioners, deceitful workers, and all Hypocrites, the day of vengeance is in
my heart against you, my Indignation burns, it is kindled, it flameth, it shall
consume you, and leave you neither root nor branch.

Behold the end of all flesh is come up before me, Rejoice ye upright in heart,
ye undefiled, ye humble, and contrite ones, Rejoice with fear and trembling,
rejoice thou heaven, rejoice thou seed of Jacob, and of Abraham my friend,
rejoice thou true Isralite, in whom is no guile, rejoice ye holy Apostles, and
Prophets, and Saints, sing aloud upon your beds of Eternal rest, all ye
Martyers, who love not your lives unto death, you followers of the Lamb ye
Redeemed by his blood, ye chosen, ye faithful and true witnesses, sing praises
for ever, and Halelujahs for ever, for I the mighty God of Israel, the
everlasting Jehovah, the I Am (and there is none can deliver out of my hand)
will work and, none shall hinder; fear not ye babes of uprightness, ye single
hearted, ye noble plants of my renown, and glory, who dwell in the retiredness
in my secret, dreadful infallible life, and Counsel and wisdom, fearing to
offend me the mighty just God; fear not the rage wrath, and fury of your
Aversaries, though an Host Encamp about you to destroy you; for behold my
Bridle is in the Jaws of the Red Dragon, and my hook is in the nose of the
feirce Leviathan, though no man can tame them, yet I the Lord God of all might
and power, (who formed the crooked Serpent) will make my sword to pierce
through his Liver, fear not, I can break up his scales though like scales of
Brass, and draw his tongue out of his mouth, and the sting of venom when I
please, fear ye not the wrath of man, neither be afraid of their revilings, and
threatenings, (but feel my pure, Innocent, harmless, upright life, and power in
yout vessels;) for behold I Will trample, and tread them under my feet and your
feet, as one that treads upon mortar, and no Idolater, Hypocrite, or wicked
person, shall escape my mighty hand.

Therefore be silent, oh all flesh, for I am arisen in my holy habitation to
plead with all Nations, come to Judgment oh all ye ungodly and receive your
sentence, Behold it draws near, prepare to the battle of my everlasting
vengeance, and recompenses; oh all ye workers of iniquity, for my soul is
filled with jealousy, and everlasting vengeance is in my heart against you,
have you not been often warned of my righteous Judgments to come? have not my
servants proclaimed them in your streets and dwelling places? have I not cried
(through them) my mighty day, which comes like a Theif in the Night upon the
wicked? Can you say, you never heard the report thereof? Can you say you were
not warned, within you, and without you? Then will I stay my fury.

But behold, I have sent my messengers early and late unto you, to warn,
reprove, and exhort you, but you have hardened your hearts, and stifned your
necks, and closed your eyes, and stopped your ears, against them, and their
message; and not only so, but you have reviled them, and mocked them, and
stoned them, and buffeted them, and abused them, and persecuted them, and
Imprisoned them, and some of them you have caused thereby to suffer death, etc.
And what will you now do? will you say when saw we thee sick, and in Prison and
did not visit thee? Or when saw we thee an hungered, or suffer affliction, and
did not minister unto thee? I tell you in as much as you have done violence to
these my servants, and messengers, (whom I sent unto you,) you have done it
unto me; and in as much as you showed them no mercy, you have showed no mercy
unto me, for they came not unto you in their own wills and name, but in the
will of him that sent them, therefore are you left without excuse, or can any
of you say (to my face) you knew not that you were reproved for sin, or did not
know what was iniquity or transgression against me, the pure holy God? Can you
say that we knew not that Pride was sin, or that Lying was sin, or swearing was
sin, or you knew not that whoredom was sin, or drunkenness, or cheating, or
scoffing, or envy, malice, and corrupt Communication, or wantonness or unjust
dealing is sin? Or can you say, you knew not that doing wrong to your Neighbor
(as you would not be done unto is sin, or Murder or Adultry is sin? If you can
say in truth that you knew not these things, whether they were good or evil,
then will I yet stay my vengeance from descending upon you.

But behold my witness in your own Consciences, the light of my spirit has
often strived with you, and manifested these things unto you, and checked you,
and reproved you, which shall now eternally condemn you; and to it I have set
my Seal, that neither heaven nor Earth shall deliver you, Amen.

Given forth, in the Eternal motion of the word of God, by W. B.

The END.

