PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Cook.
WIth that assurance we to day address,
As standar'd Beauty certain of success;
With careless Pride at once they charm and vex,
And scorn the little Censures of their Sex.
Sure of the unregarded Spoil, despise
The needless affectation of the Eyes.
The softening Languishment that faintly warms,
But trust alone to their resistless Charms.
So we secured by undisputed Wit,
Disdain the damning Malice of the Pit.
Nor need false Art to set great Nature off,
Or studied tricks to force the Clap, and Laugh.
Ye Wou'd-be Critics you are all undone,
For here is no Theme for you to work upon.
Faith, seem to talk to Jenney, I advise;
Of who, like who, and how Loves Markets rise:
Try these hard Times how to abate the Price,
Tell her how Cheap were Damzels on the Ice!
Amongst City Wives and Daughters that came there,
How far a Guinny went at Blanket-fair!
Thus you may find some good Excuse for failing,
Of your beloved Exercise of railing;
That when friend cries; -- how does the Play succeed,
Damme -- I hardly minded, what they did.
We shall not your ill Nature please to Day,
With some fond Scriblers new uncertain Play,
Loose as vain Youth, and tiresome as dull Age,
Or Love and Honor, that o're-runs the Stage:
Famed and substantial Authors give this Treat,
And 'twill be solemn! Noble all, and Great!
Wit! sacred Wit, is all the buis'ness here,
Great Fletcher! and the Greater Rochester!
Now name the hardy Man one fault dares find,
In the vast work of two such Hero's joined.
None but Young Strephon's soft and powerful Wit,
Durst undertake to mend what Fletcher writ.
Different his Heavenly Muse, yet both agree,
To make an everlasting Harmony.
Listen ye Virgins to his Charming Song,
Eternal Music dwelt upon his Tongue:
The Gods of Love and Wit inspired his Pen,
And Love and Beauty was his Glorious Theme;
Now Lady you may Celebrate his Name,
Without a Scandal on your spotless Fame:
With sighs his dear loved Memory pursue,
And pay his Wit, what to his Eyes was due,
'Twill please his Ghost even in the Elizian shade,
To find his Power has such a Conquest made.
Epilogue
by a Person of Quality. Spoken by Mrs. Barrey.
IT IS well the Scene is laid remote from hence,
'Twould bring in Question else our Authors Sense.
Two Monstrous, things produced for this our Age;
And no where to be seen but on the Stage.
A Woman Ravished and a great man wise,
Nay honest too without the Least disguise.
Another Character deserves great blame,
A Cuckold daring to revenge his shame:
A surly ill Natured Roman wanting wit,
Angry when all true Englishmen submit,
Witness the tameness of the well Horned Pit.
Tell me ye fair ones, pray now tell me why
For such a fault as this to bid me dye:
Should Husbands thus Command and Wives obey,
'Twoul'd spoil our Audience for the next New Play,
Too many wanting who are here to day.
For, I suppose if e're that happen to ye,
'Twas force prevailed you said he would undo ye.
Struggling, cried out, but all alas in Vain,
Like me you Underwent the Killing pain.
Did you not pity me, Lament each groan,
When left with the wild Emperor alone:
I know your Tender Natures, did Partake,
At least in Thought you suffered for my sake,
And in my Rape bearing a friendly part,
Each had her Valentinian in her Heart.
Printed for Charles Tebroe.


