The Alewives Invitation to Married-Men, and Batchelors. SHOWING How a Good
Fellow is slighted when he is brought to Poverty.
Therefore take my Counsel, and Alewives don't trust,
For when you have wasted, and spent all you have,
Then out of Doors she will you headlong thrust,
Calling you Rascal, and shirking Knave.
But so long as you have Money, come early or late,
You shall have her at Command, or else her Maid Kate.
To a New Tune; or, Digby's Farewell.




GOod fellows conse hither, it is to you I speak,
Good Counsel here is for you, if you will it take,
In thy Pockets may save thee many a Town,
Where ever thou walk in City, or Town:
It Is known a Good fellow I Have been many a year,
And much have I spent in wine and strong here:
For so long as I had money, my kind Hostess she,
Would cry, come when thou will boy, thou art welcome to me.
For she knew, late or early, a-pace I would call,
And whoever drink it, yet I Would pay for all;
Which made her take delight much in my company;
But it was more for the love of my money, then me:
And so long as my credit and stock it would hold,
Come early or late, I might have what I would:
For so long as I had money, my kind Hostess she,
Would cry, Come when thou will, Boy, thou art welcome to me.
But when I had masted and consumed my store,
And had nothing to mortgage, or sell to make more,
Unto my fine Hostess I then told me my tale,
She must lend me some money, or I go to'th' Goal:
Nay tarry, said she, I don't see it so rife,
Is It not lend you a penny, if 'twould save your life:
This was all the comfort that I got from she
That always pretendeding friend for to be.


Therefore it is good to save something in store,
Make much of a little, and 'twill increase more;
For the times they are hard, and money is scant,
And by drinking there many a man comes to want:
Then whilst you have goods, either house or yet land,
Besure to be careful, and keep't in your hand.
For so long as I had money, my kind Hostess she,
Would cry, Come when thou will, Boy, thou art welcome to me.
Let a Man come to to an Alehouse though Clothes they be poor,
And if that she sees you have silver good store,
She Will bid you sit down, and you're welcome beside,
And whatever you tall for, you are not denied;
But when you have wasted, and consumed your store,
Away with this fellow, thrust him out of door:
For you have, etc.
This by experience there is many finds true,
Which makes both their backs, and their bellies to ruc,
Whilst they have a penny, or credit will go,
They never will give over, though it brings them to woe,
But there sit and tipple whilst a drop will go down:
Come sill us more Liquor, though it cost me a Crown:
Thus his Money does fly, and he wastes his Pelf,
The next day he is ready to hang himself.
Then let me advise all Good Fellows that be,
Once learn to be wiser in ever degree;
In your youthful days keen something in store,
Lest you're fort'd when you're old, to beg at the door:
Don't spend all thou get, to make others brave,
When thy Wife and thy Children, never a rag have.
For so long as I had money, my kind Hostess she,
Would cry, Come when thou will, Boy, thou art welcome to me.
But when thou have good Monty make much of the same,
Don't drink it, and spend it in an unlawful Game:
And it is good for all young men to be well advised;
You see a good Husband to fortune does rise;
But a Spendthrift you see is regarded by none,
His Word will not go, let him be never so young.
But while you have money, etc.
Though a Man he has Means, he may spend all he have,
Then he unto others must be a bond slave;
Then he sighs, and he grieves when it is too late,
He should be such a fool to part with his Estate:
But while he uv'd bravely, O then day and night
Drinking and Ranting it was his delight;
But now all is consumed wasted and gone,
He may look o'th bare walls, and make his sad moan.
For now he is slighted, because he is grown poor,
Nor none will him pity, nor increase his store,
But mock him, and sear him, in his Poverty;
You might have been wiser they will to him reply:
So he is a Fool that will rant to make others brave,
And all his lise after, to live like a slave;
But he is a Wise Man, the which does take pains,
And then lets his Family taste of the Gains.
And thus all you young Men, you plainly may see,
This Song it will learn you good Husbands to be,
If thou go to an Alehouse, and have store of Cash, none;
She Will make thee welcome so long asit lasts;
But when thy pockets are empty, and silver thou have
She Will look sightly on thee, though thou makes fad moan:
But so long as you have money, your kind Hostess she,
Will cry, Come when thou will, Boy, thou art welcome to me.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pye-Corner.


