A New BALLAD
Of a Famous German PRINCE and a renowned English DUKE, who on St. James's day
One thousand 666 fought with a Beast with Seven Heads, called Provinces; not by
Land, but by Water; not to be said but sung; not in high English nor Low Dutch;
but to a new French Tune, called Monsieur Ragou, or, The Dancing Hobby-horses.

THere happened of late a Terrible Fray
Begun upon our On Saint James's day (1581) the Seven Provinces first Resolved
themselves into Free-States.
S. James's day.
With a Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump,
Thump, Thump, a Thump, Thump.
Where Rupert and George for CHARLEMAIGN
Swing'd the Dutch again and again,
(As if they had been but the French or Dane)
With a Thump, etc.
'Twas brave Tom Allen led the Van,
Stout Vtber, and bold Tiddiman,
With a Thump, etc.
And then our Immortal GENERALS
With twenty thousand Thunder-balls
Pierced their boggie flesh-mud-walls
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
The Game was hot, and then you will swear
That Jordan (Heart of Oak) was there
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
And gallant Holmes that never fails,
Torn and hurt, yet still prevails,
Valiant with or without his Sails,
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
The Royal Charles was all their Aim
(For there they knew was Princely Game)
With a Thump, etc.
Seven Provinces here spend their Quire,
( De Ruyter's mighty Triple Tire)
But had his Answer all in Fire
With a Thump, etc.
For here our glorious Prince and Duke
Gave him such a sore Rebuke
With a Thump, etc.
That now De Ruyter finds it clear
The Warlike English have no peer,
Who dare do any thing but Fear
A Thump, Thump, etc.
The Sovereign came to revenge her Wrongs,
(Becalmed a while for want of Lungs,
Without any Thump, etc.)
But soon as her dreadful Sail displaid
Good Lord what Lanes and Wrecks she made!
The Devil a Dutch came nigh or staid,
For fear of a Thump, Thump, etc.
Her Balls of Fire the Flemming sees
Are thrice as big as a Holland-Cheese,
With a Thump, etc.
And now they ran, they ran, they ran,
And left poor Zealand shift as it can;
They made him the Rere, who would be the Van
-Van Trump, Trump, Trump, etc.
The Kings own Colors ( Red and White)
Pursued the Boors all day and night
With a Thump, etc.
O how 'twould Lords and Commons please
To see our Sovereign of the Seas,
Chasing their Seven Provinces
With a Thump, etc.
Over Flatts and Banks we fired their tails
(Till we heard their croaking Nightingales)
With a Thump, etc.
This difference 'twixt two Navies stands,
Ours built for the Sea, and theirs for the Sands,
We had sent them else to their last Netherlands
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
Their Shot still at our Tackling flew,
Lest when they ran we should pursue
With a Thump, etc.
For though the Dutch are Seamen grown,
Bold English are the Marks-men known,
And therefore kill them six for one
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
Our Rere was Smith, with other two
(Spragge and Kempthorn) both true Blew,
With a Thump, etc.
And here the Zealanders came on,
Who stoutly gave us Gun for Gun,
Till Holland-like they also run
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
In In, In In, said Valiant Spragge,
We Will beat this vapouring Trump to the Hague
With a Thump, etc.
His Chaplain fell to his wonted work.
Cried Now for the King and the Duke of York!
He prayed like a Christian, and fought like a Turk
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
Six thousand Dutch (a Low Country Dish)
We sent to their own Cozen the Fish
With a Thump, etc.
The rest into Holes so tamely crawl
That little Fanfan dared them all,
Great Rupert's Sloop is an Admiral,
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
What Amsterdamnable Cowards are these
To boast that they were Lords of the Seas
With a Thump, etc!
Their Impudent Gazette proclaims
How bravely they locked up the Thames!
But had no leave from CHARLES or JAMES,
And therefore had a Thump, Thump, etc.
And now De Witt's new Holland Rump
(Who rides the States) will burn to the Stump
With a Thump, etc.
For George in England once before
Has fired one Rump, and will do more
Till Men and Bells all Dutch-land over
Sing Rump, Rump, etc.
Then let them invent some other Cheat,
Go hang their Captains 'cause they are bear
With a Thump, etc.
Let Monsieur or Mine Here that snarls
At our Sovereign and Royal Charles,
Beware of Ruperts and Albemarles
With a Thump, Thump, etc.
Printed in the Year, 1666.


