The Bishop of St. David's CASE.
THE Bishop having bin libel'd against before the Archbishop of Canterbury, for
matters of an heinous nature, supported with great Clamours; thought it for his
reputation not to insist upon his Privilege of Peerage, to prevent any Proofs
which could be made in the Cause.

But since the Archbishop has given Sentence, not only without sufficient proof
of the pretended grounds, but a Sentence of Deprivation; which no Archbishop
before him ever pronounced, of his sole Authority, against a Bishop; it is
humbly submitted to the consideration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament, whether a waving Privilege can amount to a submission to the being
divested of Peerage: and whether, however, that would give a new Jurisdiction
over any Lord of Parliament, in prejudice of the Right of the House of Lords.

This the Bishop humbly hopes may induce their Lordships to examine the
Circumstances of his Case, which he cheerfully submits to such equal and proper
Judges.

Robert Lucy, an avowed Enemy to the Bishop, having caused many scandalous
Reports to be raised of him, and by indirect Practices prevailed upon some to
swear against him, and kept others from witnessing the Truth; dressed up a
Libel with many Articles, which fall under these Heads.

1. Simony. 2. Extortion. 3. Falsification. 4. Misapplying the Revenue of the
Church. 5. Breach of a Canon in the manner of exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. 6. Disaffection to the present Government.

But the Sentence is only upon the 3 first Heads, the Archbishop, it seems,
being satisfied, that the others were added only to increase the Load; or else
as he was restrained by prohibition.

1. The first supposed Instance of Simony was, in relation to the preferring
his Nephew Mr. John Medley, to several Places in the Church; taking a Bond of
him in the Penalty of 200 l. for the Payment of 100 l. after he was collated to
the Archdeaconry of St. David 's; and, for some time, receiving Rents of that
and other of Mr. Medley's Preferments.

But that 100 l. was plainly proved to be part of 500 l. which the Bishop
advanced for the Marriage Portion of Mr. Medley's Sister, of which the Bishop
freely gave 400 l. and her Brother undertook to give 100 l.

And such Profits belonging to Mr. Medley as the Bishop received, were only
till he was reimburs'd the Money he had laid out upon Mr. Medley's account: and
tho the Bishop had some of the Places in commendam, by virtue of a Faculty to
retain'em, yet he let Mr. Medley have all the Profits from the beginning of the
Bishop's holding them in his own right.

Certainly it ought not to be believed on slight grounds, that the Bishop, who
had given such proofs of his Affection to his Nephew and his Sisters; who had
not the least Objection against him for the dispoling Church Preferments to any
other Person; and had given Demonstrations of his generous regard to Merit in
Strangers, and the greatest abhorrence of corrupt Bargains; should seek his own
Profit in advancing his Nephew, agreed to be a Person very deserving. And how
apt soever Men may be to think hardly of the Bishop; his Nephew was proved to
be a Person of a strict Life and Conversation, and very charitable; no way
ambitious of Preferment; and one that would have abhorred it upon Simoniacal
Terms.

Another supposed Instance of Simony was his taking a Sum of Money, for the
Lease to a reputed Clergyman, of a Rectory which the Bishop held in commendam.
This of it self could be no more Simony, than letting out Tithes to a known
Layman, for a Sum in hand; but the aggravation was thought to lie in the
Bishop's promising under his hand to resign the Rectory, when desired by his
Lessee. For which there was not the least Footstep of any prior Agreement, and
the Promise was freely made by the Bishop, after he had received his Money for
the Lease.

2. As to the imputation of Extortion; whether the Fees taken by him and his
Officers, were more than were allowable by the Custom of the Diocese, seems a
matter properly triable at Common Law: besides, 'twas fully proved, that he and
his Officers did not in any particular take more than was usual, and really
took less than his Prosecutor Mr. Lucy, and his Father, and succeeding Bishops
of that Diocese did in like cases.

3. The falsification, or crimen falsi, laid to his Charge was as if he had
ordained Persons without requiring the appointed Oaths and Subscription; and
yet had in this matter certisied under his Episcopal Seal, contrary to the
truth.

Of the pretended abuse of the Seal no proof was offered, and only one witness
deposed positively, about the imputed Omissions at an Ordination.

But, besides that a single Witness is not enough to six such a Charge upon a
Bishop; that Witness was upon several Accounts proved incompetent.

However, the Archbishop, supposing these matters to have been sufficiently
proved, Tho. Arch. Judex antedictus.
pronounced Sentence of Deprivation, for those Causes: and this he did by his
single Authority, as the only Judge, tho with the Assistance of some Bishops;
who were not all satisfied with it.

This some imagine that the Archbishop may do, as succeeding the Pope in
Spiritual Authority: whereas that is allowed him by special Act of Parliament,
only for Dispensations, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
and they much limited: but the Pope himself never judged Originally in such
Causes, as that in question, arising here; otherwise than as he, by his Legates,
presided in Councils.

The Is It Statute which takes away Appeals to the Pope, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
expressly provides, That the Spiritual Causes there mentioned, shall be
examined, adjudg'd, and determined, in such Courts Spiritual and Temporal, as
the Natures, Conditions, and Qualities of the Cases and Matters shall require.

And if by the Law and Usage of the Kingdom, all Deprivations of Bishops
(except such as were by Act of Parliament, or Commissioners so authorized) were
to be by judgment of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Councils; the House of
Lords must necessarily be the Court, which is to examine, adjudg, and
determine, concerning the Bishop's Case.

It Is evident, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
that neither the Statute 24 H. 8. nor the Statute 25 H. 8. (which provides for
Appeals in Cases not mentioned in the former) makes any provision concerning
Appeals, in Cases which belong to none but the Lords in Parliament.

If the archbishop judge in a Cause which belongs to them, it is absurd to urge
that by those Statutes there can be no Appeals but to Delegates; since a
Petition to the Lords in this matter comes not by way of Appeal, but Complaint
of the Archbishop's usurping upon their Jurisdiction.

The only question now is, whether the Bishop's waving Privilege, and appealing
to the Delegates, shall prejudice him.

to which the answer is plain, That it shall not oust the Lords of their
Jurisdiction. Becase of their Interest in their fellow Peers; 'twas resolved,
in the Case of Lord Gray of Ruthin, Journal of the House of Lords, Feb. 10. An.
1640.
and afterward repeated in another Case, That it is not in the power of a Peer,
to drown, or extinguish his Honor, by Surrender, Grant, Fine, or any other
Conveyance to the King.

And fully to remove the Objection here; it is provided by Act of Parliament,
That if any of the Peers of his own accord will answer, and be adjudged,
eisewhere than before the Peers in Parliament; Rot. Parl. 15. E. 3. n. 7.
this shall not turn to the prejudice of other Peers, or of himself in any
other Case.

To which may be added, That whatever Precedents there have been for trying
Bishops in Capital Cases, by common Juries, because by reason of the Canons
received here, they are not to judge of Temporal Peers in such Cases; yet this
being a Case wherein a Bishop was never judged but in a Council, and the matter
being such as infers a forfeiture of his Barony, Vid. 25 E. 3. c. 6.
which is a Temporalty; we may here apply the declaration of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in the Parl. 11 R. 2. upon the criminal Appeals then
brought; and may conclude that the matter is to be judged only in Parliament,
Et ne per auter ley que ley et course de Parl, Rot. Parl. 11 B. 2.
et qil appertient as surs du Parl. estre Iuges en tiel case.


