AN ORDINANCE PRESENTED TO THE Honorable house of Commons, by Mr. Bacon, a
Lawyer in Suffolk, and Mr. Taet, both of them Members of the same House, and
by their means was twice read, and referred to a COMMITTEE.

Pretended for preventing, growing, and spreading of Heresies.

With some brief Observations thereupon, showing how contrary it is to that
Law of Love, which teaches men to do to others, as they would have others do
to them.

London, Printed in the Year. 1646.

An Ordinance presented to the honorable House of Commons, by Mr. Bacon, a
Lawyer in Suffolk, and Mr. Taet, both of them Members of the same House, and by
their means was twice read, and referred to a Committee.
BE it ordained, that all such as shall from and after the date hereof,
willingly preach, teach, print, or write, publish and maintain, any such
opinion contrary to the Doctrines ensuing;

Viz. That God is present in all Places, That God is, or that he is One in
three Persons, Or does know or foreknow all things; Or that he is Almighty, Or
that he is perfectly Holy, Or that he is Eternal. Or that shall in like manner
publish, That Christ is not God coequall with the Father; Or shall deny the
Manhood of Christ, Or that the Godhead and Manhood of Christ are several
Natures, Or that the Manhood of Christ, is pure, unspotted of sin; Or that
shall publish, that Christ did not die, or rose from the dead; nor is ascended
into Heaven bodily, Or that his death is meritorious in behalf of Believers.
Or that shall publish or maintain, as aforesaid, that Christ is not the Son of
God, Or that the Holy Ghost is not God, Or that the Scriptures are not the Word
of God, Or that the Bodies of Men shall not rise after they be dead, Or that
there is no day of judgment after death.

Such publishing with obstinacy, shall be judged Felony: Such persons shall by
two witnesses be bound over by two Justices unto the Jail-deliver, and the
Delinquent shall be indicted for Felony; and upon finding the same indictment,
and that the party be found guilty, and shall not abjure his said error, he
shall suffer the pairs of death, without benefit of Clergy: But upon abjuring
of the said error, he shall upon two sufficient Sureties be bailed.

And be it further ordained, that if after abjuring the said errors, he shall
publish it again, he shall be indicted and put to death.

And be it further ordered, that if any person shall wittingly and
presumptuously, or contrary to admonition, blaspheme the name of God, or any of
the holy Trinity, or shall impugn the word of God, such offenses shall be
adjudged Felony, and the Offender committed without Bail or Mainprize; and the
party being found guilty, shall be branded in the left Check, with the Letter
B. and upon the like offense the second time shall suffer death.

And be it further ordained, that all persons who shall publish any of the
several errors hereafter ensuing, viz That all men shall be saved; that a man
by nature has free will to turn to God; That God may be worshipped by Pictures
or Images; or that the soul of any man after death goes neither to Heaven nor
Hell, but to Purgatory; or that the soul of man dies or sleeps when the body
is dead; or that the revelations or workings of the Spirit, are a rule for a
Christians life; though diverse from, or contrary to ^he written Word of God; or
that a man is bound to believe no more then by his reason he can comprehend; or
that the Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments, is no rule of a
Christians life; or that God sees no sin in the justified; or that a Believer
need not repent nor pray for the pardon of sin; or that the two Sacraments of
Baptism; and the Lords Supper, are not Ordinances commanded by the Word of
God; or that the Baptizing of Infants is unlawful; or that such Baptizing is
void, and of none effect; or that such persons are to be Baptized again: and in
pursuance thereof, shall baptize any person formerly baptized: or that the
observation of the Lords Day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances and Laws of
this Realm, is not according, or contrary to the Word of God, or that it is not
lawful to ^yn in public, or Family Prayer, or to teach Children to pray; Or
that the Churches of England are ^ot true Churches; Or that the Ministers or
Ordinances, are not true Ministers or Ordinances, Or that the Church government
by Presbytery, is Antichri^^ian, or unlawful; or that the Magistracy, or
power of the Civil Magistrate by law established in England, is unlawful; or
that all the use of Arms for Public defense (be the cause never so just) is
unlawful.

And in case the party so accused for any of the said ^rrours, be committed
before two Justices, the party (...) committed shall be ordered to renounce his
said error in the public Congregation of the Parish Church whence the
complaint comes; and in case he refuses or neglects the same at or upon the
day, time, and place appointed by the said Justices, that he shall be committed
to prison by the said Justices, until he shall find two Sureties, of Subsidy
men that he shall not publish or maintain the said error or errors any more.

Some brief Observations upon the foregoing Ordinance.
1. THat Mr. Taet and Mr. Bacon be desired to offer to the consideration of the
Honorable House, seriously to debate, how far their power can extend (as to the
knowledge or worshipping of God) over the persons and Consciences of the people
who in trust them.

For how can there be an intrusting power of any thing, from any or many men,
to the custody or ordering of any compacted body, but only such power which
evidently appears to reside in every Individual part thereof in themselves.

2. Mr. Taet and Mr. Bacon should do well first to prove, that any individual
part of this Parliamant, or people, of any Nation, injoyes such a power in
themselves, either to direct or compel their own consciences, in the
knowledge or worship* of their Creator* which as yet is not evident, for

It is Impossible that any finite creature can comprehend an Infinite
incomprehensible God, for it appears by many texts of Scripture to be the only
act of Love, that dwells with God to regulate and guide the hearts of men,
according to his own good pleasure; who requires no man to adore him in
knowledge or worship, more or less, but as every man is fally persuaded in his
own mind.

For man in himself has no kdowledge of God, But as God manifests himself
unto him, therefore man of necessity must follow in practice the dictates
thereof, otherwise man sins against the light of knowledge, whereby his
condition is more abominable then the brute Beast that perishes.

3. That Mr. Taet and Mr. Bacon notwithstanding, they have done in this the
Clergies work, will now at last move the Honorable House to remember how
odious and abominable former Acts of Parliaments in such cases has proved in
the sight of this generation, some Parliaments establishing that Idol of
popery, requiring conformity thereunto, under the pains of Death, affirming
it to be agreeable to the Word of God. Other Parliaments condemns this way as
Antichristian; and establishes Episcopacy, alleging that agreeable to the
mind of God, with the use of Common Prayer, Surplices, and other devices,
requiring obedience thereunto, under the like pains and punishments. So that
many for adhering to their judgments, suffered Death, for pretended Heresies
and errors: which pretended errors since appears to be truth, and the guilt
of their blood remains on this nation at this day, and had not such men
out-went the limitation of Parliaments, we might have sat in darkness till
this time. That this Parliament has declared Episcopal government to be
Antichristian, and settled Presbytery in stead thereof, but the Priests not
contented therewith, without a sole power of Jurisdiction over the lives and
consciences of the people of this nation, indevoreth to inslave all inquiring
people to seek knowledge from their lips, to believe as they believe, to know
no more then they judge fit we should know.

The contrary minded shall be inflicted with imprisonment, and death, under
pretense of Blasphemy and errors, when there is no such thing can be brought
forth by the contrivers thereof, much like the old Religion in Henry the eights
time, hanging in Smithfeild a Protestant on one day for his judgment, and a
Papist the next for his; to such a condition are we like to be reduced through
the instigation of the Clergy of our times, whose end is their interest and
domination over us the free people of England.

FJNIS.

