TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The high Court of PARLIAMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of
ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of James Biddlecombe.
HUMBLY SHOWS:
THAT John Cifrewest, Gent. was lawfully seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, of,
and in the Manor of Moorechrichell, and of, and in the Advowson of the Parish
Church of Moorechrichell aforesaid, in the County of Dorcet, and the Premises
afterward descended, and lawfully came to Dorothy Morgan, wife of Gregory
Morgan, Gent.

That the said Dorothy and Gregory Morgan, by the advice of Sir Robert Napper,
Knight, for the prevention of the sale thereof, the said Gregory being profuse,
and an ill Husband, about Michaelmas Term, in the four and thirtieth year
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth did levy a Fine thereof to the said Sir
Robert Knapper, John Fitzjames, and John Coward, Gent. in trust, to, and for
the use of the Cognizers and their Heirs.

That the said Sir Robert Knapper having obtained the Fine aforesaid to be
levied, did subtly advise and procure the said Gregory Morgan and Dorothy by
Deed, to limit the use of the said Fine to the said Sir Robert Fitzjames, and
Coward, and their Heirs, with a Proviso therein, that upon the tender of a
pair of Gloves of six pence, to Sir Robert Napper by the said Dorothy, and
declaring any new use, the Fine should be to the use of such persons, and in
such manner, as should be so newly limited.

That notwithstanding the said Sir Robert Napper did well know of the said Fine
and Deed was levied, and made only in trust, yet intending thereby to obtain
the premises to himself, upon the deaths of the said Gregory and Dorothy,
refused to grant the premises to John Biddlecomb, your Petitioners
Grandfather, who was next Heir to the said Dorothy, but entered and possessed
himself of the same, as though there had been no trust in him reposed by the
said Cognizers, although there was never any consideration paid by the said Sir
Robert Napper for the same, and although the said Dorothy was ever until her
death reputed owner of the premises.

That to entitle himself wholly in Law to the Premises, the said Coward being
dead for 700 l. given by him to Fitzjames, procures Fitzjames to release to him
the said Sir Robert Napper all his right and claim in the Premises.

That he having now by subtilty obtained his ends, he still refused to grant
the Premises to your Petitioners Grandfather, and to be relieved in Equity,
your Petitioners said Grandfather preferred his Bill in Chancery, and thereupon
by the power and procurement of the said Sir Robert Napper, it was decreed in
May, the first year of the late Majesty King James (although much equity is
expressed in the Decree it self for your Petitioners Grandfather and although
no sufficient ground is therein set forth to warrant a Dismission) that the
Plaintiffs Bill should be dismissed, and that the Plaintiff should have 200 l.
only from Mr. Fitzjames out of the 700 l. which Mr. Fitzjames had received for
his release aforesaid.

That the said Sir Robert Napper being a powerful man, and your Petitioners
Grandfather being much weakened in his Estate, by reason of the said Suit, and
not longer able to strive with them in his life time, your Petitioners
Grandfather never as yet received the 200 l. or had any consideration for the
said Premises, but shortly after died.

That after his death, your poor Petitioners Father was disabled to prosecute
his right yet occasioned your Petitioners Father through grief, to fall into a
lunacy and distraction of mind, which he continued until his death, so that
he was incapable in his life time to prosecute his right, by means thereof, and
having no friends that durst take upon them to question your Petitioners
fathers right, being awed by the power of the said Sir Robert Napper, and
Nathaniel Napper his Son, and Sir Gerard Napper his Son, and Sir Gerard
Napper has successively kept, and enjoyed from your Petitioner the said Manor
and Premises, and the said Sir Gerard Napper does most unconscionably keep and
enjoy the same, and refuses to grant the Premises to your Petitioner,
according to the trust in the said Sir Robert Napper reposed by the said
Gregory Morgan, and Dorothy.

Now forasmuch as the said Fine was levied, and the said Deed of uses made to
the said Sir Robert Napper the said Fitzjames and Coward, but only in trust,
and for that it appears by Sir Roberts own Answer in the said suit, that he
never gave any consideration, as purchase money, for the Premises, but that he
only lent her, or laid out for her 400 l. which cannot be any valuable
consideration, the Premises being at least 500 l. per annum. And for that some
short time before the said Dorothy's death, when she would have tendered a pair
of Gloves to the said Sir Robert Napper to revoke the said Deed of uses, the
said Sir Robert Napper was in Ireland, and there continued till her death, and
for that by the said Decree it self much equity does appear for your
Petitioners Grandfather, yet his Bill was unjustly dismissed, only allowing him
200 l. And forasmuch as the said Sir Gerard Napper has gotten into his custody
all the Evidences concerning the Premises, so that your Petitioner cannot
evidence his right. And forasmuch as your Petitioners Grandfather was awed by
the power of the said Sir Robert Napper, and weakened in his ability to resist
them, or to seek further relief for his just right. And for that your poor
Petitioners Father, by reason of his infirmity aforesaid, was disabled to seek
relief in life, so that by occurrence of time, and by the potency of Sir
Gerard Napper, and the Poverty of your Petitioner, your Petitioner is
altogether hopeless to recover his right in any other way but by the Clemency
of your Honors.

Your poor Petitioner therefore humbly beseeches your Honors to take his
miserable estate into consideration, and to call the said Sir Gerard Napper
before your Honors, and to compel him to bring into this House all the Deeds
and Evidences of the Manor and Premises, that thereby your Petitioner may
have your Honors clear evidence of his right, and that your Honors would be
pleased to take such speedy course for your Petitioners relief in all and
singular the Premises, as to your grave Wisdoms shall seem most meet.

And your poor Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.


