BIFRONS JANUS (...) OR, SMALL TOKENS for the Old-Year, and LITTLE GIFTS for the
New* Designed to Kiss the Hand
Of any at Sea, or Land,
Who English understand,

By the Author of A Notion for the Ocean.
-- Ita vertere seriae ludo.
OLD Tusser's and Young EHMAMP's two Money-Catches,
Or, if you will, two Silver-Watches,
Which, without mending, go about
Every month of the Year throughout,
T. Think it is no slavery to get a penny savourly.
E. A mighti Monie-Rule it is for ever and for aie,
Always receiv before Thu write and write before Thu pai.
MARCH
March is a month to purge and to let blood,
And Sweet meats now and drinks are very good,
And learned Physicians would be understood.
As mad as is any March-Hare,
Are words that very common are:
An old saying it is, but it is very handsome,
A bushel of March-dust is worth a Kings Ransom.
Of this saying which abroad does go most sure I am,
March comes in like a Lion and goes out like a Lamb.
Say we not March-winds and May-Sun,
Make linen white, and sair Maids dun?
Of March-winds some say this (besides,) March-wind will run through 9
Bull-hides
On (...) David's day Put barley in clay: What Is here? March-beer.
When March borrow's of April, three days then those three are ill.
APRIL
Causes of sickness now remove. Aprii to all men crie's in love;
For now the Body-pores being open, Extreme diseases see some hope
This Rule by heart in Gard'ning get, Sow ever dry, set ever wet,
While some foe's think of fair, or Fairies,
Good Houswives now think of their Daries.
April-skuds bring May buds. April-showers bring May-flowers.
MAY
No Garden now, or Hedge but it is good, To give the body Physic, or else food.
The Fields and Gardens walk and walk again; And from all salt, or hot meats
quite refrain.
Sick-man, Cheer up, Climb up May-hill, And longer 't may be live you will:
Hark what Field-Musick Birds do bring, Church-Musick is no better thing.
What do you think? what do you say? Naught of the very month of May?
Dread a windy May and hot, Churchyards fat makes it not?
Let May come early or late, It makes the Cow to quate.
O what a clutter, About May- butter!
JUNE.
It Is death, o'th ground rashly to lie, or sweat,
Or swill, or feed on gross and heavy meat.
Stilling of Roses now is in season, As Verses without Rhyme, or Reason
Syrups and Conservs now're in prime, This month they are made, this is the time.
Now they talk to some tune, As fresh as a Rose in June.
JULY.
Cold Baths and cooling herbs are much commended,
Till Dog Days furious heat is fully ended.
Yet for to vouch, in Rivers now to swim,
More wholesome is then Baths, will prove no whim.
Gall, Rue and Wormwood, gotten with great ease,
Strewn on your floors are found to kill the fleas:
A sort of black-coats all for shift and shark:
One called them Demi-Devils in the dark.
AUGUST.
Use this month less then usually to eat,
And slip away from sleep now after meat
And sudden cold take heed of after-heat.
SEPTEMBER.
The Year declining to provide remember,
Your VVinter-Garments in this month September;
And put them loosely on too, to prevent
What else, believe it, after you will repent.
Thi^ty days has September,
April, Juneand November:
February twenty eight alone,
But all the other thirty one.
Or thus mysticly but prettily.
March up your thumb, forefinger down, Ring-finger down likewise,
The months all come wh'ave thirty one Perkt up before your eyes.
OCTOBER.
In October clad thee well,
If on Earth you long would dwell,
To the Tailor this Tale tell,
Now his Physic bear's the Bell.
-- And to conclude, -- The Lord Mayor's day's next Simon and Jude.
Look the whole world through-in, throughout and it all round,
No Nation, Civ'tie, King, or Lord, like Our, is sound.
NOVEMBER.
This month an End of Physic make,
And 'xcept great need* till March, none take
Yet take care that dry go your feet
Else Rheums and Colds will with you meet.
The fifth of November, Sure all will remember,
DECEMBER.
To be born for himself a man will scorn,
Think then; who, this month for us all was Born?
Think on the Manger too: I^le say no more,
To make thee, i^ rich, Give dole at thy door.
At Christ-Tide, A Cock-Stride.
The Ever Memorable NATIVITY-HYMN.
ALL this Night shril Chaunticler, Day's Proclaiming Trumpeter,
Clap's his wings, and loudly crie's, Mortals, Mortals, 'wake, Arise,
From the Earth is risen a Sun, Shines at night though day be done.
Awake, O earth, 'wake every thing; 'Wake and hear she News I bring.
'Wake and joy for all this Night; Heaven and every twinkling light.
All amazing, still stand gazing, Angels, Powers, and all that be,
Awake and joy the Sun to see.
Hail, O Sun, of blessed light, Sent into this world by night;
Let thy Rays and heavenly Powers, Shine in these dark souls of ours;
For most duty, thou art truly, God and Man I do confess,
Hail, O Sun of righteousness.
JANUARY. EHMAMPI Strena Or, His New Year's Gift.
The Snake it self casts off it skin, And will not Thu the old man within,
That Man without a Navel, He Will else both live and Lord in thee,
Which Lording life will doubl doubl so, As no tongue can express Thour woe.
Thrice happi yet, if quitting sin, Thu Newborn the New-year begin;
And, Christian Reader, that Thu it Both surer may and sooner quit.
Cgno, judge, believed a sin not littl, To think a sin small were a tittl.
At Twelfth-Tide, an Hour-Wide.
Lo, here the Wisemen precious Gifts dispense,
To Christ and Mary, Gold, Myrrh, Frankincense;
So much astonished at this glorious thing,
A Maid at once to bear God, Man and King.
EHmampi Specimen, or, his Essaie on the same.
Gold, Myrrh, and Franckincens, here the Magi bring
To Christ the Babe and Marie it suckling:
The Maiden-Mather's 'maz'd, her ehast Womb can,
Hape at once the Honors to bear God, King, Man.
In Janiveer Pots freez by the Fire.
If the Good wife knew what it were, To eat a Hen in Janiveer,
She would leave but one in her stock, If that, to accompany the Cock.
In January it is not good, Without great need for to let blood,
And wondrous shy be to take cold, For Rheums and Colds are now too bold.
The last of January but one, True English bearss did bleed and groan.
FEBRUARY.
Of February-Physick be thou wary, And of warm Air 'cause it does vary.
If Phoebus shine when Mary is purified, More Frost look, after than before,
to abide
February Fill-Dike, With black or White, The Rhime's wrong, but Reason's right.
Omnium Pulvis, aut Cinis.
FINIS
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1673/4.


