Bishops-gate Lamentation
For the loss of their late RECTOR Mr. ROBERT CLARK; Who died on Monday the 19
of August 1678, and was buried (together with his dear Consort, who died soon
after) on the 22 of the same Month.
O Heaven's! how could I grieve, did I not know
Good and wise Providence rules all below.
Dear Lord, how can I think that he is gone?
He was but a white among them.
Being scarce yet known, he did so lately come.
But too too true it is: O cruel Death!
Nor Grace, nor Wit, nor Virtue, could keep's breath.
He died of a Fever.
But in afflicting Heats he is flown above:
Nor could the fiercest fire burn up his Love;
That, conquering Death, with him to Heaven is gone.
There Is none that knew him can do less than mourn.
Self-love enforces us; it is our great loss,
Though his great gain. Lord, sanctify this cross:
Which to describe I would, but have not skill.
Pardon my weakness, and accept my will.
We Have lost, we have lost, shall I say Man? nay more,
A Guide, a Pastor, one that mighty store
Of heavenly Counsels flowed from, as a Spring
Pure and perspicuous. Never any thing
Uttered by him was either dull or dark.
Oh blessed Priest and Prophet, heavenly CLARK!
Were I Enthusiast, I should profess
By Inspiration he did all express.
His Head, his Heart, with his Tongue, such music made,
That Saul was never more pleased when David played,
Than his prepared Hearers, who will say,
Profit with pleasure sprung as clear as day.
Jer. 8.6.
He on the Prophets horse first rushing came;
Proving sins cursed Custom would us bane:
That men by Practice bad, to Habits come,
Like to that brute, fear not Gods sword or gun.
Ezekiel. 37 3.
Then, from that answer to Can dry bones live?
Most heavenly Rules and Cautions did he give.
Gods power and providence we ought trust to,
Since all he does is good, and all can do.
Psalm. 101.3.
From David's saying with perfect heart he would walk,
Sweet soul, what holy measures did he chalk!
To which his hearers gave great approbation,
And which, if practiced, would bring reformation.
The sinful Times we should not need to blame,
If family-reforming were our aim.
Jer. 35.14.
How did he baffle Sin, with all its shifts,
From that example of the Rechabites!
The arbitrary Will of their dead sire,
Without a Sanction they so much admire,
That starve with cold, and choke with thirst they will,
Rather than build, or drink, though bowls be full
Of tempting wine. The Priest from God may sue:
The living Lord but thus expects from you.
Jonah 3.10.
If ever Limner to the life did draw
A Feast, such FAST I Am sure you never saw
As he set forth upon the late occasion.
How did he press for, paint forth Reformation!
High, low, old, young, rational, animal,
Acting Repentance, to the beast at Stall.
If London like to Nineveh would do,
He Would warrant it be safe, and flourish too.
Thus did he teach both how to pray and live;
And practiced all he said, that it might thrive.
On Weekdays, Prayers and Catechize expounded;
Profaness and Hypocrisy confounded.
Not glutting on the Sunday, but did seek
To make us keep a Sabbath all the week.
All which he did with so much zeal and love,
As truly acted by that holy Dove-
-like Spirit of Christ, to whom he now is gone,
And whom, whilst here, his eyes were fixed on,
As his great pattern. Jesus, his dear Lord,
He imitated in thought, deed, and word.
All Christian Graces in him Habits were.
For Moral Virtues, few could him come near.
His common Conversation was most sweet;
No Morose gravity on's Brow did fit.
A dear Companion, and obliging Friend
All found that tried him: for he still did bend
His Actions and Discourses, like the Sun,
For universal good their course to run.
The doubtful counseled, eased the troubled mind;
Confirmed the faithful, and to all was kind.
The Churches adversaries made he friends
That lived in's former Cure. For such goods ends
He cast forth several Nets to take such men;
And whilst they thought to cross him, he caught them.
That he to Souls the greater good might do,
He studied how to heal their Bodies too: He was a Physician.

And did it very often safe and sure;
Not like our Quacks; No Money, though a Cure.
This is the Guide we have lost: this our dear CLARK,
Whilst he directed us, has hit the Mark,
And followed all that holy heavenly Train
Of Saints, Apostles, Martyrs, not in vain:
Prepared in Mind and Will for Martyrdom,
Though not in Fire, did in a Fever burn;
With a resigned patience and submission,
He strove, and prayed, and for's home did petition:
And so, full fraught with faith, to Heaven he is gone,
Trusting in JESUS for salvation.
Farewell, adieu, sweet Rector: alas we!
Bishops-gate sins have us deprived of thee.
Had we thy Doctrines put in exercise,
Death could not yet have closed up thine eyes.
We now applaud thee, and lament our loss;
It Is not for sin we grieve, but for our cross.
Thy heavenly Musicks's loss we now can find;
But to dance after it we had no mind.
We loved our Schism, our Passion, and our Pride;
Our Drink, our Profit, Pleasure, Lust beside.
Christ's Yoke, though easy, we could not endure;
Reason and Virtue, with Religion pure,
Our Will dethroned: else all those calls and cries
To Prayers, Sacraments, and Catechize,
Had been to more effect. Most say, we know,
T'excuse themselves, Such do not always grow
So good as should be. But it is far more sure,
Those that do not thus do, cannot be pure.
Let Us pray that God would this our loss repair:
Though we know none, many such void there are.
Guide thou our Guides, we will Con and Re-form;
And our dear babes shall bless thee, yet unborn.
We'll praise thee for such Teachers, and such store,
As scarce in any Age were seen before,
For Virtue, Learning and true Piety.
Convert their Foes; hear thou their prayers and cry
For us and them, and Jesus for us all,
That such another Judgment may not fall
Upon us; that we grope not in the dark,
For want of such a Lamp as was our CLARK.
Amen.
With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.


