HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE Memorable Passages and Transactions, that have attended
the Life, and Untimely Death, of the Unfortunate Sir John Johnstoun, Who was
Executed at Tyburn, on the 23d. of December 1690 For Ste^ling Mistress Mary
Wharton.

Together with his Behavior in Prison, and what he Wrote there, touching the
Matt^r for which he Dyed: With his Pious Exhortations, and Dying Expressions,
etc. With a Short ELOGIE, Written by an Impartial Hand, upon this Melancholy
Occasion.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON Printed, and Reprinted at EDINBURGH, by John Reid, and are to be sold
at his Printing House in Bell's Wynd, Anno Dom, 1694.

A Brief HISTORY OF THE Memorable Passages and Transactions, that have attended
the Life and Untimely Death, of the Unfortunate Sir JOHN JOHNSTOUN; Who was
Executed at Tyburn, on the 23d. of December 1690, for Stealing of Mrs. MARY
WHARTON.
IF we seriously consider the various Circumstances that attend Humane Affairs,
they cannot but make us conclude, with the Philosopher, that no Man, however
prosperous his Condition may be in the beginning, or the greatest part of his
Life, can be accounted Happy, before we see his Latter. end: For no Man can be
accounted truly so, how great or promising soever his Affairs may be, till the
Conclusion crowns the Felicity. It happened once, (as we find it in a Credible
Author) that a great and powerful Person, admireing in the Progress of his many
Successors, he was never crossed, disappointed, or met with the least
Misfortune; Which made him seriously ponder with himself, (as we may say) to
tempt his Destiny; and concluded to cast a precious Ring, which he esteemed
above all his Riches, from a Rock into the Sea, to try how Fortune would deal
with him on that account; And so it happened, beyond his expectation, that
several Fishes being taken for his Use, the Ring was found in the Belly of one
of them; which seized him with a Melancholy and Conceit, That his Misfortunes
when they came, would sit heavy upon him, and so indeed it happened; For he
soon after fell by a violent Death. And many Stories, undoubtedly real, we
might mention of this kind, but not being very pertinent to this Affair, what
has been said may reasonably suffice; Though to make a little further progress
of a somewhat different nature: Many Persons, before any grand Misfortune has
befallen them, have, by an impulse in the Soul, in one manner or other foreseen
it, and perhaps, labored to shun it one way, when it has unexpectedly fallen
out the contrary: But to come nearer,

This unhappy Person, the Subject of our Discourse, whose untimely Fall has
given an Occasion of much Talk, was, as far as we can learn, and as indeed
appeared in his Conversation one of a Liberal Education, the Son of
considerable Parents who in his tender years, took care to bring him up in
those ways that might make him appear an accomplished Gentleman, and carry
some Figure in the World, dstinguishing him from the Inferior Rank of Men; not
leaving any thing undone that might make him fit for Conversation, or apt to do
things worthy of his Birth and Education.

He was by Birth a Native of Scotland, where indeed Learning (and especially
the Latin Tongue) is very much promoted, and encouragement given on that
occasion, it being a Language intelligable to most Nations, especially to
Travelers, or Men of any parts, rendering Conversation familiar in distant
Countries, and amongst people otherwise of various speech: And although diverse
Advantages offered in his Younger years, yet nothing was so pleasing to him, as
a desire to make himself known in the Field of Honor, the thirst of Military
glory filled his Breast, and finding no considarable Service offer for the
Advantage of his own Country, he resolved to make himself known abroad: And
having a sufficient fortune to defray the charges of such an undertaking, (as
being, according to report, no less then a Barronet of the Kingdom of Scotland,
and the second of that Rank, viz. Sir John Johnston of Caskaban:) Nor did his
expectations fail him, for he found good Entertainment in Flanders, and other
places, behaving himself so like a Gentleman, that he soon was taken notice of,
and preferred, doing many things that redounded to the gaining him respect and
Credit: So that being looked upon as a fit person for service of this kind, he
was not long without a Command, and did many signal Exploits, to the
Advancement of his own Reputation, and the encouragement of others: And when he
had leisure times, he Traveled to take a Survey of the Country, and to inform
him in the Manners and Customs of the People, and so he spent a considerable
part of his days, and Fortunate had it been for him, if he had always courted
Glory in the Camp of Mars, and not in an unlucky hour, meddled with the soft
intrigues of Venus, which proved his Ruin: For having now leisure to be in
England with his Company, where he behaved himself very civilly, and we hear
not of any thing that offered as a blot upon him, till a Woman of Chester
accused him with a Rape, which afterward he avers, appeared to be maliciously
suggested, the Woman being incited to it, as she said, when it came to a true
Understanding, by her Brother, who threatened her with death if she would not
swear it, and to avoid his fury, fled to Ireland; the Circumstance of which,
appears more at large in his Dying Words, though not much pertinent to what
where undertake, then that he absolutely denied it with his almost last breath.
Likewise another Trick of the same nature, he said was put upon him at Vtrecht
in Holland, where he Quartered.

But to return: He having an opportunity to be in London, and frequenting
places where a resort of Gentlemen usually are, amongst others, he had a
familier acquaintance with one Mr. Montgomery, a Genleman of considerable
fortune; as also Captain James Campbel, both his Countrymen, though that
acquaintance proved very unlucky: However, a strict friendship being knit
between them, he was found to be one in the party that interprized the carrying
away of Mrs. Mary Wharton, Daughter to Philip Wharton, Esquire Deceased, a Virgin
under fourteen years of age, and an Heiress of 1500, and above a Thousand
pounds in Moneys, and other effects; For which he was Tried, Cast, and received
Sentence at the Old Baily: But since, having met with a paper sufficiently
testified to be his own Handwriting, and left as the last Protestations of a
Dying-man, we may, as we hope, without giving any offense, incert the Account
he gives of the whole matter, as it happened in the many Circumstances that
attend this affair.

His Behavior in Prison, and what he wrote there, touching the Matter for
which he Dyed.
SIR, (says he, meaning the Minister to whom he gave or sent the Letter) I
think it not amiss, as a Dying-man, to give you a short account of all my
innocence, and all the reason they have for bringing me to this untimely End.

On Friday Morning, being the day she was taken way, about ten of the Clock,
Captain Campbel, and Mr. Montgomery came to my Lodging with a Haunch of
Venison: I asked them what they were going to do? Mr. Montgomery told me, it
was to treat Maddam Biarly, and the rest of the young Ladies; And that he would
have Captain Campbel Married to one of them this night; And asked me if I would
go and be a Witness to it. I told him, it must be by consent, or I would have
nothing to do with it. He told him, that if he did not procure her consent, he
would not meddle with it; And so we parted, he desiring me to come and meet him
at six of the Clock, at a Coffie-house near his Lodging, which I did, and met
Captain Campbel there, and sometimes afterward Mr. Montgomry came and called
us to the door, and told us, The Business was done. About 8 of the Clock, Madam
Biarly's Coach came by, and they went all away; Captain Campbel called a Coach
and Six Horses, and bid us go in and ordeted the Coachman to drive after her
Coach and stop in Great Queens street.

When she was put into the Coach, (as I am a Dying Man, and now receive the
Sacrament) I could perceive no discomposure in her at all: For after some time
spent by Mr. Campbel in his Amors, she began to talk of my Lord Argyle, and
told us that she had seen some of his Children at Ham, and that he was Married
to the Duchess of Lauderdales Daughter, and asked him if he were the second
Brother. Upon some Discourse, which I do not well remember, she gave him here
hand, that she would marry him. This good Humor continued still with her, so
that when the Parson desired her to say the Words after him, she spoke with so
Audible a Voice, that the People in the Room heard her louder than the Minister.

After the Ceremony was over, it was observed, that her Wedding-Ring was too
bigg: Her Husband told her he would change it to morrow: She said, No, it is
not Lucky to change a Wedding-Ring. At Supper there was nothing to be
observved, but an equal Satisfaction between both: When it was asked her,
whether she inclined to Bed? she freely consented. The next morning when we
came and asked them how they rested? she in particular, answered, Very Well.
About 10 of the Clock, Mr. Montgomery asked her, if she would go to Mr.
Pontac's to Dinner? she said, With all her Heart: Where we went and stayed till
4 in the Afternoon, and the House full of People. Then we went to our Lodgings,
and played at Cards till half an hour after 9; Then she went to Bed with all
the seeming pleasantness imaginable. This is the Truth, and no more, as I am a
Dyng Man; Neither truly, was it ever my intention or design, to be a Witness
of any thing that would look like a Force; Neither indeed, was there any
occasion for it, she being so very frank and free of her self to the Marriage.
I forgot to tell you, I desired her in the Coach, not to be afraid of any
thing, for I told her, there should be nothing of Force imposed upon her, she
told me, she was not at all afraid of that; she wrote likewayes to her Aunt
freely a Letter, Desiring she might not be troubled for her, for she was very
well with her Husband Captain Campbel, etc.

And in this he persevered upon his frequent taking the Sacrament; And at the
time of Execution, he likewayes wrote a Letter, to show a Christian Temper,
wherein he expressed himself heartily, willing freely to forgive those that had
injured him, entreating and requesting his Friends to rest satisfied, etc.

During his continuance in Prison, after Condemnation, he sent for several
Eminent Divines to assist him with Consolation and Comfort, and to prepare him
for another World; Appearing wholly to set himself about the Great Work he had
to do, in making sure his Peace for an Eternal Consolation; He was often in
Meditations and Prayers, expressing his own vileness and unworthiness, for the
sins he had committed against GOD, through the frailty of Youth, and the
corruption of Nature; Earnestly begging that he might be thoroughly washed and
cleansed in the Blood of JESUS CHRIST, that so his pollutions being done away,
he might at the end of his Life, enter into one more Glorious; and so he
continued to wean himself from worldly things, and fix his thoughts upon
everlasting. Joys, and have his eyes up to the Place whither he hoped he was
hastening; He showed a very even Temper and Disposition, and received the
Counsel and Cordial Advice that was given him, with much heed and attention,
and made all manner of visible Improvement of it, receiving the Notice, that he
must prepare for Execution, with great mildness and less concern, than was
expected upon the approach of such mellancholy News.

On Tuesday morning about eleven of the Clock, he was put into a Mourning
Coach, and followed by a Hearse, to bring back the Body, he was attended by two
worthy Divines, and was so far from fear of death, that before he came out of
the prison. he blessed God that his Mind was so well satisfied, and by the
Grace of God he was so prepared to die, that if a Reptive should come* it would
do him an injury rather than a kindness; And when he came to the place of
Execution, one of his friends by the Coach side, told him, that he then came
from the King, and no Reprive could be obtained for him, at which, he did not
in the least seem moved, being come out of the Coach, and standing in a Cart,
he made a very long speech to the people, mostly relating to the Circumstances
that attend the unhappy Accident that had occasioned his coming thither, in all
the Matterial points, agreeing with what is mentioned in his Letter: And then
came to his Exhortaion in these, or as near as could be taken, like words.

His Pious Exhortations, and dying Expressions, etc.
Gentlemen,
I Must now exhort you to be careful for the Salvation of your own precious
Souls: Gentlemen, He that has been a bred Soldier, has not perhaps Lived so
strick to the Rules of Christianity as some other Men. I confess, I have left
undone those things which I ought to have done, and have done those things
which I ought not to have done; But however, Let me entreat you, that you would
remember your Latter end: I pray God that none of you all may come to an
Untimely End, yet remember, that you must come to an end, your time must have a
period: I bless God, my Life and Conversation has not been so odious and
obnoxious to the World, nor I hope, in the Sight of God, but that I have
Confidence in his Mercy, and I hope that these Divines have been with me, can
justify that there is nothing that has come from me, but what has proceeded
from a true and penitent Heart; And I beg, that you would offer up your
Prayers to the Throne of Grace for me, because no man can say, he does not bear
the Prayers of the Righteous, for GOD hides all men to pray, and not to faint.

Well Gentlemen, He that made Heaven and Earth keep and defend you from all
Misfortunes, from the power of death and hell, and then you need not fear, for
Christ is able to save to the uttermost all that come to him; Therefore offer
up Prayer, not only for your selves, but for me who am a dying Man.

Having said thus much, the Ministers prayed with him, then he prayed to
himself, and read two prayers in a book called, A form of prayers for
Prisoners, then read the 15 and the 103 Psalms, and having prayed again, he put
on his cap and took his last leave of the Spectators in a most humble manner,
recommending them to the Protection of Almighty GOD, desiring the concurrence
of their prayers to the last breath; and after he had given the sign to be
turned of the Cart in the midst of Prayer and pious Ejaculations drew away, and
left his Soul to the arms of his Merciful Redeemer, Few eyes that beheld the
sad spectacle, refraining from tears, to see a Gantleman so untimely cut off in
the prime and strength of his days, being cut down, His body was put into the
Conffin, and conveyed away in the hearse, and the next day he was Interred.

Thus Reader, have we given you a brief Account of the matterial Circum stances
that have attended the Life of this Gentleman to his Unfortunate Grave,
recommending to the perpetual and serious Consideration of either Sex, they may
pray God to keep them from such misfortunes. Amen.

A short ELOGIE, by an impartial Hand, on the untimely Fall of Sir John
Johnston.
WHat melancholy thoughts should now arise?
Here sighs suffice not, this requires wet eyes:
Years are the least of Tribute we can pay,
When in the prime of Life, Life's snatched away.
Ah! Johnstoun, thou art gone, misfortunes hand;
Has brake the Glass and seatter'd thy frail Sand;
Grim Death, an envied Triumph has obtained,
A too too early Conquest he has gained.
So have I seen a blushing Rose look gay.
And scattered sweets in Focus's fragrant way;
When suddenly a blastring Wind hereaves
Her of her Glory, withering her Leaves.
What made thee haste to an untimely date?
I was friendship that deserved a better fate:
But here is the Comfort, Heaven perhaps decreed,
That you from Earth should this hard way be freed.
Rather then by Disease, or lingering pain,
And in full vigor storm, the Starry plain;
Break through the Azure Battlements by Prayer,
The Valiant by force are seated there.
Your pious end did you a Soldier show,
To fight for Heaven, as well as Earth below;
Go then unenvied to the Realms above,
Never more to fall a Sacrifice to Love.
Love there Refined, remains no better seed
Does mix its Corn to rear a bainful weed;
That like wild Gourds does in the Pot crowd Death,
To make what should give Life expel our breath.
Epitaph.
REader consider e're you Censure pass,
Though Death untimely break this brittle Glass
Pity at least must make you drop a tear,
When such misfortune on Earth's Stage appear;
Say humane frailty brought him to his end,
And in condoling, show your self a Friend.
FINIS.

