A BREVIAT for the Defendants; Dom. Rex, verse. Carew, and alias, in curia
Chancela.
Upon a Scire Facias, to Repeal or make void the Letters Patents, under the
Great Seal of England ( hereunto Annexed) for Reprisals, against the States
General, and their Subjects, for 1516121. with Costs and Damages, as recited in
the Scire Facias; unto which the Defendants have Pleaded and joined in
Demurrer, this Easter- Term. 34. Carol. secund. pro ut, etc.

THE Defendants Pleaded to the Scire Facias in Easter-Term, 1681. Reciting the
Letters Patents, in haec verba; Charles the Second, etc. not doubting but that
Sir Robert Sawyer, the Kings Attorney General, had been satisfied therewith, and
that the Letters Patents ought not to be Repealed or made void, upon that Writ
of Scire Facias, without satisfaction made to the Grantees.

But the Attorney General having lately put in a Demurrer to the said Plea, unto
which the Defendants rejoyned, so that the Record being made up and read in
Court, on Saturday last, the 20th. of this Instant May, 1682. (consisting of
five large Skins of Parchments; The Lord Chancellor was pleased to appoint
Tuesday following to argue the same; Declaring, That he would give Judgment
thereupon on Saturday next, although Mr. Wallop and Mr. Whitlock, the
Defendants Council, prayed longer time to consult thereon, for that a Copy of
the Record could not be made in that time.

Diverse Debates in this Affair passed the High Court of Admiralty, the Council
Table, the Commons of England, in Parliament, and the Deputies of the States
General several years together, before it was brought into this Solemn and
judicial Grant of Letters Patents, and therefore worthy of that consideration,
to be Argued solemnly before the Lord Chanchellor of England, for his Judgment
therepon; and the rather because the KING himself says, in the Body of the
Patent, That he is bound in Justice and Honor to see the Debt and Damages
Satisfied and Repaired; which is not done in the least measure to this day.

It may be considently affirmed (all circumstances considered) That there was
never two such Families as Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pindars, that
merrited so much from the Crown of England, so Barborously used abroad, and so
much neglected at home.

The Attorney General, by his Demurrer, admits all to be true in the Defendants
PLEA, That nothing was paid to the Defendants, or recoverd of the said Debt and
Damages, out of the Prizes, taken by the Kings Ships, or out of the 800000
Patacoones, mentioned in the PLEA, (and engrossed by the Prince of Orange and
others,) or by any other money from the States of Holland, or the East India
Company of the Netherlands.

The Defendants cannot admit any thing in the Scire Facias, to be effectual in
the Law, against the force of the Grant in the Letters Patents ( quo usque)
until the Debt and Damages with Costs be recovered and satisfied; although a
Treaty at Breda is urged in Bar against the Defendants; Dated 21th. of July
1667. as recited in the Scire Facias, but no Inrolment thereof, that the
Subjects might resort thereunto according to Law, and it ought to be made a
Record (otherwise it cannot any ways invalide this Grant; However, such a
particular Right cannot by Law be taken away, by any Public Treaty: Then Mr.
Attorney General farther says, That the Treaty at Breda was Renewed, Ratified
and Confirmed, by a second Treaty, Proclaimed and Published, and also mentions a
pretended Supersedeas, Dated Sexto die Junij, in the 32 year of the King, but
recites no Records or Inrolments thereof, in regard they erroneously recite the
names of some persons for others.

Some Reasons and Arguments, why the Letters Patents ought not to be Repealed
or Vacated, upon this Scire Facias, before satisfaction made to the Grantees.
1. IN the Case of a Spoil, there is no other remedy but REPRISALS, which are
in the nature of a Withernam, and if the Remedy be taken away, the Right is
suspended; which the Law will not admit in any Case that there should be a
failer of Justice. The Laws and Statutes of this Realm are positive in this
Case: In the 27th of Edw. 3. cap. 17. the Act of Parliament says, That if
Merchants of England, shall be indamaged or spoiled at Sea, by the Subjects of
any other Prince, they shall have the Law of Marque or Reprisals, without Fraud
or Deceit. Which Expresses and Imploys an effectual Releif for the Debt and
Damages, and the scire facias cannot have any Influence upon the Letters
Patents, there being no such persons therein concerned as is mentioned in the
Record, upon which Issue is joined.

The Law of Nations, so soon as the Damages are made Evident, and the Grant
passed for Recovery, Invests the Debt in the Grantee, as an Inviolable Right,
to be Repaired upon the Nation, whose Subjects did the Wrong, wherefore the
Creditors and Grantees in this Case would be left in a miserable Condition,
after the Expense of Ten Thousand Pounds and upwards, to acquire the Grant by
such steps and measures as they have taken, if it should rest in the Kings
Power (without any satisfaction to the persons interessed and injured) to
Retract his own Act passed upon such valuable Considerations, and wherein he
was not deceived in his Grant, that coupled an Interest with an Authority, as
the Law directs of common Right, for Relief of his Subjects.

The Hollanders pretend, That the King in Justice and Honor is obliged to pay
the Defendants the Debt and Damages (out of the 800000 Pattacoons) which has
been so useful to his Majesty, but the Grantees and others clayming under them,
have patiently expected and sought after Reparations by the ordinary means
prescribed by Law, putting both his Majesty, the States General, and the Prince
of Orange in Mind, by taking some small quantities of Corn and Wine, for their
Refreshment (which was by Force and Power indirectly, taken from them again)
and the Poor Seamen Tried for Felony and Piracy, for seeking after their Goods
by Lawful Authority; yet the Defendants are ready to take any Reasonable
Satisfaction from either Party, and give up the Letters Patents, concerning the
Spoils and Depredations mentioned therein, not excluding Themselves from
pursuing their Right at Law, upon Civil and personal Actions depending in
Holland and Zealand, upon other Accounts, Bills of Exchange, and Obligations
for Monys Lent, wherein the Opinions of the Lord Chancellor, the late Lord
Chief Justice Rainsford, and the Lord Chief Justice North, were transmitted to
the States, affirming, That Justice ought to be administered in those Cases,
according to the Laws of England, where the Contracts were Originally made. And
in the mean time be obliged to make no further Entries of Ships to put in
Execution the said Letters Patents, for Reprisals until the scire facias, Plea,
Demurrer, and Rejoinder be Solemnly argued on both Sides, according to Common
Justice for Judgment of the Court, or that any other Expedients may be found
out how the Debt and Damages may be repaired and satisfied. That the History of
this woeful Cause may not rise up in Judgment in future Ages, against those that
have eaten the Bread of Grieved and Oppressed Orphants and Widows.

Actum, May 22, 1682.

