An Humble PETITION unto the High and most Honorable Courts of Parliament,
that they would be pleased to condescend to the perusing of these short Notes,
tending to the refining of the Book of Common Prayer, in a few Things.
I Do not mislike the holy Prayers of our Church, because some things in or
about them may be amended: but I desire an amendment of such things, as do
either give scandal, or from which weak conscientious persons do take
scandal: that so love, peace, and unity may be preserved in our Church, from
which will follow Uniformity and Conformity. For this end, I shall give
Instances of something to be Added to the Book of Common Prayer; of some things
to be Altered, and of some things to be Removed.

1. Of some things to be added.
I read in the Common Prayer Book of Edward the sixth, printed 1552. In the
10th. Petition of the holy Letany, this prayer: From the tyranny of the Bishop
of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities, etc. O good Lord deliver us. But in
our Common Prayer Books in these days, this Protestant prayer is quite left
out: as if it were unlawful for us to pray against Romish tyranny, and Popish
detestable Doctrines. It is meet therefore that this Prayer should be added,
and restored to our Books of Common Prayer, as it was in Edward the sixths time.

2. Of some things to be altered: As
1. As you may see in the Calendar for the first and second Lessons, many
Chapters of the Apocrypha Scriptures are appointed to be read, as well as the
Canonical Scriptures. Now it is not meet that Apocrypha Scriptures, which are
of a doubtful verity, should be made of equal authority with the Canonical
Scriptures: wherefore it is meet, that there be an alteration, by putting away
the Apocrypha Chapters, and putting in their rooms so many Canonical Chapters.

2. After the first and second Lessons for Morning-Prayer, it is ordered, that
these Lessons or Chapters shall be sung in a plain Tune. Now is this decent,
when a man reads a Chapter, to sing it? Or is it so edifying, to sing it, as it
is to read it in a sober and grave tone of voice? Like as a Judge on the Bench
speaks his Charge, or as the Sheriff reads the Kings Proclamation, or as a
Schoolmaster reads a Lecture to his Scholars. In the Chapters sometimes God
threatens us for our sins, and sometimes that glorious and fearful name of
the Lord our God is read, which we ought to fear, Deuteronomy. 28.58. And is it decent
for a Minister to read these things merrily, and with a singing voice? Is it
not meet then, that this singing should be altered?

Besides in Cathedral Churches, they sing their Prayers, and is it not meet
that this also be altered?

3. The Book of Common Prayer lacks a good Method: for the Minister is forced
in reading of Service, to turn some leaves backward, and then some leaves
forward, and cannot read on to the next thing following, as he might, if things
were methodically disposed; now this would be altered.

4. The last thing in the Book of Common Prayer, is the form for Consecration
of Bishops to their office, which gives them their being, and makes them
Bishops. Now as I conceive, this Consecration ought to be in the Kings name:
For the King is supreme head of the Church, and next under Christ in authority.
And therefore Bishops ought to derive their office and authori^y therein from
the King, as next under the King: but they are consecrated, not in the name of
the King, but in the name of another and higher power, as from Christ, the holy
Ghost, and the Metropolitan, and so they make themselves to be next under
Christ, and so shoulder out of place the King, and deny his supremacy: Now
ought not this Consecration therefore be altered?

5. The Prayers of the Church ought to be without Tautologies, and unnecessary
repetitions: For Christ said, that his Disciples should not be like the heathen
in prayer, using vain repetitions, Mat. 6.7. But our Common Prayer Book is full
of unnecessary Repetitions. For 1. the Lords Prayer is used in an hours time
over and over again, as twice in Morning-prayer, and once in the Pulpit in the
Ministers former Prayer. 2. Gloria Patri, or Glory be to the Father, is in one
hours time appointed to be said and repeated over and over again six or seven
times. I could add other prayers also of like kind: Now is it not meet to alter
this?

6. In our Cathedral Churches they say their second Service in the Chancell or
on the High Altar, not in the body of the Church, where the other set Service
is said. Now the high Altar is no more holy than the body of the Church; nor is
it so convenient for the peoples edification, because they being afar off in
the body of the Church, they can hardly hear what is read: And what reason can
be rendered, why one part of the Service should be read in the body of the
Church, and another part on the High Altar? And why should it be so in a
Cathedral Church, more than in all other Churches? Is it not meet that this be
altered? 2. It is appointed in the order for the Communion, that the Table
shall stand in the body of the Church or Chauncel, where Morning and
Evening-Prayers are said: but now in the Cathedral Church, and in many others,
the Table is hoisted up, and stands on the High Altar: But this is not the
place where Morning and Evening prayers are usually said, but the place for
these is the body of the Church, and there used in all common on Churches, and
why then should it be otherwise in Cathedrals.

7. As touching Baptism, the Priest is appointed to take the child in his
arms, and to dip it into the water, unless the child be weak: so then strong
children must all of them be dipped into the water, as Anabaptists do: but this
dipping is out of use in our Church; Is it not meet then to alter this dipping
unto sprinkling of water?

3. Of some things to be removed out of the Church: As
1. As touching the Epistles and Gospels, these are appointed to be read on
Sundays, in Morning and Evening-Prayers, but I see no reason for it; for on
Sundays we have an whole Chapter read for the second Lesson, out of the
Epistles, and another out of the Gospels: what necessity is there to read a
part of a Chapter out of them? For we heard the Gospel out of the four
Evangelists before, in the second Lesson, and also the Epistle out of the
Epistles of St. Paul and others: Is it necessary to read the same matter twice
in one hour? 2. After the whole Chap. of the Gospel and Epistle is read, what
need is there to read also a piece, or a part of a Chapter out of the Gospel
and the Epistles? and both the whole Chapter and a piece of one to be read the
same day, viz. on Sunday, I see no reason for it. The Epistle and Gospel
therefore consisting but of a piece of the chapters read before, to me seems
superfluous, and therefore meet to be removed out of the Church.

2. As touching Baptism, 1. of Godfathers and Godmothers, who promise (what
they perform not) that the child shall be virtuously brought up and learn the
Creed, Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments. I see no need for these
Godfathers, etc. Time was, in days of persecution, when the Christian parents
were slaughtered, and martyred, then there was need that other Christians
should take care for the Christian education of their Infants left behind: But
we have no such persecution, our parents live with their children, and ought to
give them godly education, and so there is no need of Godfathers to do it. 2.
Of the Cross in Baptism, it is confessed by the Bishops, that the Infant is
fully baptized before it be crossed: what ^^^d then is there of the cross? May
not persons of years have a cross on their foreheads made after the Lords
Supper, as well as Infants after Baptism? These things being needless, may
safely be removed out of the Church.

3. Touching Matrimony, it is appointed, that 1. the man shall say to the
woman, With my body I thee worship. I leave it to consideration, whether these
words be fitting or not; and whether it be meet, that the more honorable
person should worship his inferior. 2. It is ordered that the man shall say,
With all my worldly goods I thee endowe. Now the Law does not allow the woman
but her Thirds, but the Priest allows her all. 3. The man must say, With this
Ring I thee wed. Now what need of a Ring to testify the Marriage, when they
are fully married before, by their solemn and mutual promises each to other,
made before God and the Congregation?

4. Of our Ceremonies, note, that 1. whilst we labor to preserve in honor,
the prayers of our Church, these Ceremonies cast dirt on them, and render them
odious: for many do mislike the Common Prayer Book, because they see where this
comes in, it draws after it the Romish Ceremonies. 2. Note, they are
Innovations, being not in use in the Primitive Church. 3. Some of them are
Jewish, as the Surplice, Cope, high Altar, Organ-pipes, etc. Now the Temple
where they were used being down, and the Priesthood who used them, changed; why
should we revive them? But others are Romish, invented at Rome, or came thence,
as the Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, holy or Saints days,
with others. Now being these had no good Original, why should we follow Papists
in them? 4. They have been the cause of silencing many godly and painful
Ministers, and a bone of contention in the Church for many years, and one cause
of the late War. But many say, St. Paul commanded Order and Decency, 1 Cor.
14.40. Answer 1. St. Paul meant it not of our English Ceremonies, for the
Primitive Church used none of them; they worshipped God in their Churches both
orderly and decently, without our Ceremonies. 2. Christ forbad them, as
Traditions of men, Mar. 7.2, etc. And St. Paul forewarned us against them, as
Traditions which are not according to Christ, Col. 2.8. Now Christ never
appointed any of them: and shall such Ceremonies be called indifferent things?
and matters of Order and Decency? I wish these may be all removed, the which
would tend to an everlasting and well grounded Peace. But I leave all to the
wisdom of our most Honorable Parliament.

By THEOPHILUS BRABOVRN


