TOBIAS Observation;
A Youngman came unto a fair,
by chance he met his true Love there
Said he, sweetheart thou art welcome here,
invited her to drink some Beer,
But in the end proved never the near,
as in this Song it will appear.
Tune of, The Country Farmer.
By Tobias Bowne.
This may be Printed,

R. P.





THere was a Youngman who lately expressed
his love to a Damsel that lived in the West;
And thus he began his mind to declare
said he, thou art welcome unto this Fair
I have a great mind with thee to talk,
come pray let us to the Tavern walk
I Will do thee no harm thou needst not fear,
for Fairing i will give thee one flaggon of Beer.
Pray how does your Father and Mother at home,
they were well this morning then answered Joan
Said he if you please to walk with me
we will be as merry as merry may be:
To tell thee the truth I do love the dear,
yet I am so doubtful my mind to declare
For fear what I ask you should me deny
and then for your Love I shall surely die
I hope you will not offended be
though I make so bold to speak unto thee,
For night nor day I can take no rest,
for Love that lies harbored within my Breast
And thou art she that can ease my pain,
then grant me love for love again:
Give me some kind answer my heart to ease,
and let me not languish in Loves disease.
The Maids Answer. Good Sir, I do fancy you jeer at me,
your Riches and mine will never agree,
For I am a poor Man's daughter its known
I work for my Living abroad and at home
Sometimes I Am at whom to spinning of Yarn
and sometimes abroad to reaping of Corn
Sometimes in the Field to milk the Cow
I get what I have by the sweat of my brow.




I live as well contented as any Maid can,
what need I entangle my self with a Man,
I walk where I please at my own command
I need not say shall I, pray shall I husband,
Now I have my self to guide and to rule,
in marrying some people have played the Fool:
Methinks it is troublesome to be a Nurse,
when children are froward and husbands are worse
Yet for your Love I have no cause to deny
sure you deserve one that is better then I
For you have a good estate of your own
And I am a poor Man's Daughter it is known,
Yet I am content, with what little I have,
Perhaps if I marry I may be a Slave,
Therefore I Will beware how I marry in have,
for fear I have cause to repent at the last.

The Man's Answer. O prithee my dearest take pity on me,
no one in the World, I fancy but thee,
And do not abuse me for loving thee dear,
I Will willingly tarry for thee one whole year
Nothing shall be wanting thy mind to fulfill
so thou will but grant me thy Love and good Will
But if thou deny me and Love thou have none,
then surely thy Heart is as hard as a Stone.
Sweetheart prithee tell me, I know you well can
whether you do fancy another youngman
Pray pardon my boldness in asking so far,
or to any other engaged you are,
My dearest resolve me if you will be so be kind,
that will be great ease to my troubled mind,
But if from all other Men thou art free,
I shall live in hopes that my Bride thou will be.

The Maids Answer. Good sir, you pretend a great deal of good will
yet I am not ready your mind to fulfill,
For I have no fancy to be made a Wife
nor never was concerned with no man in my Life
And for to live single it is my delight
and so honest youngman I wish you good night,
Pray by your leave let me pass by you youngman
for now it is high time for me to be gone.

The Man's Answer. And must thou begone and no longer wilt stay
then I wish I had not a seen thee this day,
For now I am troubled with doubt and with fear
because I am slighted for loving so dear
Young Men I advise you where ever you be
If Cupid do hit you, then think upon me,
Although you Love dearly yet never declare,
unto any Damsel the Love that you bare.

And so having ended I wish you all well
each youngman and maid to the place where you dwell
But yet I would have you one penny bestow
amp; that is the price of this Ballad you know
You know it is good to learn Children to Read,
it is fit for a Youngman to sing to a Maid
It is good for pastime on each holy day,
and here be the Ballads come buy them away.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.


