VERSES, Presented to his Masters in the Ward of St. Giles's Cripplegate,
within the Freedom.
By William Briscoe, Bell-man.
On Christmas Day.
Christmas is come; The great Cathedral Feast:
Christmas, the day of Labor, not of Rest,
On which the Word, and Workman of Creation,
Came, not to rest, but work for our Salvation:
He came, according to Prophetic Truth,
To work, to be in labor from His youth:
Descending to a Manger, from his Throne:
He came to do our business, not his own.
Another for Christmas Day.
With Angels man now sing with cheerful voice,
More cause have thou, than Angels to rejoice:
The Peace proclaimed this morn, is for thy sake,
For thee did God, our human nature take,
To gain his lost-sheep-man, of Grace bereft,
Whilst Ninety Nine, he in the Desert left.
For St. Stephen's Day.
BLessed St. Stephen, whom the faithless Jews
Did apprehend, and falsely him accuse:
For speaking Truth, he Stoned was to death;
And for his Deaths-men, prayed to his last breath.
Being the first Martyr, as true Story says,
That ever suffered for the Christian Faith.
For St. John's Day.
St. John, who was surnamed, The Divine,
Having set forth his Gospel, most Sublime;
In boiling Oil, confirmed the Truth he wrote,
Where John received a Martyrs Crown; in Vote
Of whom we read no other Martyrdom;
What if John stay (said Christ) until I come?
For Innocents Day.
THE Bethlem-Babes this day received their Harms,
The Soldiers cut them from their Mothers arms;
Herod commands it, and it must be done;
So, to cut off the Worlds Salvation:
Nothing could move, nor melt the Tyrant's eyes,
Not the Babes Innnocence, nor Mothers cries.
But Herod's cursed Design God did prevent,
And Christ for safety, was to Egypt sent.
On the late unhappy Fire in the City.
GOds's heavy Scourge laid late upon the City,
What Eye beheld it, but with tears of pity!
How fast the Fire the Houses did unframe,
And stately Streets were lickt up by the flame!
The formidable warning of whose Rod,
Make us use penitent means to move our God,
To put his Sword of Indignation up,
Lest all be made to taste of the same Cup.
Lord, who vouchsafed'st with miraculous speed,
To free thy Servants here in time of need,
From the all-deserving-fury of thy wrath,
Which on our Neighbors heavy lighted has:
Though it is acknowledged, we as faulty were
Whom thou have spared, as those that suffered there:
All Praise for this thy special Mercy done,
Be to thy Name, so long as Ages run.
London has drunk of Sorrow's Cup so deep,
That now for Ages, She is laid to sleep;
But in regard that underneath the Cope,
She was the Phoenix-City, there is hope
Our Children may survive to see the day,
When from the Old Phoenix-City, London may
A new proceed; London made new again,
A penitent Habitation for new men.
LONDON, Printed December. the 24th, in the Year MDC.LX.VII.


