The bad Husbands Reformation, OR, The Ale-Wives daily Deceit.
If thou in Folly thus proceed,
what e're you Earn to spend;
When thou art in the greatest need,
one Groat they will not lend.
To the Tune of, My Life and my Death; Or, The poor man's Counselor.
This may be Printed,

R. P.







I Was a bad Husband, that had a good Trade,
But I of the same such ill profit have made,
By taking my pleasure in folly so large,
I seldom or never took care of my Charge:
This caused much sorrow and grief to my Wife,
But now I Am resolved to lead a new Life.
While I run to ruin, she would me advise,
With tender expressions, and tears in her eyes,
If thou will be ruled, I then will contrive,
To do my endeavor in order to thrive:
Still I never regarded the words of my Wife*
Yet now, I Am resolved to lead a new Life.
Your jovial Companions and Ale-wives, you will find,
When you are in trouble will prove most unkind;
They Will laugh at your folly, and slight you like dirt,
You Will find what I tell you is not for your hurt;
In scorn I disdained to be ruled by my Wife,
But now I Am resolved to lead a new Life.
While I took my pleasure I Would ramble and roame,
And never delighted to come to my home;
In Gaming and Drinking I wasted my strength,
Till I was reduced to sorrow at length;
And then I remembered the words of my Wife,
Resolving therefore for to lead a new Life.
While I in Extravagant courses run on,
The Ale-wiFe would call me a right honest Man,
As long as I labored and brought it her all,
As likewise for Liquor most freely would call;
She would take my part then against my poor Wife,
But now I resolve for to lead a new life.
At length I did chance to be out of Employ,
And my Wife sore sick, I, and likely to dye;
And I having nothing in time of distress,
My grief, care and sorrow, was great, you may guess:
Because I had nothing to nourish my Wife,
But now I Am resolved to lead a new life.
Away to my Hostis I went with all speed,
In hopes for to borrow a Crown in my need;
And when I had told her my sorrowful Tale,
It was but in vain, for I could not prevail,
In borrowing a Tester to comfort my Wife,
Therefore I resolved to lead a new life.
Though then I had told her the depth of my grief,
She would not afford me the least of relief;
Her words was so killing when to me she spoke,
I thought in my sorrows, my heart would have broke
Then, then I remembered the words of my Wife,
And therefore resolved to lead a new life.
Now just as I was at the point of despair,
Wrapped in those troubles of sorrows and care;
Behold how good Providence then did provide,
I got into Labor, whereon I relied;
To bring in a daily supply to my Wife,
And likewise resolved to lead a new life.
And this did my grief and my troubles expel,
My Wife she recovered, and all things went well,
Now Love, Peace, and Plenty, does daily abound,
I never will forget how my Hostis she frowned;
What ever I earn i will bring home to my Wife,
As being resolved to lead a new Life.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball in Pye-Corner, near
West-Smithfield.


