The Brick-makers Lamentation from Newgate:
OR, A true Report of the Indicting, Arraignment, Trial, and Convicting of four
of the Brick-makers Court of In-justice: for the Notorious Riot committed on
the Body of one Richard Lambart, Brick-maker of Fullum, who they Arraigned,
Indicted, and had almost Executed, for some pretended idle words. Their
Examination, and Trial, and Sentence they are to undergo, expressed as follows.

The Tune is, Packingtons Pound.


GOod people come hither and listen a while,
I Will tell you a story shall make you to smile
For such a bold project there never was heard,
As now in this Ballad shall soon be declared;
The Brick-makers they
This project did play,
The Elventh of August as people do say:
Let this be a warning that others take heed,
Their court of in-justice will smart for the deed.
In Rainy wet weather it was I suppose,
When each bonny Brick-maker steeled his nose,
They drink their cups round, and do merrily prate
Each Brick-maker seemed a Lord in conceit;
Whilst thus they Carrouse,
And call on the House,
One of them his bread and his cheese he did lose
And one in the company there he did atackt,
As guilty of Felony for this bold act.
They called him Dick Lambart whom he did accuse,
Who, he said, such activity often did use;
And there for his life he would have him be tried
A Judge and a Jury this deed should deside;
A Court there was called,
The Crier he bawled
And there with his flounder mouth loudly he yaul'd;
And then on the bench for a judge there set down
One in a red wastecoat which served for a gown.
A Judge and a Jury, and Clarks did appear,
a Sheriff and also a Hangman was there,
The Judge being set and prisoner brought forth
The plaintiff he there on a brickbat took oath.
that to his great cost
Too lately he lost.
Some bread and some cheese which he saved for a toast,
And that Richard Lambart had taken his peck.
Who for it deserved to be noos'd by the neck.




FOr this he had sentance by which he was forced
To be burnt in ye hand with an apple hot roast
And afterward he on that apple must feed,
This Sentance he had for his Fellonious deed;
But now comes the worst
More bad then the first,
Poor Richard his fortune it was so accursed;
A Witness held forth, and he there did declare,
That Richard spoke Treason and he did it hear.
He said the Kings drums they did make a great sound
But in ye midst of them no guts to be found,
And that the Kings horses with Iron were shod,
And often on dirt and on stones they have trod;
That they so were fed
With butter and bread,
They lost all the Rases what ever was laid:
And that ye Kings Goshauks had got no more foul
Then is in the night-bird that is called an Owl.
This was the Indictment on which he was tried,
The Jury was sworn on a Brickbat beside,
The Evidence there did make it out plain
And Lambart away from the Bar he was taken;
Their Jury went out,
And brought it about,
That Lambart was guilty of Treason no doubt:
And then by the Judge he was sentenced, that he,
Should hang by the neck on the Tiborn Tree.
A Clay cart they got, and a horse in it beside,
And put Lambart in it, and him fast down tied,
And then unto'th Gallows they do him convey,
With a Guard of their Off^cers all on the way,
A Brickbat to read,
As they did proceed,
And then on the Gallows they hanged him indeed:
Thus have you heard of the Brick-makers Court,
who hang men in earnest, and count it their sport.
A Groom of the Kings stables came riding ye way,
Seeing this revel rout to them did say,
I see you have condemned this man in the Town,
But here is a reprieve and he must be cut down:
This being done,
Away then did run,
This Court of In-justice each mothers Son.
The Judge and the Hangman was taken in the act
And two of the Iury-men since for that fact.
This court of In-justice appeared in time
At Seshions house there for to answer their crime
A hundred pound is laid on each head,
Or else due imprisonment till it be paid:
In Newgate they are,
Remaining in care,
Of farther punishment they are in fear:
And thus you have heard of ye Brick-makers Court
Who hang men in earnest and count it their sport.
London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, next door to the Ball in West Smithfield.


