THE SERVANT'S AUDIT: A SERMON Preached at the Funerals of the Right Worshipful
Sr. EDMUND ANDERSON Baronet, in the Church of Broughton in the County of
Lincoln, Febr. 15. 1660.

By Edward Boteler, sometimes Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in
Cambridge, and now Rector of Wintringham in that County, and Chaplain to his
MAJESTY.

blazon or coat of arms

Horat. Carm. li, iij. Od. xi, -- I Secundo
Omine: and nostri memorem Sepulchro
Sculpe querelam.
London, Printed for G. Bedell and T. Collins, and are sold at their shop at
the Middle Temple. Gate in Fleet Street. 1662.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN ANDERSON OF BROVGHTON, in the County of
LINCOLN, Baronet.
SIR,
I Was in some dispute with my self to whom this Dedication might be most
proper: your Lady Mother, or your self; Romans 16.27.
but it pleased God only wise to decide that Question, by translating her into
Glory: and leaving you to enter upon your Parentalia, among which this Sermon
with your approbation and good leave, may be accounted, and pass for one. It
was preached by your Father's Will, but printed against my own. Pardon me Sir,
that I tell you so: It is not that I was unwilling to raise my whole Posse, and
offer my utmost Contributions to his memory (The adventure I made of my self in
that great and solemn appearance at his Funerals, will assert me against that
Suspicion:) but because I was sensible of that Torrent of Ink whick broke in
upon us during the late lawless, and scribbling days, every one licensing
himself to invade the Press, till we were become almost all Books, and no
learning; insomuch that if we had held on at that rate, that expression of
Saint John had scarce been an Hyperbole with us, Joh. 21.25.
Even the world it self could not contain the Books that should be written. You
cannot then blame me, if I was so charitable to my self, as to desire not to be
listed among those Supernumeraries. Over, and besides all this: I looked on
your self as the fairest Transcript of your Father's virtues, out-doing all
Copies that a pen could pretend to, and coming so near the Original, as might
justly silence, and Supersede all attempts of this nature: So that what is, or
can be written, may be seen exemplified in your self with many advantages. And
it is no small help to me, that where I am defective, and come short, I may
remit those that know you, to look at you for their Reparations. The world then
having the best account of your Father in your self: these Papers, with the
Escutcheons, and other their companions in duty for the Rites of that day,
might well have gone into privacy according as every one could get their share,
and not have been summoned to this Reviviscence, to stand a second trial, and
submit to a further, but it may be, not a more favorable sentence. But I have
learned not to consult my self where you command, and have therefore given my
self up to your obedience. Please that your Name may give life to this Sermon,
the creature of your Father's death: 't will encourage the Reader in the
perusal, as it has done the Writer in the Publication; for, the worth of it
will more than abundantly compound for the wants of,

SIR, Your most faithful, And most humble servant, E. BOTELER.

A SERMON Preached at the Funerals Of the Right Worshipful, Sir EDMUND
ANDERSON, Baronet. Febr. 15. 1660.
MAN being in honor abides not, is a Truth, Psalm. 49.12
not more legible in the Psalmist, than in this Solemnity.

Under the Hearse is Man, Adam, of the Earth Earthy, the Ruins and Reversions
of Man; A dead man (excuse the Expression) is Man drawn to the Life.

Upon the Hearse you may see Man in honor: There you have his Insignia, the
fair Achievements of meriting Ancestors, illustrated by a late Access, the
Cognizance of His Princes Favor, the Guerdon of his own Loyalty.

And, if you look at the mournful Attendants on his Exequies this day, they
tell us, That this Man in honor abides not: Job 17.1. Eccl 12.5.
Superest Sepulchrum, in a nearer sense than Job spoke it, The Grave is ready
for him, he is going to his long home, and therefore do the Mourners go about
the streets.

But though Man abide not, yet his honor (I hope) will be long lived; it will
live in his hopeful Son and Successor; it will live in the mouths and memories
of the present Age, and grateful Posterity.

I came not hither to paint his Sepulcher, or trick up his Name with any light
Embroide yes of Wit, or Art, it is plainness suits best with mourning. Besides,
his infinite Fame admits no addition, no cont ibutions of the Orator can better
it; his own life has given him the clearest commendations to the World, and
his sickness and death are his best Funeral Sermon.

Virtus Sepulchrum condidit. Horat. in Epod 9.
However being designed to this Employment both by the Will of God, and the
Will of the deceased, I shall neither be so faithless to his Merits, or false
to your Expectation, as to let him go to the Grave in silence, and not let you
know (as King David said of Abner) That there is a great man fallen this day in
Israel. 2 Samuel 3 38.


But I must remember he is not my only Text (though the practice of Antiquity
would justify me, should I spend my whole Discourse upon him) I know you will
expect another, and I have chosen one, which (I persuade my self) shall have
all your Votes for the sutableness of it:

Give me leave to treat your Attentions with it a while. It is written.

MATTHEW. 25.21. His Lord said unto him, Well done, Thou good and faithful
servant, Thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over
many things: Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.


THE Righteous perishes, Isa 57.1.
and no man lays it to heart, was a complaint in Isaiah's days, may be so in
ours. Thoughts of our own, of another death, we strive to keep as far from the
heart as we can. To mourn in our clothes, and laugh in our sleeves, that is
fashonable; and familiar it is to be light enough within, so we can but black
our selves a little about the skirts and edges, and carry a face of sadness.
And, if such an occasion as this do at any time melt us into some seasonable
meditations of our mortalities, they may rather be called our Fits, than our
Affections. It is with us for the most part, as with the people of Israel, who,
2 Samuel 20.12, 13.
when they saw Amasa wallowing in blood, and lying before them in the way,
stood still a while, and made a melancholy pause; but when he was removed out
of the way, and a Cloth cast upon him, they went on after Joab.

When we come to a Funeral, our thoughts happily are at a stand sometimes,
seldom at a stay; we are willing, it may be, to let them visit, but cannot
consent they should sit down in the Chambers of darkness. Of all the
Providence of God, his ordinary ones are least observed; and among them, this
of turning man to destruction, Psalm. 90.5.
and calling again for the return of the sons of men, is as much slighted as
any; though none being of equal concern to it, as standing betwixt both worlds,
and influencing upon our everlasting and unchangeable Beings. Dies mortis,
natalis Aeterni, the day of Death, is the birthday of Eternity.

And therefore it is that I have chosen to speak to you out of a Parable, that
I may take faster hold on your hearts, and give the present occasion an
advantage to gain upon your affections, Parables having the knack of
insinuating themselves into the memories, and lodging truths in the minds of
the Hearers. They are like plain cut Seals, that leave a fair impression behind
them. They are like Threads to string the Jewels of heavenly Truths, that they
may not drop off, and be lost. They are a great help to the practice of that
Apostolical Exhortation, We ought to give earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, Hebr. 2.1.
lest at any time we should let them slip.

The Parable you may read at your leisure, and save me the labor. The purport
of it, is under the plain and familiar Discourse of a Lord going far from home,
intrusting his servants with money, returning, reckoning with them, and
remunerating of them; to set before us in a most lively and apposite
Representation, our lives and concredited mercies, our deaths and following
judgments, our suitable retributions and final rewards.

I shall not trouble my self nor you with a disquisition, whether this be the
same Parable with that of Luke 19. or not. St. Chrysostom in his 79. Homily
upon St. Matthew's Gospel, gives us many differences; among the rest, these
two, which may serve the turn.

They differ both in the weight of the Trust, and in the number of the Trustees.

In the weight of the Trust, there a pound, here a Talent, which is one
hundred, twenty and five pounds.

In the number of the Trustees, there ten, here but three. But I shall leave
such discussions to them that have leisure enough, and to spare.

Nor shall I meddle with the Allegory, which does but spend time, and sport
with the Text.

The plain English of the Parable is this.

The man traveling into a far Country, ver. 14.] is the Son of Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ, leaving the Earth, Ephesians 4.10.
and ascending far above all Heavens. Psa. 72.11


His servants, ver. 14.] are the Inhabitants of the World, men of all degrees
and conditions. Li. 2. ad simpl. qu. 1 Pelarg. Quaest. Evang. (...) 238.
All Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him.

The Goods given, are called Talents, ver. 15. which are according to St.
Augustine, Munus aliquod divinum, some divine kind of charge or employment.

Gratia sine merito, Li. 2. de vnc. Gent. cap. 8.
in St Prosper's sense. Grace, and the gift by grace; something freely derived
to us, to which no worth of ours could entitle us, nor merit lay claim.

Quaelibet Dei dona, In Regul. brev. Inter. 253.
if you will have it from St. Basil. Any the Gifts of God. All the Goods we hold
of him.

Goods of Nature. Wit, Memory, Understanding.

Goods of Fortune; (give leave to the expression) Honors, Houses, Riches,
Possessions, Inheritance.

Goods of Grace; Ephesians 1.3.
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Word, Worship, Sanctuary,
seasons of grace, the days of the Son of man. These, all these and whatever is
dispensed and concredited to us by the Lord, are our Talents.

The diversity of these Gifts. To one, five: To another, two: And to another,
one. (...), according to every ones capacity or ability, De vita Christi. P. ^
cap. 49.^ 3.
is, Ne quem gravaret, ne cuiquam deficeret, says Ludolphus. That none might
have more than he could manage, or less than he could employ. Or else. Salm. in
Par. Tract. 39. n. 7.
Ob pulchritudinem Ecclesiae quae ex variis gradibus resultat. For the beauty
of the Church, which is a Symmetry, or elegancy of proportion, a comely Result
of several parts, each contributing his share to the whole.

The Trading with the Talents, or the committing them to the Nummularii, verse.
16.27. is the expending, and laying out of all receivings, of all our betrusted
and concredited mercies; thriving by them, and gathering in the use of them, as
if we were driving on a Trade for Heaven, and immortality.

The long time after which the Lord comes and reckons with his servants,
verse. 19. is, in general, all the days of the Son of man, the Time of his
forbearance and long-suffering with the World, from the day of his departure,
till the day of his last appearance, when he shall come again in power and
great glory, Verse. 31
and all his holy Angels with him.

In particular. The days of Man, of every man, the time of natural life, Dies
Peregrinationis, as Jacob calls them, Genesis 47.9.
the days of the years of our Pilgrimage. Eccles. 12.6, 7.
the space of our abode on this side the Grave, till the silver Cord be loosed,
and the golden Bowl be broken, and Dust return to Earth as it was.

Then, He reckons, reckons righteously, reckons indispensibly with every soul,
and then he will bespeak every faithful servant in the language of the Text.

His Lord said unto him, Well done, Thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

So that the Text (as you may see by this time) is the Soul's Audit for another
world.

Wherein is observable,

1. The Auditor, His Lord.

2. The Accomptant, Him: His Lord said unto him.

3. The Acquittance, or discharge, which is made,

1. By Applauding him. Well done, good and faithful servant.

2. By Approving him; Thou have been faithful over a few things.

3. By advancing him; I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord.

The Particulars are many, and the Time short, I must post through them, please
to let your Attentions keep pace with me, and I hope I shall not tire them.

The Auditor. He Is first, Col. 1.15.17.
and well he deserves it; it is his place. He Is the firstborn of every
creature. He is before all things, and by him all things consist. His Lord.

Lord. That Is the Auditor's Greatness.

His Lord. There Is the Accomptant's Happiness.

Toll meum, Toll Deum, better for him there was no Lord, than not be his. His
Lord.

It will be the work of this Lord in the great day of his appearance, (all
judgment being committed to him) to summon the dead, small and great, Rev.
20.12, 13.
to stand before him, to call to the Sea to give up her Dead, and Death and
Hell to deliver up the Dead which are in them, to bring the World to a
Reckoning, to Audit the Accounts, state the debentures, and settle the eternal
condition of Men and Angels. Isa. 2.11.
The lofty looks of Man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be
bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

His Lord; the Auditor: He Is first.

The Accomptant. He Is next. His Lord said unto him. To him that received the
Talents: it is he that must account for them.

Whatsoever the servant has, is, Depositum Domni, they are his Lords Goods,
though in his hands (as they are called, verse. 14.) and his Lord will call him
to account for them.

Him. This Him is not a third person to exclude the first and second: for it is
I, and thou, and all; every man (and woman) in the Congregation, not a man that
has received a Talent, but his Lord will say to Him.

Remember this; remember it often; remember it always; it will convince you
into a holy thrift, and make you better Husbands with all your intrustments.
Servants that never think of a reckoning, never value their expenses. They care
not how they debauch, and mis-spend, and lash out, they are secure against
Accounts. The evil servant that says in his heart, Mat. 24.48.49.
(...), My Lord delayeth his coming, grows dissolute upon it, smites his
fellow servants, eats and drinks with the Drunken. Oh! but let the Red
rationem have a room in your thoughts, and keep company with your meditations;
it will lay a restraint upon you, and overaw you into a spiritual providence,
and Heavenly forecast, to remember that God has appointed a day in the which
he will judge the world in righteousness; Act. 17.31.
to consider with your selves, that there is an Audit day set down in the
decretals of Eternity, a time when the Lord will have a saying with every
servant. His Lord said unto him.

And that for the Accomptant briefly, whom I leave to his Lord, and let us now
see how he comes off with him upon his reckoning, in the

Third particular, his acquittance, or discharge.

And here we find him

1. Applauded. Well done, thou good and faithful servant.

2. Approved. Thou have been faithful over a few things.

3. Advanced. I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.

Applauded first; and there we may take notice

1. Of the note of applause. Well done.

2. Of the matter of applause. Good and faithful.

The note of Applause is but one word in the Original, (...). And Arias
Montanus renders it with a been only. Well, good and faithful servant.

It is vox optantis; so St. Chrysostom is Latin'd, Been sit tibi. Be it well
to thee thou good and faithful servant. Or,

It is vox laudantis; Novarinus Lection. variet. in Mat. 25.
so from the Syriack it is given us; Been est. It is well.

I meet also with Euge, recte, recte sane. All which come to one and the same,
praising and applauding the servant for his faithfulness and goodness, Salm. in
Par. Tract. 39.
and laus in part mercedis datur: his praise being part of his pay. Well done.

What a Good God do we serve, that makes the best construction of us, and our
performances? What a Candid Interpreter is He of the actions of his people? Not
the least endeavor of any servant of his, shall want commendation, though it
deserve none; Novarinus in Loc.
and all this ad grandia quaeque allicere. To quicken our industry after the
highest attainings: encouraging us to do well, by assuring us he will one day
say, Well done.

Well done, not well wished: then Balaam had carried it: Number. 23.10.
Fiant novissima mea horum similia! Let me die the death of the righteous, and
let my last end be like his.

Well done, not well said: neither will that serve. Then every Running
pretended Preacher would thrust in with the foremost. Mat. 7.22.
Many will say in that day, Lord, Lord, Bern.
have we not prophesied in thy Name? Non legisse, sed egisse: non dixisse, sed
vixisse laus erit. It is Action shall have the praise of that day, nothing will
do then but doing. Well done.

And that for the note of Applause, it is but a word, and therefore a word of
it may suffice.

Let us now proceed to the Titles of Applause: Good, and Faithful servant.

Serve, per propriam humiliationem quoad teipsum: Lud. de vita Christi. p. 2 c.
49. Chrysostom. Hom. 79. in Matthew.
Bone, per divinam assimilationem quoad Deum: Fidelis, per utilem
dispensationem quoad proximum; so Ludolphus glosseth upon the words, following
St. Chrysostom.

Servant, by self-Humiliation. Good, by Divine Assimilation. Faithful, by
provident dispensation.

Servant, that is the first Title. A Title good enough for the best of us, I
wish we may deserve it. We use to say of other services, that they are no
Inheritance, God's service is: Not a servant of his, but has an Inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for him. Which
made St. Augustine cry out with admiration, Qualis ille Dominus qui omnes
servos suos facit Dominos! What a Master is he that makes Lords of all his
Servants!

Servant, is a Title may humble us, and honor us.

1. May humble us: allay our heat, and level our height: teach us not to Lord
it over one another, since we are but servants: make us see our distance, and
acknowledge our dependence upon him, to whose bounty we ow all that we have or
are: mind us to wait as becomes servants, Luke 12.35, 36.
having our lights burning, and our loins girded, and being like unto men that
wait for our Lord. Let this prick the bladder of Pride when it swells, and take
down rampant Greatness, remember we are but servants, Luke 17.10
and even when we have done all we can, unprofitable servants too. Servant, is
a Title may humble us, that is one.

2. May honor us. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor, Joh. 12.26
says the fountain of Honor himself. David counted the place of a Nethinim, a
Doorkeeper, (the lowest of Temple-Officers) no disparagement. And John
Baptist, that Grandee of the New Testament, than whom there never was a greater
among them which are born of women: Mat. 11 11
Of whom the Father, Quicquid eo plus esset, Augustine.
Deus esset, He could not be more, and not be God; whom some (upon what grounds
I know not) take upon them to seat in that very place from which Lucifer fell
in Heaven; yet He could find no place low enough here on earth, so he might be
in service, Mat. 3.11.
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. This was the Honorary Title of Abraham,
and other Saints of the greatest Print, and wherever the Word shall be
preached, this also, that they were God's servants, shall be told for a
memorial of them. Let me raise it one step higher. I am thy fellow servants,
Rev. 22.9.
says the Angel to St. John; the service of God sets men above men, makes them
Peers with the Angels. And that for the first Title of Applause, Servant. Well
done, Servant.

Good, that is next. Well done, Good servant: Good, by Divine Assimilation, so
is the creature good, only so, and no further. For God is the Standard, the
Rule, the Measure of Goodness. Goodness in man, is nothing else but a
conformity to God: And Man referres to God as his Exemplar in a double
conformity.

1. To his Nature; so much is intimated in that phrase of the Apostle, 2 Pet
1.4.
that you might be partakers of the Divine Nature: which is nothing else but
Analogically to resemble God, the greatest of Goods, and best of Beings.

2. To his Will; this is the Rule, as his Nature is the Pattern of Goodness,
for us to conform to. His internal Will, or voluntas Beneplaciti, the good
pleasure of his Will, that is the firstly first Rule; and his external Will; or
Voluntas Signi, His Will declared in his Word, that is the secondly first Rule
of our goodness, as the Schools speak. So that all our services are either good
or evil, as they conform to, or discord from the Will of God. To do good, and
to do the Will of God, are one and the same: and there is so much of goodness
as of conformity to the first Good in any of our services. He is a good
servant, that eyes his Lord as his Standard, and Rule in all his performances,
and comes up to him as near as mortality is capable of. Good by Divine
Assimilation, let that be enough to have spoken of the second Title. Well done,
Thou Good servant.

Faithful, that is the third. A necessary qualification in a servant: which as
God will one day requite, Be faithful unto death, Rev. 2.10.
and I will give thee a crown of life; so he does now require it, 1 Cor 4.2.
It is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful.

It is required upon a twofold account. Videt Dominus, and Credit Dominus. His
Lord sees him, and trusts him.

1. Videt Dominus, His Lord sees him; and that will require the servants
circumspection, when he considers that He is a strict and exact Animadvertour
upon the Actings and Expendings of his servants. One that will note the least
ill Husbandry, and book every extravagancy. One that keeps count of all his
receivings, and is by at all his disbursements; this over-awes him into a
gracious frugality. This is a commendable eye-service, to set the Lord always
before us, Psalm. 16.8.
and to act as being ever under the command of the all-seeing eye. 1 King. 5.26.
Went not mine heart along with thee? says Elisha to his cheating servant
Gehezi. If Elisha's eye was so near, or could carry so far; Ubi Dominus Deus
Elisha? Where is the Lord God of Elisha? (...) (...), as St. Paul speaks, Act.
17.27
He is not far from every one of us, he is very near us, he is with us, he is
within us. Cor Hominis fenestra Dei: The heart of man is God's Window by which
he looks into every room, and sees what is doing in every corner of it. He had
need carry even then that is thus looked at; and that is the servant's case
here, it concerns him to be faithful, for, Vidit Dominus, His Master sees him.

2. Credit Dominus, His Master trusts him: and He thinks it below the honor of
a man, more of a Christian, to betray a trust. He knows all he has, is
concredited to him, and deposited with him; that his whole stock of mercies are
upon Trust: that whatever his Lord has given him, he has not given from
himself; but reserves a sovereign right and interest, and is Supreme Proprietor
still. He does not so far mistake his Tenure, as to call himself Lord of what
he is but Steward. A false Title makes men false to their Trust. We misapply
our mercies first, and then we misimprove them. Thus Nabal with his surly
Possessives, My bread, 1 Samuel 25.11.
and my water, and my flesh, did good with never an one of them.

Would we often recognize our Tenure, that whatsoever we have, is ours to use
only, and upon loan, (As the Prophet's Sons said of the Ax, 2 King. 6.5
Alas Master, for it was borrowed;) it would make us more Husbandly with our
Intrustments, more true to our concredited mercies, that by them we might carry
on our everlasting Advantages.

My Time is not mine own, it is my Master's: I will so spend it, as to redeem
it, and whilst this moment lasts, make sure Eternity.

My House and Inheritance, my Riches and Possessions are not mine own, they are
my Master's: I Will make to my self such friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, Luk ^^.9.
that when I fail, they may receive me into everlasting habitations.

My very body of flesh is not mine own, it is my Master's: I will so possess
the earthly house of this Tabernacle, 1 Cor. 5.2.
that when it shall be dissolved, I may have a building of God, (...), an house
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. This is that which influenceth so
vigorously upon a servant in all his tradings and transactions to make him
faithful, Credit Dominus: His Master trusts him.

And be that enough for the first particular in the Acquittance, or Discharge,
The servant Applauded from his Titles: Servant, Good, Faithful. Well done, thou
good and faithful servant.

Please now to hear him Approved, for that is next.

Thou have been faithful over a few things. (...), which in St. Novarinus
Lection. varietas in Mat. 25.
Augustine's Latin, is, In paucis. In modico, in St. Prosper's. In a few
things, in a small matter, in a little.

Great faithfulness is often seen in a little matter. Adam must not eat the
fruit. Lot's wife must not look behind her; The matter small, the trial great
in both.

It is Gods method to proportion commands, and deposite mercies suitable to the
capacities of his servants, All are not of Abraham's growth and bulk, and so not
fit for such encounters; to wrestle with seeming impossibilities; to sacrifice
a son, an only son, and yet a son of promise too. There are lesser measures,
and so to be exercised in lesser matters. There is a Molehill, as well as a
Mountain faith, graces, the mustard seed, will fit them for a comparison, and
these must be matched with trials, and Talents of their own pitch and size; and
even in these few, these little things will appear great faithfulness. Thou
have been faithful over a few things.

I shall not trouble you with many Expositions of these few things, take some
few of many.

Pauca bona quibus utimur: pauca supplicia quae patimur, so St. Gregory. Few
are the goods we enjoy; few the evils we suffer in this life: To. 8.18.
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us. No, compare them, and
there is no comparison; joy is incomparably beyond whatever we can do or
suffer, so far that St. Paul cannot reach it with a (...), mount Hyperbole upon
Hyperbole, and heap one exceeding upon another, and still it comes short, it is
such a superexcessive, 2 Co. 4.17.
a far more exceeding weight of joy and glory. Novarinus.


Pauca sunt omnia praesentis vitae, si aeternis Patriae bonis comparentur. We
may have here some competent accommodations for our Pilgrimage, but they are
nothing to our immortal stock, to the goods of our Country, that treasure in
heaven which fails not. What God is laying out upon us now, is little to what
he is laying up for us. Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae?

O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
Psa. 31.19.


I find two Trods most beaten by Expositors; give me leave to make a step into
them, they are not out of our way.

Few things, are either our Temporal, or our Spiritual Talents, both are few.

1. Temporal Talents. The fatness of the earth, the lower springs, the
blessings of the left hand, the good things of this life, these are few,
little, nothing. The great Lords of the earth may take a view of their Estates
in a Map, where a Title is big enough to express a Town, an Iota will serve a
Lordship. Or to give you the World in that proper language of the Prophet, Take
the Nations of it with all their additaments and advantages, and they are but
Stilla Situlae, Isa. 40.15.
Momentum Staterae, Pulvis exiguus: A drop of a Bucket, the small dust of the
Balance, a very little thing. Luke 16.10
In the Parable of the unjust Steward, they are called (...), the least of all
things: Nothing is less than they (or as the Prophet) they are less than
nothing and vanity. Isa. 40.17.
Worldly enjoyments are positively little, comparatively nothing; nothing to
the glory to be revealed, nothing to the exceeding great reward. Look what
earth is compared with heaven, such is the proportion of their stock and
furniture. The furniture of heaven is like it self great, and glorious: It is
glorious in the skirts and suburbs, what is it then in the heart and center?
There is a world of splendor and brightness in the floor and pavement, what is
there then in the walls and roof? And the little earth is sutably provided: The
Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers, nay, Isa. 40.22.
they are but grass, and all their goodliness as the flower of the field, Verse.
6.
the wind passes over it, and it is gone, Ps. 103.16.
and the place thereof shall know it no more. The earth is little, and all
earthly comforts are few. Thou have been faithful in a few things.

Level thy thoughts then thou highflying nothing! Thou aspiring piece of
vanity! Thou, whose mind can tread no ground but Mountains! Thou have made a
shuffle in the World, and got a good deal of creatures, and now thou trustest
in the abundance of thy riches, Psalm. 52.7.
and have need of nothing. Alas! thou have nothing, thou miscountest thy goods;
a carnal eye (like a multiplying Glass) makes thy few things seem many; whereas
in truth, had thou the rifling of both the Indies, and the spoils of whatever
is called creature; could thou overlook as much wealth of thine own as the
Sun does, and take the whole World into thine own hands, all is but little; and
thou that have but little of that little, but few of those few things, have
little reason to look high.

And thou that art over-hot in pursuit of the things of this life, let this
give thee check, and set thee at a stand. I pray you why so great pains for so
little matters? why so many troubles for so few things? I may say to an
immortal soul hunting after the transient toys of the World; as David did to
Saul, when he followed him with three thousand men: 1 Samuel 24.14.
After whom does the King of Israel pursue? after a flea. O be ashamed then to
act upon such disadvantages; lose not the great, the many things of heaven, for
the little, the few things of earth. Temporal Talents, they are the first of
these few things.

2. Spiritual Talents, they also are little; they are few things, compared with
the numerous glories of the other life. Grace is but Infant-glory, and glory
will be grace made perfect. A Believer is a man of great incomes and receivings
now in this life, if you look at his spiritual stock, and the riches of grace;
but these are little to his hopes and expectations; his greatest riches are in
reversion. His main estate lies in his glorious Debenturs, and the blissful
increases of the life to come. We are now the sons of God, 1 John 3.2.
but it does not yet appear what we shall be. He is often with God now, he
shall then be with him always; his light now is but a dawning to the great
day, a glimpse of that eternal brightness. His clearest apprehensions now are
but praeludia gloriae, the ante actings of his after-estate. He sees now but
through a Glass darkly, then face to face; 1 Cor. 13.12.
he now knows but in part, he shall then know even as also he is known.

Spiritual Talents, they are the second of the few things, and shall close the
second particular in the discharge or acquittance, the Servant approved.

Thou have been faithful over a few things.

I hasten to the third and last, The Servant advanced: I will make thee Ruler
over many things: Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

I, and who but he? Christ is the Fountain of honor. Col. 1.19
It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, as of wisdom and
knowledge, of power and strength, of grace and holiness, so of Honor and
Majesty. He is (...), Rev. 1.5, 6
the Prince of the Kings of the earth, and he makes Kings and Priests to God
and the Father. I, it is I.

I will make thee Ruler. They are right Rulers that are of Gods making: We know
by sad experience, what it is for men to make themselves Rulers; we have had
too many of them: Pro. 28.2.
For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. They come
honestly by their Power, that have it by Commission from God. We know who says
elsewhere, By me Kings Reign; and here, Ego constituam, I will make thee Ruler.

I will make thee. Salm. in Par. Tract. 39.
Qui fuit in meritum, erit in praemium. He that helped to be faithful, honors
him for his faithfulness. He rewards his own works, and crowns his own gifts.
Thus is grace the first and the last, the beginning and the end, the Author and
finisher of our faith and salvation. Thus is life eternal, not so properly,
Merces operantis as munus largientis. It is not wages, Romans 6.1.
but largess. The gift of God is eternal life. Satan once asked it of Job, Job
1.9.
and we may ask it of every one, Does any man fear God for naught? Psalm.
119.122. Rev. 22.12.
He will be surety for his servants for good (in the phrase of the Psalmist)
His Reward is with him, and they shall not be without it; their former Truth
shall be overplus*d with future trust. Thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things.

Ruler. (...). I will set thee above, and appoint thee over. I will set thee on
high because thou have known my Name. I will make thee Ruler. Psa 91.14.


When the Saints rise they shall Rule. Mat. 19.28 Dan. 7.18.
In the Regeneration they shall sit upon thrones. The Saints of the most High
shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, Luke 12.32
even for ever and ever. It is their Father's good pleasure to give them the
Kingdom, (...), (as the Apostle commends it) A Kingdom that cannot be moved,
Heb. 12.28.
That, violent, and tempestuous men cannot toss, and roll hither and thither,
as the winds do the Sea; which is the import of the word.

I shall not discourse the manner of their Rule, it can only discover it self.
Only thus.

You must not look on it as an Univocal Rule, wherein Kings and Subjects
perform mutual protection and obedience each to other; after the manner of
Earthly Kingdoms; But it shall be a Rule aequivocal, an Exaltation, or setting
up on high; As the Sun is a kind of Monarch in the World, and Rules the day:
Mat. 13.43
so shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

Let me make use of this Expression to persuade to a double duty, and i will have
done with it.

You that shall be Rulers hereafter, I pray you

1. Be Rulers here, over your lusts, (I mean). Let not sin Rule over you, Romans
6.12
let it not reign in your mortal bodies that you should obey it in the lusts
thereof. Be not sin-troden you that shall tread the Moon under your feet. Pro.
26.1.
Honor is not seemly for a fool: It is an unseemly sight to see foolish lusts
(as the Apostle calls them) set up for themselves, and exercise supreme
authority in the soul. Enter then upon command, take the sword into your hand,
call for your corruptions, Luke 19.7
Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima vincit,
maenia -- It is the greatest command in the world, and that which the greatest
Commanders seldom attain to, to command corruption, and be Governor within.
He that can Lord it over his own lusts has a great Empire. Turn all your
ambitions after this conquest. This is a command worthy of you. Thus Rule now,
you that shall one day be made Rulers. I will make thee Ruler.

2. Be Ruled here, you that shall one day Rule. Submit to the Scepter, obey the
Commands, conform to the Laws and Edicts of Jesus Christ. Gal. 4.1.
The Heir whilst a child, differs nothing from a servant, but is under Tutors
and Governors: You are Heirs, but as yet must be under government. This life is
the time of the Saints Minority, and Pupillage, they are yet in their
Childhood, and must be in subjection till the time appointed of the Father.
Subject your selves then to the King of glory, Psa. 110.3.
be A willing people in this day of his power.

Be subject to your Lord, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
and to every Ordinance of men for the Lord's sake, to the King as supreme; and
to Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. We have a company of unruly
spirits amongst us of late, that will needs be Ruling before the time: a number
of sick-brain'd Sectaries: people that have neither wit to rule, nor will to be
ruled. And if such Brambles could get to be Kings, nothing could be expected
from them, but fire to devour the Cedars of Lebanon. Judge. 9.15
But those that will rule, must first learn to be subject; be faithful in your
few things first, and then your Lord will advance you; then, I will make thee
ruler over many things. Which is the next particular I now come to,

The extent of this Rule, Over many things. I will make thee Ruler over many
things.

Many things. Salmer. in. Parab. Tract. 39.
Super multa, that is, super omnia; minus dicit, and majus significat, He means
more than he speaks. Other Lords say more than they intend, Ostentant dum
ostendunt: All these will I give thee, Mat. 4.9.
says Satan, when he could not make good the least of them. It is the goodness
of God, that he will be better than we can believe him, he will give us more
than he tells us of, words cannot express what he will do for us. I will make
thee Ruler over many things.

Many things, many more than I can now meddle withal, my time is short; So
many, that if I had all time, even till time shall be no more, and the tongue
of an Angel to boot, I could not tell them, they would still be too many for my
undertakings. Only for a Scantling, I may say to you, as God did to Abraham,
when he would give him a ghess at his infinite posterity, Genesis 15.5.
Suspice Coelum, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able
to number them; So, more than so, many more than so, shall thy many things be.

Oh the happy difference betwixt this, and that other life! here we have but
few, there many things. Here we have Racemos only, some gleanings of comforts
which lie scattered up and down in creatures; there we have Vindemiam, the
whole Vintage, those lovely clusters of joy and peace, the reaping whereof,
shall be the delightful and unwearied employment of the Saints to all eternity.
Psa. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee: It is have in Heaven, and desire on earth. On Earth we are all
wants, in Heaven we shall be all possession. Here our souls are craving and
thirsty, there they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house, Psalm. 36.8.
and thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. Here is
desiderium quietis, there quies desiderij; here desire of rest, there rest of
desire. In short, Acquiri possunt, aestimari non possunt: They may be obtained,
they cannot be told, and therefore let these few things have fewer of our
thoughts, and let us set many thoughts, many desires upon these many things. If
they be our treasure, let them have our hearts. Set your affections on things
above, Col. 3.2.
all your affections; the things above are enough for them all, for they are
many, I will make thee Ruler over many things.

I am now come to the last clause of the Text, which illustrates the Servant's
Advance, with a second expression to the same purpose, Enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.

Intra, Ena^rat. in Man. p. 223
est res arcana. Gaudium, est res jucunda: Domini tui, est res dignissima: as
Nicolaus de Gorran glosseth.

Enter, that intimates it is secret.

Joy, that tells us it is pleasant.

Of thy Lord, that speaks it eminent.

Or if you please, (that we may contract) here is, Magnificentia, and
Excellentia Gaudij. The good servants joy illustrated, by the magnificence, and
by the excellence of it.

1. The magnificence, Enter; for so Salmeron and others, make it an allusion to
the Entrance of some Stately Structure, some beautiful building graced with an
Elegant coming in. Your fairest houses commonly have some Porch to Preface to
them. In Parabol. Tract. 39.
Intrat in Gaudium tanquam in cubiculum, says he: He enters into this joy, as
into some spacious and delightful room, gilded and made shining above with the
Vision of God, below by the glory of the body, within by peace of Conscience,
without by the Company, and communion of just men made perfect. And what do
those multiplied Gates of the New Jerusalem, which shall not at all be shut,
Rev. 2^.12, 2^.
but bear this inscription on their front, in great and legible Letters? Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord. In loco praedict.
Modo intrat in nos gaudium (says the forenamed Author) quia parvum est: in
coelo, intrabimus in gaudium, quia nos parvi and gaudium immensum. Now joy
enters into us, because it is little: but then we shall enter into joy, because
we are little to that joy which will be so immensely great. Now with the
Behemoth, Job 40.23
in Job, we can draw up Jordan into our mouths; then like the Leviathan in
David, Ps. 104 26
we shall play, and take our pastime in the Ocean. The soul may easily take in
the little Rivulets of Sublunary pleasures: but the joys of Heaven, like the
great Deep, will swallow him up. He casts himself into this joy (as Aristotle
is said to have done into the River Euripus, when he could not understand the
mystery of the strange Flux and Reflux seven times a day) Quoniam ego non capio
te, tu capies me, since I cannot conceive thee, thou shall receive me: I cannot
take in thee, and therefore, take thou me. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

But this Ocean is too deep for us: It will drown both mine and your thoughts
to go any further. Enough therefore of the first expression, illustrating this
Joy to us in the Magnificence of it. Enter.

2. Here is the Excellence of it, The joy of thy Lord. It is no less, and it
can be no greater. It is excellent upon a twofold account.

1. The joy of thy Lord, (that is) Quo ipse Dominus gaudet: The same joy in the
which thy Lord himself is: One and the same joy for both. Which certainly is
the meaning of that promise, Luke 22.30. (...), That you may eat and drink at
my Table in my Kingdom. The Saints shall have the same fare with their Savior;
their joys are all of a piece. The joy of thy Lord.

2. The joy of thy Lord, (that is) Quod per seipsum Dominus praestat: That joy
which God makes by himself, by communication of the light of his own
countenance, and not by creatures. This is that rich, choice, and overpowering
joy the Psalmist celebrates, Laetificabis eum in gaudio cum vultu tuo: Thou
have, or, Thou shall make him exceeding glad with the joy of thy countenance.
This is joy of the best, for it is of God's own making. Redemptor census,
August. de Salutar. doc. c. 10.
and haereditas dignatur esse ipsa Divinitas (says the Father,) Here God
rejoices us by proxy, there in person: now he derives joy to us by creatures;
he will then make it himself. The joy of thy Lord.

It is observed, when the Scripture would express some thing more than
ordinary, it intitles God to it. So those Lapides praegrandes, Ezekiel. 13.11
are called God's hail. And that sound sleep which seized upon Saul and his
Guard, is said to be Sopor Domini, 1 Samuel 26.12.
a deep sleep from the Lord. And those lofty and tall Cedars of Lebanon are
styled, The Trees of the Lord. Ps. 104.16.
God's Name heightens every thing, this joy of the servant here, is the joy of
his Lord. The Lord makes all joy: His presence is the complement and perfection
of all things desirable. When Ezekiel had made a large description of his
Visionary Jerusalem, in the last of his Prophecy, he closes all with this,
which indeed is all, and after which, nothing more can be said. The Name of the
City from that day shall be, Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. Where the Lord
is, there is nothing wanting: he is the height, and top, and excellency of
every thing: it is that in which this joy excells. The joy of thy Lord.

And now, if any ask what this joy is: he must never expect a satisfying answer
in this life. As one returned answer, when he was asked what Death was; Si
Scirem mortuus essem, If I knew, I should be dead; so may I say of those joys
of Heaven, I shall know them when I am with them: and I Will tell you when I meet
you there. Till then, as well may we think to grasp the spheres of Heaven
within our arms, as take in the joys of Heaven with our apprehensions.

Speranza observes, Script. Select. punct. 144 P. 29^ l. B.
(give me leave to borrow the observation from him) that St. Paul makes use of
three large measures, and yet none of them can hold out with this joy. 1 Cor.
2.9
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The eye commands a
great way, can reach the Stars, which, Philo (laughing at the folly of the
Jews) says, are so high, that a Millstone would be some years in falling from
them to the earth. And yet this eye comes short here. The ear has a larger
command than the eye; the eye sees only present objects: the ear takes in
things past, recovers the lapse of time, and represents them as in being: Rome
in her glory, Saint Paul in the Pulpit, Christ in the flesh, (Saint Augustine's
three wishes) And yet this ear is not open enough here. The heart is larger
than both, sees not only things present, and conceives of them when past: but
deals with past, present, and to come, and by a kind of Divinity can make
things that are not, as though they were; And yet this heart of man, in its
highest, sublimest, most reflex, and abstracted conceptions, is not able to
frame a Notion which may entertain these joys; more unsuited to such an
undertaking, than his hand is to span the circumference of the world, the
unequal and extimate superficies of Heaven and Earth.

Hence it is, that the Fathers, and those Divines who have dealt most in
Meditation; when they have screwed their souls to the highest, have yet been
infinitely below, and drooping, and left us still to ghess only, not know what
these joys are. However we are beholden to them for their adventures, and they
have in this obliged us; that our souls being in this life of Zacheus's pitch,
low and dwarfish; they have lent us their Sycamore-trees, their boughs and
branches, upon which we may climb and see Jesus. Sometimes we run to Negatives,
which express it by not expressing it; The tears of Hell are not sufficient to
bewail the loss of the joys of Heaven; And then, I am sure our Positives must
needs be scant; And yet such as they are, take a few of them.

They are, Certa securitas, secura tranquilitas, tranquilla jucunditas, jucunda
faelicitas, faelix eternitas, so Saint Prosper. A certain security, a secure
peace, a peaceable pleasure, a pleasant happiness, a happy eternity. Festicitas
sine tabe, Tranquilitas si^^ labe, serenitas sine nube, A feast and no
consuming, a peace and no confounding, a clearness and no over-clouding, so
Saint Bernard. Perenne solstitium, (says the same Father) ubi nec longitudo
terminum, nec claritas occasum, nec satietas fastidium habebit: An everlasting
stay of the Sun of Righteousness, where he cannot decline, where the length
has no end, the brightness no fall, the fullness no loathing.

But to leave these descants of the Fathers, the laudable essays of their
parts and piety: Let me only tell you there shall be, Nicol. de Gorran. Elucid.
in Ep. ad Philip. p. 442.
Expulsus omnis inquietudinis, and amplexus summae dulcedinis; (as I find an
Author glossing upon this Subject) Nothing to interrupt joy; every thing to
increase joy; and I shall then hasten to a conclusion.

Nothing to interrupt joy: No sin, no suffering.

1. Luke 15.7.
No sin. Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that repents: And if
remission make joy, what shall abolition do? Hereafter shall be no time for
sin, as Heaven shall be no place for it. Sin is that which now vails and
skreens the joyful face of God from the soul; It is that which now cramps a
Believers comforts, seizes on, and deads all his joys; Comprehenderunt me
iniquitates meae: Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, Psa. 40.12.
so that I am not able to look up. Sins do often now cloud the light of God's
countenance, and overcast the Heavens; but then, Delevi ut nubem, Isa. 44.22.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy
sins. Then the time is determined to finish transgression, Dan. 9.24.
and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness, to cut off these sinful days, and begin
those joyful days in which men cannot sin. No sin, that is first.

2. No suffering. Suffering puts joy out of tune: Psa. 137.4.
How shall we sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land? But a Saint in joy may
say to sufferings, as our Savior to the Pharisees, Joh. 7.34.
Where I am, thither you cannot come. Piety is no protection here: but Heaven
gives indisputable security.

1. Against all Losses; David shall there no more lament Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26.
Jer. 31.15.
a friend: nor Rachel her children: Jacob shall no more complain that Joseph is
not: Genesis 42.36. Joh. 11.21
Nor Martha, that if Jesus had been there, 2 Chronicles. 35.25
her brother had not died: Israel shall no more lament the loss of Josiah, a
peaceable, a pious, a peerlesse Prince? Mat. 9.15.
for the days of mourning shall be over. Nor shall the children of the
Bridechamber fast, and mourn, because the Bridegroom is taken from them: Rev.
19.7, 9.
for they shall rejoice, and be glad, because they are called to the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, Chapter 14.4.
and shall follow the Lamb whither-soever he goes.

2. Against all pain; For when the vile bodies of the Saints, shall be changed,
Phil. 3.21.
and fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body, they shall be impassible. And
as Philosophers ascribe the strength, and vigor of the Heavens to their
Quint-essence: there being no Elementary quality strong enough to encounter
them: they are above the assaults of heat and cold, and so incorruptible; so
shall the joys of Heaven be above the reach of all contrarieties, not to be
troubled by any pains, if any could get out of Hell, where all shall be shut
up. 1 King. 15.23. 2 King. 4.
Now Asa is diseased in his feet. And the Shunamite's child complains, My head,
my head! But then the bodies of the Saints shall be united to Christ their
head, and as soon may their head ache, as they feel any pain.

3. Against death; Death shall be then out-dated. The streets of the new
Jerusalem are swept clean from all these evils; Rev. 21.4.
There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain. Thoughts of death take off from joy. The great General was so
far from glorying in his puissant Army; Xerxes.
that he is said to have wept, to think that death in so few years should clear
the field of so many thousands. But here Corruptible shall put on incorruption;
1 Cor. 15.53, 54.
and mortal shall put on immortality; and then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. Then shall that
promise be made good, Hos. 13.14
I will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from
death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave I will be thy destruction. And
that for the first particular, which advances this joy: there shall be nothing
to interrupt it; It shall secure against Loss, Pain, Death.

2. There shall be every thing that can increase this joy. Externa societas,
Interna satietas, Aeterna jucunditas, them three: And I am beholden to Saint
Bernard for them.

1. Externa societas, good company, no inconsiderable advantage. Alcibiades,
when he sold an house in Athens, set the greater rate upon it, because it had
good neighbors; it will hugely inhance the price of heavenly joys that those
many Mansions are possessed by such desirable Inhabitants. There are the Saints
of all ages, of whom such excellent things are spoken: The ancient Patriarchs:
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: The glorious company of the Apostles:
The noble Army of Martyrs: The holy Church that has been throughout the world:
Heb. 12.23.
The communion of Saints: The general Assembly and Church of the firstborn
which are written in Heaven: God the Judge of all men: and the spirits of just
men made perfect: The pure loyal and unspotted Angels: Who if they rejoice at
the conversion of a sinner, what will they do at the consummation of a Saint?
Salm. in Loc. praedict.
Si de initio gaudium est, quanto magis de termino? If there be joy among them
to see a soul brought in to God, what will there be to see soul, and body
brought up to God, and glorified with him to all eternity? How great must that
joy needs be, which is made up of so many parts, Rev. 21.24,
where the Nations of them which are saved walk in light; following the Lamb,
and having the harps of God being triumphant, and singing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb, Saying, Great, and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints.
Society without, that is the first.

2. Interna satietas; inward satisfaction: which is never to be found on this
side God. Caeterae hilaritates, Senec Ep. 24. ad Lucil.
non implent pectus, sed frontem remittunt, All things else leave the Cantons,
and Corners of the Soul empty: the joys of Heaven are only a commensurate
object to a capacious soul; which made Saint Augustine cry out, Fecisti me
Domine pro te, and inquietum est Cor nostrum donec perveniat ad te, Thou have
made this heart of mine for thee, and it can never find rest till it comes to
thee. This the ground of Philip's request, Joh. 14.8.
Show us the Father and it suffices: and of David's resolution, Psa. 17.15.
As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied,
when I awake, with thy likeness. Here you may (as the father speaks) Videre ad
voluntatem, habere ad voluptatem, See as much as you will, and enjoy as much as
you please. Satiety within, that is the second particular to increase joy.

3. Which is the last, but not the least, Aeterna jucunditas; This joy shall be
interminate; as boundless as infinity, as endless as Eternity. Your joy no
man takes from you, Job. 16.22
says our Savior. It is the great abatement of Earthly joys, that they lie
open to the hands of rapine, the hands of men may take them from us; And if
they escape the hands of men, the hand of Providence will one day seize them:
and though we may rejoice in the days of our youth, Eccl. 12.1.
yet the years draw nigh, and the evil days will come, when we shall say, we
have no pleasure in them. It is the excellency of Heavenly joys, that they
shall ever continue at the same height and fullness. And as it is the extremity
of a damned condition to be out of hope of relief: so it is the privilege of a
glorified estate, to be above the fear of loss. The joy of the servant here, is
the joy of his Lord, made by the light of his Countenance, and the display of
the beams of his face and favor, who is God and changes not. Mal. 3.6.
If the Sun did always look with the same face upon the Moon, which it does at
the full, the Moon would never change: The Lord, the brightness of whose
Majesty does infinitely surpass that of the Sun: who shall put out the Sun by
his luster at his appearance, as the Sun now does a Candle: (which is, not
improbably, Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat.
thought to be the way of darkening the Sun at the great day) will ever keep
the same aspect to the Saints, without variableness, or shadow of change; and
therefore it is, that the joy of the Saints shall ever be at the full, and know
no declension: Shall be as interminate as the everlasting God, the fountain and
source of all joy; In whose presence is fullness of joy, Psa. 16.11.
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.
I have now quit my hands of the Text: and shall have recourse to it no
further, than to help us a little, to revive some memorials, of that eminent,
and meriting person, whose Remains yet lie before us, ere they be disposed of
into darkness, and the Land where all things are forgotten. Psa. 88.12.


I have some flowers to strew on his Hearse, they are but few, and I would hide
them too, if I thought there were any Spiders here that would suck poison out
of them.

He was, (that I may keep in with the Metaphor of the Text) A Servant of great,
and singular intrustments: His Lord had concredited many Talents to him; and he
was very provident, and faithful in trading with them, and discharge of them.
Not like those whom Parisiensis complains of, Qui majores terras possident,
minores Census solvunt: Holding most at the hands of God, and paying him
little, or no Rent. God's greatest, are commonly, his worst Tenants. But as he
received much, so he returned not a little. Take this brief account of him, and
his Talents.

1. Natural Talents. The Holy Ghost often comparing our bodies to buildings, I
may say of his, it was an Elegant Structure, a polite and well composed frame.
It is said of the crooked, and ill-shaped Emperor. Ingenium Galbae male
habitat, Galba's wit has an unhansome dwelling; His had a lovely seat. His
Wit, and Art, and Grace, had terse, and comely lodgings. There was, Lauta
supellex, and laetum domicilium, The furniture was rich, and the rooms rare.
The Jewel in a fair Casket: And, which made it a mercy, and was the rarity of
it, it was not abused to pride, and vanity, to wantonness, riot, and luxury;
which too frequently, undermine, batter, and are the ruin of the fairest walls
of earth. I have heard him often speak of disorderly, and intemperate persons,
in that ph^^se of the Psalmist, Non dimidiabunt dies, they live not half their
days. Psa 55.23.
And this comeliness of his diffused a complacentious, and grateful kind of
luster, and takingness, through his whole demeanor: his words and actions came
from him with a grace. -- Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. He had
a quick, Live.
and a ready wit: Ingenium ad omnia versatile, in the Historian's phrase. And
it was ever well set on work, inventing, and adding to his fair stock of
knowledge: so that it was hard to say whether he was, Scientior, or sitientior,
More knowing, Crescit amor nonmi, etc. --
or more craving. The riches of his soul, as these outward riches do with
others, made him more covetous. Hence the increase of his knowledge, and
experiences, was admirable, I had alm^st said ^^^redible. And this m^d^ (...)
prize to his friends, a^ (...) to all that had (...) to share (...). I am
persuaded that if a Man wanted, or had lost his skill in any ingenuous
Profession, he might have found it, or renewed it here. And, which was the
Emphasis of his great knowledge and acquirings, it was well guided, accompanied
with a sweet proportion of sobriety, and meekness: whereas great wits are
commonly unruly, exercised too often in jesting upon Scripture, devising new
fashioned Oaths, defending error, opposing truth, and disturbing the Churches
Peace. Such that unhappy wit, who dying, cried out, Heu quantus Artifex pereo!

He had a faithful, and trusty Memory: the rich Reconditory of such eminent
treasure as his active soul had brought in. He did not misuse it in laying up
trash, and folly, wrongs, and injuries, (which good men write in water:) but
even that Omne Scibile, which (the Philosopher says) is the object of the
humane Intellect, whatever was knowable, or at least, worth knowing, was in a
great measure, here reposited. And especially, that (...), Phil. 3.8.
That excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, he was well
stored with. The Word of God, shut quite out by many, and dwelling poorly in
most, dwelt richly in him in all wisdom. Those words of the wise, Eccl. 12.11
which the Masters of the Assemblies fasten with so much difficulty upon
others, were indeed Clavi in altum defixi, with him: they took deep hold
presently. So that like a well- instructed Scribe, he could bring out of his
treasure, Mat. 13.52
things new and old. He had a Crowd of Memorables of all sorts, and yet
disposed into such a method, and to such advantage, that one did not disturb,
much less thrust out another. But to proceed.

2. Temporal Talents; Among them take these few of many.

1. He had a large estate, and a large heart to do good with it; if the poor,
whom he kept constantly in work, and are competent Witnesses, may be believed.
Chrysostom.
He was of the Father's judgment, Eleemosyna est ars quaestuosissima,
Almesdeeds are a thriving and gainful Art, and the surest way to improve an
estate. I know he was looked on as tenacious, and have heard some say, here was
the fly that spoiled the box of ointment; But what cause there was to object
this, I could never see, unless it may seem reasonable, both disponere, and
bis ponere, to give, and over give, by giving over again. He was but a Steward,
and it deserves a pardon, to be a good Husband with that, for which he knew he
was to give so strict an account. He was of Bishop Andrews his mind, who was
wont to say, Full. Church Hist. of Brit. Cent. 17. B. 11. Paragr. 47. Psa. 112.5.
That Good Husbandry, was good Divinity. I am sure, he was like that good man,
which the Psalmist describes, who shows favor and lends: and guides his
affairs with discretion: A truth that wants neither wax nor witnesses, to
confirm it.

2. Authority; That Is another temporal Talent: which, we may be confident he
would have managed with care, because he refused it with conscience. And that
when courted to it by the late pretended Authority, which to deny could not
want danger: He looked on them as Parties with those Conspirators, Wisdom
forewarns him of, Prove. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and therefore followed her
counsel, in declining their ways, and company. So that you may see what he
was, by what he would not be. That which had neither the image nor
superscription, of God, nor Caesar, would not pass with him; and his
faithfulness was great in rejecting, because it could not be so in trading with
such adulterate Talents.

3. Relations; They may come in for a third: And to them he was most remarkably
faithful,

Witness his Conjugal affections; great, and ardent, which, meeting with the
pious accomplishments of a suitable Consort, made him fruitful in good works;
So that what was wanting in natural, was abundantly supplied in virtuous, and
Religious productions.

Quique color docent qua sint ab origin Nati. Witness his Parental Care in
the education of a numerous offspring, whereof many instances might be given.
One I cannot omit; malice cannot hear it without blushing: it will undeceive
any who have either conceived, or taken up any unworthy thoughts of him. It was
his repeated charge to a deserving person, Mr. J. M.
entrusted with the conduct and oversight of some of them beyond the Seas: That
above all, He should intend to fortify, and secure them in the Reformed
Profession; as well-knowing the vanity of youthful excursions; how apt our
giddy and unstable Gallants are, to make an Indian Trafique, and for the gold
and silver of the Protestant Religion, to bring home in exchange, some of the
Rattles and Feathers of the Church of Rome.

Witness his Oeconomical Prudence, and Circumspection: Living as if he had that
resolve of David always before his eyes, Psa. 101.2.
I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: I will walk within my house
with a perfect heart. Here might you have seen the very Method of Liberality;
Virtue fairly and equally seated betwixt the extremes, of unhansome parcimony,
and foolish prodigality. There was such a constant harmony, and universal
Decorum throughout his domestical Discipline, that I may say of him, (what is
said of Moses in another reference,) He verily was Faithful in all his House.
Heb. 3.5.


To these, I might add his Friendship, which was choice, and of the best. I
might tell you how affable he was in his behavior: How decent in his apparel:
How temperate in his diet: How moderate in his recreations: How excellent, and
exemplary in every thing. But I have named five already, the number of the
Talents committed to the servant in the Text; And let that suffice for his
Temporal Talents.

Let us now look a little at his Spiritual Talents, and their management; they
are the other sort of the Few things mentioned in prosecution of the Text: and
I shall detain you no longer, for some are come from far.

And here, be it first remembered to his honor, that he was A man for both
Tables. The world is too full of hypocritical, false first-Table men: great
pretenders to Godliness, and yet not having one Scrap of moral Righteousness.
As if with Agrippa, they were but half, or it may be not so much, (...), Act.
26.28
(that is the word there,) but a little persuaded to be Christians. They make no
scruple of leaving out half those requisites of St. Paul, which tell us of
living Righteously, Tit. 2.12.
as well as Godly in this present world. These daring Impostors, feared not to
part, Fear God, 1 Pet. 2.17
and honor the King; As if a rotten, pretended owning one for Scripture, would
scaffold and hold them up till they expunge and blot out the other. But He was
a second-Table man, as well as a first, and loved not to part God's
conjunctions. He knew that, God spoke, Exodus 20.1.
in the Preface, went through both Tables, and reached to the end of the
Commandments. He had respect, with David, Psa. 119.6.
to all Gods Commands, and could not sin against, That first Commandment with
promise. Ephesians. 6.2.
And if he did contract any dirt, and soiled his name at the beginning of the
late unhappy differences: I hope he has wiped it off in the close, and his
late actings have more than compounded for it: when his Zeal for His most
Excellent Majesty's restitution, was such as transported him beyond his
ordinary temper; and he was like one of the men of Judah, 2 Samuel 19.43.
whose words at the bringing back of King David, are said to be, fiercer than
the words of the Men of Israel.

And let me tell you further: As he was a Loyal Subject to His Majesty, so he
was a very observant and dutiful Son of the Church of England. He durst, and
did own her for a Beauty, even in her blackest days: and gave a charitable ear
to that Apologetical desire of the Spouse, Cant. 1.6.
Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me. The
first time that ever I had the happiness to hear him speak, it was in her
defense; and his Arguments were of that force, that they did no little
execution. I have heard him an Assertor of her Rites and Ceremonies, even then,
when to acknowledge her a Mother, was the next way to be disinherited.

And to this let me add: He had a singular, and peculiar kindness for the
Liturgy of this Church. He looked on it with admiration, and loved it as that
which was indicted by the Spirit of God, Rev. 17 6.
and written with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. This devout, and rare
composed piece (as the judicious Doctor Hamond evinceth it to be in the whole
frame, Pract. Cate.
and all the particulars of it) rather gathered than lost in his esteem, by all
the decryings, and deluding artifices, of empty and pernicious men. He was
herein as fixed, and immovable, as St. Paul: Act. 24.14.
After the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers.

But, that we may look toward a Conclusion: give me leave only to instance in
some Graces, some spiritual Talents, which he had so improved, as to serve and
bestead him in his sickness and death, and I have done.

1. Humility, and self-denial; He humbled himself under the mighty hand of God:
1 Pet. 5.6.
And would often acknowledge himself less than the least of mercies, and
deserving the greatest of punishments. He was much of that penitential temper
with those in Ezra, Thou, Ezra 9.13.
O Lord, have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. He was frequently
taking a comparative view of his sins and sufferings, and still blessing God
for the disproportion: that he suffered so little, who had sinned so much: Job
42.6.
He abhorred himself in dust and ashes, subscribing to the equity of that penal
Statute, All must die, for that all have sinned; Romans 5.12
and owning every thing out of hell for mercy.

2. Contempt of the world; which in its abundance, and beauty, could not court
his affections to over-love it. His thoughts were so abstracted from it, as is
rarely seen in a person of his condition. O death, how bitter is the
remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, Eccl. 41.1.
unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all
things? He had many smiles from the world: his estate was a very Oglio of
outward happiness: and yet his heart was much above them all; knowing he was
shortly to array himself, Chapter 12.1.
like the woman in the Revelation, and put on the Sun: he easily trod the Moon,
and all sublunary excellencies under his feet.

3. Patience, Invincible patience; keeping in an even and equal temper of
spirit in some extremities. His sickness gave him a hot charge, which he
received with as much courage, without the least ruffling of spirit, or
disorder of the inner man. The assault was sharp, yet not short neither; it was
of some continuance, a dying life for some months together, Hor. Car. l. 1. Od.
37.
Deliberata morte ferocior -- Such a Trial would have borne down a hansome sort
of Resolution, and been an over-match for more than an ordinary patience. He
was in Hezekiah's condition, Isa 38.12.
Dum ad huc ordirer succidit me. He will cut me off with pining sickness: from
day even till night will thou make an end of me. His patience and himself ended
both together.

4. Resignation of spirit; In that he was very free: not like the rich fool in
the Gospel, Luke 12.20
that must have his soul taken from him, otherwise he would never have parted
with it. Out of the depths he called unto God, Psa. 130.1.
and in the depths of his sorrows, when the waters were going over his soul, He
called with Peter, Mat. 14.28
Lord bid me come unto thee on the water. I was often with him, and often saw
him, as it were, with his Life in his hand, ready to make a surrender of it
into his hands that gave it. He was a Good Servant, and feared not to come to a
reckoning: his faithfulness made him willing to account, which I doubt not, but
he has now done with joy, and is treated with the welcome of the Text.

His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good, and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.
FINIS.
Ecclesiastic. Cap. 39. Verse. 12. Collaudabunt multi Sapientiam ejus, and usque
in seculum non delebitur.

13. Non recedet Memoria ejus, and Nomen ejus requiretur a generatione in
generationem.


In Luctum Broughtoniensem,
Concionemque funebrem ab ornatissimo, mihique amicissimo, Domino Edoardo
Botelerio, habitam, in funere nunquam satis complorato praestantissimi viri,
Domini Edmundi Anderson, Baronetti.
NEmpe nihil mirum est ex illo tempore longis
Misceri terram fletibus atque polum:
Horrent Broughtonij pulla caligine saltus,
Et Dryadum resonat planctibus omne nemus:
Nil nisi triste sonat lugubreque turba volucris,
Et geminis queritur jam Philomela malis.
Nec mihi fas sicco comitari lumine funus,
Quod merito lacrymas undique poscit, habet.
Heu, quanto exemplo curtum traduxerat aevum,
Cujus non gratis particula ulla perit!
Sine vacat studiis, seu leniter otia captat,
Ingenuum studium est, otium and ingenuum.
Praeciperent Homini quaecunque Volumina sancta,
Quae vitae verae semita recta foret,
Quaeque Deo, and Nostris, and quae sint debita Nobis,
Scire ille in votis, primaque cura fuit;
Utile tunc Hominum siquid solertia dictat,
Et quae Naturae pagina sacra docet:
Non ignoravit, siquid Chironia dextra,
Siquid Apollineae pyxides artis habent:
Quid faceret laetos hortos, quid pascua laeta;
Quis cultus campis, aligerisque jubis.
Quid loquor omnigenum ingenij solertis acumen!
Daedaleum pectus, Daedaleasque manus!
Fingere callebat, quaecunque aut Daedalus olim,
Quaeve Syracusij men's oculata senis.
Quin velasse magis, nec ocellis flentibus ultro
Naufragij tabulas exposuisse decet.
O quam te memorem, diissima Heroina,
Lucida Egertoniae gemma, decusque Domus!
Parce piis lacrymis; qua nunc ille incolit arae,
Abstersa est sanctis lacryma cuncta genis.
Parce piis oculis, quos tantum nuper amavit,
Non hos nunc lacrymis delicuisse volet.
Non vos primus amor junxit, primusque Hymeneus;
Nulla dedit junctis pignora chara Torus.
Hei mihi! non lenius tibi vulnus hoc inde, nec inde
Scis minus aut Conjux, aut minus esse Parens.
Siste pios gemitus, tanto dignissime patre,
Haeres praeclari Nominis, atque Rei;
Qui non sortitus, sed magno emisse videris,
Quas obitus chari dat genitoris, opes:
Ploratur lacrymis accepta pecunia veris,
Nec Craesi census hac ratione placent.
In vitam nihil attulimus, nihil in de feremus:
Ah! nullius opes dicis, Jobe, preti!
Quantos thesauros, quantas in pectore gazas
Quaesierat vivens, abstulit hinc moriens!
Divitias veras; quas frustra flemus ademptas!
Pectoris haeredem constituisse nefas.
Sed triste hoc vulnus, Boteleri, haec tristia damna,
Quis, insi tu solus, fando levare potest?
Solaris mortem; quis iniqua mente supremum
Te deducturo carpere possit iter?
Tu facis, ut grato mors ipsa renideat ore;
Et Domus Exilis te celebrante placet.
Eludis mortem; nam bustis eripis illos,
Quos Mors and tenebrae mox tumulare parant.
Haec Andersonij sensit solamina funus;
Raptum dum plorant, accipiunt reducem.
Tu facis, ut Nomen terris, and Imago supersit
Viva; nec haec, quanvis caetera, mortis erunt:
Per te spirat adhuc, serisque nepotibus olim
Exemplum vitae praestat, and ingenij.
Haec non potuit non accinere notorum maestissimus, Joh. Merryweather.

Books Printed for, and sold by G. Bedel, and T. Collins.
Folio.
UShers Annals of the world, English. Titus Livius Roman History. The Complete
Ambassador, Letters. Bishop Andrews Sermons, fol. Lord Bacons History of Henry
the seventh. Hall of Government and Obedience. Morris on the Sacrament, fol.
Bishop Gawden on the Church. Howes Chronicle of England. -- idem best paper.
Styles Reports. Bulstrodes Reports, three parts. Wingatts Maxims of Reason.
Lanes Reports. Winches Reports. Leonards Reports, first and second parts.
Fosters Mathemat. Treatises.
Quarto.
DYers Reading of Wills. Prograves Reading of Joyntures. Risdens Reading of
forcible Entry. Lord Cooks Reading of Fines. Denshals Reading of Fines. The
Judges Arguments on the Liberty of the Subject. Sennaults Christian Man.
Mountagues Miscellanies. Potters Number of the beast, 666. Seldom of Tithes.
Letters in French and English. History of the Gr. Seigniors Serraglio. The
Parsons Guide, or Law of Tithes. Durhams Assize-Sermon. Dr. Thomas
Assize-Sermon. Articles of Peace, betwixt France and Spain. Diverse single
Plays in Quarto.
Octavo.
LA Fida Pastora, by Sir R. Fanshaw. Lucretius Latin and English. Instructions
for erecting a Library. The Duke of Rohans Memoires. An Apology for Learning. A
Discourse of Arms and Armory. The Triumphant Lady. Three Romans. The Nuptial
Lovers. Three Romans. Hyppollito and Isabella. Three Romans. Goffes
Tragedies, in one Volume. The Court-keepers Guide. Sheppards Justice of Peace.
-- idem the Clerks Cabinet. -- idem Survey of Justice. -- idem of Corporations.
Fleetwoods Justice of Peace. Reliquia Sacrae Carrolinae. Wilkinsons Office of
Sheriffs. The Clerks vade Merum, Pre idents. Stones Reading on Bankrupts.
Twelve, and 24.
LIfe and Reign of Edward the sixth. Dr. Stuarts Sermons. The Ladies Cabinet.
Mayernes Experiments. Gunton of Bodily Worship. St. Chrysostom of Education, in
English. Abridgement of all Statutes since 1640. Thuanus his Politic Maxims
English. Steps of Ascension, Prayers and Meditations.
Sermons by Mr. Edward Boteler,
AN Assize-Sermon, Jus Poli and Fori. -- idem his Coronation Sermon. -- idem
the Worthy of Ephrata, a Funeral Sermon. -- idem his Sermon at the Funeral of
the Lady Anderson (now in the Press.)
The END.

