THE GARDEN OF ZION: Wherein the life and death of godly and wicked men in
Scriptures are to be seen, from Adam unto the last of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, with the good uses of their life and death.

In this Garden consider and take heed,
The fragrant flower grows hard beside the weed.
A precept for the right use of this Book.

love these who have their race in Gods fear run,
^t rogues as rocks in sea, see that thou shun.
Printed at GLASGOW, by George Anderson, 1644.

TO THE HIGH, AND MIGHTY MONARCH, OUR DEAR AND DREAD SOVEREIGN, CHARLES, By
the Grace of GOD, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, all Peace and Happiness.
Most gracious Sovereign,
YOur MAJESTY'S so loving acceptance of my former works, presented to You the
day before Your corronation, emboldens me again to entreat for Your Patronage,
countenance, and gracious aspect toward this little piece of poesy full of
most fruitful matter.

In it Ye may clearly see the lives of most remarkable men in Scripture, and
with them the lives of all the Kings of Judah and of Israel, with the uses
which we should make either of their life or death.

Note.
Such things are needful to be considered by all men, but chiefly by Kings
whose actions for the most part (whether good or bad) are put in Chronicles,
the Registers of time, ad futuram rei memoriam; Where after ages beholding,
what has been done in such and such a Kings reign, will freely, without fear,
give out their verdict, concerning either their virtues or their vices, so
that, while the memory of the just shall be blessed, Prove. 10.7.
the name of the wicked shall rot.

But men's sayings are of little moment, the God above with whom is no respect
of persons will one day before the eyes of all the world, Act. 10.34.
in a most open view let it be seen what every man has done in his life:
before his judgment seat all flesh that day must compeare.

In all the lives of the Kings of Judah and Israel, observe that the sin of
Idolatry provoked GOD most: The basest idol of the world is the Idol of the
Mass, a god of dowe, Ezekiel. 22 3. (...).
which goes to the draught: The Hebrews call idols Gilloulim, that is muck or
doung: Beware of that new god of bread, Dij stercores.
for if it get place in Your Majesty's Dominions, Ye need never look for a
sound and solid peace, according to that saying, of Deborah, They choose new
gods, Judge. 5.8.
then war was in their gates; the Ark and Dagon will not fail to fight;
Consider well these words, and make use of them for Your good, as Ye would
wish to have the Lords blessing upon Your government.

O whence has come such a fearful bloodshed in all Your three Kingdoms?
Whence is all this bloody war? the maine cause is, the new Go^ the idol of the
Mass set up in Chapel, 1 Kings 11.7.
hard beside Gods Temple like that high place which Solomon builded for Chemos,
the abomination of Moab, in the hill that wa^ before Jerusalem, directly for^
against Gods house which he ha^ builded, for which doing afterwar^ the Lord
made a rent in his Kingdom, whereof his posterity got the least part.

O happy shall Your Majesty be, if with good King Josiah Ye rene^ the
Covenant of the Lord in all you^ Dominions, and put away the idolatrous
Priests, and take away all the high places, with all the monument^ of
idolatry, that so all your Dominions may be pleasant and fruitful, like the
mount of Olives, which for idolatry lost its name, 2 Kings 23.13.
and vva^ called the Mount of Corruption.

O what a contentment to GOD who made you a King! O what a comfort to all
your good subjects! O what a good and what a glory to your self! that it be
said in all ages following, that King CHARLES, (like a pearl in a ring) has
been a blessed Josiah among all the Kings of Britain.

Now the Lord God of Gods bless your Majesty, and make You a Defender of the
Faith, as well in truth, as in title, that in the great day of the LORD, with
David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other gracious Kings, ye may stand
before the Son of man, that great King, who has written on his thigh, The
King of kings, Rev. 19.17.
and Lord of lords.

From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your MAJESTY'S most humble subject and
servant, M. ZACH BOYD.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of Walls.
GOD who has made your Highness a Prince, shall by his grace, as we hope, one
day make you a king, yea and more, which shall be like a rich Diamond on the
top of your crown, A DEFENDER of the Faith: It is now time for you to begin to
be busy, to learn to stir the rudder, before Ye be made a pilot, to
undertake the great charge, even the government of three kingdoms: For this
great, worthy and weighty work, Ye have great need to be wise, but so it is,
Prove. 1.7
that the fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; All other wisdom
without this, is but folly.

It was a good saying, that King David said to Prince Solomon his son, If
thou seek him, 1 Chro. 28.9.
he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever: The best way to learn your Princely Lessons, to consider well the life
and death of ki^ who have ruled among Gods people, wh^ virtues and vices are
set down by G^ own pen, to be followed, or else to avoided.

For such ends I have penned this poe^ of most men's lives in Scripture with
(...) best uses I have been able to make the of, which here I dedicate to
your H^nesse in all humility, as being my M^mite.

Accept of this little with my bl^sing, an old Servant of GOD, n^ drawing near
my threescore.

From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your Highness m^^^ humble Servant Mr.
ZACH. BOYD.

A WATCHWORD TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
Right Reverend,
OUr Schools and Country are stained: yea, pestered with idle Books; your
children are fed on fables, love songs, badry Ballads, Heathen husks, youths
poison: It much concerns you to see to this, and carefully to banish out of
the land all the names of the Pagan gods and goddesses, which (as God has
expreslie told us) should not be taken in our lips: Psalm 16.4.
These words of God in Exodus are very considerable, Ezo. 23.13.
In all things that I have said to you; be circumspect, (...) make no mention
of the names other gods, neither let it be he^ out of thy mouth.

Seeing this by God him self required, it lies upon you to ^daine, by the
visitors of School that all these monuments of id^latrie be removed, and that
o^ such Books have place, that m^ help children to know GO^ and Christ his
Son, John 17.
which is (...) Eternal.

From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your humble servant Mr. ZACHARY BOYD

PRAYERS TO GOD FOR HIS ASSISTANCE IN THIS WORK.
1.
AT Thee JOVAH this work I will begin,
Inspire mine heart, and also guide my pen:
Teach me to teach, and to publish the story
Of thy most great works, to thy praise and glory:
^ouchsafe on me in thy mercy a look,
that with thy praise I may embosse my book:
^y heart anon shall godly matter frame,
(...) thou shall glade it with thy glowing flame:
(...) shine on me with thy bright countenance,
and make thy beams through my bowels to glance,
(...), let not from me thy good sprit depart,
that with thy Saints I here may act my part.
2.
O Mighty GOD, who all things underprops,
Refresh mine heart with thy clear silver drops,
^ke Zion hill, in a fair May morning
^angled with dew, that I thy praise may sing:
(...) purge my soul, my drossie sprits refine,
^ne empty breast fill with thy breath divine:
^onceive in me, and after bring to birth
^erses most sweet, which I may warble forth;
^ouble thy sprit on me, LORD, I thee call,
^^jah like let mercies mantle fall:
^y verse begot in pain, and borne in pleasure,
^^t them contain of thy praises a Treasure.
Grant unto me that in my sacred lays
I may express the glory of thy ways,
O blessed Lord, who hearts and reins do try,
Make thou my thoughts to soar, and cut the sky;
My music meene accept, and with a look
Of mine incense receive this little smooke:
The widows mites get thy more large report,
Then Hecatombes of the richest sort.
O Lord of love, my soul with mercy fraught,
And take in good part this poor Char-coale draug^
All foggie mists, and sable clouds expel,
That I thy praise unto the world may tell:
Reveal to me Salvations sacred things,
Sealed in the Casket of the King of kings.
O Jesus Christ, be thou my sure refuge,
Who bare the doom of that Italian Judge.
3.
O gracious God, now teach me to compile
An useful work; with grace now steel my style,
That whosoever reads this book he may
Reap profit, I comfort, thou praise for ay.
The use of this Book.
COnsider this who do these verses read,
Here is a Garden, both with flower and weed
The pleasant Rose he^re smells fragrantly,
The stinking Hemlock thou may also see:
Here learn; with godly, godly be in life,
Ahorre all these who have been men of strife:
Example good follow, but shun abuse;
By Gods wisdom of all these men make use.
THE GARDEN OF ZION.
ADAM. Earth.
THis is the man who after sea and land
Was made of Earth by great JEHOVAHS hand:
In his nostrils He breathed the breath of life,
And of a rib He formed for him a wife:
^ithin this clay immortal life He placed,
^f he by sin had not himself disgraced:
By divine favor He gave him a pledge,
True holiness, which was His own image:
He in great love did choose him as His heir,
And made him of so foul a mass so fair
His great VICEROY: yea, His beloved Son,
Perfect and peerlesse, even a Paragon.
But, Oh alas, he did not so abide,
But lost this image by his foolish pride,
And unbelief, whereon (as on a rock)
He made shipwreck, a senseless sottish block;
That learned Tree, the Tree of good and ill,
Abusde by man, did mankind spoil and spill:
When he was well, content he could not sit.
But lost us all by a forbidden bit;
The lofty wife, and the crafty Serpent,
For Adams fall were Satan's instrument:
The sprite apostat residing within,
That speckled beast, with smooth damask skin
The simple sex deceived craftily,
Assuring her with GOD equal to be:
Poor Adam chiefly by her lost his life,
Who was his Phoenix, Sister, Daughter, Wife:
The earth therefore for pleasant fruits and corne^
Brought nothing forth but nettles, thistles, thorn
When man did look of fruits to get a feast,
The briers and burs did bristle up their breast:
The LORD on man no meat then would allow,
Till first the sweat should bubble on his brow.
He who before was holy, meek, and wise,
A fool by sin, was thrust from paradise,
A glorious Park, wherein (without all term)
He might have dwelt, if he had paid his Farm.
But now disgraced for disobedience,
To dwell in Eden he has not license:
The tree of life to him may not afford
Her fruit; A Cherub boasts him with a sword:
Nine hundred, and als thirty years he lived,
^mmortall first, at last for sin he died.
Thus he whom satan by sin did deceive,
A slimy Burgar was laid in his grave.
The Use.
When thou have sinned, beware thy self to hide,
^n Adams fall behold the fruits of pride,
Of strong made weak, of wise become a fool,
Gods character cancelled with grief and doole,
Great sweat of brows, no rest until our bones,
^e cooped up in a cold heap of stones:
^h that our sense as the spiders could be,
Which starts as soon as stirs the buzzing fly,
Within her web; Oh that we could begin
^o feel, to hate the least approach of sin.
EVAH. Living.
ISHAH of man was after called EVAH,
From life by ADAM direct'd by JOVAH
She of a rib was made the first woman,
Who by her pride brought many woes to man
Man's other self, his love, his help, his wife,
With the serpent was cause of all the strife:
For such a fault, her poor condition
Was pain in birth and great subjection:
But here her comfort in her greatest need,
The woman's seed shall bruise the serpents head:
The Son of Marie, Jesus Christ our Lord,
'Twixt God and man shall make a blessed accor^
The Use.
Let EVAHS fall vain women terrify,
And teach them all to love humility:
Blessed be her seed who us restored again,
And of our sins unreel'd the snarled skain.
CAIN. Possession.
FIrst borne of man, name from possession,
A sacrificer by profession:
^hy browe did fall with an envious eye,
because the Lord preferred Abel to thee:
^hou of Abel a bloody murderer
^ecamst, who should have been his best keeper:
because his blood does cry aloud to me,
^hou on the earth a vagabound shall be.
The Use
^y Cains madness thou may clearly try
What monsters lurk in the sin of envy:
^inne soon is done, but after comes the smart,
(...) vagabound, all trembling at the heart,
^en sin in secret, but God keeps account
(...) his exchequer how their sins do mount.
ABEL. Vanity.
THou second Son, thy name is vanity
Thy Hebrew name did so foretell to thee:
^hy cruel brother through envy and strife
(...) thy fair youth bereft thee of thy life:
^ods holy worship thou did not neglect,
(...) thy service JEHOVAH had respect:
though in thy youth of death thou trod the path
^^t still thou lives renowned for thy faith.
The Use.
It is no wonder by envy and wrath
To see just men unjustly put to death,
Most blessed is he whose heart base slimy he
Surmounting, toward his creature leaps:
Strive with Abel to dwell above the o^
Whose restlsse dance no stop at all disturbs^
Be like Abel that ye abode may make,
In shineing robs above the Zodiac.
LAMECH. Diminished or depauperat.
THou bragging LAMECH of vain Cains
To boast and kill thou did thy self sola^
Thou feared not God, nor shameful infami^
Of all thou first lived, in polygamie:
Fool with two wives thou led a sinful life^
ZILLAH the shadow, but ADAM the wife
The Use.
In these hardly great courage shall ye fi^
Whose words are brags, and vain bubb vvind:
^he deepest floods do run most quietly,
^ith silver streams to carry to the sea;
^ut naughty brooks in broken streams do gush,
and roaring down the horned cliff do rush.
SETH. Set or appointed.
NOw welcome SETH, for ADAM a third Son,
Set and appointed to fill ABELS room,
^hy godliness did many souls refresh,
^f thee came Christ, our Lord after the flesh.
The Use.
^od rich in comforts can his Saints relieve,
^f he take one, he can another give:
^f crosses come which do our comforts mar,
^od can anon send joys to ease our far.
ENOCH. Sorrovvfull.
O Dear to God with sorrow in thy name,
Thy heart was grieved to see the worlds shame:
While CAINS race provoked God right sore,
Thou walked with God, and so was seen no m^
The Use.
Learn here thy life, at Gods service to spe^
An holy life brings to an happy end:
Balam may vvish the righteous death to (...)
But, he profane, that day shall never see.
METHUSELAH. Emission dart or death.
THy name is death, emission, or dart,
By it ENOCH foretold the worlds smart
As some esteem the last year of thy life,
God with a flood did end this worlds strife:
To longest life of all thou did attain
Nine hundred years thou lived and sixty nine^
The Use.
Let all men learn their few years well to spe^
For longest life at last will have an end:
He who strouts now, in grave shall soon be co^
What is man's life but a tale that is told?
NOAH. Rest or comfort.
SOn of LAMECH, Son of METHUSELAH,
Thou for GODS comforts called was NOAH:
^he LORD said LAMECH cursde has sea and land,
This Son shall be a resting for our hand:
^n this man's time the bad and faithful seed
To marriage most vilely did proceed:
While all men spoiled were with corruption,
This man was just in his generation:
God with his comforts did his soul refresh,
When he intended the end of all flesh:
Thy virtues, NOAH, I can not express,
Thou wise preacher, herald of righteousness:
Whilst in the deep all others death did suffer,
Thou safely lived in an Ark of Gopher.
Thy self, thy wife, also thy children three,
With their three wives were in that house of tree:
The haughty stream this house did high exalt,
Which at the last on Ararat did halt
The Rav'n, the Dove, NOAH did forth command,
Two scouts to spy if there was any land;
At last the Dove (to tell him of relief)
Brought in her mouth of an olive a leaf.
When floods were past, by Gods mercy divine,
NOAH began to plant a pleasant vine.
But (Oh) that great herald of righteousness,
Was plunged in most filthy drunkenness;
Against JEHOVAHS great commandment,
He void of sense, lay naked in his tent:
Nine hundred and als fifty years he lived,
Just in two worlds, at last by death bereaved.
The Use.
Let good men learn all sins always to shu^
And not to stain a life that is well begun:
Fie oh, alas, that for a drink of wine
This great Herald (whose virtues bright d^ shine)
Should have forgot his GOD so spedilie,
Who had him saved within his house of tree
Fie, that he should have blotted his good na^
By lying naked in his tent with shame,
Before the face of his three children dear,
Whose life should them have taught the Lord to fear:
Behold how s^one the life of the godly,
With sin (as with a damp) may darkened b^
^f one fault let not drunkards make a safeguard,
^r once drunk makes not man to be a drunkard.
SEM. JAPHET. Fame. Beauty.
SEM, Son of NOAH, first in dignity,
The noble Jew has his descent from thee:
^hy Godliness, thy Glory, and thy Fame
^y JOVAHS pen are written in thy name:
^APHET, Beauty, thou have the second place
^o dwell with SEM the LORD GOD grant thee grace:
^wo blessed Brethren, right noble was your fact:
^n covering NOAH ye turned your back:
^ight worthy Sons, eternal is your fame,
^n modesty ye hid your fathers shame.
The Use.
^eere children learn your parents to respect;
God shall you bless, and all your ways direct,
And you preserve, that no man do you wrong,
^n earth he shall your happy days prolong.
HAM. Hot or black.
HOt as hells fire, coal-black, even like t^ devil,
Profane villain, taught only to do evil;
O cursed HAM, thou full of wickedness,
Because thou spied thy fathers nackednesse,
Because his shame thou scorned with thine eye
Servant of servants thou shall ever be,
The Use.
Cursed is that son that ever he was born
That sets himself his parents for to scorn
An Elf, not man, he called well may be
Who takes delight his parents shame to se^
NIMROD. A Rebel.
NIMROD thy name is as much as rebel,
Whom some esteem cheef builder of Ba^
This man of HAM (as holy writs record)
A mighty hunter was before the LORD.
The Use.
^on this earth thou be a mighty man,
^eware with Nimrod to play the tyran.
though men set up most high and stately towrs
^uch Castles will not keep them from GODS showers.
ABRAM. Father high. ABRAHAM. Father of a multitude.
BEhold the Son of ancient TERAH,
The faithful husband of godly SARAH:
This Father high, was first called ABRAM
For multitude turned into ABRAHAM:
Look up, said GOD, and count these starr's most hie,
Of thy Children such shall the number be:
Be perfect, walk in my commandment,
I mind with thee to make a Covenant:
When Amraphel was King of great Shinar,
The mighty Arioch, King of Ellasar,
Chedorlaomer of fair Elam King;
And Tidal Prince, of Nations did bring
A great Army, with boast against Bera
King of Sodom, as als against Birsha;
Gomorrahs King, and Admahs Shinab stout,
Who armed with great forces then came out;
And als against the Zehoims Shemither,
And Belahs Prince came all these Kings togeth^
In bloody war, these four Kings against five
Came to the fields, and in battle did strive;
But Sodoms men were forced to turn the back
Their foes some killed and some captives did ta^
Among whom was LOT nephew of ABRAM
Who to help Sodom unto battle came:
When ABRAM heard this, he in continent
Did cry for arms, and to the Battle went
With his servants, three hundred and eightee^
Who in his house well trained up had been:
He among these (as a stout General)
Did rout his foes, and LOT rescued, and all
His goods, and captives which they took awa^
He back again did bring without delay;
Then met him (by a providence divine)
Melchisedeck, who brought him bread and wine
And blessed him, after he had given that feast,
For Salems King he was, and the Lords Priest:
Unto him ABRAM in that blessed day
With cheerful heart the tithes of all did pay;
But as for spoil nothing I will he said
^est SODOM say, I ABRAM rich have made.
The Battle of Abraham, against Amraphel, King of Shinar; Arioch, King of
Nations, wherein he rescued his brother Son Lot, who had been taken prisoner
by them.
This Paraphrase was made in verse by the Prince of English Poets, JOSHUA
SYLVESTER.
ABRAM perceiving now the Army near,
By their own Fires; 'gan thus his Troops to cheer:
Soldiers (said he) behold, this happy Night
Shall make amends for that dis-astrous Fight
Was fought in Siddim, and acquittance cry,
For Sodom's shame, and Lot's captivity: adorned
Me thinks, already Victory
With Bows, and Blades, and Casks, and Cro^ returned
From the Enemy, on our triumphant spears
Erecteth Trophe is far more rich then theirs:
Me thinks, already on our glistring Crests,
The glorious Garland of the Conquest rests;
Our way to virtue lies so smooth and plain,
With painelesse Honor, and unvent'red Gain
This host, you see, is not the valiant Troup
That stripped Gomorrha, and made Segor stoop;
That Jordan, Inde, and Euphrates admire;
But a foul Heard of Swine wall'wing in m^
Regard them as they are, not as they were:
See but their sloth, do not their number fear:
He that is asleep is dead, and he that is dead
Bites not (they say): What have we then dread?
Why stay we, Lads? already down they are.
Their throats be naked, and their bosoms bare,
Their lives lie prostrate here at our command;
And Fortune calls but for your helping hand.
Come, follow me: rather, the Lord of Hoasts
(Terror of Tyrants) who through all the Coasts with a trough
Of all the Earth confounds
All worldly power, and brings men's plots naught:
Come (happy Troup) follow with one accord
^h'invincible brave Standart of the Lord.
This said; eft-soons I wot not what a grace,
What divine beam reflected on his face:
^or as in March, the Serpent, having cast
^is old foul skin, crawls from his hole full fast,
^isses, and stings, and stares us in the face,
and (gold-like) glistring, glides along the grass:
^o Heaven enspires fresh vigor in each part,
His blood renews, his heart does take new heart,
(...) martial fury in his breast there boyls,
His stature seems more taller then yer-whiles,
Youth paints his cheeks with Rose and Lilly Dies,
A lovely Lightning sparkels in his eyes;
So that his gallant Port and graceful voice
Confirms the faintest, makes the sad rejoice.
Then, on the Camp he sets, where round about
Lie mingled Carrs, and Horse, and Men that rout:
Rest seizes all; (and wanting what is fed)
The fire it self slept in his ashy bed.
The Hebrews the-while laid-on on back or breast,
Or arm, or side, according at their rest
To the ground had bound them: and those lives bereft
The which Death's Image in an Image reft.
Here, one beheaded on a Trunk of Pine,
Pours-out at once his gore, his ghost, and wi^^
The full Helm hops, and with a voice confuse
Murmurs, as if it his fell Fate accused.
Another, taken by enchanting sleep,
Mid Pots and Cups, and Flagons, quaffing de^
Does at a wound, given in his rattling gorge
The Wine again in his own Cup dis-gorge.
Another, while ingeniously he plays
Upon his Lute some passing-pleasing Lays,
Sleep seals his eyes up with a gloomy cloud*
And yet his hand still quavers light and loud
But, at the last it sinks, and, offering fair
To strike the Base, strikes but the empty air
His soul descending to the Infernal Coasts,
Goes to conclude his Song unto the Ghosts:
Doleful it was, not for the Argument
(For It was of Love) but for the sad event.
Another wak'ned with those loud alarms,
Starts-up, and groapeth round about for arms
Which, ah too soon he finds, for his part:
For a keen poignard stabs him to the heart.
Like as a Tigress, having with the gore
Of Bulls and Hiefers made her spots the more
And paved a Plain with Creatures mangled lim^
Views on each side her valiant stratagems,
Treads on the vanquished, and is proudly-sad,
That no more Foes, nor no more Maw she ha^
The the Hebrew stalking round-about the slain,
^raves (but it boots not) and would very fain
that those dead bodies might their ghosts re-gather,
^r that those mountains would produce him (rather)
^ome Foes more wakefull, that more manfully
(...) blood-drown'd Valleys might his valor try.
Amor's three sons did no less slaughter make;
^bram for zeal, they but for furies sake:
^his nails a Soldier with his Sword to the ground;
that, at a blow, the heads of two Heads discrownd.
^his underneath a Chariot kills the driver:
that, lops off legs and arms, and heads does shiver.
The Tents already all in blood do swim,
^ushing from sundry Corpse, from several lim.
(...) brief, so many ravening Wolves they seem,
^ithin whose breast, fierce Famine biteth keen,
^ho softly stealing to some fold of Sheep
While both the Shepherd and his Cur does sleep)
^urbush their hungry teeth, tear, kill, and prey
upon the best, to eat and bear-away.
Yet, at the length, the vanquished awake,
and (re-ary'd) the Victors under-take;
^utting the three proud Amorites, to flight,
^ho but for Abram, had bin routed quite.
Sleep, sleep (poor Pagans) since you needs dye,
Go sleep again, and so dye easily,
Dye yer ye think on death, and in your Drea^
Gasp-out your souls; Let not your dazzled b^
Behold the hauock and the horror too
Of the Execution, that our Swords shall do^
Hacking your bodies to heaw-out your breat^
Yer Death, to fright you with a thousand dea^
Said Abraham: and pointing every word
With the keen point of his quicke-whirled sw^
(As swift in doing, as in saying so)
More fiercely charge the insulting Foe,
Than ever storm-full cloud, which fed (...) water's
Thin moist-full fumes (the snowy mounta^^ daughters)
Showered heaps of hail-shot, or poured flood rain.
On slender stems of the new tender Grain:
Through blood, and blades, through danger, and death,
Through mangled Corpse and carrs he traverse^
And partly in the shock, part with the blows
He breaks in through thickest of his Foes,
And by his travel topsi-turneth then
The live and dead, and half-dead horse and (...)
^is bright-keen Fauchin never threats, but hits;
^or hits, but hurts; nor hurts, but that it splits
^ome privy postern, whence to Hell (in Post)
^ome groaning Pagan may ga^p out his ghost:
^e all assayls, and him so brave bestow's,
that in his fight he deals more deaths than blows.
As the North-winde, re-clearing-up the front
^f cloudy Heavens, toward the South does hunt
^he showr's that Austers spungie thirst exhales
^ut of those Seas that circle Orans walls:
^o where-so-e're our Hebrew Champion wield
^is warlike weapon and his glistring shield
Whose glorious splendour darts a dreadful light)
^ll turn their backs, and all be-take to flight:
^orgetting Fame, Shame, Virtue, Hope, and all
their hearts are don, and down their weapons fall.
(...), if that any be so strangely-stout
^s not to faint, but bravely yet hold out,
^as! it boots not, for it cannot stop
^e victory, but have his own mishap.
^ut in what Fence-schoole, of what Master, say,
^ave Pearl of Soldiers, learned thy hand^ to play
at so sundry weapons, such passados,
^^ch thrusts, such foyns, stramazos, and stoccados?
^en of that mighty God, whose sacred might
Made Heaven and Earth (and them so bra^ bedight)
Of merely nothing: of that God of Power
Who swore to be thy Target and thy Towr:
Of that high God, who fortifies the weak,
Who teaches his, even steely bows to break
Who does his Childrens zealous hearts inflam^
But daunts the proud, and does their cou^ tame.
Thy Sword abates th'armed, the strong stout;
Thou cleav'st, thou kill'st: The faint disar^ rout,
The lightning of thine eyes, thy voices thunde^
And thy stern dreadful port confounds wi^ wonder:
Death and Despair, Horror and Fury fight
Under thine Ensigns in the dismal Night:
Thou slayest this, and that thou threat'st as m^
This thou pursu'st, that thou disdain'st to touch
In brief (thou blessed Knight brave) thou q^ at once
Valiant and vile, armed and unarmed ones.
Here, thine even hand (even in a twinck trice)
In equal halves a Pagans head does slyce:
Down on each shoulder looks either half,
^o gaze upon his ghastly Epitaph,
^ lines of blood writ round about him fair,
under the curtain of his parted hair.
^eer, through a Jerkin (more than Musket proof)
^ade twelve-fold double of East-countrey Buff,
^lean through and through thy deadly shaft does thrill
^gyants bulk; the wounded hulk does reel:
^he head behind appears, before, the feathers:
and the Ethnic soul flies both ways out togethers:
^eere thou do cleave, with thy keen fauchins force,
^he Bards and Breast Plate of a furious Horse,
^o sooner hurt, but he recoyleth back,
^riting his fortune in a bloody track:
^hy barbed dart, here at a Chaldee flies,
and in an instant lardeth both his thighs,
^hile he (blaspheming his hard stars and state)
^ops (Like a Pie) in stead of wonted gate.
Now LOT (the while) escapt from ELAMS hands,
^ree from the burden of his iron bands;
^ith just revenge retorts his taken wrong,
^is feet grow swift, his sinews wexen strong,
^is heart revives; and his revived heart
^upplies new spirits to all and every part.
And as a wild and wanton Colt, got out
Of some great Stable, staring scuds about;
Shakes his proud head and crest, yerks out heels,
Butts at the air, beats on the humble fields,
His flying shadow now pursues amain,
Anon (amazed) flies it as fast again,
Again beholds it with self-proud delight,
Looks on his legs, sets his stiff tail right,
And neighs so loud to Mares beyond the Moun^
That with the noise the neighbor hills re^ sound:
So, one while Lot sets on a Troop of Horse,
A band of Sling-men he anon does force,
Anon he pusheth through a Stand of Pikes,
A wing of Archers off anon he strikes,
Anon he stalks about a steepfull Rock,
Where some, to shun deaths (never shunned stroke,
Had clambred-up; at length a path he spies,
Where up he mounts, and does their Mount s^^prise:
Whence, stones he heaves, so heavy and huge,
That in our Age, three men could hardly bouge
Under whose weight his flying Foes he dashes,
And in their flesh, bones, stones, and steel he pashes:
^metimes he shoots, sometimes he shakes a Pike,
which death to many, dread to all does strike.
^me in the breast he wounds, some in the backs,
^me on the hanch, some on the head he hacks,
(...) heaws down all; and makes where he stood
Mount of bodies in a Moat of blood.
At length the PAGANS wholly left the place.
^en both Sides ran; these chased, those to chase:
^ese only use their heels; those heels and hands:
^ose wish but a fair way: these that the sands
^ould quickly gape, and swallow quick to Hell
^emselves that fled, and them that ch^c't so, fell:
^ese render naught but blows, those naught but blood:
^oth sides have broak their ranks: pel-mel they scud;
^hoakt-up with dust, disordered, dis-aray'd:
(...) either Command, Threat, nor Entreat obeyed.
Thou that (late) bragdst, that thy wh^ Wormly brave
Could dry-foot run upon the liquid Wave,
And on the sand leaving no print behind
Out-swifted Arrows, and out-went the Win^
With a steel Dart, by ABRAH'M stiffly sent,
Art 'twixt thy Cuirace and thy Saddle slent:
And thou that thrice, near Tigris silver source
Had won the Bell, as best in every Course,
Art caught by LOT, and (thrild from side side)
Loosest thy speed-praise, and thy life beside.
It seems no Fight, but (rather as befalls)
An execution of sad criminals:
Who-so escapes the sword, escapes not so
His sad destruction; or, if any tho
Escaped at all, they were but (few at least)
To rue the fatal ruin of the rest:
For the Uncle and the Nephew never lin,
Till out of CANAAN they have chec't the clean:
Like to a Cast of Falcons that pursue
A flight of Pigeons through the Welkin ble^
Stooping at this and that, that to their Louve^
(To save their lives) they hardly can recove^
ABRAHAM after feasted Angels three,
Whom SODOMS cry brought from the Heavens hie;
^ile he with GOD was walking in the way,
(...) SODOM, GOD thus in him self did say,
^m this good man I will no more conceal
(...) whole purpose: to him I will reveal.
^s is mine earand SODOM to destroy,
(...) their vile sins I can not hear the cry:
^RAHAM at this speech began to plead,
^r to save these that godly were indeed,
(...) spoke for SODOM in humility,
^d brought the great GOD to ten from fifty:
^t LOT alone was found; therefore in ire.
^D burnt these villains with a brimstone-fire:
^hile to this man GOD promisde a reward:
^hold, said he, such things I not regard:
that shall I do with great heaps of riches?
that will thou give since that I go childlesse?
that comfort have I to be here or there?
^his ELIEZER, he must be mine heir.
^ot so, said God, I speak the verity,
^s Stars in number so shall thy seed be:
first unto him wild ISHMAEL was borne,
^ho was cast out both for his pride and scorn;
^ut after him came ISAAC at the last,
(...) Son after SARAHS custom was past:
GOD for ABRAHAM'S faith to exercise,
Commanded him his Son to sacrifice:
He suddenly (with timber, fire, and sword,
Went to obey his great Creators word:
While he did lift his hand to bring the stroke
Spare, spare, cried GOD, thine only Son ISAA^
Thy faith to me has shown what I would w^
Give me the Ram that caught is in the bush:
Because here God did ABRAHAM solace,
IEHOVAH-JIREH called was the place:
After that SARAH ended had her life,
He took KETURAH for to be his wife;
To her children he gave gifts for partage,
But for ISAAC reserved the heritage:
At last he di'd, after that he had been
Of years a hundred, threescore and fifeteene
The Use.
Learn here of good Abraham not to fear
To give to GOD what is to us most dear:
He was renowned both for his works and fai^
Let all men strive to walk in the same path.
That they at last may get a heavenly crown,
And with Abraham at Table sit down.
SARAI. My Mistress. SARAH. Mistress of a multitude.
MY Mistress Sarai, Sarah multitude,
The letter (H) a promise does include:
^en thou was until thy customs past,
(...) great JOVAH brought Isaac at the last:
^en GOD did speak thou leugh behind the door,
^s was thy fault, thou was reproved therefore:
^er thy Smiling Smelling of thy scorn,
^D made thee laugh after Isaac was borne:
^s grave matron in house the most time spent;
^ere is Sarah? behold her in the tent:
Kiriatharbah Sarah sick and pale,
^ast by death laid down her mortal vale.
The Use.
(...) women all both old and young here learn,
(...) love their tent more then the wine tavern:
(...) is most seemly that when any come
(...) seek them, then they find them at their home:
The whoores mark is, as Solomon h^ tried,
Within the house her feet do not abide.
ISHMAEL. God shall hear.
ABRAHAM'S Son, which Hagar first bear,
Does signify that God the Lord shall hear:
In younger years to scorn thou soon began
To persecute, to live like a wild man:
Cast out, said Sarah, this fool full of rage,
For with Isaac he shall have no partage.
The Use.
Take heed, O Youth, be not like this (...) lorne,
Who wanting grace eartly began to scorn:
Fyon vain man, who to scoff slily slips
With mouth awry, and his wide yavvni^ lips,
No surer sign to be burnt with hells fire
Than on this earth to sit in scorners chire.
ISAAC. Laughter or joy.
BEhold and see, Isaac a joyful name,
Which brings laughter to all that hear the same,
^r from his loins (as Scripture does record)
^me JESUS CHRIST, our only KING and LORD.
^D was his fear, he lived a holy life,
^o concubine; Rebeccah was his wife:
^s first Son Esau, by his venison
^id still conquer his best affection;
^t great JOVAH, by Jacobs Kids did move
^im to bestow the blessing on his love:
^o bless Esau he does what he best can,
^t his blind eyes can not discern the man:
^is hearing ear soon Jacobs voice did know,
^ut the Kid-skinnes said sure, this is Esau:
^e living long after his eyes were lost,
^ld full of days at last gave up the ghost.
The Use.
^o be profaine, to ravell eke forbear,
^earne of good Isaac the great God to fear:
Too many luske in sloth and lose that gai^
At first they wex, at last they do but wain^
Let us therefore our false hearts sift so neer^
That of such guilt, the Lord may hold us cl^
In good Isaac this comfort men may find
That good men may be dumb, or deaf, or bl^
REBEKAH. Fat, lusty.
REBEKAH fat, and in body lusty,
A wife for Isaac pleasant to the eye
Bethuels Labans fathers brothers love
Her heart to stay from Isaac could not move:
Hear now, said they, the Damsells yea or no;
I will, said She most gladly to him go.
She meeting Isaac in the evening tide,
Under a veil her comely face did hide;
She lighted down with most hearty submission
Her veil declared her most humble subjection
She feared GOD, She loved the right path,
Her soul abhorred the vile idols of Heth:
The Sprite of GOD her holy heart did move,
To like the Lad, whom GOD himself did lo^
Isaac loved Esau; She loved Jacob best,
The man whom GOD allowed to be blessed:
(...) wonder how a woman this could find
^herein Isaac God seer was so blind.
The Use.
^hold how GOD to baser will reveal,
that which he will from clear seers conceal:
^is graces where he likes do spring and sprout,
^ost free he is else where to send them out:
^he weakst vessel he for his service
^n steel and strengthen, without prejudice.
ESAU. Made, perfected.
BEhold ESAU made perfect like a Lade,
Of greater strength, not weakly like a Babe:
(...) his great strength a passage he did find,
and left poor Jacob at his heels behind:
^ed he was; now hear the exposition,
^holerick cruel without all compassion:
^he red Dragon to all did signify,
that redness is a sign of cruelty:
^hile other babes are borne both smooth and bare,
^ll of him was like mantle of hair:
What others say, from you I will not hide,
The Greek translateth all like a rough hide:
This man profane, as is in Scripture told
His birthright spent, yea, it for potage sold:
This Belly-god to his eternal shame
From red potage got Edom for his name:
Hated of GOD, profane in all his carriage,
With godless Heth he matched in his mariag^
He lived a Prince, sojourning in Mount Seir
He turned his back upon his fathers fear.
The Use.
Beware with Esau for an earthly thing
For back or belly, to loss the blessing:
Better it is in open field to ly,
Quivering for cold no covering but the sky
Pinched with famine like a pale feeble wig^
Then for this earth Gods good blessings to sli^
JACOB. The heel.
Here is the man so called from the heel,
Who for wrestling was called Israel
Belov d of GOD, as soon as he began,
Prince with God, that should prevail with man:
^e youngest twin, beloved of his mother,
^t for GODS grace d^sdained of his brother:
^hen he blessed perceived his brothers eye
^arkling with fire, to Laban he did fly:
(...) lodge at home for him it was not safe,
(...) past Jordan a poor man with his staff:
(...) this journey he lighted on a place
^z, called Bethel, because of GODS grace:
(...) ladder there he saw in his good dream,
^ose top did reach unto the Starrie Heaven:
(...) this ladder the Angels Sprits of love
^ent down and up, JEHOVAH stood above;
^m thence he spoke to Jacob in his dream,
^m thy GOD, who am the GOD of H^av'n;
^s land shall thee and als thy children feed,
(...) will give to thee and to thy seed:
^ill thee bless with great posterity;
(...) all the earth in thee shall blessed be:
^ile this wrestler who in wrestling did weep,
^rd thus GOD speak, he wakened out of sleep,
(...) heart trembled, and pale was all his face
(...) said afraid, how dreadful is this place?
^mble all, most fearful is this dream:
(...) is Gods house, this is the gate of Heaven:
At last he came unto the land of Padan,
Where for a space he served uncle Laban:
In faith and truth he served with all his might
Spent with days heat, and with the frost night:
For labor Laban did his daughter sell,
But blear'd Leah he gave for fair Rachel;
To serve seven years the bargan had made,
For beauty; but the bleare eyes came to bed:
Jacob at last to make all odds even
Resolved for Rachel to serve other seven:
Of Labans service at last he weary,
With both his wives constrained was to fly;
Then uncle Laban hotly him pursued.
But great JEHOVAH his servant rescued:
GOD came to Laban in the night, and said,
Take heed to speak to Jacob good or bad:
My daughters to Jacob was Labans word,
Are like poor captives taken by the sword:
What have thou done? wherefore did thou flee?
In so doing thou have done foolishly:
Behold one thing, which meriteth the rods,
Thou art a thief, why have thou stolen my gods?
Why have thou thus of my love made a rent?
Behold they are stolen and hid in thy tent:
From tent to tent, last he came to Rachel,
But where thy were these dumb gods could not tell;
At last Laban no more would Jacob grieve,
But to return, resolved to take his leave:
For Rachels sake and Leahs he did g^ant
To make with Jacob a sure Covenant:
Of many stones they made a goodly heap
Upon the which they did together eat:
This heap of witness by godly Jacob
^n Hebrew tongue was called GILEAD:
^ut this great heap in words of SYRIA
^ABAN called Jegar Sahadutha:
after kissing, and blessing for a space.
^is children, LABAN returned to his place.
^hen this was past, behold ESAU with boast,
^ut God did meet his servant with an host:
^hen this was done, the great God eternal
^restled with Jacob long in Peniel:
^hey strove all night unto the light of day,
^ow let me go to JACOB God did say:
^o, said JACOB, a blessing first appoint
^o me, whose thigh thou have thrust out of joint:
^hy name, said God, hence ISRAEL shall be;
^revaile with man, thou have prevailed with me*
^ehold now Esau with four hundred men,
^ehold also the love of these brethren;
Behold JACOB seven times he bows knee;
ESAU him meets, and kisseth lovingly:
They weep, they kiss, in others arms go,
ESAU content, will be no more a foe.
Is this fear past, a new sorrow does come
His dear Dinah defiled by Hamors son:
How his two sons did make his name to stin^
By Sichems blood, it hurts my heart to think^
He purged his horse of all idolatry,
Their idol gods he hide under a tree:
As he did pass f'om Ephrath to Bethel,
Death came and took from him his fair Rac^
From this sorrow having a little breath,
Behold another by his fathers death:
REUBEN his son defiled had his bed
As though with bread, he was with sorr^ fed.
This pricked his heart, and this his bowels sm^
When he did see good JOSEPH'S bloody coat
This holy man so tossed with grief and strife,
Past so the few and ill years of his life.
At last on bed most ready for to die,
To all his sons he left a Legacy;
To some reproofs, to some comforts most sw^
When he had done, he gathred up his feet.
The Use.
(...) serve how God of twins can one forsake,
^d the other choose, even for his mercies sake:
(...) one he did love, because it did him please,
(...) the other he abhorred to cast his eyes,
(...) hated infant, an abhorred Esau.
before that ever this worlds light he saw.
(...) Jacob learn to get thee hastily
^rre from an Esaus wicked company,
^ith staff in hand, where God shall thee direct,
^r wicked men most hurtfully infect.
(...) Jacob learn when thou begins to pray,
(...) wrestle well, and not let God away
^ll he thee bless, though it were all the night;
^cob prevail d not till the day was light:
(...) Jacob learn, if thou a Laban serve,
^ost vvatchfully his goods all to preserve;
though he churlish have not to thee regard,
^hou shall not fail to get the LORDS revvard.
^earne here to look for sable clouds of grief,
^fore death bring full and final relief.
REUBEN. See a son.
HEre see a Son, for REUBEN is his na^
With vile incest, he did himself defame
Because his sin was grievous in Gods sight,
Of the firstborn this REUBEN lost the right
LEVI, Judah, and JOSEPH, for his spot,
His Crown, portion, and als his Priesthood go^
Because he weept with a repenting eye,
Let Reuben live, (said MOSES) and not die.
The Use.
Great loss by sin yet if we can repent,
The LORD in mercy shall make up our rent:
Beware of sin, flee far from it anon,
Lest that thou hear, thy dignity is gone.
SIMEON. Hearing.
BEcause the LORD did LEAHS prayer heare^
She called him SIMEON when She did hi^ bear:
In MOSES writs so fa^ as they us tell,
Of his brethren he was the most cruel.
H^ heard not GOD, nor yet good JACOBS voice,
(...) shed much blood he gladly did rejoice;
(...) get of SICHEM his cruel intent,
(...) vilely did abuse GODS Sacrament,
(...) any reading hardly can I try,
^hy MOSES blessing the rest, past him by.
The Use.
^ere learn in wrongs thine anger to assuage,
^ODS pen does curse all sinful wrath and rage;
^t men beware either to do or think,
^t which may make their parents name to stink.
LEVI. Joining.
BIrth of Children in husbands breasts does coin
^ew love, which makes their tender hearts to join:
^r this chief cause, as in the history
(...) manifest, LEAH called him LEVI;
among these tribes this LEVI was the priest,
With Vrim Tummim on his holy breast:
Because he bare the Sword of cruelty,
His race in JACOB scattred was to be.
The Use.
Learn this before to do ill thou begin,
Divide and scatter are the fruits of sin:
The sins of men great Tribes do spoil a^ spill,
For this cause sorrows them pinch pierce, thrill:
If we fear GOD, he such griefs shall press;
Yea, kill our cares, and calm storms distress.
But if we join with Levi to shed blood,
To rage and roar, as men in a mad moo^
We shall at last with confusion be cloathe^
Wrapped in shame, dispersde, despisde, and thed.
JUDAH. Praise.
THis is the King, the great God will him rai^
This is the man whom his brethren shall praise
^e shall be LORD, his shall be the Kingdom,
^ntill the time that great SHILOH shall come:
^his is the man enriched with gifts divine,
^eth white with milk, and als eyes red with wine;
^oth grave and wise he was, as may appear,
(...) that his speech made for Benjamin dear:
^is was his fault from vice he was not pure,
^e lay with TAMAR, masked like a whore.
The Use.
^et men here learn, who have received grace,
(...) fear, to fail, and fall into disgrace:
(...) men be loose, when as they should be chest,
^hey may at last, fall into vile incest.
ZEBULON. Dwelling.
THis is the sixth, a rich and good dowry,
Said LEAH, JACOB now will dwell with me:
^is younger son then ISSACHAR, and yet
^e was before him at the blessing set,
(...) rich merchant appointed for to be,
(...) stately ships sailling on the deep sea.
The Use.
Observe here how the great Jovah comman^
Some to be King, some Priest, and some Merchands.
ISSACHAR. An hire.
Fifth Son of LEAH thy name is a hire,
Great rest and ease were chiefly thy desire:
When rest and ease to thee were brought (...) pass,
Between two burdens, thou crouch'd like an ass.
The Use.
Take heed, beware, this is a great disease,
To loiter and to seek our carnal ease.
DAN. Judgment
THe mighty God his peoples chief refuge
Has set apart this DAN to be a JUDGE:
His enemies he shall pull down and slay,
Mighty by wiles, an Adder in the way:
(...) teeth in heels of horse he fixes fast,
^ill flatlings the rider fall at last.
The Use.
^at good for God we cannot do by might,
^e must perform it by a holy slight.
GAD. A troup, an army.
^AD in thy name is both troup and army,
Yet for a space thou shall distressed be:
(...) time shall come when thy dangers are past,
^t thou thy foes shall overcome at last.
The Use.
^re not to see good men go under foot,
(...) last the bad shall perish branch and root.
ASHER. Blessing.
Worthy ASHER, I can not pass from thee,
(...) name contains bless and felicite:
None shall be able thy blessings to spoil,
Thy bread is fat, thou dips thy feet in oil.
The Use.
Here learn that Jovah riches does besto^
On some, making their Cup to overflow.
NAPHTALI. My wrestling.
While I behold this wrestler in my mi^
I see him swift, light-footed, li^ a Hind;
When in Battle he prevailed by Swords,
In praise to GOD he gave right goodly Words.
The Use.
Here learn when GOD in war gives vict^
With goodly words to praise him thankfull^
JOSEPH. Adding.
I Add to speak of JOSEPH the first borne,
Of fair RACHEL, whom grace did mu^ adorn:
This is the Lad, consider well and try,
^or dreams, and coat the object of envy:
from doing ill his brethren could not fit,
^ast Master Dreamer now into a pit:
^y Reubens mercy (this poor Isralite)
^as drawn out, and sold to an Ismalite;
after by GODS assistance Singular,
^n Egypt he was sold to Potiphar,
(...) that land (by GODS mercy and great might)
^e found great favor in his Masters sight;
(...) are in beaut^e he was and chastity,
^s vile Mistress on him did cast an eye;
^ut no propins could him allure or move,
^o yield unto that most vile strumpets love;
because of this, by a sort of tr^ason,
^haste JOSEPH was cast into a prison,
therefore a space he did abide much grieved
^y dreams again he shortly was relieved:
^y the first Dream he restored the Butler,
^ut by the next he hanged the Baker:
^y so doing he conquered a great name,
^o that Pharo was moved with his fame:
^he ears of corn, and kine, both fat and lean,
^ade Pharao seek the meaning of his dream;
though many there in learning did excel,
^et none but JOSEPH could the meaning tell;
^hen was he high lift up to dignity,
The voice of all was ABRECH, bow the (...)
When he had to this honor great attained
His father and his brethren he maintained:
At last his father on the bed of death,
Pow'd out this blessing with a holy breath.
JACOBS Blessing for JOSEPH.
TO thee, JOSEPH, my heart did muccline,
Thou art the bough of a most fruitful Vine:
His brethen, Mistress, causers of his smart
Like bloody Archers sorely grieved his heart:
But faith his bow and arms of virtues stro^^
Abode in strength these enemies among:
It was not his strength, but the arm of Go^
The hands of the mighty God of JACOB:
Blessings below, and heavens blessings sureli^
Blessings of breasts, and womb belong to the
God shall not fail my blessings to fulfill,
Sure shall they be unto the outmost hill;
Eternal blessings shall come with great speed
Like glorious garlands for to crown thine hea^
Father ISAAC gave great blessings to me,
But greater blessings I shall give to thee.
The Use.
though many sorrows godly hearts do wound,
^et at the last great comforts shall abound:
though men to prison go, and to the stocks,
(...) tossed be, as ships among great rocks,
^r be so greev'd, that they can not a little,
^v'n but get leave to swallow down their spettle,
^et if on God their faith shall fix its eye,
^hey with Joseph a good outgate shall see.
BENJAMIN. Son of the right hand.
AT thy bitth Rachel was in hard labor,
Therefore thy name was son of my dolor,
^t thy birth JACOB his dear RACHEL lost,
^hen thou wast borne, she yielded up the ghost:
^ot son of sorrow JACOB did command,
^hee to be called but son of the right hand.
^ow BENjAMIN come hither unto me,
that thou may hear what thy blessing shall be:
^hou strong in war thy fiercest foes shall foil,
first overcome, and last divide the spoil.
The Use.
Without children Rachel she would but (...)
How brittle are such pleasures here ye (...)
In this blessing let all men learn thus fa^
That it is God that makes men stout in (...)
MOSES. Drawn out.
THis Son of AMRAM, and of JOCHEB^^
Gods good people through many dan^led;
When he was borne he was a goodly child,
In all his life he was both meek and mild;
From drawing out at first he got his name,
His virtues after spread abroad his fame:
With JOCHEBED three months he did abid^
For PHAROS fear she durst him no more hid^
Poor mothers bowels here behold and man
She made for him of Bulrushes an Arc:
She made great haste, and stirred well her tim^
The Arc with pitch she dawbed, and with sh^^
Thus was good Moses set upon the River,
In a poor Boat without an Oar or Ruther:
While proud Nilus her brinks did overflow,
This young Boat-man could neither stir nor ro^
Judge ye what grief poor Jochebed did feel
^hile she thought of the Nilus Crocodile:
^hen Moses thus did ly among the rush,
^ing Pharos daughter came her self to wash
among the flags, the Ark she did espy,
^herein babe Moses did weep bitterly.
^las, said she, with great compassion,
^his is some Babe of the Hebrew Nation:
(...) soon as Miriam heard this good saying,
^e ready was an Hebrew Nurse to bring:
^en Pharos daughter earnst'ly did desire
^^chebed nurse, and she to pay the hire:
When he was grown, one day he did espy
(...) man of Egypt smiting bitterly
(...) Israelite, both with his foot and hand,
^oses him slew, and hid him in the sand:
^t afterward he perceiving two other,
(...) Israelite, even smiting his own brother;
(...) the one he said, God does not this allow,
^^ou art perverse in smitting thy fellow.
^ho made thee Judge? answ'red this perverse man,
^ilt thou me kill as thou did the Egyptian.
(...) is matter (said MOSES) is come to light,
(...) refuge is to save my life by flight:
^n MOSES from the land of Egypt fled,
(...) to the land of Midian, where he fed,
The flock of JETHRO in a painful life,
Who gave to him his ZIPPORAH for wife:
In this mean time (as by GODS word we se^
PHARO the tyran of Egypt did die;
Gods people then their burdens did bemone,
God with respect did hear their sighs and gro^
As MOSES fed the flock at Mount SINAH,
There in a fire appeared the great JOVAH:
The fire the bush did burn, but not consume
With shoes on feet MOSES did then pres^
For to draw near; he heard this divine soun^
Pull off thy shoes, for this is holy ground;
I am the great Almighty Lord he said,
To look on God then MOSES was afraid:
I have said God with much compassion
Seen of my people the great affliction:
On Isreal's back the burdens deep furrows
Have made, and now I pity their sorrows
Go to that Tyran with thy little rod,
And tell that thou art sent from the great Go^
How shall I go? said MOSES, I thy name
Know not, if thy people enquire the same:
Say thou, said God, by my commandment
I AM THAT I AM has me surely sent.
Oh, said Moses, they will not believe me,
Where will they say, did GOD appear to the (...)
They shall, said GOD, know that I have thee
^ast down thy rod, and lo it a serpent;
^gaine behold a rod it shall become:
another sign shall be in thy bosom:
^t in thine hand and see it white as snow,
^^d whole again, that they may clearly know
^^at thou by GOD Almighty have been sent,
^^d what thou do is by commandment.
^as, said Moses, my words hardly flow,
^er both my speech and als my tongue is slow.
(...) are not, said GOD, let not that cause thee grief
^^rme the speech, I make thee dumb and deaf.
(...), said Moses, mine heart I cannot frame,
(...) go this earand to speak in thy name:
^en GOD with Moses in great anger chod,
^^on a mouth shall be, and thou as GOD:
(...) as afterward these noble brethren two
^ent on, and stood before the great Pharo:
^^mmanding him with great authority,
(...) free GODS people from captivity:
^^cause that this King thus hardened his heart,
^^ten great plagues his Kingdom felt the smart.
The ten plagues of Egypt contained in five Latin verse.
^ma rubens unda, Ranarum plaga secunda,
^^e culex tristis; post Musca nocentior istis
Quinta pecus stravit; Authraces sexta ^vit;
Post sequitur grando, post Bruchus dente fando;
Nona tegit solemn; primam nec at ultima pro^
The ten plagues of Egypt in English verse.
Blood first, then frogs, and third the l^ filthy;
Fourth after all these came the noisome fly,
The fifth upon the beasts was the murrai^
Sixth loathsome boiles breakeing forth vv^ great blaine;
Seventh hail, eight locusts, and the nin^ darkness;
Last on the first borne both death and dist^
In other verse.
Blood, frogs and lice, a mixed swarm
Murraine that beasts annoyde;
Boiles, hail, locusts and darkness thick;
The first borne all destroyde.
When this was done, MOSES with his army
^ent with all have toward the deep red sea;
^ere Israel enriched with great butin,
against MOSES began so to mutin;
^n both sides mountains, and the sea before,
^hold PHARO behind us to devore:
(...) Moses now the cause of our distress,
^ou have us brought to die in wilderness.
(...) and still, said Moses, stay your passion,
^d ye shall see the Lords salvation:
^retch out thy hand, said God, over the sea,
^d by thy rod divided shall it be;
^en Moses his hand of strong faith outstretched,
(...) an East wind the deep sea was divided:
^hen Israel this great comfort had found,
among waters they walked on dry ground:
^e mighty Lord made way unto them all,
^e waters were on every side a wall;
^hen with an army PHARO them pursued,
^ut (overwhelmed with waves) they were subdued;
^y let us flee, said they, and turn the heels;
^ut great JOVAH took off their charet wheels.
^ODS Israel had (in all this fearful tide)
(...) Cloud for sconce, and als a Fire for guide:
At last Israel saved both less and more,
Saw Pharos host dead upon the Sea shore;
Then Moses with the people spoke, saying,
A song of praise to JOVAH let us sing.
The Song of Moses at the red Sea.
I Will now sing unto the Lord,
for he has gloriously
Triumphed over all his foes,
now drovvn'd in the red Sea;
2 The Lord he is my Strength and Song,
and my Salvation;
I gladly will prepare for him
an habitation.
3 With frothy deepths God covered them,
this work he did alone.
His heavy wrath did press them so,
they sanke down like a stone.
4 Thy right hand, O Lord, is become
most glorious in great power:
Thine arm, and thy right hand thy foes
have now dashed all to powder.
5 Thou have thy foes now overthrown
in great excellency:
^hou sentest forth thy fearful wrath,
that they consumed might be;
And with the blast of thy nostrils
the waters gathered there;
he floods stood upright as an heap
the deepths congealed were:
The en'my said, I will pursue,
them will I overtake,
will divide the spoil, my lust
on them now will I vvreake:
It is now time to dravv my Svvord,
them will I all destroy:
purpose now to make an end,
and this shall be my joy:
But thou, O Lord, with thy great vvinde,
most fearfully did blovv:
^hey sanke as lead in waters deep,
the waves did overflovv:
Who is like unto thee, O Lord,
amongst the greatest gods?
^ho is like thee so glorious
so mighty by thy rods?
11 Thou stretchedst out thy strong right h^
Earth swallowed them wholly;
In mercy thou led forth thine own
whom thou had bought dearly:
12 The people all shall hear of this,
and they shall be afraid;
The indwellers of Palestine
with grief shall be dismaide;
13 The Duks of Edom all amazed,
with Moab tremble shall,
The indwellers of Canaan,
shall melt away and fall.
14 Both fear and dread shall fall on them
by strength of thine army;
Until Israel pass over, they
still as a stone shall be:
15 Thou strong shall bring them in, and
them in thine holy place,
Even in thy sanctuary, O Lord,
established by thy grace:
16 The Lord shall reign for evermore,
most like a mighty King;
For he on Pharo and his host
the lofty waves did bring,
17 But as for his dear Israel,
in bottom of the Sea:
^tweene two walls of waters deep
they went both sure and dry.
Miriams song at the red Sea.
THen Miriam the Prophetess,
the sister of Aaron,
^anced with women skilfully,
playing Timbrels upon.
And Miriam thus answerde them,
praise God most joyfully;
or he the rider and his horse
has drowned in the red Sea.
AFter all this Israel in wilderness,
Of Shur by thirst did suffer great distress:
that shall we drink? said they, ah shall we die?
^hen Moses cried, and GOD showed him a tree:
^ith this tree Moses direct'd by GODS sprite,
^t Marah made the bitter waters sweet:
from thence to Sin he did the people lead
Who did murmur because they wanted brea^
There God the Lord did feed that numb^^ host
With sweet Mannah, round, small as the frost:
Again for thirst Israel at Rephidim,
Did murmur against the great God of Heav'^
Then God his servant Moses did command,
To smite the rock with his rod in his hand;
For chiding, striving, here with great Iovah,
The place was called Massah and Meribah;
God by Moses his people did protect,
In that great battle against Amalek,
His heavy hands Aaron and Hur did stay,
By his prayers Israel prevailed that day:
By his prayers they got the victory.
He built the Altar Jehovah Nissi.
At Horeb, where before he did keep sheep,
Iethro him brought his wife and children eke:
When Iethro had to him counsel imparted,
To his own land from Moses he departed:
Then Moses went up to God on Sinai,
Who did direct him, all these words to say,
What I have done in Egypt ye did see,
On Eagles wings I bare you tenderly:
Now therefore if ye will obey my voice,
Above all people ye shall be my choice;
(...) Priests to me, ye shall be a kingdom,
(...) treasure dear, an holy Nation.
^at said, Moses, a man filled with grace,
^id all these words before the peoples face:
^en all the people answ'red him unto,
(...) that the Lord has spoken we will do;
^e to, go to, to Moses God did say,
(...) ^pare Israel to morrow and to day,
(...) the third day with glory and renown,
^^fore Israel I mind for to come down;
^ke heed for if man, or heast that have breath,
^t touch the mount they shall be put to death:
(...) any touch, the mount they shall be then
^ot throw, or stoned whether beasts or men:
^t to come up to them it shall belong,
^hen they shall hear the Trumpet sounding long:
(...) the third day thundrings and lightnings past,
^^e cloud and Trumpet made them all aghast;
^^en smoke and fire on SINAH for a space,
^^cended as the smoke of a furnace;
^^en all the people trembled fearfully,
^^a the mount SINAH quaked all greatly:
^en God came down whom MOSES heard and saw,
^^d in two Tables wrote his fiery Law:
^hile MOSES was upon the mount with God,
^^ey made a calf as if they had been mad,
Of Egypts spoil to make it they were bold,
Even of Gods gifts, they had no other gold
They ate, they drank, and then rose up to p^
Behold thy gods fool ISRAEL could say;
Go get thee down, said God to MOSES the
For thy people are rather beasts then men:
Let me alone, entreat not for this fall,
For in fury I will consume them all:
Oh, said Moses, why does thy wrath wax
Against Israel, thine heritage and lot?
Think on Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,
On thy people let not thine anger fall:
While this grief Moses in his heart did feel
The Lord in have repented of the evil:
Then Moses swiftly from the mount went do^
And brought with him the worthy son of (...)
While he and Moses from the Camp were far^
Good Joshuah said I hear a noise of war;
But old Moses with his discerning ear,
Said not, but voice of singing do I hear;
When he came near and saw that filthy blot,
A golden idol, not Gods childrens spot,
He brake Gods Tables in his kindled ire,
The golded Calf he burnt into the fire;
He ground it small, and straw'd it in their dri^
That they an idol, not God might it think:
Then Moses wroth, unto the Levits cried,
(...) every man his sharp sword by his side:
^e through the camp, your brethren gorre and slay,
^at the great God you all may bless this day:
^^en the Levits these wicked men had slain,
^to the mount Moses returned again:
God be said, alas while I behold,
a'l has made unto them gods of gold:
^ve mercy, Lord, with eyes of pity look,
^^don, or else me blot out of thy Book:
^^w go, said God, as I shall give thee grace,
^duct Israel unto my promised place;
^^aite my time, when once I shall begin,
(...) visit; they shall suffer for their sin.
^ter this MOSES, faithful, full of grace
^^d great desire, to see the Lords sweet face;
^^HOVAH good to hear him was not slack,
(...) spare his life he let him see his back.
What verse, what pen can paint this great Divine,
those face JOVAH made with his face to shine?
^ith God on SINAH forty days he past,
^l this time he kept a most solemn fast:
^here of JOVAH whose wisdom does excel,
^e learned the Laws which he taught Israel,
(...) him God most excellent gifts did give,
^e was the meekest that on earth did live:
Of years he lived a hundred and twenty,
Without weakness and d^mnesse of the eye:
Because at MASSAH he failed in his faith,
Of CANAAN he might not tread the path:
To climb NEBO the LORD did him comman^
That he might see from thence the holy land.
When this was done this man of GOD did die
In MOAB land, where GOD did him bury:
Before or after came none in his place,
Who knew JOVAH so clearly face to face.
The Song of Moses before his death.
THE PREFACE.
O Pleasant heavens that are above,
with diligence give ear;
And I will speak; O earth below,
the words of my mouth hear:
2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain,
my speech as dew shall pass;
As small rain on the tender herb,
and showers upon the grass.
3 Because I surely will publish
the blessed name of the Lord:
(...) greatness therefore to Gods name,
ascribe with one accord.
I. PART.
HE is the rock, his work perfect,
all his ways judgment be;
(...) God of truth, and without sin,
most just and right is He:
They have corrupt themselves, their spot
is not the spot always
his children, they are perverse,
a race of crooked ways.
Unwise people! do ye the Lord
thus requite? is not He
^y father buyer? has he not
made and established thee?
Remember ye the days of old,
years past consider well:
^ke thy father he will thee show,
thy Elders will thee tell.
When the most High for nations
did heritage divide;
Sufficient bounds for Israel,
he wisely did provide;
9 For the Lord for his portion has
his people without blot;
Jacob is his inheritance,
appointed as by lot;
10 He found him in a desert land,
and waste wilderness, he
Him led, instructed, and him kept,
as the Apple of his eye.
11 As an Eagle stir's up her nest,
fluttreth her young upon,
Her wings does spread, and takes them
to carry them thereon,
12 So the good Lord alone did him
lead in all ways safely,
And there with him was no strange god
in all that company.
13 He made them ride on Canaan high,
that he the increase might eat;
He made him suck honey and oil,
that were in rocks most sweet:
14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheep
he gave to every man,
^ith fat of Lambs, and also Rams,
of the bread of Bashan.
^e gave them goats with the fat of
Kidneyes, of Wheat right good;
and thou did of the svveet grapes drink
the pure Wine, red like blood.
II. PART.
But Jeshurun who should have been
most righteous, did kick:
^^ou art exceeding waxed fat;
thou art also grown thick.
^^ou covered art with fatness, then
His Maker he forsook,
and of his sure salvations rock
no care at all he took.
With strange gods they provoked Him
unto great jealousy;
^ith great abominations they
moved Him to be angry.
They sacrificed unto dev'ls,
to gods whom they not knew,
whom your fathers did never fear,
because they were but new.
18 Thou art unmindfull of the Rock
that did thee once beget,
And the Lord God that formed thee
thou did always forget.
IIII. PART.
AND when the Lord saw it, he did
ahhorre them all anon:
Because of the provokeing of
both Daughter, and of Son.
20 He said, I will my face from them
hide, and I will now see
Their end, they are a froward race,
in whom no faith can be.
21 With that which is not god they have
me moved to jealousy,
They have me to anger provoked,
with their great vanity:
I them also to jealousy,
with such as are no flock,
Will move; them to anger with fools,
I surely will provoke.
22 For in my wrath fire kindled is,
such as no tongue can tell;
^t shall not cease always to burn,
even to the lowest hell:
And shall consume the earth with her
increase, poor man's desire,
And the foundations of the mount
shall surely set on fire.
3 A heap of mischiefs upon them
I certainly will send;
also upon them in wrath
mine arrows will now spend.
4 They shall consumed be and burnt,
with pain of hunger great;
and suddenly shall be devoured,
with a most burning heat:
and with bitter destruction
I will als on them thrust
^he teeth of beasts, with the poison
of serpents of the dust:
^ The svvord without, terror within,
shall destroy, and not spare,
^^e young man, virgin, the suckling,
with the man of gray hair:
^ I said, I would into corners
them quickly scatter, then
I would make their rememberance
to cease from among men;
27 Were it not that I the great wrath
feared of the enemy;
Lest their vain adversaries should
behave themselves strangly,
And lest that they (puffed up with pride)
should say these words right soon,
Our hand is now high, and the Lord
has not all this work done.
28 For they are a vain nation,
of wholesome counsel void:
Neither in their hearts foolish does
understanding abide.
29 O that they were wise, so that they
this clearly understood;
That they would now their latter end
consider for their good.
30 How should but one a thousand chase,
and two als put to flight
Ten thousand, if their Rock had not
then sold and shut up right?
32 For their rock in no way is as
our Rock that is mighty,
^ee seek no other this to judge
but our own enemy:
^2 Of Sodom and Gomorrahs field
their vine I truly call,
their great clusters are most bitter,
their grapes are grapes of gall.
^3 Their wine is Dragons poison, which
from these grapes does distill,
And is the deadly venime of
most cruel Aspes that kill.
^4 Is not this wickedness laid up
in store, there to abide,
And sealed up among my treasures,
like that which one does hide?
IIII. PART.
TO me belongs vengeance, and
recompense for their crime,
Their wicked foot shall surely slide
in due appointed time:
For their day of calamity
is surely near at hand,
And the things that shall come on them
make haste, and shall not stand;
36 For the Lord shall his people judge,
and for his folks repent,
When he sees all their power gone,
and altogether spent:
37 And he in his great wrath shall say,
Where are their gods of might
Their rock in whom they trusted much?
they come not now in sight.
38 Which ate fatlings, and wine offerings
in drink did not reject,
Let them rise up, and with their strength
you help, and als protect.
39 See now that I am he, even I
no god there is with me:
I kill, I also make alive,
I wound, and heal safely;
Neither is there among the gods
any, by Sea or Land,
That by their strength deliver can
out of my mighty hand:
40 For I my hand unto the Heaven
do now lift up and heave:
In sign that I this great oath make,
for ever as I live.
41 If I my glittering Sword whet, and
judge in severitie,
will surely reward vengeance,
to my foes that hate me:
^2 I will mine arrows in my wrath,
which is now kindled sore,
Make drunk with blood (and my Sword shall
their filthy flesh devore.)
and that with the blood of the slain,
and of captives that be,
from the beginning of revenge,
upon the enemy.
^3 Rejoice ye nations with his folk,
for he who does not change,
Will the blood of his servants dear
most speedily avenge;
And to his adversaries will
render a vengeance full;
And to his land and his people
will be most merciful.
The Use.
He who desires like good Moses to be
In all Gods house, let him serve faithfully:
He who with Moses would be a Divine,
Must speak with God until that his face she
None is so good but he will get assaults,
Love Moses virtues, but flee from his fault
To circumcise his Son he did delay,
At Meribah he also went astray;
At these waters he failed in his faith,
For which he might not tread in Canans pa^
See what it is to sin against the Lord,
Who Moses sin to spare would not accord;
God hates sin in best men, as ye see,
Though they be dear as the apple of his eye.
AARON. Prince of praise.
THis Prince of praise was Moses brother (...)
Elder then MOSES, the space of three y^
These brethren two were men of great reque^
MOSES was King, but Aaron was the Priest (...)
He was designed such by the Almond rod;
Mouth to MOSES, to him Moses as God:
When God by him as high Priest was adored,
His body was with these garments decor'd:
A girdle, mitter, and a broidred coat,
^ob, an Ephod, and a rich breast plate,
^ith URIM TUMMIM an excellent thing,
^s incense censer in his hand did hing;
^^elve precious stones on his breast were without,
^lls, Pomegranats his Ephod hang about,
^^on his brow there was a plate of gold,
^^aring these words, HOLINESS TO THE LORD:
(...) the Holy of Holys thus he stood,
^^fore the Lord with a basin of blood:
^nce in his life (alas) he played the fool
^hen he the Calf formed with a graving tool,
after he saw it, this he added more
^e rashly built an Altar it before:
because at MASSAH he failed in his faith,
^f Canaan he might not tread the path;
^ripe off his garments, put them on his Son,
^or he in office no more may remain:
upon mount HOR death him of life bereaved,
^ho forty years in wilderness had lived.
^hen God him took from this earths misery,
^f age he was an hundred twenty three:
^his holy man, most upright in his ways,
^as after death lamented thirty days.
The Use.
Most happy he who has his breast within,
that which without was sealed by Tummim.
Let no man a vain people for to please,
Do that which may the mighty Lord disple^
MIRIAM. Bitterness.
THis MOSES sister daughter of AMRAM*
From bitterness was called MIRIAM;
Elder then Moses at the river side,
She watched the Boat wherein they did him (...)
At the red sea when MOSES men among
Did dance, with women she had als her so^
She did her self in godly words express,
With gifts adorned, she was a Prophetess;
She had her faults in her most holy life,
She greeved MOSES by her words of strife
She with ARON the ill quarrel began,
For ZIPPORAH the Ethiopian.
Tush tush, said they, has God spoken on^
By MOSES, and not by us as plainly?
This Moses heard, but being very meek,
From God in wrath he no revenge did seek
But God in wrath (when he these things did
Unto them cried, Come out, come out ye three,
Though I my wrath against you have delayed,
To greeve Moses how were ye not afraid?
(...) proud in heart, inferior in place,
(...) you by dreams, to him I speak by face:
^hen GOD had shown how they had gone astray,
(...) kindled wrath and rage he went away:
^^en this was done; behold a great sorrow,
^^RIE became leprous white as the snow:
^^er her flesh was consumed by the Lord,
^^ses did pray, and then she was restored:
^^cause God was provoked by her sin,
(...) died in the wilderness of ZIN:
^^nsider here two brethren, and MARIE,
^pointed guids for Israel to be:
^^cause by sin they stirred up Gods wrath,
Canaan they might not tread the path:
(...) on HOR, Moses at NEBO steep,
^^y in Zin by death did softly sleep.
(...) wilderness AMRAMS three children dear
^^eir life did finish in the forty year.
The Use.
^ost godly hearts vain pride does whiles assault,
^^ey live not here, that live without a fault:
^th carfulness let men and women try,
(...) ^t in their hearts no place be for envy.
BALAK. A Robber.
BALAAM. A Devorer.
After that Israel in battle fighting
Had overcome strong Og of Bashan K^
BALAK king of Moab, son of ZIPPOR,
Sent men for Bala'm the son of BEOR,
Who dwelt in Pethor; to him they did say
Behold from Egypt, in battle array,
A people is come, who is most mighty,
In number great for to fight against me:
Come now therefore, I pray thee, without
Curse Israel that so I may prevail,
For this I wot, that he whom thou shall ble^
Shall be blessed, and cursed whom thou curse;
So the Elders, that were of Moab land,
Departed with great rewards in their hand
They came unto BALAAM, and thus spoke
Unto him the words of their King BALAK
He said to them, Lodge here this night su^
I shall you tell what the Lord says to me;
And God came unto BALAAM, and said,
What men are these that do with thee abi^
And Bala'm said to God, Balak surely
The son of ZIPPOR has sent unto me,
B^hold, says he, from Egypt a great band
(...) soldiers that cover all the land,
^me curse me them, peradventure I shall
^able for to overcome them all:
^d God said to BALA'M, Thou shall not go
^th them, thou shall not curse the people so,
^r they are blessed; BALA'M in the morning
^se up, and went to BALAKS men, saying,
^e Princes of King BALAK get ye now
^o your own land; for to go with you
^e mighty Lord will not give leave to me,
^en the Princes of Moab most early
^se up, and unto their King BALAK went,
^d said, BALA'M for thy commandment,
^^th no wise care; he (proud of his wisdom)
^ainely refuses with us for to come;
^d Balak sent again by the same way
^inces that were more respectfull then they;
^ho said to him, Balak, son of Zippor,
^ith great desire has us all sent thee for:
(...) bids us say, Let nothing I pray thee
^ee hinder from now coming unto me:
(...) will promote thee for thy great wisdom,
therefore to curse this people shortly come;
^hen to Balaks servants Bala'm most bold,
^id, If Balak of silver and of gold,
Would his house full me give, I not therefore
Could go beyond the Lords word, less or m^
Yet all this night here tarry, I you pray,
That I may know what more the LORD will
And GOD came unto Balaam at night,
And said to him, What was most just and rig^
If these men come again for to call thee,
Rise up, and als go with them speedily;
But yet the word that I shall to thee say,
That shall thou do most carefully always;
And Balaam rose up in the morning,
And on his ass went unto Moabs King;
But Gods anger was then incontinent
Kindled, because he with these Princes went
And the Angel of the great God that day,
For adversary stood there in the way;
Thus on his ass he rode Balak unto,
And his two servants were with him also;
And the ass saw the Angel of the Lord
In the way standing, with a glistring Sword;
And the ass turned aside out of the way,
And went into the field without delay,
And Balam smote the ass with great disdain
To turn her soon into the way again:
But the angel of the Lord in great wrath,
Of the vineyards stood in a narrow path,
Which on both sides was fenced with a wall,
(...) when the ass (for fear ready to fall)
(...) the Angel of the Lord in the way,
^till the Wall she did without delay
^sh Balams foot, then he inflamed hot,
^th staff in hand the ass in fury smote.
^en the Lord opened the mouth of the ass,
^^o said to Balam, What is my trespass?
^^y do thou strike? What have I done to thee,
^at thou have so me smitten these times three?
^n Balam said unto the ass, surely
^cause thou have in the way mocked me:
^ould there were a Sword in mine hand still,
^r now I would in wrath thee surely kill.
^en said the ass, Am I not thine always,
(...) which thou have ridden even to this day?
^as I before wont so to do to thee?
^y, said Balam, thou did not so to me:
^en Balam's eyes the Lord without delay
^'ned, who saw Gods Angel in the way,
^ith his sword drawn; then he in the same place
^w'd down his head, and fell flat on his face:
^en said the Angel, For what great trespass
^st thou these three times thus smitten thine ass?
^^hold I went out for to withstand thee,
^^cause thy way is perverse before me;
Thine ass a beast did well for thee provide,
She fearing me, turned three times aside:
Unless she had from Me thus turned away,
I had her saved, and had slain thee this day.
Then Balam said, I have the LORDS comman^
Broken by sin; for that thou here did stand
I did not know: Now therefore without let,
If thou be wroth, back soon I will me get.
No said the Angel unto Balam then,
Now take thine own will, and go with the men^
But only speak that which I speak to thee,
So Balam went toward Balak quickly.
When Balak heard this, he incontinent
To meet Balaam to a city went
Of Moab land, in borders of Arnon,
Which is the outmost coast lying alone:
Then Balak said unto Balam, Did I
Not send for thee, to call thee by and by?
Wherefore came thou not at the first to me?
Am I not able for to honor thee?
And Balam said to Balak, I a man
Am come unto thee, to do what I can:
Have I now power any thing to say,
What GOD me bids that shall I speak this day:
Then Balak went anon with Balaam,
And quickly to Kiriath-Huzoth they came;
There Balak oxen did offer with sheep,
He sent for BALAM whose science was deep:
The morrow after BALAM came quickly
To Baals high places, that he might see
From thence of GODS ISRAEL the utmost part,
That by his curse that whole people might smart;
And Balam said unto Balak, Build me
Here sev'n altars, and prepare here quickly
Seven oxen fair, and seven fat rams also;
Balak as Balam had spoken, did so;
And Balak and Balam off'red quickly
On each altar for sacrifice to be,
A Bullock and a Ram; Then Balam spoke
Unto this King, that called was Balak:
Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go,
Peradventure GOD will come me unto,
And give counsel: what he shall show to me
I will without failing all tell to thee.
Then Balaam unto an high place went,
And the Lord there met him incontinent;
Then he said, I sev'n altars did prepare,
And there have off'red; now to me declare,
What I shall say to Balak Moabs King,
Then GOD put in his mouth this word, saying,
Return unto Balak, and thus boldly
To him thou shall speak this message from me;
Then he returned when he thus understood,
And went to Balak who with Princes stood.
And he took up his parable and said,
Balak the King, This charge on me has laid
From Aram I have been brought by this Kin^
Out of the mountains of the East, saying,
Come curse me Jacob, and Israel defy,
Whom God has not cursed, how him curse shall
For from the top of the rocks I him see,
And him behold from the hills that are hie:
Lo this people in a great number throng
Shall dwell alone; and nations among
Shall not be reck'ned; who can count or tell
The dust of Jacob, or fourth of Israel?
Let me the death of the righteous man die,
And let my last end like unto his be.
And Balak said unto Balaam soon,
What meanest thou? What have thou to me do
Mine enemies to curse I did take thee,
Behold thou have them blessed most surely.
Then Balaam said, Think not this uncouth,
For I must speak what God puts in my mouth
Then Balak said, I pray now come with me
Unto a place, from whence thou may them (...)
The out most part thou shall see and no more,
Come and curse me them all from thence the^^fore.
He brought him to the field of ZOPHIM land,
To PISGAS top, whether God did command:
MOSES to go the promisde land to see,
That so after that sight MOSES might die.
There Balam said to Balak, Stand here by
Thy burnt offering, until that quickly I
Do yonder meet the great Almighty Lord,
And the LORD met Balam, and put his word
In Balams mouth, and likewise said that day,
Return again unto Balak, and say,
When Balam came unto Balak the King,
Behold he there stood by his burnt offering;
There with him were Princes of MOAB land,
Then Balak said, Now let me understand
What the LORD GOD in this perplexity
Has both revealed, and spoken unto thee:
And he took up his parable and said,
Rise up Balak, and hear an answer made:
Thou Son of Zippor hearken unto me,
The Lord is not a man that he should lie,
Nor the Son of man that he should repent,
To say one thing, and after to relent.
Has the Lord said, and shall he not it do?
Has he spoken, and shall he it not to
Perfection bring? Behold I now must bless,
God has blessed, and I can not reverse;
In Jacob he has not iniquity
Beheld, neither at any time has he
Seen perverseness in all Israel about,
God is with him; among them is a shout
Of a King; God from Egypt land forlorn
Them brought; He has as of an Unicorn
The strength, surely where God is still pres^
Against Jacob there is no enchantment;
Neither against the Lords most dear Israel
Can divination once prevail at all:
According to this time it shall be thought,
And said of Jacob, what has the Lord wro^^
Behold the people shall rise up anon,
As a great Lion and a young Lion
Lifts up himself and lies not down again,
Until he eat and drink blood of the slain;
And Balak said unto Balam that day,
Neither them curse nor yet bless I thee pray
Told I not thee, said Balaam unto
Balak, all that GOD says, that I must do.
Yet Balak said unto Balam that day,
Come now with me I do thee heartly pray;
I will bring thee unto another place,
Peradventure thou will from God get grace,
That thou may for my poor Kingdoms de^^
Power on them all a heavy curse from thence.
Then King Balak brought Balaam anon,
To PEORS top that looks to JESHIMON;
And Balam said unto Balak, Build me
Here sev'n altars, prepare right speedily:
Here sev'n bullocks, and sev'n fat rams well fed,
And Balak did as Balaam had said:
There were off'red a Bullock, and a Ram,
On each altar they did perform the same;
And when Balam saw that it pleased the LORD,
To bless ISRAEL, he did no more accord,
As heretofore to go incontinent,
For by his art to seek for enchantment;
But he perplexed in Sprite with great distress,
Did set his face toward the wilderness;
Then Balaam his eyes aloft lifting,
Saw ISRAEL in his tents abiding
According to their Tribes; GODS Spirit anon
With this parable came Balam upon.
Balam the Son of Beor hateing lies
Has said, even the man who has opened eyes,
He has said which heard the LORDS words truly,
Which saw the vision of the Almighty,
Falling into a great trance, but having
His eyes open to discern every thing;
How good thy tents are Jacob who can tell,
And thy fair tabernacles, O Israel?
As the valleys all spread forth do abide,
As green gardens by the fair rivers side,
As ligne-aloes which is of sweetest smell,
As besides waters Cedars high and tall;
Out of his buckets be shall power indeed,
The waters and in great waters his seed,
And his King higher then Agag shall be,
And his Kingdom shall be exalted hie:
God brought him out of Egypt land forlorn,
He has the strength as of an Unicorn;
He shall eat up all those that are his foe,
And break their bones, and pierce them thro^ also:
With his arrows he couched he lay down,
As a Lion, and as a great Lion,
Who shall him stir up? he that shall thee ble^^
Is blessed, and cursed that shall thee curse:
Then Balaks anger kindled with despite
Wa^ against Balam; together he did smite
His hands, saying, I called thee surely,
For to curse, but thou have blessd these times thre^
Therefore now flee unto thy place and lot,
I thought thee to great honor to promote;
But lo the Lord in this has not been slack,
^n wrath he has from honor keept thee back.
And Balam said unto Balak, This thing
Spoke I not to thy messengers, saying,
If Balak of silver and gold also
Would me his house full give, I cannot go
Beyond the great Gods will in any kind,
For to do good or bad of mine own mind;
But what it shall please the great God to say
To me, that I will speak without delay:
And now I to my people go quickly,
Come therefore and I will advertise thee,
What this people (most blessed) shall always
Do to thy people in the latter days;
And he took up his parable anon,
And said thus wise, Balam of BEOR son
Has said, and the man who does hate all lies,
Who has at all times clear and open eyes,
He has said, which has heard Gods word truly,
And knew als the knowledge of the most Hie;
Which of the Almighty saw the vision,
Falling into a trance with eyes open;
Though not at this time, yet I shall him see,
Though not nigh, I behold him shall clearlie;
Out of Jacob there shall come a star bright,
Out of Israel a scepter with great might,
Shall rise and corners of Moab annoy,
And all the Children of Sheth shall destroy,
And Edome a possession shall be,
Seir also shall be for his enemy,
A large possession, and Israel also
With courage great, right valiantly shall do
Out of good Jacob shall come he that shall
Have great and large Dominion over all,
And shall by his great power Almighty,
Destroy him that remains of the city:
And when on cursed Amalek he did look,
He deep thinking his parable up took,
And said strong is thy dwelling place surely;
Thou putt'st thy nest in a rock for safety;
Nevertheless the Kenite wasted shall,
Be till Ashur, thee carry captive all;
And he took up his parable, saying,
Alas who shall live, when the Lord this thing
Shall do? and ships with threatening and wi^ boast,
Shall come in numbers from the Chittim coa^
And shall afflict Ashur and also Eber,
And he always sure perish shall for ever:
So Balam rose up, and without delay
Went to his place: als Balak went his way.
Whether Balam did go, it is not certain,
But for his wicked counsel he was slain,
By ISRAEL as MOSES did command,
In their journey toward the holy land.
The Use.
Let Prophets here learn not for gain or ease,
To seek Princes by ill counsel to please;
For if in this sort they the Lord offend,
They with Balam shall get a fearful end.
CALEB. As heart.
CALEB his name was Heart which did not fail,
He was the spy who encouraged ISRAEL,
With JOSHUAH; the other ten afraid,
By ill report the Lords people betrayed:
Behold here written for their blot and shame,
Of all these ill spies every man by name,
Shammah, Shaphat, Igal, and Gaddiel,
Palti, Sethur, Gaddi and Ammiel,
Nahby, Gevel; These were the ill spies ten,
Who did cast down the hearts of ISRALS men:
But stout CALEB, descended of Judah,
And of EPHRAIM godly JOSHUAH,
The trembling hearts of ISRAEL did comfort,
To have courage they did them all exhort:
For this cause of all ISRAEL these two,
Got leave from GOD to Canaan to go.
The Use.
The man that would have heaven for his reward,
In Gods battles must not be a Coward:
He who is sent a matter for to try,
For no respect must deal unfaithfully.
JOSHUAH. A Savior.
THou worthy man, first called OSHEAH,
By MOSES wast called JEHOSHUAH,
Type of JESUS, a Savior by command,
Thou ledst Israel unto the holy land:
This Son of NUN, stout, was full of wisdom,
For MOSES had laid his hands him upon:
From SHITTIM he sent two men secretly,
To view the land, and Jericho to spy;
Though King and Laws to do such things forbid,
Rachab these spies close in her chamber hid,
Not fearing thing that could to her befall,
By a coard She let them down from the wall:
After good Joshuah all these things had done,
He went to Jordan from Shittim anon.
When the Priests feet in that river did stand,
JORDANS passage became like the dry land:
There twelve stones were for a memorial
Set; Other twelve were pitched in Gilgal,
For to declare to all posterity
What GOD had done by his hand Almighty:
Then good Joshuah, with great affection
By knives began the circumcision;
Then Manna ceased; An Angel did appear
To Joshuah who was GODS servant dear:
What art thou, said he, friend or fo, with boast?
A friend, a friend, the Captain of Gods host,
The Angel said; I am not for offense,
I bear the Sword for thee and thines defense:
Go to beseege the city Jericho
For great Canons, Trumpets of Ram horns blo:
Down down their walls with power I will bring,
Let all beware of the accursed thing:
When JOVAH these walls had brought to the ground,
Amongst Israel a cursed man was found:
Achan the thief provokeing GOD to ire,
First was stoned, and after burnt with fire:
In GODS good will this thief made such a crack,
That Isral's host at Ai did turn the back;
When by his death the LORD began to be
Content; the men of AI began to fly:
Then GODS people in fury and in ire
Entered the City, and set it on fire:
After that JOSHUAH had burnt this City,
The King of Ai he hanged on a tree:
The Gibeonites hearing of this report
To save themselves found out this crowned sport
Get clouted shoes, old bottels, garments rent,
Old mouldie bread, that we a covenant
May make with ISRAEL, for we are afraid,
That by their force our country be destroyed.
Then ISRAEL made with them a sure accord,
Neglecting to seek counsel from the LORD:
When all was known. ISRAEL began to grieve,
But for their oath they suffered them to live:
Now cursed be ye, base hewers of wood,
Drawers of water for the house of God,
Such shall ye be, such shall ye be eachone,
Said JOSHUAH to these of Gibeon.
When this was done five Kings of Cananites,
With ire conspired against these Gibeonites,
Because without their knowledge and consent
They had with ISRAL made a covenant:
Then JOSHUAH to help poor GIBEON
Chased these Kings along to Bethoron:
The LORD himself for to crush all their bones,
Threw down from heaven on this army great stones:
Till all was done the Sun in Gibeon
Stood still, and als the Moon in Ajalon,
That JOSHUAH full victory might have;
Five Kings he took, and closed, in a cave:
After he had fulfilled his victory,
He took them out and hanged them on a tree:
To keep Israel from strife and anger hot,
He did divide to them the land by lot.
When all was done when death and grave were near,
He spoke ISRAEL that they the LORD should fear;
Serve him in truth, serve him in fear, said he,
All idol gods cast far away from thee:
The people all with one voice did accord
To pass from idols, and to serve the LORD:
This man of GOD (before his life was spent)
With Gods people made a sure Covenant
In Shechem: there he raised up a stone,
For a witness of all was said and done:
At last this man of blessings manifold
Went from this earth fivescore and ten years old.
After his death (this man of great account.)
With grief was buried on Ephraim Mount.
The Use.
Worthy Captain, who will not thee commend?
A godly life makes ay a godly end.
Who fights for GOD, with never fading baye^
Shall have his Temples trimmed, and with laye^
Men and women his praises shall extol,
His name famous shall be in Jovahs roll.
THE GARDEN OF ZION:
The Judges.
1. Othniel: 2. Ehud: 3. Shamgar. 4. Barak. 5. Gideon: 6. Abimelech: 7. Tolah.
8. Jair. 9. Jephte: 10 Ibsan: 11. Elon: 12. Abdon. 13. Samson: 14. Micah: 15.
Eli: 16 Samuel.

1. OTHNIEL The time of God.
WHen diverse had afflicted Israel,
In a fit time the Lord sent Othniel:
By him great things in his lifetime were done,
Come of Kenaz good Calebs brother Son:
In Kiriath-sepher for vent'ring his life.
Caleb him gave his fair Achsah to wife:
King Chusan Rishataim he suppressed,
By him Israel forty years had rest.
The Use.
In greatest troubles and in dangers prime,
The Lord will send comfort in fittest time.
2. EHUD. Excellent.
WHen Israel sinned, Moab with Amalek
Were raised by GOD, his people to correct:
But when they mourned, and cried to JOVAH,
He sent them Ehud first Son of Gerah:
This man left handed was of Benjamin,
His sharp dager he hid his clothes within
With sword at side, with present in his hand
He went to Eglon, King of Moab land;
He said, O King take heed, give ear to me,
I have from God a great message for thee:
When he heard that, he rose out of his seat,
With one stroke Ehud ended the debate:
While thus Eglon did wallow in deaths shade,
The dirt came out, the fat enclosed the blade:
By him the host of Moab was suppressed,
After Israel had fourscore years of rest.
The Use.
Here learn that such a rare and single fact
Is not set down in Scripture for an act,
To teach men thus this Ehud to follow:
Each man to stob the Lord does not allow.
2. SHAMGAR. Throwing down.
THis Shamgar was a man of great renown,
With an Oxe-gaod six hundred he the down.
The Use.
Here learn that great is our eternal God,
Who can save us either by sling or goad,
4. DEBORAH. A Be.
BARAK. Lightning
Dear DEBORAH thy name a honey Be,
Who can express the praise that is du^ thee?
A Prophetess sweet thou was in thy life,
A Judge in ISRAEL, though for sex a wife.
In her time Jabin ISRAEL had oppressed
Captain Sisera, did them sore molest:
Then DEBORAH at God the Lords command
Said to BARAK, JABIN into thine hand
I will deliver by mine arm mighty;
Be stout, and doubt not of the victory.
Oh said BARAK, he is a mighty fo,
Go thou with me, if not, I will not go:
I will, said she, now surely go with thee,
But unto thee, this no honor shall be.
Up, up, now BARAK, said stout DEBORAH,
Take courage for with us is great JOVAH;
In that great day the LORD in ISRA'LS sight
Put Siserah with all his host to flight:
He fled to Jahel; there hid with a veil,
She pierced his temples with a bloody nail:
According to DEBORAHS prophecy
A wife, not BAKAR, got that victory:
When the great GOD had wrought out this great thing,
DEBORAH BARAK then began to sing.
The Song of DEBORAH and BARAK.
PRaise ye the LORD for the avenging,
of his own Israel:
When the people offered gladely
themselves unto Battle.
2 Hear Kings and Princes, I, even I
will sing unto the Lord;
Unto the Lord God of Israel
I will praises afford.
3 Lord, when thou went from Seir, when thou
did march from Edom land,
The Earth trembled the Heavens dropped,
the Clouds they did disband:
4 The Mountains melted from before
the Lord God Eternal:
Even that Sinai from before thee,
Lord God of Israel.
5 In Shangars days, Son of Anath,
in the days of Jael,
The high ways were unoccupied,
they went in by ways all,
6 The indweller of villages
in Israel did cease,
Until that I Deborah rose
a mother to make peace.
7 They chose new gods, then in their gates
was war; was their a shield,
Or spear among forty thousand
in all Isreal's field?
8 My heart to Isral's Governors
is, that with one accord
Offered themselves most willingly
to Battle, bless the Lord.
9 Speak ye that ride on white asses,
In chief rulers array;
And ye that sit in judgment, and
that travel by the way;
10 And ye the poorest of the land,
whose tread was still to draw
Waters, who for fear of Archers
did greatly stand in awe:
Ye from this fear delivered
Gods great works magnify,
Who has given justice and traffiique
in village and city.
11 Awake, awake, awake, awake,
Deborah sing anon,
Arise Barak, and lead captive
thou of Ahinoan Son.
12 He that remains he made to rule
over the Nobility
Over the people; the Lord me gave
rule over the mighty.
14 Of Ephraim against Amalek
there was a root worthy;
Also among this great people
Benjamin after thee;
From Machir of Manasse came
governors goodly men,
To this service came Zebulon,
scribes that handle the pen:
15 And the most mighty Princes of
strong Issachar that day
Were with Deborah in the field,
even Issachar I say;
Also Barak to the valley
sent on foot, did depart,
For the divisions of Reuben
there were great thoughts of heart:
16 Why would not thou from the sheep folds
go for to act thy part?
For the divisions of Reuben
were great searching of heart.
17 Beyond Jordan Gilead abode,
and why did Dan remain
In ships? Asher on the Sea shore
in his breaches sought gain:
18 Zebulon and Naphtali were
armed with spear and shield:
Their lives they jeoparded in the
high places of the field.
19 The Kings of Cana'n came, and fought,
Jabin for to maintain:
In Tana'ch near to Megiddo,
but thereby did not gain.
20 The clouds and wind'gainst Sisera
did fight from the heavens hie:
The Stars in their courses also
fought most courageously.
21 The river Kishon, even Kishon
did sweep them all away;
O thou my soul, thou have dovvntrode
great strength without delay.
22 Then were the strong horse hoofs broken
in great rage and fury,
By the means of the pransings, even
pransings of the mighty.
23 Curse ye Meros most bitterly;
yea curse, (...) the Angel:
Because against these foes they did
not help the Eternal:
24 The Wife of Heber Jael shall
blessed above Women be:
She shall be blessed above Women,
in the tent most surely:
25 He asked water and she gave
him milk of svvet relish,
She also vvisely butter brought
forth in a lordly dish,
26 She with a hammer and a nail
smote Sisera indeed;
When she had pierced his temples,
she did smite of his head:
27 He bovv'd and fell, and lay down, h^
at her feet hovv'd and fell:
Where he bovv'd there he fell down dead
at the feet of Jahel.
28 Sisera's mother looked out
at windows, and did cry
Through the lattesse with joy of heart,
to these that passed by,
Why is his Charet so long d^
coming? What is the let?
Why tarry thus the most swift wheels
of his princely Charet?
29 When her wise Ladies heard these words,
they did not long defer,
To give answer, yea to her self
she returned this answer,
30 Have they not well sped in battle?
have they not all also
Parted the prey to every man
a Dam sell or two?
To Sisera a most rich prey,
who did his strong foes foil
A color d prey of needle work,
for these that take the spoil;
31 So let thy foes perish, O Lord,
but who with heart upright
Love him, let them be as the Sun
going forth in his might.
After these forces were by God represt,
Gods Israel had forty years of rest.
The Use.
Here we may learn, how Gods great Majesty,
Can by a wife obtain a victory.
5. GIDEON. Cutting off.
GReat GIDEON, my verse now come to the
A cutting off thy name does signify:
The great God in mercy sent thee a man,
To save Israel from cruel MIDIAN:
This son of JOASH, in Isra'ls distress
Was threshing Wheat besides his own Wi^ press:
To him an Angel said, with great favor,
The Lord is with thee, thou man of valor:
Alas, O Lord, (moved with grife) said he,
That God is with us; Oh it cannot be!
Where are the wonders our fathers us told?
By Midian we crosses manifold
Do suffer; oh our miseries they scoff,
The Lord in wrath his people has cut off.
To him said God, Now go in this thy might,
Against these men thou shall for Israel fight.
O Lord, said he, what power can I have,
Wherewith I may thy people ISRAEL save?
In MANASSEH my family is poor,
My fathers house such pains can not endure.
Go to, go to, said God, do what thou can,
I shall thee help to smite them as one man.
If thou, O Lord, said GIDEON would me
To fight, a sign first I desire to see.
According to this godly man's desire,
God by his staff from the hard rock a fire
Brought forth, which did consume incontinent
Both flesh and broth, and caks GID'ON present:
When he thus saw, he trembling, said, Alas,
Gods Angel now I have seen face to face.
Fear not, said God, let nothing trouble thee,
I give thee peace, thou surely shall not die.
Then he an altar did build without cease,
JEHOVAH-SHALOM the Lord God send peace.
When this was done, which was his great renown,
Baals altar with great zeal he threw down:
Because he feared his foes that were of might,
He not by day, but did it in the night.
When this was done, the city all aghast
Unto JOASH his father quickly past;
Bring out thy Son that vile villain quickly,
Soon bring him out, for he shall surely die.
Then Joash said, Your brags are but scorning,
He shall be killed while it is yet morning:
Who darre for BAAL only speak a word?
If he be God, now let him plead by sword:
Therefore JOASH from such pleading did call
His godly son by name JERUBBAAL.
Then MIDIAN with AMALEK in ire
With an great host against him did conspire:
With deaw and drienesse the Lord on the fleece
Encouragd him from battle not to cease.
Then JOVAH said, The men that are with the
Be too many to give you victory;
Who so is fearful, and of courage bad,
Let him return now from Mount Gilead:
When Gideon stout these words proclaimed, t^^
Returned twenty and two thousand men:
Then ten thousand were in Gods host that day,
Yet is the Haost too many, God did say:
Go to the waters see what lapers be
These are the men that I will send with thee:
Three hundred men lapped upon the brink,
But all the rest bowed down their heads to d^^
This being done, behold one did proclaim
Unto his fellow in the host a dream:
A barley kake, said one, tumbled our tent;
Another said, this a fearful rent,
Our mighty army shall both faint and fall
Before GIDEON, called JERUBBAAL:
When Gideon heard the telling of the dream^
He worshipped the mighty God of heaven:
Then with all have his host he did command
Trumpets pitchers, with lamps to take in ha^^
When I the Trumpet blow, then blow each o^
^ry, Sword of the LORD and of GIDEON:
^hey brake pitchers, the lamps in their left hand;
^hey blew Trumpets as GIDEON did command,
^hile Israel did these Princely Trumpets blow,
^^ery man's Sword was against his fellow:
^he Lord himself that great Battle did fight,
^hen all MIDIAN were turned to the flight:
^hile they this army hotely did pursue,
^hey OREB ZEEB two great Princes slew:
unto his hand likewise great JEHOVAH
^eliv'red ZEBAH and stout ZALMUNNAH
^he flesh of SUCCOTH, and PENUEL in fear,
^^ter this done with sharp thorns did he tear:
^ut he at last, forgetting the great God,
^f rich earerings made an idol Ephod:
^f lawful sons he had threescore and ten,
And ABIMELEH of a concubine.
The Use.
Here for a space men may GODS cause defend,
And yet at last with idol Ephods end:
Blessed is he who serves GOD with heart entire,
And like the Sun about Heavens Bandeleere
Galopping still, does not faint in his race,
With Gods children that tread the paths o^ grace
6. ABIMELECH. My Father King.
MY Father King, ABIMELECH thy ^^
Does signify; a bastard full of shame:
This villain full of fearful cruelty,
Upon one stone did kill nine and fifty:
Of his brethren in number like a hive,
Only JOTHAM the youngest left alive:
He with silver vain men and light did hire,
Against his brethren he did thus conspire:
His mothers friends of SHECHEM he did b^
Who with the house of MILLO made him K^
Then JOTHAM went unto Gerizim hill,
And cried down this pricking parable,
The trees went forth on a time to anoint
A king; the Olive first they did appoint:
The Olive then said, Nothing I do lake
For crowns I will not my fatness forsake:
Then with one voice they said to the fig tree,
Come thou, and now receive the dignity:
The fig tree then said, Nothing I do lake
For crowns I will not my sweetness forsake:
Then all the trees the crown like a propine
With one consent offered unto the Vine:
The Vine tree then said, Nothing I do lake,
For crowns I will not my liquour forsake:
Then all the trees did to the Bramble bring
The crown, who was content for to be King.
Well said the Bramble, well I you allow,
Come now and put your trust in my shadow.
If not, let fire come from the Bramble soon,
Of Lebanon the Cedars to consume.
Well, well, said Jotham, O unthankfulness,
Soon have ye forgot my fathers kindness;
His life for you he did adventure far,
And now of his children ye murdrers are:
Ye Shechem, Millo, lewdly did conspire;
Ye for such things shall be consumed with fire.
When Abimelech reigned had years three
The Lord to punish his great cruelty,
Sent an ill Sprite betwixt him and Shechem,
Who helped him to murder his brethren:
Then Gaal with other Shechemites stout,
Desired that Abimelech should come out:
Then he anon came out most furiously,
And Gaal chasde even with all his army:
The city Sechem he sacked for their fault,
He slew their men, and sowed it with salt:
From Zalmon he brought branches in his ire,
With these he set their strongest tower on fire:
In that strong hold of the city Sichem,
He in his rage did burn a thousand men,
From thence this tyran with a speedy pace
Went and encamped against fair Thebez:
The people all, sore trembling in that hour,
With all their might fled unto their high tower
ABIMELECH (approaching in his ire)
Went near the door for to burn it with fire*
While them to yield he thought for to constrai^
With a millstone a woman brake his brain.
Fie, fie, young man, said he, me stob and stay
Lest by a woman I die shamefully:
While he was thus in a most shameful smart,
The youth obeyed and thrust him through the heart.
The Use.
Let all men here consider well and see,
What is the end of too great cruelty:
What Jotham said it is now come to pass;
Vengeance at last comes, though with a slo^^ pace.
7. TOLAH. Crimsin.
O Worthy Tolah, no war in thy time
Defiled the land with cruelty or crime:
GOD who the portion to all Princes measures,
Made him on smooth surges of seas of pleasures
To sail: He with meekness and mildness rather
Then with rigor did govern as a father.
In the Scriptures we clearly learn this far,
He was come of the tribe of Issachar:
A godly Judge, he ruled in GODS fear,
He judged Israel three and twenty year:
On Ephraim Mount they buried Tolah,
Where men had laid the corpse of Joshua.
The Use.
Happy is he who dies with a good name,
Though volumes be not written of his fame.
8.. JAIR. Shining, enlightened.
BEhold here Jair, whose virtues divine
Do sparkle bright, and gloriously shine;
A Gileadite, he ruled in GODS fear
The holy people twenty and two year.
This worthy man of children had no lack,
For thirty sons him followed at the back:
He thirty cities, as GODS word does say,
Had, Havoth-Jair called unto this day:
At last, after his days were spent and gone,
This worthy Judge was buried in Camon.
The Use.
Here leare how Jovah, in his great mercy,
Can bless a man with great posterity.
9. JEPHTE. From patach which signifies, to open or dravv a Svvord.
THis Jephte was a mgihty man of war,
Drawing of swords in his name he does be^
Old Gilead this stout Jephte begot
Unlawfully, upon a vile harlot.
When Gileads sons began for to grow stout,
They (hating Jephte) anon thrust him out.
Depart from us, said they, now speedily,
A harlots son, no heritage for thee.
Then Jephte from his cruel brethren fled,
And went in haste into the land of Tob.
In this time Ammon did molest Israel,
For this cause for stout Jephte they did call.
Now Jephte said, Ye seek me in distress,
While ye suffer for your great wickedness.
Behold, said they, We come again to thee,
That against Ammon thou may our captain be.
If, said Jephte, ye will make me your head,
Unto battle gladly will I proceed.
So be it, said they, If otherwise we mean,
The great JOVAH be witness us between.
Then Jephte sent messengers with command,
To tell Ammon not to destroy his land:
But after speeches past both to and fro,
To battle both parties resolved to go,
Then GODS Sprite came on good Jephte quickly,
Revenged on Ammon he resolved to be.
If, GOD, said he, the victory will allow
Against Ammon, I make a solemn vow,
If to my house I shall return in peace,
What first me meets shall be a sacrifice:
Or if not, I most gladly do accord
To consecrate it wholly to the LORD.
This said, Jephte went foreward in great might
Against the children of Ammon to fight:
To him that day the LORD great favor show,
His foes with force he stoutly overthrew.
While he returned from the victory,
His daughter dear with timbrels merrily
Came to meet him; to this she was not slow.
Alas my daughter, thou have brought me low
Said good Jephte, I can not now go back,
I must perform the vow which I did make.
My father dear, said she, Now do to me
What thou have vowed perform to the most Hie;
Only two months suffer me alone,
That I may my virginity bemone.
What she required her father did allow,
When that was done he performed his vow;
Not that he slew her (as some think falsely,)
But to GODS service her virginity
Did consecrate, How can men thus surmise,
That good Jephte made such a sacrifice?
Paul in his writs unto the Hebrews says,
He was a man renowned for his faith:
How could he make a sacrifice divine,
If he at first had met a dog or swine?
Durst a man, who was both faithful and good,
Bring to GOD that which chewed not the cud?
And now at last, men's rashness to arreist,
If she was slain, tell me, who was the Priest?
In Jephte this I chiefly disallow,
That with Alas he did perform his vow.
After this battle, Ephraim in ire
Against Jephte with forces did conspire;
But Jephte stout, with great numbers of men
In great haste took the passage of Jordan:
There Ephraim who did the war denounce,
By Shibboleth, which they could not pronounce,
In the battle their foes were known to be,
Sibboleth then made many men to die.
In that battle the cause of grief and woe,
Ephraim there lost thousands forty two.
Then faithful Jephte at the last deceased,
After he had Gods Israel six years judged,
The Use.
Here we may learn that bastards may get grace,
In faiths fair roll this Jephte had a place.
10 IBSAN. The father of a buckler.
AFter Jephte IBSAN of Bethlehem,
Was judge; this man had threescore of children.
At last he died, as in Scripture appears,
When he Israel had judged seven years.
The Use.
Happy is he who dies with a good name,
Though volumes be not written of his fame.
11 ELON. Strength courag.
THen came ELON from the ZEBULONITS,
Who ten years well judged the Israelits.
The Use.
Happy is he who dies with a good name,
Though volumes be not written of his fame.
12 ABDON. Work service.
AFter ELON ABDON son of HILLEL,
Eight years did judge the tribs of Israel,
The Use.
Happy is he who dies with a good name,
Though volumes be not written of his fame.
13 SAMSON. Little sun.
AFter Isreal's darkness forty years,
In great bondage this little Sun appears:
He was son of MANOAH a Danite,
A great comfort for the poor Isralite;
Before his birth his mother was barran,
In grief without the comfort of children:
At last to her an Angel did appear,
Who said to her, Thou shall conceive and bear
A son, no rasor shall come on his head,
For he shall be a Nazarite indeed;
A man for GOD, set apart from the womb,
Who Isra'ls foes shall send unto their tomb.
Then the woman said to her husband, See
A man of GOD has appeared to me:
He seemed to me a man of noble fame,
Most angel-like, he told me not his name:
He said unto me when he did appear,
Behold a son thou shall conceive and bear;
No rasor shall at all come on his head,
For he shall be a Nazarite indeed.
LORD, said Manoah, Let the man of GOD
Now come, and tell us what with this young lad
We have to do, for we are ignorant,
That we may follow thy commandment.
The LORD him heard, the Angel came anon,
And told them both all that was to be done.
Then Man'oah said, I pray thee now tarry,
Till we in haste prepare a kid for thee.
I am a sprite, said he, I eat no bread,
With sacrifice unto the LORD proceed.
What is thy name? said Manoah, tell me:
It is secret, said he, now let it be.
When he heard thus the Angel him forbid,
A meat-offring he offered for a kid
Unto the LORD; as the sacred story
Tells us, the Angel did most wondrously:
Behold th'angel who had the secret name,
Of the offering ascended in the flame.
Alas, said he, unto his worthy wife,
We have seen GOD, we shall both loss the life.
No, not, said she, we need not for to fear,
Because GODS Angel to us did appear:
If to kill us this had been his earand,
He had disdained the offering in our hand.
Then young Samson the Sprite of GOD began
At times to move in the great camp of Dan;
At last he did require a Philistine
For wife, which he at Timnah had new seen:
His parents to this could not well accord,
For they knew not that it was of the LORD;
While he to Timnah went, a beast did roar,
As though he would the young Samson devore;
But he anon him pulling by the beard,
Rent him, as though he would have rent a kid.
The LORD did this who made the sea and land,
For young Samson had nothing in his hand.
Returning after to his wife he sees
In the dead Lion a fair swarm of bees;
The honey comb most sweet he took to eat,
For this to him (in mister) was for meat.
When Philistines his feast began to taste,
Then he this riddle did propone in haste,
Out of the eater, said he, came there meat,
Out of the strong came that which was most sweet.
Seven days they had at this riddle to guess,
But the meaning thereof could not express:
With fury great they were puffed up in rage,
Because they saw they were to loss their pledge
Of thirty shirts, and thirty garments dear,
These great charges they had not will to bear.
Then said they all unto strong Samsons wife,
If we these clothes loss, thou shall loss the life:
Entise him soon, the doubt try by request,
Why should we loss so much at his fair feast?
Then did she press him by day and by night,
Until he had declared his riddle right.
Then said these men, in words not to be long,
Sweet is the honey, and the lion strong.
Then said he, With my heifer have ye plowed,
Who has unto you my dark riddle showed
Then GODS good Sprite this strong man came upon,
Who in his strength went down to Askelon;
Thirty Philistines he killed in that place,
Whose garments paid for his riddels disgrace.
Then his fair wife her father took him fro,
And gave her to his friend who was his fo.
Then he bethinking how he might revenge
This wrong, he did three hundred foxes range,
Knut tail to tail, with a burning firebrand,
Which did consume the corns upon the land.
When all was known, the Philistines in ire
Burnt the Timnite, and Samsons wife with fire,
This is no mends, yet avenged will I be,
Said Samson, I will smite them hip and thigh.
The Philistines (who did like lions ramp)
In JUDAH LEHI soon did pitch their camp.
What means this war? to them Judah did say;
To bind Samson with ropes and thongs, said they
Then of Judah went three thousand anon
To Etams top, where was the strong Samson:
To him they said, What have thou brought to pass
We all will smart for this thy great trespass.
To these men I have done no wrong, said he,
I did to them as they have done to me.
We will thee bind, said they, with cords and bands:
After, we will put thee into their hands.
Swear to me, said he, by GOD that made all,
That ye your selves will not upon me fall.
Truly, said they, thy blood we must not spill,
Thou needs not fear that Judahs men thee kill:
But unto this we with one voice accord,
To bind thine hands fast with these two new coar^
Then when his foes saw him bound at Lehi,
For joy they cried, and shouted mightily.
Upon him then came a Sprite from the LORD,
With great power he brake both bands and coards:
When he himself did thus shake in his ire,
His bands became like flax burnt in the fire.
When GOD had this great work thus brought to pass,
Strong Samson found the jaw bone of an ass:
No sword he had, no other weapons then
With that asse-bone he slew a thousand men:
After this battle sore troubled with thirst,
Upon his eyes he felt of death the mist:
Thou have me helped greatly, LORD, said he,
Oh suffer not me now for thirst to die:
Then GOD did cleave of the jaw the hollow,
From this bone soon great waters out did flow;
Because that bone by GOD was made a Well,
Samson that place Enhakore did call.
The Word signifies, the Well of him that called or cried.
SAMSON in Gaza went to an harlot,
His foes it heard, and they in anger hot,
Laid wait for him in their great strength and might,
Resolved they were to kill him in that night:
But he the gates of their Gaza did take,
With the two posts and bar upon his back:
He thence them cari'd to fair Hebron hill,
Thus the Gazits could not strong Samson kill.
Again Samson in Sorek land did love
Delilah fair, who daily would him move
With her fair words, decit and flattery,
To tell wherein his greatest strength did ly;
First withs, then coards, then with the web and (...)
To her such answers thus he did begin;
But at the last (for which he suffered smart)
He unto her revealed all his heart:
A Nazarite, said he, from my youth-head
I have been; no rasor upon mine head
Has come; If any cut mine hair from me,
Like other men I surely weak shall be.
When she saw that Samson had thus revealed,
That which from her he had so long concealed,
The Philistines she spoke, and called apart;
Come now, said she, for I know all his heart.
Then these proud lords came up in a great band
And brought to her much money in their hand.
Then she him made upon her knees to sleep,
And from his head his seven locks she did swee^
Up, up, said she, arise Samson quickly,
Behold the strong Philistines be on thee.
I will arise, said Samson, and me shake
As heretofore, of strength I have no lake.
But, Oh, Samson this did not understand,
That GOD the LORD had left him in their hand.
Then these proud men (bitter like angry bees)
Took poor Samson, and put out both his eyes;
With hard fetters of brass they did him bind
In a prison, as horse they made him grind.
Soon after that his hair began to spring,
These lords him brought to Dagons house their king.
Dagon, said they, the god of sea and land
Has now enclosed Samson in our hand:
Then all the people greatly did rejoice,
And praised Dagon with a joyful voice:
Then all merry and glad they did exhort
To call for Samson for to make them sport.
When he was come; Lad, take me by the hand,
Said he, Lead me where the pillar does stand,
Upon the which the house is founded sure,
That I thereon may lean my body poor.
The house was full, three thousand on the roof,
To see Samson of sporting give a proof
Then Samson prayed unto the Lord with cries,
Now grant me, Lord, a revenge for mine eyes:
Twixt the pillars (with his left hand and right)
He pulled them down, by great JEHOVAHS might:
Such was the end of his days full of strife,
At death he slew mo then he slew in life.
The Use.
Here we may learn; yea, clearly we may se^
That cruel men are met with cruelty:
Here is a lesson for to guide our life,
Not to reveal great secrets to a wife.
14 MICAH. Who is like the Lord.
THe word of God most clearly does reveal
How MICAH did his mothers silver steel;
Yea, which was worse, and did merit the rods
Of it he made graven and molten gods:
A Teraphim he had, and an Ephod,
And so became Apostate from his God,
A wandering Levite he hired for his Priest,
His house for idols he made like a beast.
Now I know well that God will do me good,
Said MICAH, who was most foolish and rude:
The LORD will lodge both in mine house and breast
Because I have a Levite for my Priest:
In these days (which was a most fearful thing)
^n all Israel was neither judge nor King.
^he DANITS then seeking inheritance,
Came to the house of this Micah, by chance;
His Levite and his silver gods they took:
When this was done MICAH began to look,
To run, and cry aloud after the men,
In number five come from the tribe of DAN.
What aileth thee? said they; What and wherefore?
My gods, said he, are stoll'n, what have I more?
Let not thy voice now be heard us among,
Said they, lest ill fellows upon thee throng;
It may fall out that if we come to strife
Both thou and thine this day may loss the life:
Thus foolish MICAH, Priest, and gods that day
Did loss; and so the DANITS went their way.
The Use.
Let all men learn in Gods excellent schools
Who worship idols are most brutish fools.
Of the Levite and his Concubine.
IN these days, (which was a most fearful thing)
In all Israel was neither Judge nor King:
In these ill days what man could it endure?
A Levite had a wife that played the whore.
She not fearing the terrors of JOVAH,
Ran to her Father dwelling in JVDAH:
Four whole months with him she did rema^^
Her husband went to bring her back again:
There he with his father in law abode
Where chearefully he was most welcomed:
From day to day he sought to turn again,
But by his father was urged to remain:
At last the fifth day (after all was done)
He went away well near the afternoon:
Then parted he with his wife and servant,
They near to JEBVS, found the day far spen^
The servant said, In JEBUS let us lodge,
The Levite said, To do such things I grudge;
We will not turn aside to that city,
We will not lodge with these that strangers be
We will pass over unto GIBEAH,
For there we trust is the fear of JOVAH.
When unto GI'BAH they were thus n^ come
The Sun in his Horizon was gone down:
Then he went in, and sat down in a street,
But no man there with kindness did him gree^
At last an old man (lifting up his eye)
Come from the field, did there perceive t^ three.
Whence come ye? said he, Whether will ye
We go, said they, the house of God unto
From BETHLEHEM; we have both bread (...) wine,
If thou us lodge, we shall take none of thine.
Then said that old man, Peace be now with thee,
Welcome, thy want shall all lie upon me:
As they were eating with their hearts merry,
Behold the vile villains of that city
Swarmed in numbers, of most vile rogues a rout,
The old man's house they compassed about:
Bring forth the man that came into thine house,
Cried they, of him we will make carnal use:
This vice so vile with words I can not name,
Behold in Israel of SODOM the shame.
The old man said unto them most gravely,
I pray you cease, oh cease from this folly;
This man is come under my house shadow,
Such great vileness the Lord cannot allow:
His wife, my daughter, (if so be it must)
Abuse, with man abhor to spend your lust.
But for all this these men could not forbear,
Raging in lust, such words they would not hear.
When this was done, and all remeed was past,
The Levite brought to them his wife at last:
These vile villains not trembling at Gods sight,
In their mad lust abused her all the night.
When darkness past, the clear spring of the day
Appeared, then these vile villains went away,
Then she whom they had handled like a whore
In the dawning fell down dead at the door:
At last the man opening the door, behold
Her fallen down dead, her hands on the th^^shold,
Then to her thus lying her Lord did say,
Up up, let us make ready for the way.
While he looked that she should rise with spe^
Behold his wife upon the threshold dead:
When the man saw what then was come to pa^
He took the corpse and laid it on his ass:
When he her brought unto his house at home,
He with a knife cut her through flesh and bon^
That the dead parts the wrong might clearly te^
Twelve parts he made and sent through ISRAEL:
They that this saw, said, A sin of this kind
We have not seen, advise and speak your min^
Then all the land (for this great sin much grieve^
From end to end at MISPEH were conveened
In number clearly (set down by GODS pen)
They there were four hundred thousand for men:
There the Levite, in anguish and distress,
At their desire declard the wickedness.
This heard, they all with one consent began
To go to work, to arise as one man:
Then said they all (kindled with anger hot)
To the battle we will go up by lot
Against vile Gib'ah, to fight bitterly,
That they may smart for their unheard folly.
First through Benjamin speedy posts they sent,
That Gib'ahs men might suffer for their rent:
We seek no more but when ye hear us then,
Ye send to us these vile and wicked men:
But Benjamin in a most foolish rage,
With mouth awry scorned the whole message;
Twenty six thousand they in armor bright
Prepared in Battle against Israel to fight:
From Gibeah in that army were then
Expert in war seven hundred chosen men;
Left handed strong who to fight would not spare
They with their sling stones well could hit an hair:
Against all these the Israelites had then
In readiness four hundred thousand men:
They went to GOD first to seek his counsel,
To know which of them first should give Battle,
To them this answer came from great JOVAH,
Unto the Battle first shall go Judah:
Then Israel right stoutly did begin,
To go to battle against Benjamin;
And they again (all in armor full bright)
Prepared them selves against Israel to fight,
Brave warriors all glistring with harness,
Threw down that day Israel with great distress:
Twenty six thousand joined with some few
Unto Israel twenty two thousand slew.
To GOD again they went to seek counsel
If they should give to Benjamin battle.
Go up, said GOD, your anger to fulfill
Go up, why not? if so it be your will.
The second day came Israel to fight
Against Benjamin, but were put to flight:
Of that great army of Isral's children
Destroyed down were eighteen thousand men.
Then Israel perceiving at the last
Great numbers naught, they ran to GOD by fas^
They weeped sore and powered out their heart,
Then GOD was moved for to take their part:
Up, up, said God to war I you command
To morrow I will put them in your hand.
On the third day Israel did begin
A bloody battle against Benjamin
At the first meeting (which was with fury)
Of Isral's brave men were then slain thirty.
Then Benjamin uplifting his proud crist,
Cried they are smitten down as at the first:
Then Israel by GOD himself made wise,
Said, Let us fly and draw them to high ways;
At Baal Tamar, they all in good array,
Prepared themselves to fight stoutly that day;
Liers in wait came out of hole and bore,
Ten thousand chosen made the battle sore;
The LORD Captain this great host did command,
Therefore Benjamin that day could not stand:
Before, behind Israel did them hew,
Twenty five thousand and five score they slew.
The Use.
See what is lust, consider how therefore
Were slain sixty, five thousand, and five score:
Let men also (when they their armies send)
Here learn not on great numbers to depend.
THE GARDEN OF ZION.
RUTH. Watered.
WIth famine pressed these persons went anon,
Elimelech Naomi with Mahlon,
And Chilion their sons from Bethlehem.
To MOAB land that they might their remain,
ELIMELECH Naomis best beloved
At last by pale death was from her removed:
Then her two sons their hearts for to rejoice,
Of RUTH and ORPAH made their only chois^
But in their marriage this was a great spot,
These women were from the incest of Lot:
For Moab was (against all divine order)
His mothers son and also his own brother:
After ten years in marriage were past,
These two young men both died at the last:
Then poor Naomi deliv'red from dread,
Hearing how God had given to Israel bread,
Said to Orpah, and Ruth her daughters dear,
Go to your own, for I must hence retire:
The Lord in mercy deal with you kindly,
As ye have dealt with the dead and with me:
The Lord in mercy work all to your best,
That with your husbands each of you find rest;
Then kissing them, they weeped bitterly,
They said surely we will return with thee:
Naomi said, My daughters turn again,
For now with me ye can no more remain.
The Lord mo sons on me does not allow,
Which I for husbands might give unto you:
Then all did weep, then Orpah took her le^
But to NAOMI RUTHS heart fast did cleave:
Not so Naomi said, Behold Orpah,
Best thou return with thy sister in law:
Entreat me not, said Ruth, I pray humbly
For to return from following after thee:
Both going, lodging, people, and our God
Shall all be one; with thee mine whole abode
I mind to make; to live and die indeed
With thee I mind, and als to be buried:
From thee I will by no means now depart,
Nothing but death on earth shall us two part.
When she her saw so steadfastly persist,
She said to Ruth to speak more I desist:
Then they two went with little means with them
Unto her city called BETHLEHEM:
Unto her many came where she abade
Is this Naomi? each to other said.
No more that name, said she, belongs to me,
Call me Marah, because God bitterly
Has dealt with me, the LORD has more and more
Against me wrought and has afflicted sore:
Beside her dwelt Booz a wealthy man,
A near and dear friend of her dead husband:
The barley harv'st was, Ruth desired then,
In great mister some ears of corn to gleane.
She went to fields, God did direct her chose,
She came unto the reaper^ of Booz:
When Booz knew Ruth the Moabitesse,
His melting heart did pity her distress:
Then did Booz speak friendly to her heart,
See from this field that thou do not depart:
When thou gleanest abide near the women,
Concerning thee I shall direct the men
That they thee touch not; when thou art a thirst,
Go to the vessels, and take of the best:
After that Ruth had such great fovour found,
She bowed humbly even unto the ground,
Saying thou art a rich man high in place,
And ^ a stranger in thine eyes find grace.
Then Booz said, It has been shown to me,
How kind thou have been unto Naomi:
The LORD of love who does all things remark,
Reward thee full and recompense thy work;
Then loving Booz, in things of all sort,
Left no thing undoone that might Ruth comfort:
Both meet and drink she got, while she did gleane,
Booz handfulls the reapers did ordain
To leave of purpose, that for coming forth
She might return home with some thing of worth;
When she had eaten, she put up a part,
Which she brought home with a most loving heart
Unto Naomi, who blessed the most Hie
Who had made her to find such charity:
Then said Naomi, I will do my best,
Eor thee my daughter to seek out a rest:
I trust my hope shall take some good effect,
Wash thee therefore and do as I direct:
Though thou be Ruth a silly widow poor,
Fear not to go unto his threshing floor:
When he has ended both to drink and eat;
Mark where he lies, last uncover his feet;
Wait well thy time, and after lay thee down,
And he will tell thee what is to be done:
As Naomi her daughter had informed,
All was by Ruth so in due time performed.
Then Booz to bed with a merry heart
Went, after Ruth past softly to her part:
She well resolved, not fearing hurt or scorn,
Lay down with Booz near an heap of corn:
At midnight hour when his first sleep did pass,
He was afraid, and wondered who it was:
Who can this be? Who art thou, then he said,
I am said she even Ruth thine own hand maid,
I come to thee in all humility
My near kinsman now spread thy skirt on me;
Then Booz said, the Lord his blessing send
To thee whose kindness in the latter end
To me an old man now does most appear,
Courage daughter thou need'st no thing to fear*
Thy praise is high above the common pitch,
Who seeks not young men whether poor or rich
And now, daughter, see what thou most desires
For I will do each thing that thou requires:
In this city i'ts known to every man
That thou art a good and virtuous woman:
The Lord he knows thou art to me full dear,
But know this, there is a kinsman more near;
If he refuse and the near match forsake,
I promise here to wife I will thee take.
When Booz after did that man require,
His answer was, that match I not desire
Then Booz having ended all the strife
Made choice of Ruth for to remain his wife:
A little after all these things were done,
God blessed Ruth who bare to him a son:
His name OBED, to many joy did bring,
He was grand father to David the King.
The Use.
Here learn that Christ, who of all men w^ best,
Did come of Ruth who was from Lots incest:
Here learn how God exalts the basest things,
From this poor gleaner did spring many King^*
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Books of Samuel.
ELKANAH. The Lord is jealous.
THere was a man of fair mount Ephraim,
Whom Scripture calls Elkanah by name:
His Hebrew name clearly does signify,
For some great thing JEHOVAHS jealousy:
Two wives he had Peninah and Hannah,
Yearly he went to worship JEHOVAH
In Shilo, where the Ark of GOD did stand,
For so to do the LORD did them command;
Peninnah proud because of her children
Provoked Hannah, because she was barren:
To her she was even like a trapping net,
Seeking always to make her heart to fret.
While her husband perceived her grief and sma^
With these good words he did comfort her he^
Why weepest thou for want of fair children?
I to thee shall be better then sons ten:
Then Hannah in great bitterness of heart
Went to Shiloh, from GOD to ease her smart;
In her prayer she weeped bitterly;
She vowed this vow unto the LORD most hie;
O LORD of Hoasts, if thou now wilt indeed
Look on the grief of me thy poor handmaid,
If thou will give to thy servant a Son,
He shall be thine the rasor shall not come
Upon his head; he all his days shall be
A faithful servant consecrate to thee;
While she continued in prayers divine
Priest Eli thought she had been after wine:
How long said Eli will thou drunken be?
Arise, arise, and put thy wine from thee:
My LORD, said she, do not so of me think,
I am not drunk with wine nor such strong drin^
In my great grief, in anguish with great smart
Before the LORD, I have powered out my hear^
Let not, my LORD, this thought in thy heart fa^
That thy handmaid is one of Belial:
From GOD I have been seeking some relief,
Who has an eye to my complaint and grief.
Then Eli said with great affection,
The great GOD grant thee thy petition:
When this was said the woman went her way,
She eat her meat, her face was filled with joy:
The son she sought from great GOD eternell,
From her asking was called Samuel:
This son her cheered against Peninnahs strife
Unto the Lord, she lent him all his life.
The Use.
Let us learn here our vain pride to repress,
And not to grieve these that are in distress.
Let us learn here to judge in charity,
Of others plungd in great adversity.
Let us learn here when ought does us dismay,
To run to God and humbly him to pray.
The Song of Hannah.
MY heart rejoiceth in the Lord,
my horn exalt did he:
My mouth is greatly now enlarged,
for his goodness to me:
2 There is none holy as the Lord,
there is none beside thee:
There is no rock that is like God,
our God the Lord most hie.
3 Talk no more proudly as ye do,
speak not with arrogance;
For all our deeds the Lord does weigh,
in his sacred balance.
4 The strong bows of the mighty men
are broken all at length;
And they that stumbled now, are girt
with force and divine strength.
5 They that were full in plenty have
hired out themselves for bread:
And they that were in great distress,
from God have found remeed.
6 The Lord by his strong arm does kill,
and he also does save:
He lifts up, he brings down
unto the stinking grave.
7 By his power he does make poor,
and also makes rich;
He brings low, and raises up
unto a certain pitch.
8 He brings up out of the dust
the poor from the dunghill,
To Princes seats; the strong pillars
of earth he makes stand still.
9 He will keep the feet of his saints,
the wicked in darkness
Shall all be silent, none by strength
shall prevail more or less.
10 These fools (who do reject the Lord)
shall soon be broke to pieces;
With thunders shall he trouble them,
though they be great as Princes.
and strength give to his King:
His horn shall fill with holy oil,
and make him long to reign.
15. ELI. My God.
IN Israel Judge and Priest was old ELI;
My God his Hebrew name does signify:
He had two sons Hophni and Phineas,
Who did against the Lord greatly trespass;
With greede and whooredome, a most filthy vic^
They made all men contemn Gods sacrifice.
Their father Eli in his words too smooth,
Preferred to God his sons in his reproof:
Therefore the Lord resolved them all to kill;
By fall, in Battle, he their blood did spill:
For Elis fault the Lord gave him this check,
He from his seat did fall and break his neck:
As for his sons (who in vice did excel)
They lost their life in a bloody battle.
The Use.
By Father Eli let all fathers here,
Learn not to love too much their children dear*
Let Levits learn here not to do or think
That which may make Gods sacrifice to stink.
16 SAMUEL Asked of God.
Here is a Saint the, Son of good Hannah,
Asked of God the most high Jehovah:
He was a man of a most holy heart,
He from the womb for God was set apart:
When he was young, and Elis eyes were dim
The Lord in Silo did appear to him:
Four times he cried unto him Samuel,
Before he knew that it was the Eternal:
To him the Lord there great plagues did reveal,
Against Eli which he did not conceal.
My plagues, said God, I will upon him spend,
When I begin I als will make an end:
Him will I judge, and his two sons most vile,
Against his house I will my wrath reveal:
After all this young Samuel went to bed,
Fearing to tell to ELI what God had said:
The morning come, said Eli to Samuel,
What God has said see that thou now me tell;
But if thou feign if that thou do not so,
God so to thee do, and much more also.
Then good Samuel told to him every whit,
Nothing from ELI did he keep secret.
When this old Eli clearly understood,
It is the Lord said, he, what seems him good
Now let him do against both me and mine,
Against his sentence I will not repine,
What SAMUEL said to ELI, more or less,
Upon ELI it shortly came to pass.
Then it was shown clearly by the Eternel
That Samuel was for to judge Israel.
The proud Philistines in his time came out
Against Israel; he put them to the rout:
He cried to God, and God by thunder heard,
The Philistines under their feet he troad;
To show his thanks, to tell what God had done,
In the same place he wisely set a stone;
A stone of help, for to declare Gods fame
Eben-Ezer in Hebrew was its name.
In his old age, when he was full of days,
His bribing sons did not walk in his ways:
Then all the people greeved with this thing,
Cried with one voice, Now let us have a King;
For now Samuel is old, and full of days,
His bribidg sons do not walk in his ways;
Then God directed SAMUEL how to say,
That Israel had rejected God that day.
Go to, go to, hearken unto their voice,
Give them a King according to their choice;
Be plain with them, and hide from them n^ thing,
Show them clearly the manner of the King;
To war, to till, to reap, in every point
Of hard service your sons he will appoint;
Of your daughters, who walk with lofty look^
He will make Bake^s and vile sluttish cooks;
Your fields and yards, which are the most ple^sant,
He will take and give to his own servants:
The tenth of your sheep and seed he will crave,
Your stout young men to his work will he have:
In all this bondage ye shall howl and say,
Alas; but God shall not you hear that day:
But all this speech to them no change could bring
No not, said they but we will have a King,
As this people rebelliously would have
A King, so GOD a King unto them gave.
When this was done Samuel did testify,
Before all ISRAEL his integrity.
Now I am old, said he, see my gray head,
I have been with you from my young childhood;
Now here I am, I gladly do accord,
Witness against me here before the LORD:
Be plain I pray you, and now hide no thing,
For here we are in presence of the King:
Whose Ox? whose Ass have I by wrong possessed?
By violence whom have I once oppressed?
What bribe took I therewith to blind mine eye?
If it be so, now let you testify:
Then said they all (as they well understood)
We know nothing in thee but what is good:
No man we know has been oppressed by thee,
No bribe was able for to blind thine eye:
God be witness, said he, and understand,
That now ye have not found ought in mine hand*
After this said, he did them terrify
With fearful thunders, piercing through the sky:
The people then to him (quakeing) did say,
We have sinned, to JOVAH for us pray.
Fear not, said he, but comfort to you take,
For his people the LORD will not forsake:
If ye cry to him, he will hear your voice,
For he of you has only made his choice;
As for me I will not leave off to pray
For you; I will als teach you the good way:
Only take heed, and serve the Lord with fear,
So ye his goodness shall both see and hear:
But if, ye careless, do the wicked thing,
Ye shall be consumed, both ye, and your king:
After SAMUEL (though he was old and gray)
The proud King Agag in Gilgal did slay:
He was a man faithful in every point,
Before his death two Kings he did anoint.
The Use.
Let Judges learn by Samuels history,
To take good heed that no bribe blind their eye.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Kings.
SAUL. Seeking.
THis Son of KIS from seeking has his name,
His life with vice he stained, his end with shame:
When he began his calling was but base,
Before his Crown he sought his fathers Ass;
When at the first from the stuff he came out,
Then the people with their voice made a shout;
The words they said in their lovely shouting,
Were, that the Lord would safely keep the King:
About this time Nahash the Ammonite
Against Jabesh made war with great despite;
Then Iabesh said, Spare us, and let us be,
A Covenant we will now make with thee;
But cruel Nahash burning in a rage,
By no fair words could his great wrath assuage,
No friends, no friends, said he, now will we be,
Except we first now thrust out your right eye:
Seven days they sought an answer for to give
They sent to Saul, that he might them relieve.
Then Saul armed with companies out three
Threw Ammon down with a great victory:
Saul by this valor was confirmed King,
Then all the people desired him to reign:
When he was King, even in his second year,
The Philistines with forces did appear;
They of Charets strong thirty thousand were,
Six thousand foot also prepared for war:
But Israel, which was cause of great fear,
Disarmed was without both Sword and Spear:
The Philistines triumphing them above,
Did craftily from them all Smiths remove:
Yet for the Forks, Axe, Coulters, Goads, this while
To sharpen them the Hebrews had a file:
When Saul this saw, he greatly was afraid,
In caves and rocks the people did them hide:
Then Saul, in fear not waiting on Samuel,
The seventh day off'red to GOD in Gilgal.
Then Samuel angry with his foolish haste,
Made both his ears to tingle with this blast,
Thou have rebelled, thou have done foolishlie,
Thy Kingdom no more shall abide with thee:
Then Jonathan went after secretly,
Between Bozez and Seneh, two rocks hie;
To his servant he said, Let us pursue,
God can us save by many or by few:
Before we go, by this we will them try,
If while they see us they shall say, Tarry,
Then will we stand; but if their words be so,
Come up to us, until them will we go.
They said, Come up, and that by way of mock,
When this was heard they both did climb the rock:
In that conflict, with Philistines children,
Stout Jonathan did there slay twenty men:
Terrors from GOD his foes hearts made to shake
All the Host trembled, the very earth did quake;
The LORD in arms glist'ring did fight that day,
He made his foes like snow to melt away;
The LORD of Hoasts, by his great power and might,
Made these his foes one against another fight.
When the Isralits of this mercy heard tell,
From holes and bores they rushed to Battle:
These who before for fear themselves did hide,
Stoutly their foes did beat both back and side;
They fought like Lions but anon a jar,
A fasting oath the victory did mar;
They durst not eat, and therefore faint and few,
They could not thoroughly their strong foes pursue;
While Israel thus did faint for fault of meat
Jonathan of a honey comb did eat:
As Soon as he had taste of that honey,
His sprite revived, enlightened was his eye:
What he did then it was by ignorance,
For he knew not his fathers ordinance:
But when the matter he did understand,
He said, My father has troubled the land;
For want of meat men's hearts so weakened be,
That they can not pursue the victory.
Still fight, said Saul, and do all that ye can,
Spoil and destroy, of them leave not a man;
But first to GOD to seek response they went,
To see what should be his sacred intent;
But God in wrath, for ought that they could say,
Would not make answer to Israel that day.
Go to, said Saul, there is some man of sin;
By Divine lot, I trust I shall him find:
Give perfect lot, said Saul to GOD, I pray,
That we may see by what great sin this day
Thou have been grieved, though it my Son should be,
Stout Jonathan, he shall now surely die.
Then curiously Saul seeking out this spot,
Upon Jonathan fell the Divine lot
Tell, tell, said Saul, tell me what thou have done,
Prepare for death, for thee mercy is none:
Alas, said he, I hungry wanting meat,
In a fair wood of honey combs did eat;
That which I did was done ignorantly,
Behold Jonathan must now surely die:
No more, said Saul, thou have broken the oath
Of great JOVAH, prepare thy self for death:
What? said Israel, shall stout Jonathan die?
Who has for GOD now fought so valiantly?
As God lives, who ever lives indeed,
No thing shall aile the least hair of his head.
Thus the people walking in the right way
Good Jonathan they did rescue that day.
Then unto Saul went godly Samuel.
To him from GOD this message did he tell:
Remember now how Amalek laid wait
For Israel by the way in his great strait;
Now go and smite, and utterly destroy
Beast, Man and Maid, unto the suckling Boy,
When this was said, King Saul with all his might
Against Aamalek stoutly went to fight:
He slew these men, and took Captive the King,
With him best beasts he saved alive; which thing
Acted by him against Gods Commandment,
The fair kingdom of Israel from him rent;
Then Samuel said, Where is Agag the King
See ye in haste that Tyran to me bring:
When he was come he hewed in pieces all
Agag the King before GOD in Gilgal.
After this sin the LORD to Samuel said
Go and anoint for King the herd David:
Because for Israel he ventured his life
Against Goliath, he got for his wife
Michal Saul's daughter; that great victory
Bread in Saul's breast displeasure and envy:
This soulesse Saul, by Doegs villenie,
Was moved to slay at Nob with cruelty
Fourscore and five servants of the great GOD,
Who for armor had but linen EPHOD,
Because to David, in hunger and need,
They had vouchsav'd some piece of GODS shewbread:
At diverse times Saul filled with rage and strife,
Hunted David like a flea for his life;
Whiles like a Lion, cruel he did roar,
Enraged at DAVID whiles like a wild boar:
He did him hunt most like a bloody hound.
Who cannot rest until his prey be found:
But God at last, to make of him an end,
A great army of Philistines did send:
The Philistines at Shunem were gathered,
Isra'ls army in Gilboah pitched:
When Saul that host of Philistines did see,
He trembled all, his heart did quake greatly:
Then he in fear unto the Lord did cry,
But God to him no answer would reply,
Neither by dreams, by URIM, or Prophet,
When Saul saw this, his heart within did fret,
If God will not, the Devil I will desire,
To help, said he, of him I will enquire.
There is a witch which does at Endor dwell,
Said they, She can all secrets to thee tell.
Then Saul went to that wicked wife by night,
Desiring her to bring to him in sight
Whom he should name, who ever was the man,
Then unto him thus answered the woman
Right well thou know no sprit familiar
Is now approved; make not for me a snare:
As God lives, said Saul, now ^or this thing
Thou shall not smart: Tell me whom I shall bring.
Up unto thee, said she, now to me tell;
Bring up to me, said he, old dead Samuel:
When the woman perceived this dead man
Arise from grave, to tremble she began;
She said to Saul, Thou have deceived me,
That thou art Saul I know now certainly:
Fear not, said Saul, no ill to thee I mean,
Declare me plainly all that thou have seen,
I have, said she, now perceived a strange thing
Gods wonderful from the earth ascending.
What is his form? said Saul, now tell to me,
A mantled old man, said she, I now see
When the woman these things to Saul did tell
He then perceived that it was Samuel:
He having all things in such order found,
He bowed himself, and stouped to the ground,
Then Samuel said, Why have thou troubled me?
I am, said Saul, distressed heavily;
God has me left and answers me no more,
To seek thy help I am constrained therefore.
In vain, said Samuel, come thou to me,
Who can be friend where God is enemy?
The Lord at first of thee for King made choice,
But (thou stubborn) would not obey his voice:
Against Amalek to do the Lords command,
Therefore the Kingdom is rent from thine hand;
Thy foes shall fight, thine host shall fall and flee
Thou and thy sons the morn shall be with me.
Then Saul afraid, fell straight way all along
Upon the earth, the witch and men among:
No strength in him, in him there was no might,
For he had fasted both the day and night.
When this was done, the witch prepared meat
She brought it to him and moved him to eat:
Behold anon the Philistines army
Ready to fight, as Israel was to fly:
The Archers shot, the battle went full sore,
The shafts did flee, their rage did more and more
Increase; then Saul to his servant did say,
Draw out thy sword, and quickly now me slay;
Take courage, do, let not this trouble thee,
Though thou me spare, yet will I surely die;
My fear is, that th'uncircumcised band
Come and abuse me vilely with their hand:
But the servant (who his Prince feared and loved)
To kill the King by no words could be moved.
Then Saul with rage and godless fury pressed,
With his own sword did pierce through his own breast.
Jonathan, Abinadab, Malchishuah
Saul's three sons with Saul fell on Gilboah:
The Philistines after finding Saul dead
Upon the mount, they cut from him the head:
The body of that stout and valiant man
They fastened to the strong wall of Bethshan;
Among the rest this was the sharpest rod,
His armor bright unto their idol god
Ashtaroth they brought with great pomp and glory,
As though their god had given them this victory.
When Jabesh heard what to dead Saul was done,
With one consent they all armed right soon,
The bodies of Saul and of Jonathan
They pulled down from the walls of Bethshan:
To save them sure, with fire they did them burn
Seven days they fasting for their death di^ mourn.
The Use.
This history to all men well may tell,
That none shall speed that seeks the devils couns^ll;
He is most sure that God relyes upon,
All other things will shrink and sink anon.
Men for a time may their sad hearts solace
With sound of harp, which soon will have no place,
If Kings with Saul of Gods word make no count,
He will them meet upon Gilboah mount:
These who care not their lives for to amend,
Do often come unto a tragic end:
The LORD to each man his own work repayes,
And makes him find according to his ways.
If men be graceless though never so great,
God shall anon set others in their seat:
So at the last they shall get shame and loss,
When God shall crown these men whom they did cross.
DAVID. Beloved
THE spirit of God begins my heart to move,
To sing of David whom he Lord did love:
When God him sought to make him Isra'ls King,
He was an herd, keeping the ewes with young:
Of Jesses sons he was the least and last,
As by the story is most manifest:
When God his servant Samuel did appoint
To go, and one of Jesses sons anoint;
The first he saw was Eliab fair in face,
This said Samuel is he who by Gods grace
Should be the King; No, not, this shall not be
Said God, for God sees not as men do see:
The outward barck men see of countenance,
But Gods bright eye through all the heart does glance.
Abinadab Shammah he would not choose
David he took, the rest he did refuse:
When he rudie came, the Lord did appoint
Samuel with horn of oil him to anoint:
When that was done, Gods spirit came him upon,
He hated Saul and left him his alone:
When God from him had his good sprit of grace
Removed, the devil came quickly in his place;
He sore troubled, thus to his men did say
Provide a man that cunningly can play:
I cannot pray, the devil will not depart,
My chief comfort must be by Musicks art;
A man with harp to warble let me find
That he the devil may drive out of my mind:
Then David came who warbling did his best,
The devil departed, then Saul got some rest:
After all this the Philistines with boast
Against Israel came with a mighty host:
Among the rest a man of Gath Goliath
A champion contemning great Jehovah,
Came forth with boasting a most mighty man
Whose height was six great cubits with a span:
Both up and down he thus armed did pass
With coat of male and with helmet of brass,
Graves on his legs, a target he between
His shoulders had, his spear was like a beam
Of a weever; One with a shield before
Went; this strong man all Israel troubled sore:
He cried aloud to all Israel that day
In vain set ye your battle in array;
Let one man come and fight me hand to hand
What part prevails, they shall the rest command;
If ye have hearts or hands I shall soon try,
All Isra'ls host this day I do defy:
On all Israel thus he did rub disgrace
All men did fly, but none durst turn the face,
Until David encouraged from above,
This question to the army thus did move,
What shall be done to him who shall stoutly
Kill this vile dog that does our God defy?
He, then said they, who shall perform this thing,
Shall have for wife the daughter of the King:
Let no man's heart, said David, now him fail,
I will now answer his foolish appeal;
I tremble not for all his strength and might
The Lord gives heart, I him resolve to fight:
Alas, said SAUL, thou greatly have to fear,
Thou art a youth, but he a man of war:
Not, said David, I have experience,
I am acquaint with GODS strong assistance;
He made me kill a Lion and a Bear,
What needs me now this Philistine to fear?
Go to, said Saul, GODS blessing go with thee,
With coat of male, and helmet armed be
Thou must; my Sword also gird by thy side,
That thou his strokes the better may abide:
David thus armed all from top to toe,
Said with such things to fight I can not go:
Off with his harness, his staff in hand he took,
In scrip five smooth stones chosen from the brook,
With sling in hand, in a courage divine
He stoutly went to fight the Philistine:
Then great Goliath came down to the field,
Armed with brass, before him a great shield
was borne; he lofty with a most proud look
Disdained David, scarce notice of him took;
This thing is strange it seems to me uncouth,
That in Israel there is none but this youth,
Fair and ruddy, small token of courage,
To fight against a giant full of rage:
What art thou lad, what meanest thou to do,
Am I a dog that so thou come me to
With staves and stones? a dwarf most unworthie,
By all my gods now cursed must thou be:
Come hither heard thy stones and staves now yield,
Thy flesh shall go to the beasts of the field:
Thou shall well know that I am not a beast,
I mind to make thy flesh for fowls a feast.
Words are but wind, said David, I not fe^
Thy sword or shield, or yet thy brass or spear;
I come to thee, in the most mighty name
Of great JOVAH, whom thou have thought t^ shame;
Cease from thy brags, no more to boast proceed,
I shall thee smite and from thee take the head,
Thou shall soon know, and others shall it tell,
That there is a great God in Israel:
The Lord God saves not with spears or swords,
I fear nothing, the Battle is the Lords.
This said, David with a courage divine,
Ran in all haste to meet the Philistine
With hand to bag, from thence he took a stone,
Which pierced Goliath through both flesh and bone:
The stone with force thrown sanke in his forehead,
Then like an Ox to ground he fell down dead.
Then David ran with great courage divine,
And stood upon that beastly Philistine;
Him treading down with feet he made great speed,
With his own sword from him he cut the head:
When the Philistines saw their man of might
This way mangled, they took them to the flight,
Thus wanting courage, they both fled and fell,
Affrighted much for the men of Israel:
Last David after Goliath was dead,
To Jerusalem brought this monsters head:
In the way met him these songs of women,
For Saul's one thousand David has slain ten:
From that day and forward Saul did him eye,
Having his heart stuffed with rage and envy:
Then Saul devised how to make him fall,
A bloody dowry he sought for Michal:
An hundred foreskins to David, said he,
Of Philistines thou shall bring unto me;
I seek no more, no more dowry I crave,
Do this, and thou Michal for wife shall have,
By these his words which seemed to be fair,
He aimed to draw David into a snaire:
But stout David brought in a bloody strife,
Two hundred foreskins, and so wan his wife:
All these great things filled Saul's heart with envy,
David's applause kindled his jealousy;
His wrath like fire in fuel did increase
When he did hear of David's good success;
From secret wrath to open felonnie
He went pursuing David cruelly.
For this David to Achish in Gath fled,
There he as mad the spittle on his beard
Let fall; in this most pitiful estate
Forced like fools he scrabled on the gate.
From thence to Keilah, from Keilah he past
To Ziph, where he almost by Saul was lost:
At Engedi, where he revenge might have,
He spared Saul's life, enclosed in a cave:
In wilderness having provision small,
He was refused by churlish Nabal:
Of all Saul's house the worthy Jonathan
Of David's comforts only was the man:
David at last fled to the land of Gath,
Until God had pulled Saul away by death;
His death (which would have made another glad)
Made him to sigh and many tears to shed.
The lamentations of David for the death of Saul and Jonathan.
ALas my heart, said David, does disdain
These vile villains, who have unto us Slain
The Royal blood, the beauty of Israel;
How they are fallen beware in Gath to tell,
Or Askelon; let no man hear your voice,
Lest the daughters of Philistines rejoice.
O Gilboa, now cursed must thou be,
Let neither deaw nor rain fall down on thee:
For there thee shields of men armed with might,
Were cast away like men that could not fight.
There Saul fell down upon that cursed soil,
As though he had not been anoint with oil:
Saul and Jonathan, two men most mighty,
Your bow and sword returned not empty:
Saul and Jonathan in life were lovelie,
They in there death would not divided be:
The Eagles, Lions, both in strength and flight,
Were overcome by these two men of might.
O daughters worthy the name of Israel;
Let floods of tears now bubble out, and fall
For worthy Saul, whose purpose was still set,
To deck with gold and cloth you with scarlet:
It greeves my heart to think, or yet to tell
How these mighty did fall in the battle:
O Jonathan! I must most weep for thee,
For thou a friend and brother was to me.
Thy love to me was more then love of men,
Yea it did pass the best love of women.
Of David's Reign.
OF David's reign clearly I will record;
Who was faithful, beloved of the Lord,
When Saul was slain, and Jonathan was dead,
The Crown of Judah was on David's head
In Hebron set: Then he sent to Jabesh,
And thanked them for their loving kindness,
For taking down from the walls of Bethshan
The bodies of Saul and of Jonathan:
In this mean time, which did great troubles bring,
Abner anointed Ishbosheth as king:
Joab for David was then chief captain
Against Abner, who Saul's house did maintain:
In that army Abner began to say,
Let the young men now sport, and rise to play.
Content, said Joab, then twelve on each side
Arose to fight, each man another head
Caught in his hand, and then most cruelly
His sharp sword thrust in his brothers belly:
That day between Judah and Israel
Was first a skirmish and then a battle;
A battle great, last Abner in that fight
Was beaten sore, he saved himself by flight:
While he did fly, Asahel did pursue.
But Abner straited swift Asahel slew:
Though Abners army was in good array
Good David got the victory that day:
Though David was these great troubles among,
Yet by Gods arm he daily was made strong:
Stout Abner who did Ishbosheth defend,
Unto David revolted in the end;
After this man by Joabs treachery
Was slain, which moved David bitterly
To weep and mourn, while of it he did hear,
Last he himself mourning followed the biere:
Alas, said he, with sorrow and great doole,
Did valiant Abner die as does a fool?
This great breach now can be made up hardly,
The sons of Zerviah be too strong for me.
Then Baanah and Rechab did conspire,
To slay Ishbosheth for to win a hire;
These bloody men him stobbed on his bed,
And after that with haste to Hebron fled,
Where David was; they thought to have good speed,
When they to him offered Ishbosheths head:
As God lives, said David, who has me
Redeemed out of all adversity,
Ye shall be slain, by a most fearful death,
I shall you both take away from the earth;
Come out young men, cut off their hands and feet,
And hang them up, a judgment for them meet.
Then all Israel with one voice consenting,
Appointed David there captain and King:
When he was crowned of years he was thirty,
His reign continued the space of forty;
First seven in Judah, after he did bear
His fair Scepter for three and thirty year:
He took Jebus, who thought, as they were bold,
That blind and lame might surely keep their hold.
When the Philistines heard that he was King,
A great army against him they did bring,
At Baal-Perazim he them overthrewe,
With great slaughter these Philistines he slew;
Their idols there they left their hearts desire,
Which David took, and after burnt with fire:
Yet came again the Philistines like bees,
Whom David smot at the Mulberie trees:
When rest was come he prepared speedily,
To have Gods Ark lodged in his own city;
Of good duty he did neglect no part,
He did prepare for it a new made cart:
While it was driven by Ahio and Uzzah,
Great mirth by all was made unto Jovah:
Timbrels and harps, cymbals and psalterie
With Cornets sweet made pleasant melody:
While all was joy, behold anon a jar,
A fearful breach, which all their mirth did mar;
It was both sore and sudden with terror,
For God there smote Uzzah for his error:
The Levits shoulders for to bear the Arc
Ordained were, and not an oxen cart:
The Levits might, as the Lord did command,
It carry, but not touch it with their hand:
At this great breach good David sore afraid,
Both Arc and Cart in this journey he staide;
In Obed-Edoms house he did it place,
Which in three months it did fill with grace:
When David heard of such grace and goodness^
To his City he brought it with gladenesse;
He was so glad, that in all Isra's sight
He danced before the Lord with all his might:
To be more nimble in his dance to God
He was girded with a linen Ephod;
As they came near unto David's city,
Michal beheld all with a scorning eye:
When all was done, with gladness manifold,
David returned to bless his household:
Him Michal met, and scorningly did say,
A beast, a fool, a vain fellow this day
Thou have thee shown; this was her bitter word,
What reck? sad he, it was before the Lord:
Thy taunting speech does not sink in my mind,
The Lord me has preferred to thee and thine:
From holy zeal I will not now refile,
I purpose yet to be more base and vile:
Though thou me scorn, and speak so tauntinglie,
By men and maids I shall hence honored be.
After great wars when David had got rest,
To build a house for God he thought it best:
In house of Cedar, said he, I now dwell
But only Curtains are for the Eternell:
What shall I do? to Nathan did he say,
Go to, said Nathan, do without delay;
But God to Nathan the next night did tell,
That in an house as yet he would not dwell,
But afterward should come a man of fame,
Who richly should build an house for his name:
A son of David, whom he would correct,
If he should sin, but not as Saul reject:
When David heard Nathan from God thus say,
With heart and harp he did both praise and pray.
After this done by an courage divine,
He boldly went and smote the Philistine;
From them he took Metheg, and als Ammah,
For with him then was the great JEHOVAH.
After he had subdued the Philistine,
He smote Moab and measured with a line:
He after that smote the King of Zobah,
Being assisted by the great JOVAH.
After he strong routed the Syrian host,
Who came against him with great brags and boast:
King Toi hearing of his courage divine,
Sent to him Joram with a rich propine:
At last he did consecrate to the Lord,
Both spoil and presents conquered by his sword:
To Mephibosheth in his great distress
For Jonathan he show him great kindness.
After all this his servants courtesly,
He sent to Hanun comforters to be,
For Nahash death; but that fool could not sp^
He cut their coats, and made their buttocks bare;
This als he did more for a greater scoff
Of all their beards the half he shaved off:
These men for shame could not lift up their fac^
But on David redounded the disgrace:
When King Hanun did ponder well and think^
He said this fact in David's nose does stink:
Before he know, we will make an army,
To overthrow both him and his party:
But David wise did to his captains tell,
That all should be prepared for the Battle.
That day JEHOVAH (who is most mighty)
Gave unto David a great victory:
Both Syria and Ammon, with their might,
That day by Israel were put to the flight.
David as yet remaining in his rage,
Against Ammon, their town Rabbah did besie^
He sent Joab unto it for captain,
But he himself in great ease did remain
At fair Salem; while he did there abide,
It came to pass, about the evening tide,
He rose from bed, and to the roof he went,
Where he forgot the Lords commandment:
With foolish heart, and with a rolling eye,
He did perceive Bathshebahs great beauty:
Go to, said he, you woman to me bring,
Make haste, for what is unlawful for a King?
While David thus burning in lust did say,
Some vile servant was ready to obey:
She brought to bed, by the King was defiled
Anon after she found her self with child:
Then in all haste she sent unto the King,
To see how he might wisely hide that thing:
Behold, thought David, a scandale and blot
Will soon break forth, except I cloak this spot,
I see no way to hide from all the land
This secret sin, but by her own husband;
If he come home, and once but with her ly
My sin is hid, hence no man shall it try;
Some servant go, tell to Joab quickly
That he in haste send Uriah to me:
Then Joab soon him sent; when he was come,
With fair sweet words David made him welcome
How Joab did at him he did inquire,
If all did go after their hearts desire;
Then David said, I think it now most meet,
Thou go to thy house, and there wash thy feet;
But these fair words the man not caring for,
Abode without, and sleept at the Kings door:
After that David to Usiah said,
Man, with thy wife why did thou not abide?
Uriah said, The Arc, and Israel,
Joab and Judah right well I can tell
Abide in tents, during this time of strife,
And should I now go to sport with my wife?
I will not go, as thou live O King,
I will not go, I will not do such thing.
When David heard this, he found out a wile
With drunkenesse Uriah to beguile,
That being drunk the war he might forget,
And so go to his wife without all let:
But God above this thing did so provide,
At the Kings door this man did still abide.
When David saw that for ought he could say,
To touch his wife this poor man did delay;
Then wickedly to think he did begin,
How by his blood he might then cloak his sin:
Bring pen and ink, said he, to me right soon,
When he is dead who shall know what is done?
His strange letter to Joab this did tell,
Set this man in the front of the Battle:
When at skirmish in danger ye him see,
Retire with speed, that he may surely die:
This David wrote: He wanting Gods true fear,
Made Uriah his death with him to bear.
Then Captain Joab, too too ready bent;
To pleasure Kings in their commandment,
Took this poor man with cruel craft and slight,
And set him where most valiant foes did fight,
Where men of Rabbah fiercely to Battle
Came; there they fought, and there Uriah fell.
When David heard this, he said, All is well,
My secret sin no man shall now reveal:
After Bathshebah, by mutual accord,
Became his wife, which displeased the Lord.
Then God to him his Prophet Nathan sen
To let him know that God was miscontent:
By parable he did himself express,
A holy wile to make David confess
His filthy fact, and for it sore to weep,
Who whole nine months in his vile sin did sleep.
Then said Nathan, there was in one city
Two men, the one in richesse was mighty,
The other poor; the rich upon his ground
Had herds and flocks, wherein he did abound.
But the poor man (save an ewe lamb) had naught,
Which he in strait with his poor means had bought,
And nourished with diligence indeed,
With his children he daily did it feed;
Of his own cup it drank, and of his meat
Such as he had it welcome was to eat;
Yea in his bosom sweetly it did lie,
And was to him as daughter by and by.
But O behold! unto the rich man's Inn,
A traveiler came to abide therein;
The naughty rich man (his flocks for to spare)
Caught the poor lamb, it killed for to prepare
Meat for that man, for him it he did dress,
What think ye, Sir? should he not this redress*
Then David's wrath raging against the man,
Sore kindled was, he said unto Nathan,
As God lives, who lives most surely,
That beastly wretch for that vile fact shall die:
And unto that yet I will add this more,
The Lamb fourefold he shall quickly restore:
This I ordain, no man it shall repeal,
It seemly is that Kings for God have zeal.
Then unto David said Prophet Nathan;
Even thou thy self, O King, thou art the man,
Thou would for God seem to have zeal and love*
Thou have done that which here thou do reprove:
Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel,
I unto thee this hard message will tell:
Over Israel King I made thee for to be,
Out of Saul's hands I safe deliv'red thee,
Thy Masters house (with thy Masters Kingdom)
I gave to thee, his wives in thy bosom
I made to lie; yea, I most liberally
Both Isra'ls house and Judahs gave to thee;
If in thine eyes that too little had been,
I would moreover unto thee have given,
Even such and such things; great renown and fame,
Which I bestow on these that fear my name:
Why have thou been so foolish and unwise,
As Gods precepts thus to tread and despise,
Most wickedly to do evil in his sight
To seem godly, and yet to use such slight?
Poor Uriah the Hittite (in a word)
Thou cruelly have killed with the sword;
Thou first defiled, and now have tae'n to wife
His dear ewe-lamb, and reft him of his life:
Thou lives secure, as though no ill were done,
Thou have him slain with the sword of Amon.
Now after sin shall surely come the smart,
Hence from thine house the sword shall not depart
Because by blood, and vile adultery,
Two scandals great, thou have despised me:
Thus says the Lord, who is most righteous,
I will against thee out of thine house
Raise up much evil, I will before thine eyes
Even take thy wives; and give them for to please
Thy neighbor, who with them shall openly
Before the Sun in beastly manner lie:
These most vile sins in secret thou have done,
But this before all Israel and the sun
Shall be; see what shall be in end thy luck
When for such sins such sorrows thou shall truck
And so exchange, that for thy filthy lust
Thou shall still smart, until thou turn to dust:
Even as a bird, greev'd in a wierie gail,
Does lowering droop, and hang the wing an^ tail,
Even so shall thou the rest of all thy time
Perplexed be, for thy most bloody crime
Then David pierced through the very heart,
Of his folies began to feel the smart;
He was so lively touched for his sin,
That how to speak, or how his speech begin,
He doubted much, whiles this, whiles that did sound
Within his breast, his thoughts did him confound
At last with tears his mouth utt'red this word,
I have, alas, sinned against the Lord:
By my fleshly, and most unclean desire,
I like a swine have wallow'd in the mire:
I like a beast have not well understood
What guiltiness comes by shedding of blood:
Here in thy presence, to thy Holiness,
Against my self my sin I do confess:
These bloods, alas, are ever in presence,
They weigh down sore upon my conscience:
How can I hence before thee lift my face,
Who have professed, and yet practisd disgrace?
Against thee who me from the ewes did take,
And of a shepherd me a King did make?
Most justly may thy wrath, with loudest raps.
Even through my heart thrill roaring thunder claps.
But oh, O Lord, forget my heinous sin,
Take mercies kyes, and let my soul come in,
Though I have sinned, yet will I still believe,
That thou in mercy wilt my sins forgive.
Then Nathan said, The Lord thy sins surely
Has put away, fear not, thou shall not die.
From death eternal I will thee protect,
But justice wills that I thee correct:
Thy sin therefore I will visit in have,
Even blood for blood, for adultery incest:
Thou shall not fail to feel a greevous smart,
For from thine house the sword shall not depart:
Because thy sin has caused blasphemy,
Therefore thy Son shall now most surely die,
When Nathan was departed to his house
Then God the Lord who is most righteous,
Did strike the child with great and sore sickness,
Then David God besought in his goodness,
That he would not remove the child by death,
For this he fasting lay upon the earth;
The Elders came, and urged him to eat,
But he would not refresh himself with meat.
When it was told him that the child by death
Removed was, he quickly rose from the earth,
He washed himself, and changed his countenance,
To the Lords house he went with diligence,
From thence to his own house; there he sought meat,
They gave him bread, and he began to eat.
What thing is this? then did his servants say,
While thy child lived, thou did both fast and pray;
But when the child was known for to be dead,
Thou rose from earth with courage to eat bread?
Then answ'red he, While the child was alive,
I did then pray that God would let him live:
But now h'is dead, God would it so to be,
I know he will no more return to me:
After his death Bathshebah bare a son
To David* who did call him Solomon:
But Nathan sent from the great JEHOVAH,
Changed his name unto Jedidiah:
A man of peace, beloved of the Lord,
Of both the names the clear sense does afford.
In this mean time the great GOD JEHOVAH,
Remembered what had been done to Vriah:
Then his threatenings began to take effect,
Great plagues were sent David for to correct:
Amnon defiled his dear sister Tamar,
For this Absalom Amnons life did mar:
This man who did excel in great beauty,
In Hebron made a lewd conspiracy,
To slay David, both his father and King,
That after he upon his throne might reign;
He not ceasing from this ill work begun,
His fathers wives defiled before the Sun:
He wanting the true fear of th'Eternell,
Against his father fiercely went to battle.
At Bahurim that vile rogue Shimei,
Like a cur dog did rail most bitterly,
Crying, Come out, thou man of Belial,
A bloody man, thou shall now pay for all;
The Lord at last (who is most wise and good)
Has upon thee returned all the blood
Of King Saul's house, in whose stead than do reign;
Thy son shall rule, thou shall no more be King,
The LORD has plagued thee with shame and grief,
Behold thou art taken in thy mischief.
Then stout Abishai, son of Zerviah,
David's sister, not knowing that JOVAH
Made David smart, said, Why should this dog dead
So curse th King? I will take off his head:
He said to David, Let me go anon,
That for his fault I may fall him upon.
But David knowing the mind of JOVAH,
Said, What, with you the sons of Zerviah
Have I to do? Let him now curse he said,
For upon him the LORD this task has laid,
That he David should curse, who then shall say,
Wherefore have thou vile man so done this day?
Yea, more David unto Abishai said,
A greater grief upon my heart is laid,
Behold the son of my bowels is come
To seek my life, and to take my Kingdom;
How much more may this beastly Benjamite
Do what he does, with a despightfull sprite?
Seeing I am so wronged by my Son,
I pray you all to let this man alone:
Let him curse still, touch him not with you^ hand,
For what he says it is by GODS command;
It may be that God with compassion
Will look upon my great affliction,
And that he will (though he a space delay)
Requite me good for his cursing this day.
Then David's army ready with great might
Prepared themselves against Absalom to fight;
When David viewed the march of his army,
He said to Joab and Abishai,
Dear friends, I pray, deal gently with my Son,
Deal gently with the young man Absalom.
When this was said, their was a skirmish rude
By the two armies made in Ephraim wood,
Like a great wind, boistrous with stormy puff,
Men fought in spite with mutual counterbuff:
That day Joab with Judahs brave children
Of Israel slew down twenty thousand men:
The people was sore scatt'red in the wood,
Which did devour more people then the sword.
There Absalom a Rebel, and a Fool,
Among the rest was riding on a Mule;
By his long hair a branch caught him that day,
There he did hing when the Mule went away:
Then Joab with his three darts came anon,
And thurst them through the heart of Absalom.
Then Cushi came and cried, Tidings, O King,
To the great God now praises may thou sing,
The LORD of Hoasts in Battle most mighty
Of all thy foes has now avenged thee.
Then David troubled, said unto Cushi,
Is Absalom the young man in safety?
Then Cushi said, Let all thy foes indeed,
Be like Absalom who is surely dead.
When David heard this, wounded was his heart,
From sight of men quickly he did depart
To an high chamber, for to mourn alone
The tragic death of his dear Absolon:
His sorrow such was in his wounded heart,
That forced he was to weep and go apart,
With tears of grief doubling, My son, my son,
He wished his own death had saved Absalon.
For David's murder and adultery,
Shebah arose who was son Bichri,
A Benjamite, he with stern countenance
Most proudly said, Now what inheritance
Have we in David? Let us make a rent,
Let every man return unto his tent.
So Israel did with this son of Bichri,
But Judah clave to David heartily:
Then David said to valiant Amasa,
Assemble me the brave men of Judah:
Then he went out Captain of that army,
Jaob him met with heart full of envy
Cov'red with smiles; his right hand made a wound
Which all his bowels shed out to the ground;
Then Amasa in mids of the high way
Bathed in his blood did thus wallow that day.
This done, Joab pursued speedily
After Shebah, who was son of Bichri;
When Joab came to the city Abel
This Shebahs head was thrown down from the wall;
When these of Abel had performed this thing,
Joab in haste returned to the King,
When all his foes were round about suppressed,
To sing to GOD due praises he thought best.
Yet once again Gods wrath against Israel
In David's time upon this people fell;
He stirred by Satan, would know in his pride
How many men in his land did abide;
To Joab he gave this direction,
Who liked not the Kings commission,
But yet obeyed; the Kings word did prevail,
Therefore he went and numbered Israel;
In Israel were eight hundred thousand men,
Five hundred thousand Judah their brethren
In number were: Of all, as says Gods word,
Were thirteen hundred thousand that drew sword:
When this was done, then David's heart him smot,
Gods wrath therefore was shortly kindled hot;
Alas, O Lord, said he, now pity me,
For I confess I have done foolishly;
When David did arise in the morning,
The prophet Gad this word to him did bring,
Advise and choose one of these judgments three,
If seven years of famine shall trouble thee;
Or if thou will three months choose and take,
Before thy foes to flee and turn the back;
Or if thou will have this great patience,
Three days to hazard on the pestilence.
When David saw the Lords wrath thus appear,
He said to Gad, I am in a great fear;
Yet in Gods hand I pray thee let me fall,
For his mercies are over his works all:
Then JEHOVAH in wrath to strike began,
And killed of Israel seventy thousand men;
To Jerusalem then the Angel went
With sword in hand, but God he did repent,
Him of the evil; The Angel he did command
To sheath his sword, and so to stay h^s hand:
Then Gad from God to David thus did say,
Rear up an Altar to the Lord this day.
Let this Altar be set for JEHOVAH,
Where is the treshing floor of Araunah
Then David (as JEHOVAH did command)
Did buy the floor, and in Araunahs hand
He laid thirty shekels silver for price,
And there to God offered his sacrifice.
When this was done, and David was waxed old,
Absaloms brother ADONIjAH bold,
Helped by JOAB and ABIATHAR,
In his great pride made a most fearful jarre,
A goodly man he was, and fair in face,
But proud in Sprit a man of little grace,
David him spilt, he would not him displease,
Him to reprove at all times he did cease,
Puffed up by Joab in vain asp^ring,
He thought no more but surely to be King
After David; these three, Nathan, Zadok,
Benaiah for Solomon undertook
With Bathshebah; David without delay
Declard who should Isreal's Scepter sway
After his death; The man who shall alone,
Said he be King is my son Solomon
When time drew nigh that good David should die,
He Solomon charged most carefully;
I go, said he, the way of all the earth,
I must shortly walk in the path of death;
Be strong therefore, and show thy self a man,
And keep the charge of the Lord as thou can:
Walk in his ways, keep his commandments,
His testimonies, and als his judgments;
So shall thou prosper both by sea and land,
All shall go well that thou shall take in hand:
Remember well how Joab greeved me,
When he slew Abner with great treachery,
And Amasa, and how the blood of war
He shed in peace, when no cause was of jar,
And how he put the blood of Abner sweet
In the vile shoes that were upon his feet?
I know thou can thy self wisely behave,
Let not his hoare-head in peace go to grave:
Unto Barzillais sons show great kindness,
For they were kind to me in my distress.
Behold with thee the cursed Shimei,
Who cursed me sore in my calamity;
To him (humbled) I swear by the great Lord,
I will not put thee to death with the sword;
Because he was so fierce in my distress,
Therefore take heed thou hold him not guiltless
I know thou can thy self wisely behave
His hoary-head with blood bring to the grave:
So David with his fathers sleept softly,
And after buried was in his city.
The Use.
By David learn what after sin remains,
The fruits of sin are sorrows and great pains,
By David learn, if thou have gone astray,
To turn to God and walk in the right way.
By David learn to teach your children dear,
How in their time they should live in GODS fear:
Too many speak of David's filthy fall,
To shroud their sins, and so to make them small:
Too many to their vile lusts license give,
As though to rot were the way to revieve;
But few there be that weigh well in their heart,
How greatly David for his sins did smart.
SOLOMON. Peaceable, who is at peace with all men.
GODS Sprit begins to move my pen anon,
To draw some lines concerning Solomon;
A worthy man, most excellent in fame,
At home abroad; from peace he had his name:
Good Nathan (sent from the great JEHOVAH)
Changed his name unto Iedidiah:
To change this name the LORD did Nathan move,
To testify that he the child did love.
When on his throne he was by good JOVAH
Established, to him came Bathshebah
From Adonijah causer of much strife,
That he might have fair Abishag to wife:
Well well, Solomon said, I know that thing,
Ask also for him that he may be King:
Consider well, and hearken what I say,
Adonijah surely shall die this day.
Benaiah come, and hearken to my word,
Vain Adonijah now kill with the sword:
To Abiathar the Priest said the King,
I will not now these strokes upon thee bring
Which thou deserves, because thou had a part
In troublous times of my dear fathers smart;
Thou with my foes against me was too stout,
Therefore thou shall from thy place be thrust out
To poverty; thy race shall beggars be,
Thus was fulfilled Gods word against Eli.
When Ioab heard of all was past and done,
Unto Gods house in fear he fled right soon;
There, as the practice of some had him taught,
Of Gods altars the horns with hands he caught:
Then Benajah directed by the King
Went unto him with these few words, Saying,
Thus says the King, Thou Ioab thou must come forth,
It is not seemly for a man of worth
Unto the horns of Altars for to flee,
No not, said Ioab, here I mind to die:
Then Benajah brought the King word again,
That Ioab would at the Altar still remain:
Then said the King, Go fall upon him, fall,
For the two Captains famous in Israel
( Abner, Amasa men of dignity)
Did kill, and boutcher by his treachery;
Now let their blood return upon his head,
But peace shall be on David's house and seed:
Then Benaiah to Joab in distress
Came, and him killed, and in the wilderness
In his own house him buried; In short space
Captain Benaiah was put in his place.
After, because of Adonijah jarre,
Zadok was Priest in room of Abiathar:
Then for Shimei the King in all haste sent,
And gave to him this strait commandment,
To build and dwell in fair Salem anon,
But if, said he, thou pass the brook Kidron
To go abroad, Let this be known to thee,
None shall thee save, for thou shall surely die:
Three years after he forgetting this charge,
Did seek his servants with a license large;
He past thee brook, and the Kings charge forgot
Therefore with death stout Benaiah him smot:
Remember now, said the King to Shimei,
How thou my father reviled bitterly:
Thy wickedness shall come upon thine head,
But I and mine shall be blessed indeed.
After he thus had slain these men of strife,
King Pharos daughter he took for his wife:
He loved God, and with his heart him feared,
In Gibeon the Lord to him appeared
In dream by night: to him in great mercy
The Lord said, Ask what I shall do thee:
Then Solomon unto the Lord did say,
Great kindness have thou shown to me this day;
Thou have me chosen for Gods people King,
That I with wisdom may them rule, and reigne^
I am a child, who am but to begin,
I know not how to go out or come in:
Of my desirs this is the cheifest part,
That thou would give an understanding heart
To me thy servant, by thy grace made glade,
Whereby I may discern twixt good and bad.
When God this heard, he rested well content,
He said unto him at this Parliament,
Thou have not asked riches or long life,
Nor yet revenge against the men of strife
Thy foes; but have desired a wise heart,
To rule my people well in every part,
Therefore both riches and honor to thee
Will I now give, with wisdom in plenty;
If thou godly will walk in David's ways,
In great mercy I will lengthen thy days:
By him in sleep these things were heard and seen,
When he awoke, Behold it was a dream.
Then came two harlots, who before him stood,
Each one striving to make her cause seem good,
Behold O King, said one; We two women
In one house were deliv'red of children:
I bare a son; after it came to pass,
Three days after that she delivered was:
We were in house (as seemed) without danger,
For in the house with us was no stranger:
Behold, O King, her child dead in the night
By her ov'rlaid, then cunningly with flight
She rose from bed, and with great treachery
Came to my bed, and stall my son from me.
Alas, O King, What heart can this abide?
For my sweet son, this dead lump at my side
She laid; when I arose my son to feed
With my two breasts, behold he was cold dead:
Judge ye, O King, how great then was my smart,
When his cold lips did touch me near the heart;
But when the light more clearly let me see,
I saw I was jugled with treachery:
The dead child is hers, but the living mine,
Thou the whole matter as Judge now define.
But, Oh, the other, with tears in her eyes,
Said, All she says is full stuffed with lies:
Believe her not, she has a brazen brow,
She can right well false lies as truth avow;
Let not thine heart incline to take her part,
Though in her speech she has now the forestart;
A judge must know he has an ear and ear,
That after one the other he may hear.
Alas, O King, the Lords wisdom divine
Does clearly know the living son is mine.
The other said, I am not such a beast,
Another child to bring up on my breast;
If this my son were dead, and hers living,
I would not of him now make a changling;
His dry dead bones should dearer be to me,
Then her son living full of rare beauty.
While thus the two reasoned before the King,
The King did cry, a sword now to me bring;
When it was brought, the King said so and so
With sword the living child divide in two:
No man such doubts can now discuss by art.
Divide, divide, let each one have her part:
When this was said, and ready to be done,
The mothers bowels yerned upon her son;
My Lord the King, let not this sword now fall
Upon my child, but to her give it all:
Not said the other, the judge must now define,
Let it be cut, and so not mine nor thine.
Then said the King in words both wise and mild
This is the mother, give to her the child:
When all Israel this wise judgment did hear,
Their hearts were moved King Solomon to fear.
This man was great, and full of Majesty,
Great pleasure was his orders for to see:
Some were his Scribes, and others were Recorders,
Some ruled the Host, some were his Priests by orders,
Some officers, and some over the tribute
Were set; and also some did distribute,
Some Officers; twelve months in the year,
Twelve men did serve; each man a month entire
Provided for the King and his household,
The best victuals for uses manifold:
His house by day, as Gods word does reveal,
Spent fourscore ten measures of flower and meal;
Ten Oxen fat, and twenty from Pastures
Were for his house, each four and twenty hours;
An hundred Sheep, with Hearts and fallow Deer,
Roe-buck and Fowls for each day of the year
Appointed were; such was the Majesty,
Of Solomon, who was wise and mighty;
He for Charets had forty thousand stalls
Of Horses fair, and as the Scripture tells,
Twelve thousand Horsemen skillful and mighty,
Were for the glory of his Majesty:
In all his time the GOD of peace JOVAH,
Made peace from Dan, even to Beershebah:
To him GOD gave with great largeness of heart
Much understanding in all sorts of art;
He was more wise then Ethan and Chalcol,
Then Heman Darda the sons of Mahol:
Of godly proverbs three thousand he spoke,
A thousand and five songs were at their back:
Of trees he spoke even from the Cedars tall,
Unto the Hyssop that springs from the wall:
Of beasts, of fowls, he spoke of creeping things,
Of fishes als, whose virtue profit brings
To mortal men, whose health and nourriture,
Depend much on the secrets of nature:
Then great Monarchs from all the earth did come,
To get from him some lessons of wisdom.
Then Hiram hearing Solomon made King,
From Tire he sent men congratulating,
That David's Son was set upon the throne,
Of David's friends he was a special one.
Then Solomon to Hiram did declare,
How David could not in a time of war,
Build for the Lord a house of Majesty,
Adorned with rarest things of beauty;
But now, said he, on every side is rest,
Therefore to build for God I think it best;
From thee Hiram the Cedar and the Fir
Must now be had; thy servants must now stir
Their time and serve, for none can skill to hew
Timber like these of Sidon where they grew:
Then Hiram glad of Solomon's design,
Offered to do at his desire each thing;
My men, said he, these trees unto the sea
Shall bring, and my household furnished by thee
With food shall be; this shall be our bargain,
Unto the end all things shall so remain:
Then to Hiram he gave of victual good,
Twenty thousand measures of wheat for food
With twenty measures of oil pure each year,
These two did make a league for peace and war.
When this was done wise Solomon did then,
Raise a levy of thirty thousand men;
To Lebanon ten thousand were by course
Sent each month, to provide for Gods house;
To bear burdens threescore thousand and ten
He had; with these were fourscore thousand men,
Who on the mountains were for him hewers,
Besides other many chief officers:
Three thousand and three hundred did bear rule,
Over the rest who wrought with workmans tool;
They all busy, each man wrought in his course,
To cut, to hew, to square, to build Gods house;
The length thereof threescore, the breadth twenty,
Were of cubits, the height thereof thirty;
All things before were so wisely prepared,
That in building no sound of tool was heard.
Then was that house with pomp and Majesty
Adorned so, that it was fair to see:
The Oracle spangled with golden sparres,
Was like the heaven imboss'd with twinckli^^ stars:
For Gods presence it seemed to be a shrine,
From end to end, with glory it did shine.
The Ark was there of gold and shittim wood,
The Cherubins princely upon it stood:
This type of Heaven with beauties manifold,
From top to ground was burnished with gold:
From end to to end, from the base to seeling,
Seven years were spent in that painful buildin^
When all was finished, Solomon that day,
Both blessed the people and to God did pray.
Solomon's Prayer.
O God the Lord, who art most rich in grace,
Hearken all prayers made toward the place;
If any man against his neighbor trespass,
Then hear in heaven that justice may have place;
If by their foes Israel oppressed be,
Then hear in Heaven, and help them speedily:
When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain
Then hear in Heaven, a helper then remain:
If thou shall scourge with pest blasting, mildew,
Then hear in heaven when Israel to thee sue:
What ever plague be in thy peoples heart,
Then hear in Heaven and help them in their smart.
When poor sinners shall here thee come unto,
Then hear in Heaven, frankly forgive and do:
If strangers come for here to seek thy grace,
Then hear in heaven thy pleasant dwelling place:
If thy people here against their foes compleane,
Then hear in heaven, and their good cause maintain;
If sinners cry repenting from their heart,
Then hear in heaven and ease them of their smart.
Thus Solomon this precious hour did spend,
^n blessing, praying, so he made an end.
When this was done, in the dedication
Of Gods house, he made a great oblation,
Of Oxen great, twenty thousand and two,
An hundred thousand and twenty also,
Of sheep he offered at this great service,
Which was a great and royal sacrifice.
The Queen of Sheba hearing of his name,
Which through the earth was exalted with fame,
Came with great pomp hard questions to move,
That she thereby his great wisdom might prove:
But he all doubts that then were in her heart
Resolved clearly before she did depart:
When she his glory did right well consider,
Her sprite within did fail her altogether:
When she revived was from her wondering sown,
She high extolled Solomon's great wisdom.
Now do I know, said she, most perfectly,
The truth of these things which I heard of thee:
I heard great things of thy most glorious name,
But thy presence does far surpass thy fame:
Most happy are thy men and most happy
Are thy servants that may thee hear daily;
Blessed be God, the great God eternal,
Who has thee made the Prince of Israel:
Then Shebas Queen before she took her leave,
To him rich stones, spices with gold did give;
And he again gave unto her richly,
Great things of worth most precious and coastly;
He was enriched with blessings manifold;
He made two hundred targets of fine gold;
Three hundred shields of beaten gold he made,
Which in his house of Lebanon were laid;
He also made a Throne of yvorie,
And ov'rlaid it with fine gold most richly;
Six golden Lions on each side were set,
A Lion placed was at every step:
His drinking vessels were all of pure gold,
He was enriched with blessings manifold:
In wealth all Kings on earth he did surmount,
In his time silver was in no account;
Silver like stones, Cedars like Sycomore
Were base and vile, yea so were more and more.
But oh alas, what could this wise man move,
Women of Moab and Edom to love?
With Pharaohs daughter, women of Ammon,
He had with Hittits, women of Sidon;
Women also he had, concerning such
In marriage the Lord forbade to touch,
Seven hundred wives, three hundred concubins
He had for pleasure; but oh by this means,
When he was old his wisdom did depart,
These wives from God did turn away his heart:
The true worship of God he did reject,
His heart was not like his fathers perfect;
As though he had not learned in Gods school,
With goddesses and gods he played the fool:
He serve d Ashtoreth and also Milcom;
These were the chief idols of Solomon
Whith Chemos, for which he made an high place
With great contempt before the Temples face;
This also was the rage of Solomon,
He served Molech th'idol of Ammon:
He wise in youth, did in his old folly
Follow his wives in their idolatry.
For this cause God in wrath did him despise,
As unthankful unto whom clearly twice
He had appeared; I will, said God, surely
For thy great sins rend the Kingdom from thee;
Because thy father me sought in his ways,
This great rent I will not make in thy days;
But after thee thy Son shall feel the smart,
And yet I will for David's sake a part
Of the Kingdom of Israel sure reserve,
That in his house a lamp I may preserve.
Then God to punish his idolatry,
Stirred up Hadad for an adversary
To Solomon; another called Rezon,
A great army of men gathered anon:
Hadad and Jeroboam stout also,
Unto Solomon did procure much woe:
At last he di'd after he had forty
Years lived, in peace and great tranquillity.
Papists do doubt and make a question,
If Solomon obtained salvation;
That which them moves unto this hard sentence,
The Scriptures speak not of his repentance:
But let such know his repentance was true,
As his Sermons Ecclesiastes show.
2 Samuel 7.14. Yea, God himself unto his father dear
This promise made, which takes away all fear:
If this thy Son commit iniquity,
With rods and strips I will him most sharply
Correct, and chasten, for to vex his heart,
But my mercy shall not from him depart,
As from King Saul, who forsaking my path,
From his Kingdom was cast away in wrath.

The Use.
Let him that would shun all idolatry,
Fly far from such that with it spotted be:
Where is the man that should not fear to fall,
When he thinks what befell this Cedar tall?
This is the best when man has gone astray,
With Solomon to return to Gods way.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. Of the Kings of Judah.
PROVE. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be
stablished in righteousness.


1. Rehoboam. 2. Abijah. 3. Asa. 4. Jehoshaphat. 5. Jehoram. 6. Ahaziah. 7.
Joash. 8. Amaziah. 9. Uzziah, or Azaria. 10. Jotham. 11. Ahaz. 12. Hezekiah.
13. Manasseh. 14. Amon. 15. Josiah. 16. Jehoachaz. 17. Eliakim, called by Necho
Jehojakim. 18. Jehojachin. 19. Mattaniah, called by Nebuchadnezzar, Zedekiah.

A Prayer.
O Thou great GOD called I AM THAT I AM,
Of all my verse be thou the chiefest theme;
What is my heart but a confused Mass,
A wild Chaos, until thy sprite a space
There move it self, and upon this gulf brood
Thoughts far beyond the reach of flesh and blood:
O drench my heart in Zions sacred springs,
And lead my hand to write of Judahs Kings;
And of their life and death such uses make,
That all thereby may good example take
Their vice to shun, to follow their virtue,
To learn thereby our lives for to renew.
O sprite of grace, come with thy gentle gales,
Maugre envy with thy breath fill my sails;
Now spread my Canvas, and als guide the Helm,
And smooth the Seas, lest that they overwhelm
My brettle Boat, which now among great Kings
Is come to search their good and bad doings.
Come help me Lord, and make no more delay,
The tide for none (but thee alone) does stay.
1. REHOBOAM. Enlargeing or delaying the people.
THen all Israel conveened in Shechem,
To choose with haste their King Rehoboam:
There the people with one mouth to him said,
Thy dead father great burdens on us laid;
If thou our yoke will make light and easy,
With one consent we thy servants will be:
Then said the King, From me three days depart,
Then shall ye know the purpose of mine heart:
Then said the King unto the old and wise,
Consider well, give counsel and advise,
What to this people think ye best to say?
Ye men of age, now tell me I you pray;
Then these grave men to speak so did begin,
This people now with fair words thou must win,
If thou to them a servant be this day,
To thee good subjects they will he for ay.
After this said, he turned to the youth,
To hear what counsel should come from their mouth.
What? what? said they, what? what is this saying?
Darre proud people speak thus unto their King?
Of thy dear father, how darre they complain
Who now is dead? to hear such words disdain;
Frown with thy brow, speak unto them roughly,
That thy least finger thicker now shall be
Then were his loins; Tell what is in thine heart,
In speech most plain, and so let them depart.
This young counsel the young King pleased best,
To him the third day they came all in have;
Now let us hear, said they, thy good answer,
Be plain with us, no longer it defer.
Then with a frown, as youth did him direct,
He them beheld, and did their suit reject:
What? what? said he, what means your saying?
How darre ye thus speak to your Lord and King?
Of my father how darre ye thus complain,
Who is now dead? your speeches I disdain:
The least finger that is in my body,
Then all his loins were, thicker hence shall be.
When Israel heard this answer from the King,
Then with a noise they all had this, saying,
What? what portion, or what inheritance
Have we in David? or what maintenance
Owe we to him? now David in this rent,
See to thine house: O Israel to your tent.
This matter was from the great JEHOVAH,
As was foretold by Prophet Ahijah:
When he his clothes into twelve pieces rent,
Then Jeroboam of that new garment
Got pieces ten, the Prophet kept two,
Which did declare that the rent should be so;
That Jeroboam ten tribs should command,
But two as Lamps, for David's house should stand,
In this great grudge the King Rehoboam,
Sent unto them his servant Adoram
A man for tribut; but with staff and stones,
They in their great wrath did crush all his bones:
When this young King the peoples rage did see,
He in his Charet speedily did flee;
So ten tribs did rebel without delay,
Against the house of David to this day,
In this man's time, King of Egypt Shishak,
All the treasures of gold away did take,
Which Solomon had richly made of gold,
In the Temple with carvings manifold:
The shields of gold, with rich treasures that day,
Shishak the King did carry all away.
Thus was the Temple spoiled by Shishak,
Who gold and treasures all away did take:
Behold how soon golds glory does decay,
See how rich treasures glaunce and pass away:
This man whose Mother was of Moab land,
Seventeene years King in Salem did command.
The Use.
By this young King, more young in wit then age,
Let all Kings learn to shun a peoples rage:
If they would wisely manage their affairs,
They must regard the counsel of gray hairs.
2. ABIJAH. My father God.
Here Abijah his fathers Son in sin,
As he did end ill, so did he begin:
He did not that, which Gods Word did direct,
His heart with God the Lord was not perfect:
When war arose he unto the Lord sought,
Against Jeroboam he a Battle fought;
Four hundred thousand were with Abijah,
Eight hundred thousand were against Judah,
For Jeroboam; In the fields were then
An army of twelve hundred thousand men.
Then Abijah, standing on Zemaraim,
Which is a part of fair mount Ephraim:
With a loud voice cried unto Israel,
Why come ye forth against me to Battle?
What God has joined, why go ye now to seve^
For the whole land the Lord has given for ever
To David's house, without a let or halt,
This was made sure by Covenant of salt:
Yet Jeroboam, Solomon's servant,
Does what he can to break this Covenant;
Gathred unto him are men of Belial,
Who are now come to provoke to Battle:
And now ye think the Kingdom to vvithstand,
Which should remain sure in David's sons hand;
With you is a great multitude of men,
With golden Calves of false Jeroboam:
Have ye not cast out the Priests of the Lord,
That for vile gain ye might with one accord,
Make unto you Priests that would take in hand,
To serve strange gods that were from other Lands?
But as for us, the Lord with us will be,
Who have with us the Priests, sons of Levi,
Who morn and even wait upon all service
Enjoined by GOD, the daily sacrifice:
We with our heart keep the charge of the Lord.
But ye have him all left with one accord:
Behold how God is with us for Captain,
His Priests with Trumpets to sound an alarm
Against you; Wherefore now with one accord
Conveene ye thus, to fight against the Lord?
Leave off, leave off, proceed no more this way,
For your army shall not prosper this day.
But Jeroboam free of fear and doubt,
Judahs army did compass all about:
When Judah saw them compassed in Battle,
They with strong prayers cried to the Eternal:
The Priests began with their Trumpets to sound,
Judah did shout, Which made the Echos rebound:
Then God arose to show himself by might,
He Jeroboam put unto the flight:
The flight was fierce, bloody was the Battle,
Five hundred thousand that day to Israel
Were killed; But Judah prevailed by and by,
Because with faith, they to the Lord did cry:
Thus Jeroboam curbed in his ways,
Recov'red not strength in Abijahs days:
But Abijah waxed more and more mighty,
With fourteen wives, he begat sons twenty:
Because he was not perfect in his ways,
Of his Kingdom the Lord shortened the days:
He in his ways walked not uprightly,
Therefore his great pomp lasted but years three:
The Use.
Ill Kings from Thrones by a successive sway,
Like chafe by vvind shall soon be driven away.
3. ASAH. Healing.
BEhold a King most glorious like the Sun,
Whose end was good, whose life was w^ begun;
A man of health is he who strives to please
The Lord, and does what is good in his eyes;
This worthy King with holy jealousy,
Brake down the Altars of Idolatry
Set up for strange gods; he the high places,
With groves cut down, and brake the images:
With great zeal he commanded all Judah,
To do the Law and turn unto Jovah;
Because the Lords Law he did not forget,
The Kingdom was long before him quiet.
At last ZERAH, the Ethiopian,
Came with an host of a thousand thousand:
ASAH the King thus troubled very sore,
Conveen'd five hundred thousand and fourscore:
Thus fifteen hundred thousand men that day,
With fourscore thousand in Battle array
Were set; Then Asah cried unto the Lord,
That in that strait his help he would afford;
Help us, O Lord; help us, O Lord, said he,
Thou can well help with few or with many;
Against this host we now go in thy name,
Make now our foes to turn their back with shame;
When God this heard, he rose in anger hot,
And with his sword this huge army he smot:
His wrath like waters, wheesing out did foil
The proud Zerah; then Judah got their spoil.
When this was done the Prophet Azariah,
Was sent from God for to meet King Asah;
God is with you, said he, while ye with him,
His love with you most ready to confirm,
If ye forsake him, he will forsake you now,
If ye seek him, he will be found of you:
Be strong therefore, Gods service much regard,
For God the Lord your good work shall rewa^d.
When Asa heard these words, he took courage,
The idol gods he did destroy with rage:
From Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon,
Unto Asa, many did flock anon.
Then with one mind they were glade and content,
To make with GOD the LORD a Covenant,
By God they swear in a most sol mne oath,
That man, woman, great, small, should die the death,
Who should refuse the living God to seek,
Who to his Saints is merciful and meek:
Then all the people with their whole desire
Did seek the Lord, as Asa did require;
They swear to God with shouting and Trumpets,
With singing voice, and also with Cornets:
They seeking God, believed, and did not doubt,
And he unto them gave rest round about:
When this was done this worthy King Asah,
From being Queen his mother Maachah
Removed, because vain idols she did love,
She had set up an idol in a grove:
This idol he did cut, and stamp upon,
With fire he burnt it at the brook Kidron.
When this was done Ba'sha King of Israel,
Did build Ramah to make Asah to fall;
But Asah quickly, sent to Benhadad
For help, which in the Lords eyes did seem bad:
For this doing, the Prophet Hanani,
Him told that he had done most foolishly:
What had thou, said he, to do with Syria,
To hire their help? Did not the great Jovah
Make thee subdue the Ethiopian host,
With the Lubims, who in their pride did bo^st?
Gods eyes throughout the earth run to and ^ro,
To manifest his great might so and so:
He is ready with great power to smite,
The foes of these who toward him perfect
Are in their heart: Because in this right far
Thou have failed, hence fo^th thou shall have war.
When Asa heard these words of Hanani,
A fiery wrath did kindle his fury;
Take this villain, said he, this B^lials son,
Now bind him fast, and cast him in prison:
Moreover he some people in distress,
Without mercy severely did oppress;
In his old age diseased in his feet,
To Medecins to seek he thought more meet,
Then to the Lord, who health and happiness
Has ready for his servants in distress:
Though diverse faults be seen in this man's ways,
Yet with the Lord his heart was all his days
Perfect, as the first book of Kings does tell,
Written by the scrib of God Eternell:
He swayed the Scepter years one and forty;
Though Kings be gods, yet as men they must die.
The Use.
Our brightest life is like the Moon with spot,
Where is the life that is without a blot?
4. JEHOSHAPHAT. The judgment of the Lord.
NOw fill mine heart LORD with thy glowing flame,
Raise up my Spirit and verses in me frame
Worthy the praise of good Jehoshaphat,
Whom good Asa, King of Judah begat:
As in his name, as Scriptures do record,
So in his life the judgment of the LORD
Unto all men most clearly did app^are:
That man is wise whose heart the LORD does fear.
This godly King did serve GOD in his days,
Because he walked fast in the first ways
Of David; he to Baalim not sought,
But idols worship with great might down brought;
He willing did what GOD did him command,
Therefore the Kingdom stable in his hand
Was made by GOD; then Judah to him brought,
Most rich presents, which they had dearly bought:
His heart encouraged was in the Lords way,
High places, groves, with zeal he took away:
When he was rich and in honor highly,
With Ahab he did join affinity,
With him to go to battle he was moved,
For which he was deservedly reproved
By good Jehu, the son of Hanani,
Who said, to him, Should thou help the ungodlie?
What did thou mean, to be by thought or word,
In league or love with them that hate the Lord?
Consider well, and now take heed and see,
For wrath from God is posting upon thee,
Thee to correct, but not thee to confound,
Because in thee good things the Lord has found:
The idol groves thou have taken away,
Thy heart thou have prepar d to seek always
The mighty Lord in great sincerity,
Therefore the Lord will not depart from thee.
To the Judges he gave commandment,
To take good heed, because in the judgment
The Lord was with them: Do now what ye can,
Said he to them, for ye judge not for man,
But for the Lord, If him ye do rgard,
He shall not fail you richly to reward;
Judge uprightly, beware of shifts and drifts
Respect not persons, reject bribs and gifts
Which blind the eye; but let Gods holy fear
Be upon you that so ye may forbear
To do like these who with Horse leaches sing,
To their clients, these doubled words, Bring bring;
This counsel that the Judges from him gat,
Was worthy of the name of Joshaphat,
Which signifies Gods judgment most clearly,
In my judgment by way of prophecy.
After this done with zeal, behold anon
Against Josaphat, Moab, and Ammon
A multitude, great from beyond the Sea
In Hazazon-Tamar called Engedi
Conveen'd, to fight in a bloody Battle
Against Josaphat who to th'Eternell
Had his refuge; while he was thus aghast,
He sought the Lord and did proclaim a fast:
Then all Judah with one heart did accord,
From all cities to go and seek the Lord:
Good Josaphat troubled with fear that day,
Before Judah thus to the Lord did say,
Art thou not God in heaven, who rulest all?
Art thou not he who is God eternal?
Have thou not strength and great might in thine hand?
Where are the forces that can thee withstand?
Art thou not God who did before Israel,
Drive out thy foes by thine arm eternal,
And gav'st their lands from a most loving mind,
Unto the seed of Abraham thy frind?
Thou art a Lord both strong and righteous,
Thou promised when men unto thine house
Should come to thee in great trouble and fear,
That with great speed thou would them help and hear:
And now behold, both Moab, and Ammon,
With these of Seir, mind thy Judah anon
For to invade, and their lands to make bare,
Though at thy will we did them save and spare.
And now, O Lord, consider and regard,
How with despite as foes they us revvard;
Our forces faint, Our foes are most mighty;
But this comforts; Our eyes are upon thee.
Then Judah all with wives and children dear.
Before the Lord stood in a trembling fear.
Then on Jahaziel son of Zechariah,
A divine Sprite came down from Jehovah,
Who said, All Judah and Josaphat King,
Hear now glade tidings which I to you bring
From great Jovah, who said you need (...) fear,
For I for you shall fight in all this war.
When King and people had these comfor^ found,
They bowed their heads with face unto (...) ground;
The Levites high their singing voice did raise,
They stood all up the living God to praise;
They rose up early in the morning light,
To go to battle in their armor bright;
Now as they went Josaphat stood, and said,
Hear me, O Judah, now believe in God,
Believe so, that no doubt make you once whisper,
Believe his Prophets, so shall ye all prosper.
When this was said, the singers with gladness
Did praise the beauty of his holiness.
Then God most mighty in Battle arose,
Who set ambushments round about his foes;
He made each one another for to slay,
The Lord himself the battle fought that day:
Gods arm it wrought, and not fortune or hap,
^ot one of all their army did escape;
after that God had given them thus the foil,
^is people were enricht with their great spoil;
^ost rare jewels among the dead that day
^hey found, yea more then they could bear away.
When this was done, with Trumpets, and with Harps,
They came to Salem with great joy of hearts,
And thanked God, the great God Eternell,
Who had strongly their foes foiled in Battle:
Thus the realm was quiet without shout
Of war; to them God gave rest round about:
But after this Josaphat did purloine,
In that he did with Ahaziah join,
Who was a King perverse in Israel,
Even Ahabs Son hated of The Eternal:
Who awlesse, lawless, against the Lord did rage,
With him he ships made for a long voyage
To Tarshish; But the Prophet Dodavah
Came to Josaphat from the great JOVAH;
Because, said he, thou have fallen in such slips,
The LORD himself has broken all thy ships.
When he began he was of age thirty
And five, thereafter he reigned twenty
And five; Of all he lived years threescore,
A Godly Prince, who did Gods law restore.
The Use.
If Princes would have peace, and foil the foes,
Let them in fear to serve the Lord rejoice:
If Princes would enjoy prosperity,
Let them abhor all profane company.
5. JEHORAM. High LORD.
HIgh LORD in name, but base in carriage,
For he his brethren all slew in his rage;
In great mischief and strife he spent his life,
For he had Ahabs daughter to his wife.
Then came to him writings from Elijah,
Who was the Prophet of the great JOVAH,
Because, said he, with vile idolatry,
Thou have thy self defiled filthilie,
Because with fury, rage, and great disdain,
Most cruelly thou have thy brethren slain;
Who in Gods ways had their heart more perfit^
Then thine; therefore with sore plagues I wi^ smite
Both thee and thine; A plague without all doubt,
shall from thy belly thy bowels thrust out;
^ight years he did reign; then great plagues conspired
^is death; he died, but was by none desired.
The Use.
Take heed, O Kings, make not your men to groan,
If ye would have men your death to bemone:
^hese who in lewdness both end and begin,
shall bear the scars of wounds made by their sin.
6. AHAZIAH. Possession of God.
^LL mothers Son, son of the wicked race
(...) Of ill Ahab, nothing he did possess
(...) Gods grace, but contemning the Eternell,
^e walked after the wicked counsel
^f Ahabs house, which did him sore annoy,
^or him with it stout Jehu did destroy:
^e went with Joram for to take his part
against Jehu, for which he felt the smart:
For sins against God he could not forbear,
Therefore his Kingdom lasted but a year.
The Use.
Let all men learn that sin is not a sport,
It ends our days and cuts our honors sho^
Let these here learn who are made Kings grace,
To choose their wives of good and godly race.
7. JOASH. The fire of the Lord.
When Athaliah did see that her Son
King Ahaziah was by Jehu slain,
She rose in rage, her whole force to employ,
The Royal race of Judah to destroy:
When she in fury cruel did conspire
Against Judah, then Joash from that fire
By God was saved; his Father Sister dear,
Jehoshabeath did hid him in that fear:
This good woman wife of Jehojadah,
Was appointed by the great Jehovah
To save this Prince in these times of great fea^
This Priest him hid the space of whole six year^
Jehojadah at last did him forth bring,
By force of arms he Crowned and made him King.
When Athaliah heard how all was done,
She rent her clothes, and said, Treason, treason:
When this was said, up stood Jehojadah,
The Priest of the Almighty JEHOVAH,
Captains, said he, have this vile woman forth
Of Gods house ranges, though she by birth
A Kings daughter now take her in disdain,
Without the temple let her now be slain:
When all things ord'red were in this estate,
They slew her at th'entring of the horse gate;
Then all were moved by Jehojadah,
To make a Covenant with great JEHOVAH;
Then the people went with all diligence
To Baals house, for to exact vengeance;
They brake it down, his Altars they down threw
With Images; Mattan the Priest they slew:
They offered burnt offerings, and Psalms did sing,
That done, upon a Throne they set the King:
Of seven years old before he was a man
Of strength and wit, Joash to rule began:
He was a man well set for Jehovah,
During the days of good Jehojadah;
He in great zeal made all to contribut,
Great means which he at last did distribut,
For to prepare the house of great Jovah,
Which had been spoiled by vile Athaliah;
Who to break down Gods house did well allo^
The spoil she did on Baalim bestow.
After this Hazael, King of Syria
Took Gath; to the City of Jehovah,
He set his face to compass it in round,
To make a breach, and bring it to the ground;
But Joash fearing such forces that day,
Gave him the treasurs; so he went away:
As long as Joash had Jehojadah,
He uprightly did walk with Jehovah,
But after this most worthy man was dead,
Who for his worth, with the Kings was buried,
Joash the King, with Princes of Judah,
Did leave the house of the great Jehovah;
Unto their sins they were most foolish slaves,
Who like heathens did serve idols and groves.
Yet he to them his holy Prophets sent,
To teach them his divine commandment;
Against them they did testify sincere,
But they unto their words would not give ear*
Then the good sprit of the great Jehovah,
Came upon the Prophet Zechariah,
Jehojadahs son, who stood up and said,
To the people, Thus says the Almighty God,
Why do ye thus the Lords precepts transgress
Why sin ye still stoutly without regresse?
^ee cannot prosper; because ye have now
^orsaken God, he has forsaken you:
^hen wicked men commanded by the King,
^t Zechariah stones with spite did fling:
^his man of God they slew with one accord
^n the fair court of the house of the Lord;
^hus Joash king, killing Zechariah,
^orgot the kindness of Jehojadah;
^e not remembering what that man had done
^or him in strait, but after killed his son;
When he was dyeing this was his desire,
lord look upon it, and also require.
After this fact near the end of the year,
^oash with his men were troubled with fear,
^he Syrian army in number but small,
upon his host with great fierceness did fall,
Who against Joash did execute judgment,
^or his transgressing Gods commandment.
After this King Joash in great sickness
Was left, because in blood he did transgress:
^is own servants who at his table fed
^ere, cruelly did kill him on his bed:
^ne of these servants had this name Zabad,
^he others name was called Jehozabad;
^f seven years old a child by Jehovah
^ade King, he reigned forty years in Judah:
Because Gods Prophet he slew cruelly,
God suffered not him in Kings graves to lie,
The Use.
He who for good with an unthanfull heart
Shall render ill, ill never shall depart
From his house; A murdrer though a gre^ King,
The Lord with blood unto the grave shall brin^
8. AMAZIAH. The strength of the Lord.
THis Amaziah as the history
Declares, did reign years nine and twen^
That he did good we have in holy write,
But in Gods sight his heart was not perfect:
These men he slew who had his father slain,
But by Gods statutes spared their children:
Against Edom he three hundred thousand,
Of Judahs men had ready at command;
A hundred thousand he of Israel,
Did hire with him to go unto Battle;
But from the Lord a man came to the King,
Who him discharged Isreal's men to bring
Unto his host, for God with Israel,
Said he, is not, The Lord in this battle
Will not thee help; If thou them with thee take
The Lord he shall both thee and thine forsake:
Then Amaziah unto him did say,
An hundred talents, these men have this day
Received from me; Who shall these now restore?
The Lord, said he, will render thee much more:
Then Amaziah did command these men,
Who not of Judah, but Irsa'ls children
To turn back soon, and to their home return,
For which much wrath in their bosom did burn:
Then this King stout with Judahs men alone,
Ten thousand smot of the men of Edom;
Ten thousand als this King did leave alive,
Whom he by valor did carry captive;
These he did bring to the top of a rock,
He threw them down, their bones in pieces brok:
But Fie, fie, fie, this most unthankful King,
Their idol gods unto Judah did brng:
He bowed before these things that had no sense,
And als unto them he did burn incense:
Wherefore the anger of the great Jovah,
Sore kindled was against Amaziah;
He sent to him a Prophet for to tell,
That by idols he had greev'd the Eternell;
Why have thou, said he, sought of other lands,
The gods which their own people from th^^ hands
Could not rescue? Where is respect and fear?
Then said the King, I charge thee to forbear;
To speak such words thou base man have no plac^
Be silent lest they smite thee on the face.
Well, said the Prophet, at thy commandeme^
I shall forbear, and shall remain silent,
For now I know the great God Eternell,
Thee will destroy for hateing his counsel.
Then to Joash King second from Jehu,
This Amaziah with great brags said now,
Come let us see each other in the face
That we may fight, for peace has no more plac^
Then Joash scorned this Kings great folly,
As a Thistle a cartell to a tree
Should send, whose strength under a wild bea^ foot,
Is trodden down, in top and als in root:
Lo thou have smitten Seir Edoms great host,
Thus thy proud heart thee lifts up to boast;
Abide at home, cease from such vain folly,
Why should thou fall and als Judah with thee
But Amaziah these words would not hear,
To go to Battle he would not forbear:
It came of God, most wise and most mighty,
Him to give over unto his enemy;
because after his foes he had ov'rcome,
^e sought after the idols of Edom.
^hus these two Kings did fight in good array,
^ut Amaziah was routed that day:
^n that Battle he was taken alive,
^or all his boast he was Joash captive,
^his Joash spoiled the house of great Jovah,
and carried all unto Samariah.
^ast Amaziah by conspiracy,
^as slain in Lachish with great felonnie.
The Use.
Though Kings be strong and in Battle mighty,
^hey can not stand that love idolatry.
9. UZZIA. The strength of the Lord: called also, AZARIAH. The help of the Lord.
FRom help and strength this great King had his name,
For God by help and strength did spread his fa^
As long as he sincerely sought the Lord,
His greatest foes could not resist his sword:
God helped him against the Philistines.
Against the Arabians and the Mehumins;
His name did spread to Egypt gloriously,
For he in God was strong exceedingly:
He fortified Salem with towers and walls,
With great charges he dug many wells,
An army of three hundred thousand men,
He did maintain his country to defend;
But he made strong, forgot Gods instruction,
His heart was puffed up to his destruction,
For like a Priest by a fearful offense,
He went to Temple for to burn incense;
But Azariah the Priest with courage,
Withstood the King in his folly and rage;
Cease, cease, said he, cease from this great fence,
It is for Priests to offer Gods incense;
Go out, go soon out of this sanctuary,
D^shonour thou shall have by this folly:
Then Uzzia a censer in his hand
Took, to burn incense against the Lords command;
Then the great Lord him smote in the forehead
With leprosy, then all the Priests with speed
Did thrust him out, and he himself to fly
Made have, because the Lord with leprosy
Him smitten had; for thus going astray
He lived leprous until his dying day:
All his lifetime to his great grief and smart,
He dwelt a leper privately apart.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn in their pride and folly,
Not to meddle with Jovahs Sanctuary.
10. JOTHAM. Fatherless.
JOtham during his fathers leprosy,
Did in Judah as King the Scepter sway;
He gave his mind to do that which was right,
And pleasant in the great Eternells sight;
He builded much; After in war anon
By force of arms he subdued strong Ammon;
He prospered well, he was in virtues rare,
For he his ways before God did prepare:
Twenty five years he was when he began
To reign, sixteen he did reign in Salem.
Thus di'd Jotham of age one and forty,
And buried was in David's fair city.
The Use.
The King that would wisely his Scepter sway,
Before the Lord let him prepare his way.
11 AHAZ. Possessing.
THis vain Ahaz who understood no right,
Did that which was most wicked in GOD sight;
He not regarding in heart th'Eternell,
Did walk in the ill ways of Israel:
He images set up for Baalim,
Likewise in Hinnon incense was by him,
Burnt with his children in a fearful fire,
To grieve GOD with Heathen he did conspire:
He was most bent unto idolatry,
On the high hills, and under the green tree:
Because he did contemn the LORDS command
The LORD him gave into his enemies hand;
The Syrians first, after these of Israel
Him overthrew; thus fearful was his fall.
Then valiant Pekah from the Syrian land
Slew in Judah of men six score thousand:
Also Israel (in a fearful way)
Two hundred thousand captives took away:
Likewise Philistines with profane Edom
Against the land in diverse places come;
Thus the great GOD who to vengeance is slow
For Ahaz sins brought Judahs kingdom low:
This wicked man when he was vexed sore,
With divilish spite did sin yet more and more:
The Scriptures plainly point at his trespass,
While they thus say, This is that King Ahaz.
This fool unto the false gods sacrificed
Of Damascus which had him sore displeased:
Because, said he, the gods of Syria
Has helped them, they shall be my Jovah:
The Temple doors he shut up in fury,
And gave himself to vile idolatry,
Both in Salem, and also in Judah
He set idols in contempt of Jovah:
Thus this ill man in wickedness did die,
Therefore with Kings they would not him bury.
The Use.
Kings who their land stain with idolatry
Shall often meet with woe and misery.
12. HEZEKIAH. The strength of the LORD.
THis godly Son of most wicked Ahaz
Did fear the LORD, he most religious was;
This noble King, a most worthy Divine,
In Judah land did reign years twenty nine;
In his first year the doors of GODS house fair
He opned, and the breaches did repair;
The Priests and Levits, which seemed to him m^ meet,
He together gathered to the East street:
Hear me, said he, Now your selves sanctify,
All filthiness from the holy place carry:
Our ill fathers have most vilely trespassed,
The devil them has with wicked wiles co^^passed;
They have forsaken God, and gone astray,
Their faces from him they have turned away,
The Temple doors they have shut up about,
The clearest lamps of God they have put out;
Unto the Lord they have burnt no incense,
They have not cared what manner of offense
They did to him, therefore Gods heavy wrath
Came on Judah, treading that wicked path,
Because they scornd the Lords commandment,
^o trouble, hissing, and astonishment
^e them deliv'red; for hating his word
^ur dear fathers have fallen by the sword;
And which greatly augments our misery;
^ur sons, daughters are in captivity.
^ow let us make a covenant I pray
^ith God the Lord, that he may turn away
from his fierce wrath; cast off all negligence,
^or ye are set to serve, and burn incense.
Then the Levits were gathered carefully
To cleanse GODS house from all impurity:
All th'uncleannesse within GODS house anon
They cary'd out, and cast it in Kidron.
When they had cleansed things of every sort,
To Hezekiah they made the report;
Then this good King in great zeal rose early,
And gathered the Rulers of the city:
This good King and they all with one accord
Went up in haste to the house of the LORD:
Diverse offerings they offered to JOVAH,
For the kingdom, the temple and Judah:
Levits with cymbals, harps, and psalterie,
The Priests with trumpets made sweet melody:
The people did worship, and singers sing,
Trumpets founded so that the house did ring;
This did continue GOD did it commend,
Till the burnt offering was brought to an end;
When the Trumpets most holy consecration,
Was finished, the people great oblation,
Did offer gladely with a most free heart,
The Priests, the Levites, each man did his part;
So the service of GODS house pleasantly,
Was then in order set most suddenly:
Thus Hezekiah after all repar'd,
Rejoiced in God who had his men prepared,
Then this good King by Gods divine counsel
Ordained Judah and also Israel:
To keep passover for great JEHOVAH,
At Salem from Dan to Beershebah;
The posts in have with letters from the King,
Went through all parts for to declare this thing:
The sum was this that all men then shou^ mourn,
For their trespass and to the Lord return:
If ye, wrote he, turn to this Lord of grace
In wrath he will not from you turn his face:
But Ephraim and Manasse forlorn,
Isreal's men, did laugh these posts to scorn;
Yet of Aser and of Manasse came
Diverse, to worship the LORD at Salem:
The hand of God in Judah was mighty,
To give them one heart with sincerity,
To celebrat that great Jehovahs feast,
^hey all obeyed the greatest and the least;
^ut in Israel numbers foolishly,
^^d been careless themselves to sanctify;
^^t this good King did pray for them anon,
^^e good Lord, said he, pardon every one,
^ho does his own heart prepare sinceerely,
though according to Jovahs Sanctuary
^e not cleansed; This the Lord did please,
^ho healed the people of their sore desease;
^ea more Israel without all weariness,
^id keep the feast that day with great gladness,
^hole fourteen days that feast which was holy
^bserved, was in Salem Gods city:
^he King and Princes did give much cattle
^o the people of Judah and Israel;
^nce Solomon the son of David King,
^as not in Salem ever seen such thing:
Then all the Priests and the Levits arose,
and blessed the people both with heart and voice;
^hey prayed to GOD with words filled with grace,
their prayer came unto Gods dwelling place:
When this was done by these of both nation,
^hey all intended a reformation;
^hey cut the groves, the images they brake,
^he Altars and high places they did sack;
That done, Israel in a good motion,
Returned quickly to their possession.
Then the Priests course the King with dilige^^
Ordered, and als provided maintenance,
For that great work that preachers of the wo^^
Might have courage in the Law of the Lord;
The people willing corn, wine, oil holy,
With tiths of all did bring abundantly.
Thus Hezekiah did throughout Judah:
Good, right, and truth before the great Jovah
He wrought; such was his great sincerity,
The Lord he sought with all his heart truly.
Then Sen'cherib King of Assyria,
With great forces entered into Judah;
When Hezekiah thus perceived them
Resolved to fight against Jerusalem,
Then he this counsel from his Princes took,
Who the waters of fountain and of brook
Willed him to stop, and so their host to scatt^^
Why should our foes, said they, with whol^^ water
Refreshed be? So for his own defense
Both darts and shields he made in aboundan^^
The broken walls up to the towers he reared,
In David's city he Millo repaired:
Captains of war he gathered to Salem,
And thus he spoke comfortably to them,
Be strong, let not Senacheribs army,
^ith their great number your hearts terrify;
^ith him the army of flesh, the Eternell
(...) to help us and to fight our Battle.
After he had these comforts on them pressed,
^e people all upon his words did rest:
^nnacherib after this sent some men,
^om fair Lachish unto Jerusalem.
Vile Rabshakeh thus railed in his pride,
^hereon trust ye? Into what hole abide
^ill ye? Now try and als well examine,
(...) ye will die by thirst and sore famine:
^t not your King trusting in his JOVAH
^eceive you; Is not he Hezekiah,
^ho Gods Altars and high places destroyed
^ath, that one Altar in Salem employed
Might be? Be wise, regard not his command,
^ow ye not what unto all peoples land
My Master has done; What Gods of Nations,
^^uld save their people in such vexations?
All these gods folks I overthrew at length,
^ho is your God that I should fear his strength?
therefore in time consider and percieve,
Lest that your King with vain words f^^ deceive.
The people all in silence and in doole,
Did hear these words of that blasphem^^ fool.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkijah,
Reported all unto Hezekiah,
Who hearing this was in great grief and smart,
He rent his clothes and with his clothes h^^ heart:
Unto Esaias the Prophet he did send,
Men in sackcloth his answer to attend.
These men unto the Prophet said truly
Of trouble, rebuke, and of blasphemy
This is a day; the children to the birth
Are come, but there is no strength to bring forth
Of Rabshakeh it may be God will hear,
The railing word which he void of all fear,
Sent from his Master King of Assyria,
Did vomit out against the Lord Jovah.
O man of God thy duty does thee bind.
To pray for these that are now left behind.
When these words came unto the Prophets ear,
He said let not your good Master now fear;
God in the Heavens most bright in Majesty
Has clearly heard that vile rogues blasphemy.
^ehold, says God, I in my wrath at last
upon that man will send a fearful blast
^f terror great, he shall a rumor hear,
^Vhich shall his bones and bowels shake with fear;
^ome he shall go, trust and believe my word,
^n his own land he shall fall by the sword.
After Rabshakeh had against JOVAH
^hus railed, he unto the strong Libnah
^id go, where his Master in brags most stout
^ith his army encamped round about.
This King again sent to Hezekiah
^en to revile with other words JOVAH.
Let not, said they, O Hezekiah King,
^hy God deceive thee with this vain saying,
^am the Lord the mighty God Jovah,
(...) shall you save from all Assyriah.
^ast thou not heard and understood clearly,
^ow these great Kings have wasted utterly
All lands? None could escape their mighty hand,
^^d now shall thou before their forces stand?
^^zan, Haran, Kezeph and Thelasar,
^^th strong Eden, they have subdued by war.
Where are the Kings of Hena and Ivah
Of Hamath, Arpad? Tell Hezekijah,
Where is the King of Sepharvaim strong?
Who could them match their gods or K^^ among?
When this vile letter full of blasphemy
Was read, the King to Gods house speedily
Went up; to sum the matter in a word,
That vile letter he spread before the Lord:
Then Hezekiah made to the Eternell
This prayer, saying, O God of Israel,
Which now dwell between the Cherubines
Thou art the Lord alone of all Kingdoms;
With great mercy, O Lord, bow down the ear,
And with regard my humble suit now hear
Consider how with words sharp like a good,
They have the name pierced of the living Go^
Most true it is and easy to enquire,
That they false gods have burnt into a fire
For these gods no gods were, but work hands,
Dead vvood, and stone are gods of other la^^
Therefore, O Lord, we thee beseech humbly,
Save us now from that tyrants cruelty:
that all the Kingdoms of the earth anon,
May know that thou the great God art alone.
Then the Lords Prophet faithful Isaiah,
^ent to the King even good Hezekiah
^his comfort, Thus says the God of Israel,
^hen in thy prayer thou did to me call,
^hee did hear; Concerning him that day,
^his is the word that God the Lord did say,
^he virgin, the dear daughter of Zion,
^^hee has despised and laughed to scorn;
^^rusalem has now most tauntingly
^ith great disdain shaken her head at thee:
(...) beastly man! whom have thou now nicknamed?
^ou know not whom thou have so blasphemed;
^ainst whom thy voice and eyes now can thou tell
^st thou lift up? Even the God of Israel;
(...) thy messengers both in thought and word,
^^sphemously thou have reproch'd the Lord;
(...) people dear thou have boasted with threats,
^em to destroy with numbers of charets;
^ou have boasted that thou their Cedars tall
Shall cut until they to the ground shall fall
Because thou have of men great assistance,
Thou have in number put thy confidence:
When before thee many did melt like snow
Not thou, but I these men did overthrow:
Thou overcame neither by Spear or Shiel^
But I them made like the grass of the fiel^
Like the green herb or grass on the house t^
Or corn blasted before it be grown up:
But thy abode and coming against me
Thy pride and rage is known most certainly
Because thy tumults to mine ears come up.
Therefore into thy proud nose now a hook
I will put, als my bridle in thy lips,
Thy vain glory shall suffer an Eclipse:
Though now thou boast and brag with fury,
Thou shall turn back and flee most s^ fully:
But as for Judah it shall surely spring,
And pleasant fruits in plenty shall forth
Gods foes the truth of this saying shall f^^
The Lord of hosts shall do it by his zeal
As for that vile, and vain blasphemous
Against this City he shall do nothing
^t may it hurt, no arrow he shall shut,
^em to him shall not be for a But:
^en this is done, ye shall Jehovah thank,
^'gainst Salem no man shall cast a bank:
^n home again with shame I will now send
(...) my right hand this City shall defend.
that same night the mighty Eternell,
(...) in all haste send an armed Angel,
^o in one night slew at the Lords command,
hundred fourscore and als five thousand;
^en they arose in the morning early,
^old like doung their dead bodies did lie:
Then this vain King who scorned the Eternell,
^urn'd with shame in Niniveh to dwell;
(...) shortly after it thus came to pass,
^t God him punished for his vile trespass;
Nisrochs house, which ended all the strife,
(...) own two sons bereaved him of his life.
Some days after the good King Hezekiah
^s sick; to him the Prophet Isaiah
^me with this message, Thou shall surely die,
^ow thine house in order speedily.
Then he his face turned unto the wall,
^d thus he said unto the Eternal:
Remember, Lord, how I have before thee
Walked in truth and great sincerity:
Remember now in my great grief and smart,
How I thee have served with a perfect heart
Remember, Lord, how I with all my might
Have done that which is pleasant in thy sigh^
While thus he spoke and added speeches m^
Good Hezekiah did weep very sore;
The LORD him heard, and his Prophet c^ back,
And sent him for this lease of life to make;
Tell Hezekiah, that worthy Captain,
That he yet King fifeteene years shall remain^
Thy prayer heard have I and seen thy tears,
I will t^ee heal, therefore lay down thy fear^
Yea more to thee this promise I will make,
I will this city save for mine own sake:
Then the Prophet in this time full of toil,
A lump of figs laid upon the Kings boil;
So for the well of Judahs common wealth,
The King by GOD restored was to health.
The King unto the Prophet thus did say,
How shall I know that I on the third day
Shall to GODS house go, and his service see?
What shall the sign be? now tell thou to me
Well said the Prophet, choice now as please,
(...) the Sun back or foreward ten degrees
shall go; For to go forevvard said the King
^o see shadows, it is no weighty thing,
^et the Lord now, for his great mercies sake,
Make the shadovv by his might to turn back:
^hen the Prophet as he desired said,
and GOD him heard according as he prayed.
^he Sun went back with his swift sweating Horse
^ull ten degrees as one that has remorse:
When on his journey going like the wind,
^e him bethinks his purse is left behind;
^hen back again he wheels most speedily,
^hus went the Sun, as men that day might see:
^ials went false and, Forests shadows black,
Wondered to see themselves turn and go back.
Then Berodach-Baladan of Babel
^ing, sent to him letters thus for to tell
How glade he was of all his peace and wealth,
and that he was fully restored to health.
But Hezekiah in pride of his heart
Did that shortly which did procure his smart;
Unto these men of Babel foolishly
His silver, gold, spices, armor did he
Then show; yea, all the treasures that he had,
^n his vain pride before their eyes he laid.
Then came again the Prophet Isaiah,
With this new message from the great Jovah;
He said to them, what said these men to thee?
What Is in mine house, said he, I let them see:
Among my treasures all there is nothing,
Which these men sent from the great Bab^ King,
Have not now seen; Well, well, said Isaiah,
Hear a message from the great JEHOVAH;
All thy treasures gathered unto this day,
By Babels men shall be cari'd away:
Thy dearest sons that shall issue from thee,
In Babels court they base Eunuchs shall be.
Then to the Prophet said Hezekiah,
Good is the word that thou brings from Jovah*
I look for mercy from my God always,
Let peace and truth he stable in my days.
Last Hezekiah who all his life did fear.
The Lord his God, sleept with his fathers dear*
In the chiefest sepulcher of David,
This worthy King was with honor buried.
The Song of Hezekiah.
IN cutting off of my short days,
I said I shall now go
Unto the grave; I am deprived
of my few years also:
2 I said, I shall not see the Lord
in the Land of living,
I shall behold man no more with
these that have here dwelling:
3 Mine age is parted and removed
among trouble and strife
Like sheepheards tents, I have cut off
like a weaver my life.
He with sickness will cut me off,
what ever I pretend;
From day even unto night will thou
of me soon make an end;
4 I reckned till morning that as
a Lion so surely
He will my bones break; Of me thou will make an end speedy:
5 Like a poor cran in great distress
or a troubled swallow
So did I chatter; I did mourn
as does the simple dove:
My eyes do fail with looking up,
and very dimmed be*
O Lord I am oppressed sore,
now undertake for me:
6 What shall I say? He spoken has,
and als has done no less:
I shall go softly all my years
in my souls bitterness.
7 In all these things is the life of
my Sprite; they that believe
Do live by them; Recover me,
and so make me to live.
8 Behold for a desired peace
I had great bitterness:
But thou in love have saved me from
the pit of rottenesse;
For thou who of afflicted men
do ever notice take:
In thy great mercy all my sins
have cast behind thy back.
9 For grave cannot thee praise, and death
can not celebrate thee;
They that go to the pit can not
hope for thy truth surely.
10 The living, the living he shall,
praise thee, as I this day;
The fathers shall to their children
make known thy truth always.
11 The Lord was ready me to save,
therefore we with accord
To the string'd instruments will sing
in the house of the Lord.
The Use.
^f Kings shall serve the Lord with all their heart,
^n great trouble the Lord shall take their part:
But this the Lord of heaven can not abide,
that hearts of Kings be lifted up with pride.
13. MANASSEH. Forgetting.
JOseph comforted by Gods great mercy,
Which made him quite forget his misery,
From such forgetting he his first born Son
Called Manasseh, so for such reason,
^t may be this King, at first got his name,
He in his life was stained with sin and shame;
^ike heathen men, void of Gods fear and grace,
He in folly did build up the high place,
Which his father commanded to destroy,
He did it build with cheerfulness and joy;
As though a God had not been in Israel,
He madly reared up Altars for Baal;
He made a grove and with much folly driven,
He gave worship unto the host of Heaven;
Observing times and using enchantments
He did despise the Lords commandments:
He als provoking the Lord unto ire,
Made his own sons to pass through burning fi^
He dealt with wizards, and sin worthy death
He did, which did God much provoke to wra^
In his folly worthy the name of rage,
He set in Gods house a most vile image:
This man practisde more vile abominations,
Then were done by profane heathen nations:
Who by the force of the great Eternell
Destroyed were before his Israel:
At last the Lord, full of compassions,
Abhorred such abominations.
Because this man, said he, has plaide fool,
Defiling Judah with his vile idol,
Behold I bring such troubles and such fears
Which shall cause tingle all the hearers ear^
^r such doings wherein is no relish,
^rusalem now wiped (like a dish)
^all be; In red war their foes shall them foil,
^hey shall to them become a prey and spoil,
^r since from Egypt I brought them the way
that was most right, they ever went astray.
Manasseh more in his fury most rude,
(...) Salem did shed much innocent blood:
While Manasseh did not regard Gods check,
^rong Babels captain took him by the neck
among the thorns, and him with fetters bound,
^o the Lord did this vile man much confound:
Yet when he was in great affliction,
^e ran to God with supplication,
before the Lord he much humbled his heart,
^e prayed to God who heard him in his smart,
and helped him, and brought him back again
from Babel for in Salem to remain.
Then Manasseh did by experience
^ost surely know that God was his defense;
^hen was his heart inflamed with gods love,
^e all strange gods with idols did remove;
^ll strange Altars he brake down speedily
^ith zeal, and cast them out of the city:
^t last this King who to God gracious
^eturned, was buried in his own house.
The Use.
Let sinners learn for no sin to despair;
No sin there is, but God can it repair:
For witchcraft, blood, and vile idolatry,
Manasseh humble did obtain mercy.
14. AMON. Faithful, true.
THis wicked man of two and twenty year
Began to reign; He void of all Gods fe^^
Did reign two years; God made his Kingdom short,
Because he made of wickedness a sport:
He with Manassch in his ways was bad,
But did not with Manasseh turn to God.
At last against this King unrighteous
His servants rose, and slew him in his house:
After this done, the people all in ire
Did kill these men who did his death conspir^^
The Use.
Let Kings beware of sin to make a sport,
For many sins do cut their honors short:
^^t parents learn to fear to go astray,
^^r their children often follow their way:
^^t Subjects learn to fear their Kings to kill,
^^r other shall not fail their blood to spill.
15. JOSIAH. The fire of the Lord.
BEhold Josiah; consider a part,
The fire of Zeal clear burning in his heart:
^^ght years he was when he upon the Throne
^^gan to sit; he reigned thirty one:
^^e did with God most constantly abide,
^^om David's ways he turned not aside:
^hen he was come to eighteen years of age
^ough young in years, he was both grave and sage:
He sent scribe Shaphan to Priest Hilkijah,
^^at the silver for the house of JOVAH
^^th'red at doors, as GODS word did command,
^ight be shortly put in the workemans hand:
Then to Shaphan said the Priest Hilkijah,
^ave now found in the house of JOVAH
^ods Law-book; Then Shaphan took it with speed;
And with great joy and gladness it did read.
After Shaphan this book did with him bring,
And it in haste did read before the King:
When he the words heard of that Testament,
For greef and sorrow the King his clothes rent:
Then diverse men by him were set to look,
To try right soon the meaning of the Book:
A great wrath, said he, is against us kindled,
For our fathers against God have rebelled:
Then at the last the good Priest Hilkijah,
With others went to Prophetess Huldah;
This woman in a College at Salem
Did dwell; with wisdom she said unto them;
Thus says the great Lord God of Israel
Unto the man that sent you, ye shall tell,
Behold I will bring ill upon this place,
The Inhabitants I will greatly disgrace;
All the plagues I will send without remeed
Which good Josiah in that Book did read;
My wrath against this place shall kindled be,
Because of their most vile idolatry;
But go and tell the good King Josiah,
This message from the mighty Lord Jovah,
Because thou had a trembling tender heart,
And for such sins did often weep apart,
Because when I did speak against this place;
Thou rent thy clothes with tears drenching thy face,
^hold thou shall now this great comf^rt have,
(...) peace thou shall be gathered to thy grave;
^ough days be coming full of miseries,
^^ore they come death shall close up thine eyes;
^^ter these men heard such words of comfort,
^ey to the King the message did report.
Then Josiah with the men of Judah
^ent up unto the house of great Jovah,
^th him there were the Priests and Prophets all,
^ere als the people were both great and small;
(...) them he read the Lords book every word,
^ich had been found in the house of the Lord:
^n this good King who Gods word understood
(...) serve the Lord hard by a pillar stood:
(...) with the people all with one accord,
^d make a Covenant there before the Lord:
Gods presence all ill ways they forsook,
^^lling to do according to that Book:
Then the King in the name of great Jovah
^mmanded soon the high Priest Hilkijah,
^^th other keepers whether great or small,
^ring quickly the vessels made for Ba'l
(...) for the grove, out of Gods Temple fair,
That he GODS house might cleanse and al^ pair:
When this was done in the field of Kidron,
He in great zeal there them did burn each on^
And to fulfull the word of th'Eternell,
The ashes he did carry to Bethel;
Vile Priests there were who with idolatry
Defiled had both Temple and City:
To Sun, Moon, Planets and als to Baal
They sacrificed, and to Heavens host all:
These vile men, he desiring God to please,
In his great zeal put down, and made to ce^^
The grove also which was idolatrous,
The King with speed brought out from the L^^ house,
At Kidron he it burnt and stamped small
To small powder, and cast that powder all
Upon the graves of these who foolishly
Had been defiled with idolatry.
The Sodomite^ far from Gods house he dr^^
And these who did weave hangings for the g^^
He with the rest Topheth defiled anon,
Which was in the vile valley of Hinnon,
So that no man thereafter durst aspire
To make his Son for Molech pass the fire.
Thus he persisting as he had begun,
Took the horses which were given to the Su^^
By Kings of Judah, which made Priests to mourn,
The Suns Charets he in a fire did burn.
He did beat down and break most speedily,
The Altars which in vile idolatie,
Manasseh, Ahaz, when they God forsook,
Did build; the dust thereof in the base Brook
Of Kidron he did cast; High places vile
^or Ashtoreth, Chemosh, Milcome, defile
^e did; That bad Abomination,
^ard at mount Olives, mount of corruption,
Which Solomon did build in Israel,
Whereby he much provoked th'Eternell,
^as by Josiah destroyed speedily,
^ch was his zeal for the great Gods glory.
This good King als the images brake then
^e cut the groves and with the bones of men
^^e places filled; the Altar at Bethel,
(...) Jeroboam made who moved Israel
(...) sin, he brake down, it to dust he drove,
^^d stamped it small, and also burnt the grove.
The King turning him self at last did spy,
^vers Sepulchers wherein dead did ly:
^ke up these bones, said he, in his great ire,
^^on this Altar burn them all with fire:
^w do for God who does my crown uphold,
^^ this long since by God has been foretold:
Then said the King, come now, and tell to me,
What title is among the graves I see?
The men of that city said to the King,
Here lies the Prophet which message did b^^
That great Jovah, the God of Israel,
Should do such things to the Altar of Bethel:
Then said the King, this man whom GOD love,
Let him alone, see no man his bones move.
Likewise this Prince sent from the great VAH,
Reformed the cities of Samariah.
Their Priests he slew with his sword in his ir^^
And on their Altars their bones burnt with fir^^
Then King and people all with one accor^^
A great Passover did keep to the Lord,
The like whereof before had never been
Among the Kings, or yet the Judges seen;
Yet more, the workers with familiar sprits,
With wizards, idols, and all idle rits
He spied out, and wholly put away,
Thus he Gods house reformed without delay^
Unto the Lord this King just and upright
With all his heart, with all his soul and might
Turned himself, in great zeal more and more
He had no match, after or yet before:
But oh alas, the great wrath of Jovah,
Could not be turned from the sins of Judah;
Manasses sins both cruel and unkind,
^ld not go out of great Jehovahs mind.
(...) will, said God, withdraw now my great love
^m all Judah, them now I will remove
(...) of my sight, as I did to Israel,
Salem als like judgments I will tell;
(...) wrath against it here plainly I declare,
^ugh I had said my name shall ay be there.
^hen good Josiah King after all this
^ne with his men to fight at Carchemish,
^inst Necho of Egypt land the King,
^o did with him a mighty army bring;
^ho to him Embasadors did send,
^ell him that he came not for this end,
^hurt Josiah either near or far,
(...) others at whom he intended war:
^d has him sent, therefore now let him pass:
(...) afterward thou smart for thy trespass:
^hou Necho in this Gods war annoy,
Lord is with him who shall thee destroy.
^ut for all this Josiah with Necho
^olv'd to fight him near to Megiddo:
^n he disguised came to that Battle,
Archers shot and there Josiah fell:
^n said the King, sore wounded I this day
Battle am, have me therefore away:
^^e desired so they this wounded King
From the battle unto Salem did bring
In a Charet; There this good man he died,
There he also was with his fathers buried.
After his death all these that did sojourne
In Judah, did for him lament and mourn;
Yea for his death the Prophet Jeremie,
With words of grief lamented bitterly.
The Use.
Behold, O Kings, who mind to please Jova^
Of zeal a pattern was this good Josiah:
This man by halfes did not idolatry
Reform, but purged all most perfectly:
High places, groaves, images, idols vain
Hill Altars he did cut, break, and disdain
16. JEHOACHAZ. The possession of God.
JEhoachaz Son of good Josiah,
Was after him crowned King of Judah;
He feared not God, he in Jehovahs sight,
Followed the trace of ways that were not r^
Him Phar'oh Necho King of Egypt land
Took, and with fetters strong at Riblah band
We years of age he was and als twenty,
^en he was crowned and reigned but months three.
The Use.
Kings here learn not in their sins to sport
^angers God, who cuts their honors short.
17 ELIAKIM. called also, JEHOJAKIM. GOD ariseing.
After that Necho King of Egypt land,
Deposed had by strong and mighty hand
^oachaz, he sent for Eliakim,
^ose name he changed into Jehojakim;
^s was the second son of Josiah,
^o by Necho was made King of Judah:
(...) age this King was eighteen years and seven
^^en he began; he reigned but eleven;
(...) feared not God, he in JEHOVAHS sight
^low'd the trace of ways that were not right:
^n his days Nebuchanezzar the King
(...) Babylon, Jehojakim did bring
^o bondage; in this uncouth slaverie,
He was a servant the space of years three:
But afterward, as the history does tell,
He turned and against him did rebel:
But for the sins of the Kings of Judah
He got no help from the great JEHOVAH:
For the great sins done by their wicked hands,
Against Judah the Lord sent troops and bands
From Syria, from Moab, and Ammon,
And also from the land of Babylon;
These he did send against Judah to fight,
For to remove Judah out of his sight;
For the great sins by King Manasse done,
The Lord in wrath would not the land pardon
Last by Nebuchanezzar he was found,
Who straightly him in most strong fetters bound
To Babylon to carry him that day
He thought surely, but died by the way.
Of his great faults we have the history
In twenty two chapter of Jeremie;
He was a man full of unrighteousness,
His eyes and heart were but for covetousness
Oppression, blood, and also violence,
Did most vilely stain the hands of that Prince
Therefore concerning King Jehojakim,
Thus said the LORD, None shall lament for (...)
This at the last shall surely come to pass,
He shall with shame be buried like an Ass;
^e shall be drawn and cast forth filthily,
^eyond the gates of Salem Gods city.
The Use.
^et Kings beer learn for God their life to spend,
A sinful life brings to a shameful end.
18 JEHOJACHIN. The preparation, or strength of GOD.
THis wicked man called Jehojachin,
Followed the trace of ill Jehojakim
^is foolish father: He had these names three,
^ehojachin, Jechonias, als he
^honias was called; When he began
^o reign he was of eighteen years a man,
In his time Nebuchadnezzar quickly
from Babylon did send a great army:
^erusalem, in great fury and rage,
^hese men of Babel stoutly did besiege;
^t last the King Jehojachin came out
^ith mother, servants, princes him about;
^hus this ill man in the eighth year of his reign,
Was taken captive by great Babels King:
Who with his rascals most unrighteous,
Did carry thence the treasures of GODS house
He also rageing in wrongs manifold,
Cut in pieces the rich vessels of gold,
Which had been made by wise King So^^^mon,
In Gods Temple of these he left not one:
Ten thousand captives from Judah that day,
With crafts-men, smithes, he carried all away
The poorer sort by his pride and disdain
Were only suffered at home to remain:
Jehojachin with Mother, Wives that day,
And officers were carried all away.
Against this ill man the Prophet Jeremie,
Gods fearful judgments declared plainly;
As I live, said the Lord, though Coniah
Son of Jehojakim King of Judah,
Were near and dear as signet on the hand,
Yet would I pluck him thence, so that to stand
Before my face this vain and naughty fool
Shall not have strength, like a broken idol:
O Earth, earth, earth, give ear and hear (...) word,
For I that speaks am the Almighty Lord;
Write him chidelesse, a man of no virtue,
This Jechoniah shall not have issue;
T^is is enacted qy the great Jovah,
^e of his feed shall be King in Judah,
The Use.
Kings follow their wicked fathers trace,
^e Lord them shall pluck shortly from their place,
^he King who with Coniah plays the fool,
(...) in Gods eyes like a broken idol.
19. MATTANIAH. The gift of GOD.
He after was by Nebuchanezzar King of Babylon, called, ZEDEKIAH, The
righteousness of GOD.
THis was the third son of good Josiah,
(...) Jehojachins Uncle; the great JOVAH
^e did contemn; he humbled not his heart,
^hen Jeremie from God spoke him apart:
Against Babels King he falsely did rebel,
Who made him swear by the great Eternell;
Gods word to him gives this reprofe and chec^
His heart he hardened and stiffned his neck;
Therefore in the ninth year of his ill reign,
God sent to him the host of Babels King,
Who against Salem pitched with courage stout
And built strong forts against it round about:
Two years that seege continued hardly,
At last famine prevailed in the city:
It to defend, in it was no more might,
The men of war from it did flee by night:
The King himself, who stood out long in vain,
At last did flee by the way of the plain;
Him the Caldees pursued with feet of Roe,
And overtooke him near to Jericho;
Him they did bring unto the fair Riblah,
There they judgment upon Zedekiah
Did give; yea his sons there before his face
These villains slew without mercy or grace:
When that was done, in their most cruel spo^
That this poor King should have no more co^^fort
By sight of eyes, they this devise did find,
To put his eyes out, and so make him blind;
Because against the Lord he did trespass,
His foes him bound with strong fetters of brass^
The ninteenth year of Nebuchanezzar,
Nebuzaradan his captain from far
^me with great forces, he with rage and ire
^ds house and the Kings palace burnt with fire:
^is Babylonish army strong and stout
^ake down the walls of Salem round about:
^us that city with all that there was found,
^ith GODS house als was brought unto the ground:
^ebuzaradan in Judah left then
^^ely vine dressers, and poor husband men.
^e men of might with all their wealth that day
^^t of their land were carried all away.
The Use.
^hen King or people thus live void of grace,
^he Lord shall them soon remove from their place:
^ho want Gods help, their foes shall soon them foil,
^^em captives take, and their rich treasures spoil:
^r Judahs sins the mighty Lord that day
^ng, Crown, Scepter, and carried all away:
^r their trespass he would not them defend,
^^t of their Kingdom made a tragic end:
Behold how this people of great renown,
Were spoiled at last of Liberties and Crown:
They angered God, they did his Prophets scorn,
Therefore no Jevv did sit on Judahs Throne.
Let Kings here learn who are set in high place,
That Kingdoms stand not by men's strength, but grace:
Let Kings here learn how for their sin anon
God brings to naught their Scepter, Crown, and Throne.
THE GARDEN OF ZION.
Of the Kings of Israel. 1. Jeroboam: 2. Nadab: 3. Baasha: 4. Elah: 5. Zimri:
6. Omri: 7. Ahab: 8. Ahaziah. 9. Joram: 10. Jehu: 11. Jehoahaz: 12. Jehoash:
13. Jeroboam: 14. Zechariah, last of Ichus race: 15: Shallum: 16. Menahem: 17.
Pekajah: 18. Pekah. 19. Hoshea.

A Prayer.
O Well of life, now shovv thy golden source
A silver pipe make my heart for its use:
In holy terms make me the praise express,
Which is most due unto thy holiness;
I beg thy light and grace for to diserne,
That teaching others, I my self may learn.
Eclipse me not like the Coach of the Moon
When it is black, but turn my night to Noone:
My breast, O Lord, with sacred verses fill,
Which I may write with a most nimble quil.
Of Judahs Kings, as we have understood,
Many were bad, but fevv alas were good;
But Isra'ls Kings thy word them All does blame,
Not one of them did truly fear thy name,
They with idols thy worship did abuse,
Of their ill lives teach me to make good use.
1. JEROBOAM. Contending or striving with the people.
THis wicked man at first but a servant
To Solomon, did scorn Gods Covenant:
This Son of Nebat stinketh filthilie,
His name is rotten by idolatry:
None Like to him in Scripture I can find,
For none as he made Gods if a'l to sin:
At first Solomon, for his industry;
This young man set up in a high degree,
For his valor and for his brave courage,
Of Joseph's house he gave to him the charge;
But after that, the Prophet Ah^jah
Did clearly show from the great Jehovah:
That Jeroboam ten T^ibes should command,
But two as Lamps for David's house should stand;
Because Solomon by idolatry,
To a great wrath had provoked the most hie:
When Solomon heard that he should be King,
He sought by death such honors down to bring:
But he to the King of Egypt anon
Fled, and was there until King Solomon
Did end his days; then after he came back,
From Egypt King who called was Shishak.
The Isra'lits assembled at Schechem,
To Crown with pomp the young Rehoboam,
By Jeroboams instigation,
Were moved to make for relexation
(...) suit to him, who answ'red them roughly,
Therefore according to the Prophecy
Of Abijah, ten Tribs were quickly rent
from David's house, then they incontinent,
^onsid'ring what strength they had of men,
^o Jeroboam sent of their brethren
^im for to Crown soon King of Israel,
^his purpose was from the great Eternel:
When Rehoboam was come to Salem,
An hundred fourscore thousand chosen men
He gathered for in a bloody Battle,
To fight against the house of Israel;
By force of war this ill advised King,
Thought well the Kingdom back again (...) bring:
But then unto the Prophet Semajah,
There came a word from the great Jehovah
Who said to Rehoboam and his host,
It is not time either to fight or boast;
Let not now Judah against Israel
Come for to fight in a bloody Battle;
This matter is from the Lord righteous,
Let every man therefore turn to his house:
Then they GODS word did hear with hu^^^ heart,
And so they all returning did depart.
Then Jeroboam Shechem and Penuel
Most Princely built, and als in them did dwell
He proud in sprit, said these words in his heart,
I fear at last that David's house depart
From me and mine, to turn unto their Lord,
And so me kill in fury with the sword;
If they go up for the great GODS service,
To do at Salem daily sacrifice:
Then Jeroboam with his bad counsel,
Two calves of gold made against th'Eternell:
It is too much, said he, for you to go
Up to Salem; both pain and cost also
It is to go so far to the Eternell;
See here more near thy gods O Israel:
Of these two calves in Bethel he set one,
At Dan another which brought down his Throne
Thus did this vile man his Kingdom begin
With dead idols, which thing became a sin:
Before these calves the people speedily,
Did worship with most vile idolatry;
He vile houses of hie places did make,
And base Priests that were not of Levis stock:
On Bethels Altar which was great offense,
He sacrificed and als burnt incense.
While this he did, behold anon a jar,
A man from GOD thus cried Altar, Altar;
^hus says the LORD a child of David's house,
^osiah King a man most righteous,
He in a zeal and godly jealousy,
shall such Priests bones most cursed burn on thee:
^ee now a sign, the Altar shall be rent,
^he ashes shall be powered out and spent.
When Jeroboam heard from the Eternel,
What this man said against the Altar in Bethel,
From the Altar he did put forth his hand,
Saying lay hold on this man I command;
But GOD dried up the arm of this profane,
So that he could not pull it in again;
GOD rent the Altar and ashes powered out
Then the King trembling, who before was stout*
Said to GODS man, a man of gift and grace,
Pray thou for me, and now entreat Gods face,
That he to me my hand would now restore;
When he did pray, it became as before.
Then said the King, I will thee now reward
Come home with me; but he did not regard
All the Kings gifts; for the half of thine house
Said he, I will not in this untimeous
Time go with thee, a man void of all grace,
I will not eat neither drink in this place;
For no request to go I will accord,
For so it was me charged by the LORD.
At this same time as Scriptures to us tell,
There dwelt an old Prophet at this Bethel;
His sons him told what great things had bee^ done
By the Prophet at Bethel; then right soon
To them he said, now saddle me mine Ass;
He rode thereon, and to him where he was
Under an Oak, sitting softly he came
and said to him, tell me if thou the man
^f GOD art, whom the great LORD JEHOVAH,
^nt to our King from the land of Judah.
I am, said he; Come home said he with me,
^efresh thy self with meat and be merry:
^o said, Gods man, this thing I may not do,
(...) will not eat nor yet thy house go to;
from GODS precept I may not go astray,
(...) must not eat nor return by the way
that I came first; But thou must not do so
^id the old man, a Prophet I also
^m as thou art, an Angel to me spoke,
that unto mine house I should bring thee back.
While they at Table were eating gladely,
^he Sprite of GOD made the old Prophet cry,
unto the Prophet who came from Judah,
^hus says, the LORD, even the great Jehovah:
because thou have rebelled, this message have
^ith thy fathers thou shall not lie in grave.
When this was said, GODS man he went away,
^n his journey a Lion by the way
^im met and killed, but so it came to pass,
^e did not eat the man nor yet the Ass
Whereon he rode: Behold men passing by,
and seeing this came, unto the city,
Where the old man was who at this report,
Was moved much and did his sons exhort
To bring his Ass, that he might ride and see,
To know the truth of all that history:
When he came there, both Lion and the Ass
Were standing near the dead Prophets carcass
He the dead corpse upon his Ass did lay,
And with great grief brought it to the city;
There as a child lamented by his mother,
He mourned, and said; Oh, Alas my brother
Then said this old man to his sons apart,
The mighty Lord this tells me in mine heart,
What this Prophet has said against Bethell,
Shall all be done by the great Eternell:
When I am dead see that ye then me lay,
In this same grave wherein Gods man does ly^
Now Jeroboam with his healed hand,
Did not regard what Jovah did command;
Base Priests he made even of the basest sort,
He set them up GODS people to exhort;
Who did desire, he did them consecrate
For Priests, though villains and most reprobate
Yea he himself a King void of all grace,
Became a Priest to serve at an high place;
These were his great sins a most shameful thin^
Which cut him off from ruling more as King:
Thus void of honor of glory and fame,
He lived and di'd with a most rotten name.
Then Jeroboam sent to Ahijah
His wife, to know if his son Abijah
Then sick, should live or die; then she thus wise
Before that blind man did her self disguise:
At this same time the word came from JOVAH,
Which said unto the Prophet Ahijah,
Behold now coming Jeroboams wife,
To ask of thee concerning her sons life;
This know in time, take heed and now be wise,
For when she comes she will her self disguise;
When she shall come her doubts for to discuss,
Then say to her in my words thus and thus.
When Ahija heard the sound of her feet,
Then coming in, he spoke as he thought meet;
Come in thou wife of Jeroboam vain,
What mean thou some other thy self to feign?
Hard tidings for thee are from th'Eternell,
Go and them quickly to thy husband tell:
Thus says, the LORD, who rules both Land and Sea,
For as much as I have exalted thee;
And of a Servant has made thee a Prince
Over my people, yet have thou ever since,
By thy vain pride and vile idolatry,
Done evil above all that were before thee;
Like basest men who do the LORD forsake,
Thou have me cast proudly behind thy back:
Therefore, I Lord, who am most righteous,
Shall bring much evil on Jeroboams house;
From him I will cut off both great and small,
Not leaving one to piss against the wall:
I will the remnant of his house destroy,
As a doung hill which men carry away:
These of his loins who die in the city,
Shall by vile dogs be rent most cruelly;
If any fall among the fields most fair,
Food they shall be to the Fowls of the air;
Arise woman, to thine own house get thee,
For when thou enters into the City
Thy child shall die, for him Israel shall weep,
And him bury that he ingrave may sleep;
Because in him, as God has said the word,
There is some good thing found toward the LORD:
Moreover God for his glory and praise,
A worthy King in Israel shall raise,
Who Jeroboams wicked house that day,
Shall all cut off and sweep like doung away:
But what? Even now the Lord who is perfect,
As reeds in water shall Israel smite:
Because they heard not what he did command,
He shall them root up out of this good land;
He shall them all scatter beyond the river,
Because by groves they stirred up his anger.
When this was said to Jeroboams wife
She rose and went to Tirzah, but the life
Of her young child, was then ended most sure,
When she came to the threshold of the door:
They buried him and mourned as Jovah,
Had said before by Prophet Ahijah.
When Jeroboam years twenty and two
Had reigned, he died a man of sin and woe.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn that the great GOD most hie,
Shall root them out, if with idolatry
They stain his land; though for a time forborne
They be, at last none shall sit on their Throne
Sprung from their loins; the Lord shall them deface,
Both root and branch shall be cut from their race.
2. NADAB. A Prince or willing.
WHen Jeroboam most wicked was dead,
Then Nadab his son reigned in his stead,
Ill fathers son who walked in his way,
At Gibbethon Baasha did him slay:
Ill fathers son of a most wicked race,
He swayed the Septer but for two years space.
The Use.
Let all men, chiefly Kings, here learn and (...)
What are the f^uits of vile idolatry;
Such in Gods love have rarely room or place
GOD pulls them down and soon roots out the race.
3. BAASHA. A doer.
Baasha smot Jerobo'ms house with death,
To him he left not any that had breath:
Thus Jeroboam for his great trespass,
By Baasha shortly was made childelesse;
Though thus he did these wicked children slay,
He walked still in Jeroboams way:
To him Jehu the son of Hannani,
From GOD was sent to tell him this plainly,
I have exalted thee out of the dust,
My people has been subject to thy lust;
Thou have walked in Jeroboams way,
Therefore the Scepter thou may no more sway;
With Jeroboam I Baashas race,
Will clean root out, and will wholly deface;
To Dogs and Fowls his children shall be meat,
They in the fields and cities shall them eat:
Last this ill man after he had twenty
And four years reigned, he in GODS wrath did die,
The Use.
To punish sin and not reformed be,
Is but a fruit of pride and vain glory:
Let all these who men's manners would reform,
Unto GODS will their own life so conform.
4. ELAH. Strength.
AFter Baasha came his son Elah,
Who governed Israel in Tirzah;
While with Arzah h^s steward he did feast,
He drank himself more drunk then any beast:
While Elah was in drunkenesse filthy,
He killed was by his servant Zimri:
This filthy man to soberness a foe,
All his glory enjoyed but poor years two.
The Use.
Beware to make of sin a play or sport,
It ends our days, and cuts our honors short.
5. ZIMRI. A cutter.
THis ill servant after his Master slain,
Did sway the Scepter and with great disdai^
Destroyed all the house of Baasha,
As Jehu had declared from JOVAH:
He killed his friends and al^ h^s kinsfolk all,
He left not one to piss against the wall:
The people hearing what in great fury,
To King Elah had been done by Zimri,
Therefore against him with greef and disdain,
They Crowned King Omri a most brave Captain:
He with an army then came speedily,
And in fair Tirzah besieged Zimri:
When Zimri saw all these men so conspire,
He in his palace burnt himself with fire:
He for a Crown walked in bloody ways,
And yet his Kingdom lasted but seven days.
The Use.
Death of ill men the living does exhort
To fear the Lord, and not in sin to sport:
Let subjects learn who have grace or reason,
For no respect to have hand in treason.
6. OMRI. Measure, or handful,
WHen the most part had Crowned KING Omri;
Half of the people did follow Tibni;
But the most part set Omri on the Throne
So Tibni died, and Omri reigned alone,
Twelve years he reigned; this ill King from Shemer.
Samariahs hill for two talents silver
Did buy; On this hill he built a city,
Which from that Shemer he ordained to be,
Called Samariah which great city still,
Has name from Shemer owner of that hill.
But this Omri waxed wicked more and more,
Yea, he did worse then all that were before;
Both King and Captain wicked in his days,
He walked in all Jeroboams ways:
This Omri di'd by the hand of JOVAH,
And buried was in his Samariah.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn not to sin more an^ more,
Lest they wax worse then all that were before.
7. AHAB. Beloved.
THis Son of Omri wicked more and more,
Did worse then all the Kings that were before:
When he was once advanced to be King,
^o him it seemed to be but a light thing;
^o walk in Jeroboams wicked way,
^ut also he would farther go astray.
Ethbals daughter who was of Zidon King,
^aine Jezabel for wife he did home bring:
^ith her vile gods forsakeing The Eternal,
^e like a beast went and did serve Baal;
^e made a grove, he GOD provoked more,
^hen all the Kings of Israel did before.
In his days Hiel building Jericho,
said ground and gates with much sorrow and woe;
On Abiram the first borne and Segub,
The ground and gates a great judgment did rub.
When Ahab was lying in wickedness,
God sent Elijah to preach great distress
against the land: This said he from the Lord,
No dew, no rain, according to my word
These years shall be, Then God said to this man,
Go hide thy self at Cherith near Jordan;
^hou of the Brook shall drink waters most fresh,
(...) Ravens ordained have to feed thee with flesh;
And so he went, and so the Ravens did bring
Both bread and flesh, at morn, and als evening.
A little after the brook was dried up,
So that Elijah could not drink or sup.
Then came to him a word from the Eternel
To Zarephath of Zidon go and dwell,
Obey my word which is not false or vain,
A widow there shall surely thee maintain:
So he arose to Zerephath to go;
When he was come, Elijah found all so
As God had said, Behold a poor widow,
Gathering some sticks with much grief and row;
To her he said fetch me a drink I pray,
Of water, with some bread without delay.
As GOD lives said she I have not a cak^
But an handful of meal which I must take
With oil in cruse, and with sticks speedily
It dress, and with my son it eat and die.
Then to that widow, good Elijah said,
Take courage now thou needst not be afraid;
But see that first for me thou dress a cake,
And after for thee and for thy son make,
For thus says, the Lord, God of Israel,
The poor handful of meal in thy Barrel,
Shall not be spent, nor yet the cruse of oil
Shall fail, till rain has made a fertile soil^
Then she in have prepared for Elijah
Both cake and oil; as the word from Jovah
Had said, both meal and oil did last always,
^hereof these three persons eat many days.
After these things, this woman's son fell sick,
^ll breath was past, then she began to seek
^lijahs help, what I to do with thee,
^ave man of GOD, said she, that thou from me
^y son should take, and for a sore vengeance.
should call my sin now to remembrance?
^ive me thy son, to the widow said he
from her bosom unto a loft quickly,
^e cari'd him, and as the sprit him led,
^e laid that child softly on his own bed,
unto the LORD he cried what have thou done?
^las, O LORD, why have thou slain her son?
^hen this was said upon the child times three,
(...) stretched himself and cried mightily
(...) to the LORD, O LORD, I humbly pray,
^store the soul unto this child the day.
The Lord from hearing then could not refrain,
^t sent the child's soul into him again:
^en Elijah the living child brought low,
^om the high loft and to the poor widow
^stor'd her son, who said to Elijah,
^w do I know that thou art from Jovah,
^d that the word of the LORD in thy lips.
^rueth unfeigned withou lies or slips.
It came to pass, then after many days,
GOD to Elijah walking in GODS ways
Came, thus and said, now go to Ahab King,
For I now rain upon the Earth will bring
When GOD these words spoke unto Elijah,
A sore famine was in Samaria:
In this famine by drougth Ahab the King,
With Obadiah, for their beasts saving,
Went through the land seeking brook and fo^taine,
For with water the poor beasts life maintain:
Ahab this way, but Obadiah took,
Another way to seek fountain and brook.
As Obadiah walked in the way,
Behold Elijah who met him that day:
When he him knew he fell upon his face,
And said art thou Elijah? By GODS grace
I am said he; go and to Ahab tell,
Elijah is here from the Eternell.
Alas, said he, what have I done this day,
That now for thee, King Ahab should me slay
There is no Kingdom there is no country,
Whether my LORD has not sent to seek t^
And when they answred that thou wast (...) here,
He took an oath and deeply made them sw^
That they thee found not; now thou say go tell
Ahab, my LORD, the great King of Israel,
Behold Elijah is come here surely,
But oh Alas, as soon as I from thee
Am gone, Gods sprite will carry thee away,
And then in rage King Ahab will me slay:
I speak the truth, no lie is in my mouth,
I thy servant fear the Lord, from my youth*
Was it not told thee how from Jezabel,
I hid the Prophets of the Eternel?
With bread and water their life I did save,
An hundred men by fifty in a cave;
And now thou say go to Ahab and tell,
Elijah is here from the Eternel.
No, said, Elijah as God lives I say,
To Ahab I will show my self this day.
As soon as King Ahab saw Elijah,
With great contempt he said to him Aha,
Art thou the man that troublest Israel?
Not I, said he, but thou who the Eternell,
Have now forsaken with thy fathers house,
To follovv Baal in a wicked course:
Therefore now send and unto mount Carmel,
Gather to me the men of Israel,
The false Prophets eight hundred and fifty,
See that they als unto me gathered be;
Then Ahab sent unto all Israel,
And gathred all these Prophets to Carmel.
Then by the people Elijah well seen,
Said, how long two opinions between,
Thus will ye halt? If GOD, be GOD, allow
Him for to serve, if not, Baal follow.
When he these words spoke with great co^^^dence,
Among the people there was deep silence:
Elijah said, Gods cause I will maintain,
For the LORD here I only one remain,
But Baals Prophets a great number be,
Here they are four hundred men and fifty:
Give two bullocks the true GOD to enquire,
Let him be GOD who shall answer by fire.
When the people that saying understood,
All with one voice they said the word is goo^
Then Elijah to these Prophets did say,
Choose an bullock and dress it first this day
For ye be many, begin to enquire,
If your god can-now aswere you by fire.
Then they did take and there dress a Bullo^
They cried aloud, and on their breast did knoc^
From morn to evening, they did not forbear
To cry Baal, but Baal could not hear:
No voice was heard, nor any answer made,
On the Altar they leapt as they were mad.
At noone Elijah them began to mock,
Now cry aloud, now your breasts dump and knock
He is a god, either he is talking,
^r he his foes fiercely is pursueing,
^r in a journey, or most fast asleep
that he may hear, now to him cry and weep.
They cried aloud, and cut themselves with knives
and lancets, als with perrell of their lives;
^ut when midday in such jangling was past
without answer; Then Elijah at last,
said to the people, come near me right soon;
^hen they came near, to see what should be done.
Gods Altar he repaired with courage stout,
^e made a large trench the Altar about;
^ill four barrels with water, then said he,
and with it drench the sacrifice quickly;
^gaine, again, yea third time do the like,
^ill it pass over the trinches highest dike:
^hus did they all, which was ordained by him.
^hey made Altar and trench with water swim:
Then said Elijah, O GOD, of Israel,
^et it be known that thou art the Eternal;
Let it be known that thou art GOD and LORD
And that these things I have done at the word;
Here me O LORD, hear me now I the^ pray,
That this people may surely know this day
That thou art God, who do them all maintai^
And that thou have their heart turned bac^ again.
When this was said, from the great Eternel,
A sacred fire down from the high Heavens fell
This fire fallen down for the great GODS s^^vice,
Did with all have consume the sacrifice;
The wood and stones, with dust it did consume,
The trench water it licked up right soon;
When this was done all men on face afraid,
The LORD is GOD, the Lord GOD t^ cried.
Then said Elijah, take these Prophets vile;
See none escape, see that none you beguile:
Then they took them, and Elijah anon,
Did slay these Priests down at the brook shon.
When this was done good Elijah did say
To King Ahab, I have good news this day;
Go eat and drink my word it is not vain,
(...) hear a sound of abundance of rain:
^o Ahab went up, to eat and to drink,
^ut Elijah in himself thus did think,
(...) will go up to the top of Carmel
^o see some sign of rain from the Eternel.
Then he went up, and there, as might be seen,
Cast himself down and put his face between
His knees, and said, to his servant go see,
^f thou can spy some clouds upon the Sea:
Then he went up at the Prophets saying,
And turned back, he said, There is nothing;
^even times again to go he did command,
At last he saw a cloud like a man's hands.
Then said Elijah go without delay,
And to Ahab this from Elijah say,
Now get thee down and thy Charet prepaire,
Before the rain, as long as it is fair:
^n the mean time heavens black with clouds and wind,
Powered down great rain before and als behind.
Then Ahab rode and went to Jezreel,
Elijah als strengthened by the Eternel
Did gird his loins, and before Ahab ran,
Ahab in Coache, but Elijah foot man:
Thus the Prophet of the great Eternel,
Before the King did run to Jezreel.
Then to Jezabel Ahab every word,
Did tell plainly how that Elijahs sword
Had slain her Priests, not having spared one,
And that besides the cursed brook Kishon:
Then Jezabel this hard message did send
To Elijah, so the gods me defend,
For thy ill prats, and for thy bloody crime,
Thy life shall pass the morrow at this time.
When he heard this, he in great fear arose,
His heart trembled and could not well repose:
He in all have went to Beershebah,
Which is a part of the land of Judah;
He left his servants there in his distress,
A days journey he went in wilderness;
There set down under a Juniper-tree,
He did request the Lord that he might die;
I am not better then my fathers dear,
Said he, now take my life from all this fear.
As he did ly under the Juniper
Right fast asleep, to him there a dinner
An Angel brought to refresh him with meat;
He touched him, and said, Arise and eat:
As he awoke, behold a cake of bread
Was on the coals, and a cruse at his head
Of water good; Then Elijah to eat
And drink began, and after fell asleep.
The second time the Angel came again,
^ho did for him a new dinner ordain;
^rise, said he, and eat now speedily,
because the journey is too great for thee:
^ee what great care the good Lord had that day,
that Elijah should not faint by the way:
^hus he arose to eat and drink quickly,
(...) this foods strength he walked days forty,
and forty nights, till to the mount of God,
^oreb he came where he made some abode.
While he was there lodged in a poor cave,
^he God of heaven who takes delight to save
^is servants, said, to his Elijah dear,
that now Elijah? What now do thou hear?
My heart, said he, has been very jealous;
^or the great God who is most righteous:
^ll is now lost, all thy servants away
^re taken, now they seek me als to slay;
^oe forth, said God, and stand upon the Mount;
^hee will I teach all dangers to surmount.
Behold at first a boistrous mighty wind,
which brake the Rocks and all that it could find:
After the wind rageing came an earthquake,
which made Horeb from end to end to shake:
After the earthquake came a burning fire,
But in these three was not the Lords desire;
He was not there; After came a small voi^
Where to abide, the Lord did much rejoice:
When Elijah heard this voice full of grace,
He in his mantle wrapped all his face;
He went out and stood before Jehovah,
Who said, what do thou now here Elijah?
My heart, said he, has been very jealous
For the great God who is most righteous,
Thine Altars, Prophets, and thy Covenant,
Thrown down and slain they have with gr^ contempt,
And als forsaken; thy servants away
Are taken; Now they seek me als to slay:
Go, said the Lord, return to Damascus,
And when thou come to that desert, thus
Anoint Hazael King of Syria,
And Jehu for Israel, als Elisha
For Prophet in thy room, these all anoint,
For so these things to be I do appoint:
For the great sins acted by Israel,
Against them shall come the sword of Hazael
Whom he shall spaire, the mighty man Jeh^
^all with his sword all into pieces hew;
(...) any from Jehu escape away,
them shall the sword of good Elisha slay:
^t know Elijah for all thou hears and sees,
^ven thousand who have not bowed the knees,
^ave me left who have not done amiss,
^r once so much to give Baal a Kiss.
When this was done, from Horeb Elijah,
^parted soon and found out Elisha;
^hen he him saw with his twelve Oxen yoke
^wing, on him quickly he cast his cloak:
^en he left all and ran most speedily,
^ter Elijah, saying, now let me,
^e that which to do can not be amiss,
^t me my father and my mother kiss:
^d then I promise most assuredly,
^ith all mine heart to follow after thee:
^e back again, delay not, go right soon,
^id Elijah, for what now have I done?
^is done Elisha came incontinent,
and with Elijah he went as servant.
Then came Benhadad strong from Syria,
^ith thirty two Kings against Samaria:
^s messengers he unto Ahab King,
(...) to the City sent with this saying;
^us says Benhadad, who darre now repine,
Thy Silver, Gold, Wives, Children all a^ mine:
To him Ahab answ'red, my Lord, O King,
What have thou said, it is a true saying;
For I am thine and all that I can have,
Grant me friendship no other thing I crave.
When Benhadad these words of courtesy
Did hear, his heart was lifted up proudly,
His messenger he back again then sent,
Unto Ahab with this commandment;
I will to morrow my strong servants send,
Who all thine house shall search from e^ to end:
What in thine eyes is most pleasant that da^
They in their hands shall carry all away.
Then Ahab spoke his Elders with great grief^
See how this man now seeks a mischief:
My silver, gold, my wives, children, freely,
I offered to him, who does as ye see:
Then the elders with such words not conten^
Said to Ahab, beware to give consent,
Regard him not; Then Ahab made report,
To the messengers in words of this sort;
What the King first desired, it unto
I soon yielded, but this I cannot do.
When the messengers had made their report
Unto Benhadad in words of thss sort,
^hen Benhadad sent back unto the King,
His servants soon with these words of threatening:
The gods do so to me and more also,
^f for the people that with me shall go
The dust of all Samarias City,
Shall now suffice for them handfulls to be.
Then Ahab answ'red tell ye now your King
We will not yield for all his great threatening,
Let not him that girdeth on the harness.
So boast himself as free of all distress.
When they report made of all this saying,
Benhadad with his Kings were then drinking
unto his tent: To his servants that day,
He said be now all in Battle array;
When this was heard, his strong men speedily
Did rank themselves against that fair City:
Behold anon a Prophet from the LORD,
Who did King Ahab comfort with this word,
Thus says the Lord, this host without delay,
(...) will deliver in thine hand this day:
Though Benhadad now boast much of his sword,
^hab shall know that I am God the Lord.
Then Ahab said, by whom shall this be done,
^he man of God gave him this answer soon;
By the young men of good worthy Princes,
Who mighty are among the Provinces,
Then said, Ahab, tell me from the Eternell,
Who shall among us order the Battle?
To that the Prophet shortly did reply,
Even thou who art the Lord of the city:
Then Ahab called the young men him unto
Who were numbered two hundred thirty two
The host it self which Ahab did command,
In number all were but poor seven thousand.
When these brave men went to battel^ noone,
Benhadad drunk was in his pavillion
With thirty two Kings, who this most did the
How their bellies might be filled with drink:
Then the young men of the Princes that day,
Before the rest went first in their array.
When Benhadad the King of Syria,
Heard that these men were from Samaria,
He said, whether they be for peace or war
Take them alive, but to slay them beware.
When this was said, army against army
Began to fight, but Syria to fly
Made have; That day poor Israel with few,
Benhadads great host bravely overthrew:
To King Ahab the Prophet came again,
And said, mark well, my counsel not disdain
^or surely at the return of the year,
^enhadad will with a new army stir:
Then Benhadads servants to him did say,
their gods are gods of hills, therefore now they
^e stronger then we, let us in the plain
against them fight, and they shall soon be slain:
Do this als if thou would prevail this day,
^ake heed and take these drunken Kings away,
and put Captains with order in their place,
(...) shall thou soon thy strongest foes deface:
Make up an army like that which thou lost.
^haret for charet, horse for horse to post,
and run them down in some field that is plain,
^hen shall we see their army foiled and slain.
It came to pass at the turn of the year,
that Benhadad to fill men's hearts with fear,
^ame with an host of charets and of men,
unto Aphek against Isral's children:
^ke little Kids Israel was in array,
^ut Syrians filled the country that day.
While all in order were fet for battle,
(...) man of God came unto Israel,
And said, GOD says because the Syr^ boast,
That GOD on hills can only help your host*
It shall be seen that such words are but v^
For as on hills so am I in the plain,
For good success this day, I give my wor^
And ye shall all know that I am the LO^
Then these two armies filled with co^ much,
Did sev'n days one against another pitch:
In the seventh day, they joined the Battle;
An hundred thousand that day by Israel
Of Syrians were slain, the rest did fly
Unto Aphek, and there in that city
Upon twenty sev'n thousand men a wall,
Fell with great noise, which killed great small.
Then Benhadad who durst no more abide,
Came to the city for himself to hide
In some chamber, there his servants did say,
Our foes by force have much prevailed day,
But we have heard which comfort t^ brings,
That merciful are all Isreal's Kings;
Let us quickly seeing there be such hopes
^ut on sackcloth, and bind our heads with ropes,
and go to Abab with humility,
^eradventure that King will pardon thee.
As they had said, so quickly in these hopes
^ey got sackcloth, and bound their heads with ropes:
^en to Ahab adorned with Majesty,
^ey came with these signs of humility,
King, said they, let there be no more strife,
^ore Benhadad from thee does beg his life.
that? Said the King, is your Master not dead?
^ell him that he my brother is indeed:
(...) bring him forth that now I may him see,
^d that he may in Charet ride with me.
Then Benhadad said to Ahab therefore,
(...) thee the Cities I will now restore,
which my stout father took from Israel,
(...) thy brave Captains to thee may well tell.
^hen said Ahab this Covenant this day
^all betwixt us; So he sent him away.
Then came a Prophet with his own accord,
^ho to his neighbor in words of the Lord,
^id smite me soon, I pray thee now smite me,
that? Said the man, wherefore should I smite thee?
Because said he, thou would not now obey
GODS voice by me, a Lion shall thee slay:
So as the Prophet said it came to pass,
A Lion slew him for this his trespass:
Then the Prophet another found quickly,
And as before said to him smite thou me:
Then he not slack, quickly a weapon found,
And did him smite which made a bloody woun^
Thus the Prophet sore wounded went away,
And waited on King Ahab by the way:
He thus disguisd with ashes on his face,
Did cry to Ahab passing by that place,
Thy servant went out into the Battle
While there I was, this unto me befell;
Behold a man turning himself aside,
Who brought a man unto me, and thus said
Keep me this man, for if he be missing,
Then for his life, thy life shall be the thing
Which shall be ransom; or surely deliver
Without delay, a full talent of silver:
But as thy servant busy was, anon
This captive man away from me was gone.
When this was said, then said to him the K^
Now thou thy self have decided the thing;
Of that matter speak thou no more to me,
Thus have thou done, so shall thy judgment be.
When that was said, the Prophet in that place,
Hasted and took the ashes from his face:
^hen did the King discern there most clearly,
that this man was come with some Prophecy.
^hen said the Prophet, Thus says GOD the LORD,
because thou have rebelled against my word,
because thou have let go out of thine hand,
(...) man whom I to destroy did command,
^cause that thou refused to do this,
^hy peoples life, and thine shall go for his:
^en King Ahab went to his house heavy,
which then was in Samarias city.
After these things it befell in that place,
^at good Naboth hard by Ahabs palace,
^d a vineyard which was in Jezreel;
^is man his vineyard was desired to sell
Ahab King who offered him money,
(...) a vineyard better then it could be.
But this answer to Ahab he did tell,
^e LORD forbid that I to thee should sell,
^at which I have for mine inheritance
^m my fathers, and not by hap or chance.
Then Ahab to his house returned heavy,
And laid him down upon his bed sadly;
He turned away his face in his sick bed,
He freted so that he would eat no bread:
But Jezabel his wife came him unto,
Arise said she, I know well what to do:
Do thou not rule the Kingdom of Israel?
Art thou not King over both great and small
Arise and eat and also be merry,
For Naboths vineyard I will give to thee.
So to the Elders she in Ahabs name,
Sent Sealed letters a fast to proclaim;
Set Naboth soon, said she, in some h^ place
Among the people? set before his face,
Two wicked men who may witness this thin^
That Naboth has blaspheem'd GOD and King:
When that is done, him carry out quickly,
Him stone with stones that he may surely di^
Then the Elders ill Judges without grace,
Condemned Naboth to be stoned in that place*
When he was dead they sent to Jezabel,
For to tell how all the matter befell;
When she this knew, she unto sick Ahab
Did cry arise, for now Naboths vineyard
(...) in thy power go take possession,
^ho darre control a great Kings action?
When AHAB hea^d that poor Naboth was dead,
^e went unto his vineyard with great speed.
^or of the same to take possession,
^ho darre control a great Kings action?
Then the Lord spoke to Elijah saying,
Arise go down, to meet Ahab the King;
^ehold how he in his great wickedness,
(...) gone poor Naboths vineyard to possess,
^eake unto him by my direction,
^ast thou killed and als possession
^ast taken now? Where thou have Naboth good
^illed with stones, there dogs shall lick thy blood.
Then said Ahab to Elijah quickly,
^ast thou me found, O thou mine enemy?
^ea, said Elijah, for with all thy might,
^hou have thee sold to do ill in GODS sight:
^ehold I will bring fearful plagues on thee,
^hee will I spoil of all posterity,
them will I slay that piss against the wall,
^oth him that s shut up and left in Israel:
Behold also for thy vile bloody spot,
Thine house like that of the son of Nebat
Shall be brought down, or like to Baasha,
Whose race was rooted out by Jehovah.
The LORD also spoke this to Jezebel,
The dogs most vile shall her in Jezreel
Eat; Ahabs children shall destoyed be
By souls in fields, by dogs in the city.
Among the Kings which governed Israel,
None was like Ahab who himself did sell
To work mischief, in the course of his life,
To this he was by Jezebel his wife
Most stirred up; he like a raging fool,
Did give himself to Amorits idol.
When Ahab heard these words of Elijah,
Which threatningly he spoke from Jehovah;
He rent his cloths, and put sack on his flesh
Then he with meat would not himself refresh,
This King did lie in great humility
In sack, also a mourner went softly.
Then came the word from the great Jehova^
Unto his faithful Prophet Elijah,
To whom he said, Behold how before me,
Ahab the King in sackloth most humbly,
Does lie and fast, I promise for this thing,
In his lifetime judgments I will not bring;
^ut because I am a GOD righteous,
My plagues after shall come upon his house.
Then Israel living without all fear,
^or three years space was free of bloody war
^ith Syria; The third year it befell,
^saphat came to the King of Is^a'l:
^ven King Ahab who to his servants said,
^now ye not well that Ramoth in Gilead
(...) ours by right, and yet we care no thing,
(...) to rescue from the great Syrians King?
To Josaphat, Ahab said so and so,
^ilt thou O King, to Ramoth with me go,
(...) fight against the Syrian army?
^th horse and man at thy service shall be,
^id good Josaphat: But this I desire,
^at thou this day at the Lords word enquire.
Then King Ahab gathered together there,
^s false Prophets the matter to declare;
(...) them, he said, now give me your counsel,
^'gainst Ramoth I shall go in Battle:
(...) up, said they, for so God does command,
^ho shall surely shute Ramoth in thine hand.
Josaphat said, yet farther I desire,
(...) there not here of whom we may enquire,
Prophet of the Lord besides? yet one
^ere is, said Ahab, Micajah the Son
Imlah, whom I hate, for he for me,
Has never good in all his prophecy.
Josaphat said, Let not the King say so,
We heard the rest, we will hear him also.
Thus Ahab sent for Micajah that day,
To hear also what he to them could say:
Then these two Kings sat in great dignity,
Each on his Throne adorned with Majesty,
In the entrance of Samarias gate,
Waiting upon Micajah the Prophet;
Before he came the Prophets pleasantly,
Unto these Kings did good things prophecy,
Zedekiah Son of Chenaanah,
With horns of iron, said, Thus says Jehovah,
With these iron horns, this I now give for doom,
The Syrians host thou shall push and consume;
So likewise all the Prophets then by order
Said unto him, Go to Ramoth and prosper;
The war is Gods and good is thine earand,
The Lord shall Ramoth put into thine hand.
He that was gone for to call Micajah,
Said unto him, Behold from Jehovah,
All the Prophets speak good with one acco^
Unto the King; So also let thy word
Be like to theirs, be not too strict and rude,
But to the King speak thou that which is good.
Then him answered the Prophet Micajah
^s God lives what unto me Jovah,
(...) his good Sprite at this time shall reveal,
that from King Ahab I shall not conceal.
When he was come the King said so and so,
Micajah tell if we to Battle go
^all against Ramoth, or shall we forbear?
that is thy mind? Let me an answer hear.
Go and prosper, said, Micajah in scorn,
^od in thine hand shall that people forlorn,
^eliver now; speak truth I thee adjure,
^id Ahab, for I cannot scorn endure.
^hen said Micajah the truth I will tell,
upon the hills I saw all Israel,
As wandering sheep that have not a shepherd:
^hen this I saw then the Lord to me said,
^hese have no master, this is mine advice,
that every man go to his house in peace.
^ehold said Ahab, to Josaphat King,
^id I not rightly conjecture this thing,
that this Micajah in his prophecy,
^ould say no good in what concerns me?
^hen said Micajah, hear now thou therefore,
(...) the Lords Prophet yet will tell thee more;
(...) saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne,
Before him there all heavens host came anon:
Then said the Lord who best among you all,
Can move Ahab for to go up and fall
At Ramoth? One said this, another that,
At last came forth, a spirit, a reprobate,
Who stood before the mighty Lord, and sai^
I take in hand that I shall him persuade.
Then said the Lord, unto that Spirit wherewi^
With many lies, said he, I will go forth
And him deceive; Go forth, said GO^ do so,
Thou shall persuade him and prevail also.
But Zedekiah Son of Chenaanah,
Went near and smote the cheek of Micajah
Which way, said he, the Sprite of God from me,
A Prophet went for to speak unto thee?
Then said Micajah for thy boast and pride,
The day shall come that thou thy self shall hi^
In inner chambers close, Then said the King,
Take this Micajah and soon do this thing;
Put this fellow into some vile prison,
And feed him with bread of affliction,
And water als until I come in peace
From the Battle; This well me now do please,
Said Micajah, for if thou come safely
From that Battle the Lord has not by me
^ken at all; This is most sure I tell,
^rken O people and consider well.
^o the King Ahab and Josaphat both,
^th their great Army went up to Ramoth:
^n Ahab King resolved by advise,
^he Battle he did him self disguise;
(...) he had said unto Josaphat King;
(...) on thy robes in time of the fighting.
^he King of Syria had his thirty two,
^taines commanded, saying, so and so;
(...) that ye fight neither with great nor small,
^e only with the King of Israel.
When the Captains Josaphats rich clothing
(...) see, they thought he had been Isra'ls King:
^n they aside turned with all their might,
^inst Josaphat with forces to fight.
^hen King Josaphat with a mighty shout,
^ong his foes in danger cried out;
^en the Captains in that bloody Battle,
(...) that he was not the King of Israel,
^y turned back and quickly went him fro,
^eek Ahab, who was their cheifest foe.
^hen at a venture a man drew a bow,
(...) hurt Ahab with a deadly arrow;
^n said Ahab to him who his coch drove
(...) wounded, if thou my life can save
Delay no more, with diligence make have,
And carry me aside out of the host.
So Ahab died, and in Samaria,
Was buried as the Prophet Micajah
Before had told, who it well understood;
They washed the coch, the dogs did lick blood.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn to shun ill company,
A Jezebel stained with idolatry:
Let Kings here learn GODS Laws for regard,
Ahab did loss his Crown for a vineyear^
Let Kings here learn GODS Micajah hear,
And not to base Placebos to give ear.
8. AHAZIAH. The possession of GOD.
THis wicked son after Ahab was dead,
In wickedness did unto him succeed:
He like his father did worship Baal,
And so provoked the great God Eternal.
A few days after a great grief befell,
^ng Ahaziah through a lattesse fell
^om an high chamber, whereby he made sick.
^om Ba'lzebub his life and health did seek.
Then an Angel sent from the great Jovah,
^id to his Prophet faithful Elijah,
^ise go up and the Kings servants meet,
^d say unto them in these words most meet,
(...) it not because that in all Israel
^ere is no GOD, that thou go to Baal?
^w therefore hear that which the LORD has said,
^ou shall not therefore come down from thy bed:
^hen this message Elijah had imparted,
(...) went his way and from these men departed.
Then messengers unto the King came back,
^ho said unto them why are ye so slack,
(...) to return from the way I you sent,
^om Ba'lzebub who only can content
(...) troubled heart? Then answered they the King,
(...) man us met who sent us back, saying,
(...) tell your Prince who has you foolishlie,
^t to idols wherein is no safety,
^it not because that in all Israel,
There is no God that thou go to Baal?
Now therefore hear what the Lord God (...) said,
Thou shall not therefore come down from (...) bed.
What man was he that came you up to mee^
Said Ahaziah both troubled and sick:
He was, said they, a man old and hoary,
Who bade us turn and no longer tarry:
This hoary man who did us thus enjoine,
A leather girdle had about his loins:
The man that is clothed with that habit,
Is most surely Elijah the Tishbite:
Then did the King a Captain of fifty,
Send unto him sitting on an hill hie;
They said, Thus says the man that bears crown,
Thou man of GOD see that thou soon c^ down.
Elijah said, if man of God I be,
Let fire come down and thee and thy fifty
Consume and slay; with these words fell fire,
Which did as good Elijah did desire,
Again the King a Captain with fifty,
Sent to Elijah commanding quickly
^r to come down, as had been said before,
^ese words they spoke to fright him more and more;
^ey said, Thus says the man that bears the Crown,
^ou man of GOD, see that thou soon come down.
Elijah said, if man of God I be,
^t fire comedowne, and thee and thy fifty
^nsume and slay with these words fell a fire,
which did as good Elijah did desire.
He sent again a Captain of fifty,
^ho came and at Elijahs feet humbly
^d supplicat that he his favor might
and, that his life might be dear in his sight.
Then said the Angel Elijah now go down,
^are not the face of him that bears the Crown;
^en he arose and went unto the King
and said, This is the mighty Lords saying;
(...) as much as thou to Baalzebub
^st sent, a disgrace on the LORD to rub,
^erefore I tell thee what GOD unto me
^th said in wrath, is it not certainly?
^it not because that in all Israel
^ere is no GOD, that thou unto Baal
^uld send? Therefore from thy bed certainly
Thou shall not come down but shall surely
Thus after two years that he bare the crown,
Unto the dust by death he was brought down
The Use.
Let all men learn in sickness and distre^
To trust in God who ever good success,
Grants unto these that upon him depend
Who do not so, shall feel it in the end:
Hear this who with shit children in your a^
Run to witches, to stithies, salves, and cha^
9. JEHORAM. The highness of GOD
KIng Ahaziah after him had none,
Who in Israel succeeded to his Throne;
But Jehoram his brother in that day,
Sat on the Throne and did the scepter sway:
Of this man who did from the LORD depart^
With an arrow Jehu did pierce the heart:
He was son of Ahab and Jezebel,
A race much hated of God Eternel.
The Use.
^t all Kings here learn not to go astray,
(...) they in peace would long their scepter sway;
(...) Kings from GOD in their folly depart,
^D arrows has wherewith to pierce their heart.
ELIJAH. The mighty Lord.
(...) Jorams reign Gods word in history,
^nserts concerning Elijah worthy.
When to take up Elijah in his mind
^e Lord had purpose by a great whirlewinde:
^en Elijah the Prophet from Gilgal
^ent with Elisha, and to him did call,
^d said, Here tarry, for the Eternel,
^th me ordained for to go to Bethel:
^sha said, As the great God does live,
(...) no request will I Elijah leave:
^en these two Prophets of the Eternel,
^gether went down unto fair Bethel:
^s of the Prophets there to Elisha,
^d, Know not thou thy Master Elijah,
Shall from thine head be pulled away this day?
I know, said he, hold ye your peace I say.
Als Elijah, said to Elisha so,
I pray thee tarry, for to Jericho
The Lord has sent me, I must him obey,
But as for thee thou shall do well to stay:
Elisha said, as the great God does live,
For no request will I Elijah leave:
When they were come unto fair Jericho,
The Prophets sons said to Elisha so,
Have thou not heard that thy Master this day,
From thee by God should be pulled away?
Yea I it know, said he, most certainly,
Hold ye your peace, and henceforth let me b^
Elijah said to Elisha his man,
Now tarry here, for God me to Jordan
Has sent: As the most mighty Lord does live
Said Elisha, I mind thee not to leave:
When Elijah this matter thought upon
He yielded then, and so the two went on:
There fifty men who then all Prophets were,
Stood over against for to view them a far.
There Elijah with Elisha his man,
Most gravely stood hard by the flood Jordan:
Then Elijah took his mantle anon,
With it by faith he struck the flood upon;
^y this the waters they divided found,
(...) that these two went over on the dry ground.
When they the Jordan together had past,
^ijah said to Elisha at last,
^^ke now what thou desires I do for thee,
^fore by God I be lifted on hie:
^ou have me served with respect and regard,
^e what thou would have now for thy reward.
Elisha said, this is my suit to thee,
^t thy good Sprite be doubled now on me;
^hen Elijah heard Elishas saying,
^e said, thou have now asked a heard thing;
^everthelesse, if thou shall then me see,
^hen the great God shall take me up on hie,
(...) shall be so unto thee as thou would;
^t not, if then thou can me not behold.
It came to pass as these two went on still,
^hold a sign the promise to fulfill;
^cording to good Elishas desire,
^ere appeared a fair charet of fire:
^ith great horses which parted them that day,
Elijah in whirlewinde went away:
When Elisha had seen all that befell,
(...) father, father, charet of Israel,
^d their horsemen he thus aloud did cry,
^t he him saw no more after that day.
Then Elisha for grief incontinent
Took his own clothes and in two pieces rent*
Last after this, the Prophet Elisha,
Took up the mantle of good Elijah
That fell on him; and so went back anon,
And stood besides the bank of the Jordan;
With that mantle he smote the waters deep,
Which both above, and beneath back did creep
For Gods servant to make a ready way,
That good Elisha might pass through that day.
When the Prophets that were at Jericho
Saw Elisha, they all said so and so,
Behold the sprit of faithful Elijah
Does rest upon his servant Elisha;
These came to meet him with all diligence,
And bowed before him with great reverence.
Behold, said they, there be with us fifty
Strong men of worth, let them go we p^ thee,
And seek thy Master, least peradventure
The Sprite of God who had of him the cure
Has taken him, and has him cast upon
Some high mountain, or low valley alone.
Then said Elisha, your zeal I commend,
But my advise is that ye shall not send:
From their purpose he could them not reclam^
They urged so that he did blush for shame:
Therefore he said, if it be your will send,
^ey sent therefore and three days to an end
^id seek, and seek on valley and mountain,
^t nothing found, and so returned again:
^hen to Elisha they at Jericho
^me with report, how they both to and fro
^d wandered; to them Elisha did say,
^old you that before ye went away.
The Use.
^t Prophets learn who serve the great Jovah,
(...) follovv the footsteps of Elijah:
(...) spared not great Kings, but did them rebuke,
^hen they Jehovah most leudly forsook:
^ost Kings are slain by the vile flattery,
(...) base fellows, who walk not uprightly:
^t all Elijahs that walk in GODS way,
^oke for GODS coch to carry them away.
ELISHA My GOD salvation.
^Hen Elisha sojourned at Jericho,
The men of that city came him unto,
Who said, behold a place that is pleasant,
But the water is naught, and good ground sca^
Then said Elisha bring me a new cruse,
Put salt therein whereof I may make use;
When this was done, he went forth to the spri^
Of these waters, and cast the salt therein:
And said, Thus says the mighty LORD, I have
Healed these waters as ye may perceive;
Henceforth no death or any barren land
Here shall be seen, for so does GOD comman^
Then Elisha from thence went to Bethel,
As he did go this Tragedy befell:
Some children came out of Bethels city,
Who said unto the Prophet tauntingly,
Go up thou bald head, go up thou bald-head,
He turned back and cursed them with speed.
Then from the wood came Bears incontinent,
Who forty two all into pieces rent:
From thence to fair Carmel went Elisha,
And from Carmel unto Samaria.
Now Jehoram ill Ahabs second son,
In Samaria did sit on the Throne;
He did much ill in great Jehovahs sight,
Yet not like Ahab; for this which was right
He did; Baals image he put away,
To which Ahab his father went astray:
But Jeroboams sins he could not leave,
^o these idols his foolish heart did cleave.
In this time Mesha who of Moab King
^as a sheepmaster, who much sheep did bring
(...) Ahabs days, when once Ahab was dead,
^is man rebelled against the Royal seed.
^en Jehoram the King of Israel,
^saphats help desired in Battle
against Moab; He said with horse and man
against Moab I will do what I can
^or thee and thine, Thus the King Jehoram,
^ith Josaphat, and the King of Edom
^ent to that war; three Kings in company,
^esolv'd to fight against Moab stoutly,
^id of seven days journey fetch a compass,
^t had no water for man, horse, or ass;
^as, said Joram, it is great pity
^at we three Kings by Moabs great army
^ould be destroyed; Then Josaphat did say,
(...) there not here some good Prophet this day?
Behold, said one, the Prophet Elisha,
which water on the hands of Elijah
^id power; Then said Jehosaphat the King,
(...) pleases me to hear of that saying;
^or a good man he is in work and word,
^et us him hear, for with him is the Lord:
(...) these three Kings went down to Elisha
(...) know what he would say from Jehovah.
Then good Elisha to Jehoram King,
These words of wrath had unto him saying,
To speak to thee I have no great desire,
Go to thy fathers Prophets and enquire:
Were it not that I did regard surely
Jehoshaphat, I would not look on thee:
But now that I what is to come may tell,
Bring unto me a most cunning Minstrell.
When he did play, then soon it came to pass^
That on Elisha the hand of GOD was;
Then said Elisha make ditches quickly,
In great abundance in this fair valley.
Thus says the LORD, ye neither w^ nor rain
Shall see, and yet the ditches of the plain
Shall be filled with water, that ye may
Both ye and all your cattle drink this day^
This thing is light, GOD may it soon c^mand,
The Moabites he shall put in your hand;
And ye shall smite every fenced city,
And als ye shall fell down evry good tr^
Ye shall also their wells of water stop,
That in their thirst they receive not a drop;
As he had said, so water came anon,
With abundance by the way of Edom.
When Moabites heard that the Kings that day
^re come to fight, they in their best array,
^th armor bright then all stood in the border,
^s for Battle these men were set in order.
When Moabites rose in the morning soon,
^old the Sun upon these waters shone;
^e Sun beams made these waters to seem red,
^e Moabites said surely it is blood;
^e Kings surely have one another slain,
^e spoil for us now safely does remain:
^en they came to the Camp of Israel,
^e Israelites upon them fiercely fell,
that they fled from Israel speedily,
^o did them chase unto their own country;
^eir cities fair they did beat down at last,
^on their fields each man a stone did cast
(...) of his sling, and stopped every well,
^eir fairest trees also they did down fell.
When Moabs King saw the Battle too sore
^t him, he took seven hundred men therefore,
(...) break even throw unto great Edoms King,
(...) finding that he could not do that thing;
(...) eldest Son he took before them all,
whom for an offering he burnt on the wall;
^is eldest Son belonged to Edoms King,
Whom Moab had as Captive in keeping.
When Edom saw, that for to save his Son
Israel would not break up that siege right so^
He in his heart being full of fury,
Against Isr'al returned to his country.
Then a certain poor afflicted widow
Came to Elisha with grief and sorrow,
Saying, My husband a Prophet is dead,
Thou know right well that he the LO^ indeed
Did fear; And now alas the creditour
Is come to take my two sons at this hour,
To be bond men; To her with great pity
Elijah said, what shall I do for thee?
Tell me, said he, what have thou in thine ho^
A pot of oil, said she, who had no spouse.
Go, said Elisha, and vessels borrow
From thy neighbors, yea borrow not a few*
When thou comes in, then shut the doo^ hind,
For Gods blessing on that oil thou shall find
When she her pot in these vessels did power,
All the vessels were filled in that hour;
When all was sought there were no vessels m^
In all the house, the oil did stay therefore:
How all was done she to the Prophet told,
^o did appoint all the oil to be sold,
^^ay debt of the first and readiest,
(...) after that to live upon the rest.
After all this it fell upon a day,
^t to Shunem Elisha had his way,
^ere was a woman full of charity,
(...) him constrained her guest for to be;
(...) so it was as often as he did pass
(...) them, he entered and no stranger was.
Then said she to her husband lovingly,
^s man of God which often passes by
(...) a good man; to us a matter small
^ill be for him to build on the wall
^hamber, with a table stool, a bed,
^d candlestick; If such a guest be fed
^o our house, it shall be found our best,
^so we do the LORD will bless the rest.
So it fell that Elisha on a day,
(...) to this house of Shunem made his way;
^en said he to Gehazi his servant,
^s Shunamite call thou incontinent,
^hen she was come and did before him stand,
(...) earnestly did desire t'understand,
that thing he might for her great care procure,
^th King Captain whereof she might be sure.
Among mine own people, said she I dwell,
Thou need'st not King, nor yet the Capta^ tell
Of mine estate; At last said Gehazi,
This is the point, this is the verity,
She has no child in all her rich household
To be their heir, and als her Lord is old.
Then said Elisha about this season,
Of time of life thou shall embrace a son;
Then said she to him, Oh now do not lie
To thine handmaid, but speak the verity;
So it befell that at the same season
She did conceive, and after bare a son.
When he was grown it fell upon a day;
That this young child with his father to play
Went out among reapers, at last he said,
Unto his father, oh my head, my head;
His father dear said to a lade shortly,
This sick child now to his mother carry;
When she him got, she set him on her knee,
About the noone sickness made him to die:
Then she went up and laid him on the bed
Of Elisha, the dear servant of God,
On him she shut the door and went away,
And to her husband thus and thus day say;
Send me I pray a young man with an ass,
That to Elisha I may shortly pass;
Why will thou go, said he to her, I pray,
(...) is not new Moon, nor yet sabbath day;
Yet let me go, said she, all shall be well,
^er ass she sadled, and came to Carmel
unto Elisha, so it came to pass,
^hen he her saw, wondering what matter was,
^e said anon to servant Gehazi,
^he Shunamite behold, what can this be?
^o run and meet her from this mount Carmel,
and know of her if all at home do well;
^ll well, said she, then at Elishas feet
^^e fell down there, and then began to weep;
Then Gehazi came fast to thrust away
^he Shunamite in great distress that day;
^et her alone, said Elisha, behold
^reat grief of heart, which GOD has not me told.
She said, did I desire a Son to have?
^id I not say, see thou me not deceive?
Then said Elisha unto Gehazi,
^^rd up thy loins, and take my staff quickly,
^e that no man thou salute by the way,
^or do no thing that may procure delay;
^hen thou art come with speed unto the place,
See that this staff thou lay on the ch^ face;
But the mother would not leave Elisha,
For so she swear by the great Jehovah:
Then she arose, Elisha did follow,
All for to stint the Shunamits sorrow.
Then Gehazi the staff upon the face
Of the child laid, but during all that space
Was neither voice nor yet any hearing,
Wherefore he turned to Elisha, saying
The child is not awaked, there is no life;
Then Elisha came with that worthy wife;
And saw the child laid dead upon his bed,
Then to them all the good Elisha said,
Retire your self and let me here alone
Be with the child, then they retired anon,
Then Elisha with zeal began to pray,
He went up als, and upon the child lay;
He mouth to mouth, and eyes to eyes did joi^
And hands to hands, and stretched him^ upon
The young dead child, there without h^ harm
Then the young childs flesh anon wa^ warm:
Then he returned and walked to and fro,
And on the child he stretched him also.
^hen at the last the young child seven times neesd
(...) eyes were opened, and so was revived:
(...) calling for the Shunamite anon,
^^a said to her, Take up thy Son:
^^n she went in and full of comforts sweet,
(...) down at the Prophet Elishas feet;
(...) bowed her self humbly unto the ground,
^ling swetly for her great comforts found.
after Elisha came unto Gilgal,
(...) great dearth which troubled great and small,
(...) on the great pot said he to make meat,
^t the sons of the Prophets now may eat;
^en the servant heard these Elishas words,
(...) went and of a wild vine gathred gourds,
^lap full which he shred into the pot,
(...) at these herbs were that servant then knew not;
^en the Prophets these herbs began to eat,
(...) cried out that death was in their meat;
(...) Elisha bad his servants bring meal,
^^ch put in pot they did no more death feel.
^hen Naaman great Captain of the host
Syria, who would have spared no cost
^e helped of his vile leprosy,
^rn'd of a maid, who by captivity
(...) in his house, that in Samaria
There was a Prophet called Elisha
Who could him help, and heal most perfectly
Of his disease of woeful leprosy.
Then said the King of Syria, Go to,
I will now send a fair letter unto
Jehoram King, who guides Israel,
Then the man went, and took with him of al^
Best things; Of silver he took ten talents,
Six thousand pieces of gold, of rayments
Ten changes, and so brought unto the King,
The Kings letter containing this saying,
Behold therewith I have sent unto thee
Naaman to be healed of leprosy.
When King Jehoram heard this letter read,
He in amazement this utt'red and said,
Am I a God to kill or make alive?
Who in best Physic can so deeply dive?
Wherefore now see, it is easy to tell,
That he now seeks against me a quarrel.
When Elisha had heard how that the King
Had rent his clothes, he sent him this saying,
Be not amazed, let him now come to me,
And he shall know that a Prophet surely
Is in Israel; So to Elishas door
Naaman came, and stood there it before,
With horse, charets, in pomp and dignity,
Then a servant Elisha sent quickly
With this message, go to the Jordan fair,
and sev'n times wash thee in the water there,
^o shall thy flesh again come unto thee,
^hou shall be clean, and that most perfectly.
But Naaman was wroth, and went away,
and said, Behold, I thought the man this day
^ill surely come and pray unto his GOD,
And touch the place and cleanse me of this rod;
^^ana, Pharpar right well I can tell,
^e better rivers then these of Israel:
May I not wash in them, and so be clean?
^us he turned and all in rage was seen.
Then came to him his servant thus saying,
My father, if the Prophet some great thing
^d ordained thee, would thou not have it done?
(...) much rather when thou thy health so soon
^y have by washing in water softly?
^sh and be clean, he says no mere to thee.
^t that wise word great Captain Naaman,
^waded was soon to wash in Jordan;
His flesh like childs flesh was then cleare^ seen
To be restord, so Naaman was clean.
Then he returned with all his company,
And stood before Elisha, who did see
What God had done, then said Na'man behold,
I this in heart will all my lifetime hold:
And now I will here in thy presence tell,
In all the earth but only in Israel
There is no GOD; Therefore hear t^ saying?
I pray thee take from me now a blessing:
What? said Elisha no blessing I crave,
Of thy presents nothing I will receive:
And though he urged and request did make,
Yet Elisha his present would not take.
Then said Na'man, Elisha I pray thee,
Let two Mules burdens of earth unto me
Be given, for henceforth I here give m^ word,
To quite all stranqe gods for to serve the LORD:
In this thing the LORD thy servant p^don,
If I henceforth in the house of Rimmon,
Bow down my self with my Master and King,
^he LORD pardon thy servant in this thing:
Then said Elisha go in peace this day,
Thus he departed and so went away.
But Gehazi did from his Master slide,
After the man he went to get a bribe:
(...) will said he some earand to him make;
(...) will now run and some what of him take,
When Naaman saw the man thus running,
He lighted down and said? What is the thing
That thou desir'st? What now? Are all things well?
All well, said he; My Master bids thee tell,
Behold even now there be come unto me
From Ephraim mount two young men most worthy,
Sons of the Prophets, let them from thee have
^art of the present, nothing more I crave,
But of good silver only one talent,
And with that als two changes of raiment.
Then said Na'aman take two talents for one,
Them with the raiment he soon laid upon
Two of his servants, who bare them before
Gehazi, who fearing his Master sore,
Took the base bribe, and sent them back quickly,
For so he thought to hide his villainy.
Then he went in and stood before his Lord,
Who said to him, now tell me in a word
Whence come thou? Tell me what thou, h^ done;
Thy servant went no whether said he soon:
Fie man, said he, went not mine heart w^ thee,
When the man turned again so speedily?
From his charet to meet a crafty knave
Who ran after a shameful bribe to crave:
Is this a time, money, garments, to seek,
Oxen or sheep, vineyards or servants eke
Behold therefore Naamans leprosy
To thee and thine shall cleave most speedily:
When this was said, that men GODS f^ might know,
That villain went out, leper whit as snow.
Then the Prophets unto Elisha said,
We can not well in this strait room abide,
Let us we pray thee go unto Jordan,
And there a great beam shall by every man
Be cut, that we GODS servants in Israel
May have a place wherein that we may dwel^
^en said Elisha make ready to go;
^en said one, thou with us must be also,
^will, said he, and so with them he went,
unto Jordan, where they incontinent
^id cut down wood, but as one did down fell
(...) beam, his Axe head in the water fell:
^hen the man cried with great grief and sorrow,
^as Master this axe I did borrow.
Elisha said, I will thee now solace,
(...) in Jordan thou can point the right place
^here it did fall; Which when he show to him,
^e by a stick made the axe head to swim:
^o Elisha asswag'd his great sorrow,
^y rendering the axe which that man did borrow.
Then Syrias King against all Israel,
^tended war by his servants counsel,
(...) such and such, a most fit place said he,
^ncampad shall my greatest forces be,
^hen Elisha unto Jehoram King,
^nt speedy message to warn him faying,
^ke heed that thou now pass not such a place,
^or there in wait are foes thee to deface;
^hen Jehoram harkening this counsel wise,
^id save himself, there more then once or twice.
For this the King of Syrias heart was sore
^roubled, his servants he did call therefore,
And said unto them, can no man me tell
Who traitors us to the King of Israel?
Then said one, O King think not so I pray,
For what in thy bedchamber thou do say,
That Elisha can most perfectly tell
To Jehoram the King of Israel.
Go said the King, spy me where is t^ man:
Behold, said they, he is now in Dothan;
Therefore the King sent thither with great boast
Of horses charets, a most mighty host;
Then came these men by night who were m^ stout,
And compass did the city round about;
When Elishas servant was up early,
Behold an host did compass the city;
Then he all trembling did speak so and so,
Alas, good Master, how now shall we do?
Then said Elisha, thou needst not to fear,
For more with us then with these men be hee^
Then Elisha unto the Lord did pray,
That God his eyes would open in that day,
When GOD him heard as he did then desire,
His servant, horses, and charets of fire,
Did on the mountain then most clearly see,
About Elisha for guard and safety.
Then Elisha most bold in all distress,
^ntreated God to smite them with blindness:
and so he did; Then Elisha did say
^o these blind men, this is not the right way;
^f ye would the straight path unto these take
whom ye now seek, follow me at the back;
^ut he them led unto Samaria;
^hen to the Lord said Prophet Elisha,
^pen the eyes of these me, n I thee pray,
that they may see where they remain this day:
^hen God opened their eyes and they did see,
that they were in Samarias city.
Then Jehoram as his heart did indite,
Cried Elisha my father shall I smite?
Sall I them smite? No, said Elisha, spare
For all these men now Gods prisoners are:
Would thou these smite, whom thou by sword or bow
Have taken captive? would thou that allow?
Set rather bread and water them before,
That they may eat and drink, and come no more
To fight with us; so as GODS man did say
The King he did, and these men went away.
After Benhadad King of Syria,
Came with an host against Samaria:
The siege was sore, great als was the famine,
An Asses-head which rarely has been seen,
For fourscore pieces of silver was sold,
Doves doung was dear, what one small kabb^ could hold,
Cost there at that time no less then twenty
Pieces, such was the dearth in that city.
Then Joram King upon the wall passing,
Heard a woman cry, Help my LORD O King;
If GOD, said he, help thee not in distress,
I cannot by Barne-floore, or yet winepresse:
Yet, said the King, tell me what aileth thee:
This woman, said, she in fraud said to me,
We hunger sore, give us thy son for meat
The day, and after we my son shall eat.
At her desire my poor son we first boiled
But on the nixt day, she false me beguild;
She hid her sone; this is a true saying,
This makes me cry, help me my O Lord O King
When the King heard these words of gre^ sorrow,
He rent his clothes, these who did him follow
Beheld and saw what cloths he had within,
Even base sackcloth nearest unto his skin,
Then said Joram, the LORD do so and more
To me, if that Elishas head therefore
Shall stand on him; Elisha in his house
Did sit when Joram, most unrighteous,
A messenger sent swift from him before,
But ere he came, Elisha grieved sore,
^id to the Elders, See this murth'rers seed
^ath sent a man to take away mine head,
^hen he comes, let him no entry find,
^ere with a sound his Master feet behind:
^en came the man with this blasphemous word,
^e will no longer wait upon the Lord;
^his ill from him is, he will no help send,
^e need not look that he us now defend.
Then said Elisha, hear from Jehovah
^o morrow in the fair Samaria,
^oth flower and barley in a great cheapnesse
^all be for to relieve this great distress.
Then said a Lord on whose hand leaned the King,
^his Prophet tells us a most scornful thing;
though GOD Heavens windows by his arm mighty
should open wide, this thing it could not be:
^hen said Elisha, thou shall see that meat,
^ut God of it shall not give thee to eat.
While Samaria was in this estate,
^oure leprous men were lying at its gate;
^^ch to other said in perplexity,
If we sit here; we will not fail die;
Now let us go unto the Syrian host;
Men pinched with hunger must not men's boast:
If they alive us save, then shall we live,
If they us kill, to be well we believe;
Then they rose up in the twilight most fair,
They to the camp came but found no man the^
For the great Lord the Syrians in his boast
Had troubled sore with noise of a great host:
For certain, said they, the King of Israel
Has hired Hittits and Egyptians tall,
To come upon us wherefore they that day
Troubled arose, in have and went away:
They left their tents their horses and their
And als the camp, and all that therein was.
When these lepers came to the Syrians ca^
With joyful hearts they all both ate and dra^
When that was done these four incontinen^
Did carry thence both silver and raiment:
What they desired none did them there forbi^
They got riches, and in the ground it hid;
Then each man said, This is a day of grace,
We do not well for this to hold our peace
In good tidings; If we to morning light
^y, some mischief will upon us light:
^w therefore come that we may go and tell
Kings household, what the great Eternel
^h done for us: Then to the city soon
^y went, and told perfectly was done.
When the King heard this, he arose by night,
^d said, This is but policy and slight;
^se men do know that we be much hungry,
^refore to draw us from our strong city,
^y hide themselves, that when we are come out,
^ey may surprise and compass us about.
Then said one, let five horse men go and view,
(...) see if what the lepers say be true;
^ese five men, as the King did them allow,
^ent on horse back the Syrians to follow;
^ey followed them unto the fair Jordan,
^ong the Syrians there was not a man
^ho had a heart or hand to fight that day;
^r have their clothes and arms they cast away.
When the Messengers returned and told,
that God had done by mercies manifold,
^e people went and their rich tents did spoil,
^us God himself did that day Syria foil:
Elisha had spoken of cheapnesse,
^f flower and barley, so it came to pass.
But that great Lord who doubted in his h^
The plenty saw, but of it did not taste;
For while the people went out in a spate
To get vivers, they trod him in the gate.
Then said Elisha to the Shunamite,
Go from thy place to another more meet;
For the LORD surely will for whole ye^ seven
Afflict Israel with a sore famine:
Then she arose at Elishas command,
And sojourned in the Philistines land.
At seven years end she returned and said
Unto the King, Oh pity thine handmai^
My house and land cause now to me store;
Grant me mine own, O King I crave more.
In this mean time the King with Gehazi
Did talk and say, Now briefly tell to me,
What great wonders the mighty LORD JOV^
Has wrought by thy good Master Elisha;
As Gehazi all such things was telling,
Behold the woman comes before the King,
Whose Son he had restored unto life,
Then said Gehazi, behold here the wife,
And this her Son whom by the Lords power,
El^^ha did from death to life restore.
When the King heard the woman's petition,
^t she might have of all restitution;
Officer he sent who went therefore,
^d unto her, her whole rents did restore.
Then to Damascus came good Elisha,
^d Benhadad, the King of Syria,
^ng then sick, one came to him and told,
^od Elisha the man of GOD behold
^hither come; Then unto Hazael,
^e Syrian King his mind did freely tell;
(...) to the man, said he, and in thine hand
^ke him a present, for so I command;
^is also try, for so it does me please,
I recover shall of this disease.
Then Hazael with a most rich present
^to Elisha went incontinent;
^urty Camels burden Hazael thus,
^ought to Elisha from rich Damascus;
^ho said, Benhadad King of Syria,
^th sent Hazael to thee Elisha
(...) try, if now to tell him it the please,
(...) he recover shall of this disease.
Go, said Elisha, to Benhadad say,
^o recover most certainly thou may,
^owbeit the Lord has clearly showed me,
that at this time King Benhadad shall die.
When this was said, he set his countenanc^
On Hazael, on him his eyes did glance
With piercing looks; then in a sorrow deep
Good Elisha the man of God did weep:
Then Hazael said, I proy thee me tell,
Why weeps my Lord? Alas for Israel
Said Elisha, for I now clearly see
What great mischief shall to Israel by thee
Be done; their strong holds thou shall s^ fire,
Their young men slay, thou shall in rage ire
Their children dash, thou shall als their w^
With child rip up; when this was all said, (...)
Hazael said this is a hard saying,
Am I a dog that I should do such thing?
Then to him said the Prophet Elisha,
GOD says, thou shall be King of Syria?
Then he came to Benhadad speedily,
Who said, what said Elisha unto thee?
He told me, said he, that thou should recov^
Of this disease, so he did not discover
What he had heard; shortly it came to pass
That he a thick cloth spread upon his face;
So after Benhadad the King was dead,
His servant Haza'l reigned in his stead.
After Elisha had anointed King
^u, who down ill Ahabs house did bring
^ehus sons time who called was Joash,
^ha fell in a deadly sickness,
^en to Elisha came Joash the King,
^o said these words over his face weeping,
^y father, my father, whom Israel
^ir strong Charet and Horsemen well did call.
Then said Elisha, take to thee a bow;
^d arrows als on shooting to bestow:
^en he did as Elisha did command,
^ha put his hand upon his hand;
^en the window and now shoot a shot,
^d Elisha, so the King, as by lot,
^ected well, did shoot; This sharp arrow,
^d Elisha, to thee declares that now,
^is is the arrow of Gods deliverance
^m Syria, whereon he shall vengeance
^ke by his might; Again unto the King
^sha had this Prophetic, saying,
^ke now thine arrows, and smite on the ground,
^r in Gods eyes Israel has favor found:
^en he smote thrice, but afterward did stay,
^r this Elisha most wroth said that day,
five or six times thou had well the ground
^itten, thou had a full victory found
^ainst Syria, who do you much despise,
Whereas thou shall smite Syria but thrice.
Then God by death Elisha took away,
And Israel was invaded that day
By Moabits; they bearing a dead man,
Afraid by troops, to Elishas grave ran,
And let him down; As soon as he the she
And bones did touch, he stood upon his feet.
The Use.
Let Prophets learn by Elishas practice,
Plough and Oxen to quite for GODS servi^
Who serves the Lord, he great advant^ has,
Advantage both in life and als in death:
Let Prophets learn by Elishas desire,
A doubled sprit of grace for to require:
Silver and gold at last men shall disdain,
And shall confess that grace is only gain.
10. JEHU. Subsisting or advanced.
WHen Elisha an young man did appoint,
To go with oil Jehu for to anoint,
The young man went to Ramoth Gilead,
^d did all, as good Elisha him bade;
^hen he there came, the Captains were sitting,
^en he to Jehu addressd this saying.
To thee O Captain I have an earand,
which thee to tell Elisha did command;
^en he arose and went into an house
^ith this young man, who with oil precious
^d him anoint, subjoining this saying,
^ou art by GOD appointed to be King:
^e bloody house of Ahab thou shall smite,
^r his great sins of malice and despite,
^e blood and whooredome of vile Jezebel
^all be avenged by the Eternell,
^r the whole house of Ahab shall perish,
^OD shall leave none against the wall to piss:
^is house shall be, says the great Jehovah,
^ke Jeroboams or like Baasha:
^ikewise in the portion of Jezreel,
^he dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel,
^r her vile sins, and her most bloody fury,
^hen she is dead none shall her carcass bury:
When this young man had thus all these t^ said,
The door he opened, and with speed he fled
When this was done, one said unto Jehu^
Wherefore to thee came now this mad fellow
Then said he, this man's communication
Ye well know, I need no more expression.
All is most false, said they, which thou do^
Now tell us truly what thou heard'st this (...)
I will not feign, said he, but will you tell,
He me anointed has King of Israel.
When these men heard of Jehu this sayin^
They trumpets blew, and cried, Jehu is Kin^
So Jehu King against Joram did conspire,
To Jezreel he in wrath hot like fire
Rod in charet for there Joram to slay
With Ahazia, who was come that day,
To see Joram who there cured his wounds,
Made by Hazael fighting in his bounds.
Then on a high tower in fair Jezreel
Stood a watchman, who to the King did
I clearly see a huge great company,
Then Joram said take an horseman quickly
And send to meet them; to them let him
Is it for peace that ye come so this day?
When he thus said, stout Jehu in a rage
Said, turn behind me, a most sure presage
(...) bloody war: The watchman this seeing
^ow all appeared, declared unto the King.
Yet once again a horseman to them send,
^id King Joram, that what these men intend
^e may now know, then went that second man,
^ho one horseback to Jehus army ran,
^d said, whether peace or war intend ye?
(...) him Jehu als said, Turn behind me:
^en said the watchman in words true and plain,
(...) came to them, but comes not again;
^hink I see Jehu son of Nimshi,
^r in driving he does drive furiously.
Then Joram said, make shortly ready now,
^at in our charets we against Jehu
^y go; Then Joram armed went anon
^th Ahazia his own sisters Son
^g of Judah he went to that Battle,
^d met Jehu in the plat of Jezre'l
^ere Naboth died; When Joram saw Jehu,
^cri'd aloud, Is it peace for us now?
What peace, said he, as long as Jezebel,
^ne ill mother with whooredomes does rebel,
^l als witchcrafts? Then Joram turned quickly
Ahaziah, and said, treachery
Then Jehu drew a bow in anger hot,
(...) Jehoram between the arms he shote:
The piercing arrow went out at his heart,
And he anon sanke down in his charet.
Then said Jehu to Bidkar his Captain,
Take up this corpse, and cast it with disdain
On Naboths field: When we did serve Ahab
We heard by God this burden on him laid;
Surely, said God, I have seen yesterday
The blood of Naboth: In this plat repay
I will that murder, in that plat of ground
Let him be cast, that the Lord may be found
Both just and true; When Ahaziah King
This slaughter saw, he in his heart fainting,
With all his might in his charet did fly,
And Jehu after followed him quickly;
To smite him, als his servants he did spur
With cries, who smote him going up to Gu^
Which is by Ibla'm; he to Megiddo
Did fly anon, and there he died also.
Then Jehu came with haste to Jezreel,
Where was the witch, and vile whore Jezeb^
When she it heard, she then painted her face,
And tired her head with folies in that place:
She looked out, and said unto Jehu,
Had Zimri peace who his own Master slew?
Then Jehu lifting up his face unto
The window, said, who is on my side, who
To him three Eunuchs looked out anon,
(...) them he said, see that ye throw her down;
^d so they did, so that then from the wall
^r sprinkled blood on the Horses did fall:
^ere King Jehu in zeal and anger hot
^eene Jezebel quickly troad under foot.
When he was come in for to eat and drink,
Jezebel he began thus to think;
^e see now this cursed woman, said he,
^r she is a Kings daughter verily,
^e bury her; they went at his commands,
^t only the skull, feet, palms of her hands
^ey found; the greedy dogs got all the rest;
^en Jehu heard this, he esteemed best
think of that which Propet Elijah
^d threatened from his Master Jehovah.
In the same place of pleasant Jezreel,
^e dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel,
^rvile carkase as doung upon the field
^all be, no faird or force shall there it shield;
^hile her dead bones scattred in Jezreel
^all be, none shall say; This is Jez^bel.
Thus this ill wife of wicked King Ahab,
^st Queen, last queen, a vile and dirty drab,
^as to the dogs by the Lord given for meat,
^ho did her eat, except skull, palms, and feet.
In Samria King Ahab had then
Of sons that were in count threescore and ten;
Then Jehu wrote to these of Jezreel,
And Samaria, see if ye expel
My forces can; Of Ahab take a Son,
And see if ye darre set him on the Throne.
They at these words were then exceeding lie
Afraid, and said, it were to us folly
To fight a man, whose force and mighty hand
Two great Kings were not able to withstand;
Therefore the Rulers sent unto Jehu,
Saying, We are thy humble servants now;
What thou desire, now command and say,
With one consent we will Jehu obey.
Then Jehu wrote to them of the city,
If ye be mine and will hearken to me,
Take the Sons of Ahab and Jezebel,
And send their heads to me in Jezreel:
Threescore and ten Sons of Ahab they slew,
Their heads in baskets they sent to Jehu:
What they had done, men told unto the King,
Who said, lay them in heaps till the morning:
So Jehu King direct'd by the Eternel,
Slew all that Ahab had in Jezreel,
Both all his great men, his kinsfolks and Priests
None would he save for prayer or requests.
Then from Jezreel Jehu went away,
^to Samaria there he by the way
^d meet comeing Ahazias brethren,
(...) them he said, who, or what sort of men
^e ye? said they, we are of Royal blood,
^e are come down, so it seems to us good,
^ndly to s^e the children of the King
^d them salute, we mean none other thing.
Then said Jehu, take all these men alive,
^ho are in number thirty seven and five;
^ey to obey the precepts of Jehu,
^d take them all, and at a pit them slew.
After Jehu did meet Jehonadab,
^ho was the Son of one, called Rechab;
(...) him he said; Is thine heart right with me,
(...) mine with thee? He said, it is truly;
^en said Jehu, give to me now thine hand,
^ter my Coch as King I thee command;
^w come, said he, according to my word,
^d see what zeal I have had for the Lord.
Then Jehu came unto Samaria,
(...) the direction of the great Jovah;
(...) Ahabs race he left not one at all,
^ho after him did piss against the wall:
^us he fulfilled the words of Jehovah,
which he before did speak by Elijah.
Then Jehu by a goodly stratageme,
^th'red the people, and said unto them,
Ahab served but with a little touch
Great god Baal, but I will serve him much;
Therefore to me gather the Prophets all,
That I with them may serve the god Baal;
Let none be wanting at this gods service,
For I for Baal have a sacrifice.
Let this be done, see that ye me believe
If any come not, he sure shall not live,
But Jehu all this did by subtilty,
That Baals service he might utterly
Destroy; Jehu commanded to proclaim,
That he a great assembly did ordain.
Then Baals men, his service to defend,
Came to his house, which they from end to en^
Did fill; when Jehu saw them all present,
Unto a servant he gave commandment,
To bring forth the vestments for all quickly
From Baals house, where Baals men only
Could claim a room: When Baals men beg
To sacrifice, King Jehu did ordain,
Fourscore of men who stood armed without
To go and slay, and compass them about;
If any, said he, of these ye let go,
Your life surely shall be for his also.
Then the stout Captains at King Jehus w^
Did smite these men with the edge of the swo^
And cast them out and to the city went,
T^ere they from Baals house incontinent
^ught the images, which they in great ire
(...) break and burn in the midst of a fire:
^ey Baals house brake down without delay,
^ich a draught-house they made unto this day;
^us Jehu strengthened by the Eternel,
^stroyed Baal out of Israel.
Then to Jehu the Lord made a promise,
^cause he had against Ahab done service,
^at the fourth man that should come of his race,
^ould sit as King and rule into his place:
^t to walk justly Jehu took no heed,
^r his vain heart was not upright indeed;
Ahabs slaughter he did greatly fail;
^r what he did was not in holy zeal
^r Gods glory; but for commendation,
^r Throne, Scepter, and vain ostentation:
(...) zeal he seemed to do for the Eternel,
^d yet did still worship calves at Bethel
(...) last Jehu with his fathers softly
^id sleep deaths sleep, and in the fair city
^f Samaria, after his last breath
^as buried; a way for all the earth.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn when they with for^ and might
Do serve the Lord, to have an heart u^ right;
If serving God men have another aim;
Their vain glory at last shall end with sham^
We may here learn in Jehus history,
That all is not zeal that seems zeal to be:
Men may do much, as fight, preach, good m^ save,
And yet for all be but a painted grave.
The use of Jezebels death.
Let Queens here also learn by Jezebel,
With vain idols not to greeve th Eternel*
For he there bones with Jezebels can dash,
And unto dogs also can give their flesh.
11. JEHOAHAZ. The possession of God.
THis Jehus son God to the Throne did brin^
Who seventeene years of Israel was King
Though God him set up by his power and might,
^t he did that which was ill in his sight;
^eastly man, by the calves of Bethel,
^th Jeroboam he the Eternel
^d much provoke; Als in Samaria
^ere stood a grove, which greeved Jehovah;
^r this the anger of the Eternel
^as kindled much against all Israel:
(...) Hazael and also Benhadad
^rr'd up to plague this people that was bad.
Then Jeho'haz unto the Lord did pray,
^ho heard his suit, and that without delay,
^r God was moved with compassion,
^hen he did see their great oppression:
(...) man was found by the hand of Jovah,
^ho took from Isra l the yoke of Syria;
^or this Kings sins God made his forces small,
^ftie horsemen with ten charets for all,
^en thousand foot he had, a most poor King,
^is men were made like the dust by threshing.
The Use.
^et Kings here learn that vile idolatry
(...) a great foe to all prosperity:
(...) King and Subjects do what is unjust,
Their Thrones and States shall threshen b^ to dust.
12. JEHOASH. Burning or distrusting.
THis second man from grandfather Jehu,
Did wicked Kings in wickedness follow*
This man, as by the history appears,
In Samaria did reign sixteen years:
He Amaziah in Battle alive
Did take, and als led him away captive:
After, he spoiled the house of great Jovah,
And cari'd all unto Samaria:
He ceased not from Ieroboams sin,
But like a fool rashly did walk therein:
In Samaria after his last breath
He buried, was, a way for all the earth.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn who would in mem^rie
Have good report, to shun idolatry:
Let Kings here learn that spoilers of Gods house
Shall not long after have state prosperous.
13. JEROBOAM. Contending or striveing with the people.
THis was the third from grand father Jehu,
He did ill Kings in wickedness follow:
^his Jeroboam Ieroboams sin
^id well allow, and also walked therein:
according to the word of great Jovah,
which he did speak by the Prophet Jonah;
^e did restore Isreal's coast and gain,
from Hamath unto the sea of the plain,
^or the Lord saw Isra'ls affliction
^as very bitter, and had compassion;
^or at this time none was shut up or left,
^oor Israel of all help was bereft.
^he Lord said, Not that he from under heaven
Would wholly blot out his own Isra'ls name,
^ut would them save, as it then came to pass
^y Jeroboam the Son of Ioash;
^his man, as by the history appears,
^id reign the space of forty and one years.
The Use.
^et Kings here learn that vile idolatry,
among virtues ressembles a dead flee:
Such may do good and seem to have G^ favor,
But this dead fly sends out a stinking sav^
14. ZECHARIAH. The rememberance of the Lord.
Here Zechariah last of Iehus race,
Who on the Throne of Israel had place*
He feared not God, for he wicked in heart,
From Ieroboams sins did not depart.
At last Shallum in rage and fury hot,
Before the people Zechariah smot:
He six months did reign in Israel,
When that was done by Shallums hand he fel^
The Use.
Let Kings here learn that sin is not a sport,
It ends their days, and cuts their honors she
15. SHALLUM. Peace, Prosperity.
THen Shallum King who was Son of Iabe^
Came to the Throne by his great wicked^
A full month he did the Scepter sway,
Then Menahem this murderer did slay.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn that sin is not a sport,
It ends their days and cuts their honors short.
Who for to rise make other men to fall,
Shall rush down shortly like a trott'ring wall:
Let Kings here learn that conquest is not good
Which is obtained by shedding humane blood.
16. MENAHEM. A roarer.
THen Menahem with the sword smote Tipsah,
And also the coasts thereof from Tirzah,
Because to him they opened not their gates,
All that he found in all these bounds and feats:
With sword this Roarer smote most cruelly,
Of the women he did cut the belly
Where children lay; He most wicked in heart,
From Ieroboams sins did not depart.
At last came Pull the great Assyrian King,
Against the land great forces he did bring:
Then Menahem great sums to him did pay,
So Pull with all his forces went away;
Ten years he did reign, and after by death
This King he went the way of all the earth.
The Use.
Let Kings beware to stain their memory
With vile murder, and blood of cruelty,
To kill women it is most inhumane,
In such doings is neitheir glore nor gain.
17. PEKAJAH. The opning of GOD, or brought out by GOD
THen Menahems son, called Pekajah,
Began to reign in fair Samaria;
He feared not GOD, for he wicked in heart,
From Jeroboams sins did not depart.
Then Pekah the son of Remalia,
A captain stout, did against Pekajah
Conspire, whom he without mercy or grace
Did with the sword kill in his own palace,
^ith Argob Arieh and other fifty,
^f Gileadites who felt his cruelty.
The Use.
^t Kings here learn that sin is not a sport,
^ends their days, it cuts their honors short;
(...) to their children they seek glore or gain
^nlawfully such things shall not remain:
Menahem could look hi^ of his grave,
^kajah might say. Nothing now I have
(...) all thy conquest: Thus it is not good,
(...) come to Thrones by shedding humane blood.
18. PEKAH. Open.
After that Pekah the Son of Remalia,
Had with the sword slain the King Pekajah,
(...) force of arms, this wicked man anon,
^d then usurp Isreal's Crown and Throne:
^is murderer was most profane in heart;
^m the vile idols he would not depart,
^ich Jeroboam at Bethel and Dan
^d set up; At last the King Assyrian,
Tiglath, Pilezer with an army strong
Took Kedesh-Hazor, Galile, Jion,
Abel-Beth Ma'chah of fair Naphtali,
The bravest men he in Captivity
Cari'd away unto Assyria.
At last Hoshea the son of Ela,
Against Pekah made a conspiracy,
He wounded Pekah, so that he did die:
Thus King Pekah most cruel and profane,
In the year twenti^ ^f his reign was slain.
The Use.
Let Kings here learn, whose charets are the swords,
That they shall reckon for their deads (...) words:
If they usurp Crown, Scepter, or the Thr^
The LORD shall come with great venge^ anon:
As Peka slew Pekajah to be King,
So Hoshea that Pekah down did bring:
Killers of men rarely this favor have
From GOD to go in peace unto t^ grave.
19. HOSHEA. A savior.
IN Ahaz twelft year King of fair Judah,
Began to reign this man, son of Elah:
^ow Israel were come to their last cast,
^f all their Kings Hoshea was the last:
^e served not Jovah with all his might,
^ut foolishly did evil into his sight;
^et was he not so vain, nor yet so vile
^s other Kings had been in Israel.
At last came up, against this Hoshea,
^halmanezer King of Assyria
unto this King Hoshea a servant
^ecame; To him he gave costly presents,
^ut afterward to be free of this foe,
^e messengers sent to the mighty So
^ng of Egypt: Then Shalmanezer soon
^d shut him up, and bound him in prison:
^hus Hoshea, a man of Elahs line,
^d sway the Scepter the space of years nine.
At this same time Israel was gone astray,
^ey were profane, not caring for GODS way;
^ey vainly feared gods that were no GOD,
therefore God scourged them with the Assyrian rod;
Yea more this vile people with all their mig^
Did secretly these things that were not right:
They built High places in every city,
They like the Heathen with idolatry
Provoked the LORD yea like most foo^ fools,
They took pleasure to serve most vile idols.
Yet against Israel the LORD did testify,
And said, Israel yet return unto me
From your ill ways; if my name ye will fe^
Ye yet to me shall be a people dear.
But from their ill ways they would not part,
Their neck they stifned and hardened their he^
In their mad course they followed vanity,
Running themselves in vile idolatry;
Molten images, calves, and groves they made,
Heavens host also, as though they had been man
They did worship, and for to have their fall,
They did oppoint great service for Baal:
Yet further to provoke the Lord to ire,
They made their children to pass through fire:
For these their sins the LORD by his great mi^
All Israel removed out of his sight
Here for the sins of vile idolatry,
Ye see the end of Isra'ls Monarchy:
^gs of Israel here did end their race,
^ause they were profane and void of grace.
The Use.
Prince and people meditate Gods law,
(...) to provoke see that they stand in awe:
Kings pride against him stiffen their neck,
^ir Crowns, and Thrones, and Scepters he will break:
Nations against the LORD be stout,
(...) will both King and people als root out:
(...) mighty LORD great Jovah has said this,
^ee sin, ye and your King shall perish.
A WATCH WORD, Concerning the forty and one Kings that did reign over GODS
people.
^et Princes learn by these one and forty
How rare it is both good and Prince to be:
^s most clear that it is a heard thing,
(...) be both good and honou'rd as a King;
^eed, lust, and pride, do cogge most easily,
^emselves in hearts poisoned with flattery.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of Ezra.
A Prayer.
WHen night on men dumb silence sha^ distill,
When wearied bones them selves wit^ sleep do fill,
When gloomy darkness husheth every thing,
Then let thy sprit verses of virtue bring
Into my mind, well stored with thy gra e,
Which may the hearts of worthy men solace:
While nights black mantle covreth a gre^ part,
^t thine Aurora shine bright in mine heart:
^hen depths appear where through I cannot ride,
(...) thy great Barge me togh against the tide.
In Babylon thy people years seventie,
^ere we arid much with long captivity;
upon them thou of thy wrath had the flashes
^rought, and had burnt their Temple Town to ashes;
^ut thou who never thy people forsook,
^ith mercies eyes at last did on them look.
These verses LORD now through thy strainer pass,
And make them clean as is the clearest glass,
that by them may appear even to the least,
^ow thou by Ezra, who was scribe and Priest,
^eclared have how good Zorobabel,
^ho in great virtue highly did excel,
^ebuilt the Temple, and how by a jar
^ods peoples foes that worthy work did mar
(...) Cyrus time, until Darius King
unto the cope oedain'd the house to bring.
EZRA An helper.
CHAP. 1.
AFter that Salems Temple had li^ long
Burnt in ashes, and the Jews h^ among
Their foes been captives, GO^ made Cyrus King
Of Persia, to care for rebuilding
Of Gods fair house, for this occasion,
He causd publish a proclamation.
When this was heard these who before di^ mourn,
With joy in have provided to return:
Then to Sheshbazzar in a plenteous store,
The Temples vessels Cyrus did restore.
Chap. 2.
OF the people returned three thousand,
Six hundred and thirty with ready hand
To build the house, which burnt before had been,
Of Priests there came a thousand and seven teene,
^f Levites were a hundred thirty nine,
^ith Nethinims all with courage divine,
^ith them servants of Solomon's children,
^l for to build were well prepared then.
^he Priests which could not show their pedigree,
^ere not permitted in priests place to be:
^he Tirshatha who did the rest command,
^ould not permit that any took in hand.
that any should of holy things make feast,
^ll with Urim and Tummim came a Priest.
^he whole number were forty two thousand,
^hree hundred threescore Jews from Babels land,
^sides servants and maids for service given,
^ere seven thousand three hundred thirty seven,
^ith horses seven hundred, six and thirty,
^ith mules two hundred five and als forty:
^eir Camels were four hundred thirty five,
^ith them they did six thousand asses drive,
^ith seven hundred and also twenty more
^e rich all freely offered to restore
^he house of GOD and build it in his place,
^hey all offered as GOD gave them the grace:
(...) thousand dramnes of gold without delay,
^e thousand pound of silver they did pay;
A hundred Priests garments they did prepare,
Which their courage in building did declare.
Chap. 3.
THen first of all came Prince Zerubabel,
With Jeshua Priest for the Eternel,
They for the Lord a fair Altar did rear,
To offer to him who was Isaks fear;
Their willingness clearly for to declare,
To offer then they in no way did spare:
The workmen well rewarded were no slack,
Each man his charge did gladly undertake:
When the foundations of Gods house were cast,
Some had great joy; Others were all aghast,
And weeped sore, even these who first had seen
What glory in Solomon's works had been:
Of joy andd weeping such was then the noise,
That hardly could one well discern the voice.
Chap. 4
When this great work begun was (...) Gods grace
Then wicked men anon it to disgrace
Rose up by craft, deceit and policy,
Offering them selves with them builders to be;
But not accepted, they in open way
^em for to hinder proudly did essay:
^shlam, Mithridath, Tabeel, and Rekum,
^e Chancellor, and Shimshai Scribe did come
^gether, and against Jerusalem
(...) Artaxerxes they wrote letters then,
^ewing that stubborn Jews who were proudly
^bellious, were rebuilding their city:
^en quickly back the King to them did write,
^at they the work anon should interdite;
^en ceasd the work until the second year
(...) Darius King, who Persias crown did bear.
Chap. 5.
^Hen Zerubabel and Shealtiel both,
Whom GOD with virtue from above did cloth,
^ey by Haggai and als by Zecharie
^ing stirred up, did with all industry
^t forward the great work they had in hand;
^he rest obeyed, and they did well command:
^tnai and Shether-boznai were their foes,
(...) hinder them they did a letter close,
^d sent it to Darius Persias King,
^ewing that Cyrus had done the like thing;
^d now they this of Darius did desire,
that he of Cyrus decree would enquire,
Who would not suffer this great house to be
Rebuilded, because of their mutiny.
Chap. 6.
THen Darius the King made a decree,
That in the house of rolls a search should be,
Made by his servants with all diligence,
And there was found within the Medes Province
A roll, wherein was written a record,
Which did contain the decree word by word
Which Cyrus made, Gods house for to restore,
The height whereof should be cubits threescore,
The breadth as much; and the expenses shall,
From the Kings own house shall be taken all.
When Darius found this enrolled decree,
He it confirmed and ordaind all to be
Provided, so that they should nothing want,
Which might them help either to build o^ plant.
But ye Tatnai and Shetherboznai see,
That to this great work ye no hinder be,
Also I have made a decree most fast,
That whosoever alter this word past,
The timber from his house shall be pulled dow^
And shall be set up, and he hanged thereon:
And that the greater fear men's hearts may fill,
^is house for this shall be made a dounghill:
and God that has his name causd there to dwell,
^estroy shall all Kings and people that shall
^ut to their hand to Alter or destroy
^his house of GOD, who does me now employ
^or this great work, for this I a decree
^ave made, let all be done right speedily:
^hen this was heard the Jews with diligence
^id build, and the King did pay the expense:
They prosp'red much through the sweet prophecy
^f Haggai, and likewise of Zachary.
In the sixth year of Darius the King,
^he Jews GODS house unto the cope did bring,
^he Priests having this good occasion,
^id keep the feast of dedication,
and the Passover with joy and gladness,
^or God had looked on their sore distress
And made them joyful, for he turned the heart
Of Darius, great kindness to impart,
^o the builders which he did still extend,
Until that great work was brought to an end.
Chap. 7.
NOw in the seventh year of the happy reign,
Of Artaxerxes of great Babel King,
Ezra the Scribe, with his most cunning speac^
Came from Babel to Salem for to teach
Gods people, where this good man found an^
Gods gracious hand there to be him upon:
For Ezra had prepared well his heart,
To seek and search Gods law in every part:
He Gods statutes and judgments als did pre^
Unto Israel both by works and speech.
Unto Ezra great Artaxerxes King,
Commission gave that he with every thing
Needful for Gods house should be furnished w^
This Ezra got under the Kings broad seal:
The King with his counselors did agree
Both gold and silver to give most freely
For that effect; The King als did ordain
That what silver scribe Ezra could obtain,
From People, Priests, all should be by and by
Employed for God, rams and lambs to buy
For sacrifice, and what should be wanting,
Should all be furnished by Darius King,
Who did with speed his Treasurers command
To have all such things ready in their hand,
Even Silver, Wheat, and Salt, and Oil, (...) Wine,
To be for God from the King a propine,
For why, said he, Should God wrath fearful bri^
Against the realm or against the King?
When this was done, Ezra rejoiced greatly,
^at God had moved the King to beautify
^s house in Salem, and that he in end
^s mercy to him richly did extend:
^^en said he, I was streth'ned mightily,
(...) the hand of the Lord was upon me.
^^en I did gather out of Israel
^o go with me, even men which did excel.
Chap. 8.
^Hen diverse from Babel with Ezra went,
Men who in virtue were most excellent:
^en to the river that to Ahana
^oth run, they were all gathered by Ezra:
^ere we abode in tents even three days space,
^t could not find any of Levis race.
^ter we had both Priests and people viewed,
^erefore to diverse I would have it showed,
^at they for Gods house should then quickly bring
^en that were wise, and fit for ministering.
Then by the good hand of the Lord our God,
^ey brought unto us men of knowledge good
^e sons of Mahli, the sons of Levi,
number eighteen with other twenty.
^en I proclaimed a fast there, said Ezra,
Even hard besides the river Ahava,
That we our selves there where me may abod^
Might sore afflict before the Almighty God,
To seek of him a way with diligence
Both for our selves, our sons and our substanc^
For I thought shame to seek from the King the^
A band of Soldiers, and als of Horsemen
Us to protect against our foes, for I
Had to the King uttred this speech boldly,
The hand of GOD will surely their part ta^
That do him fear; But these that him forsak^
And with profane walk in the wicked path,
They surely shall feel the dint of his wrath;
So we besought the Lord with hunmble fast,
And he entreated was of us at last:
When this was done, Ezra great quantity
Of silver gold, and fine copper quickly
Causd to be weighed to the Priests, and them
He ordained all to bring unto Salem.
On the twelft day of the first mon'th Ezra,
Departed from the river Ahava,
That we unto Jerusalem might go,
GOD by his hand us saved from every foe.
So we unto Salem came in safety,
Wherein the Temple we did clearly see
The silver gold well weighed, then anon,
We did deliver our commission
Unto the Kings Livetenents whose abode
^as on this side of the river; of God
^he house they did most carefully prepare,
^hereby they did their diligence declare.
Chap. 9.
^Hen Ezra was kindled with holy rage,
Because the people had in marriage
^ken the daughters of a wicked race,
^e holy seed, thus did themselves disgrace;
(...) among these most wicked Nations,
^ey followed their abominations;
^t let the commons of the people pass,
^e great Princes were chief in this trespass.
When I this thing did hear I quickly rent
^th grief of heart my mantle and garment:
^oni'd I sat down, my heart did bleed,
^e hair I plucked both off my beard and head;
Then came to me numbers with one accord,
^o with their hearts did truly fear the LORD,
^ey greeved were for their wicked practice,
^te astoni'd till even sacrifice:
^en I arose up from my heaviness,
^ing my mantle in my sore distress
^t with my garment; then upon my knees
^ll down, and to God did lift mine eyes,
Spreading my hands out to his Majesty,
And said, O God, to lift my face to thee
I am ashamed, for even over our head
Our sins are greatly increased indeed,
And our trespass against thy holy name,
Up to the Heavens is grown up to our shame:
Since the days of our fathers we have seen,
That we in great trespass have surely been
Unto this day, and for our sins have we,
Our Kings, our Priests been to captivity,
And spoil deliv'red, and to shame of face,
As we this day do feel with great disgrace.
And now the Lord to us with sorrows pressed,
A little space has made grace manifest,
That we escape might danger and disgrace,
And get a nail in his most holy place,
That so our God might lighten clear our eyes,
And in our bondage give a little ease:
For we who are Gods chosen heritage,
Among our foes were captives in bondage;
But God to us extended has mercy,
Even in the sight of Kings, who mightily
In Persia rule, that he so by this thing,
Might unto us even give a reviving
For to set up GODS house with buildin^ fair,
And desolations thereof well repair,
and so in Salem, and als in Judah,
(...) get a wall from the great JEHOVAH.
And now our GOD, alas what shall we say
^r we thy precepts have despisd this day,
^^d clean forsaken, for in lustful rage
^ith the heathen we have in marriage
^fil'd our selves, in our trespasses we
^fore thy face at this time stand guilty.
Chap. 10.
When Ezra thus did pray and weep right sore,
^d cast himself down the LORDS house before:
^en Jehiels son, called Shechaniah,
(...) answer soon, and said unto Ezra,
^ have trespassd against the LORDS command,
have espousde the strange wives of the land,
for all this we truly here may tell,
^t touching this, there is hope in Israel.
therefore now let us make without delay
^h GOD a Covenant, for to put away
^h all the wives and children most forlorn
^ch of these wives have hitherto been borne,
^e Ezra for this matter to thee
^ngeth; also we with thee will be:
Be of courage, and do as ye now hear,
Then rose Ezra, and made Israel to swear,
That they should do according to his word
Then Ezra before the house of the LORD
Rose, and quickly into the chamber went
Of Johanan, where he was miscontent
For their sins, who had been cari'd away,
He ate no bread, no water in that day
He drank at all, and they proclaimed quickly,
Unto the children of captivity,
Through all Judah and Salem, that together
They should themselves for this good purpo^ gather:
Then within three days (as they did ordain)
They greatly mourned for their sins, and f^raine.
Then Ezra Priest stood up, and als did tell,
By wives ye have increasd sins in Israel,
Therefore unto your fathers God confess,
To do his pleasure see that ye profess;
Sever your selves from the men of the land,
And from strange wives; Then all did ta^ in hand;
While they heard Ezra speaking thus that day,
That as he said, they gladly would obey:
That GOD might turn away his anger hot,
Which kindled was by such a filthy spot:
They gave their hands, that they would put away
their wives, and being most guilty that day;
^s God ordained, so it came to pass,
(...) ram they offered for their great trespass.
The Use.
^eere learn, that though GOD with great misery,
^fflict his Church in long captivity,
^et at the last before that they be shent
(...) of the evil will surely him repent;
Zerubbabel (with his precepts schooled)
(...) can raise up Jerusalem to build;
^r manners good he can find out a scribe,
(...) learned Ezra wise precepts to prescribe,
^ee will not want, if it then needful be,
good Haggai, and faithful Zachary:
^a Cyrus his ordinance recall,
Darius he for to build the wall
^n raise, who by a most constant decree
^ll furnish all that thereto needful be:
See how the LORD can wisely with a beck,
A wink, a word, the greatest things direct.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of Nehemiah.
A Prayer.
THy works are wondrous, as all men m^ see,
Thy Phoebus bright careering on the sky
Comes forth pompous, like a Bridgroom^ light,
Thy stars like nails of gold decore the nigh^
Thou sends thy winds justing among the clouds,
They roar they stir the bubbling wa^ floods:
What god, O GOD, can be compared to thee'
^ho art great Ruler both of land and sea?
^rant unto me that in my sacred lays,
(...) may express the glory of thy ways.
By Zerubabel thou thy Temple fair
^ebuilt; by Ezra thou did well repair
that was amiss in manners; last of all,
^y Nehemiah thou made up the wall
^f fair Salem; O make us all to feel
^ithin our hearts such burning holy zeal.
NEHEMIAH. The consolation of the Lord.
Chap. 1.
AS I was in Shushan there came to me
One of my brethren, called Hanani,
With certain men of Judah, of whom I
that was the state of the poor Jews did try,
that had escapt from among dangers great,
and which of the captivity were left.
And they again together said to me,
^he remnant left of the captivity
^e in reproach, and great affliction,
And Salems wall is also broken down.
Our foes most fierce (who against us did conspire)
The gates thereof have all now burnt with fir^
It came to pass, when I these words did he^
From great mourning I could no more forbea^
While that my heart greev'd to and fro w^ driven,
I did both fast and pray, the GOD, of Heaven:
I said, O LORD of Heaven I beseech thee
Great and terrible that keeps mercy,
And Covenant for them that do him love.
And keep the precepts of the Lord above,
Unto thy servant give attentive ear,
That thou thy servants prayer well may hear,
Which before thee I pray both day and night,
Isreal's sins confessing in thy sight.
Not only so, but oh, alas, both I
And als my fathers house have sinned greatly:
Against thee we have most corruptly dealt,
For which great grief and sorrows we have fe^
Thy statuts and thy most righteous judgement^
We have not keept, which thou by thy servant
Moses did give, Remember I pray thee,
What thou in justice and als in mercy
Spoke by Moses, saying, If ye transgress,
I will you scatter, but if ye confess
Humbly your sin, and return timeously
^o me, I will you gather most quickly,
(...) our enemies also I will defame,
and will you bring where I will set my name.
Now these are thy most faithful servants, and
people, whom thou by thy Almighty hand
^edeemed have, O LORD my GOD, now grant,
^n ear attentive unto thy servant,
and to thy servants prayer now give ear,
^ho thy great name always desire to fear:
that I intend now prosper, I thee pray,
that I may find thine assistance this day;
(...) the sight of this man me mercy grant,
^or I cupbearer was the Kings servant.
Chap. 2.
THe twenty year of Artaxerxes King,
I his cupbearer, wine to him did bring;
(...) his presence I had not been before,
^s I was then in great sadness; wherefore
^he King himself thus looking on me, said,
that aileth thee, and why art thou so sad,
^eeing with sickness thou not troubled art?
This nothing else is but sorrow of heart.
When by the King these words were to (...) said,
Then I anon was very sore afraid:
When at this time fear made my lips to quiver,
Unto the King I said, King live for ever,
Why should I not be sad and all aghast,
When the city of Salem lies wast,
The place of my fathers sepulchers dear,
Its gates are burnt, from grief who can forbear?
Then said the King to me, See what is best,
For what do thou now greeved make request?
Then lifting up my heart I did soon pray
Unto the Lord, and to the King did say,
If it the King please, and if thy servant
Have in thy sight found favor, to me grant,
That I be sent unto Judahs city,
That it anon may builded be by me.
Then said the King, the Queen als sitting b^
For how long shall be this thy great journey?
And when will thou again to us return?
Now set a time, it keep, and not adjourne;
When I this heard, I set to him a time,
To let me go the King did well incline.
Moreover I said to the King humbly,
If it the King shall please, let soon to me
Letters be given for them that do govern
Beyond the river, that they well may learn,
That thy will is for the honor of JOVAH,
that they convey me over to Judah:
^lso a letter to get I thought best
^o Asaph, the keeper of the forest,
that he timber should give for beams quickly,
^o make the gates of palace, house, city.
that I did seek that did the king command,
according as on me was GODS good hand:
^hen I beyond the river came quickly,
^ving Captains which the king sent with me.
When Sanbalat the wicked Horonite,
^d Tobiah the servant Ammonite
^eard of it, it them greev'd exceedingly,
that any sought the good of GODS City.
So GOD (who me did save in all my ways)
^ought me to Salem, where I was three days,
(...) the night time, when sleep sad on men falls,
(...) went, and viewd the ruin of the walls.
Thereafter I the Jews did all invite
(...) build the walls, and that even in despite
(...) all their foes: Ye know, said I, what is past,
^rusalem GODS City lies waste:
^a, what our greatest foes did most require,
^e walls are down, the gates are burnt with fire.
^en I to them declared most clearly,
^w that the good hand of GOD was on me;
^d how the king (before I did depart)
Spoke to me words which did comfort my hea^
Let us rise up, and build courageously,
So GOD their hearts made stout, and hands read^
But when that Sanballat the Horonite,
And Tobiah the servant Ammonite,
And Geshen the Arabian did hear,
They at our work began to laugh and gyre,
And us despise; what is this great doing
Said they, Will ye rebel against the king?
Then unto them I most boldly did say,
The God of Heaven will prosper us this day:
Therefore we now his servants will arise,
And build; but you who Gods servants despise,
In Gods Salem have no memorial,
You have no portion, yea no right at all.
Chap. 3.
IN this Chapter we have the names of all
These who did build fair Salems broken wall.
Chap. 4.
BUT after when that wicked Sanballat
Heard that we did so build the wall, and the
We courage had, he (wroth with indignation)
Did scoff and mock the whole Jewish nation:
Before his brethren, and of Samaria,
^e army, he said, laughing with Ha, ha,
^hese feeble Jews, what? Will they fortify
^emselves? Or what? Will they most foolishly
(...) sacrifice? Will they even in a day
^d all this work? Will they revive, I say,
^e stones out of their bruised rubbish heap,
which are all burnt? Now was the Ammonite
^obiah by him, who said scornfully,
^l that they build will fall down by and by:
(...) that a Fox but leap upon their wall,
^e shall it break down, and make all to fall.
Hear, LORD, how we despised are indeed,
and their reproach turn upon their own head;
and make them all at last a prey to be,
^en in the land of their captivity;
and cover not their great sins less or more,
^r thee to anger the builders before
^ey have provoked, so we did anon
^ild all the wall, till all was fully done.
But when Sanballat and Tobiah vain,
^ith Ammonits, Arabians profane,
and Ashdodites that Salems wall did hear
^as builded, they had both great wrath and fear,
therefore together they did all conspire,
(...) go and fight against Salem in ire,
And so to stop the work; Nevertheless
We unto God did pray in our distress:
Likewise (because of their malice and might)
We set a watch against them day and night.
And Judah said, The strength of bearers all
Is much decayed, and for to build the wall
We are not able for such quantity
Of rubbish, as ye all may clearly see.
Then said our foes, Before they be aware
We shall them slay, and so their work shall mat^
From all places the Jews came, and us told,
Even unto ten-tymes, that our foes most bold
With great forces provided would not fail
To come, and us with fury to assail.
Therefore to save the people from these fears,
I armed men set with bows, swords and spears:
Then to the Nobles and Rulers I said,
Of these vain men see ye be not afraid;
Remember God, and armed in his sight
For your brethren, and sons, and daughte^ fight.
From that time was their counsel brought t^ naught,
Half of my servants in the work well wrought;
The other half against dangers and fears
Held bows and shields, and habergeons and spears
And other weapons which they best could find,
(...) Judahs house the Rulers stood behind:
(...) with one hand the builders in that fear
^d work, and with the other held the spear;
(...) each builder had his sword by his side,
^e Trumpeter hard by me did abide.
Then to the Nobles and the People all
said, The work is great, and on the wall
^e far asunder building do remain.
^erefore in time let us wisely ordain,
^at in what place ye shall the trumpet hear,
^e then to us with all haste shall draw near:
^e fear not men's malice, or yet their might,
^r God the Lord himself for us shall fight.
Thus we labored and half did hold the spear,
^om morning light till the stars did appear:
^kewise I told that I it best did judge,
^at every one with his servant should lodge
^ithin Salem, that they the daytime might
^bour, and be to us a guard by night:
(...) none of us all put off our clothing
(...) night or day, but only for washing.
Chap. 5.
AMong the People then was a great cry,
Because they were oppressed by usury,
Which made them lands and houses all morgag^
Then Nehemiah in fury and rage
Reproved the Nobles for such usury,
He against them set a great assembly:
He said, We have redeemed our brethren
The Jews, which were sold unto the Heathen;
And will you even sell your brethren? Or shall
They unto us be sold, and made slaves all?
When they heard this, they all did hold their peace,
They found nothing to answer in that place.
Unto them all I boldly said also,
It is not good truly what ye now do;
Ye should fear God, and shun iniquities,
For the reproach of Heathen enemies;
I likewise might exact of them money,
Let us now all leave off this usury:
To them their lands, vineyards, houses this day,
And olive-yards, wine, corn, restore, I pray.
Then said they all even without any more,
Unto our brethren we will all restore.
Then did I call the Priests, and made them swe^
That they should do as they had promisde here.
Moreover I thus shook my lap, and spoke,
So from his house GOD every man shall shake,
And from his labor, that does not truly
Perform this point, GOD shall him make empty.
^en all said AMEN, and did praise the Lord,
^e people did according to their word.
Moreover I these twelve years governor
Judah have not for my hard labor
^en the bread due to these of my place,
^t that I should GODS work mar or disgrace,
^t these who had governed before me,
(...) the people were chargable truly,
^ey taken had both Silver, Wine, and bread,
^a their servants bare rule over them indeed,
(...) did not I, such things I would not hear,
^cause that I the Lord resolved to fear;
(...) also I for all that did befall,
^ntinu'd in the work of Salems wall:
(...) my Table a hundred and fifty
(...) of Israel with heathen ate daily:
^ly an ox, with six sheep for my fare,
^th dainty fowls my servants did prepare:
^ce in ten days all sorts of wine with speed
^ey brought to me, yet I did not the bread
(...) the governor eat, for in that age
^on the people was heavy bondage:
^cording as I have done uprightly
(...) this people, now my God think on me,
Chap. 6.
THen Sanballat, Geshem and Tobiah,
With all our foes who were against Jovah,
Perceiving that GODS favor so did reach,
That we the wall had reared, and no breach
Was left therein, they quickly sent to me,
That in the pla^ne of Ono speedily
I should them meet, in some village thereby,
But they mischief intended by and by.
Then I to them did quickly send saying,
A great work now I am surely doing,
So that to come to you I have no leisure,
For why should GODS work cease while I g^ thither?
After this sort, four times they sent to me,
And as before I answered them quickly.
Then Sanballat his servant did command,
The fifth time with a letter in his hand
To come to me, it open bare this thing;
That I intended always to be King,
And that I did Prophets to preach appoint,
That all Judah should me for King anoint.
Then unto him I sent with this saying,
Thou speak false, sure there is no such thing
These things thou have sure from no other pa^
But from thy self feigned by thine own heart,
^uch false purpose these men did undertake,
that at the work they might our hands make weak:
^ow therefore Lord we entreat thee at length,
^o fortify our hands now by thy strength*
I afterward came unto Shemajah,
^ho seemed to direct me from Jovah;
^et us, said he, In the Temple this day
^s hide, for they will come us for to slay
^ven in our house; therefore for this purpose
^ithin GODS house we will our selves enclose
and shut the doors of GODS house, for they will
(...) the night season come thee for to kill.
While he these speeches crafty did conceive,
^at the last began for to perceive
that GOD had not him sent, but that indeed
^his Prophecy was bred in his own head:
^r Tobiah and Sanballat in ire,
^r this ill purpose d^d him basely hire
^e to affright, that I should so begin
(...) do, and by this means to fall in sin,
^d that they might raise up an ill report
^d me reproach, with all these of my sort.
(...) God think on Tobiah, Sanballat
those works are evil, and who do lewdly prat;
(...) Noadia false the Prophetess,
^th other Prophets who in great distress
Would have me put, now also think upon;
For their deceit let them all smart anon.
In twenty fifth day of the mon'th Elul,
In fifty two days finished was the wall:
When this was heard and seen by our enemies,
They were all much cast down in their own^ eyes,
For they at last perceived well and thought,
That this whole work of our great GOD wa^ wrought.
Moreover then the Nobles of Judah
Sent many letters unto Tobiah
And he to them, for in Judah, forlorn
And wicked men had then unto him sworn
And he to them, for he was son in law
To Shechaniah the son of Arah,
Also his son then called Johanan,
Had marred the daughter of Meshullam,
Also they did his good deeds before me,
Report that I to wrath might kindled be,
What words I spoke they made him them (...) hear,
And Tobiah wrote for to cause me fear.
Chap. 7.
IT came to pass, that when fair Salems wall
Was builded, and the doors were set up all,
When the porters and all the singers sweet,
With Levits were appointed as was meet,
(...) to my brother called Hanani
Over Salem, then gave the charge quickly,
As also to the good Hananiah,
Who was faithful and did fear great Jovah,
(...) said unto them, See they not forgot
That Salems gates until the Sun was hot
Should not be opened, and that carefully
Both day and night they should watch the c^ty.
Now the city indeed was large and great,
But the people were very few in it;
The houses als were not in every part
Well builded; then my GOD put in mine heart,
To gather all the Nobles for to see,
To reckon evry man's genealogy;
So we found out the Register anon
Of them which first came out of Bayylon,
Habajahs sons were put from the Priesthood,
Because that they by Register make good
Could not to show their right genealogy,
So they no more as Priests might reckned be.
The governor then said as was most meet,
That holy things these men no more should eat,
Till their stood up at last a faithful Priest,
With Vrim and with Tummim on his breast.
At this time the people were less and more,
Forty two thousand three hundred threescore,
Besides these were servants numbered rightly
Seven thousand three hundred seven and thirty,
They had of men two hundred forty five,
And women who to sing sweetly did strive:
The Tirshatha at these occasions,
With others gave right large oblations.
So God forgetting their iniquities,
Made Israel to dwell in their cities.
Chap. 8.
THen the people gathred from every tribe,
Came all unto Ezra the Priest and scribe,
Desireing h m that he would take in hand,
To read and make them for to understand
The law of God, So Ezra stood to read
And to expound, the people all gave head;
And that he might be better understood,
He stood upon a Pulpit made of wood.
Ezra there standing did bless the Lord then,
The people all answ'red, Amen, Amen;
With lifted hands, their heads they bowed dow^
And d^d worship, with faces to the ground.
Then Jeshuah, Hodijah, and Bani,
With others read Gods law book distinctly,
And gave the sense in each difficle thing,
And causd them to understand the reading.
Then Nehemiah the Tirshatha great
With Ezra, Levites who the people taught,
Said to the people, Now with one accord
Rejoice, this day is holy to the Lord;
See that to mourn or weep ye stand in aw,
For all did weep when they did hear the Law.
Then said he to them as he thought most meet,
Go eat the fat and also drink the sweet:
Send portions, let nothing now be spared,
To help these for whom nothing is prepared:
Be not now sorry, but rejoice at length,
For that the joy of the LORD is your strength.
Thus the Levits with their most holy skill,
So taught the people that they all were still,
Now hold your peace to them there they did say,
Neither be greev'd, for holy is this day.
Then all the people, as they thought most meet,
Did go away both for to drink and eat,
And to send portions, and to make great mirth,
Because they had heard GODS word of great worth.
Then gathred were upon the second day,
Numbers to hear what Ezra scribe would say,
Both Priests, Levits, and people in a band,
Came unto Ezra for to understand
The law of GOD; then found they that Israel
In booths of branches once a year should dwell*
And that they should with diligence the same
In all the cities of the land proclaim.
So all the people for to shun reproof,
As Ezra bade, made booths upon the roof
Of their houses, and some made in the street,
Some in GODS court, as they thought fit a^ meet.
Since Joshuas days Israel had not done so
Then all rejoiced, as was enjoined to do
The people then forgetting their distress,
Were filled all with joy and great gladness.
Then Ezra wise, a worthy man indeed,
In the book of Gods law did daily read;
Seven days the feast they kept; the eight da^
Was most solemn, that done, they went away.
Chap. 9.
NOw of this mon'th in the twenty fou^ day,
The children of Israel without delay
Assembled were with sackcloth and fasting,
And earth upon them a sign of mourning;
Then from all strangers Isreal's holy seed
Did separate themselves, and did indeed
Confess their sins before the Lord right soon,
And als the sins which their fathers had done,
^hen as they were directed by GODS grace,
^ith reverence they stood up in their place:
^ne fourth part of the day they read Gods law,
another fourth part they confessd with awe
their greevous sins, and that with one accord,
that done, in fear they worshipped the Lord.
Then on the stairs the Levites by and by,
^o standing up unto the Lord did cry:
^hen other Levits said with one accord,
^tand up, and bless for ever ye the Lord,
^hy glorious name for ever blessed be,
which is extolled above blessings most hie;
^hou, even thou art the mighty Lord alone,
^y thee the Heavens, the Heaven of Heavens were done
^ith all their host, the Earth and all that be
^herein, with what does swim in the deep sea,
^hou by thy power do preserve them all,
^hey at thy feet to worship thee down fall.
Thou art the LORD who did choose Abram
from Vr of Calde, whom thou Abraham
Did call after, and foundest most surely,
His heart to be most faithful before thee;
With him in mercy (thou being conten^)
Made a most sure and solemn Covenant,
To give the land of wicked Cananits,
Of Hittits, and the profane Perizzits,
And Ammorits, and Girgashites by grace,
To these who should be of Abraham's race;
What Thou have said Thou have performed now,
For in all things most righteous art thou.
The troubles of our Fathers thou did see,
And heardst their cry, even hard by the (...) sea,
And shewedst signs and wonders to Pharo,
And on his servants, and people also;
For Thou did know how that they de^ proudly
Against them, so a Name Thou did g^ Thee,
As clearly it appears to us this day,
Yea, before Thee we must confess, a^ say,
Thou before them the red sea did divide,
So that the waves were walls on every side,
^hey stood up straight as thou did command,
that thy people might walk one the dry land.
^s for our foes, thou did them all anon
unto the deepes throw down as a great stone.
Moreover thou them leddest in the day,
^ven by a cloudy pillar; thou the way
them show by night, by a pillar of fire
^hou did them guide as their hearts could desire.
Thou came dawne with great pomp and with might
Upon mount Sinai and from heavens most bright
^hou spak'st with them and gav'st them right judgments
^rue Laws, good statutes and commandments,
And made them thy sabbaths understand,
And statutes Laws ordain'st by Moses hand;
And from the heaven gav'st bread to them hungry
And from the rock gav'st drink to them thirsty,
And promisedst that they should sure possess
The land, which thou had by thy Holiness
Sworn them to give; but they dealt most proudly
As our fathers, and hardened most stiffly
Their necks, so they wicked stood not in a^
They hearkened not unto thy blessed Law;
They stubburnly refused to obey,
The great wonders which they saw every d^
They did forget; their necks as in a rage
They hardened, and to turn to their b^dage
They made a Captain in rebellion,
But thou art a God ready to pardon,
Most gracious, and unto anger slow,
Of kindness great, which rich does overfl^
Yea more, when they a molten Calfe (...) made,
And in great rage most wickedly had said,
This is thy GOD which from Egypt broug^ thee,
By this they did the Lord provoke highly:
Yet thou in mercy them in their distress
Forsookest not, even in the wilderness,
The cloudy pillar with darkness by day
Them from their foes did hide, while i^ the way
Of the red sea they marched; in the da^night
(...) fiery pillar went before with light.
^hy good Sprit also unto them thou gave,
^u^ did provide that they might Manna have
(...) meat; in thirst (when they thee did provoke)
^ou gave water from the flinty rock:
(...) forty years thou in the wilderness
stained, so that in greatest distress
^ey lacked nothing, they feared not the cold,
(...) all that time their clothes did not wax old;
(...) more, in this GODS mercies did excel,
(...) their marching their feet did never swell:
^ou gav'st them Kingdoms, and they did possess
^th Sihons land, and Ogs in wilderness,
^ou did them bless and multiply their seed,
^s Stars in Heaven that were above their head:
after they had past through the wilderness,
^e promisde land thou made them to possess;
^ou in their hands gave these Kingdoms and Kings,
And made them Masters for to rule all things
Within these bounds and also to command
Their strongest cities, and their fattest land:
They did possess houses full of all goods,
Vineyards, and wells dug and Oliveyards,
And pleasant fruit trees in great abundance,
Which God apponited for their maintenance;
So they did eat, they filled with fatness,
They lusty did delight in thy goodness.
Nevertheless they (disobedient)
Rebelled proudly against thy commandemen^
Behind their backs they did reject thy Law,
To slay thy Prophets they stood not in aw;
Because against them they did testify,
That from their ill ways they might turn (...) thee,
But they wicked by their transgressions,
Against God wrought great provocations.
Therefore (for their greevous iniquities)
Thou them delivere'dst to their enemies,
Who them did vex with much trouble and fear,
Yet when they cried, thou from heaven did the^ hear
According to thy manifold mercies,
^ou gav'st them saviors from their enemies
^em for to save; but when prosperity,
and rest they got they rebelled against thee;
therefore in wrath thou left them in the hand
^f cruel foes, whom they could not gainstand,
^et when returning they cried unto thee,
^hou hard'st from Heaven their groans of misery,
By frequent rods thou made them stand in awe,
them for to bring again unto thy Law,
^et they dealt proudly, and refused to hear
^hey sinned still against thy judgments severe,
^ith hardened neck the shoulder they withdrewe
and would not hear, nor yet their life renew:
^et many years thou did them still forbear,
^ea and reproved, yet would they not give ear;
therefore in wrath thou gav'st them in the hands
^f the most cruel people of the lands:
^everthelesse for thy great mercies sake,
^hou utterly them would not forsake,
Now therefore, LORD, who art great a^ mighty,
Who Covenant keep in thy great mercy,
Let not this greef seem little thee before,
That on our kings, princes, and priests lies sor^
Als on our prophets, fathers, people all,
Not sparing any either great or small,
Since the time of the strong Assyrian kings,
Unto this day such is the case of things.
Howbeit in all that is upon us brought
Thou art most just, and truly have done naught
But what is right, and full of equity,
But we, alas, all have done wickedly;
Neither our kings, our princes, or our priests
Did keep thy law, or yet care for thy hests,
Or hearken unto thy Testimony,
Wherewith thou did against them testify,
For in their kingdom they would not thee serve,
But still profanely from thy law did swerve.
Behold we are servants, alas, this day,
And for the land that thou did give for ay
To our fathers, the fruit thereof to eat,
Behold in it, as drudges we must sweat;
It yields much increase unto the kings,
Whom over us thou have set for our sins,
Over our bodies they domination have,
And cattle, they us at their pleasure slave:
Thus we afflicted are in great distress,
Because of this we all both more and less
A Covenant sure both make and write it well,
And to it set our Priests and Princes seal.
Chap. 10.
NOw these that sealed were Nehemiah
The Tirshatha, son of Hachaliah
and Zidkijah, with Priests Levits Porters,
and singers, als Nethinims with others,
Who having knowledge to their brethren clave,
and made an oath that they should so behave
themselves wisely, to walk in the Lords Law,
and that to sin they all should stand in aw.
We also vowed by counsel grave and sage,
neither to take nor give in marriage,
^ut to abhor the people of the land,
^o do the same we made a solemn band:
^so we did ordain without delay,
^ot to permit markets on sabbath day;
and that also we would leave the seventh year,
and from exacting of debts would forbear,
Also we did ordain to charge yearly,
Our selves with the third part of good money
Of a shekel, this was for the service,
Of GODS own house made for his sacrifice.
Then we cast lots Levites and Priests among,
For the wood offerings, which then did belong
Unto GODS house, on his Altars to burn,
According as GODS law ordained by turn:
Likewise to GODS house we ordained to bring,
The first fru^ts of all trees and every thing,
The first borne of our children and cattle,
We year by year brought unto th'Eternel,
With first of all things that Levits could crave,
The tithes in all wherein we tillage have.
Chap. 11.
THen they ordained the tenth man of Israel,
To come and in Jerusalem to dwell,
Of the people nine parts they did ordain,
In other Cities to dwell and remain:
The people blessd all these who willingly
Offered to dwell in Salems fair city.
Chap. 12.
HEre are the Priests, Levits of Israel,
Which came up with worthy Zerubabel:
Here is als the hie Priests succession
Recorded, with the dedication
Of Salems walls, the office of the Priests,
Appointed for to keep the Solemn feasts.
Chap. 13.
WHen we unto GODS Law gave audience,
We found it written that for no pretense
The Ammonite or Moabite should come
For ever in Gods congregation,
Because they met not Israel with bread,
But hired Bala'm against them indeed,
That he them should blast with bitter cursing,
Which God by grace turned into a blessing.
It came to pass now when they understood
The law, they did the mixed multitude
From Israel so sever and disperse,
That they with them should have no more commerce.
Then Nehemiah caused speedily
Cleanse all the chambers, which were set to be
Prepared for Tobiah by the hie Priest
Eliashib, who at his earnest request
Being allied to him, then did prepare
A great chamber, a great shame, even there where
The Levits laid, incense and tithes of corn,
And wine, and oil, which thitherto we borne:
For this greeved was good Nehemiah,
Who cast forth all the stuff of Tobiah.
Moreover he perceiving the Levits,
Whose charge was for the ceremonious rites
Defrauded of their wonted portion,
Had with the Rulers great contention.
He said to them, Fie on you, how can ye
Make GODS house thus through extreme poverti^
To be forsaken by the Levits, who
By your vile greed are wronged so and so?
After that done, he a man full of grace,
Made the Levits to return to their place.
Then all Judah soon brought the tith of con^
And the new wine, and oil were also borne,
With diligence unto the treasuries,
Which brought to Levits great commodities;
Treasurers likewise Nehemiah tried,
Shelemiah Priest and als Zadok the scrib,
And of Levits Pedajah, and Hanan
The Son of Zaccur, of these every man
Was counted faithful; these did distribute
What cheerfully others did contribute.
Then Nehemiah said, Remember me,
Concerning this O my GOD graciously,
And wipe not out my good deeds, I thee pray,
Which I have done for my GODS house the day.
In these days said the good Nehemiah,
(...) saw others in the land of Judah
Who on the Sabbath, wine presses did tread,
Who brought in sheaves and their Asses did load;
Others wine grapes, and burdens great did lay,
Upon beasts backs, and on the Sabbath day
Them brought to Salem, and corns openly
Did sell, but I against them did testify.
There men also dwelt who brought fish from Tire,
With diverse wares which were costly and dear,
And on the sabbath these men most profaine,
Made their markets in GODS Jerusalem.
Then with the Nobles great men of Judah
(...) did contend for the great Jehovah;
What evil is this ye do then did I say
That ye profaine thus the LORDS sabbath day?
Against the LORD did not your fathers thus,
And did not our GOD bring all this on us,
And on this cit^e? yet ye bring more wrath
On Israel by profaining the Sabbath.
It came to pass that when I did remarke
That Salems gates began for to be dark
Before the sabbath, then I did command
That all the gates should by my servants hand
Be surely shut, I straightly charged that they
Should not be opned till the sabbath day
Was fully past, and so for this effect
I at the gates some of my servants set,
And them directed most straightly, that they
Should not permit upon the sabbath day
Men to bring burdens, so my servants wise
Made the merchands for to lodge once or twice
Without the walls, then did I testify
Against these men and said for certainty,
Why lodge ye thus about the wall, profain?
Assure your self if ye do so again,
On you most vile I will lay hands therefore,
From that time on sabbaths they came no more.
The Levites I ordained without delay,
To keep the gates, even for the sabbah day.
Concerning this, my GOD, remember me,
And spare in the greatness of thy mercy.
I saw then Jews who married of Ashdod
Wives, and of Ammon, and else of Moab;
Their children spoke half in the Ashdods speech,
But of Hebrew they could not speak a which,
Then with them I severely did contend,
And did them curse, and of them in the end
I also smot some whom I did not spare,
In wrath also I plucked off their hair,
And by the Lord I made them for to swear
Saying, ye shall not give your daughters dear
Unto their sons, nor yet their daughters take,
Nor with them shall ye any marriage make,
Did not Solomon one of Isra'ls Kings,
Against the LORD sin greatly by these things?
Among many none was like unto him,
Outlandish women yet him causde to sin:
Will ye then with this ill defile your lives,
Even to transgress by marying strange wives?
And then one of the sons of Joiada,
Son of Eliashib hie Priest of Jovah,
Sanballats daughter mari'd wickedly,
Therefore in haste I chased him from me:
Remember them, my GOD, because that they
Thy holy Priesthood have defiled this day.
Thus I them cleansed from the wickedness
Of strangers, and then in their business
The priests and Levites I did well appoint
Precise to keep their wards in every point,
Both for the first fruits, and offering of wood,
Remember me, O my GOD, now for good.
THE USE.
By Zerubabel, GOD in his mercy,
Did build the Temple and Salems city
By Ezra scribe even to his laws conform,
The peoples manners he did well reform,
And which indeed was not a comfort small
By Nehemiah he built Salems wall.
See how the Lord his mercies does inlarg^
By imposing to every man his charge;
That so his Church may on this earth endur^
Diverse he ordaines its well to procure:
Some to do this, and some that, at his wi^
Which his favor demonstrates and his skill
As he makes birds by pleasant quaverings,
Like nimble Thumbs, which strike on dive^ strings,
Renew their note and in diversity
Rejoice man's heart with a sweet melody,
Even so the Lord, with diverse gifts does dec^
That he thereby his people may protect
And beautify, and so them may advance,
From under the Bushel of ignorance:
See how God does his diverse comforts seal
Both for the church, and als the commonwell.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of Esther.
A Prayer.
(...) Now must speak of Ahasuerus King,
And of Haman, who on a tree did hing,
And likewise of the godly Mordecai,
Who for the well of Gods church did apply
His heart, for to her happiness procure,
That she from danger might abide most sure;
Of this good Esther with goody intent
Was by God made a blessed instrument.
Now come, good God and with thy breath divine
^nspire mine heart, my drossie sprits refine,
Power in my breast thy sacred divine powrs,
And teach me how to spend my painful hours.
ESTHER. Hid.
Chap. 1.
IT came to pass that Ahasuerus King,
When he was in the third year of his reign
Did make a feast unto all his Princes,
And his servants, Rulers of Provinces;
There he in pomp and royal dignity
Did show the honor of his Majesty:
This feast to show of his glory the rays,
Did last an hundred, and als fourscore days:
After this feast, he to the people all
A banquet made, both unto great and small,
In Shushan fair, which was the Kings palace
There many subjects did themselves solace,
With eating, drinking, merrinesse and plays,
This feast did last the whole space of seven daye^
Both white and green, and blue hangings we then
Fastened most sure, with cords of fine linen,
And costly purple to the silver rings,
Pillars of marble, and such other things;
The beds were of fine silver and of gold,
Which were most pleasant always to behold;
^ichly upon a pavement they stood
^f red, blue white, and als black marble good:
(...) gold vessels they drink unto them gave
(...) abundance, as much as they could crave.
^he law of drinking was none did compel;
^or so the King had well appointed all
^is Officers, who did no more require
^ut that each man drank after his desire.
Also Vashti the Queen, women did bring
^o feast with her, in the house of the King:
(...) the seventh day as Ahasuerus was
^errie with wine, even as it came to pass
that he ordained (without less or more)
that Eunuchs should bring Vashti him before,
^ith the crown royal, full of dignity,
^o show unto the Princes her beauty;
^or she was fair; But Vashti did refuse,
^o come unto the King who wroth did use
^reat rigor for her disobedience,
because they thought it drew in consequence:
^hese of the Princes who were the most wise
^hought by this deed that women would despise
their husbands, when of it once they should hear,
and that the basest would no more forbear,
therefore of this let there be a decree
against the great pride of the Queen Vashti,
Seeing she has contemned the royal state
Of Ahasuerus, let her whole estate
Be given unto some other speedily,
Who shall by all be esteemed more worthy;
That all women by her may stand in aw,
Let this decree be written for a law,
Which publish^d through out the Empire all,
Shall make wives honor husbands great an^ small:
After the Princes had heard this saying,
They it approved, so likewise did the King,
So letters were sent that all men might hear,
That each man in his own house rule should be^
Chap. 2.
After these things when Vashti was away,
The Kings servants at last began to say,
Let fair young virgins be sought for the King,
And be committed to ^ega^s keeping,
And let the maid which pl^aseth the kings eye,
Be placed Queen in stead of proud Vashti:
When this was said, anon with the saying,
In every point well pleased was the King.
Now in Shushan there was a certain Jew,
The son of Ja^r, as the Scriptures show,
A Benjamite, his name was Mo^decai,
He from Salem had been carried away
^o Babylon, in the captivity,
With Jechoniah there captive to be:
^his man Hadassa which was good Ester,
His Uncles daughter brought up, and als bare
^he whole charges; he for her daughter took,
When she was orphan he her not forsook.
It came to pass at last when the decree
Was heard, that Ester was brought to Hegai
Who keept the women, he anon Esther
Most fair in face to others did prefer:
Ester as yet most wisely did not show,
That she by nation was a virgin Jew,
As she directed was by Mordecai,
She strave in all things humbly to obey.
The custom was these maids to purify,
The space of twelve months, that they thus might be
Well for the King prepared, as was thought meet,
With oil of myrre, and other odours sweet;
But above all the rest Esther got place,
For in the Kings sight she obtained grace,
So that he set the Crown upon her head,
For Vashti he did make her Queen indeed.
Then the King made a feast to his Princes,
And a release als to the Provinces:
And royally gave gifts of every thing,
According to the great State of the King.
In this mean time the worthy Mordecai
Sat in the Kings gate, waiting every day:
Esther had not yet showed her kindred,
Nor her people, as Mordecai indeed
Had charged, for she respected Mordecai,
As a daughter she him still did obey.
While Mordecai thus sat in the Kings gate,
Two chamberlens men given unto debate,
Bigthan, Teresh, of these that kept the door,
Who did intend to take the King; therefore
Mordecai knowing what by them had been
Plotted against the King, soon told the Queen,
And Esther wise did then declare the same
Unto the King in good Mordecais name.
When inquisition was made speedily,
It was so, and they hanged were on a tree;
And in the book of Chronicles this thing
All this was written even before the King.
Chap. 3.
AFter these things the King of Persia
Did raise Haman, son of Amedatha
The Agagite, and him advanced high
Above all the Princes that were him with:
^ll the Kings servants not to give offense,
^id bow to him, and give him reverence:
^ut Mordecai (who did him not allow)
^efused always unto him to bow.
^or this Haman (incensde with great fury)
^tended to destroy most speedily
^oth Mordecai and all his nation,
because he made not due submission.
In the first month, the month Nisan,
(...) the Kings twelfth year, before proud Haman,
^hey cast Pur, that is, lot from day to day,
^ow that they might the Jews all sweep away.
Then Haman said to Ahasuerus King;
^ake heed, and hearken unto my saying;
^eer is a people that stands not in aw,
^roud, and perverse, who keep not the Kings law:
therefore it hurts the profit of the King,
that they within thy bounds have abiding:
(...) it shall please the King them to destroy,
(...) will ten thousand talents surely pay
^f good silver, and give it speedily,
^o these that have charge of the treasury.
Then thus persuaded Ahasuerus King,
(...) continent took from his hand his ring,
and said to him, Take these folk speedily,
and do with them, as seems good to thee.
Then letters from the King anon were sent,
To all Provinces for the same intent,
That all the Jews without fail in one day
Should from the earth like doung be sweept aw^
The posts went out, and runnig made great have
To execut what Haman had purchased:
The King and Haman then drank merrily,
But poor Shushan was in perplexity,
Chap. 4.
WHen what was done, was seen by Mordec^
He rent his clothes and bitterly did cry,
He put on sack-loth with ashes, and went,
And to the Kings gate came incontinent:
In every province then was great mourning
Among the Jews, with wailing and fasting:
Yea thus perplexed, many night and day
In vilest sackcloth and in ashes lay.
When Esthers maids thus Mordecai had seen*
Clothed with sack, they told it to the Queen,
Who greeved much, unto Mordecai sent,
To change his sackcloth with costly raiment:
But he the same from their hands would no^ take.
Then Esther wondering why he thus did make
So strange with her, she for Hatah did call,
that he should know what was it great or small,
that greeved had the heart of Mordecai,
(...) that he did wear sackcloath day by day.
So Hatah went to him unto the street
^f the city, even before the Kings gate;
and Mordecai him told with great annoy,
that Haman minded the Jews to destroy;
^e gave him als the copy of writing,
^f the decree sealed by the Kings own ring,
that he unto Esther might show the same,
that she might know what evil her foes did frame,
and that she should go quickly to the King,
^o make request for to prevent this thing,
(...) Hatah came with diligence that day,
and told Esther the words of Mordecai.
Then Esther sent Hatach to him again,
^o speak these words, she wise, did him ordain;
^he Kings servants and people all do know,
that the Kings Laws most strict do not allow,
that to the inner court come great or small,
^t such as those for whom the King shall call;
nothing but death for him who is so bold,
As to approach except the King out hold
His golden scepter, thereby to give leave
To come to him; none but such after live.
But I have not been called unto the King
These thirty days; tell Mordecai this thing
And they again did tell to Mordecai,
The words which Esther unto them did say.
Then Mordecai commanded this answer
Quickly for to be given to Queen Esther,
Think not with thy self I tell thee for new^
That thou escape shall more then other Je^
For if at this time thou do hold thy peace,
Enlargement shall come from another pl^
Unto the Jews, but thou most certainly
With thy fathers house shall destroyed be:
Who knows but thou by providence divine,
Art to the Kingdom come for such time?
When this was told, then bade the g^ Esther
To Mordecai soon return this answer,
Go quickly, and well gather every man,
Among the Jews present within Shushan,
And fast ye for me the space of three day
I also and my maids will fast likewise,
And so to go I will not stand in aw
Unto the King, though not after the Law:
To get good speed now from my heart I wish,
But if I perish, then let me perish.
So what Esther commanded, Mordecai
Resolved well to do it by and by.
Chap. 5.
IT came to pass after on the third day,
That Esther richly clothed without delay,
In the inner court of the Kings house then stood,
When Ahasuerus King this understood,
To show both his favor and her surety,
His golden Scepter he held out quickly;
So Esther drew near, and with diligence
Touched the top of the Scepter of the Prince,
What will thou Queen Esther, then said the King
What is thy request now in any thing?
It shall be given, to ask now boldly come,
I will it give, though half of the Kingdom.
Then Esther said, If it shall please the King,
I only seek, ye grant me this saying,
Let the King and Haman together come
To the banquet I have prepared for him.
Then the King said, at the banquet of wine
Unto Ester, what is that suit of thine,
And thy request? unto me boldly come
I will it give, though half of the Kingdom.
Then said Esther, This only suit I bring,
If I have found in the sight of the King
Favor, let the King and Haman quickly,
Come to my feast which shall prepared be;
Then the morrow as the King shall think best,
I shall plainly show what is my request.
Then went Haman forth from the King the day
Joyful and glad, but when he Mordecai
Saw in the Kings gate, that he up not stood,
With indignation kindled was his blood.
Nevertheless proud Haman did refrain
Himself, until he returned again
Unto his house, where he incontinent
For his wife Zeresh and for his friends sent,
And Haman told them of the great glory
Of his riches, and children, which many
In number were, he told als every thing,
Wherein he had been honored by the King,
Who had (in sign and token of his love)
Promoted him the Princes all above.
Yea moreover said he the Queen Esther,
Made a great feast, whereat none at all were,
Except the King and I, and to be plain,
To morrow invited I am again,
Yet all this glory availes me nothing,
As long as I see Mordecai sitting
At the Kings gate; Then said Zeresh his wife
And all his friends, we shall soon end this strife;
Let a gallous of fifty cubits hie,
For Mordecai right soon prepared be:
Speak to the King to morrow, and anon
Let Mordecai be hanged thereupon,
Then merrily go to the feast; this said,
Well pleased Haman, and he a gallous made.
Chap. 6.
ON that same night Ahasuerus the King
Could not get sleep, he caused to him bring
The Chronicles, that they the same might read,
Before the King; thereto he took good heed;
There it was found written that Mordecai,
Had told how two vile traitors did betray
The King, Bigthana and Teresh they were
Two Chamberlens the keepers of the door,
Who sought on Ahasuerus for to lay
Their hands; this was revealed by Mordecay,
What honors for this got he? said the King,
^he servants said, For him is done nothing.
In this mean time, Haman without delay,
Was come to Court to cause hang Mordecai:
Then said the Kings servants unto the King
That Haman stood in the court; in him bring
Said Ahasuerus, who to Haman said,
What gifts shall be given, or what honors laid
Upon the man on whom the Kings delight
Is to bestow honor with all his might?
Now proud Haman thought in his lofty heart
That to him the King would this all impart,
Thus he answ'red, let the apparel dear,
Which Ahasuerus uses for to wear
Be brought, with horse on which he King does ride,
Let als the Crown be set upon his head,
And thus in pomp let him even by the hand
Of some great Prince be clothed, then let command
Be given, that he most humbly with all speed
Bring him on horseback, and through the street lead,
And then proclaim the rider there before,
Thus shall it be done without less or more,
Unto the man whom the Kings Majesty
Delights to honor with great dignity,
Then said the King unto Haman, Make haste,
Now take my horse, and my apparel best,
^s thou have said, And do to Mordecai,
^et nothing fail, do all without delay.
Then Haman took the apparel and the horse,
^aving within his heart greef and remorse,
^s the King had ordained, without delay,
Haman did each thing unto Mordecay,
before whose face he did proclaim this thing
This is the man in whom our Prince, and King
Has his delight, and bids tell at this hour,
That his delight is this man to honor.
Then Mordecai to the Kings gate returned,
But Haman hasted to his house and mourned,
Having his head cov'red in sign of grief,
and told Zeresh his wife, and these who chief
Were of his friends, what did to him befall,
Then said to him, his wife and als friends all,
^f Mordecai be of the Jews a man
before whom thou have fallen, do what thou can,
Against him surely thou shall not prevail,
^ut shall before him still fall without fail:
While they did speak, the chamberlens in haste
Came to bring Haman unto Esthers feast,
Chap. 7.
SO King and Haman came with Esther Queen,
The second day at me banquet of wine,
And the King unto Esther said again,
What is thy request? Now with me be plain,
Conceal nothing, to ask now boldly come,
I will it give though half of my kingdom.
Then Esther Queen answ'red, and said the thing,
If in thy sight I have favor, O King
Found, let my life now be given unto me
And my peoples, for we ordained surely
To be destroyed are, and als to be slain,
So that none of us alive should remain,
If they us for bondmen and bond women
Had sold, we all had kept silence then,
Although in so doing the enemy,
The Kings damage could not repair rightly.
Then said the King unto Queen Esther soon
Who? Where is he who durst such thing presume
For to atchieve? Then said Esther quickly,
This is Haman our wicked enemy
Then Haman when he had the matter seen
Was sore afraid before the King and Queen,
Then from the banquet wroth when this was done
The King arose, into his garden soon
He went; then Haman stood to make request
To Esther for his life; for fear oppressed
His heart, because he saw that an evil thing,
Against him was determined by the King.
The King returned found Haman on the bed,
Of Esther fallen, then to him the King said,
Will this Haman now also force my Queen,
Even in the house as here now may be seen?
As the King this word had said, With disgrace,
The men arose, and cov'red Hamans face.
Then Harbonah a servant to the King
To Ahasuerus said, Think on this thing:
Behold this Haman made for Mordecai
A gallows high, even of cubits fifty,
Whereon he minded to hang him anon,
Then said the King, soon hang him thereupon,
So was Haman hanged on a gallows hie,
This did the Kings wrath fully pacify.
Chap. 8.
ON that day the great King Ahasuerus
Unto Esther the Queen gave Hamans house,
Then Mordecai was brought unto the King,
And Ahasuerus gave to him his Ring,
Which he to Haman had given, in that day,
Over Hamans house Esther set Mordecai.
Then Esther after Haman most perverse
Was hanged, did suit his letters to reverse,
Which could not be, but to Esther this thing,
Was granted by Ahasuerus the King,
Even that the Jews themselves might well defend
Against the malice which their foes did intend:
So the posts rode, and published the decrees,
Permitting Jews to kill their enemies.
Then Mordecai, soon went out from the King,
Who unto him had given his royal Ring
With apparel of blew, and white, and Crown
Of purest gold, with garments hanging down
Of fine linen, and als of purple made,
Then the City of Shushan was most glade.
Then had the Jews both light and great gladness,
With great honor, and joyful merrinesse,
In all places whether the Kings decree
Did come, the Jews there had prosperity,
With joy, gladness, a feast, and a good day.
Then many people did without delay
Even become Jews, who then did much excel,
For of the Jews the fear upon them fell.
Chap. 9.
IN the same day which Haman did ordain,
That all the Jews in each place should be slain,
The Jews strengthened, great forces did command,
So that none of their foes could them withstand,
Yea more the Rulers helped them right well,
Because the fear of Mordecai then fell
Upon them all, thus the Jews, in a word,
Their enemies smot with stroke of the sword,
In the palace of Shushan the Jews then,
Slew and destroyed there five hundred men
With ten sons of Haman, Parshandatha,
Dalphon, Aspatha, and als Poratha,
Aridatha, Parsmashta, Arisai,
Adalia, Vaiezatha, Aridai,
All these the Jews did slay, they gave command,
That on the spoil they should not lay their hand.
Unto Esther the King he said again,
The Jews in Shushan have destroyed and slain
Five hundred men, and Hamans sons, ten Princes,
What have they done in the other Provinces?
But yet tell me what is thy petition,
What would thou further, and it shall be done?
Then said Esther, If it shall please the King,
Unto the Jews in Shushan grant this thing,
To do the morrow also speedily,
Even according unto this days decree,
And let Hamans ten sons now for his sake,
Be hanged on the gallows which he did make:
When this the King did hear, he did anon
Command right quickly it so to be done:
Then according unto the Kings decree,
Hamans tens Sons were hanged on a tree,
Thus all the Jews that were then in Shushan,
Gathered themselves together every man,
On the fourteenth day of Adar, they then
At Shushan quickly slew thee hundred men,
All these the Jews did kill, but gave command
That on the spoil no man should lay his hand:
While other Jews this matter understood,
Themselves they gathered and right stoutly stood
For their lives, and had rest in all the land,
And of their foes slew seventie five thousand;
But as did others so likewise did they,
None of them all laid hands upon the prey.
The Jews then the thirteenth and fourteenth day
Did consecrate to feasting and to play:
But these at Shushan with these other two,
Did consecrate the fifteenth day also,
As a day of both feasting and gladness,
To praise the LORD, who saved them from distress.
The Jews who in villages did remain,
The fourteenth only for this did ordain,
To be a day of feasting and gladness,
Even a good day of showing great kindness
One to another, this did Mordecai,
Write to the Jews who gladly did obey;
To stablish this among them near and far,
That the fourteenth and fifteenth of Adar
Should yearly keep well in their memory,
Because that they them from their enemy
Did rest, so that from sorrow that black day,
Was turned unto feasting and to play,
And sending portions one to other, and
Gifts to the poor who had nothing in hand.
Then with courage the Jews did undertake,
As they had then begun, there was no lake;
As Mordecai had written they did all,
Because Haman to put the Jews in thrall
Devised had to cast Pur, or the lot,
That he them might destroy in anger hot:
But when Esther came to the King with speed,
Hamans device he ordained on his head
For to return, and that he should quickly,
With his ten sons be hanged on a tree.
For this the Jews after did not forbear,
Two days of Purim to keep every year,
Yea that thereafter these two days indeed,
Should never perish from them and their seed.
Then Esther the Queen and als Mordecay
D^d write aga^ne for keeping of that day,
For to confirm all that they did ordain;
And that none of them should these days p^fane,
But should remember how GOD by and by
Did see their fastings and als heard their cry:
These matters of Purim were by decree
Confirmed, and written in a book clearelie.
Chap. 10.
THen Ahasuerus the King did command,
To lay a tribut upon all the land,
And als upon the Isles of all the sea,
The like tribut he ordained for to be:
The noble acts of his ^reat power and might,
And Mordecais greatness in all men's sight,
Are they not written well with other things,
In Chronicles of all the Persian Kings?
Thus Mordecai exalted most highly
Unto the King was then next in degree,
^e sought the wealth of his people indeed,
He likewise did speak peace to all his seed,
THE USE.
Here learn how that the LORD in great mercy,
Rescues his Church in great adversity;
When all things seem to be destroyed and gone,
Then does the Lord for help rise up anon:
Though troubles great the Church greeve day by day,
GOD at the last can raise a Mordecai;
And though Haman, who GODS folks death does seal,
Be high the day, on the top of the wheel,
And in his fury like a Boar does range
For to devore, GOD can soon make a change
In Princes hearts so that from high degree
They shall such bring, and hang them on a tree:
See here how GOD his Church can well defend,
And brings his foes unto a tragic end.
ADVOCATES' LIBRARY EDINBURGH

THE SECOND VOLUME OF THE GARDEN OF ZION: Containing the Books of Job,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs, all in English Verse.

By M. ZACHARY BOYD.

GLASGOW, Printed by George Anderson, 1644.



To the most Royal Lady, ELIZABETH, His Majesty's only Sister, Princess of
Palatine of Rhine, etc.
MADAME,
THE Tops of high Trees are mightily shaken by the winds, while the lower
branches suffer a more gentle wagging; the thunderbolts smi^e oftest upon the
tops of ^eepest rocks, while the base valleys enjoy a ^lme in a gentle gale.

Your HIGHNESS, very eminent both in race and Place, has felt this in your
time, (...) much as any other of the land: As for the ^^rticulars, diverse are
big, like Habbakuks vi^n, which was in so great letters, Hab. 2.2.
that men ^ight run, and read the same.

I know none in Scripture, except CHRIST, ^ho has been more put to the proof
of patience then holy Job, his calamities were gre^^ he was brought very low,
but GOD at last, ^ter he had humbled him, blessed his latter e^^ more than his
beginning: JOB 42.12.
The Lord mak^ so with your Highness, when all those stor^ are past, your end
with the Righteous shall Peace. PSALM. 37.37


Let it please your Highness to take in part this little mite of my Muse, with
blessing, and most fervent prayers to GOD, sovereign Comforts to cure all your
Cros^ and to wipe the tears of troubles from (...) Eyes: Your Comfort is like
the Prophets ^sion, Though it tarry, wait for it, beca^ it will come, HAB. 2.3.
it will not tarry.

From GSASGOVV the 30. day of September, 1644. Your HIGHNESS most humble
Servant, M. ZACHARY BOYD.

THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of JOB.
A Prayer.
O Son of GOD, who from thy veins did power
Upon the Cross that mostred crimson shower,
To save lost man, me with thy Sprite inspire,
And in my breast kindle a sacred fire:
Conduct my pen, cleanse both mine hand, and heart,
That I thy Priest may safely touch thine Arc:
Teach me to tune the glory of thy Name,
How thou by Job did Satan foully shame,
Though he with an insatiate fury fell
Did go about him, for to quail and quell,
As thou favor to my Heroicks show,
So for these Lyricks thy Graces renew.
JOB. Sorrowful, or Hated.
INUZ a Man called Jo there was,
both perfect, and u^ right,
Who feared GOD, and d^ eschew
evil even with all h^ might:
2 And in that place where he did live
in great prosperity,
By marriage were born to him
seven sons, and daughters three.
3 His substance was seven thousand Sheep;
and Camels thousands three,
He also had five hundred yoke
of Oxen most lusty.
Five hundred Shee-asses he had,
rich both in men and beast:
So that he was the greatest man
of all those of the East.
4 His sons did in their houses feast,
yea, every one his day;
They called their sisters there to eat,
and drink with them always.
5 It was so when their feasting days
were gone about quickly,
Job did them sanctify, and rose
up in morning early.
For each he offered sacrifice,
fearing his sons greatly
That they had cursed GOD in their hearts,
thus did good Job daily.
6 Now it befell upon a day,
when Angels in a throng
Before GOD did present themselves,
Satan came them among.
7 Then the LORD unto Satan said,
whence comes thou? he anon,
From going to and fro on earth,
from walking up and down.
8 Then the LORD unto Satan said,
Have thou considred well
My servant Job, there is none like him,
that on the earth does dwell.
A perfect and an upright man,
like unto whom are few:
One that the mighty God does fear,
and does evil still eshew.
9 Then Satan in his malice great,
to God this answer brought,
It is no wonder that so be,
does Job fear God for naught?
10 Have thou not hedged him and his house,
where he may safe abide?
Have thou not hedged all about,
he has on every side?
Thou have by thy grace infinite,
blessed the work of his hand,
And his substance is mightily
increased in the land.
11 But now put forth thy hand, and touch
what he has in each place,
And he will most despitfully
even curse thee to thy face.
12 All that he has is in thy power
said God, on him only
Lay not thine hand; so Satan went
out from the Lord quickly.
^3 There was a day, when his children
(who were indeed numbrous)
Were eating, and wine drinking in
their eldest brothers house.
^4 At that time came a messenger,
unto good Job and said,
The oxen were plowing, and the asses,
were feeding them beside.
15 The Sabeans have them all spoiled,
thy servants they have slain,
And I only escaped have
to tell to thee the same.
16 While he yet spoke another came,
and said most certainly,
The fire of the Almighty GOD,
is fallen from the heavens hie.
It sheep and servants has burnt up,
and they consumed be,
And I only escaped am,
alone for to tell thee.
17 While he yet speaking was, there came
another who did tell,
The Caldeans made out three bands,
and on the Camels fell.
Yea they them cari'd have away,
and thy servants have slain,
And only I escaped have;
for to tell thee the same.
18 While he thus spoke, another said,
Thy sons and daughters all
Did eat, and als drink wine into
their eldest brothers hall.
19 But O behold what did befall,
a most fearful distress,
There came a strong and mighty wind,
even from the wilderness:
The house four corners it did smite,
which on the young men fell:
They are all dead, and I alone
escaped am to tell.
20 The Job arose, his mantle he
rent, and did shave his head;
He down upon the ground did fall,
and worship did with speed.
21 Then said he in his grief and smart,
Out of my mothers womb
I naked came, and shall return
als naked to my tomb.
The LORD has given, and als the LORD
has taken all away:
The LORDS great name be blessed still
for ever and for ay.
^2 Yet worthy JOB most patient
in all this misery
^id not offend, nor charge his GOD
with rigor foolishly.
Chap. 2.
ANother day the sons of GOD
came themselves to present
Before the LORD, Satan also
among them there he went.
2 Whence comes thou? GOD to Satan said,
then Satan answred soon,
From going to and fro on Earth,
from walking up and down.
3 Have thou considred JOB, said GOD,
that there is none him like,
One that fears GOD, and evil eschewes.
perfect, and upright eke?
Behold, how still he holds fast
even his integrity,
Although that him for to destroy
thou (without cause) mov'dst me.
4 Then Satan the LORD answered soon,
JOB has felt little strife:
But skin for skin, all that man has
will he give for his life.
5 Put forth thine hand, his bone and flesh
touch, and in little space
He even out of all patience
will curse thee to thy face.
6 And the Lord unto Satan said,
Behold, and now perceive
He in thine hand given over is,
but see thou his life save.
7 So from the presence of the Lord,
Satan went up and down,
And smot poor Job with painful boiles,
from the sole to the crown.
8 Then a potsheard to scrape himself,
he took all desolate,
Thus he perplexed in his mind
among the ashes sat:
9 Then said his wife, Retain'st thou still
thine old integrity?
What meanest thou, O foolish man?
now curse thou GOD, and die.
10 But he again said unto her,
his witless wife to school,
Thou speak now thou knows not what,
thou speak like a fool.
Shall we receive good, and not evil
at the hand of the LORD?
^n all this did not holy Job,
with lips sin in a word.
11 Now when Jobs three friends heard of all
this evil and great disgrace
That came on him, they every one
did come from his own place:
The Temanite, Eliphaz, and
als Bildad the Shuhite,
And Z^phar also joined with them,
the wise Naamathite:
For they together had all made
appointment of one sort,
To come, and mourn with their dear friend,
and him for to comfort:
12 But when they did lift up their eyes
afar, they him no more
Did know, they lifted up their voice,
and weeped very sore.
And every man his mantle rent,
while thus they had it riven:
They sprinkled dust upon their heads
toward the highest heaven.
13 So seven days without speaking words,
and seven nights they down sat
Upon the ground, for they did see
his grief was very great.
Chap. 3.
THen opened Job his mouth anon,
and in grief cursd his day,
And answ'ring with a wounded heart,
Job thus began to say,
3 Cursd be the day that I was borne,
and let the night like have
That it was said, my mother did
me a man child conceive.
4 Let that day be darkness always,
let not GODS eye divine
Regard it, neither let the light
upon it ever shine.
5 Let darkness it and shadows stain,
let a cloud steadfastly
Dwell on it; let the blackness of
the day it terrify.
6 Let darkness seize upon that night;
to the days of the year
Let it not come, nor numbered be,
with months by men here.
7 Let that night in all times to come,
be solitary still,
Let no voice at all come therein,
that is glade or joyful.
8 Let them it curse with all their heart,
that use to curse the day
^ho are still ready to raise up
their great mourning always.
9 Let the stars of its twilight be
dark, let it look for light
^ut have none; neither let it see
the fair days dawning bright.
10 Because it of my mothers womb
shut not the doors closely,
Nor in the days of troubles great
hide sorrow from mine eye.
11 Why died I not even from the womb,
which compassd me about?
Why did not I give up the ghost,
when from it I came out?
12 Why did the midwives gentle knees
me at my birth prevent?
Or why the breasts that I should suck
gave milk for this intent?
13 For now both still, and quiet I
should have been for my best;
I should have sleeped in the grave,
then had I been at rest.
14 With Kings, and also counselors,
men of the earth most rare,
Who in places most desolate
did build their houses fair.
15 Or with Princes who glistring gold
had in their treasures still:
Who their houses adorned well,
with silver fine did fill:
16 Or as an hid untymly birth,
I surely had not been,
As infants in their mothers womb,
which light have never seen:
17 There cease always the wicked men,
From troubling the oppressed;
And there from toil and carking care
the weary be at rest.
12 The prisoners there together rest,
they not at any hour
Do hear the voice which does proceed
from the great opressour.
18 These that be small, and also gerat,
even there together be;
And the servant for toilsome task
is from his master free.
20 Wherefore is light given unto him
that is in misery,
And life upon the earth to them
that in soul bitter be?
21 Which every day do long for death,
but it comes not therefore;
and dig for it, even more then for
hid treasures and great store.
22 Which do exceedingly rejoice,
and always gladness have,
^n their greatest afflictions,
when they can find the grave.
23 And why is light given to a man,
whose way is always hid,
and whom the Lord has hedged in,
and from evil will not red?
24 For my sighing before I eat,
does come and me about,
^y roarings loud like waters great
are largely powered out.
25 For that which I still greatly feared,
is come now upon me,
and that whereof I was afraid,
is to me come surely
26 In safety I was not always,
nor yet still had I rest,
(...) was far from all quietness;
yet troubles me oppressed.
Chap. 4.
WHen this was said, then Eliphaz
the Temanite that day
Did form an answer, and to Job
after this speech did say.
If we assay to speak with thee,
as friends, and so be bold,
Will thou be greev'd? But who from words
can well himself withhold?
3 Behold thou have instructed well
diverse in numbrous bands,
And thou by thy most wise comforts,
have strengthened the weak hands.
4 Thy words have well upholden him
that was in miseries
Straight falling, and thou strengthened have
the weak and feeble knees.
5 But now it is upon thee come,
thou faintest more and more,
It now thee touches in the quick,
and thou art troubled sore.
6 This is thy fear, and confidence,
which now is made to hop,
The uprightness of all thy ways,
and even thy strongest hope.
Who ever perished innocent,
remember I thee pray?
O! where was ever the righteous man
cut off in any way?
Even as I have seen surely they
that plow iniquity,
and sow the seed of wickedness,
the same reap certainly.
They perish by the blast of GOD,
as by a bloody war,
and by the breath of his nostriles
they all consumed are.
10 The roaring of the Lion and
the voice of Lions fierce,
and als of young Lions thee teeth
are broken with disgrace.
11 The old Lion does perish for
lack of his prey and food,
and the stout Lions Whelps anon
are scattred all abroad.
12 A thing unto me by the Lord
was brought most secretly,
little thereof by mine ear
received was surely.
13 In thoughts that come most strangely from,
the visions of the night:
When deep sleep falls upon men,
deprived of sense or sight.
14 A panick fear then came me on,
I then began to quake,
With this fear was a trembling, which
made all my bones to shake.
15 In this mean time appeared a sprite,
which passd my face before,
The hair of all my flesh stood up,
for I was troubled sore.
16 It stood still there most steadfastly,
but what did then concern
The visage, and the form thereof
I could not well discern.
An image was before mine eyes,
there was a deep silence,
And I did clearly hear a voice
speak these words in this sense,
17 Shall any among mortal men,
more just then the Lord be?
Or shall a man whom GOD has made,
yet be more pure then he?
18 Behold in his servants most dear,
whom he with graces large
Endewes, he trusts not, his Angels
with folly he does charge.
19 How much less on all such that dwell
in base houses of clay
Whose ground is dust, which crushed are
before the moth always.
20 From morning to the evening they
are certainly destroyed,
They perish still without regard,
which they can not avoid.
21 Does not their great excellency,
in them still go away,
And so without wisdom like fools,
go to their dying day.
Chap. 5.
CAll now if there be any that
will surely answer thee,
To which of the Saints will thou turn
thy self to justify.
2 For wrath from the Almighty God
the foolish man does kill,
And envy slayes the silly one,
without wisdom or skill.
3 I have seen taking root anon,
the foolish without grace,
But in a moment suddenly
I cursd his dwelling place,
4 His children far from safety are,
they are crushed in the gate,
There is none to deliver them
before the judgment seat.
5 Whose harv'st the hungry eats up,
for their poor maintenance,
Even from the thorns, the robber als
devours their whole substance.
6 Although affliction from the dust
to come be not once found,
Neither do troubles great also
even spring out of the ground.
7 Yet poor man unto trouble great,
and fearful misery
Is always borne, most like the sparks
that still upward do flee.
8 I unto the Almighty GOD,
would seek with all my heart,
And unto GOD would I commit
my cause in every part.
9 Which great things and unsearchable,
by his arm Almighty
Does work, and things most marveilous
which without number be.
10 Who gracious upon the earth
for watring gives rain,
and also water sends upon
the fields of all the plain.
11 He in his wisdom sets on high
men of most low degree,
that those which mourn to safety may
at last exalted be.
12 The devices of crafty men
he disappointeth wise,
^o that their hands can not perform
their wicked enterprise.
13 He by his wisdom takes the wise
their craftiness among:
and the counsel of froward men
is cari'd all headlong.
14 They in their course with darkness meet,
in the days time of light,
And wandering in the noone day groop,
as in the darkest night.
15 But he well saves from the sword,
the poor of all the land,
And from their vile blasphemous mouth,
and from the mighties hand.
16 So the most indigent and poor
has hope in misery,
And the great GOD does stop the mouth
of vile iniquity.
17 Behold whom the Lord God corrects
he sure is most happy,
Therefore the chastning not despise
of him that is Almighty.
18 For he makes sore, and binds up,
he wounds, but the hole
He closes up, his hands again
do perfectly make whole.
19 In troubles six, by power great,
he shall deliver thee:
Yea in seven also by no evil
thou shall then touched be.
20 In famine he shall thee redeem
from death, and in a word,
In war he shall thee save even from
the power of the sword.
21 From the scourge of the wicked tongue
thou safely hid shall be:
Thou need'st not fear destruction
when it comes suddenly.
22 At famine and destruction
thou safe shall laugh always:
The raging beasts upon the earth
thee shall not once afray
23 For with the stones of all the field
thou in a league shall be
^he beasts which in the field remain
shall be at peace with thee.
24 Thou shall know that thy Tabernacle
shall always be in peace.
Thy dwelling place thou visit shall
and from all sin shall cease.
25 Thou shall know also that thy seed
in all the land about
shall be great and thine off spring as
grass that from earth does sprout.
26 Thou to thy grave at last shall come
in a full age most like
A shock of corn that comes in
in his season all ripe.
27 Lo this we have searched; it is so;
That it well understood
May be by thee now hear it well,
and know it for thy good.
Chap. 6.
THen Job replied, Oh that my greef
were even now thoroughly weighed,
And my sufferings together were
all in a balance laid.
For they should be of greater weight
then the sand of the sea,
Therefore my words are swallowed up,
that they no more should be.
4 For of the great Almighty God
the arrows are in me,
The poison whereof does my sprit
drink up most speedily.
The fearful terrors of the Lord,
against me every day,
Like squadrons in an army great
set themselves in array.
5 The wild Ass does he lowdly bray,
if he has grass his fill,
Or lowes the Ox, as in great greef,
if he has fodder still.
6 Unsavory things without relish,
who without salt can eat?
In whites of eggs who can find taste,
that they should be for meat?
7 The things that in my plenty great
my soul refusd to touch,
Are still now for my dainty meat,
while I for sorrow crouch.
8 Oh that I might have my request!
and God would grant to me,
In his mercy the thing that I
long daily for to see.
9 Even that it would now please the Lord
me to destroy as dead,
and that he would let loose his hand,
and cut me off with speed.
10 Then should I yet have comforts sweet,
in mine integrity,
Yea, I my self in sorrow would
harden most constantly.
^et him still strike and never spare,
for this I know right well
^he words of the most Holy One
I never did conceal.
11 What is my strength that I should hope,
among such grief and strife?
What is mine end, even that I should
prolong my wretched life?
12 Is my great strength the strength of stones,
which does not quickly pass?
Or (as I may here well subjoine)
is all my flesh of brass?
13 Is not my sprituall help in me
well fixed even always?
and shall I say that wisdom is
quite driven from me away?
14 To the afflicted pity should
be from his friend most dear.
Showed, but of the Almighty GOD
he does forsake the fear:
15 My brethren have deceitfully
dealt as a brook always,
And as the streams of brooks they do
most quickly pass away.
16 Which blackish are by reason of
the ye both hard and firm,
Which in cold seasons cover it,
the snow is hid therein.
17 What time again they do wax warm,
they vanish with disgrace
When it is hot, they are consumed
even out of their own place.
18 The paths of their way at the last
are turned aside; also
They perish quickly, and in haste
they all to nothing go.
19 The troops of Tema looked still
with an attentive eye,
The companies of Shebas men
did wait for them surely.
20 Because they hoped had, they were
confounded all with shame,
Yea, they ashamed greatly were,
when they all thither came:
21 For now ye are nothing at all,
as may be tuely said
Ye see clearly my casting down
and ye are sore afraid
22 Did I say ever unto you
in my necessity
Unto me bring, or give rewards
of your substance for me?
22 Or that ye should from the enemies hand
most strong deliver me
Or me once from the hand redeem
of these that mighty be?
23 Teach me, and I will hold my tongue,
and no more of you crave,
And cause me for to understand
wherein I erred have
25 How forcible are the right words
which do proceed from love?
But as for you tell me what does
your arguing thus reprove.
26 Do ye imagine to reprove
words and the speeches find
Of one that is most desperate,
which are light as the wind?
27 Yea, ye do proudly overwhelme
the poor and fatherless
And also for your friend ye dig
a pit of great distress.
28 Now therefore be content in mind
and also look on me,
For unto you it is evident,
if I do feign or lie,
29 Return I pray you, let it not
be still iniquity;
Yea turn again; my righteousness,
is in it most furelie.
30 Is there transgression in my tongue
when I such things rehearse?
Can not my taste wisely discern
the things that are perverse?
Chap. 7.
IS there not one appointed time
for man on earth to go?
Most like the days of an hireling,
are not his days also?
2 As a servant the shadow does,
desire most earnestly,
As an hireling looks for reward
of his work constantly.
3 So am I made for to possess
the months of vanity,
And nights that are most wearisome,
appointed are for me.
4 When I lie down into my bed,
I often this do say,
When from this place shall I arise?
and when shall it be day?
(...) full of tossing to and fro
am troubled all the night,
And this continues ever still,
until the day be light.
5 My flesh with vile worms clothed is,
and clods of dust also,
My skin is broken, and become
most loathsome me unto.
6 My days go swifter in their course,
then weavers shittles slide,
They quickly without hope are spent,
and do not fixed abide.
7 Remember that my life is wind,
in all things here mine eye,
Of any good that is here below
shall no more ever see.
8 The eye of him that has me seen,
shall hence see me no more,
Thine eyes upon me fixed are,
and I am not therefore.
9 As the great cloud consumed is,
and vanish does away,
So he that goes down to the grave,
shall rise no more for ay.
10 He shall no more return unto
his house, or yet his race,
Nor yet shall any more he be
acknowledged by his place.
11 I will therefore in anguish great
no more my mouth refrain,
I in my souls great bitterness
most surely will complain.
12 Am I like an unruly Whale,
or like a boistrous sea,
That thou should need to set a watch,
to watch thus over me?
13 when I say in my great distress,
whereby I become faint,
My bed shall comfort me, my couch
shall well ease my complaint.
14 Then thou with night dreams most fearful^
do skare and trouble me,
And through appearing visions
do still me terrify
15 So that my poor afflicted soul,
in all this toil and strife,
Does choose strangling, and death also;
yea rather then my life.
16 I loath it, I would not always
thus live in misery;
^et me alone, for all my days
are very vanity.
17 What is man that thou should him
in whole, or yet in part
^hus magnify? and that thou should
upon him set thine heart?
18 And that thou should visit him,
in favor by and by
^ach morning, and him narrowly
at every moment try?
19 How long will thou not from me Lord
depart? nor me alone
^t, until I my spittle may
a little swallow down?
I sinned have, what shall I do
unto thee now or then?
(...) thou! who the preserver art
even of all mortal men.
^hy have thou in thine anger set
me, as a mark against thee?
that I even unto my self
a burden seem to be?
21 And why do thou not pardon me
my great transgression?
And take away the iniquity
that lies my soul upon?
For in the dust now shall I sleep,
and in the morning me
Thou with great diligence shall seek,
but I then shall not be.
Chap. 8.
THen Bildad the Shuhit did say
unto poor Job, How long
2 Wilth thou thus speak? How long thy wo^
shall be like wind most strong?
3 Darre thou be bold for to affirm,
that the Lord does subvert
The judgment? Or the Almighty God
does he justice pervert?
4 If thy children against him have sinned,
and he without delay
For their transgression in his wrath
has cast them all away:
5 If thou unto the Lord betimes
would in humility
Seek, and make supplication,
even unto the Almighty:
6 If thou were pure, and upright, sure
he would for thee awake:
Thy righteous house most prosperous
he would not fail to make.
7 Though thy beginning was but small,
And pinched with great distress;
^n mercy yet thy latter end,
he greatly should increase.
8 I pray thee of the former age
enquire and do not spare;
And of their fathers to the search
see thou thy self prepare.
9 For we are but of yesterday,
and nothing surely know;
Because our days on earth do pass
like shades, we know not how.
10 Shall they not in their wisdom great
thee teach well by their art?
and utter still most worthy words,
even out of their own heart?
11 Can the green rush without the mire,
or moisture well up grow?
Or can the flag grow up, and spring
where waters do not flow?
12 While it yet in his greenesse is,
and not cut down always
Before all other herbs it does
even wither quite away.
13 So are the paths of all these men,
that the Lord God forget,
So of all hypocrites the hope
shall perish without let.
14 Whose vain, yea, and most foolish hope
shall be cut off quickly;
Whose idle and unconstant trust
like spiders webs shall be.
15 He shall then lean upon his house,
but it shall not stand sure,
He shall with both hands hold it fast,
but it shall not endure.
16 He is most green before the Sun,
his branches all about
In his fair Gardens pleasantly.
with buds and bloomes shoot out.
17 His roots about the heap are wrapped,
and of stones see the place:
By force of their own moisture they
through rubbish have increase.
18 If he destroy him from his place,
then shall it him deny:
I with mine eyes have not thee seen,
shall it say by and by.
19 Behold of his way this the joy
from such things still does flow,
^ut of the earth even surely here
shall others lately grow.
20 Behold a good and perfect man
God will not cast away,
either will he in mercy help
the evil doers always.
21 Till he with laughing from great joy
thy mouth in mercy fill:
and like wise satisfy thy lips,
with great rejoicing still.
22 They that thee hate with wicked hearts,
with shame shall clothed be
^he place where wicked men do dwell,
shall come to naught surely.
Chap. 9.
THen holy Job answ'red, and said,
this to be truth I see:
But how should man who is perverse
with God thus righteous be?
If he in rigor and in wrath
with him would once contend;
can not answer him unto
one point of a thousand.
4 In heart he is wise, and in strength
is most mighty indeed:
Who against him hardened has himself,
and after has come speed?
5 Which greatest mountains does remove,
and they know not surely:
Which overturns them in his wrath,
so that they cease to be.
6 Which shakes the earth out of her place,
most like a rolling ball
And the strong pillars makes thereof
for fear to tremble all.
7 Which by his power infinite
commands the bright sun;
So that at morn he rises not
he seals the stars anon.
8 Which by his mighty arm alone
does spread out pleasantly
The azurd heavens, and treads upon
the great waves of the sea.
9 Which Arcturus and Orion
(that raging stormy youth)
Makes with the Plaiades, and there
fair chambers of the south.
10 Which does by his Almighty hand
great things past finding out,
Yea, and great wonders numberless.
in all the world about.
11 Lo! he goes by me, so that him
I by no means can see:
He does pass on also, but well
he is not perceived by me.
12 Behold he takes away, who can
him hinder? Who also,
Will unto him this boldly say,
What minds thou now to do?
13 His anger God will not withdraw,
which makes his foes to droupe
The proudest helpers that can come
must under him all stoup.
14 How much less by my wisdom small,
him answer well shall I
To choose my words out, and with him
the strongest reasons try?
15 Whom, though I were most righteous,
yet answer would not I:
But I would supplication make
to my judge by and by.
16 If I had called, and he had given
to me an answer choice;
Yet would I not believed that he
had hearkened to my voice.
17 For with a temptest rageing sore
he fiercely breaks me,
And als my wounds without a cause
he does still multiply.
18 He will not suffer me my breath
to take in great distress,
But in his furious rageing wrath
me fills with bitterness.
19 If I do speak of force and strength,
lo! he is strong indeed,
And if of judgem^nt, who shall set
for me a time to plead?
20 Mine own mouth sure shall me condemne^d
if I me justify;
If I plead perfect, he me will
prove most perverse to be.
21 Though I were perfect, yet I not
would in a way unwise
My soul know for to justify,
my life I would despise.
22 This is one thing, therefore I it
said in my great annoy,
The ^erfect and the wicked man
GOD does alike destroy,
23 If that the scourge most suddenly
men on the earth does stay;
(...) trials of the innocent
he will laugh, sport, and play.
The earth is given unto the hand
of these that wicked be;
^e judges faces there he cov'rs,
if not, where, who is he?
Now swifter then a post my days
(as well is understood)
^ey suddenly do flee away,
and so they see no good.
As swiftest ships before the wind
they passed are away;
^d as the Eagle in the air,
that hastes to her prey.
If I say, I will my complaint
forget, that I may sport,
^ill leave of my heaviness,
and so my self comfort;
I of my sorrows am afraid,
with grief my heart is spent:
now that thou in judgment wilt
not hold me innocent.
If I be wicked, Why do I
then labor thu^ in va^ne?
If with snow water I me wash,
and make my hands most clean.
31 Yet shall thou in the ditch me plunge,
and all my cleanness mar,
And mine own clothes me so defiled,
shall surely me abhor.
32 For as I am, he is not a man,
that I incontinent
Should answer him, and we should come
together in judgment,
33 Nor any days man yet there is
betwixt us to command,
That might by his authority
upon us lay his hand.
34 Let him in his great mercy take
his rod away from me;
And let not his most dreadful fear
me greatly terrify:
35 Then would I with great boldness
and not fear him also;
But oh! in this most troublous time
it is not with me so.
Chap. 10.
MY soul of my life weary is,
on me I my complaint
Will leave: I will in bitterness
speak of my soul all shent:
I boldly will say unto GOD,
See thou condemn not me:
^ew me wherefore thou do contend
with me so bitterly.
Is it good that thou should oppress?
and the work of thine hands
^espise? And on the counsel shine
of the most wicked bands?
Are thine eyes flesh or see thou as
a man on earth does see?
Are thy days as the days of man,
or years as man's days be?
That after mine iniquity
and sin thou do enquire:
Thou know that I not wicked am;
who can save from thine ire?
Thine hands have made and fashioned me,
in all parts for the joy
^f these who were my parents dear;
yet thou do me destroy.
^emember now, I thee beseech,
that thou me (as thou can)
^f clay have made, and will thou now
bring me again to dust?
(...) Have thou not in my mothers womb
me powered out surely?
Even as the milk, and like the chease,
thou have als crudded me:
11 Thou have me clothed with skin and (...)
and for my sure defense,
Thou me with bones and sinews both
did as with remparts fence.
12 Thou have me life and favor als
given, as I may observe:
Thy visitation does my spirit
at all times safe preserve,
13 And these things thou have in thine heart,
even hid most secreetly,
I doubt not, for I clearly know
that all this is with thee.
14 If I do sin against thy law,
then well thou markest me,
And thou will not once me acquit
from mine iniquity.
15 If I be wicked in my ways,
then woe to me indeed;
If I be righteous yet will I
not once lift up my head.
In this my greef I surely am
full of confusion,
Therefor thou in thy mercy see
my great affliction.
16 For it upon me day by day
does more and more increase,
^hou huntest me from place to place,
even as a lion fierce.
17 Thy witnesses thou do renew
against me, on me thy wrath
^hou do increase; changes and war
are still against me both.
18 Wherefore then have thou from the womb
me brought forth? oh that I
^p given the ghost had, and had not
been seen by any eye.
19 I should have been as though I had
not been, yea I should have
^none been ca^ied from the womb,
unto my resting grave.
20 Are not my days upon the earth?
then for thy mercies sake
^ease, and me suffer that I may
a little comfort take,
21 Before I go, whence I shall not
unto the livings path
^eturne, even unto darkness black,
and the shadow of death.
22 A land of darkness as darkness
and of deaths darkest night,
Where order is not to be seen
whereas darkness is light.
Chap. 11.
THen Zophar the Naamathite,
said, Should not such words be
Answered; and should a man of talk himself thus justify?
3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace
though thou has got a name,
And when thou mockest, shall no man
upon thee bring great shame?
4 For thou have said my doctrine's pure,
and clean als in thine eye:
5 But O that GOD with open lips
would now speak against thee.
6 And that he would his wisdom great
make thee well to observe:
Know therefore that GOD less exacts
then thy sins do deserve.
7 Can thou by a most curious search
find out GOD in thy mind,
Or unto a perfection great,
can thou The Almighty find?
8 It is as high as higest heavens,
what can thou do? It Is low:
^ea deeper then the deepest hell,
what of it can thou know?
Its measure's longer then the earth,
and broader then the Sea;
10 If he cut off, gather, shut up,
what can his hinder be?
11 For he vain men does know right well,
He sees their wickedness:
Will he not then consider it,
to punish such excess?
2 For vain and foolish man would seem
to be most wise in heart:
though man upon this earth be borne,
like a wild Asses colt.
3 If thou thine heart prepare, and stretch
thine hand to him humbly,
5 If wickedness be in thine hand;
let it not dwell with thee:
5 For then shall thou lift up thy face.
which shall be without spote;
^ea thou most steadfast shall be then,
and shall not fear a jot,
6 Because thou shall thy misery
For ever and for ay
^orget, and it remember as
the floods that pass away.
17 And thine age shall be clearer then
the noone day, that is most bright,
Thou shall shine forth clearly, thou shall
be as the morning light.
18 And thou shall be secure, because
there is hope which is best:
Yea, thou shall dig about thee, and
in safety take thy rest.
19 Also thou shall lie down secure
from all adversity;
None shall affright thee, many shall
make their suit unto thee:
20 But the eyes of the wicked shall
fail, even till they be lost;
They shall not escape, their hope shall be
as giving up the ghost.
Chap. 12.
ANd Job answ'red and said to them,
in great perplexity,
2 No doubt but ye the people are,
wisdom with you shall die.
3 But I do understand as well
as any of you all;
Yea, who knows not such things as these,
though of a judgment small?
I am like one by neighbors scorned,
who upon God does call,
^e answreth him; the just upright
is laughed to scorn by all.
He that is ready with his feet
to slip, he is most sure,
^s lamps despised in the thought,
of these that leave secure.
The robbers houses prosper still,
and they that God provoke
^o live secure, into whose hand
God puts a wealthy stock.
But ask the beasts, and they anon
shall thee teach most clearelie,
^d the fowls fleeing in the air,
and they als shall tell thee.
Speak to the earth, and it surely
shall teach thee lessons rare,
^e fishes also of the sea
shall unto thee declare.
Who knows not that the hand of God
has wrought all of this kind?
In whose hand is the living soul,
and breath of all mankind.
Does not the ear try words, and als
the mouth taste meat always?
12 With The Ancient men great wisdom is,
and skill in length of days.
13 In wisdom great and strength also
he highly does excel,
He both has understanding great
and excellent counsel:
14 Behold he breaks down, and it
cannot be built again,
He does shut up, and truly there
can be no opening then
15 Behold the waters he withholds,
and they anon grow dry,
He sends them out, they all the earth
do turn over by and by.
16 With him is strength and wisdom great
these who most simple be
That are deceived, deceivers als
all wisely rules he
17 He counselors spoiled leads away,
and judges fools does make
18 The bond of Kings he loses soon,
and girds their loins with sack.
19 He Princes spoils, and overthrowes
the mighty men always:
20 The trusty speech, the ageds skill
he does remove away.
21 Upon the princes of the earth
he powers contempt at length;
And of the great and mighty men
he weakneth all the strength.
22 He deep things out of darkness great
discov'reth by his might,
The blackest shadow he of death
d^^^ bring out to the light.
23 T^^ nations he does well increase,
and by him they are slain,
The nations he does all enlarge,
and straitneth them again.
24 The heart of cheifest people he
on earth does take away;
And makes them err in wilderness,
where there is not a way.
25 They here and there grope in the dark,
where there appears no light
and he them (like a drunken man)
makes stagger by his might.
Chap. 13
MIne eye has all this seen, mine ear
has heard, and understood
What ye know, I do know the like,
not under you in good.
3 I unto the Almighty speak,
and reason with him would,
4 But ye are all Physicians vain,
to forge lies ye are bold.
5 O that ye all would hold your peace,
your wisdom it should be,
6 My reasoning, and pleadings of
my lips hear patiently.
7 Will you for God speak wickedly
and talk deceit in end?
8 W^ll ye accept his person thus?
will ye for God contend?
9 Is it good that he should you search?
to mock him are ye set?
10 He Will you reprove, if secretly
ye persons do accept.
11 Shall not his great excellency,
with dread you all afray,
12 Your rememb^ance like ashes is
your bodies are of clay.
13 Now hold your peace, that I may speak,
and come on me what will,
14 Why in my teeth take I my flesh
hazarding life to spill
15 Though he me slay, yet will I trust
in him, even more and more,
^ut I mine own ways as I can
maintain will him before.
16 He shall be my salvation,
for hypocrites surely
shall not with their vain shows once come
before his Majesty.
17 My speech that fu^l of matter is,
with diligence now hear,
unto my declaration als
see that ye all give ear.
18 Behold now I by wisdom great
my cause even most wisely
^ave ordered, I know that I shall
be justified thereby.
19 Who is he among mortal men,
that will well plead with me?
(...) or if I now be dumb, I shall
give up the ghost surely.
20 Only do not two things to me,
and I will not me hide;
21 Withdraw thine hand, let not thy dread
make me now sore af^id.
22 Then call thou and I answer will,
or else answer thou me,
23 How many are my greevous sins
reveal thou unto me.
24 Why do thou hide from me thy face
as if thy foe were I?
25 Will thou thus break a tossed leaf,
and pursue stubble dry?
26 For thou against me bitter things
do write, which is uncouth,
And make me always to possess
the great sins of my youth.
27 Thou putt'st my feet als in the stocks,
and look to all my ways
Thou sett'st a print upon the heels
even of my feet always;
28 And poor man in his best estate
is as a rotten cloth
Consumed all, as garments are
all eaten with the moth
Chap. 14
Poor man that of a woman weak
upon the earth is borne,
Is of few days, he is also
with troubles rent and torn.
2 He does come forth, even like a flower
and is cut down again,
He as a shadow flies away,
and does not long remain.
3 And do thou so on such an one
full of infirmity,
Thy clear eyes open, and me bringst
into judgment with thee?
4 Who can a clean thing here on earth
by his great power alone
Bring out of that which is unclean?
no not, there is not one.
5 Determined his days are all,
and months numbered with thee,
His bounds thou have appointed, that
he can not pass surely.
6 In thy great mercy turn from him,
that here well rest he may,
Until that (as an hireling) he
accomplish shall his day.
7 For if a tree be cut, there is hope
that it again will sprout;
And that the tender branch thereof
will not cease to bud out.
8 Even though the root thereof on earth
wax old, and so be found:
Yea more, and that the stock thereof
even die into the ground.
9 Yet through the sent of water fresh
it will most quickly bud;
And there bring forth most pleasant boughs,
like plants beside a flood.
10 But on earth poor man wastes away,
and after that must die,
Yea man he gives up the ghost
when that is, where is he?
11 As overflowing waters great
fail from the deepest sea,
And floods decay, and at the last
from running become dry.
12 So man lies down, and does not rise,
Till the heavens be no more,
They not awake, shall nor be raisd
out of their sleep therefore.
13 O that thou would in mercy great
me hide in grave at last,
That thou als would me secret keep
until thy wrath be past.
That thou would in thy wisdom als
appoint m^ speedily
A set time for my life, and so
at last remember me.
14 If men die shall they live again?
this should seem very strange:
The days of my appointed time
I Will wait till come my change.
15 Thou shall call, and I answer will,
as thou shall me require,
Thou to the work of thine own hands
will have a good desire.
16 Do thou not number all my steps
and watch well over my sin?
17 My transgression is in a bag
sealed, thou it sow'st therein.
18 The mountains falling come to naught,
and moulder all away,
The hardest rock removed is,
out from its place and stay.
19 The waters still do wear the stones,
thou washest quite away
These earthly things, and thou destroy'st
the hope of man always
20 Against him still thou do prevail,
and he anon is past,
His countenance thou changes, and
him sends away at last.
21 His sons come unto honor great,
and he it does not know:
Likewise he does not once perceive
when they are brought down^ low.
22 But as long as ^is fi^sh on earth
shall bear his soul about
The soul within shall mourn, the flesh
shall have great pain without.
Chap. 15.
THen Eliphaz the Temanite
said, Should man wise in mind
2 Speak vainly, and his belly fill
with the barran east wind?
3 Should he thus with such iddle talk,
and words that are most rude
Go reason, or with speech wherewith
he sure can do no good?
4 Thou casts off fear, by prayer als
on GOD thou do not call,
5 Thy mouth speaks ill, and thou do choice
the crafty tongue withal.
6 Not I, but thine own wicked mouth
condemns thee certainly,
And which is more, yea thine own lips
against thee testify.
7 Art thou the first man that was borne,
and made the hills before?
8 Gods secrets have thou heard? and do
esteem thy wisdom more?
9 What know thou, which we do not know^
or yet not understand?
10 With us are all the aged men
the gray-heads of the land.
11 Gods comforts with thee are they small?
are secret things with thee?
12 Why does thine heart thee carry, and
at what does wink thine eye?
13 That thou against the Almighty God,
thy spirit turn'st so and so,
And let such most foolish words
out of thy vain mouth go?
14 What is man that he should be clean
himself to justify?
And he which of a woman borne,
that he should righteous be?
15 Be^old no trust he in his saints
does put for all their might,
Yea, the most clea^ and azurd heavens
are not clean in his sight.
16 How much more loathsome, and more vile
is man, as ye may think,
Who all sorts of iniquity
as water still does drink?
17 I Will show thee, hear, I will declare,
even that which I have seen,
18 Which wise men from their fathers told,
so hid it has not been.
19 To whom alone the earth was given;
that therein they might dwell,
No stranger did among them pass,
either to buy or sell.
20 The wicked man does all his days
travel with pain not good,
To the oppressor of his years
the number is well hid.
21 In his years is a dreadful sound,
in his prosperity
The destroyer shall surely come
upon him suddenly.
No means can make him to believe,
that he out of da^knesse
Shall once return, the sword it waits
for him in great distress.
23 For bread he wandreth, saying thus,
Where is it in the land?
He knows that the day of darkness
is ready at his hand.
24 With trouble he shall be afraid
and with much anguish so,
Against him they shall prevail as Kings,
that unto battle go.
25 For against the God of heaven above
he stretches out his hand,
And against the Almighty he himself
does strengthen in the land.
26 He with a d^sp'rat violence
upon the LORD does run:
Even on his neck the bosses thick
of his bucklers upon.
27 Because his face he covreth well
with fatness, even so that
He collops makes on his flanks,
which are both great and fat.
28 He dwells in cities desolat,
and where no man can stay,
In houses ready to become
great heaps of stone and clay.
29 He impovrish'd, all his substance
shall not continue long,
His fa^re and large estate he shall*
not on the earth prolong.
30 From darkness he shall not depart,
the flame shall soon up dry
His branches, surely by his breath
he shall go soon away.
31 Let not him trust in vanity,
who being void of sense
Deceived is; for vanity
shall be his recompense.
32 Before his time it shall be cut,
his branch shall not be green,
33 As th'Olive he shall cast his flower,
as unripe grapes the vine.
34 For multitudes of hypocrites
sure desolate shall be;
And fire shall soon consume the tent
of all base briberie.
35 They mischief in their heart conceive,
and bring forth with much guile
Great vanity: their belly does
prepare deceit the while.
Chap. 16.
THen Job anon him answered thus,
2 I have heard how befall
Many such thin^s, most naughty now
comforters are ye all.
3. Shall words of wind, and vanity
at last have not an end?
What is this that imboldens thee,
such answers to intend?
4 I could well speak, if your souls were
even in this my souls stead:
Against you I could heap up words,
and shake at you mine head.
5 I with my mouth would strengthen you
for your aid and releef;
The moving also of my lips
should well assuage your grief.
6 Though I do speak, my grief is not
asswadged any way:
And though in silence I forbear,
what am I easde thereby?
But now He has me weary made,
in great perplexity:
In wrath thou have made desolate
even all my company.
8 With wrinkles (as a witness) thou
have filled me in disgrace:
My leanness in me rising up
bears witness to my face.
9 He that me hates in wrath me tares,
his teeth still gnashing be
Upon me, this my cruel fo
sharpneth his eyes on me.
10 They gaped have, they smitten als
have me upon the cheek,
With great reproach they gathered were
against me calm and meek.
11 GOD in wrath has delivered me
to the ungodly band,
And of the wicked has me turned,
even over in their hands.
12 I was at ease, asunder he
has broke me; by the neck
He has me taken and shaken sore;
and set me for his mark.
13 His archers do me compass round,
my reins asunder all
He cleaves, and does not spare; he powers
out on the ground my gall.
14 With breach upon breach at all times
he breaks me all along:
He fiercely does upon me run,
most like a giant strong.
15 I sackcloth on my skin have sowd,
which makes my heart to burst:
The horn of all my strength I have
defiled in the dust.
16 Great weeping in my troubles sore
my face defiled has;
And on mine eyelids still abides
the shadow dark of death.
17 This is not for iniquity,
wrought by hands all impure,
For I take head to all my ways,
my prayer it is pure.
18 O earth! if I thus guilty be,
then cov'r thou not my blood;
^et not my cry come unto thee,
for to be understood.
19 Now also th^s I know right well,
behold my WITNESS true
Dwells in the heavens, and my RECORD
on high himself does show.
20 My friends in mine affliction great
me all do mock and scorn.
^ut unto God mine eye powers out
hudge tears both even and morn:
21 O that one might with God on earth
for men thus plainly plead;
^s one that pleads for one that is
his neighbor good indeed.
22 When some few years upon the earth
are quickly come and gone
^hen at last shall I go the way
whence I shall not return.
Chap. 17.
COrrupted is my breath, my days
extinct are certainly,
^he graves also are now prepared,
and ready made for me.
2 Are there not proud and wicked men,
that at me mock their fill;
In such provoking vain, does not
mine eye continue still?
3 Lay down a little, put me now
in surety well with thee,
Who is he among mortal men
that will strike hands with me?
4 For thou from understanding good
have hid their heart; thou shall
Them not (according to their mind)
to dignity exalt.
5 He that unto his dearest friends
vain flattery can speak,
Of his children the eyes shall fail,
when they in want shall seek.
6 He as of babbling people vain,
a byword has set me,
And to my foes in former times
a tabret made to be.
7 By reason of my sorrow great,
mine eye is dim also;
My members as a shadow are
all filled with greef and woe.
8 Men upright shall astonished be
at this, and (which is meet)
The innocent himself shall stir
against the hypocrite.
9 He that is given to righteousness,
shall als hold on his way;
And he that has clean hands shall be
made stronger every day.
10 But as for you all foolish men,
do ye return, and now
Come, for I cannot find at all
one that is wise with you.
11 My days in vanity are past,
for which I greatly smart,
My purposes are broken off,
even the thoughts of mine heart.
12 My day of joy they changed have
into the greef of night,
13 Because of such a darkness great
they have made short my light.
14 I have unto corruption said,
and to the worms that crowle,
My father and my mother you,
and sister will I call.
15 And where is now my hope? As for
my hope who shall it see?
16 They to the pit shall go when in
the dust we resting be.
Chap. 14
THen Bildad the Shuhite did say,
How long now will it be,
2 Ere you end all your words? Mark well,
and after speak will we.
3 Wherefore are we as brutish beasts
thus counted all the while?
And still reputed in your sight
as naughty men and vile.
4 In anger hot he tears himself,
shall the earth with disg^ace
Be left for thee? And shall the rock
removed be from its place?
5 The brightest light of wicked men
shall surely be put out,
Yea, and the sparkle of his fire
shall not shine him about.
6 The light within his Tabernacle
shall by judgment divine
Be dark; his candle shall with him
be quenched, and never shine.
7 The steps of all his greatest strength
shall straightened be most fast*
And his own counsel still perverse
shall quickly down him cast.
8 For he by his own foolish feet
is cast into a net,
And so he rashly walks upon
a snare that is for him set.
9 The grin that is laid down for him,
shall take him by the heel;
And robbers by their violence
against him shall prevail.
10 The snare for him is in the ground
laid, both by night and day;
And for him a deceitful trap
is still set in the way,
11 Great terrors shall on every side
him fearfully affright,
And shall even drive him to his feet,
with a most speedy flight.
12 With pinching hunger ever shall
be bitten all his strength,
And ready shall destruction be
even at his side at length.
13 The greatest strength it of his skin
shall swallow less or more,
Yea, even of death shall the first borne
his greatest strength devore.
14 His confidence out of his tent
shall clean be rooted out,
And it shall bring him to the King
of terrors round about.
15 It in his tent shall surely dwell,
because its none of his:
Upon his habitation shall
brimstone be scattred thus.
16 His roots which seemed great sap to have,
shall be dried up beneath,
His branch above shall be cut off
together from the earth.
17 From the earth his rememberance
shall perish with great shame,
And he among men in the street
shall not have any name.
18 He from the light that shines on earth
shall be to darkness driven,
Out of the world he shall be
chasd from the morn to even.
19 He neither son nor nephew shall
among his people have,
Nor any in his house to dwell
when he goes to the grave.
20 They that come after him shall be
astonished at his day,
As they that went before him were
affrighted sore always.
21 Surely such are the dwellings of
the wicked wanting grace,
Of him that does not know the LORD,
this is the very place.
Chap. 19.
THen Job answered, and said to them;
how long (as with sharp swords)
2 Will ye my soul thus vex, and cut
in pieces with your words?
3 These ten times ye reproached have
me greatly to defame,
That you your selves make strange to me,
you are not touched with shame.
4 And be it so indeed that I,
have erred, once and again,
Mine error truly with my self
does constantly remain.
5 If ye indeed against me will
your selves thus magnify;
As als against me my reproach
plead most despightfully.
6 Know now that GOD has overthrown
me without any let;
And in my great distress he has
me compassed with his net.
7 Behold out of my greevous wrong
I do cry by and by,
But am not heard; no judgment is,
though I aloud do cry.
8 He has sure fenced up my way,
that I it cannot pass,
And he also has darkness black
even set in all my paths.
9 He has me of my glory great
clean striped all indeed,
And he also the royal Crown
has taken from mine head.
10 On each side he me has destroyed,
as ye may clearly see:
My surest hope he has also
removed like a tree.
11 He also kindled has his wrath
against me by and by,
And also counts that to him
an enemy am I.
12 His troops together come, and up
their way against me raise,
My Tabernacle round about
to compass is their praise;
13 He has my brethren from me far
put, as ye now may see;
And mine acquaintance dearest all
estranged are from me.
14 My loving kinsfolk failed have
in my necessity,
And my famil^ar friends most dear
have all forgotten me.
15 They that dwell in my house, my maid
me for a stranger right
Do all account, and so I am
an aliant in their sight.
16 My special servant I did call,
and he no answer gave,
I did entreat him with my mouth
that comfort I might have,
17 My breath unto my wife is strange,
though I always did make
My suit, that she should rest content,
even for the childrens sake.
18 Yea, young children me did despise,
me as a mock to be,
I in displeasure soon arose,
and they contemned me:
19 My most familiar inward friends
they did abhor me all,
They whom I most loved turned are
against me, great and small.
20 My bone unto my skin and flesh
does cleave exceeding fast;
I am escaped with the skin
even of my teeth at last.
21 O ye my friends, have pity now
on me, whom thus ye see,
For the hand of the almighty GOD
has greatly troubled me.
22 Why do ye persecute, as GOD
not with my flesh content;
23 Oh that my words were written now!
Oh that they were in print!
24 That they were all most clearly grav'n,
even with an iron pen,
And lead, that in the rock for ay
they might be seen by men.
25 I know that my REDEEMER lives,
that at the latter day
He shall then stand upon the earth,
his scepter for to sway.
26 And though after my withred skine
my body, worms quickly
Should all destroy, yet trust I still
GOD in my flesh to see.
27 Whom I shall see even for my self,
and mine eyes shall behold,
And not another; though my reins
be all consumed as old.
28 But ye should say, why persecute
we him upon the ground?
If we the matters root could see,
he guiltless should be found.
Chap. 20.
THen said Zophar Namaathite,
my thoughts with great distaste,
2 Cause me therefore to answer thee,
and for this I make haste.
3 I of my most shameful reproach
have surely heard the check,
And my sprit that well understands,
me to answer does make.
4 Do thou not of long time this know,
by great experince,
Since man was placed on the earth,
to have his residence,
5 That wicked men's triumphing short
incontinent is past;
And that the joys of th'Hypocrite
but for a moment last?
6 Though his excellency to heaven
do mount up by and by,
And though his head even reach unto
the high clouds of the sky,
7 Yet like his own doung he for ay
shall perish certainly:
They which have seen him brave before
shall say, Now where is he?
8 He as a dream shall flee away,
he shall not come in sight,
He shall be chasd away, even as
a vision of the night.
9 The eye also which him clearly
saw, shall him no more know;
Nor yet shall his place any more
behold him here below.
10 His children shall then seek to please
the poor, even more and more:
Yea, he these ill extorted goods,
with his hands shall restore.
11 His withred bones are full of sins,
of youth defiled with lust,
Which surely shall lie down with him
in grave, among the dust.
12 Though wickedness, to be abhord,
be in his mouth most sweet,
Though he under his tongue also
hide it as dainty meat.
13 Though he it spare, and not forsake,
but in mouth keep it still;
14 Yet his meat in his bowels is
turned into aspes gall.
15 He riches swallowd down has, and
shall vomit them again,
Out of his belly cast them out
GOD shall with great disdain.
16 Of aspes the poison he shall suck,
him vipers tongues shall slay,
17 Of honey, butter, brooks, and floods
he shall not see for ay.
18 That which he greatly labored for
he surely shall restore,
Do what he can, it swallow down
He shall not any more.
According to his substance shall
his restutition be:
And he shall not rejoice therein,
as in prosperity.
19 Because he has forsaken, and
oppressed the poor always,
And houses which he builded not,
by force has reft away.
20 Surely he in his belly shall
not quietness then have,
He of that which he most desired
nothing at all shall save?
21 There shall none of his dainty meat
be left, even less or more,
For his goods which he up did heap,
no man shall look therefore.
22 In fullness he and plenty much
in fearful straits shall be,
The hands of wicked men shall come
upon him suddenly.
23 When his great belly fill he would
GOD shall upon him cast,
And rain on him his furious wrath,
while he is eating fast.
24 He from the iron weapon shall
flee, which he sure shall feel;
He shall fiercely be stricken through,
even with a bow of steel.
25 Its draw'n, and from the body comes
the glistring sword anon
Most fiercely comes out of his gall;
terrors are him upon;
26 All darkness in his places shall
most secretly be hid,
A fire not blown by force of men
shall him consume with sppeed.
What ever he does, or yet intends,
with him it shall go ill:
That which shall be left in his tent
shall be destroyed still.
27 The heaven shall all his sins reveal,
against him shall rise the earth,
28 His goods and increase shall depart
in the day of his wrath.
29 This is the wickeds portion all,
from God in every point;
And als the heritage which God
unto him does appoint.
Chap. 21.
BUt to Zophar Job answered then,
what is now said by me:
2 Hear and consider, and let this
your consolations be*
3 Now suffer me that I may speak
a little as I can,
And after that I spoken have
then may ye still mock on.
4 As for me, my complaint to man
is not made as ye see,
If it were so, why should my sprite
not greatly troubled be?
5 Mark me, and be astonished, and
your hand on your mouth lay;
6 When I remember this, I am
with fear afraid always.
7 Wherefore live wicked men, and als
become old with great might
8 Their offspring is established fast
and their seed in their sight.
Gods heavy rod is not on them,
their houses stand most fast
10 Their bull genrdeth and fails not
their cowes their calves not cast
11 They like a flock their little ones
send forth, their children dance;
12 With tymbrell, harp, and organes sound
they cheer their countenance.
13 In wealth they spend their days, to grave
they go without delay,
14 Therefore they bid the LORD depart,
and will not know his way.
15 What is The Almighty that we should
take care him for to serve?
What profit is to pray to him
that he would us preserve?
16 Lo, for all that into their hand
their good things yet not be,
The counsel of all wicked men
let it be far from me.
17 The candle of the wicked man
how often is it put out?
How often comes their destruction,
and sorrows round about?
18 They like the withred stubble are
before the wind always,
And as the chaff, that stormy blasts
does carry all away.
19 God his iniquity lays up,
even for his children all;
In justice he rewards him,
and it well know he shall.
20 His eyes shall his destruction see,
which shall make him to shrink;
He of the wrath most surely shall
of the Almighty drink.
21 For after him what pleasure has
he in his house always,
When as his months are cut off
in the midst of his days?
12 Shall any man GOD knowledge teach,
that hid things he may see?
Is he not he that judges those
that are exalted hie?
23 One being wholly at his ease,
in his full strength does die:
24 His breasts of milk are full, his bones
with marrow moistened be.
25 Another in souls bitterness
with joy eats not at all,
26 They shall alike lie down in dust,
the worms them cover shall.
27 Behold your inward thoughts I know
and which ye wrongfully
Devices ill imagine still,
in great wrath against me;
28 For ye say, Where is of the Prince
the house? Yea, more us tell,
Where are these great and wicked men,
and where now do they dwell?
29 Have ye not asked carefully
them that go by the way?
May ye not all most easily
their tokens know always?
30 That wicked men reserved are
unto the day of death,
They all shall surely be brought forth,
unto the day of wrath.
31 Who shall in fury to his face
plainly declare his way,
And who shall him what he has done
deservedly repay?
32 Yet after all shall he be brought
unto the stinking grave,
And in the tomb his residence
he constantly shall have.
33 The valley clods shall unto him
be sweet, all less or more
Shall draw to him, as numbers great
are always him before.
34 How then do ye most foolishly
me comfort now in vain,
Seeing that in your answers all
great falshhood does remain?
Chap. 22.
THen Eliphaz answered anon,
2 Can man unto God be
So profitable, as the wise
is to himself surely?
3 To the Almighty pleasure is it,
that righteous thou remain?
Or that thou make thy ways perfect,
is it unto him gain?
4 Will he thee with sharp words reprove,
for any fear of thee?
Will he with thee in judgment wroth
thus enter furiously?
5 Is not thy sin so great, that it
in greatness does surpass,
And wicked deeds even infinite
wherein thou do trespass?
6 For from thy brother thou a pledge
have taken sure for naught,
And stripped the naked of their cloths,
for which they sore had wrought.
7 Thou to the weary have not given
water to drink in need,
And from the hungry man also
thou have withholden bread.
8 But O! as for the mighty man,
who highly did excel,
He had the earth, and th'eminent
in it did richly dwell.
9 Thou widows poor have sent away,
which now most empty be,
And of the fatherless the arms
have broken been by thee.
10 Therefore snares are thee round about,
fear sudden troubles thee;
11 Much waters cov'r thee, Or darkness,
so that thou can not see.
12 Is not GOD in the height of heaven,
whence he does all things see?
Behold, and als consider well,
the Stars how high they be.
13 And yet thou say, How does the LORD
all things know and remarke?
Can he by wisdom great discern,
even through the cloud most dark!
14 Thick clouds above so cover him,
that he can nothing see:
And in the circuit of the heaven
he walks gloriously;
13 In wisdom have thou not deserved
the course that GOD of old
Has wont to take of these that are
in wickedness most bold?
16 Which out of time by GODS great wrath
were cut down as they stood.
Whose foundation was overflowne
as with a mighty flood.
17 Which proudly said unto the LORD,
from us quickly depart:
What can from us the Almighty do,
to help us in our smart.
18 Yet all their houses with good things,
he has made full to be,
But counsel ill of wicked men
is far away from me.
19 The righteous men that live on earth
it see, and are most glad,
And the innocent them laugh to scorn,
in their destruction sad.
20 Whereas our substance permanent
stands both by night and day
Not cut down, but what rests to them
the fire consumes away.
21 Thy self now with him in thy ways
acquaint most carefully,
And be at peace, for sure thereby
much good shall come to thee.
22 I pray thee from his mouth receive
the law in every part,
And see that thou lay up his wotds
in the inward of thine heart.
23 If to the Almighty thou return,
thou shall be built for ay,
Iniquity thou from thy tent
then shall put far away.
24 Then as the dust thou shall the gold,
even lay up by and by,
The gold of Ophir as the stones
which in the brooks do lie.
25 Yea, the almighty (by his power)
thy sure defense shall be;
And as for silver thou shall have
of it a great plenty.
26 For then in the Almighty thou
shall by his saveing grace
Have thy delight, and unto GOD
shall glade lift up thy face.
27 Thy prayer thou shall unto him
make with great zeal always,
And he thee hear shall, and thou shall
to him thy vows all pay.
28 Thou shall a thing decree also,
and it established all
To thee shall be; upon thy ways,
the light shine clearly shall.
29 When men are cast down, then thou shall
there is lifting up, well say;
The humble person save he shall
by his great power always.
30 For the sake of the innocent
he will an Island save,
If that thy hands were such, thou might
from God like freedom have.
Chap. 23.
THen Job answered to Eliphaz,
even to this day my mones
Most bitter are, my stroke it is
more heavy then my groans.
3 O that I knew where I him might
find in this wretched state!
That with all boldness I might come
even to his justice seat.
4 My cause before his Majesty
I would well order still:
My mouth with arguments also
I would most gladly fill.
5 The words I would most surely know,
which he would answer me,
And understand what he would say
in misery to me.
6 Will he against me with his power
in wrath begin to plead?
No, but he would in mercy great
put strength in me indeed.
7 There with him then the righteous might
to dispute be most free:
So thus for ever from my Judge
I should delivered be.
8 Behold I foreward go, but he
is not there as I crave:
I also backward go, but I
him can not then perceive.
9 On the left hand where he does work,
but him I not behold;
He hides himself on the right hand,
that I him see not should.
10 But he the way that I do take
most clearly does behold;
And when he has well tried me
I shall come forth as gold.
11 My foot his steps most constantly,
has held, also his way
I kept have, and have not once
from it declined away.
12 I from his precepts start not back,
which are both grave and good;
His words I have esteemed more then
my necessary food.
13 But what he has once in his mind,
who can him turn therefro?
And what his soul desires once
even that he does also.
14 For he performs the thing that is
appointed still for me,
And many such things are with him
after his own decree.
15 Therefore I at his presence great
am troubled very sore
When I consider, I of him
afraid am more and more.
16 For God by his most blessed hand
does soften all my heart,
And the Almighty troubles me
with painful grief and smart.
17 Because before darkness I was
not cut off in my place,
And that he had not cov'red well
the darkness from my face.
Chap. 24.
Why seeing times not hidden are
from the almighty always,
Do they that wicked know him not
yet see his judgments days?
2 Some the fixed land marks do remove,
and take away indeed
Their neighbors flocks with violence,
and still upon them feed.
3 The ass of the poor fatherless
they quickly drive away,
The widows ox, they also take,
for pledge, as for a prey,
4 The needy they out of the way
where they did still abide
Did turn, the poor together they
themselves closely did hide.
5 Behold even as the asses wild
in deserts wandering so,
They rising early for a prey
forth to their work do go.
The wide and howling wilderness
(as is well understood)
For them and for their children als
does yield a daily food.
6 Their neighbors corn upon the field
with violence they reap,
Their vintage als they wickedly
do gather in a heap.
7 They cause the naked without clothes
to lodge in their own hold
So that they in a storm have not
a covering for the cold.
8 With showers of mountains high they are
thus wet in every place,
For want of shelters they are forced
the hard rocks to embrace.
9 The fatherless they from the breast
do pluck, as in a rage,
And of most poor distressed men
they cruel take a pledge.
10 They him spoild of his garments all
cause naked for to go,
And from the hungry they the sheafe
do take away also.
11 Which oil within their walls do make,
and their wine press with pain
Do tread, and yet do suffer thirst
and nothing thereby gain.
12 Out of the city men do groan,
and wounded souls do cry,
Yet for this to them God lays not
their folly by and by.
13 Against the light they do rebel,
while they themselves would hide,
The ways thereof they do not know,
nor in its paths abide.
14 The murdrer rising with the light;
does kill by great mischeef;
The poor and needy; in the night
he is a common thief.
15 For the twilight the adultrers eye
does still wait in his place,
No eye, says he, shall now me see,
disguising all his face.
16 In dark throw houses they do dig,
which they well by their sight,
Had marked for them in the day,
they brutish know not light.
17 As deaths shadow the morning is
to them from GODS great wrath;
If one them know* they surely are
in terrous even of death.
18 He cursed on earth, like waters swift
does quickly pass away,
Of vineyeards with great plenty blessed
he not beholds the way.
19 Great drought and heat, snow waters cold
do most quickly consume,
So does the grave, these who are bold,
to stain their life with sin.
20 The womb wherein he was conceived
shall him forget anon;
The filthy worm that creeps on earth
shall sweetly feed him on.
He afterward sure shall no more
by men remembered be;
All wickedness shall at the last
be broken as a tree.
21 The barren that bears not, he does
most cruelly entreat,
And to the widow does not good
before his judgment seat.
22 The mighty also with his power
he draws with wrath and strife,
He rises up with lofty looks,
no man is sure of life.
23 Though it be given him for to be
in safety, where always
He rests secure; yet are his eyes
even still upon their ways.
24 They for a little while on earth
exalted are most hie,
But they anon are always gone
and made of low degree.
Out of the way as others are,
they are removed with scorn,
And suddenly are all cut off,
like tops of ears of corn.
25 If this be not as I do say,
who boldly darre come forth,
And by his words contend to make
my speech of nothing worth?
Chap. 25.
THen answred Bildad the Shuhite,
and thus he spoke quickly,
2 Dominion and fear with him are,
he does make peace on hie.
3 The armies which he does command,
by none can numbered be;
Upon whom does not his fair light
arise most pleasantly?
4 How then with God be justified
can man, who is forlorn?
Or how can he be clean that is
even of a woman borne?
5 Behold even up unto the Moon,
and it not shines bright;
Yea more the glistring stars above
are not pure in his sight.
6 How much less man that is a worm,
should he be reput so?
Or yet the son of man likewise,
which is a worm also?
Chap. 26.
BUt Job answred incontinent,
how thou the weak at length
Now helped have? How savest thou
the arm that has no strength?
3 How have thou counseld him at last,
who surely is unwise,
And clearly have declard the thing
even truly as it lies?
4 To whom have thou uttred such words
of foolish vanity;
And whose sprite with great gifts adornd
did once proceed from thee?
5 Dread things from under waters deep
are formed, and who there dwell?
6 Destruction is not cov'rd, nor hid,
before him is the hell:
7 The North laid over the empty place,
he wisely does extend:
He this hudge earth without a prop
on nothing does suspend.
8 The waters in his thickest clouds
he binds incontinent;
And yet the cloud which seems so weak
them under is not rent.
9 By his great strength he holds back
the fair face of his throne,
And upon it most wondrously
he spreads his cloud anon,
10 He compassed has the waters great,
with bounds them to defend,
Until that both the day and night
shall come unto an end.
11 The mountains high which (pillar like)
uphold the heavenly roof,
Do tremble, and astonished are
at his angry reproof.
12 Even with his power most excellent
he does divide the sea,
By understanding through the proud
he smitteth valiantly.
13 By his Almighty Spirit he has
the heavens adorned also,
His hand the serpent formed has,
which crookedly does go.
14 Lo these are but some parcells of
his ways that are supreme,
But little is that portion all
that we do hear of him.
But who among all mortal men
can understand the thunders
Of his great might, which does the earth
fill with most fearful wonders:
Chap. 26.
MOreover yet afflicted Job,
in greevous troubles laid,
Continued as he did before
his parable, and said,
2 As lives the Lord, who taken has
my judgment clean away,
And The Almighty who vexed has
my greev'd soul every way.
3 While breath, or GODS Sprite shall be in
my nostrils all the while:
4 My mouth not wickedness shall speak,
nor yet deceit or guile.
5 No, GOD forbid that I should you
once mind to justify;
Until I die I will not quite
mine own integrity.
6 My righteousness I still hold fast,
and will not let it go;
My heart shall not me while I live
with this reproach also.
7 As the most wicked on the earth
let the enemy to me
Be, and these that against me rise
as the unrighteous be.
8 For what hope has the Hypocrite,
though he a wealthy prey
Has gained by his guile, when GOD
shall take his soul away?
9 Will GOD in Heaven incline his ear
once for to hear his cry,
When trouble great shall fiercely come
upon him by and by.
10 In The Almighty will he himself
with joyfulnesse delight?
Or will he always call on GOD,
by day or yet by night.
11 I by the mighty hand of GOD
will teach you and reveal;
That which with the Almighty is
I will not now conceal.
12 Behold! and now consider well,
it ye your selves have seen:
Why are ye then thus vain, as they
who ever fools have been?
13 This is the wickeds portion all
which he from GOD shall have,
Oppressors shall this heritage
from The Almighty receive.
14 If multiplied his children be,
it is for the sword indeed:
His offspring begging still shall not
be satisfied with bread.
15 These that after remain of him
shall buried be in death;
And for disgrace his widows shall
not weep for him on earth.
16 Though he make raiment as the clay,
and silver heap as dust,
17 The godly shall the silver get,
his robes shall cloth the just.
18 If he build houses fair, it is
but l^ke the naughty moth,
He shall at last consume his house,
as it does fret the cloth.
His house also is like a booth,
which keepers set up soon
And in the turning of an hand
again is pulled down
19 The rich man shall anon lie down,
but shall not gathred be,
He opneth clearly both his eyes,
but after where is he?
20 As waters great so terrors do
take hold on him with might,
A tempest great him steals away
in darkness of the night.
21 The East wind away him caries still,
as by a fearful chase,
And he departs; and as a storm
him hurles out of his place.
22 For GOD in his fierce fury shall
great weights upon him cast;
He shall not spare, most feign would he
out of his hand fl^e fast:
23 Men at him shall still clap their hands,
in sign of great disgrace
They all combined with great disdain
shall hiss him from his place.
Chap. 28.
SUrely there is a wealthly vein
for silver that does shine;
There is also a place for gold
where they from dross it fine.
2 Iron out of earth with labor great
is taken, and anon
The brass into a purer mass
is molten out of stone.
3 To darkness he wise sets an end,
and well he sea^cheth out
Perfection all; and makes good use
of hid Mines all about
4 He so disposes of the floods
that they flow by and by,
Again by his almighty power
they become wholly dry.
5 As for the earth, its surface does
yield bread for man's desire,
And under it there matter is
combustible for fire.
6 The stones thereof are als the place
of Saphires in great store,
Abundantly among the dust
it has the golden ore.
7 There is a path unknow'n to fools,
not seen by vultures eye;
8 The lions whelps have not it trod,
the lion passed not by.
9 His hand upon the rocks he puts,
with sledge he slents them down,
The steepest mountains by the roots
he als does overturne.
10 Among the flintie rocks he does
great rivers soon cut out,
His eye sees every precious thing
in all the land about.
11 The floods (that they not overflow,)
he binds with his might,
The thing that is most secret hid
he brings forth to light.
12 But wh^re shall wisdom now be found?
where is its dwelling place?
13 Its price men knows not; of the earth
it is not on the face,
14 Its not in me the gulfie depth
does most clearlie confess;
It Is not with me als since the sea,
yea neither more nor less.
15 For gold, that is most precious,
it can not gotten be,
Nor silver for the price thereof
shall weighed be surely.
16 It can not so be valued well
with gold of Ophir dea^e,
With the most precious Onix stone,
or with the Sapphire clear.
17 The gold and Crystal can not als
with it equal compare:
The Exchange of it shall not be for
fine golden jewels rare.
18 No mention of the coral shall,
or yet of pearls be made
For wisdoms price is far above
the Rubies glauncing red.
19 No Ethiopian Topaze shall
it equal here or there;
The purest gold in furnace fined
with it may not compare.
20 But whence is then that wisdom comes,
where is understandings place?
21 Since it from all the livings eyes,
and fouls has hid its face.
22 Death and destruction in their speech
do always say the same:
We only thereof with our ears
have heard the noble fame.
23 GOD by his wisdom great thereof
does understand the way,
He well does know the place thereof
where it abides for ay.
24 For he unto the farrest ends,
of earth looks with his eyes,
What is under the cope of Heaven
He it most clearly sees.
25 He makes the weights for stormy winds,
according to his pleasure,
The waters also which run deep
he weighs all by measure.
26 When for the rain by wisdom great
He made a sure decree:
And for the Thunders lighning als
a way appointed he.
27 Then did he see it, and declare,
and so did clear all doubt.
He it prepared wisely and
it fully searched out.
28 And unto man at last he said,
Beholds GODS only fear
Is wisdom, and to cease from ill
is understanding dear.
Chap. 29.
MOreover in his mourning Job
to speak made no delay:
In parable he did proceed,
and thus began to say.
2 Oh that I were as in days past,
when GOD preserved me!
3 When his lamp on mine head did shine,
and I did walk safely.
4 As I was in the former days,
before my youth was spent,
When of the LORD the secret was
well seen upon my tent.
5 When the Almighty by his grace
was yet even still with me;
When all my ch^ldren with great joy
I round about did see.
6 When I my steps with butter washed,
without labor or toil,
And as the rock (as in a shower)
powered out rivers of oil.
7 When I did through the city go,
and went upon my feet
Out to the gate, when I prepared
my seat even in the street.
8 The young men saw me excellent,
and under this pretense
Did hide themselves; the aged stood up,
to bear me reference,
9 The Princes talking did refrain,
that they might understand
My wise discourse, and on their mouth
they all did lay their hand.
10 The nobles likewise held their peace,
and which was a great proof,
Of my wise words, the tongues of all
did cleave unto their roof.
11 When that the ear of man me heard
it surely me did bless,
And when the eye me saw also,
it gave to me witness.
12 Because I did deliver these
who poor to me did cry,
The Orphans, and him thar had none
to help him by and by,
13 Blessings of such as ready were,
to perish came on me,
And I did cause the widows heart
to sing most joyfully,
14 I righteousness anon put on,
which (as a glorious gown)
Me clothed; my judgment was a rob,
and a most stately crown.
16 I as the most clear seeing eyes
unto the blind became,
And als in humane charity
I feet was to the lame;
16 I was a father to the poor,
in all the land about
The cause which I not understood
with care I searched out.
17 The jaws of wicked men I brake,
and gave them all the foil,
And with a mighty arm did pluck
out of their teeth the spoil.
18 Then in my fond conceit I said,
I shall die in my nest,
My days as sand I Will multiply,
and after go to rest.
19 Out by the waters blooming fair
my root was spread anon,
And all the night the pleasant dew
lay still my branch upon.
20 My glory was still fresh in me,
as all did understand;
And als the bow of my great strength.
renu'd was in my hand.
21 Unto me men most wise gave ear,
to hear what I would tell,
They waited well, and silence keept,
when I did give counsel.
22 After that they had heard my words
they spoke no more again,
My speech upon them dropped all,
as does a pleasant rain.
23 As for the rain that fruitful is,
they for me did abide;
As for the latter rain their mouth
they opened very wide.
24 If I did laugh on them, then they
believed it not at all;
They were afraid to cause the light
of my visage to fall,
25 I sat as chief, I choose their way
most meekly without boast;
I dwelt even as a King, that is
amid an armed host.
And as a wise man that in time
his comforts sweet powers out,
Amide th^se who for greef of mind
are mourning him about.
Chap. 30.
BUt now these young ones me deride,
whose ragged fathers I
Would have disdained even with the dogs,
of my flock to set by.
2 Yea of their hands whereto the strength
could ever profit me
In whom old age all perished was
as all might clearly see?
3 For want and famine desolate
they were; they did flee fast
To will fernesse in former times,
most barran all and waste.
4 Who mallows hungry do cut up,
by bushes here and there,
And have no other thing for meat
but roots of Juniper.
5 From among men they were driven forth
as men given to mischief;
They cried aloud all after them,
even as after a thief.
6 To dwell in the unpleasant clifts
of valleys like vile slaves;
And in the shelters of the rocks,
or shadows of the caves.
7 Among the bushes lying they
in misery did bray:
They under nettles gathred were
together every day.
8 They of vain fools the children were,
yea, of men of no name
Most base, then earth they viler were,
to own them men thought shame.
9 And now their song am I become,
and byword of disgrace,
10 They me abhor, they flee from me,
and spit even in my face.
11 Because that he has loosde my cord,
and me afflicted sore;
They have the bridle now let loose,
not sparing me before.
12 Upon my right hand rise the youth,
my feet they push away
The ways of their destruction great
they against me raise always.
13 Most bitterly they mar my path,
they most backward indeed
Set foreward my calamity,
of help they have no need.
14 As a breaking of waters wide
they all come upon me;
They in the desolation great
did roll themselves fiercely.
15 Upon me terrors turned are,
my soul pu^sue do they
Even as the wind; my welfare als
as clouds does pass away.
16 And now my Soul is powered out
with terrors manifold;
The days of great affl^ction now
on me have taken hold:
17 In the night Season are my bones
all pierced in me and pressed,
My sinews all are shrunk with pains,
that they can get no rest.
18 By the great force of my disease
my garment which is hot
Is changd, about it binds me as
the collar of my coat.
19 He has by a great violence
me in a deep mire thrust,
And I distressed am become
like ashes and like dust.
20 I cry to thee, but thou do not
me hear in grief ensnaird,
When I stand up to look for help
thou do me not regard.
21 Now thou art cruel also turned
unto me in the land,
Thy self against me thou do oppose
with strong and mighty hand.
22 Up to the wind thou lifts me up,
and on it makes me ride:
Thou so dissolves my substance all,
that nothing does abide*
23 For I do this most clearly know,
that thou, LORD, me wilt bring
To death, yea to the houses that
set for the living be.
24 Howbeit his hand unto the grave
He Will not stretch by and by*
Though they in his destruction great
continually should cry.
25 For him that in great trouble was
did I not weep right sore?
Was not my soul in misery
much grieved for the poor.
26 When I good things did well expect
distress came me upon;
And when I waited for the light
there darkness came anon.
27 My bowels boiled with great pain,
they rested not surely;
The days of great affliction als
most swift prevented me.
28 I grieved without the light of Sun
went mourning by and by,
And in the congregation great
with anguish I did cry.
29 A brother I to dragons am,
with owls I do abide,
30 My bones are burnt with scorching heat,
black is my withred hide.
31 To mourning also turned is
my harp that was most sweet;
My organ turned is in the voice
of them that sadly weep.
Chap. 31.
A Covenant sure then with mine eyes
most carefully I made
Why in great folly thus should I
even think upon a maid?
2 For what portion of GOD is there
appointed from above?
Or als' inheritance is there
from the Almighties love?
3 Is not destruction ordained to
these that do wickedly?
Strange punishment is als for these
that work iniquity.
4 Does he not with his clearest eyes
perfectly see my ways?
He als with observation strict
my steps counts all my days:
5 If in my foolishness I have
even walked in vanity,
Or if unto deceit my foot
has hasted wickedly.
6 Then let me in an balance even
be weighed narrowly,
That the Almighty God may well
know mine integrity.
7 If my step turned has from the way,
and my heart did believe
Mine eyes, and if unto my hand
the least blot once did cleave;
8 Then let me sow my precious seed
in all my fields about,
And let another eat; yea, let
my race be rooted out.
9 If that my heart by women has
(as by a snairing bait)
Deceived been; or if I at
my neighbors door laid wait;
10 Then let my wife by recompense
unto another grind,
Let others als on her bow down
even in my sins own kind.
11 For this is a most heinous crime,
a great iniquity
Which righteous judges should correct
with great severitie.
12 For it a fire consuming is
to wast even round about
All mine increase which I enjoy
it would anon root out.
13 If I als did despise the cause
of manservant, or maid,
When they in any humor hot
with me contention made.
14 What shall I do when that the LORD
against me up shall rise,
And when he visits what shall I
to answer enterprise?
15 Did not he that made me, him make,
as all may understand,
And did not one within the womb
us fashion with his hand?
16 If I by rigor have the poor
withheld from their desire,
Or of the widow poor the eyes
have causde to fail or tire;
17 Or if my morsel mine alone
I eaten have apart,
So that the fatherless thereof
not eaten have a part.
18 For from my youth the fatherless
was well brought up with me,
The widow from my mothers womb
I guided carefully.
19 If I for want of clothing warm
have any perish seen,
Or any poor distressed, that had
without a covering been:
20 If his loins have not blessed me
to keep me from all harm,
If by the soft fleece of my sheep
he was not then made warm:
21 If I against the fatherless
have once lift up my hand,
When I my help even in the gate
did see and understand,
22 Then rotting from my shoulder blade
let fall mine arm anon:
Yea more I say, even let mine arm
be broken from the bone:
23 For from GOD the destruction great
a terror was most sure,
By reason of his highness great
I could it not endure.
24 If I have made the gold my hope
in any exigence,
Or have said to the finest gold
Thou art my confidence:
25 If I rejoiced, because my wealth
was great as such and such,
Or yet because at any time
mine hand had gotten much,
26 If I beheld the shinning Sun
to worship with his light,
Or yet the Moon, fair in the sky,
with glory walking bright,
27 Or that my heart entised has
been secretly thereby,
Or that my mouth has kissd mine hand
on such for to rely.
28 This als were an iniquity,
which Judges should remove;
For I thus should denied have
the God that is above.
29 If I at the destruction great
of him that hated me
Rejoiced, or yet lift up my self
at his great misery:
30 Or have I suffered once my mouth
with liberty to sin
By wishing fearful plagues and curse
unto his soul within.
31 If the men of my tabernacle
yea said, Not oh that we
Had of his flesh! Such are his wrongs
he can not satisfy.
32 The stranger surely did not lodge
in open street always;
My doors I opned unto these
that travailed by the way.
33 If I my great transgressions als
did cover craftily,
As Adam, and did closely cloak
my vile iniquity:
34 Did fear of many or contempt
of men me terifie,
That I keept silence and not went
out at my doors straightly?
35 O that one among mortal men
could happily be found
Who would me hear, and of my words
consider well the ground.
That the Lord God would answer me,
this is my chief desire,
And that my foe would wickedly
to write a book conspire.
26 I it upon my shoulder would
most gladely take and bear;
And as a crown upon mine head
I daily would it wear.
37 Of all my steps the number I
would unto him declare,
I as a Prince would go to him
and all my wrongs repair.
38 But if my land for my misdeeds
against me cry amain,
Or that the furrows als indeed
likewise thereof complain.
39 If I once of the fruits thereof,
without money made use,
Or yet have caused wickedly
their life the owners loss.
40 Let pricking thistles grow in stead
of most excellent wheat,
And cockle even most noisome weeds
for barley be my meat*
Here Job did pause.

Chap. 32.
SO these three men to answer Job
incontinent did cease,
Because they hopeless saw that he
was righteous in his eyes.
2 Then of the wrath of Elihu
sore kindled was the flame,
This Buzite son of Barachel
was of the race of Ram;
Against poor Job he was in rage,
because his words implyd
That he himself more then the LORD
even always justifyd.
3 Against his three friends kindled was
his wrath, because they had
No answer found to him, and yet
they had condemned Job.
4 Now Elihu had waited long,
In his great modesty
Till Job had spoken, because they
were elder all then he.
5 When Elihu saw that these three,
to answer Job surceast,
His wrath then with a burning zeal
was kindled in his breast;
6 Then answred he, and said I am
right young, and ye are old,
Wherefore to show to you my mind
I durst not well be bold;
7 I said within my heart that days
were fit to take the speech,
And that the multitude of years
should surely wisdom teach.
In man indeed a sprit there is,
but that he things can sift
With understanding good, it is
of GOD a special gift.
9 They surely are not always wise
who are great in the land,
Nor yet do these that are of age
good judgment understand:
10 Therefore I at the last did say,
Now hearken unto me;
I also mine opinion will
unto you show freely.
11 Behold I for your words did wait,
I gave good ear always,
While by your wisdom ye profound
did search out what to say:
12 Yea, unto you I did attend
even as unto a Prince;
But none of you could answer Job,
or yet his words convince.
13 Lest ye should say, We have now found
great wisdom as a crown,
GOD by his strong and mighty arm,
and not man thrusts him down.
14 Now he has not his hauty words
directed against me:
Nor yet mine answer unto him
shall with your speeches be.
15 They altogether were amazed,
they answered me no more;
They being all thus in the dumps
left off to speak therefore.
16 When I had waited long with grief,
(for they all could not speak,
But stood still, they like naughty fools
their answer had to seek)
17 I said unto them, At the last
I answer will my part,
I also mine opinion all
unto you will impart.
18 For I am full of matter wise,
as clearly ye shall see;
The sprite that lodges me within
it now constrains me
19 Behold as wine my belly is,
which can not get a vent;
Like bottels new it ready is
to be in pieces rent.
20 I will now speak, so that I may
thereby refreshed be:
My lips anon I open will,
and answer speedily.
21 I humbly pray you let me not
men's persons now accept,
Nor let me flattring give to men
the titles of respect.
32 For flattring titles surely I
unto men can not give:
If I did so, my maker would
me not permit to live.
Chap. 33.
Wherefore I pray thee Job now hear
me with attentive head,
And hearken well unto the words
that from my mouth proceed.
2 Behold, I surely now my mouth
have opned at the last,
In my mouth spoken has my tongue,
and told how things are past.
3 Of my hearts perfect uprightness
my words shall surely be,
And als my lips great knowledge shall
even utter most clearly.
4 The sprite of God who makes all things
by his strength made me has,
And the Almighty has to me
given life even by his breath.
5 If thou by thy great wisdom can
me answer less or more,
Stand up now, and well set thy words
in order me before.
6 I am according to thy wish,
even in Gods stead the day
I also am as others are
formed of the dust and clay.
7 So for my terror thou needst not
greatly affrighted be,
My hand be well assured shall not
upon thee heavy be.
8 Thou in my hearing spoken have,
which I have heard clearly,
9 I am without transgression all,
no sin there is in me.
10 He does against me quarrels pick,
he counts me for his fo;
11 He in the stocks does put my feet,
he marks my paths also.
12 Behold in this thou just not art,
to thee now well I can
Make answer; this I may affirm,
GOD greater is than man.
13 Why do thou this most foolishly
against him contend and strive:
For of his matters he a count
will not to any give.
14 For God speaks once, yea twice, yet man
perceives not what is said,
15 In dream, or vision, or deep sleep,
or slumbrings on the bed.
Then opneth he the ears of men,
and does instruction seal,
17 That he may stop men from his work,
and pride from man conceal.
18 His soul and life he from the pit,
and sword does safe maintain,
19 He chastned is upon his bed,
his bones all suffer pain.
20 So that his life through troubles great
abhors his bread to eat,
His soul also does still refuse
to take most dainty meat.
21 His flesh consumed is away,
that it cannot be seen,
His bones that were all hid, stick out
his body is so lean.
22 In this mean time his troubled soul
draws near unto the grave,
And his life likewise unto these
that still destruction crave.
23 If with him be a messenger
on choice of a thousand,
To show to man his uprightness
and make him understand.
24 Then he is gracious unto him,
and says anon him save,
From going to the pit, for I
a ransom now found have.
25 Then than a childs flesh certainly
shall fresher be his flesh,
Unto the days of lusty youth
he shall return afresh.
26 He shall then pray, and GOD to him
shall favor show, and he
Shall see his face with joy; to man
he will render righteouslie.
27 He looks on men, If any say
I have sinned grievously,
And als the right perverted have,
but did no profit see.
28 He from the pit his soul will save,
his life shall see the light,
29 Lo all these things the Lord with man
works often by his might.
30 To bring back from the pit his soul
for to enlightened be,
31 Mark well O Job, hear, hold thy peace,
and I will speak to thee.
32 If thou can speak me answer, for
I would thee justify
33 If not, me hear, and hold thy peace,
and I will now teach thee,
Chap. 34.
YET Elihu still speaking, said,
2 Ye wise men, sage, and grave,
Now hear my words, give ear to me
all ye that knowledge have:
3 For man's ear well all words does try,
as the mouth tastes food;
4 Let us choose judgment unto us,
and let us know what is good.
5 For Job has said most foolishly,
I righteous am always;
And GOD the good right of my cause
has taken clean away.
6 Should I against my right once lie?
he with a curelesse wound
Has stricken me, and yet for that
no crime at all is found.
7 What man in all the earth like Job,
himself so overthinks,
Who wilfully void of all sense
great scorn as water drinks?
8 Which is companion unto these
that work iniquity;
And in his carriage walks with
men that most wicked be.
9 For he has said, it profits not
a man to be upright,
That he with the Almighty GOD
should still himself delight.
10 Therefore ye wise men hearken now,
all wickedness far be
From GOD, and from The Almighty that
he do iniquity.
11 Eor he the work of every man
most justly will repay,
And shall cause every man to find
according to his way.
12 Yea, surely GOD not wickedly
will do in whole or part,
Nor yet will the Almighty once
his judgment wise pervert.
13 Who over the earth has unto him
the weighty charge imposd
And who but he by his great power
the world all has disposd?
14 If he upon man set his heart
in fury and in wrath,
If he shall gather to himself
his sprite and als his breath.
15 All flesh that dwells upon the earth
together perish must,
And mortal man shall turn again
unto his former dust.
15 If thou now understanding have
hear and hearken to me
17 Shall wicked rule, and shall the just
condemned be by thee?
18 Beseems it to say to a King
by way of great disdain
Thou wicked art; to Princes als
ye all are most profaine?
19 Then how much less to him that can
not Princes proud endure,
And who in justice not regards
the rich more then the poor?
For they indeed are all alike
the work even of his hands,
And therefore that which is for both,
he wisely still commands.
20 They soon shall die, the people shall
be vexed at midnight and
The mighty men shall taken be
away without a hand.
21 For on man's ways his eyes are still,
his going he does see,
22 The shadows dark can not these hide
that work iniquity.
23 For he more then the right on man
will not lay with his rod,
That he in judgment enter should
with the Almighty GOD.
24 By multitudes he strongly shall
in pieces break the great,
And pull them down, and in their stead
most quickly others set.
25 Therefore he knows well their works,
and he them in the night
Does overturne, so that they are
destroyed out of sight.
26 He strikes the wicked openly,
because that they did swerve,
And would not any of his ways
with conscience well observe.
28 So that unto him of the poor
they cause soon come the cry,
And he the cries of troubled men
does hear still by and by.
29 When quietness he gives to man,
who then dar be so bold
To grieve him? When he hides his face
who can him then behold?
Whether against a nation all,
It be done publicly,
Or only it against a man
be done most privately.
30 That the most wicked hypocrite
should not the Scepter sway,
Lest that the people foolishly
ensnared be always.
31 It surely meet is to be said
unto the LORD therefore
I chastisement have borne, offend
I will not any more.
32 That which I see not teach thou me
that I hence may refrain,
If I have done iniquity
I will not do it again.
33 Should it be after thine own mind?
whether that thou does choose.
He will it surely recompense
or whether thou refuse.
And not I, I may well affirm
even whether less or more,
What do thou know most perfectly
see thou it speak therefore.
34 Let men of understanding good
unto me plainly tell,
And let him hearken who always
in wisdom does excel.
35 Without knowledge Job spoken has
and that most foolishly,
Without all wisdom were his words,
as all may hear and see.
36 That Job be tried unto the end
this is my chief desire,
Because that for most wicked men
his answers did conspire;
37 Eor he to sin rebellion ads
even while he feels the rod,
He claps his hands, and multiplies
his words against the Lord.
Chap. 35.
YEt Elihu moreover said,
2 Think thou this to be right.
That thou do say my righteousness
then God appears more bright.
3 For thou said, what advantage will
it unto thee now be,
And profit what shall I then have,
if from sin I be free?
4 To thee and thy companions now
this answer make will I,
5 Look to the heavens, see and behold
the clouds high in the sky.
6 What do thou vain man him against
if thou be given to sin,
If thou transgressions multiply,
what do thou unto him?
7 If thou be righteous in thy ways,
what to him do thou give,
Or from thine hand, what what does he,
at any time receive?
8 Thy wickedness may hurt a man
that is like unto thee,
Thy righteousness to sons of men
may always helpful be.
9 Because of great oppressions they
do make the oppressed cry;
By reason of the mighties arms
they cry out by and by.
10 But none among them all does say,
where is the GOD of might,
My maker who most graciously
gives songs even in the night,
11 Who teaches us most carefully,
and has us wisdom given
More th^n to all the beasts on earth
or yet the fowls of heaven?
12 There they do cry but none at all
gives ear or yet takes head,
Because of ill men who in pride
most wickedly exceed.
13 Most surely foolish vanity
by God shall not be heard,
The almighty who is above,
sure will it not regard.
14 Though thou say thou shall not him see,
yet he is always just,
Therefore see that with all thine heart
thou always in him trust.
15 But now because it is not so,
God in his anger hot
Has visited; yet in great strait
poor Job this knows not:
16 Therefore does Job most foolishly
open his mouth in vain,
Without knowledge he multiplies
words while he does complain.
Chap. 36.
ELihu yet proceeding said,
a little suffer me,
2 And I will show that I have yet
to speak for the Almighty.
2 I will my knowledge fetch from far,
like a most learned scribe
And to my Maker righteousness
I surely will ascribe.
4 This I may well say for a truth,
my words false shall not be,
He that in knowledge perfect is,
is always still with thee.
5 Behold the Lord most mighty is,
he no man does despise,
Most mighty he is in great strength
and als he is most wise.
6 The life of wicked men he not
preserves by his might,
He in his justice does always
give to the poor his right,
7 From righteous men he just does no^
withdraw his eyes anon,
But with Kings high in dignity
they are upon the Throne.
Yea, he by his Almighty power
does them establish fast,
And they high unto dignity
exalted are at last.
8 And if they be in fetters bound,
and cords most like a slave,
9 Then he their works and sins does show,
that rhey exceeded have.
10 To discipline there ear also
he opneth most wisely,
And them commands that they return
from their iniquity.
11 If they obey and serve him thus,
and that unto the end,
Their days they in prosperity
and years in joy shall spend.
12 But if they will not him obey,
they by the sword surely
Shall perish all, and they likewise
as fools shall surely dye.
13 But hypocrites who most abhord,
are men of double heart,
Still heap up wrath; they cry not when
he binds them till they smart.
14 They die in their most lusty youth
as often may be seen,
Their life is among Sodomites
of all men most unclean.
15 The poor man he delivers well
in trouble and debate
Their ears also he opneth wide
in his oppression great.
16 Even so would he thee from the place
of straitness great made free,
And the rest of thy table rich,
of fatness full should be.
17 The judgment of vile wicked men
thou have fulfilled surely,
GODS judgment and his justice als
they take now hold on thee.
18 Since wroth he is, beware that he
with strokes take thee away,
Then shall thou not delivered be,
though thou great ransom pay.
19 In such a case will he esteem
thy great riches at length?
No not the finest gold, nor all
the forces of great strength.
20 See that thou not desire always,
to see the dismal night,
When people poor are in their place
cut off by men of might.
21 Take heed, see that thou not regard
most vile iniquity;
For rather then affliction thou,
this chosen have surely.
22 Behold GOD highly does exalt,
even by his power supreme;
His understanding is so great,
that none can teach like him.
23 Who among the most mighty has
enjoined him his way?
Or who dar say to him, Thou have
most lewdly gone astray?
24 Remember that thou magnify,
his work which men behold,
25 It is so clear, it may be seen
both by the young and old.
26 Lo, GOD is great we know him not,
in all the land about,
Nor can the number of his years,
be fully searched out.
27 For he the drops of water makes,
to become very small;
According to their vapors they
do make the rain to fall.
28 Which the clouds in the firmament,
do cause drop down apace,
And upon man abundantly,
distill in every place.
29 Also the spreading of the clouds
can any understand;
Or the noise of his Tabernacle,
set up by his own hand?
30 Behold his gloriou^ l^ght on it
he spreads most brightlie,
And by this means he cov'reth all
the bottom of the sea.
31 For he by them the people does
judge as he thinks meet,
In plenteous abundance he gives
unto them all their meat.
32 With clouds he cov'reth all the light
even by his power divine,
He by the cloud that comes betwixt,
forbids it to shine.
33 The noise thereof concerning it
does show its furious rage,
Concerning vapors such also
the cattle often presage.
Chap. 37.
AT this also with inward fear
my heart does all this space
Even tremble still, and troubled fore
is moved out of its place.
2 Hear of his voice attentively,
the great noise all about,
And als the rumbling sound that of
his sacred mouth goes out.
3 He mighty under the whole heaven
directs it wisely forth,
And als his lightning bright unto
the ends of all the earth.
4 After the lightning seen a sound,
does roar most dreadfully;
He thundreth high even with the voice
of his excellency.
And he the rain and thunder als,
by his strength will not stay;
When his voice is among the clouds
by night heard or by day.
5 GOD with his voice most wondrously
does fearful thunder send;
Great things he surely does which we
can not well comprehend.
6 He to the snow gives a command
to cover all the plain,
The same to do he does appoint
the small and mighty rain.
7 The hand of each man he seals up,
that men his works may know:
8 Then go the beasts unto their dens,
and rest in places low.
9 Out of the chambers of the South
the whirlewind comes forth;
And cold, which chilleth every thing,
proceeds out of the North.
10 Even by the breath of God the frost
is given at his command,
The breadth also of waters great
is straightened by his hand.
11 He gathreth vapors and them makes
thick clouds by his great might
To labor much; he scattreth als
his cloud that is most bright.
12 And by his counsels that are wise
it turned is round about,
That they may do what ever he bids
even all this world throughout.
13 He quickly causes it to come,
by a most firm decree,
Whether for rod, or for his land,
or else for great mercy,
14 O Job now hearken at the last
to all that I have said,
Stand still and now consider well.
the wondrous works of God.
15 Know thou when God disposed then
by his wisdom divine,
And causd the great light of his cloud
most brightly for to shine?
The ballancings do thou well know
of clouds both great and small.
The wondrous works of him who still,
perfectly knows things all?
17 How thou thy garments thee upon
to be right warm do find,
When he the whole earth quiet makes,
by force of the south wind.
18 Have thou with him by thy great power
spread out the spangled sky
Most strong, and as a looking glass
that is molten by and by?
19 Teach us now by thy wisdom great
what we shall say to him,
For order we our speech can not
we are so dark and dim.
20 Shall it be told him what I speak?
of this he has no need;
If any speak amiss he shall
be swallowed up indeed.
21 And now the bright light in the clouds
men do not clearly see,
But the wind with great force does pass
and cleanses them quickly.
22 Most from the North fair weather comes
most clear as is the gold,
With GOD is wondrous Majesty,
more bright by manifold.
23 Concerning the Almighty God,
we can not him find out,
He excellent in power is,
in all the land about.
In judgment and in justice als
he plenteous does excel,
So that he will not sore afflict
men, whether great or small.
24 Therefore men fear his Majesty,
yet he for their desert
Does not respect these men on earth,
who are most wise of heart.
Chap. 38.
AT this time the Almighty Lord
to Job an answer made
Out of the blustering whirlewind, and
after this manner said.
2 Who is this that presumptuously
does counsel overcloud,
With darkness thick, by foolish words
not having knowledge good?
3 Now like a man gird up thy loins,
for questions now of thee
I will demand, See if thou can
an answer make to me,
4 Where wast thou when I of the earth
the ground-stone did lay fast?
Declare to me if at this time
thou understanding have.
5 Now tell me if thou knows, thereof
who laid the measures out?
Or who upon it stretched has
the line even round about?
6 The fair foundations all thereof
I pray thee whereupon
Fastened are they? Or who of it
did lay the corner stone?
7 When as the morning stars above
together sweetly sang,
And all the sons of GOD for joy
their shoutings highly rang.
8 Or who shut up the sea with doors
that flows the earth about,
When it brake forth, as if it had
of the womb issued out?
9 When I the cloud its garment made
by my most mighty hand,
And darkness thick for it also
to be a swaddling band:
10 And also for it did break up
the place of my decree,
And wisely set both bars and doors
for it always to be,
11 And said, Thou shall come hitherto,
but shall no further stray,
And here thy proud and lofty waves
thou shall not fail to stay.
12 Have thou the morning since thy days
had ever at thy beck?
Or have thou at his wonted place
the day caused spring to break?
13 That it take hold might of the ends
of all the earth about?
And that the wicked might from it
be quickly shaken out
14 By GODS hand it is turned all,
as to the seal the clay,
And as a garment good they stand,
in most pleasant array.
15 And from the wicked men their light
is even with holden all,
And the hie arm of lofty ones
shall then be broken small.
16 Have thou entered into the springs
of the most rageing sea?
Or have thou searched all the shelfs,
that in the great depth be.
17 Unto thee all the gates of death
have they wide opened been?
Or of deaths shadow black the doors
have thou most clearly seen.
18 By thy wisdom have thou perceived
the breadth of this great ball,
Even of the earth; declare it now
if thou do know it all.
19 Teach me also, where is the way
where the clear light does dwell;
And as for darkness where is the place,
thereof, if thou can tell.
20 That thou should take it to its bounds
above or yet below,
And that the paths unto its house
thou perfectly should know.
21 Because in that time borne thou wast,
perfectly know,st thou it?
Or yet because the number of
thy days is very great.
22 Have thou into the treasures great
of snow even entered well,
Or have thou seen the store house of
the hard congealed hail.
23 Which I for me, have well reserved
against the time of jarres?
Against the day of battle and
the day of fearful wars.
24 Can thou where the light parted is
the way by wisdom find?
Which on the earth by violence
does scatter the East wind?
25 Who has the water spouts also
divided for the rain,
Or yet the way for thunder claps
whole sound does roar amain?
26 To cause it rain upon the earth
where no man is at all;
Yea on the wilderness wherein
is neither great nor small?
27 To satisfy the desolate
and waste ground of no worth,
And to cause buds of tender herbs
most pleasant to spring forth.
28 If that the rain a father has
if thou can, to me show,
Who among all begotten has
the pearly drops of dew?
29 Out of whose womb did come the ice
can thou a reason render,
As for the hoary frost of heaven,
who at first did it gender?
30 The mighty waters flowing deep,
are hid as with a stone,
The face of all the deep through cold
is frozen all anon.
31 Of pleiades the influence
can thou bind with thine hands,
Or of the winter Orion,
can thou well loose the bands?
32 Can thou bring forth the Mazzaroth,
twelve signs in their seasons,
Or can thou well Arcturus guide
with his fair glistring sons?
33 Of heaven thee ordinances all
know thou perfectly well?
Can thou set its dominion all
upon the earth by skill?
34 Can thou lift up thy voice unto
the clouds that are most hie,
That in abundance waters great
may come and cover thee?
35 Can thou by thy great strength also
the fearful lightnings send,
That they may go and say to thee,
we all thee here attend?
36 Who is he that great wisdom has
put in the inward part?
Or who has understanding given
unto man's foolish heart?
37 Who in wisdom the clouds above,
with skill well number may:
Or of the high heavens who can once
the running bottels stay,
38 When as the dust upon the earth
does into hardnesss grow,
And fast to together cleave the clods,
when all is dry below?
39 Will thou even for the Lion fierce
take pains to hunt the prey,
Or the appetite of lions young
to fill without delay!
40 When they most craftily do couch
in dens most wide or strait,
And in the covert hid abide,
for there to ly in wait?
41 Who for the Raven provides his food?
When his young still do cry
Unto the LORD, for lack of meat
they wander by and by.
Chap. 39.
Knows thou the time when the wild goats,
and als the wanton hindes,
Bring forth their young and tender calves
according to their kinds?
2 Can thou the months number that
they in their time fulfill;
Concerning times that they bring forth,
have thou perceived with skill?
3 They bow themselves, then they bring forth
their young ones round about,
When that is done by GODS providence,
their sorrows they cast out.
4 Their young ones are in liking good,
they prosper well and store
With corn in plenty; they go forth
and to them turn no more.
5 Who has the wild ass free sent out,
or who has loosde his bands?
6 Whose house to dwell in I have made
the wild and barren lands.
7 He scorns the Cities multitude
when they do make a noise;
The crying als he not regards
even of the drivers voice.
8 The range of the high mountains great
his pasture is well seen,
He here and there does quickly search
for every thing that is green.
9 Will the Unicorne with all his strength
stoop down thee to obey?
Or will he come unto thy cribe
to feast upon thy hay?
10 Can thou well the strong Unicorne
with his band bind straightly
In furrow? or the valleis will
he harrow after thee?
11 Will thou of him presume always,
because great is his strength,
Or will thou to him in this thought
thy labor leave at length?
12 Will thou believe him that he will
bring home to thee thy seed,
And it together to thy barn
will bring home with all speed?
13 Gave thou the goodly wings unto
the Peacoks that are fair,
Or wings and feathers of great worth
unto the Ostrich rare?
14 Who lays her eggs, and leaves them in
the earth as in great trust
In stead of hatching with her wings,
she warmes them in the dust,
15 That feet of beasts may crush them all
of that she makes no reck,
Or that the wild beasts running there
them may in pieces break;
16 She hardened is against her young
not fearing they be slain,
As though they were not hers; no fear,
her labor is in vain.
17 Because GOD has deprived her
of all wisdom of heart,
Nor yet he understanding will
unto her once impart.
18 Yet with her wings and feet also
she does so nimby skip,
That she the horse and rider both
is able to out stripe.
19 Have thou given also to the horse
his strength that is full of wonder,
Or have thou clothed all his neck
with a most fearful thunder?
20 Can thou him as a Grasshopper
affright well in his way,
Of his nostrils the glory great
is terrible always.
31 He in the valley proudly paws
and glorys in his strength,
He goes most boldly on to meet
the armed man at length.
22 He mocks at fear, als he is not
affrighted by a word,
He is not moved for to turn back,
even from the bloody sword.
23 The quiver ratleth with great din
against him in the field?
The gl ttring spear does als appear,
there likewise is the shield.
25 With fierceness and most furious rage
he swalowes up the ground,
He is so fierce he not believes
that its the trumpets sound.
25 Amongst the trumpets with Ha Ha!
he chearefully does laugh,
For he the battle long desired,
then smells a far off.
He hears the thunder joyfully
of captains that do cry,
And likewise of the soldiers fierce
the shouting by and by.
26 Do Hawks fly by thy wisdom, and
their wings stretch to the south.
27 Mounts The Eagle up at thy command
and makes her nest on high?
28 She still abides upon the rock,
and on the ragged cliff,
The craggie places of the rocks,
which are both steep and stiff.
29 From thence she clearly seeks her prey
even wlth a courage bold;
And her bright eyes that are most quick
a far off do behold.
30 Her young ones also greedily
them selves for to maintain
Do suck up blood; and there is she
where lying are the slain.
Chap. 40.
MOreover yet GOD said to Job,
2 Shall he that does contend
With GOD, him teach? he that reproves
let him answer in end.
3 Then answered Job the LORD, and said,
4 Behold, what shall I say?
I am most v^le, upon my mouth
my hand now will I lay,
5 Once have I spoken but I will
not answer thee indeed:
Yea twice alas, but surely I
no further will proceed.
6 Then the Lord answ'red unto Job,
after his speech was laid,
Yea out of the whirlewind he spoke,
and thus to him he said;
7 Gird up thy loins now like a man;
I will demand of thee,
And thou who art so full of wit
declare now unto me,
8 Will thou my judgment disanull,
and condemn will thou me,
That thou in all thy words and deeds
most righteous may be?
9 Have thou poor man a mighty arm
which is like unto mine?
Or can thou thunder as I do
even with a voice divine?
10 With Majesty most excellent,
now deck thy self the day,
With glory and with beauty als
see thou thy self array.
11 The rage of wrath cast thou abroad
as in a high alarm;
And when thou see a man that is proud
abase him with thine arm,
12 Look on the proud man, and him soon
bring low with great disgrace,
And quickly with thy foot tread down
the wicked in their place.
13 In dust them hide, and also bind
their faces in the grave,
14 Then will I say that thy right hand
is able thee to save.
15 Behold now and consider well
the Behemoth which I
Made with thee, he does eat the grass
as oxen by and by.
16 Lo now his great and mighty strength
is in his loins surely,
And his force in the navill is
even of his big belly.
17 His mighty tail he whisks about,
as stiff as any Cedar
The sinews of his stones also,
are wrapped altogether,
18 The bones of his great body are
as pieces strong or brass,
His bones are like the iron bars,
they in great strength surpass.
19 He is the Cheef and Masterpiece,
of the almighty LORD,
He that him made can when he please
even kill him with his sword.
20 Surely the mountains forth his food
do bring him every day;
Where all the beasts in open fields
most wantonly do play.
21 He under the fair shady trees
lies safely in his dens,
In the close covert of the reeds,
among the pleasant fens.
22 The shadows of the branches green
do over his body pass;
The willowes of the running brook
on all sides him compass.
23 Behold a river without have
with his wide throat he drinks;
That he the Jordan can draw up
into his mouth he thinks.
24 He does it take even with his eyes,
which seem to be most fierce,
He with his nose through strongest snares
most easily can pierce.
Chap. 41.
Can thou with strong hooks well draw o^
the great Leviathan,
Or draw him by the tongue with cords
out of the Ocean?
2 Can thou an hook put in his nose,
and make him stand in aw;
Or can thou with a pricking thorn
him bore even through the jaw?
3 Will he to thee much prayer make,
or speak soft words to thee?
4 Or with thee make a Covenant sure,
or yet thy servant be?
5 Will thou with him as with a bird
begin to sport and play?
Or will thou for thy maidens als
him bind by night or day?
6 Shall the companions of his flesh
a banquet rich prepare:
Shall they his great and lusty joints
among the merchands share?
7 Can thou his skin that is most thick,
with barbed yrons fill:
Or his great head with sharp fish spears
to pierce have thou the skill?
8 Lay hands on him, remember well
the battle very sore,
If this thou do, with him thou shall
not meddle any more.
9 Behold his hope that would him kill
is altogether vain:
For at his sight men are cast down,
and can not rise again.
10 None is so fierce as to be bold
to stir him with his hand;
Who then is able by his power
before me for to stand?
11 Who has prevented me, that I
his debtor should repay?
What under is the cope of Heaven
is surely mine always.
His parts or yet his power I
will not conceal or hide,
Nor his comely proportion all
even as it does abide.
13 Who of his garment glorious well
discover can the face,
Or who with double bridle can
come to him in his place?
14 Who can the wide doors of his face
well open with his key?
His cruel teeth are round about
most terrible to see.
15 His scales, his pride together are
shut close as with a seal,
So near they are together, that
twixt them none air can feel.
17 Together they so joined are,
and stick so, that therefore
They by no force of strength once can
be sundred less or more.
18 By his neesings a light does shine,
as has been often tried:
His eyes are like the bright eyelids
even of the morning tide.
19 Out of his mouth go burning lamps,
and sparks of fire most hot:
20 Out of his nostrils goes a smoke,
as from a seething-pot.
21 His fyrie breath does kindle coals,
when he does with the same
Out of his mouth send speedily
a hot consuming flame.
22 In his great neck remains strength,
no work can him annoy,
Thus pains and sorrow him before
are turned into joy.
23 The flakes of his flesh joined are,
no thing can them divorce,
They are so firm, that they can not
be moved by any force.
24 His heart is as a stone most firm,
who could it clearly find,
Yea, hard as a Mils neather-stone,
which is laid for to grind.
25 The mighy (when he rises up)
afraid are mightily,
By reason of such breakings they
themselves do purify.
26 The sword of him is broken soon
that fiercely lays him at:
The like befalls to dart and spear,
and unto the breast plate.
27 He always lightly does esteem
the iron as the straw,
No more for brass then rotten wood
he fierce does stand in aw.
28 The arrows keen shot from the bow
can not him put to flight,
The sling-stones are in his account
most like the stubble light.
29 Darts as the stubble counted are,
for them he has no fear:
He with disdain still laugheth at
the shaking of the spear.
30 Sharp ragged stones are under him,
he spreads on mire and dirt
Sharp pointed things, which once his skin
not able are to hurt.
31 He like a pot does make the deep
to boil, as it were hot,
He makes the sea as ointment als
all seething in a pot.
32 Where he has past in greatest deepths
he leaves upon the streams
A shining path, so that to all
the Ocean hoary seems.
33 Upon the whole earth here below
sure there is not his like,
He is so made that trembling fear
can not upon him strike.
34 He does behold all other beasts
as no thing him beside:
He is the great and mighty king
of all the sons of pride.
Chap, 42.
AFter that JOB heard this discourse
most full of gravitie,
He to the LORD this answer made,
and said to him humbly,
2 I know that thou can every thing
do whether great or small,
And that no thought can once from thee
witholden be at all.
3 Who is he? Yea I am the man,
Who thought my self too holy;
I hid Gods counsel wise and good;
by reason of my folly.
4 Hear I beseech thee, and I will
speak, and demand of thee,
What I desire of thee to learn
declare thou unto me.
5 I often of thee have heard by
the hearing of the ear,
But now I see thee with mine eye,
even by thy grace made clear.
6 Wherefore I do my self abhor,
and now with full intent
In vilest dust and ashes both
I humbly do repent.
7 And it was so that after GOD
these words to Job had said,
To Eliphaze the Temanite
the LORD thus answer made,
I wroth am with thee and thy friends,
for ye the thing that is right
Not spoken have, as righteous Job
my servant most upright.
8 Therefore take Rams, and bullocks als
which are both fat and fair,
And soon unto my servant Job
see that ye all repair*
A burnt offering bring for your selves,
for this to GOD is due,
And Job my servant fervently
shall always pray for you.
For surely will I him accept,
lest in my justice strict
I for your folly at the last
some judgment great inflict.
Because ye have not spoken so
discreet in every part,
What Is right of me, as Job has done,
with a most upright heart,
9 So Eliphaze the Temanite,
and the Shushite Bildade,
And Zophar the Naamathite
did as the Lord them bade:
Also the Lord in mercy great
(when this was done and past)
Considered Job, and chea^efully
him did accept at last.
10 When for his friends he prayed the Lord
did heal his grief and sore,
He unto JOB gave twice as much
as ever he had before.
11 Then came to him his brethren all,
his sisters and his kin,
And others all who had before
of his acquaintance bin.
With him they bread ate in his house,
and they did him bemone,
And gave him comfort of the ills
that GOD brought him upon:
Each man also incontinent
did give as he best could
A piece of money, and also
an earring of fine gold.
12 So that the LORD in mercy great
unto JOB did extend
His gifts in the beginning great,
but larger in the end.
For he had fourteen thousand sheep,
and camels six thousand,
A thousand yoke of oxen, als
she asses at command.
13 Of Children JOB had at the last
seven sons, and daughters more
In number three, so did the LORD
his family restore.
14 The first he called Jemima,
and Kesia next the same,
Then Keren-happuch after her
was als the third by name.
15 In all the land no women were
as Jobs daughters so fair,
Among their brethren Job them gave
inheritance most rare.
16 He after this an hundred years
did live, and als fouttie,
And saw his sons, and his sons sons
the fourth genealogy.
17 So Job at last deceased when he
unto old age was come,
And after he was full of days
he went to his Long-bome.
The Use.
LET men here learn that no thing here is sure;
Who Is rich the day, the morrow may be poor.
Let men here learn not to fear Satan's rage,
For God his own does compass with a hedge:
If he permit great troubles by and by,
Our patience they are but sent to try:
When we are spoiled, let this be still wish,
That patiently in all the Lord we bless.
When we see men deep plunged in troub^^ sore,
Let us beware them to condemn therefore;
It is for man a great temerity
Him to condemn whom God does justify.
At last here learn, though godly men a grace
Do suffer whiles, At last their end is Peace
FINIS.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of the PROVERBS.
A Prayer.
GReat Wisdoms Hall here (as I think) I see
Embroidred all with Divine-Tapestrie:
Here Solomon has Proverbs grave and wise,
None but vain fools such wisdom can despise.
Now great Jehovah, with thy Heavenly fan
Blow up my breast, that I may gravely scan
These weighty words, and their sense wisely reach
Which Jedidiah thy servant did preach:
Now clear my sky, even like Mantle blew,
How I may pen these Proverbs to me show:
Within my heart now make thy Sprite divine
To work, as does in Caskes the finest wine,
Which by some chink, if it get not a vent,
Blows up the bung, or does the Hodghead rent.
As thou have set me thy help before,
Reveal thy self to me yet more and more.
CHAPTER I.
The Preface.
THe Proverbs that are words of weight
of the wise Solomon.
Who was the king of Israel,
and of David the son.
2 Their use is wisdom for to know,
and good instruction reach,
To understanding words perceive,
which men discretion teach.
3 Th'instruction wise for to receive
in all humility,
Of wisdom, justice, and judgment,
and als of equity.
4 To give unto the simple folk
a divine subtilty,
Unto the young man knowledge, and
discretion good thereby.
5 A wise man will hear, and also
his learning will increase:
A wise man shall attain unto
wise counsels more or less.
6 To understand a proverb, and
th'interpretation mark,
The weighty words of the wise als,
their sayings that are dark.
The beginning of the Proverbs.
7. GODS fear is the beginning of
knowledge that makes wise,
But wisdom and instruction all
fools wickedly despise.
8 My son, hear the instruction of
thy father, stand in aw:
And of thy mother dear see that
thou not forsake the Law.
9 For they of grace an ornament
shall be unto thine head,
And they shall be about thy neck
as chains most rare indeed.
10 My dear son, if to wickedness
vile sinners thee entise,
Consent thou not, but from their course
abstain, if thou be wise.
11 If they say, Come with us, Let us
lay wait for humane blood,
Let us now lurk for these that be
both innocent and good.
12 Let us them swallow up alive,
as does the greedy grave:
Even like to these that go to pit,
from which none can them save.
13 We shall all precious substance find,
as in a fertile soil;
We also in great plenty shall
our houses fill with spoil.
14 Among us now cast in thy lot,
and care not for a curse;
Let us rejoice, and let us all
have only but one purse.
15 My son, walk thou not in the way
with them, but them disdain,
From their path full of wickedness
see thou thy foot refrain.
16 For their feet do most swiftly run
to that which is not good,
And make great haste, for by all means
to spill and shed much blood.
17 By the sight of the net well might
the foolish bird be taught,
But she intent upon her food
is heedlesly then caught.
18 And for their own blood they lay wait,
and others think to slay;
And while they lurk thus privily,
their lives they still betray.
19 So are the ways of every one
that greedy is of gain,
Which of the owners takes away
the life that is profane.
20 She who the Fathers wisdom is,
does cry aloud without;
Her voice to me she in the streets
does utter with a shout.
21 She in the chief place of concourse
even in the gates and way
Does cry, She in the city does
these words most wisely say,
22 How long will ye simplicity
thus love without all skill,
And ye scorners delight to scorn,
and fools hate knowledge still?
23 Turn you at my reproof: behold
into you I will power
My Sprite, I will make known my words
unto you every hour.
24 Because I called have, and ye
refused to understand,
And no man has regarded once
when I stretched out my hand.
25 But ye proudly have set at naught
my counsel grave and wise,
And would hear none of my reproof,
but did it all despise.
26 I als at your calamity
to laugh will not forbear,
I will you surely scorn and mock
all trembling in your fear.
27 When your fear and destruction great
shall come as a whirlewinde,
When anguish and distress shall come
your hearts with grief to bind.
28 Then shall they cry, but I will not
them answer when they call,
They shall me early seek, but they
shall not me find at all.
29 For that they hated knowledge, which
abounds in GODS word,
And foolishly refusd to choose
the true fear of the Lord.
30 They fools would none of my counsel,
which might have made them wise,
They all the words of my reproof
most proudly did despise.
31 Therefore of their own way they shall
the fruit eat ever still,
And their divices naughty all
with folly shall them fill.
32 For the eyes of the simple shall
them slay, and much annoy,
And the prosperity of fools
shall quickiy them destroy.
33 But who so hearkneth unto m^
he shall most safely dwell*
And shall be quiet all his life,
from all the fear of ill.
Chap. 2.
MY dear son, if thou will receive
my wise words reverently,
And if thou my commandment als
wilt surely hide with thee.
2 So that thou now thine ear unto
GODS wisdom still incline,
And most humbly thy heart apply
unto wisdom divine.
3 Yea, if thou after knowledge good
do cry, as for thy choice,
And understanding for to get
high liftest up thy voice.
4 If thou with care for her do seek,
as for the silver fine;
And for her as for treasures hid
to search thou do incline.
5 Then shall thou rightly understand
of the LORD GOD the fear,
And find the knowledge of the LORD,
which to all should be dear.
6 For the LORD who is merciful,
does richly give wisdom;
Knowledge and understanding both
out of his mouth do come.
7 He sound wisdom lay'th up for these
that do live righteously,
He is a buckler unto them
that do walk uprightly:
8 Of his most just judgment the paths
he keeps every day,
And of his Saints that serve him, he
preserves well the way.
9 Then righteousness and judgment als
thou shall well understand,
With equity; and als the path
wherein thy foot shall stand.
10 When worthy wisdom enters in
thy well prepared heart,
And knowledge pleasant to thy soul
does in no time depart*
11 Discretion shall preserve thee well
from danger all that be,
And understanding from the LORD
most safely shall keep thee.
12 Thee to deliver from the way
of the man that ill brings,
From the pernicious wicked man
that speaks froward things.
13 Who foolishly leave and forsake
the paths of uprightness,
For in their folly great to walk
in the ways of darkness.
14 Who do rejoice for to do evil,
and that with all their might,
And in the wickeds frowardness
have pleasure and delight.
15 Whose ways are crooked knowing not
what is straight uprightness,
And they in their most wicked paths
are full of frowardness.
16 Thee from the strange woman to save,
more dangerous then swords,
From the stranger which flatt'reth much
with her deceitful words.
17 Which the guide of her youth forsakes,
who still should be her love:
And does forget the Covenant all
of her great GOD above.
18 For her most vile house does incline
unto the doors of death
And to the dead all slain by sin
directly is her path.
19 None of these all return again,
who foolishly are bold
To go to her, nor of the paths
of life do they take hold.
20 That thou most constantly may walk
with good men in the way,
And of the righteous keep the paths,
and fear to go astray.
21 For the upright shall dwell in lands
which shall thee well maintain,
And these that be perfect in heart
shall still therein remain.
22 But wicked men shall be cut off
from all the earth about,
And the transgressors of GODS law
shall be all rooted out.
Chap. 3.
My dear son, look that thou my law
do in no way forget,
But see that my commandments all
thou keep with all thine heart.
2 For length of days they shall to thee
add with a happy life,
And Peace and Plenty wonderful
far from debate and strife.
3 Let not Mercy and Truth forsake
thee; bind them to thy neck:
Write them upon the table of
thine heart which they shall deck.
4 So shall thou most sweet favor find,
and an excellent light
Of understanding good, and that
both in GOD and man's sight.
5 Trust in thee LORD with all thine heart,
well purged and made clean,
And unto thine own wisdom see
that in no way thou lean.
6 In all thy ways acknowledge him
who shall thee still protect,
And thy paths through all dangers he
shall safely all direct.
7 Be thou not wise in thine own eyes,
take heed unto thine heart:
The mighty Lord see that thou fear,
and from all ill depart.
8 It shall be to thy navill health,
and more then that alone,
It wattring and moistning shall be
even marrow to thy bone.
9 With thy substance honor the Lord
even whether more or less,
And with the first and rarest fruits
of all thy blessed increase.
10 So shall thy barns be filled with
plenty of corn most fine:
Thy presses als abundantly
shall burst out with new wine.
11 My son, the chastening of the Lord
see that thou not despise:
Nor yet of his correction good
be weary any ways.
12 For whom the Lord loves he corrects,
as he it thinks right;
Even as a father does his son
in whom is his delight.
13 Most happy is the man that does
Gods heavenly wisdom find,
And he that understanding good
gets for to clear his mind.
14 For the rich merchandise thereof
is better manifold
Then silver, and the gain thereof
then is the finest gold.
15 She then Rubies more precious is
which high esteemed are,
And all the things thou can desire
may not with her compare.
16 In her right hand the length of days
abide as in their seat;
And in her left hand also are
riches and honor great.
17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
which men's heart do solace,
And which should much stir up our hearts,
even all her paths are peace.
18 She is a tree of life to them
that on her hold do lay,
And every one that her retains
is happy every way.
19 The Lord by wisdom founded has
the earth, and made it sure,
By understanding he the heavens
has stablish'd to endure.
20 By his knowledge are broken up
the depths that are not few,
The lofty clouds GODS charets high
drop down the pleasant dew.
21 My son, let them not from thine eyes
by any way depart,
See that thou keep discretion well,
and wisdom sound in heart.
22 So shall they be unto thy soul,
as life thee to protect,
They likewise shall not fail to be
as grace unto thy neck.
23 Then thou protected by the Lord
shall safely in thy way
With courage walk, so that thy foot
not stumble shall always.
When thou lies down, thou shall not be
afraid by danger deep;
Yea thou most safely shall ly down,
and sweet shall be thy sleep.
25 Let not thy heart be sore afraid
of any sudden fear,
Nor of the desolation great
when it does come right near.
26 For GOD of thy sure confidence
shall always be the root,
From being taken in a girn
he shall keep well thy foot.
27 Withhold not good from them to whom
it is due, as by a band,
When as to do the same it is in
the power even of thine hand.
28 Say not unto thy neighbor, Go,
and come again to me,
And I to morrow will it give;
when it thou have by thee.
29 Against thy neighbor any way
see thou devise not ill;
Since that he does by thee always
even most securely dwell.
30 With any man without a cause
strive not in any term:
If so be that he innocent
has done to thee no harm.
31 Vain oppressors envy thou not,
who do poor men abuse,
And see that thou be very ware
none of their ways to choose.
32 For an abomination great
the froward is always
Unto the Lord; but his secret
is with the righteous ay.
33 GODS curse upon the wickeds house
shall bring it all to dust,
But he most plenteously does bless
the dwelling of the just.
34 Surely he in his wrath does scorn,
the scorners to their face,
But unto men of humble hearts
he always gives grace.
35 The wise shall all inherit still
great glory in their name,
But the promotion of all fools
shall be nothing but shame.
Chap. 4.
YE children of a father hear
the teaching wise and learned,
And to know understanding good
with diligence attend.
2 For I to you give doctrine wise,
that ye may stand in aw,
And walk in mine obedience,
and not forsake my law.
3 For even I was my fathers son,
his pleasure and delight,
Yea tender and beloved well
in my dear mothers sight.
4 He taught me als, and said to me,
let thine heart now believe
My words; als my commandments all
keep well that thou may live.
5 Get wisdom, understanding get
most heavenly and divine,
Forget it not, and from my words
see that thou not decline.
6 Forsake her not, and so she shall
most safe preserve thee still,
Love her with all thine heart, and she
shall keep thee from all ill.
7 Wisdom, as all men well may know,
in cheifest place is set,
Therefore get wisdom, and with that
good understanding get.
8 Exalt her high, and she shall thee
promote in every place,
To honor great she shall thee bring
when thou do her embrace.
9 She shall to thee an ornament
of grace give lovingly,
A crown of glory sure she shall
deliver unto thee.
10 Hear, O my son, consider well,
and hear now lovingly
My words, and the years of thy life
shall blessed and many be.
11 I have thee taught in Wisdoms way,
and that with all my might:
I also have thee straightly led
in paths that are most right.
12 When thou shall go, thy steps shall not
be straightened sore at all;
And when thou runnest thou shall not
once stumble for to fall.
13 Take fast hold of instruction still,
let her not go away;
Keep her with all thine heart, because
she is thy life always.
14 Of wicked men see that the path
thou enter not into;
And in the way of livers lewd
see that thou never go.
15 Avoid it well with all thine heart,
be wise, pass not it by,
Turn from it with all diligence,
and quickly pass away.
16 For they sleep not except they have
mischief done great or small,
And their sleep soon does pass away,
till they cause some to fall.
17 For they the bread of wickedness
eat with all diligence,
And drunkards like they glut and drink
the wine of violence.
18 But the path of the Just is as
the shining light always,
That shines more and more unto
the clear and perfect day.
19 The way of wicked men is as
the darkness of the night;
At what they stumble more or less
they brutish know not right.
20 My son, with diligence attend
unto my words divine,
Unto my wholesome sayings see
that thou thine ear incline.
21 By carelessness from thy two eyes
let them no time depart,
But keep them as a treasure rich
in the midst of thine heart.
22 For unto these that do them find,
they give life, and refresh
The hearts of men, and are also
even health to all their flesh.
23 Keep thy heart with all diligence
from wickedness and strife,
For as a fountain out of it
the issues are of life.
24 Put far away from thee a mouth
that is froward and averse
From words of grace; put far from thee
the lips that are perverse,
25 Let still thine eyes look right upon
the things that they do see,
And let thine eyelids be direct'd
straight to look before thee.
26 The path of thy feet ponder well,
that thou may still walk sure,
And also let thy ways all be
established to endure.
27 Unto the right hand, nor the left
turn not, for wrath or love,
From the evil works of wicked men
see thou thy foot remove,
Chap. 5.
MY son, with diligence attend
unto my wisdom now,
And to my understanding als
thine ear incline and bow.
2 That thou may discretion good
in heart wisely regard,
And that thy lips may knowledge keep,
above all watch and ward.
3 For of a strange woman the lips
as honey drop and boil,
Her tongue and mouth much smoother are
then is the finest oil.
4 But as the woormwood bitter is,
so her end in a word
Most bitter is, yea sharp is it
as a two edged sword.
5 Her filthy feet go down to death,
which does man's life expel:
Lest any be deceived thereby
her steps take hold on hell.
6 Lest thou should weigh the way of life,
the same for to allow:
Her ways are still so moveable,
that thou can not them know.
7 Therefore, ye children, now my voice
well hear with all your heart,
And from the wise words of my mouth
see that ye not depart.
8 Remove thy way right far from her,
vile and unrighteous,
And take good heed that nigh the door
thou come not of her house.
9 Lest to these thou thine honor give,
who are great foes to thee,
And the time of thy years to these
that fierce and cruel be.
10 Lest strangers with thy richest wealth
be filled plenteouslie:
And thy most painful labors all
in strangers houses be.
11 And that thou a vain fool at last
to grieve and mourn begin;
When thy flesh and thy body both
consumed are with sin.
12 And say, Oh how instruction good
have hated I unwise,
And how did my most foolish heart
such sweet reproofs despise?
13 And the voice of my teachers all
would not obey or hear:
Nor to them that did me instruct
would I incline mine ear.
14 Amidst the Congregation great
most foolishly almost
In all ill which did compass me,
I perished was and lost.
15 The waters of thine own cisterne
drink thou abundantly,
And waters out of thine own well
that run most pleasantly.
16 Spare not thy fountains full, but them
all largely still disperse,
To let thy rivers flow in streets,
see thou be not averse.
17 Let them be only for thy self,
and such as fear the Lord,
But unto strangers wicked men
nothing at all afford.
18 Let thy fountain which is for thee,
be blessed with heart and voice,
And with the dear wife of thy youth
with gladness great rejoice.
19 Let her be as the Hind and Roe
which pleasantly do move,
And let her breast thee satisfy,
still ravished with her love.
20 My son, why will thou ravished be,
thy self for to solace
With a stranger, and her bosom
in thine arms to embrace?
21 For all man's ways are still before
the eyes of The Eternal:
And in his balance wisely he
pondreth his goings all.
22 The wicked shall be taken with
his own iniquity:
And with the coards of his own sins
he shall fast holden be.
23 He shall without instruction sure
come to his dying day,
And in his folly great he shall
for ever go astray.
Chap. 6.
If thou, my son, be for thy friend,
as surety for to stand:
If with a stranger by promise
thou stricken have thine hand.
2 Thou with the words of thine own mouth
art snared by and by,
Thou with thine own words taken art,
which thou can not deny.
3 Do this, my son, and save thy self,
when thou art in the hand
Of thy friend, humble then thy self,
make sure I thee command.
4 Beware that thou in any ways
unto thine eyes give sleep;
Or suffer slumber day or night
on thine eyelids to creep.
5 Thy self deliver as a Roe
from hunters hands quickly;
And as a bird als from the hand
of these that foulers be.
6 Thou Sluggard loit'ring on the downs,
whom good men should despise;
Go to the Ant, consider well
her ways, and then be wise:
7 Which having none among the rest
her guider for to be:
^ea, which has none to rule at all,
or yet to oversee.
8 In Summer with wisdom her meat
she does right well provide,
and carefully does gather all
her food in the harv'st tide.
9 How long will thou sleep and ly still,
O sluggard most unwise,
When will thou from thy slumber, and
thy drousie sleep arise?
10 Yet will thou say, A little sleep
and slumber does me please,
A little folding of the hands,
to sleep and be at ease.
11 So shall come fast thy poverty.
do what thou may or can,
As one that travails, and thy want
as does an armed man.
12 A naughty person which can not
in good things do or talk
A wicked man that hates the Lord,
with froward mouth does walk.
13 He winketh with his wily eyes,
he speaks with his feet,
He with his fingers falls does teach
such lies as he thinks meet,
14 Much frowardness is in his heart,
he mischeef does devise
Continually, he does discord
both sow and enterprise.
15 Therefore most sudden upon him
shall his calamity
Come, shortly shall he broken all
be without remedy.
16 These six things does the Lord God hate,
from which we should depart,
Yea, an abomination great
sev'n are unto his heart.
17 A proud look, and a tongue also,
in lying understood,
The wicked and the cruel hands,
that shed much sakelesse blood.
18 A heart that does most wicked things
with a full aim and drift,
And also feet that to mischeef
in running be most swift.
19 A false witness that speaks lies,
before the face of men,
And him that craftily does sow
discord among brethren.
20 Thy dear fathers commandments all
my son keep, and in aw
See that thou stand, and not forsake
thy loving mothers law.
21 Bind them most sure continually
Fastened upon thine heart,
And ty them fast about thy neck,
that they thence not depart.
22 When thou shall go, it shall thee lead,
and sleeping shall thee keep.
And it shall talk with thee when thou
awakest out of sleep.
23 For the commandment is a lamp,
the law is light as day;
And reproofs of instruction good
are of our life the way.
24 To keep thee from the wicked wife,
and safely thee preserve
From flattering of a woman strange,
which maks men's hearts to swerve.
25 After her beauty filled with faird
in thine heart never lust,
Nor let her twinkling eye lids once
thus take thee under trust.
26 For by a whore a man is brought
to a poor piece of bread,
And the adultresse for his life
will hunt with all her speed.
27 In his bosom can any man
take such a kindled fire?
And shall not all his cloths be burnt
with such a vain desire?
28 Can any man securely go
on burning coals with heat?
Can such a man so save him self
that he burn not his feet?
29 So he that to his neighbors wife
does go to make a rent,
What ever he be that does her touch
shall not be innocent.
30 A thief that steels his neighbors goods
men do not so despise,
If hunger move him to such things,
when they do him surprise.
31 But if he be found, he restore
which is most righteous,
Shall seven fold more, he shall give all
the substance of his house.
32 But who adultry so commits
with her that is a wife,
He is a fool; he that it does
destroys his soul and life.
33 Wounds and dishonor shall he get,
GOD shall him so repay;
And his shameful and vile reproach
shall not be wiped away.
34 For jealousy is of a man
the rage, he not therefore
In the day of his vengeance great
will spare thee less or more:
35 He wroth, no ransom will regard,
for to make up that rent
Yea though that thou give many gifts,
will he so rest content?
Chap. 7.
MY dear son, keep thou well my words,
which thou do hear from me:
And also my commandments all
lay thou up now with thee.
2 With care keep my commandments well,
and happy live thereby,
And also keep thou well my law
as the apple of thine eye.
3 Upon thy fingers bind them fast,
and let them not depart,
Most carefully write them upon
the table of thine heart.
4 Say unto wisdom in these words,
Thou art my sister dear,
And understanding also call
thy kins-woman most near.
5 That they thee from the woman strange,
more dangerous then swords
May keep, yea from the stranger which
does flatter with her words.
6 For at the window of my house
attentive as I went,
I did behold and constantly
I looked through the casement.
7 Behold among the simple ones
among the youth abide
A young man I discerned well
of understanding void.
8 He through the street her corner near
passing without delay,
Unto her house that leads to death
most quickly went the way.
9 The times he went, the evening was,
when it is the twilight,
And also at another time
in the black and dark night.
10 Behold a woman there him met
in harlots vile attire,
Subtle in heart to catch the youth,
and kindle his desire.
11 This is her fashion, she is loud,
and stubborn, full of pride,
With her servants within her house
her feet do not abide.
12 Now she without, now in the streets
prepares for youth a bait,
At every corner shamlesly
she lies still in wait,
13 So she caught him, and did him kiss,
their hearts for to solace;
And then at last she said to him,
with a most shameless face,
14 With me I have Peace-offrings now,
with all sorrows away
To GOD I paid have my vows
most perfectly the day.
15 Therefore with diligence I came
forth for to meet with thee;
And now behold I have thee found
who art full dear to me.
16 I have my bed with cov'rings decked
of tapestrie that is mine,
With carved works and linen clean,
of Egypt good and fine.
17 My bed I well perfumed have,
As I may now thee tell
With Myrrh, Aloes, and Cinamom
which have the sweetest smell;
18 Come let us take our fill of love
and each other embrace,
Until the morning with loves sweet,
let us our selves solace.
19 For the good man is not at home,
nor yet in the country,
He for his worldly business
is gone a long journey.
20 He taken has a bag with him,
of money for his way,
And afterward he will come home
at the appointed day.
21 With much fair speech she caused him
to yield without remorse,
With the fair flattring of her lips
at last she did him force.
22 As an ox to the slaughter goth,
he go'th with her straight way,
Or as a fool unto the stocks
correction to essay.
23 Till a dart through his liver struck,
as a bird to the snare
Makes haste, not knowing that such things
men for its life prepare.
24 Unto me now hearken therefore
ye children for your well,
And now attend unto the words,
which my mouth shall reveal.
25 Let not thine heart by foolishness,
decline unto her way,
In her paths most pernicious
see thou go not astray.
26 For she right many has cast down,
who wounded, not again
Could rise; yea many strong men als,
have thus been by her slain.
27 Her house is most pernicious,
it is the way to hell,
A going to the chambers down
of death that is eternell.
Chap. 8,
MOst worthy wisdom for man's well
aloud does she not cry?
And understanding als put forth
her sweet voice by and by?
2 She in the top of places high
most openly does stand,
Yea in the places of the paths
to make men understand.
3 Unto you all ye men of worth,
with my words do I call,
4 And my voice to the sons of man
directed is with all.
5 Ye simple wisdom understand,
and ye fools, lest ye smart,
With diligence see ye be of
an understanding heart.
6 Hear for I of things excellent
will speak with all my might,
And all the opening of my lips
shall be of things most right.
7 For my mouth shall most constantly
speak truth, and shall not slip,
And wickedness shall not at all
proceed once from my lip.
8 All the words that come from my mouth
are still in righteousness
No froward thing there is at all
in them, or yet perverse.
9 They are all plain to him that has
an understanding mind,
They are also all right to them
that wisely knowledge find.
10 Care not for silver, but receive
instruction manifold,
And carefully for knowledge seek,
more then the choicest gold.
11 For wisdom Rubies is above,
and all the things most fair
That may by men desired be
can not with it compare.
12 I wisdom with prudence always
do dwell most pleasantly,
And of inventions knowledge find,
that grave and witty be.
13 The fear of God is for to hate
evil, pride, arrogance,
And the evil way and froward mouth
do I hate all greatly.
14. Counsel is mine, and wisdom sound,
as men shall know at length:
I understanding am indeed,
I have no lake of strength.
15 By me the mighty Kings do reign,
who sit on benches hie,
And mighty Princes in their place
do justice als decree.
16 By me the Princes rule with might,
and Nobles by my grace,
Even all the Judges of the earth
from me receive their place.
17 I with my heart do love all these
that have a love to me,
And these most surely shall me find
that early seekers be.
18 Continually I have with me
both honor and richesse,
Yea riches dureable that are,
and also righteousness.
19 My fruit is better then the gold,
yea then fine gold that glitter,
My rev'nue als is far above,
the fine and choicest silver.
20 I all men that resort to me
lead in the righteous way,
In the midst als of judgments paths,
that they go not astray.
21 That I may cause all these that do
me love and honor still
Well to inherit wealth; and I
will all their treasures fill.
22 The mighty Lord possessed me
with mercies manifold,
In the beginning of his way,
before his works of old.
23 From everlasting I set up
was by his mighty hand,
From the beginning of all things
or ever there was land.
24 I was brought forth when were no deepths*
even flowing on the ground,
When no fountains there were which did
with water great abound.
25 Before the mountains settled were,
before the hills of worth,
Yea, even from all eternity
I was indeed brought forth.
26 While as the earth and pleasant fields
the Lord that is wise and just
Had not yet made, nor highest part
of all the worlds dust.
27 When I prepared the heavens I was
there in my holy place,
When he a compass set upon
the depths excellent face,
28 When he established above
the clouds, as in a heap,
When he strengthened by his strong arm
the fountains of the deep.
29 When to the sea he gave decree
not for to pass a point
His precepts; when he of the earth
the ground stone did appoint.
30 Then I by him as one brought up
with him was; every day
I his delight was, and did joy
before his face always.
31 Rejoiceing in these parts of earth,
which were indwelled then,
And my pleasure and chief delights
were with the sons of men.
32 Now therefore hearken unto me,
ye children, young in days,
^or they indeed most blessed are
that wisely keep my ways.
33 Be wise, and good instruction als
be most glade for to hear,
And see that thou do not refuse
unto it to give ear,
34 Blessed is the man that hears me,
and watches at my gates,
and of my doors waits at the posts,
as poor men in such seats.
35 For who so finds me, does find
life which is greatest gain,
and he of the LORD GOD above
much favor shall obtain.
36 But he that against me forlorn
himself to sin does move,
Much wrongs his own soul; yea all they
that hate me, death do love.
Chap. 9.
Wisdom her fair house builded has,
which seemly is to see,
She has hew'n out her pillars seven
as ornaments to be.
2 She killed has the beast; she has
mingled her costly wine:
She furnished has her table rich
with dainties good and fine.
3 Her maidens that attend her she
has sent forth by and by,
Upon the highest places of
the city she does cry.
4 Let simple men turn hither in,
and that without delay,
And as for him that wants wit
she to him thus does say,
5 Come eat of my most blessed bread,
as I do you command,
And drink of the wine which I have
well mingled with my hand.
6 All these that foolish be forsake,
that happy so thou may
Live a blessed life, and also go
in understandings way.
7 He that reproves a scorner gets
shame to himself and spot,
And he that wicked men rebukes,
does get himself a blot;
8 To shun all hatred see that thou
a scorner not reprove,
But a wise man rebuke, and he
will thee most surely love.
9 Give to the wise instruction good,
and he will wiser be,
Teach a just man, and he increase
in learning will by thee.
10 GODS fear is the beginning of
wisdom that makes wise,
The knowledge of the holy is
even wisdom sound always.
11 For thy days in great mercy shall
be multiplied by me,
and the years of thy blessed life
shall sure increased be.
12 If thou be wise thou shall be wise
for thy self; this now hear,
^ut if thou scornest, thou alone
the smart thereof shall bear.
13 A woman that is clamorous,
and troubles all the land,
^e simple is, and nothing knows,
as she should understand.
14 For at the door she of her house
sits idly on a seat,
the high places which are of
the city large and great.
15 To call the simple Passengers
to make them go astray,
When for their worldly business
they go right on their way.
16 Who so is simple let him turn
now hither for to sit;
And also she does say to him
that wants sprituall wit,
17 The stolen waters of carnal lust
are delicate and sweet;
And bread in secret corners are
most pleasant for to eat.
18 But he knows not that there the dead
are, though the Lord it tell,
And that her mad and foolish guests
are in the depths of hell.
Chap. 10.
A Wise son to his fathers heart
does cause joy and gladness,
But to his mother dear a fool
brings grief and heaviness.
2 The treasures of great wickedness
no profit bring to man,
But righteousness deliv'reth sure
from death that is pale and wan.
3 The Lord will not let good men's souls
both famish and decay,
^ut he the goods of wicked men
in wrath does cast away.
He that with a slack hand does deal
anon becomes poor:
^t of the diligent the hand
enricheth men most sure.
He that in Summer gathreth, is
a wise son worthy fame,
^t he that sleeps in harv'st, is sure
a son that causes shame.
Great blessings are upon the head
of men without offense,
^t the mouth of the wicked is
cov'red with violence.
The memory of the just man
who lives without a spot
^^st blessed is; but sure the name
of wicked men shall rot.
The wise in heart commandments good
receive well one and all;
who is in his foolish talk
^ prating fool, shall fall.
He that walks upright, walks surely
not to be overthrown,
But he that does pervert his ways
shall to his shame be known.
10 He that so winketh with the eye
does sorrow cause and grief,
But he that is a prating fool
shall fall into mischief.
11 The mouth of him that righteous is,
is a fair well of life,
But violence cov'reth the mouth
of all men given to strife:
12 Hatred, which is a bitter root,
does strife stir up and move,
But on the other part all sins
are cov'red well with love.
13 In the lips of the man that is wise
wisdom does still abide;
But rods are for his back that is
of understanding void.
14 Wise men knowledge lay up with care
which unto them is dear;
But the mouth of the foolish is
unto destruction near.
15. The rich man's wealth, which does abo^
is his most strong city;
And the destruction of the poor
is their own poverty.
16 The labor of the righteous man
to life attaines in end,
But the fruit of the wicked sort
to sin does always tend.
17 He that does keep instruction good,
of life is in the way;
But he that does refuse reproof
does err, and go astray.
18 He that with vain and lying lips
his hatred evil does hide:
And he that utt'reth slanders false
in folly does abide.
19 In many words there wants not
great sin that does arise,
^ut he that can his lips refrain
may well be called wise.
20 The just man's tongue like silver choice
is when it comes forth,
^ut the heart of a wicked man
is sure of little worth.
21 The prudent lips of righteous men
(as ye may clearly see)
^oe many feed; but wicked fools
for want of wisdom die.
22 Gods blessing makes surely rich,
of nothing he has need,
With it no sorrow he at all
or grief does add indeed.
23 Unto a fool to do mischief
it is but thought a sport,
But a well understanding man
has wisdom to exhort.
24 The wickeds fear shall come on him
swift as a glaunce of fire;
But surely well shall granted be
the righteous man's desire.
25 The wicked like a whirle-winde is,
which soon does pass away,
But the man that is righteous still
is founded sure always.
26 As vinegar is to the teeth,
and smoke unto the eye,
So is the sluggard unto them
whose messenger is he.
27 The fear of GOD it does prolong
the good man's happy days,
But of the wicked man the years
shall shortened be always.
28 The hope of righteous men shall be
both joy and gladness all,
But ill men's expectation sure
shall perish great and small.
29 The way of GOD is strength unto
the upright man surely,
But for them shall destruction be
that work iniquity.
30 The righteous man shall never be
removed with disgrace,
But wicked men upon the earth
shall have no dwelling place.
31 The mouth of just men wisdom does
bring forth without all doubt,
But of the froward man the tongue
at last shall be cut out.
32 The lips of him that righteous is
know what is fit to say,
But of the wicked folk the mouth
speaks frowardness always.
Chap. 11,
TO GOD abomination is
a balance false and slight,
But a just weight it is always
at all times his delight.
2 When pride does come with lofty looks
then shame comes by its side,
But wisdom with the lowly still
does constantly abide.
3 The upright men's integrity
shall them guide with great joy,
But the perverseness of the bad
shall surely them destroy.
4 Great riches do not profit much
in stormy days of wrath,
But righteousness the godly man
deliv'reth sure from death.
6 The perfect man directed is
even by his righteousness,
But transgressors shall taken be
in their own naughtiness.
7 When by death is a wicked man
removed far away;
His expectation perish shall,
his hope shall all decay.
8 The righteous man deliv'red is
from trouble and from dread,
And the perverse for all his wiles
shall come into his stead.
9 An hypocrite with his vile mouth
his neighbor does destroy,
But through knowledge the just man shall
deliv'red be with joy.
10 When it goth well with righteous men
the city shall rejoice,
And when the wicked perish, then
there is a shouting voice,
11 By blessings of the Upright man
the city is well known
^o be extold; by wicked mouths
it quite is overthrown.
12 A man that is of wisdom void
his neighbor does despise,
^ut he his peace does hold that is
of understanding wise.
13 A talebearer that breadeth strife
men's secrets does reveal,
^ut he that is of a faithful sprit
the matter can conceal.
14 Where no counsel is to be found
the people poor do fall,
^ut where good counselors abound
their safety is for all.
15 Who for a stranger surety is
shall surely for it smart,
^^d he is sure that suretyship
does heat with all his heart.
16 A gracious woman that is wise
retains honor sure,
and strong men also richesse get
which long time do endure.
17 The man that is merciful with good
his own soul does refresh:
But he that cruel is always
does trouble his own flesh.
18 The wicked work deceitful works
but he that does regard
To sow the seed of righteousness
shall get a sure reward.
19 As righteousness does tend to life,
so he that under wrath
Pursues evil, pursues it
even unto his own death.
20 A froward heart the LORD abhors,
but such as are upright
In all their ways, before his face
are surely his delight.
21 Though hand in hand join, wicked men
shall not go well away,
But the seed of the righteous shall
deliv'red be always.
22 As of fine gold a jewel fair
is in a vile swines snout;
So is a woman fair which is
discretion all without.
23 The desire of these that do walk
into the righteous path
Is good; but th'expectation all
of wicked men is wrath.
24 Some scatter and do yet increase,
some more then is meet withhold:
But it does tend to poverty
as well men may behold.
25 The lib'rall soul shall be made fat
where ever it shall go,
And he that watt'reth well, shall be
watt'red himself also.
26 He that for gain withholdeth corn;
the people curse him shall,
But blessing shall be on the head
of him that does it sell.
27 He that seeks good procures still
much favor with wisdom,
But he that seeks a mischief
unto him shall it come.
28 He that does in his riches trust,
shall get a fearful fall:
But righteous men even as a branch
with beauty flourish shall.
29 He that his own house troubles still,
inherit shall the wind,
The fool a servant to the wise,
himself shall surely bind.
30 The fruit of righteous men is good,
who can it well despise?
It is a tree of life, and he
that wins souls is wise.
31 Behold the righteous in the earth
shall get a recompense,
Much more shall wicked sinners get
for all their fair pretense.
Chap. 12.
Who so does love instruction good
he knowledge loves also,
But he that hates a reproof
like a bruit beast does go.
2 A good man has Gods favor great
who will not him contemn,
But a man of devices ev'll
he surely will condemn.
3 A man established shall not be
by his own wickedness,
But the root of the righteous shall
not be moved more or less.
4 A woman to her husband good
is as Crowns set with stones
But she that makes him ashamed
brings rotting in his bones.
5 The thoughts all of the righteous man
are right in GODS conceit,
But counsels all of wicked men
are fraud and mere deceit.
6 The words of ill men are to lie
in wait for blood alone,
But the mouth of the upright shall
deliver them anon.
7 The wicked men are overthrown,
and are not to be found,
But the house of the righteous man
shall stand fast on the ground.
8 A man shall be commended much,
as men shall find him wise,
But him that is perverse in heart
all good men shall despise.
9 He that despised is, and has
a servant, is indeed
Much better then who honor does
himself, and lacks bread.
10 The righteous the life of his beast
regards near and far;
But the most tender mercies of
the wicked cruel are.
11 He that his land does till shall be
well satisfied with bread,
But he that follows persons vain
is void of wit indeed,
12 The wicked of ill men the net
desire most earnestly,
But the root of the righteous men
yields fruit abundantly.
13 The wicked by words of his lips
is snared round about,
But he that in his ways is just,
of trouble shall come out.
14 A man by the fruit of his mouth
with good shall filled be,
And of his hands the recompense
shall rendered be surely.
15 The way of fools in their own eyes
seems to be just and right;
But who to counsel good gives ear
is only wise aright.
16 A fools wrath kindled as a fire
is well known presently,
But he that is a prudent man
does cover shame wisely.
17 He that always does speak the truth,
does show forth righteousness,
But a falls witness in his words
does still deceit express.
18 There many be that do speak like
the pearcing of a sword,
But the tongue of the wise truly
is health in every word.
19 The lip of truth for ever shall
established be most sure,
But a tongue lying does but for
a moments space endure.
20 Deceit is in the heart of them
that forge ill to annoy,
But to the counselors of peace
is gladness great and joy,
21 No ill shall happen to the just,
which may procure his greef,
But the men wicked and perverse
shall filled be with mischief.
22 The lying lips are to the Lord
abomination right,
But they that truly in their ways
do deal, are his delight.
23 A prudent man his knowledge great
conceals in quietness,
But the hearts of the foolish men
proclaim their foolishness.
24 The good hand of the diligent
shall bear rule over all,
But the man sloathfull in his ways
shall under tribute fall.
25 While heaviness is in the heart,
it makes it to stoop,
But a good word it makes glad,
and so no more does droop*
26 The righteous then his neighbor is
more excellent always,
But the way of the wicked does
seduce them every day.
27 The sloathfull man he rosteth not
which he took at his chase,
But the wealth of the diligent
is good in every place.
28 In the blessed way of righteousness
is life for great and small,
And in the fair path way thereof
there is no death at all.
Chap. 13.
A Fathers good instruction sure
a wise son well does hear,
But scorners unto wise rebuke
will no ways give their ear.
2 By the fruit of his mouth a man
shall for a recompense
^^at good things, but the sinners soul
shall still eat violence.
3 He that his mouth keeps, keeps his life
that it may sure abide,
But he shall perish who his lips
perversely opneth wide.
4 The sluggards soul desires much,
and has nothing to spend,
But of the diligent the soul
shall be made fat in end.
5 5 righteous man does always hate,
and lying lips does blame,
But he that is wicked loathsome is,
and comes at last to shame.
6 Sure righteousness keeps him that is
upright in the good way,
^ut wickedness does overthrow
the men that go astray.
7 There is that makes rich himself,
yet has no thing to spend,
^here is that als himself makes poor,
yet is found rich in end.
8 The riches of the wealthy man
are of his life most dear
^he ransom, but a sharp rebuke
the poor refuse to hear.
9 The fair light of the righteous man
rejoices every one,
But of the wicked man the lamp
shall be put out anon.
10 By pride only (that is most fierce)
great strife the land does fill,
But with the well advised man
is wisdom ever still.
11 Wealth purchased by vanity
shall suddenly decrease,
But who by labor gathreth well
shall in great wealth increase.
12 Deferred hope makes sick the heart,
with lingering and delay,
But when desire is come, it is
a tree of life always.
13 Who so the word despises, shall
destroyed be surely,
But he that the commandment fears
shall well rewarded be.
14 Of life a fountain is the law
of him that is wise in heart,
And likewise from the snares of death
in great have to depart,
15 Good understanding in affairs
does favor give always,
But hard and full of trouble is
of transgressors the way.
16 The man that surely prudent is
with knowledge wisely deals;
But in his words and works a fool
his folly soon reveals.
17 A messenger that wicked is
does fall into mischief,
But a faithful ambassador
is health for man's relief.
18 Both shame and poverty shall be
to him that does refuse
^nstruction; but he that regards
reproof, shall honor choose.
19 Desire accomplished is most sweet
unto the soul and heart,
^ut foolish men abhor always
from ill for to depart.
20 He that with wise men walks, shall
be surely wise anon,
^ut a companion of the fools
shall be destroyed and gone.
21 Much ill does sinners still pursue,
but to the righteous sort
^ood at all times surely shall be
repaid to their comfort.
22 A good man an inheritance
to his children does leave,
But sinners wealth is laid up for
all those that justly live.
23 Much food assuredly is in
the tillage of the poor,
But there is that destroyed is
for want of judgment sure.
24 He that does spare his rod, does hate
his son, that seems most dear,
But he that loves, him betimes
to smite will not forbear.
25 The righteous eats, and satisfied,
his soul does know no scant,
But of the wicked men at last
the belly sure shall want.
Chap. 14.
EAch woman wise does build her house
right wisely she commands,
But who is foolish does pluck it down
even with her own two hands.
2 He that walks in his uprightness
fears God and so is wise,
But he that in his ways perverse
is, does him still despise.
In the mouth of the foolish is
a scourge and rod of pride;
^ut wise men's lips shall them preserve,
so that they shall not slide.
Where Oxen not remain to work
the crib is clean at length,
^ut much increase always abounds
even by the Oxes strength.
A faithful Witness fearing God
he will be loath to lie;
^ut a witness perverse and false
a liar still will be.
Scorners seek wisdom, but to them
God does it not reveal,
^ut knowledge easy is to him
that understands well.
Go quickly from the presence of
a fool, thee from him save,
^hen of knowledge in him the lips
thou do not well perceive.
The wisdom of the prudent is
to understand his way,
^ut of vain fools the folly great
deceit is every day.
Fools in their rage do make a mock
at sin, as at a sport,
But there among the righteous all
is favor of each sort.
10 Man's heart knows his own bitterness,
which does him most annoy,
A stranger also not at all
does meddle with his joy.
11 Their house shall sure be overthrown
who wickedness fulfill,
But the upright man's dwelling place
shall bud and flourish still.
12 There is a way which seems right
to man, but in great wrath
The end thereof are unto him
the fearful ways of death.
13 In laughter often the heart is filled
with sorrow and distress,
And last, the end of all that mirth
is grief and heaviness.
14 The back-slider in heart shall be
even filled with his own ways,
A good man shall be from himself
contented all his days.
15 The simple every word believes
that vain men to him tell,
But he that is a prudent man
looks to his going well.
16 A wise man fears, and from all ill
does carefully depart:
^ut the mad fool does rage, and is
most confident in heart.
17 He that is soon to anger moved
does deal most foolishly,
and a man of devices bad
he hated still shall be.
18 The simple in his foolish ways
inherit folly shall;
^ut these that prudent are in heart
are crowned with knowledge all.
19 The ill in heart before the good
are forced to bow the knee;
and wicked men even at the gates
of righteous crouch we see.
20 The poor even of his neighbor near
is surely hated much,
But many friends do still resort
about him that is rich.
21 Het that his neighbor does despise,
a sinner great must be:
But he that mercy on the poor
has, happy sure is he.
22 These that devise ill and mischief
do they not err unwise?
But both mercy and truth shall be
to them that good devise.
23 In labor all and diligence
there profit is in end,
But the vain talk of idle lips
to penury does tend.
24 The wise men's crowns their riches is,
which them do much adorn,
But the great foolishness of fools
declares them all forlorn.
25 A witness true delivers souls
from great peplexities,
But who in heart a witenesse is
deceitful, speaks lies.
26 In the fear of the mighty Lord
is a strong confidence,
His children all shall have a place
in danger for defense.
27 Of life a fountain surely is
the Lords fear in the heart,
From the most cruel snares of death
in wisdom to depart.
28 A numbrous people does right well
the Kings honor advance,
But in the want of people is
destruction to the Prince.
29 He that is slow to wrath he is
of understanding great
^ut he high folly does exalt
that hasty is of sprit.
30 A heart that is sound from fraud and guile
the life is of the flesh,
^ut envy is the rottenness
of bones that are not fresh,
31 He that the poor man does oppress,
his maker he most sure
^eprocheth, but who honors him
has mercy on the poor.
32 The wicked in his wickedness
is driven away by wrath,
^ut he that is a righteous man
strong hope has in his death.
33 Wisdom rests in the heart of him
that does well understand,
^ut what is in the midst of fools
is known to all the land.
34 A nation by its righteousness
exalted is with fame,
^ut sin is a most vile reproach
to any peoples name.
35 The Kings favor is great indeed
for servants that are wise,
But against him that causes shame
in wrath he shall arise.
Chap. 15.
AN answer soft with wisdom great
fierce wrath does turn away,
But grievous words that give offense
stir anger up always.
2 The good tongue of the wise man still
does knowledge use aright,
But the mouth of fools foolishness
powers out with all their might.
3 The eyes of the Almighty Lord
are sure in every place
Beholding ill, and als the good
for blessing or disgrace.
4 A tree of life sure is the tongue
that wholesome words does teach,
But wickedness that is therein
is in the sprit a breach.
5 A fool his fathers teaching does
most foolishly despise,
But he that a reproof regards
most prudent is and wise.
6 In the house of the righteous man
much treasure is and store,
7 But in the wickeds revenewes
Is grief and trouble sore.
8 The Lord abhors the sacrifice
of men that wicked be,
But the prayer of upright men
is his delight surely.
9 The Lord who holy is and just
abhors the wickeds way,
But who go after righteousness
he loves them always.
10 Correction to him grievous is
that does the way forsake,
And he that foolish hates reproof
shall die with shame and lake.
11 Hell and destruction are before
the LORD, how much more then
Are patent to his eyes of fire
the hearts of mortal men?
12 A scorner one that him reproves
does hate and als despise.
He is so foolish that he will
not go unto the wise.
13 A glade heart makes the countenance
even cheerful more and more,
But by the sorrow of the heart
the sprit is broken sore.
14 The heart of him that understands,
does knowledge seek indeed;
But the mouth of vain fools also
on foolishness does feed.
15 The days of the afflicted are
evil, and of no request,
But he that's of a merry heart
has a continual feast.
16 Much better is a little with
the true fear of the Lord,
Then treasure great which is with grief,
and vexing trouble stord.
17 Much better is a dinner of
herbs joind with love and mirth,
Then is a stalled ox most fat,
and hatred still there with.
18 A wrathful man strife stirs up,
and lets not men get ease,
But he that is to anger slow
does wisely strife appease.
19 The ways of him that slothful is,
as hedge of thorns remain,
But the way of the righteous man
is made both smooth and plain.
20 A father is made wondrous glad
by a son that is wise,
But he that foolish is in heart
his mother does despise.
21 To him that without wisdom is
great folly is his joy,
But uprightly he walks who wise
his wits does well employ.
22 Great purposes do fail when they
good counsel are without,
But stablish'd they by numbers are
of Counselors about.
23 By th'answer of his mouth a man
has joy well understood:
A spoken word in season due
sure is exceeding good.
24 The way of life is high above
to him that wisdom has,
That so he may right speedily
depart from hell beneath.
25 The proud man's house God will destroy
that it may not endure,
But of widows the border he
establish will most sure.
26 The Lord abhors the thoughts of these
that constant are in ill,
But the words of the pure in heart
are words most pleasant still.
That man his own soul troubles much
that greedy is of gain,
But he that does hate bribes and gifts
shall sure alive remain.
28 The righteous heart does study still
to answer every hour,
But the mouth of the wicked sort
still ill things out does power.
29 Unto all such that wicked are
the Lord will not come near,
But of all these that righteous be,
the prayer he well does hear.
30 The light of the eyes does still rejoice
the heart, and it comfort,
And als the bones are all made fat,
even with a good report.
31 The ear that the reproof of life,
does hear well and obey,
Delights much for to abide
among the wise always.
32 He that instruction does refuse,
his own soul does despise,
But he that humbly hears reproof
gets understanding wise.
33 Gods fear is the instruction good
of wisdom most surely,
Before the time that honor come
is true humility.
Chap. 16.
THe preparation of the heart
in man both night and day,
and als the answer of the tongue
is from the Lord always.
2 All the ways of a carnal man
in his own eyes are clean,
^ut God does weigh the sprits which are
of him most clearly seen.
3 Unto the Lord commit thy works,
that they may well endure:
and he the thoughts shall of thine heart
establish still most sure.
4 The Lord most wisely for himself
things of all sort has made,
^^st a for the day of great distress
the wicked and the bad.
5 The Lord abhors the proud in heart,
what ever he think or say:
though hand join hand, unpunished
he shall not be always.
6 By Mercy and Truth wickedness
is purged from the heart;
And by the true fear of the Lord
men from all ill depart.
7 When a man's ways reformed well
the mighty Lord does please,
He makes even his enemies all
to be with him at peace.
8 A little thing with righteousness
is better in Gods sight,
Then revenewes both great and large
obtained against all right.
9 The heart of man that prudent is
his way may well devise,
But all his steps directed are
by God both good and wise.
10 A divine sentence in the lips
of the King often is found,
His mouth well ruled transgresses not
in judgment good and sound.
11 A just weight, and the balance als
unto the Lord belong,
The weights all of the bag his work
are all the earth among.
12 Abomination unto Kings
to practice wickedness
It is; for stablish'd is the Throne
most sure by righteousness.
13 The righteous lips that shun all lies
of Kings are the delight.
and they do much respect and love
him that does speak aright.
14 The wrath of Kings most surely is
as messengers of death,
^t he that prudent is and wise
will pacify such wrath.
15 In light of the Kings countenance
life does always remain,
^s favor als is as a cloud
even of the latter rain.
16 Much better then the gold is it
to get wisdom divine,
and to get understanding then
the silver that is fine.
17 The high way of the upright is
from all ill to depart;
^t that wisely does keep his way,
preserves his soul and heart.
18 Pride got'h before destruction still
among both great and small,
and likewise does an hauty sprite
before a shameful fall.
19 Humble to be it better is
with these that lowly be,
Then to devide with lofty men
the richest spoil we see.
20 He that his matters wisely guides,
shall always find good speed,
And who so trusts in the Lord
he happy is indeed.
21 The wise in heart in all their ways,
most prudent call they will,
Likewise the sweetness of the lips
increases learning still.
22 A well of life unto the wife,
is wisdom most surely,
But of fools the instruction all
great folly semees to be.
23 Of the wise man the prudent heart
his mouth does wisely teach,
And makes learning of all sorts
unto his lips to reach.
24 Words pleasant are as honey combs
unto the soul most sweet,
And also to the bruised bones
for health they are most meet,
25 There is a way which unto man
seems right, but in Gods wrath
The end thereof which fearful is,
the ill ways are of death.
26 He that does labor, does it all
for him self for to have,
For his mouth in necessity
the same of him does crave.
27 A man ungodly in his ways
digs up ill with desire,
And in his lips set on mischief
there is a burning fire.
28 A man that has a froward heart
discord does sow and strife,
and whisperers do sep'rat soon
the cheifest friends in life,
29 A man that is given to violence,
his neighbor does entise,
and leads him into the way
of wicked and unwise.
30 He shuts his eyes things froward to
devise, a great trespass;
^e moves his lips with fraud and guile
and brings ill to pass.
31 The hoary head a fair crown is
of glory and riches,
it be well and wisely found
in ways of righteousness.
32 He that is to anger slow, excells
the mighty all among,
And he that rul's his speech him that
does take a city strong.
33 The lot is cast unto the lap,
as at peradventur,
But the disposing all thereof
is of the Lord most sure.
Chap. 17.
A Morsel dry much better is
and quietness of life,
Then houses full of sacrifice
with great debate and strife.
2 A wise servant shall over rule
a son that causes shame,
And shall inherit them among
who brethren are by name.
3 The fining pot for silver is
appointed by and by,
And furnace for the gold, but God
the hearts of men does try.
4 A wicked doer to falls lips
attentively gives head,
A liar als does give his ear
to naughty tongues indeed.
5 Who mocks the poor his maker does
reproach most shamefully,
^e punished sure shall be that is
glade at calamity.
Childrens children a blessed offspring,
of old men are the crown,
And fathers als of children are
the glory and renown.
7 Speech excellent becomes not
the men that foolish be,
Much less becomes it a Prince,
with lying lips to lie.
8 A gift in his eyes that it has
is as a precious stone,
Whethersoever it does turn
it prospreth well anon.
9 He that transgressions covreth close
most wisely seeks love,
But he that matters does repeat
does friendship soon remove,
10 Into a wise man a reproof
to teach him enters more
Then strips into a foolish man
in number to five score.
11 A wicked man in all his ways
rebellion seeks only,
Therefore against him shall be sent
men with great cruelty.
12 Let a Bear robbed of her whelps
a man in fury meet,
Much rather then a ramping fool
in his most rageing heat.
13 Who so rewards ill for good,
at last shall feel the smart:
For ill at any time shall not
once from his house depart.
14 Strife new begun is as when one
to water gives a way,
Therefore leave off contention all
before ye go astray.
15 He that the just man does condemn,
and wicked justify,
They both abomination great
are to the LORD surely.
16 A wealthy fool by all his baggs,
does surely hope in vain:
To get wisdom, since he has not
a heart it to attain.
17 A wise and worthy friend always,
does love most constantly,
And like wise a dear brother is
borne for adversity.
18 A man of understanding void
most rashly strikes hands,
and in the presence of his friends
goes into sureties bands.
19 He that does love debate and strife,
does love transgression;
And he that proud exalts his gate,
does seek destruction.
20 He that has a most froward heart,
does find no good at all,
And he that has a tongue perverse
into mischief does fall.
21 He that begets a fool, it does
unto his grief and smart,
The father als of furious fools
no joy has in his heart.
22 A merry heart does good always,
like medicine most sweet,
But all the bones are dried up
even by a broken sprite.
23 Out of the bosom craftily
a man profane in heart,
Does take a gift that he the ways
of judgment may pervert.
24 Wisdom is always him before
that understanding has,
But of a fool the eyes are in
the ends of all the earth,
25 A fool unto his father is
great grief and als distress,
And unto her that bare him he
is also bitterness.
26 To punish the just and upright,
it seems not good to be,
Nor yet to rashly Princes strike,
for right and equity.
27 He that has knowledge spares much
his words with wise intent,
And he that understanding has,
has a sprite excellent.
28 A fool when he does hold his peace
is counted wise by men,
When man is silent, he is thought
a man of knowledge then.
Chap. 18.
A Man who through desire to learn,
does set him self apart,
Does seek and intermedle with
wisdom with all his heart.
2 In understanding any way
a fool has no delight,
But that his heart discover may
it self in all men's sight.
3 Wheresoever the wicked come,
then comes contempt quickly;
And upon man's face comes reproach
with great ignominy.
4 The words of a man's mouth are as
deep waters every way,
And the wellspring of wisdom is
a flowing brook always.
5 It is not good the person of
the wicked to allow,
And that for in judgment corrupt,
good men to overthrow.
6 A vain fools lips enter into
contention great and small,
And his mouth full of naughty words,
for strokes does quickly call.
7 A fools mouth his destruction is,
his lips that can not spare
^o speak idly, are of his soul
a most deceitful snare.
8 Talebearers words are even as wounds,
and they down quickly go,
unto the bellies in most parts,
all filled with grief and woe.
9 He that lives slothful in his work,
not caring to come speed;
Is brother unto him that is
a waster great indeed.
10 A strong tower is the name of GOD,
both unto rich and poor:
The righteous man does run to it,
and is most safe and sure.
11 The rich man's wealth is his refuge,
and city of defense:
And as a wall in his conceit
which is void of all sense.
12 Before destruction come on man,
his heart is most hauty:
And also before honor come
is true humility.
13 He who before the matter heard
does quickly answer frame,
It is most certainly to him
both folly great and shame.
14 The sprite of courage will sustain
a man's infirmity,
But who is strong to bear a sprite,
that deeply wounded be?
15 The heart of him that prudent is
does understanding get;
And to seek knowledge of the wise,
the ear is always set.
16 The gift of man does make a room
for him in every place:
And him before great men does bring
without shame or disgrace.
17 He that in his own cause is first,
does seem most just to be,
^ut after him his neighbor comes
him searching narrowly.
18 The lot does cause contentions all
to cease in every heart;
^etweene the mighty of the earth
the portions it does part.
19 A city is more easy win,
then brethren in their jarres:
and their contentions are most like
the strongest castle bars.
20 The fruit of a man's mouth well shall
his belly satisfy,
and with the increase of his lips,
he shall well filled be.
21 In power of man's tongue always,
is death and life most sweet:
^^d they that love it with their heart,
the fruit thereof shall eat.
Who finds a wife, a good thing finds
even help and pleasant gain,
And of the mercy of the Lord
great favor does obtain.
23 The poor man in his want does use
entreaties most humbly,
But the churl rich in worldly wealth
does answer him roughly,
24 A man that friends has, must himself
unto them friendly show
Then any brother closer sticks
a friend that is fast and true.
Chap. 19.
THe poor is better that does walk
in his integrity,
Then he that is in lips perverse
and seems a fool to be.
2 That the soul without knowledge be
it is not good or meet,
And he does sin in many ways
that hastes with his feet.
3 The foolishness of vain proud man
perverteth all his way,
And his hard heart against the Lord
in rage does fret always.
4 By great wealth many friends are made
which helps in our smart.
But from his neighbor dear the poor
is always set apart.
5 A man that is a witness falls
shall not unpunished be,
And he also shall not escape
that vainly speaks a lie.
6 A Princes favor many will
most humbly still entreat,
And all men are a friend to him
that gifts often gives great.
7 The poor man's brethren hate him all,
much more go far away
^is friends; he them pursues with words
who wanting are always.
8 He that gets wisdom surely does
his own soul dearly love,
He that does understanding keep,
shall find good from above.
9 A false witness indeed shall not
unpunished be always,
And he that speaks lies most false
shall perish and decay,
10 Delight a vain and foolish man
beseems not at all;
Much less a servant rule to have
over Princes great or small.
11 The great discretion of a man,
his anger does delay:
And a transgression to pass over
his glory is always.
12 As roaring of a Lion fierce,
so a Kings wrath does pass:
But his favor most gracious is,
as dew upon the grass.
13 To his father a foolish son
is great calamity;
And the contentions of a wife,
do drop continually.
14 House richesse are the inheritance
which fathers do afford,
But he that has a prudent wife,
her has even from the LORD.
15 Men into slumber and deep sleep
are cast by slothfulness:
A soul that is idle suffer shall
both hunger and distress.
16 He that keeps the commandment well,
his own soul keeps safely,
But he that does despise his ways,
undoubtedly shall die.
17 He that has pity on the poor,
unto the Lord does lend:
and that which he has given will he
in payment to him send.
8 While there is any hope thy son
even chasten by and by.
^et not thy soul him spare at all
though he aloud do cry.
9 A man of great wrath punishment
shall suffer and sustain,
^or if thou him deliver, yet
thou must do it again.
10 Hear wise counsel, and also good
instruction soon receive,
that so thou in thy latter end
may always wisdom have.
11 In a man's heart that is profound
devices many be,
^everthelesse the counsel of
the Lord shall stand most free.
12 Of a man worthy the desire
his kindness is most sure;
^^d better then a liar is
a man though he be poor.
The fear of the Almighty LORD
to life does always tend,
^e that it has is satisfied,
no ill shall him offend.
24 In his bosom a slothful man
does hide his hand in vain,
And will not so much as it bring
unto his mouth again.
25 A scorner smite, and simple men
will sure beware therefore:
Also reprove the wise, and he
will be wise more and more.
26 He that does wast his father and
his mother chase away,
Is a vile son that causes shame,
and brings reproach always.
27 My son I counsel thee to cease
th'instruction for to hear,
That causes men always to err,
from words of knowledge dear.
28 A wicked witness judgment all
does scorn both less and more,
And the mouth of the wicked does
iniquity devore.
29 Judgments severe for scorners are
prepared by Gods hand,
And sore stripes for the back of fools,
that nothing understand.
Chap. 20.
WIne is a mocker and strong drink
is raging great always,
and whosoever is thereby
deceived is not wise.
As roaring of a Lion so
is of a King the fear,
Who him provokes to wrath does sin
against his own soul most dear.
It for a man an honor is
to cease from strife quickly,
^ut every fool of knowledge void,
therewith will meddling be.
The sluggard will not plow because
of cold showers that down fall,
therefore in harv'st time shall he beg,
and have nothing at all.
Counsel is in the heart of man,
like waters deep surely,
^ut one of understanding good
will draw it out quickly.
Of men the most part will proclaim
each one his own goodness,
^ut who can by his wisdom find,
^ a man of faithfulness?
7 The man that is just wisely walks
in his integrity,
His children dear are after him
a blessed posterity.
8 A King that sits in the throne
of judgment just always,
With his own eyes all wickedness
does scatter clean away.
9 Who can in truth affirm and say,
my heart I have made sure,
Clean from all sort of wickedness,
I from my sin am pure?
10 Weights diverse and such measure als
though they much gain afford,
They both abomination are
alike unto the Lord.
11 Even a young child is known by that
which he does in men's sight.
Whether his work be good and pure
and whether it be right.
12 The ear that is inclined to hear,
and als the seeing eye,
The Lord has even made both of them
by his hand for to be.
13 Love not long sleep lest that thou come
to poverty with speed,
Thine eyes open and thou shall be
well satisfied with bread.
14 The merchand says it is naught it is naught
when he desires to buy,
But when from thence he is away
he boasts by and by.
15 Of Gold and Rubies men esteem,
but the lips that can say
The words of wisdom, are indeed
a jewel rare always.
16 His garment take that surety is
even for a strangers sake,
And of him for a woman strange
see that a pledge thou take.
17 Bread that is gotten be deceit
unto a man seems sweet,
But afterward his mouth shall be
with gravel filled for meat.
18 Each purpose well established is
by counsel good and wise,
And when thou mindest to make war
do it with good advice.
19 Who bearing false tales goth about,
men's secrets with great slips
Reveals; therefore haunt him not
that flattreth with his lips.
20 Who so his father curses or
his mother dear, most sure
His lamp shall be put out anon
in darkness most abscure.
21 An heritage may at the first
be gotten hastily,
But out of doubt the end thereof
shall no way blessed be.
22 Say not when thou provoked art
ill recompense I will,
But wait on God and he shall sure
thee save from danger still.
23 Weights diverse are unto the Lord
abomination all,
And a false balance is not good
with either great or small.
24 Man's goings all are of the Lord,
who ordreth them always,
How can a man then understand
to walk in the good way?
25 It is a snare to him that does
the holy things devore,
And after his vows for to make
inquiry strick therefore,
26 A King that cunning is and wise,
can ill men scatter well.
and for a just judgment also
bring over them the wheel.
27 The sprit of man Gods candle is
which shines in our hearts,
(...) of the belly searches still
even all the inward parts.
28 Mercy and truth most safely do
preserve the King alone,
^y mercy to his subjects all
upholden is his Throne.
29 Of young strong men the glory great
is their great strength indeed;
and of old men the beauty is
the gray and hoary head.
30 The bluenesse of a wound surely,
the ill does cleanse away,
(...) of the belly the inward parts
stripes still do purg always.
Chap. 21.
THe Kings heart in the hand of GOD
is as a river still,
^le does it turn by his great might
whethersoever he will.
The way or work of every man
in his own eyes is right.
But the LORD pondreth well the hearts,
by his wisdom and might.
3 To do judgment with upright heart,
and als to do justice,
Is more acceptable unto
the LORD then sacrifice.
4 A haughty look disdaining men,
a proud and lofty heart,
And plowing of the wicked men
is sin in every part.
5 All the thoughts of the diligent,
tend unto plenteousnesse,
But every one that hasty is
to want and to distress.
6 The getting of great treasures by
great lies, a vanity
Is tossed to and fro of them
that seek death foolishly.
7 The robbery of all wicked men
shall quickly them destroy,
Because judgment aright to do,
they do refuse always.
8 The way of men it froward is
and strange in good men's sight.
But as for the man pure in heart,
his work is good and right,
9 Of the house top in corners high
it better is to dwell,
^hen in a wide house with a wife,
whose words are brawlings fell.
10 The wicked man desires ill
which still is in his mind,
No favor in his cruel eyes
his neighbors poor can find.
11 When punished is the scorner vain,
the simple does perceive;
And when the wise instructed is
he knowledge does receive.
12 The righteous man the wickeds house
considreth and does know,
But GOD the wicked for their sin
does quickly overthrow.
13 Who at the poor man's cry does stop
his ears with heart that is hard,
He also in his grief shall cry,
but shall not then be heard.
14 A gift that is in secret given
does anger pacify,
And in the bosom a reward
makes wrath away to fly.
15 It is a great joy to the just,
judgment to do justly,
But great destruction for them is
that work iniquity,
16 The man that wandreth from the way
of understanding plain,
Shall in the congregation of
the dead always remain,
17 He that too much his pleasures loves
shall certainly be poor,
And he that loves wine and oil
shall not long rich endure.
18 A ransom for the righteous man
the wicked man shall be,
And the transgressour for the man
that walks uprightlie.
19 A man may in the wilderness
with more contentment dwell,
Then with a woman hauty that
is most contentious still,
20 The wise man's house rich treasure has
and oil abundantly,
But a man of a foolish heart
it spends up needlessly.
21 He that so after righteousness
and mercy with his mind
Does follow, righteousness and life
and honor als shall find.
22 A wise man does the city scale
of men of great renown,
And the strong confidence thereof
unto the ground casts down.
23 Who so his mouth and als his tongue
can wisely keep from strife,
That man his soul does safely keep
from troubles in his life.
24 Who proud in sprit does deal in wrath
shall hear these words of shame,
A proud and haughty scorner als
is his most shameful name.
25 The slothful man's desire will not
him surely fail to kill,
For his hands full of idleness
refuse to labor still.
26 He all the day long greedily
does covet in his heart,
But he that is a righteous man
spares not, in any part.
27 Of wicked men the sacrifice
abhorred still we find,
How much more when he brings it
with a most wicked mind.
28 A false witness that loves lies
shall perish certainly.
But he that hears well what is said,
does speak most constantly.
29 A wicked man hardneth his face
do what ye can or say,
But as for the upright in heart,
he does direct his way.
30 There is no wisdom among men,
nor counsel great or small,
Nor knowledge which against the LORD,
can well prevail at all.
31 Against the day of Battle the
horse is prepared with speed,
But safety from such dangers great
is of the LORD indeed.
Chap. 22.
A Good name rather is to be
chosen then manifold
Riches, and loving favor more
then silver and fine gold.
2 The rich and poor together meet
for so it does befall,
But the Almighty LORD, he is
the maker of them all.
3 A prudent man the ill forsees,
and hides himself wisely,
^ut simple men pass on and are
sore punished by and by.
By humbleness and also by
the GOD of heavens true fear,
^re riches great and honor both,
and life which is most dear.
In the way of the froward man,
are thorns and snares laid deep;
He surely shall be far from them
that does his soul well keep.
6 Train up a child in the way that
he should go with his heart,
And when he is old, he surely will
not from it once depart.
7 The rich high over the poor does rule
who must him still attend,
And he that borrowes fervant is
unto him that does lend.
8 He that iniquity does sow,
shall reap but vanity;
And the rod of his anger shall
at last fail certainly.
9 He that has an eye bountiful,
shall blessed be most sure;
For he abundantly does give
his bread unto the poor.
10 Cast out quickly the scorner, and
contention shall be gone,
Yea, bitter strife and als reproach
shall surely cease anon.
11 He that the pureness of the heart,
does love with heart and mind,
For the grace of his lips most sure,
the King shall be his friend.
12 The eyes of GOD do well preserve
all these that do him know
But of transgressors he the words,
does always overthrow.
13 The slothful man says in this way,
in words that are but vain,
Without there is a Lion I
in the streets shall be slain.
14 The mouth of a strange woman is
as a deep pit or gin,
The man abhorred of the LORD,
shall surely fall therein.
15 Unto a childs heart foolishness
is fastly bound always,
But the rod of correction soon,
shall drive it far away.
16 He that the poor molests to be
even rich incontinent,
And he that gives to the rich,
shall surely come to want.
17 Bow down thine ear and hear the words
of these that speak wisely,
And unto knowledge all thine heart,
see that thou well apply.
18 For it is a most pleasant thing,
if thou them keep in thee,
They sure withal even in thy lips
shall right well fitted be.
19 That thy trust may be in the LORD,
I have to thee this day.
Made clearly known and manifest
even unto thee I say.
20 Have I not written unto thee,
things that be excellent,
In counsels and knowledge also,
and that with good intent?
21 That of the words of truth I might
thee make the certainty
To know, that thou might answer well
to them that send to thee.
22 Rob not the poor because he is
a man of poor estate,
Nor yet him that is afflicted sore
oppress thou in the gate.
23 For the LORD GOD will surely plead
their cause, his wrath shall boil
The foul of those that spoiled them,
he will not fail to spoil.
24 With angry men no friendship make
which may procure thy woe,
And likewise with a furious man
at all thou shall not go.
25 Lest thou incline thine heart to learn
his ways that are not fair,
And so by walking in his ways
get to thy soul a snare.
26 Be thou not one of them that hands
strike unadvisedly;
Or of them that not taking heed
for debt even sureties be.
27 If thou have nothing for to pay
through thy great poverty,
Why should he take away by force
thy bed from under thee?
28 The land mark that most ancient is
see thou it not remove,
Which thy fathers in former times
have set for peace and love.
29 See thou a man that is diligent,
before Kings he most sure
shall stand; he shall not stand before
men base mean and obscure.
Chap. 23.
When thou before a ruler high
do sit down for to eat,
^ee that thou with attention still
consider well his meat.
Take good head, yea unto thy throat
fail not to put a knife,
^f thou be given to appetite
for base things of this life.
Be not desirous thou of his
sweet dainties for to eat,
^or whatsoever they seem to be
they are deceitful meat.
4 With carking care and painful toil
not labor rich to be,
From thine own wisdom that is vain
see that thou cease quickly.
5 Set not thine eyes on riches, which
them make wings certainly,
They as an Eagle flee away
most swift even to the sky.
6 The bread of him that niggard is
see that thou do not eat,
Beware that thou in any way
desire his dainty meat.
7 For he is as he thinks in heart,
both eat and drink, says he,
But yet for all his pleasant words
his heart is not with thee.
8 The morsels which with great delight
before him thou did eat,
Thou shall them vomit up, and so
shall loose thy words most sweet.
9 See that thou speak not in the ears
of fools that are not wise,
For they the wisdom of thy words
will certainly despise.
10 See thou the old land mark set down,
remove not more or less,
And enter not into the fields
of the poor fatherless.
11 For he that their Redeemer is
in power is mighty,
He who is a most righteous Judge,
shall plead their cause with thee.
12 Thine heart unto instruction good,
see that thou well apply,
And als thine ears unto the words
of knowledge by and by.
13 From the young child correction wise
withhold not less or more,
^or if thou beatst him with the rod
he will not die therefore.
14 Thou shall him beat even with the rod,
though he it cruel call,
And so his soul deliver shall
even from the lowest hell.
15 My son most dear if so thine heart
in all thy life be wise,
My heart even mine, then always shall
most merrily rejoice.
16 Yea more my inward reins shall still
rejoice with all their might,
When thy lips well advised shall
speak such things as be right.
17 Let not thine heart at any time,
the sinners great envy,
^ut all the day long strive to be
in Gods fear by and by.
18 For surely the prosperity
of wicked men shall end,
But thy hope shall not be cut off
what ever thou intend.
19 My son whom I desire to teach,
hear thou without delay,
Be wise in every thing and guide
thine heart in the right way.
20 Amongst wine-bibbers be thou not
thy self for to refresh,
Nor yet among the riotous men,
that eaters be of flesh.
21 For drunkards and the gluttons shall
sure come to poverty,
And drowsiness shall cloth at last,
a man with rags surely.
22 Unto thy father humbly still
well hearken and behold,
And not despise thy mother dear,
when she is weak and old.
23 See thou buy truth, but sell it not
as ignorant and rude,
And wisdom and instruction als,
and understanding good.
24 The father of the righteous man
shall greatly joy receive,
And he that a wise child begets
of him much joy shall have.
25 Thy father and thy mother shall
be glad with heart and voice,
And she that bare thee in her womb
shall heartily rejoice.
26 My dear son give to me thine heart,
that I may it preserve,
and let thine eyes attentively
my works and ways observe.
27 For a vile whore most surely is
a deep ditch of distress,
and a strange woman is also
a pit without regresse.
28 She also crafty lies in wait,
as one does for a prey,
and she transgressors among men
increases every day.
29 Who has woe, sorrow, strife, and who
has babbling wanting ease?
Who causeless wounds has, and who als
has redness of the eyes?
30 They that long tarry at the wine,
and so their time do spend,
^hey that mixed wine still seek and of
their drinking make no end.
31 Upon the wine of color red
beware to set thy sight.
When it gives color in the cup
and moves it self aright.
32 It at the last even serpent like
most venomous does bite,
And stingeth like a cokatrice
the fruit of wines delight.
33 Thine eyes strange women shall behold
which are from good averse,
And thine heart thus deceived shall
things utter most perverse.
34 Yea thou shall be as he that lies
in the midst of the sea,
Or as he that lies on the top
of masts that too strong be
35 They have me stricken shall thou say
and yet I was not sick;
They beat me but I felt it not,
I it again will seek.
Chap. 24.
AGainst ill men see thou be not
envious any way,
Nor yet desire to be with them
by night or yet by day
2 For their hearts only study still
destruction sore and grief,
And their lips full of fraud and guile,
talk only of mischeef.
3 Through wisdom great and excellent
an house is builded sure,
By understanding it is well
established to endure.
4 And also by great knowledge shall
the chambers more or less
Be filled with all precious and
the most pleasant richesse.
5 A wise man in his strength is strong,
yea, as is seen at length,
A man that is of knowledge great
increases still his strength.
6 For thou by counsel wise shall make
thy war; also in the
Great number of good counselors
there always safety be.
7 Too high is wisdom for a fool
who does all wisdom hate,
He senseless opneth not his mouth
to speak words in the gate.
8 He that devises to do ill,
and to vex men with greef,
Shall surely be called to his shame
a person of mischeef.
9 The least thought of all foolishness
is sin, and also when
A man a scorner vain becomes
he is abhorred of men.
10 If thou a man faint in the day
of great adversity,
Thy strength and thy courage also
seem very small to be.
11 If to deliver men from death,
thou always do disdain,
And careless be for those that are
even ready to be slain.
22 If thou do say we know it not
he that does weigh the heart,
Does he not it consider well
and that in every part?
And he that keeps thy soul does he
not know it certainly?
Shall he not render to each man
as his deservings be?
13 Because that honey fine is good,
see that of it thou eat,
And also of the honey comb
which to thy taste is sweet.
14 So shall the knowledge excellent
of knowledge ever be,
Unto thy soul most precious all
when it is found by thee
Then there shall be most certainly
a rich reward that day,
^o that thy expectation shall
not be cut off always.
15 Against the righteous lay not wait,
O man void of all grace,
When thou have power even in thine hand
spoil not his resting place.
16 For a just man seven times does fall
and rises up again,
But wicked men shall in mischeef
both fall and there remain.
17 Rejoice not when thine enemy fierce
in misery does fall,
And let not when he stumbleth down
thine heart be glad at all.
18 Lest that it sore displease the Lord,
when he such things shall see,
And from him turn away his wrath
to bring it upon thee.
19 Because ill men advanced are,
thy self in no way fret,
Nor yet be thou envious at
the wicked man's estate.
20 For to the ill man no reward
there shall be round about,
The candle of the wicked shall
in darkness be put out.
21 My son the Lord fear and the King
both mighty in revenge,
And see thou meddle not with them
that still are given to change.
22 For their fearful calamity,
most suddenly shall rise,
And who the ruin of them both
to know shall be so wise?
23 These things also belong unto
the wise well understood,
To have respect of persons it
in judgment is not good.
24 He that unto the wicked says,
thou art a righteous seed,
The people him and nations shall
curse and abhor indeed.
25 But unto them that him rebuke,
shall surely be delight,
And a good blessing als shall come
upon them day and night.
26 Each good man sure shall kiss the lips
with honor and respect,
Of him that answers wisely can
aright in words direct.
27 Thy work without prepare and make
it for thee in the field,
And afterward when that is done,
thine house right wisely build.
28 Against thy neighbor without cause
see thou no witness be,
With lying lips let none at all
deceived be by thee.
29 Say not I will do unto him
as he has done to me,
Surely according to his work,
it shall now rendered be.
30 By the bare field of slothful men,
I with attention went,
And by the vineyard of the man
that is void of judgment.
31 And lo, all was grown over with thorns
and nettles had the face
Thereof cov'red; and the stone wall
was down in every place.
32 Then I saw and considered well
it as I did perceive
And did look on it; and also
instruction did receive.
33 A little sleep and slumber als
the sluggard well can say,
A little folding of the hands
to sleep while it is day.
So thy most fearful poverty
shall come do what thou can
As one that travails, and thy want
as does an armed man.
Chap. 25.
THese also are the Proverbs of
wise Solomon surely,
Which good King Hezekiahs men
did copy carefully.
2 It is the glory of the Lord
things secret to conceal,
But a Kings honor is to search
and matters to reveal.
3 Great is the deepnesse of the earth,
and so the height of heaven,
The heart profound of Kings is als
unsearchable to men.
4 From the fine silver take away
the dirtie dross and rude,
And for the finer shall come forth
a vessel pure and good.
5 From before the King take away
men given to wickedness,
And most surely his throne shall be
stablish'd in righteousness,
6 In a Kings presence put not forth
thy self most foolishly,
And likewise stand not in the place
of these that great men be.
7 For it is better that men say
come to a higher place,
Then in the Princes presence to
be put down with disgrace.
8 Go not forth hastily to strive.
lest in the end with blame
Thou know not what to do when thee
thy neighbor puts to shame.
9 With thy neighbor debate thy cause,
as fitting is and meet,
And unto any other man
reveal not a secret,
10 Lest he that hears it thee put
to shame without delay,
And so thy shameful infamy
turn not from thee away.
11 In season good a speech discreet
that spoken is fitly,
Like apples is of gold that in
pictures of silver be.
12 As gold earerings and ornaments
of gold most fine and dear,
Even so is a reprover wise
on an obedient ear.
13 As cold snow in the heat of harv'st
is to the reapers flesh,
So does a faithful messenger
his masters soul refresh.
14 Who of a false gift so does boast
as one both proud and vain,
Is like unto the clouds and wind
that void are of all rain.
15 By long forbearing is a Prince
persuaded, and anon,
A soft tongue als with meekness great
does wisely break the bone.
16 Have thou found honey? eat enough
but let the rest remain,
Lest thou therewith be filled much
and vomit it again.
17 See that thou from thy neighbors house
withdraw thy foot swiftly,
Lest of thee weary at the last
he hate thy company.
18 A man that bears witness false
against his neighbor dear,
Is like a hammer and a sword,
an arrow, or a spear.
19 To trust in trouble in a man,
not faithful in each point,
^s like a broken tooth in jaw,
and a foot out of joint*
20 As one in cold takes cloths away,
as vinegar among
The nitre; so is he that sings
to heavy hearts a song.
21 If hungry be thy fo, him give
of thy bread for to eat,
And give him if he thirsty be
for drink water most sweet.
22 For thou upon his head shall heap
the coals of burning fire,
And the Lord God shall thee reward,
even to thine hearts desire.
23 The north wind with a mighty gale
does drive away the rain,
So does an angry countenance
backbiting tongues restrain.
24 It better is in corners high
of house tops to abide,
Then with a woman brawling still
in a house that is wide.
25 As cold waters do much refresh
a thirsty soul, so are
Good news which unto men always,
come from a country far.
26 A righteous man that falls down
before the wicked train,
Is as a corrupt filthy spring,
and a troubled fountain.
27 It is not good for health of men
much honey for to eat,
So als their own glory to search,
for men it is not meet.
28 He that is weak and has not over
his own sprite rule at all,
Is like a city broken down
that is without a wall.
Chap. 26.
AS snow in summer, and as rain
is in a harvest day,
So great honor for foolish men,
not seemly is always.
2 As birds and swallows fly away
but not return again,
So the curse causeless shall not come
on such for to remain.
3 A whip for horse, and for the ass
which is both slow and slack
(...) bridle, and a rod prepared
is still for the fools back.
According to his folly not
answer a fool at all,
^st thou also be like to him
and so in folly fall.
According to the folly of
fools answer thou likewise,
^st he puffed up in his conceit
him self think to be wise.
He that a message to direct
by a fools hand does think,
like one that cuts off his feet,
and so does damage drink.
The men that in their legs are lame,
can not go equally,
^ is a parable in the mouth
of such as foolish be.
As he that not considering well,
a stone binds in a sling,
^ is he that gives honor to
a fool in any thing.
As thorns go up in drunkards hands,
which cannot them discern,
^ is a parable in the mouth
of fools that can not learn.
10 The great God that all things has formed
by his hand that is hie,
Does both reward the fool and these
that great transgressors be.
11 As a vile dog returns to
his vomit filthily,
So to his folly does a fool
return most speedily.
12 See thou a man in his conceit,
that seems wise to be?
There is more hope in any fool
then in him is to see.
13 A sloathfull man that will not work,
says there is in the way
A Lion, yea in all the streets
a Lion is always.
14 As does the door upon his hings
now turning here, now there,
So does the sloathfull on his bed
which does his means empaire.
15 The sloathfull in his bosom hides
his hand; it with great pain
Does grieve him much even from his mouth
to bring it back again.
16 The sluggard in his own conceit
does wiser seem to be,
Then seven men that can render well
a reason most wisely.
17 The passer by that medleth with
strife which does not belong
^o him, is like one that does take
a dog by the ears long.
18 As a mad man in fury great
who sure no judgment has,
Who casts with great violence
firebrands with arrows death.
19 So is the man that by deceit
his neighbor does extort,
and after says, without remorse
am I not but in sport?
20 Where no wood is, the burning fire
there goes out quickly,
(...) where no talebearer there is
the strife does cease to be.
21 As coals are unto burning coals
and wood to flamming fire,
(...) als to kindle strife it is
a wicked man's desire.
22 The words of a talebearer are
as wounds, and they do go
^own in the bellys inner parts,
with misery and woe.
23 The burning lips and wicked heart,
how ever it be most closse,
Are like a potsheard which is well
covered with silver dross.
24 The man dissembleth with his lips
that does another hate,
Within him as a treasure he
does still lay up deceit.
95 Believe him not at all when he
dissembling speaks fair,
For seven abominations then
within his heart there are.
26 Whose hatred always by deceit,
is covered more and more,
His wickedness shall sure be showed
the assembly all before.
27 Who so by fraud does dig a pit,
shall surely fall therein,
And he that als does roll a stone,
it will return on him.
28 A lying tongue hates all these that
afflicted are thereby,
And a mouth flattering works sure
a ruin by and by.
Chap. 27.
^N what shall on the morrow be
boast not in any way,
^or what changes thou do not know
may fall out in a day.
2 Let mouths of other men thee praise,
but let thine silent be,
^et strangers speak, but let thy lips
be closely keept by thee.
3 A stone is heavy, and sand
is weighty like the lead,
^ut a vain fools wrath then them both
more heavy is indeed.
4 Wrath is most cruel, anger als
brings courage by and by,
^ut who is able by his strength
to stand before envy?
5 Rebuke open has power great,
men's sins for to remove,
Though it seem harsh, it better is
then any secret love.
6 The wounds all of a worthy friend,
most faithful are always,
^ut kisses of an enemy are
deceitful every way.
7 The soul that is full does loath at last
the honey comb to eat,
But to the soul that hungry is
a bitter thing is sweet.
8 As a bird foolish from her nest
does wander a great space,
So is a man that carelessly
does wander from his place.
9 Perfume and ointment does rejoice
the heart and cheer the mind,
So does the hearty counsel from
the sweetness of a friend.
10 Thine own friend and thy fathers friend
forsake thou not also,
In trouble to thy brothers house
see that thou cease to go.
For better is a neighbor near,
in the time of our smart,
Then he that is a brother called,
but is far off in heart.
11 My son, be wise and make my heart
most joyful for to be,
That I may have to answer him
that proud reprocheth me.
12 A prudent man forseeing ill,
him hids till it be past,
^^t these that simple be pass on
and punished are at last.
13 Take his garment that strangers for
is bold to be surtie,
and take a pledge of him that for
a strange woman will be.
14 He that flattring with a loud voice
his friend does early bless,
(...) shall be by a prudent man
even counted for a curse.
15 On all sides water dropping in
a very rainie day,
(...) a contentious woman are
alike in every way.
16 Who hides her the wind also
from blowing hide he may,
^^d the ointment of his right hand
which does it self bewray.
17 As iron sharpneth at all times
the iron or the steel,
(...) kind man the countenance
of his friend sharpneth well.
18 Who so the fig tree keeps fast
he on its fruit shall feed,
^he that on his master waits
shall honored be indeed.
19 As in the water clear always
face answreth unto face,
So the heart of a man to man
in every time and place.
20 Hell and destruction are not full
but still do cry to bring;
So man's eyes are not satisfied
with any worldly thing.
21 As fining pots for silver are
and furnace for the gold,
So is a man unto his praise
as men may well behold.
22 Though in a mortar thou a fool
among wheat should bray,
Yet will not his great foolishness
from him depart away.
23 Be diligent to know right well
of all thy flocks the state,
And to thy herds most carefully
both early look and late.
24 For riches though greatly desired
are not for ever sure,
To every generation does
the crown always endure.
25 The hay appears and also
the tender grass so fair,
^^d herbs upon the mountains high
are gathred all with care.
6 The wool of lambs are for thy clothes
which is a good device,
^^d the goats skipping up and down
are of thy field the price.
7 And thou shall have goats milk enough
even for thy daily food,
^or thy household, and for the life
even of thy maidens good.
Chap. 28.
THE wicked when no man pursues
does flee to a strong hold,
But all the men that righteous are,
are as a Lion bold.
2 For the transgression of a land,
men many Princes see;
But by wise men the state thereof
shall sure prolonged be.
3 A poor man that most greedy does
oppress the poor and small,
^s like unto a sweeping rain
which leaves no food at all.
4 These that forsake the law do praise
and wicked men commend,
But such as careful keep the law
with them always contend.
5 Evil men do not perceive at all
the judgment of GODS hand,
But they that daily seek the LORD,
do all things understand.
6 Much better is the poor man that
walks in his uprightness,
Then he that is perverse in heart
though he swim in richesse.
7 Who well does keep the Law of GOD,
is a son that is wise,
But he that likes the riotous men
his father does despise.
8 He that his substance does increase
by gain unjust, most sure
He shall it gather for the man
that pity will the poor.
9 He that from GODS Law turns his ear
and will not hear gladly,
His prayer abomination vile
unto the LORD shall be.
10 Who makes the righteous go astray,
he shall with great distress
Fall in his own pit, but the just
shall good things still possess.
11 The rich man in his own conceit
is wise without all doubt,
^ut the poor that well understands
does clearly search him out.
12 When righteous men with heart rejoice,
great glory is to see,
^ut when ill men to honor rise,
then good men hidden be.
13 He that cov'reth his sins, shall not
well prosper in his days,
^ut who shall them with heart forsake.
shall mercy have always.
14 Most happy he that fears always,
GOD shall send him relief,
^ut he that hardneth still his heart
shall fall into mischief.
15 As is a roaring Lion, and
as is a ranging Bear,
(...) over a poor people does
a ruler ill appear.
16 A Prince that wants wit, is an
oppressor in his ways,
^ut he that hates covetousness
shall well prolong his days.
17 A man that by his violence
does any person slay,
By justice shall flee to the pit,
see that no man him stay.
18 Who so in life walks uprightly,
that man he surely shall
Be saved; but he that in his heart
perverse, at once shall fall,
19 He that painful his land does till
shall of bread have plenty,
But he that follows persons vain,
shall come to poverty.
20 A faithful man shall still abound
with blessings permanent,
But he that hastes to be rich
shall not be innocent.
21 To have respect of persons, it
is ill both more and less,
For for a piece of bread that man
will certainly transgress.
22 He that makes have for to be rich
has doubtless an ill eye,
And thinks not that him upon
shall come great poverty.
23 He that a man rebukes, shall
after more favor get,
Then he that falsely with the tongue
to flatter still is set.
24 Who so his parents robs and says,
it is no fault at all,
The same of a destroyer we
may the companion call.
25 He that is of a hauty heart
stirs up debate and strife,
But he that puts his trust in God,
shall be made fat in life.
26 He that does trust in his own h^a^t
most foolish is surely,
But he who wisely so does walk
shall well delivered be.
27 He that does give unto the poor
shall not have any lake,
But he that hids his eyes shall have
great curses on his back.
28 When wicked ones do rise, men hide
themselves most secretly,
But when they die the righteous folk
increase abundantly.
Chap. 29.
HE who reproved often his neck
does harden stubbornly,
Shall suddenly be all destroyed
without all remedy.
2 When good men have authority
the people all rejoice,
But when the wicked rule does bear
then is a mourning voice.
3 Who wisdom loves he joyful makes
his fathers countenance,
But who with harlots still abides
does spend his whole substance.
4 The King that is wise by judgment does
establish well the land,
But it is overthrowen by him
that has a bribing hand.
5 A man that with his flattring words
his neighbor still does feed.
He for his feet in all his ways,
a net does surely spread.
6 In the transgression of ill men
there surely is a snare,
But righteous men sing and rejoice
with joy and gladness rare.
7 The righteous man considreth well
the poor man's cause apart,
But wicked men to know it once
regard not in their heart.
8 Men scornful bring a city in
a fearful snare always,
But wise men through their wisdom great
do turn all wrath away.
9 If wise wen with a foolish man
into contention fall,
Whether he rage or yet he laugh
there is no rest at all.
10 The blood thirsty does hate the man,
that upright is in life,
But the just man contrarily
seeks to preserve his life.
11 A foolish man does utter all
his mind most foolishly,
But a wise man till afterward
it keeps in cunningly.
12 If ear to lies a ruler give,
which do men's names defame,
His servants all to slanders als
their tongues will surely frame.
13 The poor and the deceitful man
by the LORDS power divine
Together meet; the LORD on both
does make his sun to shine.
14 The King upright in all his ways
that judges faithfully
The poor, his throne for evermore
shall sure established be.
15 Rods and reproofs great wisdom give,
but which is worthy blame,
A foolish child left to him self
his mother brings to shame.
16 When wicked men are multiplied
transgression does increase,
But righteous men shall see them fall
in danger and distress.
17 Correct thy son, and he shall give
thee rest both day and night,
Yea, prudent he unto thy soul,
shall surely give delight.
18 The people where no vision is
do perish speedily,
But he that well the law does keep,
most happy sure is he.
19 Servants corrected will not be
by words, that men can say,
For though they well do understand,
yet will they not obey.
20 A man most sudden in his words,
and hasty do thou see?
There is more hope of any fool
nor of him there can be.
21 He that a servant from a child
up brings too tenderly,
Shall at the length have him most sure,
as his own son to be.
22 An angry man does strife stir up
with a most troubled sound,
Men furious in transgressions great,
do always still abound.
23 A man's own pride shall bring him low
under his neighbors feet,
But honor shall uphold always,
the man of humble sprite.
24 Who so is partner with a thief,
his own soul hates always,
He does hear men urged with great oaths
and does them not bewray.
25 The fear of man does bring a snare,
but who for to endure
In safety, trusts in the LORD,
he shall be safe and sure.
26 The Rulers favor many seek
which may them help afford,
But the judgment of Judges does
depend upon the LORD.
27 The man unjust abhorred is
by the just man always,
The wicked is even loathed by him,
that is upright in the way.
Chap. 30.
WIse Agurs words son of Jakeh,
even the sweet prophecy;
The man spoke unto Ithiel,
and Vcall certainly.
2 Surely I am more brutish then
all other men can be,
And understanding of a man
I have not as ye see.
3 I neither wisdom good did learn
which wise men well do teach,
Nor yet to holy knowledge I
am able for to reach.
4 Who has ascended up to heaven?
Or who from thence again
Descended has? Who in his fists
the wind makes to remain?
Who waters in a garment has
bound fast for to endure?
Who all the ends has of the earth
established most sure?
What is the name of such a man
whereby thou do him call,
And what is his sons name also,
if thou can clearly tell?
5 Every good word that does proceed
from God is clean and pure,
He unto them that trust in him
a shield is firm and sure.
6 See that thou add not to his words
lest that he thee reprove,
And thou be found one who is set
most wicked lies to love.
7 Two things have I with all mine heart
required Lord of thee,
Deny me them not I thee pray
before the time I die.
8 Take vanity from me and lies,
give me not poverty,
Nor richesse; feed me with the food
convenient for me.
9 Lest I full, thee deny and say,
Who is God in disdain?
Or lest I be poor, and so steel
and take GODS name in vain.
10 Unto his master a servant
accuse not least he thee
Curse bitterly, and thou at last
be guilty found to be.
11 There is a generation that
their father dear do curse:
And being filled with wickedness,
there mother do not bless.
12 There is a generation als
that in their eyes are pure,
And yet their filthiness not washed
does still in them endure.
13 There is a generation als
how lofty are their eyes,
And their eyelids are lifted up
through their great pride and ease.
14 There is a generation als
whose teeth are as a sword,
And their jaw teeth as knives most sharp,
oppressors in a word.
15 The base horseleach has daughters two
which give give still do cry,
Three things they are; yea, four which ye^
can never satisfy.
16 The grave, also the barren womb,
the earth that is not full
Of water, and the fire that does
cry for more fuel still.
17 The eye that mocks his father and
refuses to obey
His mother, Ravens and Eagles it
shall pick out for a prey.
18 There be three things indeed which are
too wonderful for me:
Yea, there be four which I my self
know not with certainty.
19 The marks that in the way appear
of Eagles in the air,
The serpents way when it upon
a hard rock does repair,
The way als of a sailing ship
in the midst of the sea,
A harlots way to spoil a maid
of her virginity,
20 Such is the way of her that is
a vile adulteress,
She eats and wips her mouth saying,
I do not wickedness.
21 For three things is disquieted,
the earth both far and near,
Yea, and for four which it can not
be able for to bear.
22 For a servant when he does reign,
and troad men under feet,
And als a fool when he is filled
with good and dainty meat,
23 For a woman that is odious,
a poor husbands distress,
And likewise an hand maid that is
heir to her own mistress.
24 There be four things upon the earth,
which are of little price,
But by the great Gods providence
they are exceeding wise.
25 The Ants a people are not strong
which in the earth repair,
Their meat they in the summer time
with diligence prepare.
26 The little conies in the fields
are but a feeble folk,
Yet they most cunningly do make,
their houses in the rock.
27 The locusts in their armies all
have no King that commands,
Yet go they forth in order good,
even all of them by bands.
28 The spider with her crooked hands
does here and there take hold,
And to abide in palaces
of great Kings she is bold.
29 There be three things upon the earth,
which go right orderly,
Yea there are four in number which
in going are comely.
30 A Lion which among all beasts
is strongest for a prey,
and for all these that him gainstand,
does not turn once away.
31 A gray hound with great speed and als
a hee-goat and a King.
against whom by the force of men,
there is no uprising.
32 If thou in lifting up thy self,
have done things foolishly:
^f thou have thought ill, lay thine hand
upon thy mouth quickly.
33 As churning of milk butter brings,
and wringing of the nose
Brings blood, the forcing so of wrath
brings forth both strife and noise.
Chap. 31.
THe words of good king Lemuel all
the worthy prophecy,
That his dear mother did him teach,
that he might prudent be.
2 What my dear son? And what the son
which I with pain did bear
Into my womb? And what the son
of all my vows most dear?
3 To woman vain give not thy strength
which shall thee much annoy,
Nor yet thy ways to that which does
the mighty Kings destroy.
4 O Lemuel it is not for Kings
as thou may wisely think,
Nor yet for Princes foolishly
strong wine to bibe and drink.
5 Lest that they drink and then the law
forget, and als pervert
The judgment of these men that are
afflicted sore in heart.
6 Give thou strong drink unto him that
is in great greef and smart,
And also wine unto all these
that be of heavy heart.
7 Let him drink well, and then forget
his poverty therefore,
And so remember in his mirth
his poverty no more.
8 Thy mouth still open for the dumb
even whether near or far,
Even in the cause of such that to
destruction ordained are.
9 Thy mouth with wisdom open well,
and judge thou righteously,
The cause of needy men and poor
plead thou most faithfully.
10 Who on earth can a woman find,
both virtuous good and wise?
^he richest Rubies all above,
is her excellent price.
11 Of her husband, the heart in her
does trust without all toil,
^o that he furnished well in all
shall have no need of spoil.
12 She loving him most heartily,
and fleeing from all strife,
^ill do him good still and not ill
even during all her life.
13 She seeks wool and also flax,
and that most carefully,
and early with her hands and late
she works willingly.
14 She like the ships of merchands is,
which still procure much good,
^e well directed, from a far
brings safely home her food.
15 She rises als while it is night,
and wisely gives meat
To her household, a portion als
for all her maids to eat.
16 A field she does consider and
it buys for fear of want;
With the fruit of her hands she als
a vineyard well does plant.
17 Her loins she girdeth well with strength
her self for to address
Unto her task, she makes strong
her arms for business.
18 She does perceive her merchandise
to be good in men's sight,
Her candle burning her before
does not go out by night.
19 Her hands unto the spindle she
most carefully does lay,
Her hands also the distafe hold,
and so does pass the day.
20 Her hand unto these that be poor
she stretches out richly,
Yea, more she reaches forth her hands
to these that needy be.
21 For her household she of the snow
is not afraid at all,
For with scarlet her household is
well clothed great and small.
22 She cov'rings to her self does make
of richest tapestrie,
Her clothings of the finest silk
and costly purple be.
23 Her husband in the gates is known
by such attire most net,
^hen he among the Elders does
sit in the judgment seat.
24 She diligent the linen fine
does make and als it sell,
^e likewise does fine girdles give
unto the merchands all.
25 Strength and honor her clothing are,
such is her great wisdom,
and she by these her comforts shall
rejoice in time to come.
26 She with wisdom op'neth her mouth,
which makes all stand in aw,
^^d in her tongue governed well,
of kindness is the law.
27 Unto the ways of her household
she wisely looks indeed,
^^d being busy eats not
of idleness the bread.
28 Her children rise up, and her call
most blessed in all her days,
^er husband also well content,
he praises her always.
29 Much daughters have most virtuously
done as men well may tell,
But thou indeed them all above
most highly do excel.
30 Deceitful surely favor is
and beauty is but vain,
But a woman that fears the LORD,
her praise shall still remain.
31 Of her hands give her of the fruit
which early work and late,
And let her own works with applause,
still praise her in the gate.
The Use.
Let not the words of vain men with their no^
Outshrill the precepts of Gods divine voice,
But set thy heart their meaning for to find,
And lay them up till brimefull be thy mind^
While Wisdom thus stoups down poor man teach
Most wise Proverbs that we their sense may re^
Let us still learn and careful act our part,
That wisdoms words may get place in our he^
Fie, what a shame to hear in wisdoms school
Such lessons wise, and yet remain a fool!
They double stripes are worthy who may find
^his glorious light, and yet are beetle blind.
Away with these who in most furious fits
^ith earthly dregs do drench their wanton wits.
^ch often them selves most wise of all do deem
^ike mummers which are not that which they seem.
^eer wisdom learn and strive for to be wise,
^hese grave proverbs see that thou not despise,
that thou thereby may learn to fly from sin,
^ven Satan's cobweb and his deadly gin,
^herein he holds, and does als diverse pull
^ crafty means the simple for to gull.
(...) fiery wrath shall make the Crows and Pyes
^^ck out the pride of Childrens scornful eyes,
^ho Mothers precepts lightly still set by,
A vengeance sure most heavy by and by
^all come on these, who proverbs good and wise
^^d precepts grave shall foolishly despise:
(...) thou thy duties well would learn and see,
^his precious Pandect hold before thine eye.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Book of Ecclesiastes.
A Prayer.
OF Wisdoms precepts how to guide o^ ways
We have last sung in our most sacred lays;
Now come Jovan my heart strings put in (...)
To warble how all things under the Sun
Which here in greatest estimation be,
Are nothing als but very vanity:
All things below have an uncertain seat,
See how Boats slide where ploughs did slic^ late
And ploughs now till where Boats before did slide,
under the welkin what can fast abide?
Here climbs one, there on the top of the wheel
Another stands, anon up goes his heel
And down his head, then shuffled his designs
All topsie turvie upside down God brings;
^ome are most base, and some with toll and tax,
^et up on hie, do break poor peoples backs;
^ome hunts for this, and some for that, at last
Death all away does carry with a blast:
^hen where is man, and where are his designs?
Lord draw our hearts far from such naughty things
To keep thy Law in doing what we can,
For this the duty is of every man.
Now by thy grace both purge our heart and head
From dirtie darnell sins vile cockleweede,
That while we hear of vain things the discourse
Without a curse we may run out our course.
CHAP. I.
THese be the weighty words wise
of preacher Solomon,
Who was King in Jerusalem
and of David the Son.
2 All vanity of vanities
the Preacher says truly
Yea, vanity of vanities,
all is but vanity.
3 What profit has a man of all
his labor here begun,
Which he with a most carking care
does take under the Sun?
4 One generation among men
away does quickly slide,
Another generation comes,
but the earth does still abide.
5 The sun also arises and
he goes down quickly,
And hastes to the place where he
at morning rose early.
6 From South to North the wind does go,
it whiles continualy,
According to its circuits it
does turn again quickly.
7 The rivers all run to the sea,
the sea yet is not full;
Unto the place from whence they come
return they thither still.
8 Man can not utter how all things
are full of labor here,
With sight the eyes are not satisfied,
nor with hearing the ear.
9 The thing that has been is which shall
be, and that which is done
Is that which shall be, and there is
no new thing under Sun.
10 Is there a thing whereof it may
be said, see this is new,
It has already been before
of old time with some show.
11 No remembrance of former things
there is, nor shall there be
Of things to come with these that shall
come after us quickly.
12 The preacher I who cunningly
in preaching did excel,
Was in the fair Jerusalem
king over Israel.
13 I gave my heart by wisdom to
search all things that are done,
By such pain God does exercise
men here under the Sun.
14 Under the Sun I have seen all
the works that done there be,
Behold all is vexation great
of sprite and vanity.
15 That which is crooked can not be
by men again made straight,
And that which wanting is, can not
be numbered once aright.
16 I pensed, saying, I am come
to great estate and more
Have gotten wisdom, then all they
that have been me before.
Yea my heart by the LORD inspired,
in every exigence
Of wisdom, and of knowledge had
a great experience.
17 I gave my heart wisdom to know,
and to know madness eke
And folly, I saw that this was
vexation of the sprite.
11 For in much wisdom surely is
much grief and heaviness,
And he that groves in knowledge great
does sorrow als increase.
Chap. 2.
In mine heart said, now go to
with mirth I prove will thee,
^ake pleasure therefore; and behold
this als is vanity,
I deeply pensing in my thoughts
of laughter said it is mad,
Of mirth like wise I did affirm
that it is vain and bad.
I in my heart did further seek
to give my self to wine,
and to lay hold on folly great,
even by wisdom divine.
^ll I might see what was that good
for sons of men always,
which under heaven they all should do,
dureing their painful days.
I made me great works, I did build
me houses pleasantly,
planted also with great pains
me vineyards as ye see.
I made me pleasant gardens and
o^chards with flowers and roots,
also planted trees in them
even of all kinds of fruits.
6 I made me pooles of water deep,
as though they had been seas,
To water therewith pleasantly
the wood with goodly trees.
7 With silver I did servants buy,
and also maidens fair,
I had borne also in mine house
in virtue servants rare.
I had possessions great also
of cattle less and more,
Above all these that did excel
in Salem me before.
8 Silver and gold I gathered als
with great dexterity,
And the peculiar treasure of
Kings and Provinces hie.
Men singers and maid singers I,
and the delights of men,
With instruments most musical
of all sorts got I then.
9 So I increased more then all
that in Salems city
Were me before; my wisdom als
remained still in me.
10 And whatsoever thing that was
desired by mine eye,
did it not keep back from them
that they it should not see.
y heart I not with held from joy,
for my heart did rejoice
all my labor; and this was
my portion and my choice.
11 Then did I look on all the works
that my hand had wrought so,
^d on the labor that I had
much labored for to do.
ehold vexation of the sprite
and vanity was all
nder the Sun, there surely was
no profit great or small.
When this was done, I speedily
my self did turn again,
^sdome and madness to behold,
and als man's folly vain;
or what can do the man that comes
after the mighty king,
^en that which has already been
done, even the self same thing.
Then did I see that wisdom did
all folly far excel,
s far as light does darkness black,
when it does it expel.
14 The wise man's eyes are in his head,
but men of judgment small
Walk all in darkness, One event
does happen to them all.
15 Then I anon said in my heart,
when I this thing did see,
As it does happen to the fool,
so happens it to me.
And why was I more wise then they,
who were thought fools to be?
Then I again said in my heart
this als is vanity.
16 For there no more remembrance is
of the wise, no thing differ,
Then of the fool that nothing knows,
all is forgot for ever.
Seeing that which is at this time,
shall be in latter days
Forgot, And how as foolish men,
likewise do die the wise?
17 Therefore I hated life because
all work under the Sun
Is grievous; yea, is vanity,
and a vexation.
18 Yea, I did hate my labor all,
which I below did see,
Because I should leave it to him
that should come after me.
And who by his intelligence,
can know whether he shall
man be unto wisdom given,
or one of judgment small:
^t of my painful labors all
he shall the master be,
^ that I have he shall command,
this als is vanity.
Therefore thus pensive in my mind,
I went about with care,
all the labor which I took
to cause my heart despair.
For on the earth there is a man,
whose labor seems to be
wisdom and in knowledge great
and als in equity.
^t shall he leave it to the man
who labored not a white,
his also is a vanity,
and a great ill of sprite.
For of his labor what has man
that may content his heart,
herein he has under the Sun
sore toiled in every part.
23 For all his days are sorrows great
travail and greef surely,
Yea his heart rests not in the night,
this als is vanity.
24 There is no better thing for man,
then eat drink and the good
Of his labor well to enjoy,
as from the hand of God.
25 For who among the Princes all
has power great more then I
To eat? Or who can heerunto
more hasten by and by?
26 F^r God does give unto the man,
that does himself employ
In good, he gives him wisdom and
great knowledge with much joy.
But he to sinners travel gives
to gather and up heap
For good men; This is vanity,
a vexing of the sprite.
Chap. 3.
TO every thing surely there is
a season set to be,
And to each purpose is a time,
under the heaven most hie.
2 There is a time for to be borne,
and als a time to die,
A time to plant and to pluck up
things that now planted be.
3 There is a time also to kill,
a time to heal the slain,
There is a time for to break down,
a time to build again:
4 A time to weep, a time to laugh
with cheerful countenance,
There is a time also to mourn,
and a time for to dance.
5 A time for stones to cast away
and gather them again,
Time to embrace, and also from
embracing to refrain.
6 A time to get, a time to loss,
nothing stands at a stay,
There is also a time to keep,
and time to cast away.
7 A time there is to make a rent,
and to sow for to seek,
A time there is to keep silence,
and als a time to speak.
8 A time to love, a time to hate,
each time it has its place,
A time there is for fearful war
and als a time for peace.
9 He that does work with greatest pains
what is his profit sweet,
In that wherein he labors much
with painful toil and sweat?
10 The travail which GOD gives to men,
I have seen with mine eyes,
For such is his good pleasure still
men so to exercise.
1^ The LORD who in all wisdom is
most excellent and prime,
Has by his hand made beautiful
each thing in i'ts own time.
He also has the world set
in their heart all about,
That none of all the sons of men,
GODS great work can find out.
12 I know there is no good in them,
but for man far from strife,
With all his heart for to rejoice,
and do good in his life.
13 And that each man should eat and drink.
and als enjoy the good
Of all his labors on the earth,
it is the gift of GOD.
14 What ever God does, that I know
shall even for ever be,
No thing put to nor yet from it
can taken be surely.
And God by his Almighty hand
It works less or more,
That all men with a great respect
should still fear him before.
15 That which has been is now; and that
which is to be has been,
And God requires that which is past,
which men have heard or seen.
16 More I of judgment saw the place
that there was wickedness,
And that iniquity was in
the place of righteousness.
17 The bad and righteous God shall judge
I said then in mine heart,
^or for each purpose is a time,
and als for every work,
18 I in mine heart of men's estate,
said, God might easily
them manifest, and that they might
themselves see beasts to be.
19 For that which all the sons of men
befalls, does befall
Unto the beasts; even one thing does
befall unto them all,
They all have one breath; as the one
so does the other die,
Above a beast they have no place,
for all is vanity.
20 All things below unto one place
do go as is most plain,
All of the dust are, and also
all turn to dust again.
21 Who knows the sprite of man that goes
even upward to the heaven,
And the sprit of the beasts that is
unto the earth down driv'ne?
22 Wherefore I see now that there is
no better thing for choice,
Then that a man in all his works
should constantly rejoice.
For that is even his portion all,
alloted for to be.
And what shall be done after him
who shall bring him to see?
Chap. 4.
SO I returned in my sprite,
and did consider soon,
All the oppressions great that are
here done under the sun.
Behold the tears of men oppressed,
no comforter they had,
Their spoiling foes sure power had great,
but they had comfort bad.
2 Wherefore the dead I praised much,
that were already dead,
Yea more then all the living which
are yet alive indeed.
3 Yea better then both they he is
which has yet never been.
Who the ill work done under sun,
as yet has never seen.
4 Again I did consider well,
and carefully remarke,
All travail undergone by man,
and also every work;
For this man of his neighbor is
crossd greatly with envy,
This is vexation of the sprite
and also vanity.
5 The fool his hands folding will not
work for to win his meat,
Therefore he pinched with poverty,
is forced his flesh to eat.
6 Much better is with quietness
an handful that is meet,
Then both hands full with travel and
vexation of the sprite.
7 Then I returned speedily
to see all that was done,
And I saw a great vanity,
that was under the Sun.
8 There Is one alone, and there is not
a second or another;
Yea, he is so alone, that he
has neither child nor brother.
Yet still he labors, and can not
for whom he labors tell,
This also is great vanity,
yea, it is a sore travel.
9 Together in society
two better are then one,
Because they have a good reward
for all their labor done.
10 For if they fall the one will lift
his fellow, but much woe
To him that is alone, for when
he falls, none helps him so.
11 Again if in a stormy time
two shall together ly,
Then they have heat; but how can one
be warmed by and by?
12 And if against him one prevail,
on this he may rely
Two shall withstand; a threefold cord
men break not easily.
13 A poor and wise child better is
then an old foolish King,
Who will no more by counsel good
admonished be to reign.
14 For out of prison he does come
to reign in high degree,
But the other in his kingdom borne
comes all to poverty.
15 The living which walk here below,
I did perceive indeed,
All walking with the second child,
that shall stand is his stead.
16 The Inconstant people have no end
of all that was before,
These that come after shall not please,
this is vexation sore.
Chap. 5.
WHen thou go to the house of GOD,
as children to the schools,
Then keep thy foot, hear rather then
give sacrifice of fools.
For they in their great foolishness
consider not wisely,
That while they do that outward work,
they do iniquity.
2 See with thy mouth thou be not rash,
thine heart let it not be
Swift for to utter any thing,
before GODS Majesty
For GOD is in the Heaven above,
and thou with little show
Art upon earth, therefore let all
thy words be wise and few.
3 A dream comes through the multitude
of careful business,
A fools voice is well known when he
does many words express,
4 When unto GOD thou vow'st a vow,
defer it not to pay,
For he no pleasure has in fools,
so pay without delay.
5 Not to vow it far better is,
then that thou every day
Should make fair vows unto the LORD,
and them neglect to pay.
6 Permit not once thy mouth to cause
thy flesh for to trespass,
Nor yet before the Angel say,
that it an error was.
Wherefore should GOD be at thy voice
provoked thee to annoy,
And after the work of thine hands
in wrath thee to destroy?
7 For in the m^ltitude of dreams
and many words there be
A number great of vanities,
but fear thou the most Hie.
8 If thou th'oppression of the poor
and judgment false do see,
And justice in a Province als,
let it no marvel be;
For he that then the higest is
higher, without delay
Regards such things, and there be
some higher even then they.
9 The profit of the earth below,
moreover is for all.
The King is served by the field,
even whether great or small.
10 He that loves silver, silver shall
him not once satisfy,
Nor he that loves great increase,
this als is vanity.
11 When goods upon this earth increase
for wealth or yet for meat,
They also much increased are
who all such things do eat:
And what good to their owners is
among all companies?
They only have this that they may
behold them with their eyes.
12 The work-mans sleep it is most sweet,
though he eat less or much,
But plenty great does mar always
the sleep of him that is rich.
13 There is a sore ill which I have,
perceived under the sun,
Even riches for the owners kept
to their great hurt therein.
15 But these riches by travel ill,
do perish in the land,
And he begets a son, and there
is nothing in his hand.
15 As he came from his mothers womb,
so without all delay,
He naked shall return, nothing
he carry shall away.
16 This is a sore ill that as he
came, even so shall he go,
That gain has he that for the wind
he labored so and so?
17 All the days of his life also
he does in darkness eat,
nd he much sorrow has and wrath
when he is grieved and sick.
18 Behold what I have seen; It Is good
for one to drink and eat,
nd take part of that GOD has given,
to be his portion meet.
19 This is GODS gift when of riches
man learnes to make good use,
^d of his portion eats, and in
his labor does rejoice.
For so his days in mirth do pass,
and seem most short to be,
^ GOD him answreth in the joy
of his heart cheerfully.
Chap. 6.
UNder the Sun there is an ill,
which often now and then
^ve seen common for to be,
among the sons of men.
2 A man to whom the Lord has given
wealth, honor, and richesse,
So that he wants not for his soul,
all that he would possess,
Yet God him not the power then gives,
to eat thereof gladly,
But strangers it do eat; This is
disease and vanity,
3 If that a man years many live,
and children much beget,
So that the days even of his years
be in a number great
If his soul be not filled with good,
and als not bu^ied be,
I say that an untimely birth,
much better is then he.
4 For he comes in with vanity,
and in darkness departs,
And his name shall still cov'red be
with darkness in all parts.
5 Moreover he has not the sun
seen, nor known any thing;
This more rest then the other has,
whose heart much greef does wring.
6 Yea though he live a thousand years,
twice told in a long space.
^et has he seen no good at all;
all go unto one place.
7 Of poor man all the labor great,
is for his mouth even st^ll,
and yet his appetite most large
nothing can ever fill.
8 For what have wise men here below,
then the most foolish more?
What has the poor that knows to walk
the living here before?
9 Of the eyes better is the sight,
then wandering thoughts can be;
^his of the sprite vexation is
and also vanity.
10 That which has been already named
is well known man to be,
With him he can not well contend,
that stronger is then he.
11 Since that there be so many things,
that vanity increase,
that is poor man bettred thereby,
on the earth more or less?
12 For who does know what is good for man
in this life to the end,
^e days of his vain life which he
does as a shadow spend.
For who can by his art or skill,
unto a man well tell
What shall be after him, though he
in wisdom great excel?
Chap. 7.
A good name is more precious sure
then ointment is always,
And betrer is the day of death
then is a man's birth day.
2 Far better it is for to go
where men do daily mourn,
Then to resort unto the house,
where men feast turn by turn.
For of all men that is the end
who dwell in any part,
And he that on the earth does live,
will lay it to his heart.
3 Sorrow, then laughter better is,
for by a countenance sad,
The heart of man that it beholds
is much more better made.
4 The hearts of wise men from the house,
of mourning go not forth,
But the heart of these that be fools
is in the house of mirth.
5 It better is to hear rebuke,
and learn in wisemens schools,
Then for a man at any time
to hear the song of fools.
6 For as the crackling of dry thorns,
beneath pots seems to be,
So is the laughter of the fool,
this als in vanity.
7 Oppression surely makes mad
a wise man in each part,
And bribes and gifts do so corrupt,
that they destroy the heart.
8 The end of things much better is
then their beginnings be,
And patient men be better then
the proud that look so hie.
9 Beware of anger; in thy sprite,
to have it is not best,
^or in the bosom of all fools
great anger still does rest.
10 Say not, wherefore were former days,
then these now better be;
For who concerning this enquires,
he does not prudently.
11 If with a rich inheritance
great wisdom also be,
It Is good; by it there profit is,
to them that right do see.
12 Wisdom and money a defense
are men's lives for to save,
But knowledge surely gives life
to all them that it have.
13 Consider well the work of GOD,
for who by his great might
Can that which he has crooked made,
again make to be straight?
14 Be thou most joyful in the day
of thy prosperity,
But well consider in the time
of great adversity.
God the one against the other has
set wisely in their kind,
Even for this end that after him,
nothing vain man should find.
15 All things that are here under sun
I with attentive eye
Have seen clearly even in the days
of my great vanity:
There is a just man that is lost
even in his righteousness,
Als wicked men prolong their life,
in their great wickedness.
16 Be not thou too too righteous,
nor yet in a vain toy
Be overwise, why should thou,
in this thy self destroy?
17 Be not als wicked overmuch,
nor yet too foolish be;
Why should thou before the time,
thy self make for to die?
18 It good is that early in time,
of this thou should take hold,
Yea from this to withdraw thine hand
see that thou be not bold.
For he that in the fear of God,
does daily on him call,
Shall have in all things success good
and shall come forth of all.
19 Wisdom the wise does strengthen more
then ten men that excel
In mighty strength, which pleasantly
in cities fair do dwell.
20 For on the face of all the earth,
no man can find or see,
A man that is just or that does good,
or that of sin is free.
21 Als take no heed unto all words,
that by men spoken be,
Lest that thou hear thy servant grieved
with curses cursing thee.
22 For often als thine own heart knows,
that thou in great distress
Provoked, others cursed have
and that with bitterness.
23 All this I have by wisdom proved,
I said also surely,
I will be wise grave and discreet,
but it was far from me.
24 That which is far from us removed
and deep exceedingly,
Who can by wisdom find it out
where ever hid it be?
25 I did apply mine heart to know,
and to search round about,
And wisdom, and the reason of
things weighty to seek out,
And als of folly for to know
clearly the wickedness,
Even of the foolishness of men
and of their great madness.
26 And bitter more then death I find
the woman whose vain heart
Is snares and nets, her hands as bands,
to catch in every part:
Who so in GODS good favor is,
shall from her speedily
Escape most safe, but sinners shall
even by her taken be.
27 Behold, the preacher wisely says,
this have I found anon
To weigh and find out the account
even counting one by one.
28 Which yet my soul with diligence,
does seek and als essay
All means to get it, but can not
it find by any way.
One man among a thousand I
have found and understood,
But sure among all women kind
not one I have found good.
29 Lo this only well found I have,
that God without all doubt
Man has made upright, but they have
inventions vain sought out.
Chap. 8.
WHo is the wise man on the earth?
who has understanding
To know th'interpretation good,
of any doubtful thing?
A man's wisdom does make his face
most gloriously to shine,
And of his face the boldness shall
unto a change incline.
2 To keep the Kings commandments all,
I now do counsel thee,
And that because of the great oath,
which should observed be.
3 Go not with speed out of his fight,
from every ill thing cease,
For he does whatsoever things
his mind content and please.
4 Where the word of a great King is,
might is there to affray;
What do thou now in this or that
Who dar unto him say?
5 Who so keeps the commandment fast,
shall surely feel no ill,
A wise man's heart the judgment and
the time discerns well.
6 Because the time and judgment als
by man not by and by
Observed are, therefore on him
comes a great misery.
7 For for to know the things to come,
he does not so excel
In wisdom great, when it shall be
who among men can tell?
8 There is no man that any strength
has to retain the breath,
He likewise has no power at all
when comes the day of death.
Of weapons there no casting is,
or in that war discharge,
Nor yet ill men shall wickedness
a^ any time enlarge.
9 This have I seen under the Sun,
and clearly understood,
Some time a man over others rules
against his proper good.
10 Such a great man I have well seen
with great pomp laid in grave,
So taken he was from his seat,
forgotten like a slave.
11 Because GOD wrath not executs
against wicked speedily,
Therefore men's hearts are fully set,
to do most wickedly.
12 Though hundred times a sinner sin,
and death him still forbear,
Yet sure it shall be well with them
who GOD do truly fear.
13 But wicked men shall not be so,
nor shall prolong their days
Which as a shadow are; because
they fear not GOD always.
14 There is upon the earth below,
done a great vanity,
Unto just men it happens as
to these that wicked be.
Again there be most wicked men,
to whom befalls surely,
According as to righteous folk,
this als is vanity.
16 Then mirth I did commend because
man's cheef thing under sun,
Is to eat, drink, with merrinesse,
until this life be done.
For of his labor that with him,
shall all his days abide,
Which GOD upon him does bestow
under the Heavens most wide.
16 When I did wisdom seek to know,
and things on earth to see,
There were who neither day nor night,
did sleep once with their eye.
17 Then I beheld the work of GOD,
that no man by his mind,
The work that is done under sun
can clearly all out find.
Chap. 9.
FOR all this I well in mine heart
considered to declare,
That righteous and wise with their works
in GODS hand surely were.
No man upon the earth below,
does either less or more
Know love or hatred by all that,
which is here him before.
2 All things alike do come to all
there is one event sure,
Both to the good and to the clean
and to him that is impure.
To him that sacrifices als
in fervent zeal most hot,
And likewise to him that profane
als sacrifices not,
As is the good of godly life,
so is the sinner both,
And he that swears most profane,
as he that fears an oath.
3 This is an ill all things among,
though they be great or small.
Under the Sun, even that there is
one event unto all.
Yea, als the hearts of sons of men
are full of ill indeed,
They live in madness, after that
they go unto the dead.
4 For unto him that lives here
there is hope more or less,
For better far a living dog
then a dead Lion is.
5 The living know that they shall die
but dead both great and small
Know nothing, they have no reward
they are forgotten all.
6 Their love, hatred and envy als
is perished quite away,
Of all that is done under the sun,
no portion more have they.
7 Now go and eat thy bread with joy
and with a merry heart.
Als drink thy wine, for God thy works
accepts in good part.
8 Let all thy garments which thou wears
be always white and clean,
Let not thy head at any time
lake ointment that has been.
9 With thy dear wife see all thy days
thou live most joyfully,
For that thy portion in this life
is most assuredly.
10 What thing thine hand shall find to do,
it do with all thy might,
For neither work nor wisdom is
in graves all void of light.
11 I did return and saw below,
the sons of men among,
That to the swift is not the race,
nor battles to the strong,
Nor bread nor riches nor favor,
unto wise men of skill.
But time and chance unto them all
do happen ever still:
12 For man also most ignorant,
knows not his time that is set
As fishes all, that taken are
in a deceitful net,
And as birds that are caught in snares,
so are the sons of men
Snared in an ill time when it falls
most quickly upon them.
13 This wisdom worthy of respect
have I seen with mine eye,
Under the Sun, such was its worth,
it seemed great to me.
14 A little city with few men
there was, and against it
A great King came and it besieged,
and built his bulwarks great.
15 There was in it a poor man found,
who by his wisdom great
Did save the city, yet no man
remembered him a white.
16 Then said I wisdom better is
then strength; nevertheless
The poor man's wisdom is despisde,
and his words more or less.
17 In quiet wise men's words are heard
as in most learned schools,
More then the cry of him that rules
among the lofty fools.
18 Then warriors weapons better is
wisdom that brings joy,
But one sinner that wicked is,
much good will soon destroy.
Chap. 10.
DEad flies do cause the ointment best
of Apothecarie,
To send forth even a savor vile
stinking most filthilie,
So does a little folly als,
most shamefully disgrace.
Him that for wisdom and honor
among men has a place.
2 As the right hands of any men
to work most nimble be
So is the wise man's heart, but hearts
of fools like left hands be.
3 Yea also when he that is a fool,
walks by the way anon,
His wisdom fails that he is a fool,
he says to every one.
4 If the sprite of the Ruler great
shall rise up against thee,
^eave not thy place, for yielding does
offenses pacify.
5 There is an ill under the sun
which I have seen indeed,
As an error which surely from
the Ruler does proceed.
6 Folly is set in dignity,
which is a great disgrace,
While these who truly able are
do sit in a low place,
7 I have on horses servants seen,
and after I anon
Have Princes seen as servants base
walking the earth upon.
8 He that for others digs a pit,
shall surely in it fall,
And who so breaks down an hedge,
a serpent bite him shall,
9 Who so removes stones, shall be
hurt therewith by and by;
And he that cleaves wood, shall be
endangered thereby.
10 If that iron be blunt and he
do not the edge well whet,
Then must he quick put to more strength;
but wisdom must direct.
11 Except the serpent venomous
by charms enchanted be
Sure bite he will, a babbler vain
no better is then he.
12 Of a good wise man's mouth the words
are gracious; but the lip
Of one that is a babbling fool,
himself will swallow up.
13 While he begins to speak, his words
are but mere foolishness,
Likewise the end of his discourse
is nothing but madness.
14 A fool is filled with words, no man
can well tell what shall be,
And what then shall be after him,
Who can him tell surely?
15 Fools do themselves with labor great
even weary every day,
Because they do not know so much
as the broad cities way.
16 Woe unto thee, O wretched land
when childish is thy king,
And thy Princes as gluttons eat
early in the morning.
17 Blessed art thou land when thy King is
come of a noble race,
And thy Princes eat soberly,
for strength not drunkenesse.
18 By slothfulness the building all
most quickly does decay,
And through great idleness the house
it droppeth through always.
19 A feast sure is for laughter made,
and wine makes merry men,
^ut money answ'reth constantly
all things both now and then.
20 See that the King that rules the land
thou curse not in thy thought,
And likewise curse thou not the rich
to thy bedchamber brought:
For a bird of the air the voice,
shall carry by and by.
That which has wings the matter shall
tell even as it does ly.
Chap. 11.
UPon the waters cast thy bread,
and spare it not always,
For thou shall sure it find again,
though after many days.
2 To seven or eight a portion give
and that most liberally,
For thou know not what hindrance soon
upon the earth may be.
3 If that the clouds of heaven above
be filled well with rain,
They for the fruits upon the earth
empty themselves again.
If toward south, or yet the north,
at last shall fall the tree,
In the same place where it does fall,
there also shall it be.
4 He that too strict observ's the wind,
shall not well sow his seed.
He that too strict regards the clouds,
shall sheaves not reap with speed.
5 The sprites way thou know not, nor how
bones in the womb do grow,
Even so thou not the works of God
who makes all, do know.
9 When it is morning then sow thy seed,
upon thy labored land,
And in the evening time also
with hold thou not thine hand.
For whether this shall prosper well
or that, not understood
It is by any, who can tell
if both alike be good?
7 Truly the light is sweet and als,
a pleasant thing it seems,
Unto the eyes for to behold
the suns fair glistring beams:
8 But if a man live many years,
and in them more or less
Rejoice, let him remember well
the days of great darkness;
For they unpleasant surely shall
in a great number be,
All that which comes under the sun
is very vanity.
9 O young man in thy youth rejoice,
and let thy heart thee please,
Walk in the ways of thy heart, and
in the sight of thine eyes.
But know thou this assuredly
that even for every thing,
God in his justice thee at last
will into judgment bring.
10 Therefore all sorrow from thy heart
see thou remove quickly,
Put ill away, for childhood and
youth are but vanity.
Chap. 12.
THy Creator remember well,
in youth while the ill day
Is not come, nor the years draw nigh
when thou shall surely say,
In all such things under the sun,
no pleasure I at all
Have in my heart, I loath such things
yea whether great or small.
2 While the Sun, light, or yet the Moon,
or the stars in their train,
Be not darkened nor yet the clouds
return after the rain,
3 In the day when the keepers of
the house as in palsy
Shall tremble, and the strong men shall
themselves bow faintingly.
The grinders then shall cease to be,
as mouldred all away,
And these that out at windows look
als dark'ned be always.
4 And in the streets the doors shall be
shut when the grinding sound
Is low, he at the chirp of birds
shall rise from sleep unsound.
His sprits also shall be so dull,
that he shall nothing know,
The daughters all of music then,
shall be brought very low.
5 Of high things they shall be afraid,
and fears als in the way
Shall be, and als the Almond tree
shall flourish white always.
Desire shall fail, a grasshopper
a burden shall be so,
Because man dies, the mourners then
about the streets do go.
6 Before als that the silver cord
be loosed at the length,
Or that the golden bowl at last
be broken with its strength.
Or that the pitcher broken be,
even at the maine fountain:
Or yet that broken be the wheel
that is hard by the cisterne.
7 Then shall the dust return to earth,
as it was most vile dust,
Then shall the sprite return to God
who gave it at the first.
8 Even vanity of vanities,
the Preacher well does call
The things that are on earth below,
yea vanity is all.
9 Because the Preacher wise was, he
did tea^h the people still,
Yea he gave good heed, and sought out
wise Proverbes with great skill.
10 The Preacher sought to find out words
acceptable to hear,
What written was it was upright,
words to the truth most near.
11 Wise words are like to goads and nails,
by preachers fastened well,
Which from one shepherd are all given
who does the same reveal.
12 By these my son admonished be,
of making books no end
There is; much study als the flesh
with weariness does spend:
13 Let us now hear the end of all
fear God, and as thou can
His precepts keep, for sure this is
the duty all of man.
14 For God in judgment every work
most clearly shall reveal,
With every secret thing also
yea whether good or ill.
The Use.
LET Men here learn where all may clearly see
Under the Welkin all but vanity:
Here tears in eyes, and fears in heart as house
With many sorrows have their Rendevouz:
Of earthly things the vast confused crowd
Is now or then all cov'red with a clowd;
Though men on Thrones advanced have their Seat,
All Is naught except they be as Good as Great;
Look not to see beneath the Firmament.
A state of life that here gives full content;
A dying still is in poor queasie man,
His life at longest is but like a span;
It like a Post does pass even in a stream,
And is anon forgotten like a dream;
Gods holy Law is only pure and plain,
In life and death Christ is our only gain:
Let us here learn in time to turn our back,
On vanity, and quickly it forsake:
With bended knees and als with broken hearts,
Let us be careful that we in all parts
May fear the Lord, and daily on him call
For this to do, it is the end of all.
All other thoughts are surely vile and vain,
A brood most base even of a burly brain:
Who so profane this earthly glory seeks,
Shall loss his life among such crooked creeks:
O happy he who hating vanity,
Does rest content Gods pensioner to be;
Not careing for the leeks and garlic fell,
The Egyptian hotch potch which Gods Israel
Preferred to Man their whilom-Angels food,
Admired at first but well not understood
^hile it most sweet like Coriander round,
^ like hoare frost did ly upon the ground:
^ heaven above is only rest, below
he Trump of war does still Tantara blow.
reat troops of ills as long as we are here,
^ill vex us still between both faith and fear;
^t O when this our dismal time is past,
o all the godly joy shall come at last:
et us therefore return to God with speed
rom vanities, and see that we take heed,
^ seek the best part, that we by his grace,
ike crawling Ivy may the Lord embrace;
et this our care be in these latter times,
rofession bare serves but to cloak our crimes.
THE HOLY SONGS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT: Dedicated to the Royal Lady
Mary, his Majesty's Elder Daughter, Princess of ORANGE.

By M. Zachary Boyd.

Printed at Glasgow by George Anderson, 1645.

To the Reader.
I As yet have known none that in poesi has turned all the song of Scripture,
except Theodore Beze, who has done it very acurately in the French tongue; I^
the Song of Songs, and the Songs of Mos^ Deborah, Hannah, Ezekiah, Mary, Simeo^
and Zechariah and diverse others, be so he^venly as all may see, it were to be
wish^ that in the Church they had place to be sun with the Psalms of David,
unto the whic they are not inferior.

TO THE MOST ROYAL LADY MARY, His Majesty's Elder Daughter Princess of ORANGE.
MADAME,
IT was the saying of a KING, PROVE. 18 16.
a man's gift makes room for him before the great; If there were no other way
but by gifts, I should come behind and not before, how ever it be, as S. Peter
said to the creeple at the Temple gate called Beatifull, Such as I have I give,
yea; Act. 3.6
and that with a willing mind.

In days of mourning, we must t^ forget our spiritual mirth; Chri^ precept is
that we rejoice ever more Women more then men are incline^ to singing, 1 THESE.
5.16.
as daily practice dot^ show; when David returned from the slaughter of the
Philistine, it is said, that the women came out o^ all the cities of Israel
singing, 1 SAMUEL 18.7.
Sa^ has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands; no mention is made
of men singers.

If your Highness desire spiritual recreations in h^ly songs, I have here
tuned the Song of Songs in the first place, and not without reason, (...) being
so called by excellency: Vn^ it are subjoined the other chief songs contained
in the Old and New Testament, as they ly in order: The Apostle S. James has
given this precept, JAM. 5.13. COL. 3.16.
I^ any merry? Let him sing; S. Pau^ ordaines that we sing with grace i^ our
hearts to the Lord; In another place, he wills that we be filled wit^ the
spirit, and that we speak to our selves in Psalms, and Hymns, EPHESIANS. 5.19.
and Spiritual Songs, making melody in our heart to the Lord.

The Lord grant your Highness such happiness, that ye may have many joyful
days to awake your glory, that ye may cheerfully sing the praises of the LORD.

Your Highness most humble servant, Mr. Zachary Boyd.
From Glasgow the 20 of March, 1645.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Song of Songs.
A Prayer.
O Great Jovah, who art the Prince of m^
Renew thy grace for to encheere my pen
To praise thy name, good matter now endite
Make me thy Scribe this love Song for ^ write
A Song of Songs, Let not thy virtue fal^
To stir me up to be thy Nightingale,
That now and then in my most busy days,
With streins unwonted in sweet sugared lays
I may express some of that sacred Love,
That thee to take the Church for spouse did move,
To woo her with such words of heavenly art,
That would even melt the hardest marble heart.
While I this love Song put in Poesy,
Make thou my heart to fall in love with thee:
Let us not once with badry songs defile
Our lips, like these who to their vomit vile
Do daily turn; O make us now afresh,
To hate the garment spotted with the flesh*
That I this Song of Songs may sweetly sing,
Make me to sip of thy immortal spring,
That Christ, who did both hell and death destroy,
May still the Antheme be of all my joy.
THE SONG OF SONGS, Which is Solomon's.
CHAP. I. The Church speaks to Christ.
LET him me with the Kisses kiss
of his mouth most divine,
For thy great love most certainly
far better is then wine.
3 Because of thy good ointments smell,
as ointment most sweetly
Thy name is powered forth, therefore
the Virgins do love thee.
4 O draw me with the cords of love,
we after thee will run;
The King he has brought me unto
the chambers of his Inn.
We will be glade and als rejoice
in thee, and also we,
Thee will remember more then wine,
the upright all love thee.
5 Though I be black I comely am,
O Daughters of Salem,
As tents of Kedar, and as the
curtains of Solomon.
6 Look not on me because that I
most blackish seem to be,
Because the Sun has with his beams
long looked upon me.
My Mothers children angry were
with me, they keeper made
Me of their vineyards, but I not
did keep mine own vineyard.
7 O thou whom my soul dearly loves,
I pray thee tell me soon
Where thou do feed, and where thou make
thy flock to rest at noone.
For why should I be any way
as one that turns aside,
By flocks of thy companions all
where ever they abide?
CHRIST.
8 O fairest One, if thou not know,
forth by the footsteps go
Of thy flock, feed thy kids beside
the sheepheards tents also.
9 I have compared thee my Love
unto a company
Of horses in Pharos charets,
which strong and lusty be.
10 Thy cheeks are comely all with rows
of jewels manifold,
Thy neck richly adorned is
with finest chains of gold.
11 I and my Father will thee make
of fine gold borders good,
We also thee richly adorn
will with the silver stude.
The Church.
12 While the King who in Majesty
most highly does excel
At table sits, my spiknard then
sends forth thereof the smell.
13 My welbeloved is of myrrh
a bundle unto me;
All the night long betwixt my breasts
with pleasure lie shall he,
14 My dear beloved is always
most excellent to me,
As clusters of Champhire are in
vineyards of Engedi.
CHRIST.
15 Behold thou art most fair my Love,
even with most rare beauties:
Thou art I say exceeding fair,
and have pure chaste Doves eyes.
The Church.
16 Behold thou my beloved dear,
art fair and still have been,
Yea, pleasant above others all,
our bed is also green.
17 The glorious beams of all our house
are of the Cedar trees,
And of the pure and polished fur
are made our galleries.
Chap. 2.
CHRIST.
I Am the most sweet smelling Rose,
that grows on Sharon field,
And als the rarest Lilly which
the fattest valleys yield.
2 As among pricking thorns and briers
appears the lilly rare,
So is among the daughters all,
my love perfectly fair.
The Church.
3 As the Apple tree, among the trees
of the wood thick and throng,
So likewise my beloved is
the sons of men among.
4 Under his shadow I sat down
with great delight in have,
And his fruit which most pleasant is
was sweet unto my taste.
4 He brought me to the banquet house,
his sprit so did me move,
His banner that was over me,
was altogether love.
5 O stay me me now, with flagons and
with apples that are sweet
Me comfort, for I surely am
of love exceeding sick.
6 His left hand in a loving way,
is fast under my head,
And his right hand embraces me
most lovingly indeed.
7 By Roes and Hindes, O Salems maids,
I charge you that ye cease,
Either to stir or yet awake
my love until he please.
8 Behold my dear beloveds voice,
he comes most speedily,
Upon the mountains leaping and
skipping on hills most hie,
9 He Is like a Roe or a young Heart,
he stands behind our wall,
He looks forth and shows himself
even through the lattesse all.
10 My Welbeloved said to me,
rise up without delay,
My love and als my fair one now
make have and come away.
11 For lo past is the winter all
with its most stormy blast.
The rain also which spoils the ways
is over gone, and past.
12 The flowers on earth do now appear,
the birds do sweetly sing,
The Turtle in our land is heard,
as in a pleasant spring.
13 The fig tree her green figs puts forth
Vines tender grapes always.
Most sweetly smell, Arise my love
my fair One come away
14 O my dear Dove, that art now hide
in the clifts of the rock,
Even in the secret places of
the stairs where thou do lurk.
Let me now see thy countenance,
and let me thy voice hear,
For sweet is thy voice, and also
thy countenance is clear.
15 Take us the foxes, yea take als
foxes that little be,
That spoil the vines, for tender grapes
our vines have as ye see.
16 My Welbeloved sure is mine,
and I am his indeed,
Among the lillies smelling sweet
he pleasantly does feed.
17 Until day break and shadows pass,
turn my beloved and be
Thou like a Roe, or a young Heart
on Bethers mountains hie.
Chap. 3.
BY night on my bed carfully
I sought with all my mind
Him whom my soul loves; I sought him
but I him could not find.
2 I will now rise and go about
in streets of the city,
And in the broad ways will him seek
whom my soul loves dearly.
I sought him very carefully
and that with all my mind,
But though I sought him night and day,
yet could I not him find.
3 The watchmen that still go about
the city, then found me,
To whom I said, Have ye him found
whom my soul loves dearly?
4 It but a little was that I
from them did pass away,
But I him whom my soul does love
did find without delay;
I held him, and would not him let
go till, I quickly had
Him to the house, and chambers brought
of her that me conceived.
5 I charge you Salems daughters by
Roes and Hinds, that you cease
Either to stir or yet awake
my Love until he please.
6 Who Is this that like pillars of smoke,
comes out of wilderness
Perfumed with frankincense and myrrh,
and merchants powders als?
7 Behold his bed which far above
does Solomon's excel,
About it of most valiant men
are threescore of Israel.
8 Expert in war they all do hold
swords in their hands most bright,
Each man his sword upon his thigh,
because of fear by night.
9 King Solomon in his great pomp
himself did make a bed,
A charet which of Lebanon
was of the choicest wood.
10 Its pillars were of silver, and
its bottom was of gold,
The covering was of purple fine,
most rich for to be hold.
The midst thereof most gloriously,
well paved was with love,
For the fair daughters of Salem
as it them did behove.
11 Go forth with admiration great
ye daughters of Zion,
And with respect and reverence
behold King Solomon.
With crown wherewith his mother crowned
in his espousals day,
And in the day his heart was filled
with gladness great and joy.
Chap. 4.
CHRIST.
BEhold my love thou art most fair,
most fair is all thy skin,
The pure and chaste eyes of the Dove
thou have thy locks within;
Thy hair thy outward ornament
does shine and glister clear
Even like a flock of goats that from
mount Gilead do appear.
2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep,
that are even shorn perfect,
As when they from the washing come
they are both clean and white:
Each one of them most fertile is
and bear twins in a throng,
Not one that is of all the flock
is barren them among.
3 Thy pleasant lips are always like
unto a scarlet thread,
And when thou speak then all thy speech
is comely still indeed:
Thy temples als within thy locks
do blush so modestly,
That of Pomegranates they a piece
most surely seem to be.
4 Thy neck is like King David's tower
built for an armory,
Wherein a thousand bucklers hang,
and shields of men mighty.
5 Thy two breasts full of dainty food
are like two Roes indeed
Young that are twi^nes, which well among
the pleasant lillies feed.
6 Until the day most clearly break
and shadows flee from hence,
I Will get me to the mounts of myrrh,
and h^lls of frankincense.
7 My Church, my Love, thou art all fair,
and so thou seems to me,
Thou art so washen and made clean,
there is no spot in thee.
8 My spouse with me from Lebanon,
from Lebanon with me
Come, look from tops of Amana,
Shemir and Hermon hie;
Come from thy persecutors all,
even from the Lions dens,
And also from the Leopards
that haunt the high mountains.
9 My sister spouse my heart thou have
ravished; thou have my heart
With one of thine eyes ravished, with
one chain upon thy neck.
10 How faire's thy Love my Sister Spouse!
how better much then wine!
And the smell of thine ointments sweet
then spices good and fine.
11 Thy lips my spouse as the honey comb
drop, honey milk alone
Under thy tongue, thy garments smell
most sweet as Lebanon.
12 My sister spouse a Garden is,
which is enclosed well,
A spring shut up, a fountain als
whereon is set a seal.
13 Thy pleasant plants an orchard are
of Pomegranats most fair,
With pleasant fruits the Champhire sweet,
with spiknard that is rare.
14 Spiknard, Saffron, and Calamus,
and Cinnamon, and tree
Of frankincens, Myrrh, Aloes,
with spices chief that be,
15 A fountain for to water well
the gardens all anon,
A well of living waters and
fair streemes from Lebanon.
The Church.
19 O Norrh wind quickly now awake,
and come thou South about,
Upon my Garden blow that so
its spices may flow out.
Let my beloved come at last,
into his Garden sweet,
That he there even most cheerfully
his pleasant fruits may eat.
Chap 5.
CHRIST.
I Am into my Garden come
my Spouse and Sister wise,
I gathr^d have my pleasant Myrrh,
with my delicious spice;
eaten have my honey comb,
and drunk milk, wine, gladly;
Now eat O friends, drink, O beloved,
yea drink abundantly.
The Church.
I sleep securely, but my heart
does wake both night and day,
^t is the voice of my Beloved
which knocking thus does say,
My Sister, Love, Dove, undefild,
now open to me right,
^or my head and locks filled are
with dew drops of the night.
I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on a while,
washed also have my feet,
how shall I them defile?
My Welbelov'd put in his hand
by the hole of the door,
and for the love of him were then
my bowels moved sore.
I rose at last to open to
my Welbeloved one,
and then my hands most fragrantly,
did drop with myrrh anon:
My fingers with sweet smelling myrrh
also did richly drop,
Which in abundance fell upon
the handles of the lock.
6 To my Beloved I opened then,
but my Beloved anon
Withdrawn himself had far away,
and from the door was gone:
My soul failed when he spoke, I him
sought, but I not surely
Could find him, when I called he gave
no answer unto me.
7 The watchmen that did go about
the city, there me found,
They smot me most despightfully,
and did me deeply wound:
These who did keep the walls thereof
by night and als by day,
From me with great despite and rage
my veil soon took away.
8 I charge you daughters of Salem
if my Beloved ye find,
That ye him tell, that of his love
I am sore sick in mind.
Strangers enquiring for CHRIST.
9 O fairest among women, what
is thy Beloved more,
What is he more then others are
that thou do charge so sore?
The Church.
10 Both white, and rudy, my Beloved
is, as I understand,
He beautiful the cheifest is
even among ten thousand;
11 His head is as the finest gold,
his locks they bushy are,
And also black even like a Rav'n
his youth-head to declare;
12 His eyes are as the eyes of Doves
that by the rivers sit,
Well washed with the whitest milk
and also fitly set;
13 His cheeks are as the spices bed,
as sweet flowers that excel,
His lips like Lillies droping sweet
of pleasant myrrh do smell.
14 His hands as goldrings are set with
the Berill richly made,
His belly as bright yvory is
with Saphires overlaid.
15 His legs as Marble pillars are
on golden sockets set,
His countenance is as Lebanon,
as Cedars high and great.
16 Most sweet his mouth is, yea he is
most lovely altogether,
This my Beloved and this my friend
is, O thou Salems Daughter.
Chap. 6.
Strangers enquiring for CHRIST.
WHether is thy Beloved gone
of all women most fair?
Or whether is he turned that we
may seek him, now declare?
The Church.
2 Into his garden my Beloved
gone down is, for to eat
In gardens fair, to the spice beds,
to gather lillies sweet.
3 My Welbeloveds I am all
and my Beloved most rare
Is also mine; he feeds among
the lillies white and fair.
CHRIST.
4 Most beautiful my Love thou art
as Tirzah, and comely
As Salem, and most dreadful as
with banners an army.
5 From me thine eyes now turn away,
for they me overcome,
Thy hair is as a flock of goats
that from fair Gilead come.
6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep
which go from washing throng;
Each one bears twins, and there is not
one barren them among.
7 Thy temples als within thy locks
do blush so modestly,
That of Pomgranates they a piece
most surely seem to be.
8 Though threescore of fair Queens there be,
and Concubines fourscore,
And virgins als them to attend,
yea without number more.
9 My Dove my undefiled is
but one, She the most rare,
Her mothers only One, and cheef
choice of her that her bare.
The daughters of the land her saw
and blessd her heartily;
Yea, the Queens and the Concubines
they praised her highly.
10 Who is she that as morn looks forth,
fair as the Moon and clear
Even as the Sun, and Armies as
that dreadful banners bear.
11 To the Nutgarden I went down,
the valley fruits right good
To see, to see als if the Vine
and Pomegranates did bud.
12 Or ever I was aware, my soul
with love to thee all pressed,
Like Charets of Aminadab,
made me to make great have.
13 Return, return, O Shulamite,
return, return to me,
That we with great gladness of heart,
may look now upon thee.
What will ye in the Shulamite
with great contentment see?
Even such a sight as if it were
two Armies company.
Chap. 7.
O Princes daughter how pleasant
with shoes thy feet now are,
The joints of thy thighs jewels seem
wrought by some workman rare.
2 Thy navell like round goblets is
which want not liquor sweet,
Thy belly as with lillies set,
is like a heap of wheat.
3 Thy two breasts the two Testaments,
which all thy children feed,
Most pleasant are like two young Roes,
which comely are indeed.
4 Thy stately neck is as a tower
of whitest yvorie,
Like fishpooles in Heshbon thine eyes,
that by Bathrabbim be.
Thy nose is comely as the tower
of Libanus most rare,
Which toward Damascus does look
in stately form and fair.
5 Thine head on thee is Carmell like,
als of thine head the hair
Is purple like, the King is held
in galleries most rare.
6 How fair and beautiful my Church,
how pleasant to my sight
Art thou to me always, O Love
for pleasure and delight!
7 This thy most goodly stature is
like unto a Palm tree,
And thy breasts like two clusters of
Grapes that well filled be.
8 I said, I unto the Palm tree
to go up will be bold,
I will of the fair boughs thereof
with all my force take hold.
Now also shall thy breasts all be
as clusters of the vine,
And of thy nose the pleasant smell
like apples good and fine.
9 And like best wine thy mouths roof is
for my beloved sweetly,
That goes down causing sleepers lips
to speak most graciously.
The Church.
10 I surely my beloveds am
whom I love tenderly,
And his desire though not deserved,
is always toward me.
11 Come my beloved Savior now,
let us together go
Forth to the fields; in villages
let us now lodge also.
12 Let us get up with diligence
to the vineyard early,
Let us now see if that the vine
does flourish pleasantly.
Whether the tender grapes appear,
and the Pomegranates bud,
There will I surely give my loves
to thee both fair and good.
13 The mandrakes smell, and at our gates
all pleasant fruits now be,
Both new and old, which I laid up,
O my beloved for thee.
Chap. 8.
The believing Jews.
O That thou my blessed Savior now
were as my brother near,
that sucked has the breasts of her
who is my mother dear!
When I should find thee here without,
I would with gladness thee
^ost loving Kiss, even so that I
should not despised be.
I would thee lead with all my heart,
and forth I would bring thee,
Into my loving mothers house,
thereto instructed be.
I gladly would thee cause to drink
of my well spiced wine,
And of the fair Pomegranates juice,
which pleasant is and fine.
3 Under my head in lovely ways
his left hand laid should be,
And his right hand most tenderly,
likewise embrace should me.
4 O daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge you that ye cease;
To stir up or awake my Love,
and that until he please.
CHRIST.
Who is this from the wilderness,
that comes up by and by,
And thus on her Beloved does
even leaning still rely?
It is my Church I thee did raise
up from the Apple tree,
Thy mother there thee did bring forth,
she brought forth that bare thee.
The believing Jews
Me as a seal set on thy heart,
and on thine arm set me,
^or love as death, and as the grave
most strong is jealousy.
^ven burning coals of hotest fire
are the coals of the same,
Which kindled have a vehement
and a most piercing flame.
True love can not be quenched at all,
by waters flowing down,
^or yet can floods of troubles great
by any force it drown.
^f any largely of his house
would give the substance all
^t utterly contemned should
be both by great and small.
We have a little sister which
no breasts has less or more,
What shall we do even in the day
she shall be spoken for?
CHRIST.
If she continue firm and fast,
like to a mighty wall,
A silver Palace build on her
we altogether shall:
And if she be even as a door
to give ear to my words,
We will most safely her enclose
with finest Cedar boards.
The believing Jews.
10 I am a wall, my breasts also
like towers are on the ground,
Then was I in his eyes as one
that had his favor found.
CHRIST.
11 At Baal-Hamon a vineyard
king Solomon had set,
The vineyard unto keepers he
for profit then had let:
Each one of these his servants for
the sweet fruit of the vine,
A thousand pieces was to bring
of silver good and fine.
12 My vineyards fruits are all for me,
but thou O Solomon
Must have a thousand, and the rest
the farmers live upon.
13 Thou that in Gardens dwell fair
and live in Gods fear,
^ompanions hearken to thy voice,
cause me it als to hear.
The Church.
^ake haste my Welbelov'd, and be
thou like unto a Roe,
(...) to young Hearts, that on the mounts
of spices quickly go.
THE SONG OF MOSES AT THE RED SEA:
After GOD had drowned Pharao and his whole host. EXODUS 15. verse. 1.
Will now sing unto the LORD,
for he has gloriously
Triumphed, he horse and rider als
has thrown into the Sea.
The LORD he is my strength and song,
and my salvation sure,
An habitation I for him
most gladly will prepare.
My fathers GOD, he still has been
and that in every part;
I him therefore will now exalt,
and that with all my heart.
3 The Lord who has a mighty arm
is as a man of war,
The Lord most surely is his name,
well known both near and far.
4 He Pharos charets and his host
has cast into the Sea,
In the red Sea, even drowned all
his chosen Captains be.
5 With frothy deepths GOD cov'red them,
this work he did alone,
Into the bottom they did sink,
even as a heavy stone.
6 Thy right hand is become, O LORD,
most glorious in great power,
Thine arm and thy right hand, thy foes,
have dashed even all to powder.
7 Thou have thy foes all overthrown
in great excellency,
Thy wrath thou sent'st forth, which consum'^
them as the stubble dry.
8 And with the blast of thy nostrils
the waters gathered there,
^he floods stood upright as an heap,
the deepths congealed were.
Th enemy said, I will pursue,
them will I overtake,
will divide the spoil my lust
upon them will I wreak.
In my wrath most fierce will draw
my sword them to annoy,
^y mighty hand with fearful plagues,
shall surely them destroy.
11 Thou did blow with thy boistrous wind,
the sea them covr'd indeed,
^hey in the mighty waters all
sank down as heavy lead.
12 Who Is like thee LORD among the gods?
who is glorious like to thee
^ holiness, and fearful praise,
and wonders done by thee?
13 Thou in thy fierce wrath stretchedst out
thy right hand with great strength,
^he earth opning her mouth did then
all swallow up at length.
Thou in thy mercy have led forth
thy people bought by thee,
Thou in thy strength them to thy house
have guided lovingly.
14 The people all shall hear of this,
and they shall be afraid;
The indwellers of Palestine
with grief shall be dismaide.
15 The Duks of Edom all amazed,
with Moab tremble shall,
The indwellers of Canaan
shall melt away and fall.
16 By thy great Army fear and dread
shall heavy on them fall,
They as a stone still shall be till
thy people pass over all;
O LORD, till that thy people all
pass over with courage fine,
Which thou by thine Almighty hand
have purcha'd to be thine,
17 Thou strong, shall bring them in, and them
plant in thy holy place,
Even in thy pleasant Sanctuary
established by thy grace.
18 The LORD shall reign for evermore
most like a mighty King,
19 For he on Pharo and his house
the lofty waves did bring.
But the children of Israel all
who did the LORDS command,
They in the mids of all the sea
went safely on dry land.
Miriams Song at the red Sea.
THen Miriam the Prophetess,
the sister of A'ron,
Did dance with women thankfully,
and Timbrels played upon.
And Miriam thus answered them (...),
praise GOD for now has he
^riumph'd; He horse and rider als
has thrown into the Sea.
The Song of Moses, a little before his death. DEUTERONOMY. 32. verse.
1. THE PREFACE.
O Pleasant heavens that are above,
with diligence give ear
And I will speak, O earth below
the words of my mouth hear.
2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain,
my speech as dew shall pass,
As small rain on the tender herb
and showers upon the grass.
3 Because I surely publish will
the blessed name of the LORD,
Ye greatness to our GOD therefore,
ascribe with one accord.
The first Part.
4 He is the rock, his work's perfect
his ways all judgment be,
A God of Truth, and without sin
most just and right is He.
5 They have corrupt themselves, their spot
is not the spot always
Of his children, they are perverse
a race of crooked ways.
6 Unwise people do ye requite
the Lord thus? Is not He
Thy Father, buyer? Has he not
made and established thee?
7 Remember ye the days of old,
years past consider well;
Thy Father ask, he will thee show,
thy Elders will thee tell.
8 When the most High to nations did
the inheritance divide,
When he the sons of Adam all
did separate beside,
He by his wisdom set the bounds
of all the people then,
According to the number of
his Isreal's children.
9 For the Lord, for his portion has
his people without blot,
Jacob is his inheritance
appointed as by lot.
10 He found them in a desert land
and wast wilderness; He
Him led, instructed, and him keept,
as the apple of his eye.
11 As The Eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttreth her young upon,
Her wings does spread, and takes them
to carry them thereon.
12 So the good Lord did him alone
lead in all ways safely,
And no strange god there was with him
in all that company.
13 He made them ride on Canaan high,
that he the increase might eat,
He made him oil and honey suck,
from flintie rocks most sweet.
14 Butter of Kine and milk of Sheep,
he gave to every man,
With fat of Lambs, and also Rams,
of the breed of Bashan.
He gave them Goats with the fat of
Kidneyes of wheat right good,
And of the sweet Grapes thou did drink
the pure wine red like blood.
The second Part.
15 But Jeshurun who should have been
most righteous, then did kick,
Thou waxed art exceeding fat,
thou art grown very thick.
Thou cov'red art with fatness; then
his maker he forsook,
And of his sure salvations rock
no care at all he took.
16 With strange gods they provoked him
unto great jealousy,
With great abominations they
him angry made to be.
17 They sacrificed unto devils,
to gods whom they not knew,
Whom your fathers did never fear,
even gods that were but new.
18 Thou art unmindfull of the Rock
which thee once did beget,
And the Lord God that formed thee,
thou did always forget.
The third part.
19 And when the LORD saw it, he did
abhor them all anon,
Because of the provoking great
of Daughter and of Son.
20 He said, I will from them my face
hide, and I will now see
Their end; they are a froward race
in whom no faith can be.
21 With that which is not GOD they have
me moved to jealousy,
^o anger they have me provoked
with their great vanity:
them also to jealousy,
with such as are no flock
Will move; to anger them with fools
I surely will provoke.
22 For in my wrath fire kindled is,
such as no tongue can tell,
It shall not cease always to burn
even to the lowest hell;
It shall consume the earth all with
her increase, man's desire,
And the foundations of the mount
shall surely set on fire.
23 Upon them of mischeef a heap
I certainly will send,
I also upon them in wrath,
mine arrows now will spend.
24 They shall consumed be and burnt
with pain of hunger great,
And suddenly shall be devoured
with a most burning heat:
And with bitter destruction, I
will also on them thrust
The teeth of beasts, with poison als
of serpents of the dust.
25 The sword without terror within
destroy shall, and not spare
The young man, Virgin, Sucklings als,
with the man of gray hair.
26 I said I into corners would
them quickly scatter, then
I would make their rememberance
to cease from among men;
27 Were it not that I the great wrath
feared of the enemy,
Lest their vain adversaries should
behave themselves strangly.
And lest that they puffed up with pride,
should say these words anon,
Our hand now high is, and the LORD
this work all has not done.
28 For they all a vain Nation are
of wholesome counsel void,
No understanding good at all
in them does still abide.
29 O that they were wise, so that they
this clearly understood,
That they would now their latter end
consider for their good.
30 How should but one a thousand chase,
and two als put to flight
Ten thousand, if their Rock had not
them sold and shut up right?
31 For their rock in no way is as
our rock that mighty is,
We none but even our enemies seek,
for to be Judge of this.
32 Of Sodom and Gomorrahs field
their vine I truly call,
Their clusters great most bitter are.
their grapes are grapes of gall.
33 Their wine is Dragons poison, which
from these grapes does distill,
And is the cruel venime of
vile Aspes that men do kill.
34 Is not this wickedness laid up
in a great store with me,
And up among my treasures als
even sealed secretly?
The fourth Part.
35 To me belongs vengeance, and
recompense for their crime,
Their foot shall slide assuredly
in due appointed time;
For their day of calamity
is surely near at hand,
And the things that shall come on them
Make have, and shall not stand.
36 For the Lord shall his people judge,
and for his folks repent.
When their great power he sees all gone
and altogether spent.
37 And he in his great wrath shall say,
where are there gods of might,
Their rock in whom they trusted much?
they come not now in sight.
38 Which ate fatlings, and wine offerings,
in drink did not reject
et them rise up, and with their strength
you help, and als protect.
39 See now that I am he even I
no god there is with me;
kill, I also make alive,
I wound, I heal safely.
here be not one among the gods
by sea, or yet by land.
hat by his strength deliver can
out of my mighty hand.
40 For I my hand unto the Heaven,
do now lift up and heave
^ sign of a great oath, and say,
for ever as I live.
41 If I my glistring sword whet, and
judge in severitie,
vengeance surely will reward
to my foes that hate me.
42 I will mine arrows in my wrath
(which is now kindled sore)
ache drunk with blood) and my sword shall
their filthy flesh devore.)
And that with the blood of the slain,
and men that captives be,
From the beginning of revenge
upon the enemy.
34 Rejoice ye nations with his folk,
for he who does not change,
Will the blood of his servants dear
most speedily avenge.
And to his adversaries will
a vengeance render full,
And to his people and his land
will be most merciful.
THE SONG OF DEBORAH, AND BARAK:
After the Victory against th army of Jabin King of Canaan who reigned in
Hazor, whose Captain was Sisera, whose head was cut off by Jahel, the wife of
Heber. JUDGES 5. verse. 2.
PRaise ye the LORD for the avenging
of his own Israel so,
When as the people willingly
did to the battle go.
Hear Kings and Princes, I, even I
will sing unto the Lord;
nto the Lord God of Israel,
I praises will afford.
Lord when thou wentst from Seir, when thou
did march from Edom land,
he Earth trembled, the Heavens did drop,
the clouds they did disband.
The Mountains melted from before
the Lord God Eternell,
^en that Sinai from God before,
the God of Israel.
In SHAMGARS days son of ANATH,
in the days of JAEL,
^e high ways were unoccupi'd,
they went in bywayes all.
The indwellers of villages,
in Israel did cease,
ntill that I DEBORAH rose,
a mother to make peace.
They chose new gods, then in their gates
was war; was there a shield
spear forty thousand among,
in city or in field?
8 My heart to Isra'ls Governors
is, that with one accord,
Offered themselves most willingly
to Battle, bless the LORD.
9 Speak ye that ride on Asses white,
in Rulers chief array,
And ye that sit in judgment, and
that travel by the way.
10 And ye the poorest of the land,
whose trade was still to draw
Waters from wells, Of Archers ye
did greatly stand in aw.
Ye from this fear delivered,
GODS great works magnify,
Who has traffic and Justice given
in village and city.
11 Awake, awake, awake, awake,
DEBORAH sing anon,
Arise BARAK and lead Captive
thou of AHINOAN son.
12 Him that remains he made to rule
over the Nobility,
Over people als; the LORD me gave
rule over the mighty.
13 Of EPHRAIM, against AMALEK
there was a worthy root;
And after thee, stout BENjAMIN,
among thy people great
rom MACHIR of MANASSE came
governors goodly men,
o this service came ZEBULON
scribes handling well the pen;
15 And the most mighty Princes of
strong ISSACHAR that day
Were with DEBORAH in the field,
even ISSACHAR I say.
here BARAK to the valley sent
on foot, did soon depart;
or the divisions of REUBEN
there were great thoughts of heart.
16 Why from the Sheepfolds would not thou
go for to act thy part?
or the divisions of REUBEN
were searchings great of heart.
17 Beyond JORDAN GILEAD abode,
and why did DAN remain
^ ships? Asher on the sea shore
sought in his breaches gain.
18 ZEBULON, and NEPHTALI stout
were armed with Spear and Shield,
hey jeoparded their lives all in
high places of the field.
19 The Kings of CANA'N came and fought,
JABIN for to maintain,
In TANAH to MEGIDDO near,
but thereby did not gain.
Against SISERA, the clouds and wind
did fight, from the Heavens hie,
The bright stars in their courses als
fought most courageously.
21 The river KISHON, even KISHON
did sweep them all away;
O thou my soul, thou have down troad
great strength without delay.
22 Then the strong horsehoves broken were
even with their strongest bones.
By the means of the pransings great
of the most mighty Ones.
23 Curse ye MEROS the Angel said,
yea curse them bitterly,
Because they did not help the Lord,
against these that were mighty.
24 JAEL the wife of HEBER shall
blessed above women be,
Above women she shall be blessed,
in the tent most surely.
25 He asked water, and she gave
him milk of sweet relish,
She also wisely butter brought
forth in a lordly dish.
26 She with a hammer and a nail
smote SISERA indeed;
When she his Temples pierced had,
she did smite off his head.
27 He bowed and f^ll, and lay down, he
at her feet bowed and fell;
Where he bowed there he fell down dead
at the feet of JAHEL.
28 SISERAS mother looked out
at windows, and did cry
hrough the lattesse with joy of heart
to these thar passed by,
Why taries his Charet so long?
What hinder does it let?
Why tarry thus the wheels most swift
of his Princely Charet?
29 When her wise Ladies heard these words,
they did not long defer
^o give answer; yea, to her self
she returned this answer.
30 Have they not well in Battle sped,
have they not all also,
arted the prey to every man,
a damsel or two?
To SISERA a wealthy prey,
who his foes strong did foil;
A colored prey of needle work
for these that take the spoil.
31 So perish let thy foes, O Lord,
but who with heart upright
Him love, let them be as the Sun,
when he goes forth in might.
The Song of Hannah, which She sang to GOD when She had borne Samuel, after
long barrenness. 1 SAMUEL 2. verse. 1.
MY heart rejoiceth in the LORD,
my horn exalt did he;
My mouth is greatly now enlarged,
for his goodness to me.
2 There is none holy as the LORD,
there is none beside thee,
There is no rock that is like God,
our God the Lord most hie.
3 Talk no more proudly as ye do,
speak not with arrogance;
For all our deeds the Lord does weigh
in his sacred balance:
The strong bows of the mighty men
are broken all at length,
^d they that stumbled, now are girt
with force and divine strength.
They that were full in plenty, have
hired out themselves for bread,
^d they that were in hunger great
securly ceasd indeed,
e that was barren and contemned
has borne sev'n great and small,
^d she that many children has
is waxed feeble all.
The LORD by his strong arm does kill,
and he does also save;
^ lifts up, he brings down
unto the stinking grave.
By his great power he does make poor,
and also makes rich,
^ brings low, and raises up
unto a certain pitch.
He raises up, out of the dust
the poor from the dunghill,
He lifts the beggar and him sets
on Thrones with Princes still;
For the strong pillars of the earth
unto the Lord belong,
And he by his great power has set
the world all them upon.
9 He of his saints will keep the feet,
the wicked in darkness
Shall all be silent, none by strength
prevail shall more or less.
10 These fools who do reject the Lord,
shall soon be broke to pieces;
With thunders shall he trouble them
though they be great as Princes.
The Lord shall judge the earth below,
and strength give to his King,
The horn of his anointed, he
shall high exalt so reign.
The Song of David, which he sang to give thanks, after that Nathan had
promised him benefits and blessings, but chiefly the Messiah to come of his
seed. 2 SAMUEL 7. verse. 18.
O LORD my God, now who am I
that thou on me have thought,
What is my house that thou in love,
me hitherto have brought?
This was but small Lord in thy sight;
thou of thy servants house
^ast spoke for a great while to come,
as thou art righteous:
his truly Lord, a mercy great
I clearly now do see,
fter the manner of a man,
this seems no way to be.
And what can David more to thee,
for this thy goodness say?
or thou Lord God, who art most hie,
thy servant know always.
4 For thy words sake thou have now done
according to thy heart
These things, to make thy servants all
thee know in every part.
5 Thou Lord art great, like thee is none,
no God is thee beside,
According to all things that we
have heard on every side.
7 What Nation one in all the earth,
is like thy people dear,
Even like Israel whom God redeemed,
that he might them acquire,
To get a name and do great things
for thy most holy land,
Before thy people which from Kings
redeemed are by thy hand?
8 For to thy self thou have confirmed
Israel to thee for ay
A people; and thou art become
their Lord and God always.
9 What of thy servant and his house,
thou have Lord spoken now,
As thou have said, it by thy grace
establish and allow.
10 And let thy name be magnified
for ever and for ay;
The Lord of Hosts is Isral's God,
let all the people say,
nd let the house of thy servant
David, for evermore
e by thy mercy and thy might
established thee before.
11 For thou Lord God, the Lord of hosts,
the God of Israel,
nto thy servant have revealed,
thy mercies that excel.
will thee build an house thou said,
therefore I have this day,
^und even this prayer thus in my heart,
unto thee for to pray.
12 And now, O Lord, that God thou art,
and thy words be most true,
nd thou this goodness promisde have,
unto thy servants now.
Therefore be pleased for to bless
thy servants house always,
hat it may so continue still,
before thee fast for ay.
or thou O Lord, in mercy great
have spoken it to me,
ow let the house of thy servant
for ever blessed be.
The Song of Isaiah, Conce^ning the vineyard, wherein Gods people is reproved
for their barrenness in good works, notwithstanding of all the pains were
taken by the Prophets. ISA. 5. verse. 1.
TO my beloved, I my belov'ds
song will now sing with skill,
My welbelov'd a vineyard has
in a most fruitful hill.
2 He it did fence, and gathred out
its stones at every hour,
He planted it with choicest vine,
and in it built a Tower.
He als made a vine press therein,
and looked it should bring forth
Good grapes, but forth always it brought
wild grapes of nothing worth.
3 O ye indwellers of Salem,
and Judahs men always,
Betwixt my vineyard and me now
judge justly I you pray.
4 What could I unto my vineyard,
do more then I have done?
While I for good grapes looked still,
it brought wild grapes alone.
And now go to I will you tell,
what to my vineyard I
Will do, I will the hedge thereof
away take by and by.
Then shall it all be eaten up,
I will break down its wall,
and it by wild beasts of the field,
shall down be trodden all.
I also now will lay it wast,
it shall not pruned be
^or dug; but men briars, and thorns,
anon come up shall see.
(...) also by my divine might,
the clouds all will command,
That they shall neither day nor night
rain down upon the land.
^ For of the Lord the vineyard is
the house of Israel,
And Judahs men his pleasant plant,
which others should excel.
And he for judgment looked well,
but O then by and by
Oppression, als for righteousness,
but O behold a cry.
A Song of thanks, for the mercies of GOD. ISA. 12. verse. 1.
I Will thee praise, O Lord, though tho^
with me most angry wast,
Thine anger is now turned away,
thou me comforted have.
2 Behold and well consider; God
is my salvation sure,
I will still trust, and not afraid
now will be less or more.
For the great Lord, Jehovah is
m^ strength and als my song,
He my salvation is become,
to him it does belong.
3 Therefore out of salvations wells,
ye shall your self employ,
Fine water in abundance great
to draw al ways with joy.
4 Then shall ye say praise ye the Lord,
and call upon his name,
His works among the pople show,
and high exalt his fame,
Unto the Lord sing thankfully
for he has things of worth
Done by his mighty hand, this well
is known in all the earth.
Cry out and shout with a loud voice,
ye that indwellers be
Of Zion, Isra'ls holy one
is great in midst of thee.
A Song, inciting to confidence in God. ISA. 26. verse. 1.
WE have a city all made strong,
the Lord salvation will
Appoint for to be mighty walls
and bulwarks ever still,
The glorious gates now open that
the Nation void of sin,
Which constantly the truth does keep,
may freely enter in.
Thou will him well preserve and keep
in perfect peace to be,
Whose mind is still upon thee stayed,
because he trustes in thee.
4 For ever in the Lord trust ye,
for ye shall feel at length,
That in the Lord Jehovah is
an everlasting strength.
5 For he brings down dwellers on high;
the lofty city low
He lays, it to the ground he brings
even to the dust below.
9 The foot shall basely tread it down
even the foot of the poor.
And the steps of the needy als
shall even the like procure.
7 The justs way all is uprightness,
thou upright in thy ways,
Of the just in the balance thou
do weigh the path always.
8 Yea in thy judgments way, O Lord,
we waited have for thee,
Our souls desires unto thy name
and thy remembrance be.
9 I with my soul have constantly
desired thee in the night;
Yea with my sprite I early will
thee seek with all my might.
^or when thy judgments in the earth
us teach for to discern,
^hen all the worlds inhabitants
Gods righteousness will learn.
10 Let favor great be showed still
unto the wicked man,
^et for all that he righteousness
will neither learn or can;
^v'n in the land of uprightness
unjustly will he deal,
and of the Lord the Majesty
behold no way he will,
11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up,
they all refuse to see,
^ut they shall see against their will
though they do close their eye.
because thy people they envye,
ashamed they shall be sore,
^ea the fire of thine enemies all
shall quickly them devore.
12 Lord thou will ordain peace for us,
this still is in our thought;
^or thou in us have all our works
even by thy finger wrought.
13 O Lord besides thee other lords
have ruled us to our shame,
But by thee only will we all
make mention of thy name.
14 Hence forth these wicked shall not live
who are now dead and slain,
They at last all deceased are,
they shall not live again.
Therefore thou visited have them,
and them destroyed always,
And als have made their memory
to perish quite away.
15 The Nation well thou have increasde,
thy glory shines forth;
Thou had removed it far unto
the ends of all the earth.
16 Lord when they were in trouble, they
did visit thee anon,
They powered out prayers when thy rod
was heavy them upon.
17 Most like a woman at child birth,
who in her pangs does cry,
So have we Lord been in thy sight
distressed by and by.
18 We great with child have been in pain,
and have brought forth the wind,
To help out friends or foes defeat,
no strength at all we find.
19 Thy dead men shall most surely leave,
together well they all
^ith my dead body even revive,
and als arise they shall.
^e that in dust dwell now awake,
for thy dew is indeed
^s dew of herbs, and als the earth
shall cast out all the dead.
20 My people come, now enter thou,
while as the time is fit,
unto thy chambers, and with speed
the doors about thee shute.
^here for a little moment hide
thy self far from the blast,
^nt^ll the indig^ation great
be safely over past.
21 For lo, the Lord out of his place
does come most speedily,
^o punish all the men on earth,
for their iniquity.
The earth shall als disclose the blood,
that in it did remain,
And shall no more the means afford,
to cover close her slain.
The Song of Hezekiah, afte^ GOD had healed him of his sickness, and promised
unto him fifeteene years of life. ISA. 38. verse. 10.
IN cutting off of my short days,
I said, I shall now go
Unto the grave; I am deprived
of my few years also,
2 I said that in the livings land
the Lord I shall not see,
I shall no more see man with these
that here indwellers be,
3 Mine age is parted and removed
by troubles and great strife
Like sheepheards tents; I veaver like
have even cut off my life.
With sickness he will cut me off
what ever I pretend,
From day even unto night will thou
of me soon make an end.
4 I rekned till morning that as
a Lion so will he
Break all my bones; from day to night
thou'l make an end of me.
Like a poor Cran in great distress,
or a troubled swallow,
^o did I chatter; I did mourn
as does the simple Dove.
My eyes do fail with looking up,
and very dimmed be,
O Lord, I am oppressed sore,
now undertake for me.
6 What shall I say? he spoken has,
and als has done no less,
(...) shall go softly all my years
in my souls bitterness.
7 In all these things is of my sprite
the life; they that believe
Do live by them; Recover me,
and so make me to live.
8 Behold for a desired peace
I had great bitterness,
But thou in love have saved me from
the pit of rottenesse;
For thou who of afflicted men
do ever notice take,
In thy great mercy all my sins,
have cast behind thy back.
9 The grave can not thee praise, and death
can not thee magnify,
They that go to the pit can not,
in hope rest well on thee.
10 The living, yea the living shall
thee praise as I this day;
The fathers to their children als,
shall teach thy truth always.
11 The LORD was ready me to save,
therefore we with accord,
To the string'd instruments will sing,
in the house of the LORD.
The Song of Jonah, Containing a Prayer and Thanks for his deliv^rance out of
the belly of the Whale, wherein he had been three days, and three nights.
JONAH 2. verse. 1.
I Cried to God and he me heard,
out of hells belly I
Did cry aloud, and thou my voice
even heardest by and by.
2 For thou had cast me in the deep,
in the midst of the Sea,
^e floods me compassd, and thy waves
did all pass over me.
Then said I, I out of thy sight
am cast with great disdain,
^t to thy holy Temple I
will surely look again.
Even to the soul the waters did
me compass with all speed,
^e deepth me closde about, the weeds
were wrapped about my head.
To the bottomes of mountains steep
I went down speedily,
(...) earth for ever with her bars,
did always compass me;
have thou from corruptions pit,
by mercies me upon,
lord, my God and Savior dear,
my life brought up anon.
The Lord, I did remember when
my soul thus within me
faint; into thy Temple came
my prayer even unto thee.
^hey that do lying vanities
observe in any way,
Their own mercy most foolishly
they do forsake always.
8 But I to thee with thankful voice,
will sacrifice afford,
What I have vowed, I mind to pay;
salvation's of the Lord.
The Song and Prayer of H^bakkuk, wherein he declaret^ his trembling at GODS
Majesty, and also the confidence of his faith, while the Caldeans afflicted
GODS people. HABBAK. 3. verse. 2.
O Lord God full of Majesty,
I thy servant have heard
Thy speech in words of gravity,
and I was sore afraid.
2 In midst of years revive, O Lord,
thy work and ever still
Make known; als in thy burning wrath
remember mercy well.
3 From TEMAN and from PARAN mount
came God the Holy one,
His glory cov'rd the heavens, his praise
was all the earth upon.
His brightness was as light, he had
Horns coming from his hand,
^here was the hiding of his great power
which none did understand.
Before him went the pestilence,
and hot coals at his feet;
He stood and measured all the earth,
as it did seem most meet.
^e did behold and also drove
asunder nations all,
and the everlasting mountains were
scattred both great and small:
^he hills perpetual in their place
did humbly stoup and bow,
His ways are everlasting all,
as we do clearly know.
Of Cushan in affliction great
I saw tents great and small,
^he Curtains of the Midian land,
did also tremble all.
Was the Lord God displeased much
against the Rivers clear?
^as thine anger incensed thus,
against Rivers far or near?
Against the sea was thy wrath so
that thou did fiercely ride,
Upon the horses and charets
that safety might abide?
9 Thy bow all naked quite was made,
that men there might believe
Thou swear unto the Tribes: thou did
the earth with waters cleave.
10 The hills thee saw and trembled all,
the water passed by,
The deep his voice did utter, and
lift up his hands on hie.
11 The Sun and Moon stood in their place,
even at thine arrows clear,
They at the light went, and the shine
of thy most glittring spear.
12 Thou furious did march through the land
in indignation great,
Thou also did the heathen thresh,
even in thine anger hot.
13 For thy peoples salvation thou
went forth without all fear,
Even for salvation of great worth,
with thine anointed dear.
Out of the wicked house did thou
with power great wound the head,
Discov'ring the foundation all
unto the neck with speed.
14 Thou by thy hand Almighty of
his villages the head,
Even with his staves did strike anon,
with fierceness great indeed:
They came out all as a whirlewind,
and that to scatter me,
Their joy was all as to devore,
the poor most secretly.
15 With thine horses which were most strong
thou did walk through the Sea,
Even through the heap of waters great,
as men did clearly see.
16 My belly trembled when I heard,
and at the voice anon
My lips quiv'red, and rottenesse
did enter in my bone.
I trembled in my self that I
might rest in days most sad,
When he comes to the people, he
with troops them will invade.
17 Though the figtree not blossom shall,
nor fruits in Vines shall be,
The labor of the Olive fat,
shall fade most certainly,
The fields shall not yield any meat,
the flock shall from the fold
Be cut off, and there shall no head
in stalles be young or old.
18 Yet will I in the mighty Lord
rejoice in every part,
In the Lord God my Savior dear,
I joy will with my heart.
19 The Lord God is my strength, and will
make my feet swift to be
Like Hindes feet, and will make me walk
upon my places hie.
The Song of Marie in the house of Zacharias, after Elizabeth had told her,
that at her salutation the child in her womb had leaped for joy. LUKE 1.
verse. 46.
MY soul now all with gladness filled
the LORD does magnify,
My sprite rejoiced has in God
a savior still for me.
2 For he regarded has of his
handmaide the estate so small,
For lo all generations sure,
shall hence me blessed call.
3 He strong, has done great things to me,
and holy is his name,
Who still him fear, his mercy great
shall always be on them.
4 He has great strength showed with his arm,
the proud he in all parts
Has scattred, in the vain conceits
of their most foolish hearts.
5 He has put down even from their seats
these that most mighty be,
And also he exalted has
these of a low degree.
6 The hungry well he filled has
with good things evry way,
These who are rich and wealthy he
has empty sent away.
7 In remembrance of his mercy
he helped has indeed
His servant Israel, as he spoke
to Abraham and his seed.
The Song of Zacharias where his mouth was opened, after he had been nine
months dumb for not believing the Angel Gabriel, who from God had promised him
a Son. LUKE 1. verse. 68.
LEt the LORD God of Israel
for ever blessed be,
For visited his people all
and als redeemed has he.
2 And of salvation he for us
has raisd up gloriously
Ane horn in worthy David's house
who served him faithfully.
3 As he spoke clearly by the mouth
of his dear Prophets all,
Which since the world began have been
even whether great or small.
4 That we should from our enemies all
be saved in each part,
And from the hand of all these men
that hate us with their heart*
5 The mercy promisd to perform
unto our fathers, and
^is holy Covenant made with us
to make always to stand.
The oath which he to Abraham swear
that he to us most dear
^ould grant that we safe from our foes
might serve him without fear.
Yea serve him in all holiness
and righteousness always,
^ot for a little space of time,
but even for all our days.
And thou child of the highest shall
be called the Prophet rare,
^or thou before the Lord shall go
his ways for to prepare.
Thou knowledge of salvation shall
unto his people give,
^y the remission of their sins
which he will all forgive.
^o Even through the tender mercy of
our God most prone to grace,
^hereby the DAYSPRING from on high
has shown to us his face.
1 To give light unto them that sit
in darkness and deaths shade,
Into the way of holy peace,
our feet always to guide.
The Song of Simeon: After he had long looked for the Consolation of Israel, he
at last moved by the Holy Spirit, went to the Temple, and there finding the
babe Christ, he took him up in his arms, and blessed GOD, and said, LUKE 2.
verse. 29.
NOw letst thou in thy mercy great,
thine old servant O LORD,
At last by death in peace depart,
according to thy word.
2 For after many days at last
mine eyes though now worn dim,
Thy consolation sure and fast
have with great comfort seen.
3 Which thou O Lord most lovingly,
even by thy saving grace,
Prepared have abundantly
before all peoples face.
4 A precious light to lighten all
the Gentiles far, and near,
^d als the glory of Israel
that is thy people dear.
This Song of Simeon, is always sung in the French Church for conclusion,
after they have received the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper. The use of all the
Songs.
THE songs of Larks, Linots, and Nightingals
Compard to these, are but like naughty tales,
which in our ears deserve to have no place;
^hese divine songs sad hearts do well solace,
and fill with joy: yea, and with capering foot
^ake souls to rise, and dance where they did sit
^ithin our breasts, like John at Marys voice,
which made him leap, and cheerfully rejoice.
To sing such songs let us our selves inure,
^ill that we dance above the starry floor,
and sing to Christ the Hallelujahs sweet,
^here Sun and Moon are pav'ment for our feet,
Far from the words of a most vile infection,
Which slute the body, and als slave the affection
Oh that we could from vain words here forbear
Till of our life be ended the Career:
Fie on vile men, whose badry songs a blot,
Defile the air come from their filthy throat.
Fie on these who in vanities do swim,
Who dance and leap, and hold out any lim
With nimble fet-locks; but have not a word
Of holy songs to laud and praise the Lord:
Such want a heart Christ's love for to remark*
They can not sing, or dance before the Ark.
But as for us, away with fleshly love,
And beastly songs which Gods word does reprove
Vain idle words which in these latter days,
Are made the subject of men's sweetest lays;
Let Christ the fairest all the Saints among
Be still the matter of our daily Song;
Let all our Ditties run upon this string,
Let hearts and Harps in him rejoice and sing;
What is amiss, let us it hence remove,
That we may sing of Christ our life and love.
FINIS.
Some few Christian Precepts.
WHat God the gives take in good part,
cease other to devour,
Like Alexanders glutton net
whose Kingdom Kinged four.
When thou triumphs, not lofty be
but think upon a cross,
^or who the day is set on hie
may soon his laurel loss.
Take heed in time and learn to fear,
the great Almighty God,
Who made Denis a King to bear
for Scepter Pedants rod.
Remember how that Prince of Spain,
who for Europe did breath,
By Gods Almighty hand was slain
even by a louzie death.
Remember how some in their pride
Gods heavy hand did feel,
Their head on neck could not abide.
off chopped with whiffing steel.
6 Think still on death for time does slip
though it seems but to creep,
Man here is as at sea, his ship
still sails, though men do sleep.
7 While wind does serve, embark, be wise
to meet all haps before,
When death shall cut thine enterprise,
then thou shall row no more.
8 Take time in time, for wind and tide
will in a moment turn,
We here sure will not long abide,
and gone, will not return.
9 Look not here for true happiness,
the place of our exile,
A bare and barren wilderness,
where we live all this while.
10 Look on thy body as on clay,
the soul is stuff more fine,
A substance which wears not away
a blast of breath divine.
11 Luske not in sloth, seek not thine ease,
Moths gnow clothes in a chest,
Swords also rust within their sheeths,
and so do souls in rest.
12 Manure thy heart with diligence,
and it in sow good seed,
But still beware of negligence,
for early grows the weed.
13 All idleness disnatures wit,
but travel makes it quick,
Do nothing that disableth it
by force or yet by trick,
14 With constant eye still Christ behold,
and on him still repose,
As with the Sun the Mary gold,
does open still or close.
15 When death us summons to go hence,
we should not be dejected,
For from the same no more the Prince
then Carters is protected.
16 Our life's a web of small and gross,
this is us given for doom;
That sorrows are as threeds a Cross
in this our earthly loome.
17 Let us abhore ambition
content with that we have,
In grave in one condition
are King, Earl, Sir and Slave.
18 This earth is like a Chesse-board where
some leap some limp anon,
Kings, Pawnes, Knights, Aphens here and there
stand; yet there wood is one.
1 TIMOTHY 1. verse. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise GOD, be honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.


Errata.
IF any of these verses go not so smoothly as thou would, know that I have
tied my self very straightly to keep still the words of the Scripture: Some
escapes there be in the printing, at some times a syllable more, and some are
less then should, but the judicious Reader may easily take the matter up: Page
272. David's house is put for Isra'ls house, Page 142. bribidge for bribing,
Page 265. qy for by, Page 330. day say for did say, Page 364. trotring for
totring, etc.


