1. CROSSES, 2. COMFORTS, 3. COUNSELS. Needful to be considered, and
carefully to be laid up in the Hearts of the Godly, in these boisterous
broiles, and bloody times. By M. Zachary Boyd.

Isa. 9.5. Every Battle of the Warriou^ is with confused noise, and garments
rolled in blood. Ierem. 8.22. Is there no balm in Gilead? Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me in the day trouble, and I will deliver thee. printer's device of George
Anderson, featuring a male head at the center of an arrangement of tassles and
feathers, with a lion's head at the top left and right corners (not in
McKerrow)

Printed at Glasgow by George Anderson, 1643.

emblematic printer's device of John Day, featuring an old man displaying a
skeleton on an ornate tomb to a younger one; from the skeleton issues a tree;
in the background is a coastal town (McKerrow 128) ETSI MORS, INDIES ACCELERAT

VIVET TAMEN POST FVNERA VIRTUES



To the right Noble, and most Virtuous Lady, D. ANNE CUNINGAME, Lady Marquess
of Hamiltoun.
MADAME,
THis earth, as one has said well, is but a moat of darkness, and a lump of
vanity; yea all things under the Sun, says Solomon, are but vanity of
vanities; Ec. 1.2 Ec. 12.13
our only wisdom is to fear GOD, and keep his commandments, this is the whole
duty of man, which should be our chiefest task.

But, alas, our divisions like harpies and horseleaches are ready to rent and
tear in pieces the very heart strings, and to suck out the inmost blood, and
last life of our dearly beloved mother the Church of Britain.

And now your La. who have hitherto win good reputation among the Saints, Judge.
5.7
is here desired to continue to be a Deborah, a mother in Israel.

It is a worthy and noble employment to do any good for the well of Zion: your
La. Note.
is a branch of that noble and ancient house of Glencarn, who in the first
reformation, to their eternal praise, while many others like Issachar, a dull
ass, Genesis 49.14 Judge 5.23
did couch down between two burdens, came out boldly, to help the LORD against
the mighty.

The Gunpowder papists are now in hopes with power and policy, craft and
cruelty, to take GODS Ark prisoner, and to set up their Dagon.

Our refuge is to the Lord of hosts, who in the very turning of an hand, and
closing of an eye, can dash down all their bloody designs, as He marred the
fox FAUX from fireing the powder.

How ever the matter go, Christ must be true, his servants must look for
affliction; In the Text of these sermons, he says unto them, Ye shall be
betrayed by parents and brethren, etc. In this little valume I have done what I
could, by Gods grace, to descry and decipher both Crosses, Comforts and
counsel, for the well of Gods kirk in these bloody days.

Here willing to acquit some part of my bounden duty toward your La. no less
eminant in goodness than in greatness, 2 John. 1
I dedicate this little to speak in S. Iohnes words. Unto the elect Lady and
her children, whom I love in the truth: That both your La. and your most noble
Posterity, may ever be on Christ's side, I humbly prostrate and power out my
soul, before the Throne of Grace and Mercy.

Your La. humble and obedient servant, M. Zachary Boyd.

CROSSES. The first Sermon, preached the 12. day of March; 1643.
LUKE XXI. 16. Ye shall be betrayed both by Parents, and Brethren, and
Kinsmen, and Friends, and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.

Verse. 17. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake.


THere be four parts in this Chapter; in the first part until the fifth verse
Christ commends the poor widow, who cast in her two mites into the treasury.

There be contributions appointed now for Gods church in great distress: A
publict fast with tears and prayers have been ordained to be through the whole
land from Dan even to Beershebah. Sam. 17.11 Note.
Happy art thou who ever thou be, if from a sincere heart thou contribute the
least mite of a holy groan for the well of Zion, Psalm. 122.6
the psalmist says, they shall prosper that love thee: In the second part of
this chapter from the fifth verse until the twentiefive, Christ fortelleth the
destruction of the Temple: All glory must go down that stands not by Christ's
favor; Christ was unwelcome to that Temple, and therefore a stone was not left
upon a stone: also it behoved all ceremonies to flee away quickly after the
coming of that bright and glorious Sun, the Sun of righteousness. Mal. 4.2


In the third part from the twenty and fifth verse until the thirty and
fourth, it is declared what signs should appear before the last day: When that
day shall come, then all Gods children shall get rest, Rev. 21.4
all tears shall be wiped from their eyes.

In the fourth part, from the thirty and fourth verse until the end, the LORD
exhorts all his servants to be watchful, There was never greater need to
watch and pray then at this time, for there were never greater dangers nor more
tentations; for this cause, I in Christ's own words exhort you all, Watch and
pray, Mat. 26.41
that ye enter not into temptation.

The words of my text, are within the compass of the second part; they
contain diverse crosses that were to come upon Christ's servants, before the
destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem.

Before the destruction of a nation, a city or family, or private man, the
LORD ordinarily gives warnings less or more: Note.
As in temporal things, signs before tempests appear; as sweating of stones,
flying of fowls; noise of dams and great water falls threeds on the grass, a
red sun and a lowering sky in the morning; so before desolations of countries,
destructions of cities, families, or private men, the Lord ordinarily gives
warning that men may make good use of the same.

As for us, let us not be like these to whom the Lord said, O ye hypocrites,
Math. 16.9
ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of
the times? that is, the signs going before the first coming of Christ; now we
may discern the signs of great judgments to come on this unthankful
generation.

In the words of this text, there is a warning given by Christ to his
disciples, concerning great troubles that were to come upon them; ye, said be,
shall be betrayed both by parents and brethren, and kinsefolkes, and friends.

This text is most fit for this time, wherein we may most clearly see signs of
horrible troubles coming upon Gods church: Note.
The Lord is threatening to plead against us both with famine and blood: Eze.
38.22
let us now come to the words wherein we have to speak of crosses.

The division of the text. IN the words that I have read, there is a prediction
of great crosses and calamities to come upon Christ's servants; there be three
parts of the text: In the first, Christ for tells that they shall be
betrayed; In the second part he declares that some of them shall be put to
death; In the third part he shows that they shall be hated of all men for
his names sake; Of these I shall speak in order as God shall assist me by his
holy Spirit.

I. PART. Betraying.
IN all the parts of this text, the Lord forwarneth his disciples both present
and to come, of very great troubles; ye, said he, shall be betrayed both by
parents and kinsefolkes and friends, etc.

Observe here first in general, The doctrine.
the great mercy of God toward his own children; he sensibly gives them
warning before troubles come; he tells them most plainly that here is not
their rest, but that they must look for many troubles, even troubles of all
sorts: The Lord in forwarning his children of troubles, has one of these two
ends before him; either he does so that his servants may escape the danger,
Genesis 6.13
so Noah was warned by God to make an Arc, and to save himself and his family
from the flood; Genesis 19.15
so Lot was warned by the Angel to flee from Sodom, before fire came down and
destroyed it; or else God gives to his servants forewarning of troubles, that
they may prepare themselves to bear them the more patiently and courageously;
for this end especially he made his Apostles acquainted before hand, that
very great troubles were to fall upon them.

The use, The use.
let us all take this warning to our selves we have had a long peace, but let
us not look, for a perpetual prosperity; Gods Church below is a militant
Church ever in a warfare; as long as the devil and wicked men are permitted to
go loose in the world, the church shall not want her enemies; Psalm. 30.6
It was a very foolish word that David said, I said in my prosperity, I shall
never be moved, but what followed? thou did hide thy face and I was
troubled. Note.
God for the sins of this land does threaten to hide his face; if he do so, we
all shall be troubled: how ever it go, we are much beholden to the Lord who
these years bypast has given us so many warnings, whereas he might have
suffered us with the wicked to return and be ashamed suddenly; Psalm. 6.11
Note.
He has not at the first said to us as he said to his own people Israel, Exo.
33.5
I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee; these
five or six years bypast, the Lord has been still threatening with judgments
after judgments, to come up into the midst of us, for to consume us; he has
not spoken of moments but of years, and for moments, has given us years to
repent in; and woe unto us if we make not good use of such a rare and
wonderful mercy.

Let us now from the general come to the particulars; the Lord in this text
gives his disciples warning of three particular evils, first betraying:
secondly, putting to death of some; thirdly an universal hatred for his names
sake; first we have to speak of betraying.

The first evil he forewarnes them of, is betraying; the word in the original
signifies to yield, to commit, to give over, or betray; these by whom they
should be betrayed, are here four in number: 1. their parents: 2. their
brethren: 3. their kinsemen: 4. their friends; Christ in Matthew makes mention
of the like unnatural dealing; the brother says he, Mat. 10.21
shall deliver up the brother to death and the father the child, and the
children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to
death: Note.
The sense of all these words is, as if the Lord had said to his Apostles, and
to all the faithful; your troubles shall be very great, for they shall proceed
not only from strangers, but from your dearest and nearest in nature, even from
your parents, children, brethren kinsmen, friends, from whom in all worldly
appearance ye might expect your greatest comforts, as being these whose bowels
should be full of favor and tender love for to procure your good.

Observe here that Gods dearest children, The doctrine.
who are Psalm. 119.38. devoted to Gods fear, are subject to great afflictions;
the trouble is very piercing when we are crossed by these who should be our
special comfort. Note.
After that David had spoken of many that had troubled him, he melting for
heaviness subjoyned this as more then all, Psalm. 41.9
yet my familiar friend in whom I trusted which did eat of my bread, has lift
up his heel against me, this was said of Ahitophel in the first place, and
after of Judas his treachery, against Christ, of whom Christ said in the new
Testament, John 13.18
He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against me, when a master
is betrayed by his servant, when a Father or a mother is crossed by their
children, the affliction is very painful to bear; Jobs friends were a great
grief unto him, their words wounded him more on the doung hill, then the evil
he had received by the Sabeans and Caldeans, who had robbed him of all his
goods.

The 1. use; The 1. use.
when such things befall us, that our nearest friends trouble us, let us
remember that such has been the case of the dearest of Gods children; Note.
1 Samuel 14.44 2 Samuel 15.12 John. 18.2
Jonathan had a persecuting father and David a persecuting son, and Christ
had a traitor servant: and to all the apostles it is said here, ye shall be
betrayed both by parents and by brethren, Psalm. 116.19
and kinsmen and friends;

The 2. use: The 2. use. Note.
Let us learn here neither in the cause of God, nor yet in things that concern
our selves to trust in any man; Job said, my friends scorn me, Job. 16.20
many may say the like: behold here how parents and brethren and kinsemen and
friends turn all traitors to betray the servants of the Lord; Note.
There is only one father that cannot betray his children even God our father,
only one Brother, and only one friend, only one kinseman Christ, that changes
not in his love; but as for men all men are liars, Psalm. 73.26
David said that God failed him never. Note.
If men in these last days had the eyes of Elishah, to see within the breasts
of men, 2 King. 8.11
as he looked into Hazael, they would see in many familiar friends things to
be done, for which they might justly in Hazaels words. be called dogs rather
then men. Note.
God has hid many particulars from our eyes, but he has told us this in
general, that many who seem to be our greatest friends, will not fail to
betray us. A man sitting at the Sermon like a child sucking his mothers
breasts, will be ready to betray the preacher; when he finds his time, he
will spit out the sincere milk of Gods Word, 1 Pet. 2.2
and call it the bitter gall of treason: Note.
As Jrijah the Captain of the Ward falsely accused the Prophet Jeremiah,
saying, Thou art a Traitor, Jer. 37.13
Thou fallest away to the Caldeans; to such many Preachers may say, Job 19.2
as Job said to his naughty friends, How long will ye vex my soul, and
break me in pieces with words?

Note.
In my judgment Satan in this land has a nest of cockatrices eggs, where for
a time he sits very still and quiet, until he has hatched a number of
traitors, divelish Doegs, who being his chickens, will anon come out of his
nest, and fly abroad for the delating and betraying of many.

Note.
There be in this land many professors, they are not papists; but what then?
Give them peace and plenty, and let them see the rivers, Job. 20.17
the floods, the brooks of honey and butter, and little shall they care for any
Religion; all is one to them to be for God or for Baal; they have a stomach of
an Ostrich, that will be able to digest a service book, before they loss a
ridge of their land: before such take up Christ's Cross to suffer, they will
rather take up the Tabernacle of Moloch, Act. 7.43
and the star of the god Remphan; Such with all their fair outward profession
in days of peace, are but like a potsheard, Pro. 23.23
covered with silver dross. Others are Judas like, who first served Christ for
the bag, Math. 27.3
and afterward served his enemies for thirty pieces of silver. Note.
Thousands if they once imagine that there is more profit by serving the
queen of Heaven, then the KING of Heaven, will keep all their incense and
drink offerings for her; who would have thought that ever Gods people would
have spoken these words, Jer. 44.18
Since we left off to burn incense to the queen of Heaven, that is, to the
Sun or Moon, we have been consumed by the sword, and by the famine.

Note.
Thousands in this land who have subscribed with their hand unto the LORD, Isa.
44.5
and surnamed themselves Covenanters, are this day ready, like Ahola and
Aholibah, Ezekiel. 23.5
to play the harlot with idols, before that for Religion they put on the
sheepskins, and the goat skins, Heb. 11.37
for to go wander up and down, or for to dwell in caves; Note.
or to quite their dainties, for like poor bodies, to go in rags, Job 30.4
and cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat. Alas,
the love of Christ constrains few in this land to have but a resolution to
suffer; We of this nation, for the most part, are like the church of Sardis,
Rev. 3.1.
we have a name that we live, but are dead; yea, Eze. 24.6.
we are like a pot whose scumme is not gone out of it: there be few that regard
that glorious Covenant of life and peace: Mal. 2.5.
to many may be said, Mal. 2.8.
Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi.

Note.
Fie, fie upon the treachery of many, fie upon our divisions, Have we not all one
Father? Mal. 2.10
Has not one God created us? Are we not all men of one country? Have we not
of late been all compassed with the common enemy, papists, atheists, and
Armenians? Have we not all sworn one Covenant? Have we not abjured all
divisive motions? And now, why do we deal treacherously every man against his
brother, Mal. 2.10
by profaining the Covenant of our Fathers? And now why are we become
treacherous to Christ our husband, as women that break wedlock? Eze. 16.38
Our danger, Genesis 4.7.
like Cains sin lies at the door: our iniquities have highly provoked God to
wrath; He in a rage may justly say to this nation, as in Hoseas time he said
to Israel, Ye have transgressed my Covenant, Hol. 8.1
and trespassed against my Law.

If we repent not in time, he in his fury shall join the bloody sword with
this threatened famine, Ezekiel. 14.17
saying, Sword go through the land. At such a time as this it was heard in
Israel, Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 21.9.
Say a sword, a sword is sharpened, and also fourbished. 10.
It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter: it is fourbished, that it may
glitter: should we then make mirth? Is this a time for laughter? We are called
to lamentations, Zeph. 2.2
for the Decree is so far advanced against us, that except with all haste we
return to God, we shall be made a spectacle of amazement; though these three
men, Noah, Daniel, Eze. 14.20
and Job were all three this day living in Scotland, they should not be able to
deliver us.

Who does not see most fearful breaking out of monstrous sins in all the
quarters of the land? Hos. 4.2.
We all may well say with Jeremiah, Jer. 14.7
Our iniquities testify against us, and our backslidings are many, Note.
yea we have pressed God under us, Amos 2.13
as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, and therefore we most justly
deserve to be abhoreed of all, so that in our greatest trouble none should go
aside for once to ask how we do. Jer. 15.5


Seeing this land is so crammed with numbers of men, who daily by their
divisive motions break Gods Covenant, let not a man either trust in his
father, or in his son, or in his kinsmen, or in his friends; the world is full
of treason, Christ and his Servants are betrayed by many: of too many in
Scotland this day may God say to his Servants, as he said to Ezekiel concerning
Israel, Son of man, Eze. 22.18
the house of Israel is to me become dross; Note.
Many are like Jeremiahs rotten linen girdle, Jer. 13.10
which was good for nothing.

II. PART. Putting to Death.
After betraying, the Lord here speaks to his disciples of putting some of
them to death; Some of you, said he, shall they cause to be put to death.

Observe here how wicked men, The doctrine. Hos. 4.8.
who, as the Prophet speaks, set their heart on iniquity, can not be tied by
any bonds of love; they ever grow worse and worse; behold here how after they
have betrayed Gods servants, they can not rest, until they cause some of them
to be put to death; under color of freindship they confer with them
familiarly, or come to hear them, for to steal some words, which they may so
wrest, as to make them treasonable, and the speakers traitoures; If any man
should defend us and save our life it is a father, a friend, a brother or
kinseman, or friends; a friend, says Solomon, is borne for affliction, Pro.
18.24
and there is a friend that sticks closer then a brother.

Note.
Worldly friends and kinsemen are often very sensible in wrongs done to their
friends in earthly matters, as carnal quarrels, O then they will hive together
like Bees, and cluster like burres; but if the cause of Christ be in question,
Satan draws away unsanctified men's hearts, and of friends turns them foes,
for to delate them, and cause some of them to be put to death The use.


The use, Note.
Let us learn that carnal bands can not tie men in spiritual matters; near
in blood, but not in GOD, can not have solid love, Dan. 2.43
they are like the iron and myrie clay of the feet of Nebuchadnezzars image,
which could not cleave one to another: By this let us know, what it is of all
sorts of friendship that is not grounded upon God.

Observe here again, The doctrine.
that Christ says here, they shall cause some of you to be put to death: some
but not all; where we may learn, that God calls not all his servants to be
Martyrs: Note.
When Peter had heard of Christ that in his old days he should be a martyr,
he incontinent enquired what should become of John; Lord said he, Ioh. 21.21
and what shall this man do? as if he had said, shall he be bound and led
away also? the Lords answer was, what is that to thee? * The Lord in his
wisdom, permits some of his servants to be all their days like Peter when
he was young, having liberty to gird themselves and go whether they would to
be free of fetters and prison; John 21.18
Sometimes he will hide his servants from troubles, Isa. 26.20
Come my people said he enter into thy chambers and shut thy doors about thee;
hide thy self for a little moment, until the indignation be past; Some of his
servants he will laden with temporal blessings in abundance; Eze. 34.15
I, said the Lord, will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down all
they that worship; as upon fat leasures.

Note.
All the true worshippers of God are not always poor and lean no not, the
psalmest says, that they that be fat upon the earth shall eat and worship,
Psalm. 22.29
that is, the rich and wealthy as well as the poor shall be servants to the
Lord. Abraham was rich, and Jacob was rich, and Job was rich, and the three
wise men that came to worship Christ in the cratch were wealthy, they opened
their treasures and presented unto Christ gifts; gold, Mat. 2.11
frankincense and myrrh: All these and many more were by God made fat upon the
earth, and they did eat and did truly worship the Lord in all sincerity.

Note.
Others again by his divine dispensation, he will appoint in a poor estate to
wander about in sheepeskins, and goatskins, Heb. 11.37
being like Joshuah clothed with filthy garments, Zech. 3.3.
or like Gibionites going with old and clouted shoes. Josh. 9.5


Others he will put to a strict form of life, in a sober diet, Ier. 35.9.
like the Rechabites, who had no houses to dwell in, and did drink only water:
others as here he will suffer to be put to death; of all these I will say, this
is the generation of them that seek him. Psalm. 24.6


The use. The use. Note.
If the Lord permit our lot to be so, that we like those of my text be put to
death, let us count it an honor; to die for Christ, is truly to die in the
bed of honor. How many Soldiers for a triffle by day will go boldly, and
adventure their life upon the mouth of a Canon, upon a breach, or in the open
field? But, O, for a kingdom, and for a kingdom in Heaven, what should a man
refuse either to do or suffer?

III. PART. Hatred for his Names sake.
WE have heard how the Lord has given his disciples warning of three
particulars evils that were to come upon them, the first was a betraying of
them by their parents, brethren kinsmen and friends, the second was, a causing
of some of them to be put to death, of those we have spoken: Now the third
follows, which is an universal hatred for Christ's Names sake, Ye, said he,
shall be hated of all men for my Names sake.

In these words I shall consider these three things; first there is a hatred
against Gods servants foretold, Ye shall be hated, said Christ; secondly, he
declares that this hatred shall be very great, even universal, Ye shall be
hated of all men; thirdly, he shows for what cause, For my Names sake.

1. Hatred against Gods Servants.
FIrst the Lord warns his disciples here of a great evil; Ye said he,
shall be hated.

Hatred is the very dregs of wrath, Ira odium generat.
for great wrath at last turns into hatred. He says not unto his Disciples,
Men shall be angry at you, but he says, Ye shall be hated: this is an
effect of hatred, these that hate any, desire neither to hear, nor to see
them; Ammon after he began to hate Tamar could not suffer her to tarry any
longer in his sight, but caused thrust her out at doors: 2 Samuel 13.17 1 King.
22.8
King Ahab could not hear the preachings of Micajah, his reason was, I hate him.

Observe here that Gods servants have this among many other troubles, The
doctrine.
they are hated; this is very grievous to Gods children; Jsaack compleined
that Abimelechs servants had hated him, and sent him away; Ge^. 26.27
from this puddle of hatred issue out the streams of brawlings and debates.
Pro. 10.12
Hatred, says Solomon, stirs up strifes: Note.
The wicked can not suffer Gods children to live in peace, because they hate
them, and they can not but hate them, because light and darkness can have no
communion, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
Christ can not have concord with Belial.

The use, The use. Note.
Let Gods children here learn what they have to look for in this world, let
them live like Angels, they shall not fail to be hated, this must not seem
strange unto us, when we are abhorred by the men of the world: Gods dearest
ones have been this dealt with, Jacob was hated of Esau, Genesis 27.41
and Ahab hated good Micajah; yea, 1 Kin. 22.8
and the world hated Christ himself: If, says Christ, the world hate you,
Ioh. 15.18
ye know that it hated me before it hated you; we must look for no better,
and therefore resting upon the love of God, we must contemn the hatred of the
world. Note.
It is but a little matter to be so hated of the world, that a man be called
after the name of Isaacks second Well, sitnah, that is hatred, Genesis 26.21
if so be that with Solomon he be Gods jedidiah, beloved of the Lord. 2 Samuel
12.25


2. The universalitie of the hatred.
YE have heard how Christ has said to his servants, Ye shall be hated:
Secondly, it follows that we consider the Universalitie of this hatred, Ye,
said he, shall be hated of all men.

Here it may be objected, how could that be? If they were to be hated of all
men, they should be hated of the godly also.

Note.
To this I answer briefly, By all men, we must understand all sort of men,
whether rich or poor, noble or ignoble, men of all ranks; such also are called
all men, because the most part of men hate GOD and his servants; the most part
of the world, as ye may know, walk in the broad way, Mat. 7.13
and all such are poisoned with hatred against Christ and his servants:
according to this the Lord here said to his disciples, Ye shall be hated of
all men. In the words before Christ had spoken to his Disciples of parents,
brethren kinsmen, and friends, that would betray them, here he speaks of
others of all ranks that would hate them.

Observe here, The doctrine.
that the children of God have many adversaries; they are so many, that in this
text they are called all men, the enemies of the Saints here below, may take
unto themselves the devils name, Legion, because they are many: As they are
many, Mark. 5.9.
so are they most despightfull, full of hatred, most ready to oppress Gods
children in a most fearful manner, to to rob and to spoil them, to banish and
burn them, to head and to hang them; yea, Heb. 11.37
and to sow them asunder; yea, and to sell them like beasts, as did these
enemies of Gods people in Joels days, Joel 3.3
who gave a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink
and wash their steps with butter

The use, Job 29.6 The use.
Let us not wonder to see many horns in the sides of these that serve God; if
the like befall to our selves, let us not fret; shall not Christ's words be true
all men?

Again, The doctrine.
observe here particularly what is the condition of Gods servants here below,
they are the object of hatred to the most part of the world. Note.
If a child of God through infirmity, fall into any sin, the discourse thereof
shall empty many bowls of wine, and many who are more modest, have their
secret joy for the fall of the Man, which plainly declare hatred to be in the
heart; what words can better express the matter, than the words of Christ in
this text, Ye shall be hated of all men.

The use, The use.
When we find it so toward our selves, let it not seem strange; Christ's
words must be true: Note.
It should be our comfort thus to be hated, for by such means we may know whose
we are. Joh. 15.19
If, said Christ, ye were of the world, the world would love his own; But ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you: Note.
Seeing it is so, let us not care for the friendship of wicked men; away with
their love, praise, and commendation: Woe unto you, Luke 6.26
said Christ, when all men shall speak well of you, for so did their fathers
unto the false prophets.

Again, The doctrine.
whereas the Lord here says to his servants, that they shall be hated of all
men, I observe, that great is the folly, yea the fury, and madness of the
wicked; they hate the very men for whose sake their life is spared: If the
godly were all out of the world, the world should go to an end; if these
pillars were away, the very Heavens should pass away with a noise.

2 Pet. 3.10
As the wicked are fools, so are they unthankful, for they hate the men whose
clothes they put on, and whose meat they daily eat: for all the meat and
clothes in this world, by right, belong only to these that are godly, to whom
Gods word has said, 1 Cor. 3.21
all things are yours: if all things be theirs, the wicked have nothing but by
usurpation. Again, they are both fools and unthankful, in that they hate the
godly, who hold Gods judgments off them, Eze. 22.30
for only they make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before God for the land,
Zeph. 3.3
that he should not destroy it; notwithstanding of all these benefits, these
evening wolves both hate and abhor them.

The use, The use. Note.
Wonder not that wicked men go to hell, for they are all fools, they are like
mad men, who cutting the pillars of the house, should cause the house fall down
above their heads; the godly are the pillars of the world: As for us, let us
love all these that love God, let them be to us as all the godly are to Christ
Our mother, Luke 8.21
our brother, and our sister.

Again, The doctrine.
whereas Christ here by way of prophecy fortelleth what hatred shall be in the
hearts of wicked men against his servants, I observe Christ's knowledge and
wisdom to be great; Note.
we may with good reason say that he is wiser then Daniel, Eze. 28.3
yea wiser then Solomon, who was wiser then all men: 1 King 4.31
then Ethan the Ezrahite and Heman and Chalcol and Darda the sons of Mahol; all
these, by all their great wisdom, could see no thing of all that is enclosed
within the hearts of men: men's hearts have no windows for eyes of flesh, but
all is open to Gods eyes of fire; Revel. 1.14
God in Ezekiel said to his people, Ezekiel. 11.5
I know all the things that came into your mind, yea every one of them: The
Lord here saw a far off that great hatred that was to be in the hearts of all
men against his dear servants; Note.
He said not unto them in this text, that all men shall strike you with their
hands, or rail upon you with their tongues, but he forwarneth them of a
persecution, enclosed in the hearts of the most part, even the hatred of the
heart; Ye, said he, shall be hated of all men for my names sake.

The use, The use. Note.
Ye who have the name of Christians, learn here not to think it enough, if
with your tongues ye rail not upon Gods servants, or if ye strike them not:
Behold here in Christ's account it is a persecution, if ye hate them in your
heart: See therefore ye take heed to your hearts, and that ye love these whom
God loves: As for your hatred, spend it upon your sins, rail on them with
your tongues, Luke 18.13
strike upon your Breast with the Publicane, and upon your thigh with Ephraim,
Jer. 31.19
and never take rest, until ye get that holy revenge, which is required to
be in that godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11 10.
that works repentance never to be repented of.

3. For what cause the godly are hated of the wicked.
WE have heard how Christ did foretell to his servants, that they should be
hated: I also declarunto you the universalitie of the hatred, Ye shall be
hated of all men; Now thirdly it follows that we consider the ground and
cause of all this hatred, it is contained in these words, For my names sake;
that is as much as if Christ had said to his servants, ye shall be hated for
my cause, for the profession, for the Gospel, the doctrine of my name, or
because ye belong unto me, and because your heart is sound in my statuts. Psalm.
119.80


The doctrine. Note.
Observe here for what cause chiefly the wicked persecute Gods servants; it is
not for their faults, because they are liars, and swearers, and swagerers, and
drunkards, and harlots, or because, as God upbraided his people, Eze. 39.27
their way is before God as the uncleanness of a rem ved Woman no not, but for
my names sake, says the Lord: where we may learn, that the Gospel, the
doctrine of Christ's name has many enemies. Note.
Thieves and harlots hate the light of the Sun, yea they abhor the least
glaunce of a candle; the doctrine of Christ's name is a shining sermon, Hos. 6.5.
it sets sin before the sinners eyes; it checks and heweth them for it; They
hateing to be reformed, hate also to be reproved: 1 King 22.8
Ahab hated Micajah for no other reason, but because he preached Truth, and
would not flatter him in his sins, as the other false prophets had done, Ye,
said Christ here to his faithful servants. shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake.

The 1. use, The 1. use.
Let all Gods servants here learn, whatto look for from the most part of
men, even hatred for Christ's name: When such things come to pass that many for
the same cause hateus, let us not wonder: Note.
The wicked that do such things are so many, that in my text they are called
all men: ye, said Christ, shall be hated of all men for my names sake: Note.
Let the love of one man Christ, be a recompense against the hatred of all
men; let heaven granted unto us for his names sake, encourage us to bear
patiently the hatred of all men for his names sake; yea, when we so suffer,
let us rejoice that we are accounted worthy, to suffer reproach or shame for
the sake of his sacred name: Let this be our joy, we have the dearest of Gods
children with us in the same case, king David said, Psalm. 119.63
I am a companion of all them that fear thee.

The 2. The 2. use.
use: Seeing the godly suffer so willingly much hatred for Christ's names sake,
and seeing only for his names sake we receive all our comfort, John 14.13
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do, and seeing his name is
so honorable that at his name every knee must bow: Philip. 2.10
Let us love the name of Jesus that plant of renown; Eze. 34.29
let us respect it and honor it, that we weary not in any troubles we suffer
for it: Note.
If seven years of that most painful service for Rachel seemed to Jacob but
short, Genesis 29.20 2 Cor. 5.14
because he loved her, let the constraining love of Christ so sweaten all our
sorrows, that they may seem easy unto us; yea, matter of great joy as the
Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name:
Acts 5.41
Note.
If for Christ's name sake our adversary should write a book against us; Job.
31.36
let us be content with Job, to take it upon our shoulder, and bind it as a
crown to us: yea, if for his names sake we were bound with a chain of iron,
let that iron chain be more precious in our eyes, Genesis 41.42
then that chain of gold that Pharao put about Joseph's neck; let us in a holy
brag in such a case say with S. Paul bound in iron, It is for the hope of
Jsrael that I am bound with this chain; Act. 28.20
that chain was to him as a most rare and precious jewel.

The 3. use: The 3. use. Note.
Let this serve for reproof to all these, who in steed of suffering for the
sacred name of Christ, most vilely abuse this name above their cups, or
vilipend it in the streets, or with profaine merchands have it in their shops,
to cover their lies for to deceive the buyers in selling their wares; All such
men will never suffer hatred for the name of Jesus. The 4. use.


The 4. use: Let this also serve for reproof to many, who are not moved for
the abuse of this glorious name of Christ, for whose sake they should be ready
to suffer the hatred of the most part: Note.
If any speak a word of reproach against their name, they anon from words
will go to swords; yea, fight in blood to the knees, but the name of Jesus
has few friends; If so it be that some speak words of reproof, they for the
most part are like the soft reproves of Eli, whose words to his sons were
without life, blunt without anedge why do ye such things? 1 Samuel 2.23
for I hear of your evil doings by all this people; Nay my sons, for it is
no good report that I hear; 25.
If one man sin against another, the judge will judge him, but if a man sin
against the LORD, who shall entreat for him? How few are these among us, that
will this day speak so much for God? and yet Gods judgments were such against
Eli and his house for his softness in Gods quarrel, that the ears of every
one of them that heard of them were made to tingle: 1 Samuel 3.11
Such also are not ready to suffer hatred for the sake of this name.

The 5. use: The 5. use. Note.
Last of all, seeing wicked men hate the godly for Christ's name sake, let us
take good heed that when wicked men hate us or persecute us, it be not for our
own sake, for any evil in us, yea that it be not as it is often said in Amos,
Amos 1.3 etc. 1 Pet. 2.20
For three transgressions and for four. Peter says, What glory is it, if when
ye be buffited for your fault, ye shall take it patiently, Let no man suffer
as a malefactor, that is not thank worthy; Let us all therefore take good heed
that our afflictions be not for our deservings, like the thief on the cross,
who said to his fellow, we are here justly, Luke 23.41
for we receive the due reward of our deeds; Hos. 8.3
So the Prophet Hosea speaking of Israel said, Israel has cast off the thing
that is good; the enemy shall pursue him.

Let us all therefore with all diligence give good heed that we be not
pursued, afflicted, or hated, for casting off the thing that is good, but that
our sufferings be for Christ's names sake who for our sake pleased not himself,
Romans 15.3
but willingly exposed himself to all sorts of reproaches and contumelies, yea
and that to the shameful death of the cross: To him be glory for ever: AMEN.

COMFORTS, AND COUNCIL. The second Sermon, preached the 19. day of March, 1643.
LUKE XXI. 18. But there shall not a hair of your head perish.

Verse. 19. In your patience therefore possess your souls


MY ways, said God, are not your ways, Isa. 55.8
and my thoughts are not your thoughts: For as the Heavens are higher then the
earth, 9.
so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts:
The ways of men for the most part, have fair beginnings but end not so; many
like Joab first kiss, and after kill, first smile; 2 Samuel 20.9
but after smite; the ways of Satan with men at the beginning, is to hide all
dangers until the last come; when he would have allured Christ unto his
service, he spoke to him of great gifts, Mat. 4.8
even all the kingdoms of the world, if he would but fall down and worship
him; he spoke not a word of hell unto him, but only of preferments unto worldly
honor. The ways of God are not such; He at the first meeting speaks to men
of crosses, but after that, as in this text, he cherishes them with comforts,
and directs them with counsels: According to this he speaks here to his
disciples; he had terrified them in the words preceding with betraying,
putting to death, and with the hatred of all men; Now in these words he makes
his candie to shine upon their heads, Job. 29.3
he manifests his love in a great measure of comfort, But, says he, there
shall not a hair of your head perish; In your patience possess ye your
souls: here is a staff of steel to lean on in great troubles; I, said
David, Psalm. 27.13
had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, etc.

The division of the Text. IN these Words there be two parts, In the first
part there be comforts, But there shall not a hair of your head perish; In the
second part there be counsels, In your patience possess your souls.

I. PART. Comforts.
IT was a very terrible speech, which the Lord uttered unto his Disciples, in
the preceding verses, that they should be betrayed, and that some of them
should be put to death, and that they should be hated of all men: Behold here
how he gives unto them a singular comforts, Jer. 8.22
as Balm of Gilead, for healing of their hearts that were wounded; But, said
he, there shall not a hair of your head perish.

Observe here first what method the Lord keeps in dealing with his servants,
The doctrine.
their worse things go first and comforts come last; their estate is like that
wine in Cana, John. 2.10
the best came last. Gods walking toward his own is like his coming to
Elijah at the cave of Horeb, before God came in the calm, a great and strong
wind went before him, which rent the mountains, and brake the rocks, and
after the wind, came an earthquake, 1 King 19.12
and after the earthquake, came a fire; after these three were past, the Lord
came in a still small voice. At the first, Mary Christ's mother got a hard
answer from him, John 2.4
woman, what have I to do with thee? But a little after, he did more then she
required; at the first he called the woman of Canaan a dog, Mat. 15.27
but a little after he show himself all love; the child of God bears Gods
yoke in his youth, Lam. 3.27
his first days are hardest; God casts down before he raises up; 1 Samuel 1.7
many a sore heart had Hannah, before her Samuel came; Job suffered much before
he could say, God makes my heart soft. Job 23.16
Note. Zech. 1.19
The Prophet Zechariah saw first four horns scattering Judah, but after anon
came the comforts of the Carpenters that came to fray them.

The use, The use. Note.
When troubles ly heavy upon us, let us comfort our selves in this, better is
coming; a foul Februar is a comfort to the labourer, because he looks for a
dry March: Sanctified afflictions in youth, should be a comfort, telling us,
that God is coming in the calm: The way to the wealthy place is to pass
through fire and water; Psalm. 66.12
the Lord said to his two dissciples, O fools! Luke 24.26.
Behoved it not Christ to suffer all these things, and so to enter into his
glory? Gaping of wounded men, Isa. 9.5
and tumbling of garments into blood, go before the songs of victory: Christ
himself was hanged on a cross on earth, before he was honored on a throne in
Heaven; He was first cast down on his face upon the earth, yea deseended into
hell, before he was set at the right Hand of GOD in Heaven. Note.
The Gardener when he sets a tree, at the first setting down he shakes
it to and fro, and treads down its roots with great force, for to fasten it
the more surely; so does GOD with his dearest servants, that He may cause
those that come of Jaakob to take root. Jsa. 27.6


It is for those that go to hell to receive all their good things on earth:
Luke 16.25
Job speaking of the Wicked, said They have no changes; wicked men's eyes stand
out with fatness: Psalm. 73.7
the portion of Kings meat is a defiling thing, Dan. 1.8
beasts that go in fattest pastures are nearest the slaughter: The portion of
Gods children is not here, their rest is in another place, their last shall be
best; Psalm. 34.19
If many be the troubles of the righteous, within a short space the Lord shall
deliver him out of them all; yea in the midst of the fiery trial we shall
still be in safety, though in some hours of temptation we may be as David
like a bottell in the smoke, Psalm. 119.83 Psalm. 23.4 Psalm. 119.109. Psalm. 68.1
Psalm. 37.37
or in deaths valley, having our soul in our hand; but O tarry a little, and
God will arise, and help his servants, The end of that man is peace: troubled
David said to God with great boldness, Psalm. 73.24
Afterward thou shall receive me to glory; let this be like a staff of steel
for our faith to lean upon in a stormy day; Gods children must be bold, Job
18.14
not subjects to the King of terrors.

Let us now come to the particular comfort mentioned in my text: the Lord here
says, that there shall not a hair of your head perish. Note.
The wicked are mighty and cruel, they as on horse back ride over the heads of
the godly, Psalm. 66.12
yet are they not able to carry a hair with them, but by Gods permission; not a
hair of your head, said Christ, shall perish.

Observe here that the LORD has a singular regard to all those that love him;
The doctrine.
they are to him as the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8
he most carefully keeps them: Note.
He is not like idols, that care not for their worshippers, Hos. 8.5
Thy Calfe, O Samaria has cast thee off, but God will never cast off his
servants; Baal did not regard the cries of his priests, though they cried from
morning unto noone, 1 King 18.26.
and cut themselves with knives, but the Lord always regards his servants,
his eyes are still upon all the hairs of their head. The tender hearted mother
and nurse are very careful, to keep their young suckling, yet their care
faints, when they are overcome with sleep: but he who is above, and keeps
his servants, does neither slumber nor sleep; many hairs may fall from the
child, and the mother never know what becomes of them, but a hair of our
head falls not to the ground but he has an eye on it: Note.
This is no hyperbolick speech, for the Lord as he is omnipotent to do all
things, so is he omniscient to know all things, even to the number of all the
hairs of all the heads in the world; he knows the full number of the sand,
and of the drops of the sea, as perfectly as we know how many eyes we have in
our head; he preserves us so, that the least things that concern us shall not
perish.

The Angel Gabriel said well to Mary, Luke 1.37
nothing shall be unpossible with God; no not, were it to make a virgin to
conceive a Son, or a Camel to go through a needle eye; Markio. 25 Job 37.18
He who has spread cut the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking
glass, He with whom is terrible Majesty; 22.
He who is almighty and excellent in power, 23.
can most easily preserve his servants, so that not a hair of their head shall
perish, no not in a most bloody time, even when it is said of the sword, Eze.
21.15
Ah it is made bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.

When God had said, Ier. 30.7
It is even the time of Jacobs trouble, he in the same verse subjoineth, but
he shall be saved out of it; Man's extremity is Gods opportunity: Jer. 30.6
Ask ye now, said the Lord, whether a man does travail with child?
Wherefore do I see every man, with his hands on his loins, as a woman in
travail, and all faces are turned into palenesse? Behold terrible things, and
very strange, every man in trouble as a woman in travail, but in the eight
verse follows a fair deliverance, I, said the Lord, 8.
will break the yoke from off thy neck: See how the Lord was ready to save his
servants in greatest danger, so that not a hair of their head did perish: When
Jeremiah was in prison among mire, the Lord sent unto him an Ebedmelech, with
old cast clouts, Ier. 38.12
and rotten rags, to put under his arm holes, to draw him out of the
dungeon; the Lord would not suffer his servant to perish.

The use: The use. Note. Psalm. 119.122.
Let this serve for comfort unto you; If ye serve God well, He will be
surety for you for good, and likewise will safely keep you, and all that ye
have in these days of war, he will preserve your husbands and sons, that
they be not killed, your wives that they be not abused, your virgins that they
be not deflored, you^ houses that they be not spoiled, your cattle, and
coffers that the^ be not carried away; yea, more^ ye faithfully serve him,
their sha^^ not a hair of your head perish; no^ a hair of Shadrach was burnt
in the fiery furnace; Dan. 3.27
no King can do the like to any at his service: God only is a shelter and
strong tower o^ defense; Psalm. 61.3
none but God can keep a man that he perish not, his preservation reaches to
the smallest hai^ our head: Note.
And to speak in the words of a Kings oath, Ier. 38.16
As the Lord lives that made us this soul, there shall not a hair of your
head perish; This is most easy to him that by his hand of power overturneth
the mountains by the roots. Ier. 28.9


An Objection.
Here it may be objected and said by a carnal man, that more then the hairs
of the heads of Gods servants perish; for many good men are slain and
murdered: In the words preceding the Lord himself said, some of you shall they
cause to be put to death, many good men's houses are spoiled, their cattle like
Jobs oxen and asses are carried away, Job 1.13
how then is it here said, that there shall not a hair of their head perish:
Note.
Concerning the comfort of this text, I may say as Ezekiel said to God Ah Lord
God, they say of me, Eze. 20.49
does he not speak parables or riddles? We know not what he means, while
he says, that God so keeps men's hairs, that not one of them shall perish, 1
Cor. 9.9
Does the LORD care for oxen? says the Apostle, so do many say, Does the Lord
care for a hair of a man's head?

The Answer.
THE Prophet Zechariah teaching men to be awfully affected to the great
Majesty of God, cried out, Be silent, Zech. 2.13
O all flesh before the Lord, yet notwithstanding many with Job in his fit of
miscontentment, must needs fill their mouths with arguments and dispute with
the Lord, as though he were bound to give them a count of all his doings.

The Lord in Hosea said a fearful word, Hos. 4.6
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; Ignorance is the destruction of
many; ignorance makes men to think when they see others slain, robbed, and
spoiled for the Gospel, that they and all their estate are perished: Micah 2.7
O thou, said Micah, that art named the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the
LORD straitened? O thou that art named a Christian, is the arm of the Lord
shortened, that he can not work and save us, so that the least hair of our head
perish not?

To come to the objection, I say that it is but a blind objection, these that
have the eye of faith do clearly see that God preserves his own, that not a
hair of their head does perish:: Thy husband is he slain? thy children are
they killed for Christ's names sake? thou must not therefore esteem that they
are perished; faith will not speak so: Note.
If the King should come, and take a beggars child in in this Province of
Cliddisdaile, and make him a Barron in Barrenthorow, the nixt adjacent
Province, would the beggar say that his son were perished? would he not rather
say with Jacob, hearing of Joseph's honor in Egypt; It is enough, I will go
and see my son? Genesis 45.28
So David said of his dead son, I will go to him: 2 Samuel 12.23.
what I pray you is the distance of the heaven from the earth to a lively
faith? It is but as it were to go from one Province to another; yea, but from
one side of the street to another: Note.
When ye marry your daughters they go from you; if ye hear that they are
well with their good Husbands, ye are glad, ye will not think them perished,
because they are gone a little from the house: Now all the godly that are
slain for Gods name, are but gone as it were to the other side of the street,
to their most worthy husband Christ who has given to them in the heavens
right to the tree of life, Rev. 22.14
where continually they see God face to face, that face wherein is fullness of
joy; Psalm. 16.11
open a little the eyes of your faith, and ye shall find all this to be so as I
speak: none properly perish but these who after death, are damned to be burnt
in hell fire: to him that goes to heaven may well be said of life eternal,
that which God said to Jeremiah of his natural life Thy life shall be for a
prey to thee. Ier. 39.18


As for your worldly goods and riches; ye will say, the bloody and barbarous
man of war, has spoiled me, and taken all away, and so where is now the
promise, that not a hair of our head shall perish?

To this I answer, let your sleeping faith waken, what say ye? is all your
riches perished, because all has been taken away for Christ's name sake? I say
it is not perished: Note.
Tell me if when ye have lent a thousand pounds to a worthy wealthy
faithful man, bound fast by his obligation, think ye that all your money is
perished, because it is out of your hand? I think not; But so it is, all that
is taken from you for Christ's names sake is in a better hand, it is lent unto
Christ, who has given an obligation sealed with his blood, that ye shall be
surely paid with such an increase, that the greatest usurer in the land never
required the like; even a hundredth for one: yea, more then all, everlasting
life. If thou would see the obligation, behold it is here in readiness,
registrate in the Books of Counsel of heaven,

Christ's Obligation registrate.
Matthew. XIX. Verse 29. BEhold, said one to Christ, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore?
Now follow the words of the obligation.

Jesus said, Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Note.
Let these who esteem this to be but a Banquerupts Bond, keep well their
houses and lands for themselves; it may be that shortly they loss such things
for the sake of some other, who will never repare their losses, so that both
they and all that they have, shall perish. Note.
Gods wrath shall not spare their very hair; his rasor of wrath like that
hired rasor in Isaiah, Isa. 7 20.
shall shave the head and hair of the feet, and shall also consume the beard,
even to the very stumps, hair and all shall perish.

As for you who have faith to believe, ye may here clearly know that GODS
children, and all that they have, are well kept, yea ^o that a hair of their
head shall not perish: Joh. 20.27
To all the godly let it be here said as Christ said to Thomas Be not
faithless, but believing. Note.
I may well lay of Christ when he promises any thing, that which Naomi said to
Ruth of Booz, Sit still, Ruth. 3.18
until thou know how the matter will fall, for the man will not be in rest,
until he have finished the thing: nay, he will do much more then he
promises here; to save us that we perish not, to preserve us from evil, is
a very great blessing, but more, the Lord will give us gifts, even grace here,
and glory hereafter. Note.
After that King David had ended his festival sacrifice, 1 Chro. 16.3.
He dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of
bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine; What was all that? But
O the gifts that God will deal to every one that serve Him faithfully! After
this life all such shall sit upon Thrones: Crowns and Kingdoms in Heaven are
Gods gifts prepared for every man, and every woman, that willingly suffer on
earth tribulation for his Names sake: such shall not only not perish, but shall
for ever enjoy pleasures, which eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor ever could
enter into the heart of man.

Note.
King Ahasuerus question to Haman was, Esther 6.6
What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor? All the
greatest things that Haman could invent, and say, were these, Let the royal
apparel be brought, 8.
which the King uses to wear, and the horse that the King rides upon, and
the Crown royal which is set upon his head, and by one of the Princes bring
him on horseback through the streets of the city, and proclaim before him
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights to honor: What were
all these things, I pray you? an apparel, and a horse, and a crown, and a
proclamation? that was all; all these things were like that meat that Christ
spoke off, when he said Labor not for the meat that perishes: John 6.27
all these things are long since passed away, the horse, and the crown, and
the royal apparel, and all that fair show, is past and perished, like a
glauncing spark of fire, which flying from a Smiths stithie dies in the flight.

But O, that which Christ shall give to these that suffer affliction for his
names sake, shall never perish; he shall give unto them not a loaf, 1 Chronicles.
16.3. 1 Pet. 5.4
as David gave to his subjects, but a life that is eternal. A crown that
fades not away. John says, Rev. 22.4
that they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads, as a
mark crying, This shall it be done to the man whom Christ delights to honor.
Note.
But woe to the wicked, Obad. 1.4
for though they set their nest among the stars, both they and all that they
have shall perish; their soul shall perish, their body shall perish, and their
estate also shall perish. * Gods wrath, as I said before, shall not spare their
very hair; his rasor of wrath, like that rasor in Isaiah, shall shave the
head, and the hair of the feet, and shall also consume the beard, even to the
very stumps, hair and all shall perish: they have not a Jesus for to save;
they will loose nothing for his Names sake, and for their sake he will save
nothing of theirs, and so at last they shall loose all; though they were Kings
and Princes, the Lord in fury shall cry, Ezekiel. 21.27
I will overturn, overturn, overturn all their wealth, their honor, Zepha. 3.8
and their majesty: All the earth, said the Lord, shall be devoured with the
fire of my jealousy; then all the worm-eaten glory of the wicked, with all
their good things, Luke 16.25
and great designs, shall anon wither away, Jon. 4.7.
like Jonahs gourd. Note.
As they sew the wind, Hos. 8.7
so shall they reap the whirlewinde, which has neither stalk, nor bud that
can yield any meal; Hos. 9.11
as it was said of Ephraim, All their glory shall flee away like a bird.

But as for all the godly, albeit by the wicked they be stoned, and sown
asunder, Heb. 11.37
and slain with the sword; Dan. 3.20
or with Shadrah, be cast into a fiery furnace, or with Daniel into a Lions
den, Dan. 6.16
the words of my text shall still remain true, not a hair of their head shall
perish: The Lord has a great respect unto his servants; Hos. 14.5
I, said he, will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the lilly, and
cast forth his roots as Lebanon: Who is wise, and he shall understand these
things? My people says the Lord, Joel. 2.26
shall never be ashamed, not a hair of their head shall perish. Note.
Away with that doubting If of Esther, Esth. 4.16
If I perish, I perish; The Heavens and the Earth shall pass away, Plal 102.26
They, says the Psalmist, shall perish, but not a hair of our head shall
perish.

THE SECOND PART. Christ's Counsel and Direction.
IN the second and last part of this text, the Lord after he has both let his
servants see their troubles, and also their preservation, he gives them a
counsel and direction what they have to do in their greatest strait; In your
patience, says he, possess ye your souls.

There be here two things required, first, that we have patience; secondly,
that in our patience we possess our souls; David said well, Psalm. 119.165.
great peace have they which love thy law. Hupomone Sustentatio qua impetus and
incursus alicujus rei sustinetur.
As for patience, the word in the original signifies a remaining still under
any thing, a willing undergoing of any difficulty; this is done when a man
flings not like a beast to shake off the burden, but with all submission
tarrieth under the burden, until God give a deliverance, like a worthy watch
who goes not from his place until his hour come, and that another come to
fill his room: In a word, patience is a grace of God, whereby a man in
trouble, humby meekly, and submissely takes in good part wrongs and injuries,
and withal, waits until the good hand of God come to his help Note.
It is such a glorious grace, and so pleasant unto God, that he writes himself
the God of patience. Romans 15.5


We have heard what patience is; Now it follows that we consider what we
have to do with our patience. Christ's counsel and direction here is, that in
our patience we possess our souls. To possess properly signifies to have a
thing in our power; Possideo, qui potest sedere, id est, sedem vel habitationem
in loco aliquo collocare.
The Latin word from which this English word is driven, signifies a power to
sit still for to enjoy that which we have: so to possess our souls in
patience, declares that a firm and stable patience is here commanded, which
a man should as strongly and carefully keep as his dearest earthly possession;
This the Lord here required of his servants, when he said unto them, In your
patience possess ye your souls, as if he had said, Strive to be master over
your selves, that ye may take in good part all sorts of crosses and calamities.

This is a very powerful form of speech; I read in Scripture diverse speeches
concerning patience; the psalmist says, Psalm. 37.7
Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, this is a very sweet saying, The
poor servant that was not able to pay his masters rent cried pitifully, Mat.
18.26
Lord have patience with me: Note.
But in all the scriptures, ye will not find a more powerful speech then
this, In your patience possess your souls; that is, let your souls be
possessed with patience, or have patience in your hearts as a possession, that
is, keep patience as fast as a man maintains his possession, Obad. 1.17
or as it was said of Jacob, that he possessed his possessions; what Christ
here commands he gives unto his servants. The doctrine.


Observe here the great mercy of GOD toward his servants, whereas the wicked
in affliction pine away in their sins, and fret out their hearts with
comfortles grief. Gods servants by his grace in greatest calamities, possess
their souls in patience; in whatsoever estate they be in, they are content, in
poverty in nakedness, in prison, in persecution and banishment, they bear all
patiently; in all these things they are more then conquerours; it is the desire
of a courageous Captain to be in such a war, wherein his valor may most
appear: so patience delights in hardness; Dan. 1.12
Pulse by Gods blessing is more pleasant to a godly Daniel, then the Kings
portion; royal dainties are of a defiling power: Dan. 3.20
Shadrah at the mouth of the fiery furnace got work for his patience, Job 2.8
and so did Job upon the dung hill Note.
It is the honor of patience not to lie upon beds of yvorie, Amos 6.4
and drink wine in bowls, but rather to endure hardness, to pass through
difficulties, to climb up the hill with Jonathan, and pass between the two
sharp rocks, 1 Samuel 14 4
Bozez and Seneh, hurt and hatred.

The use; The use.
let us all strive for this grace, that in days of great distress we may
possess our souls in patience; when Genazi at Dothan saw the city compassed
with enemies, he said to his master Elishah, Alas my master, how shall we do?
2 King 6.15
Our master Christ here directs us all how to do in such a case, In your
patience, says he, possess ye your souls; Note.
A patient soul is a fair possession; he that has it, will not sell it to a
king, for his kingdom: 1 King 21.3
A good man like Naboth will not sell his possession; a man that has a
possession, esteems much of it; he dresseth it, he adorneth it, he pulls
out the weeds, hedgeth it about; seeing man is so careful for a earthly
triffle, O what care should we have for this most excellent possession? that we
may possess our souls in patience; let us not sell this possession, though we
might have a Kingdom in exchange for it.

Observe here also that great is the difference between the sufferings of the
godly and the wicked; The doctrine.
the wicked having once lost their earthly possession have no other possession
when they are spoiled; such say as Micah said to the Danites, Judge. 18. 24
ye have taken away my gods and what have I more? but when the wicked have
robbed and spoiled the godly man of all earthly possessions, he has still the
best behind, he possesses his soul in patience: Truly he has better reason
for him then the wicked man: Note.
For the wicked man having lost his earthly possession has no promise of any
recompense of reward, for all that he had, whether corn, wine, oil, silver,
or gold, were all prepared for Baal, Hos. 2.8
or rather for his belly, which having no ears, can no more hear, or help him
in the days of his trouble, then Baal could hear the prayers of his priests,
Joel 1.8
this having lost his gods like Micah he mourns and lamenteth like a virgin
girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth, and will not be comforted
like Rachal in Ramach weeping for her slain sucklings; Mat. 2.18
A worm has smitten his gourd, John 4.7
and it is withered and he is out of patience, because he never understood this
counsel, and direction of Christ given to his servants, In your patience
possess your souls.

The use, The use.
Let the consideration of all these things effectually move us to possess our
souls in patience, when tribulations and calamities shall come upon the land;
let us resolve to suffer loss of earthly things, that we may gain the
heavenly: Note.
If men had hearts to believe, every one wuld be readier then another, to
suffer for the name of Christ: as men that have moneys strive to get a good
hand, or as Masters that have land, strive to get good tennents, that will pay
well, so should we all be glad, when Christ calls us to loss any thing for
his names sake, for by so lossing we shall profit much: There is nothing that
causes our fears in troubles, but either want or else weakness of faith;
flesh and blood understands not in worldly losses, to possess their souls in
patience.

I confess, that we are compassed about with many infirmities, a little blast
of wind terrified Peter in a miracle; yea, in a miracle of love in the very
presence of Christ, who like a loving master had commanded him to come unto him
upon the sea; there was no remedy for his fear, Mat. 14.31
until Christ took him by the hand, and reproving him for his weak faith put
him up into the ship; we have all great need to pray that he would take us by
the heart, and pity our infirmities which are great and many: O how hard a
thing it is in time of wrongs to practice this precept, In your patience
possess ye your souls; It is to a carnal man like Shibboleth to an Ephramite,
Judge. 12.6
a word which he could not pronounce, so is it a precept which he can not
practice: what shall we do then? As long as we are here, troubles are fearful
to flesh; but as soon as we begin to tremble, let us cry to Christ for
faith, that in our patience we may possess our souls; we had never more
need then in these most terrible days of most bloody wars, wherein all men are
exhorted to fasting and prayer, from Dan even to Beershebah. 2 Samuel 24.


* And now to end this whole sermon in a word; know ye all this day that the
servants of the Lord upon their watch tower, as like Elijahs servants, upon the
top of Carmel, have at last spied a cloud, not of comforts but of wrath,
arising like a man's hand; 1 King 18.44.
except the Lord avert it, it is like that cloud ready to cover the whole
heavens, and to fall down upon his Majesty's three dominions in showers of
blood: except that with all diligence we return unto the Lord, all this evil
shall surely come to pass: Dearly beloved, what I say unto you, I say unto
all, Heb. 10 36
ye have need of patience, yea, and in your patience to possess your souls.
The Lord teach and enable us all to do so, for Christ his sons sake, Amen.

To whom with our hearts this day, Psalm. 119.54 Hos. 14.2
in the house of our pilgrimage, we humbly render the calves of our lips, To
him be glory for ever.
FINIS.

