The two faithful Lovers, Or, A merry song in praise of Betty.
Young Men and maids I do intend
To sing a song that is newly Penned;
And if you please to have it out
'Twill please your fancies without doubt.
By T.B.
Tune of, the amorous Damsel of Bristol-City.
With Allowance.



IN a May-Morning as I was walking
I heard two Lovers together talking;
With words so sweet he spoke unto her,
And thus he did begin to woo her:
Said he well met my dearest Betty,
Thou art a Girl that is wond^ous pretty;
If I could gain but your love and favor,
I Would b^ thy dearest Love for ever.
Slight not Sweetheart this loving motion,
A Hundred pound it is my Portion,
But if we never enjoy one penny,
True-love is better than b^ggs of Money.

The M^ids Answer. Good sir your words are kindly ^poken,
But hasty love is soonest br^ken;
It Is good for you observe ^our doing,
And be not you too, ^uick in wooing.




If I should grant you my love to marry,
Perhaps you would wish you did longer tarry,
And in one Year begin to flout me,
And wish that you had gone without me.
Some men do flout their Wives, it is certain
And say they might had better fortune;
So thus they always frown and lowre,
And scarcely live one quiet hour.

The Man's Answer. Sweetheart my love on thee is fixed,
Both night and day I am perplexed;
Then prithee do not thou deny me,
But come sweetheart and sit down by me.
Doubt not sweetheart i will never offend thee,
My love is true which I pretend thee,
I Will not forsake thee for Gold nor Money,
Then do not slight me my dearest Honey.
Betty blame me not for my speeches,
I do not aim for Gold nor Riches,
My heart is fixed without moving;
Sweet Betty be thou kind and loving.
Grant but to me thy Love and Favor,
Both day and night I hard will labor
If that I have but health my honey
Thou shall not want for Meat nor Money.

The maids Answer. Youngmen have such a way in wooing
To vow and sw^^er the^'l still ^e lo^ing;
Yet in one Year there is small regarding
Which makes some Maids repent their bargain.
Yet if I thought your love was constant
Which you pretend now at this instant,
Methinks I cannot well deny thee
Because with words you satisfy me.
For what you said I do commend you,
And in this cause I will befriend you;
Ask but the good will of my Father,
And you and I will join together.

The man's Answer. Oh now thy words it does revive me,
For I did fear thou would deny me,
While life does last i will never forsake thee,
Since for my wife I mean to take thee.
There is never a Maid in London City
In my conceit is like my Betty,
She is so hand^ome in her favor,
I think my self a blessed to have her.

So to conc^ude, I wish each Lover
To prove so constant to each other
As those two did, of whom i am speaking:
There need not be so much heartbreaking.
Printed for J Wright. J. Clark. W. T^ackery. a^^ I. Passing^r.


