A BOTTLE OF HOLY TEARS, OR, Jeremies Threnes and Lamentations for Isreal's
misery and Ierusalems woeful desolation, Metrically and Metaphrastically laid
out in Verse, explaining plainly the meaning of the Prophet in his lamenting
Phrases. Very suitable for these times, wherein we have a call every day to
learn the Lesson of Englands Lamentation, War and Plague having made a
strong entrance into diverse parts of the Land, and lean Famine and Desolation
knocking at the door for entrance.

Therefore said I, look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to
comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people, Esaias 22.4.
Consider ye and call for the mourning-women, and send for the cunning-women,
that they may come, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her
neighbor Lamentation, Jer. 9.17, and 19. YORK, Printed by Tho. Broad, 1645.

To the godly Reader that understands what these times are, and practices
Jeremies Lamentations with a sorrowing and sensible heart.
IN that day, (said the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 22.12.
) did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and to baldness,
and to girding with sackcloth, in this day he calls for the same, for this is
the day of Jacobs trouble. What he calls for, these Verses, as black as the
Ink they are writ withal calls for also. Nazian. 1. pacificat.
Nazianzen confesses, he never read these lamenting lines of Jeremy, but with a
lamenting heart, and with overflowing tears in his eyes. Not only Ieremies
but ours are lamentable days, and do challenge our Threnodies and mourning
Verses. We have our sorrowful Doctor Jeremy, and the Doctrine is our own, or
the Application rather comes home to us, our Jerusalem being on a fire, our
Temples waste, our Elders and Prophets gone into Captivity, our Magistrates
none to be found sitting in the gates, our Merchants are weary of the Land, and
say it is more tempestuous then the sea, they bear dust and ashes upon their
heads, our Virgins are defloured by an heard of Goats. Rachel weeps for her
children, and will not be comforted, because they are not. Every one eats the
flesh of his own arm, Manasseh is against Ephraim, and Ephraim against
Manasseh, and both against Judah. O the cruel and unmercifull dealings of the
men of these days, as if it were not only true that the English were not
only gone to live among the Cannibals in New England but a Colony of Cannibals
were brought thence to devour, and banquet with man's flesh in Old-England. O
Lord to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to
our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Dan. 9.8.
If there were true judgment given of our calamities what they are, it might
be resolved thus and that justly, that the iniquity of the Throne, the Inxurie
of the Palates, the oppressions of the Tribunals, the profaneness of the
Sanctuary, the ungodliness of the street and market, are all met together in
one, and have called forth the justice of God to plague us, and to be revenged
on such a Nation as this. We have heard of fours great judgments the Lord
threatens to great sinners, wild beasts and those we have, belluine, brutish
and bitter men, that need not learn in the wilderness but set up a Lecture in
the desert to the Tigers and Leopards to teach them to destroy and ^eare in
pieces, and for the other three, limos, lointos, and polemos, Famine, Plague,
and War, (woe unto us that we have sinned,) they have said of the Land, Here
will we dwell, for we have a delight therein. The Lord teach us the lesson of
these days to lament and turn unto him. O all you careless souls that pass
by, that have some ease and quiet, when all the Land is steeped in bitterness,
and lies in the breach of the wrath of the Almighty, how can you go with such
a dry Summer in your eyes? Is it nothing to you, that the Land mourns, the
Church hangs up her Harp on the Willow trees. Sion sorrows, England and
Ireland are bidding farewell to their broken hartstrings, behold and see if
there be any sorrow like Englands sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted her
in the day of his fierce wrath. Come and vie tears with the weepers, bow your
heads and eyes to the wounded, that having part in her sorrows, when she
finds comfort you may challenge a part in her joys. For as none could go
into the Temple of Honor, but they must pass through the Temple of Virtue; so
certainly it will come to pass that none shall enter into the glorious Temple
of the Churches joy, but they that go through the closet of mourning, earnestly
bewailing both our sins, ^say 66.10.
and Gods peoples sufferings. Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all
ye that love her: Rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her. To this
purpose I have plainly and simply set upon my own heart, and labored to
strike fire with Ieremies flint and steel, that some of his compassionate
sorrow might take hold on me in the midst of the passions of the Lords
inheritance, and do think the endeavor, Nahum 2.7. ^^ck. 7.16.
be it never so mean, honest and good in calling upon others to learn to be
Doves, tabring upon their breasts, and mourning in the valleys. The Prophets
meaning I have followed with a Metricall and Metaphrasticall interpretation,
sometimes taking a Poetical license to be more large, but always following
the Prophetical sense. Nor is it strange that Lamentation should be in Verse
and Poetry, the Prophet writ it so in Hebrew meeter, spending four Alphabets
of Hebrew Letters, Hi^r^^. Epist 115. ad Paulam Vrbi
(somewhat like the 119. Ps. lme,) about it, the manner of Verse inost
resembling a Trimeter Sapphicke. Why not sorrow in Verse when David's
Penitential, full of the wormwood of repentance in' 51. Psalm, was vented in
mournful Poetry, and had more water of godly sorrow in it, then the spring had
Elementary water, in which Bathshebah bathed? If from this Prophets Threnes,
Pelusi. epist. 298. Lib. 1. Lucae C^nobiarchae.
who was prophetoon polyp^^thestatos, the most calamitous of all the Prophets.
I shall but gain some few hearts, with holy and sorrowing sense by compassion,
to lament the passions of the Lords people. I shall rejoice, because wet seed
carried out has a promise of sheaves to be reaped and brought home
triumphantly. The Verse is neither Scenicall nor Cynicall, but plain and
passionate; Lacbrymosae p^^mata puppi. Pers. Mat. 5. Es^y 57.18.
not Martials Verse to break the Diaphragme with laughter, but like Puppius
his Verse, the Cloth and Fringe all tears. Englands state is sinful and
mourfull, the Lord teach us tomourne, that the next Message, we have from the
Lord may be that of Christ, Blessed are you that mourn, for you shall be
comforted. I will restore comforts to you, and to the Mourners.

Of the Name, the Argument, the Book, and the Author.
BEyond all doubt it is, that Jeremy was the Author of this Book. He was the
pen in the hand of the Holy Ghost, by which this Book was written. Of all
the Books in Scripture, this about the Author falls under the least question.
Cassanae in Caral. glor. mund.
The Ienes call the Book Echa, from the first word Quomodo, as the French (it
is thought) call their Salique Law, from the two first words, Si aliqua. The
Hebrew Doctors and Rabbis call it Cinoth, that is Lamentations. Of the Greeks
it is called Threnoi, because the matter of it is Lamentable, the name of it is
suitable, Lamentations. The Jews use to read this Scripture by the prescription
of their Rabbis, Pet. a figueiro in Lam. Jer. in Ca. 1.
the 9. day of July, or the month Ab in their Synagogues, because that day
Israel fell Jerusalem and the Temple were burnt. In the Greek and the Roman
Bibles, the Book begins with this proeme added to it, And it came to pass
after Israel was carried into Captivity, and Jerusalem was laid desert, that
the Prophet Jeremy sat and lamented with this Lamentation over Jerusalem, and
said, How does, etc. Some think this Book not to be a single one of it self,
Jeremies large Prophesies, and to go^ on with it. Junius and Tremelius think
it to be the Book of Lamentations made at Josiah^ funeral 2 Chronicles. 35. Now
whether there were two Books of Lamentations will fall under question. Sure it
is, that much of the Jews misery came hasting on after Josiahs death, so as
the sorrow for him turned into a proverbiall of great mourning, Zach. 12, 10
or the mourning of Hadadrimmon. But for that it should be the Book that
underwent the penknife, and the martyrdom of fire by Jehojakim, Jer 36. needs
not far to be sought after, seeing there was much matter of prediction, here
only of deploration. It remains to conclude that it contains as a bottle
Jeremies tears, wherewith he bewasles the wretched estate of the Jews and
Jerusalem, writing an Epitaph upon that dying City, whose misery he saw begun
at Josiahs death, and foresaw her great desolation instant and imminent; yea,
pressing fast onward under Zedekiah, in War, Famine, cr^ell Tyranny, and all
evils, within the predicament of misery and prevailing enemies. By this writing
he acts Lamentation, confession of sin, appeal to Gods mercy, deprecates
judgment, lays open Gods just wrath, Isreal's unjust ways, thereby both
exciting his own people, and giving an example and a lesson to all people, to
learn how to repent and turn to God, when he in his judgment is turned
against them. He being a Prophet, it not only stays at that destruction by
Babylonians under Zedekiah and Jehoiachin, Jer. 52.
but withal fore-tells, fore-sces, and fore-bewailes Jerusalem, and Jews
deeper downfall by Titus and the Romans.

The Lamentations of the Prophet JEREMY Metrically Meraphrased.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. COme see and wonder how great Zion sits
In sad alonenesse, lately her fair streets,
were filled with populous throngs. Now none will woo
Poor forlorn Widow, none make love unto her
Cat me soelicemtoties jactasti^ amici? Qui ceeidit Rabilinon er^^ ille gradu.
Boetide conso^^ (...).
How had she all Nations knees? her ears were blessed her
With name of Princess, servant now at best.
Verse. 2. Sad day's often eased by night, when as kind sleep
Stops up tears Bottle: but her sorrows keep
Their watery course both with the Moon and Sun,
Her Cheeks are water Channels where floods run:
Her eyes no standing Ponds, but flowing Springs;
(...) ^^vers have forgotten thee, they seek thee not, for I have wounded th^^
wi^k (...). 30.14.
Yet no friend visits, no Lover comfort brings:
Once many a name, and face of loving friends,
Now low estate begins, their friendship ends.
Disloy all love's soon changed from amity
Verse. 3. By adverse state, to perverse enmity
Judah is stripped of all her Sovereignty,
And captive led in great servility:
Amongst the Heathenish routs this holy flock
Does lead a restless life with Pagan folk.
In vain heart wishes to escape, hope waits,
The enemies have caught her in such straits.
Verse. 4. The ways to Zion crowded with holy guests,
Which yearly came to keep her solemn feasts,
Pathwayes and gates now languishing lament,
Because few feet there tread, none them frequent:
The Priests are prodigal of sighs, and moan,
Depris'd of holy Office, Virgins groan,
Deeply afflicted: Zion knows no less,
Herself in gulphed in great bitterness.
Verse. 5 Beyond all this, her enemies do command,
She must obey, they have the upper hand.
Her sins this scourge to the Lords hand did reach,
When the Word's rejected then the Rod shall teach.
He many sius these many sorrows bred,
For this her children now are Captive led.
Verse. 6. That face of beauty, which Zion did renown,
Like all her bliss is gone, uncomely grown.
As straggling Hearts her Princes are become,
Wandering for food being pasture-pincht at home.
The strong pursuers do them strengthlesse drive
'Cainst powerful force poor weakness cannot strive.
Verse. 7. But O that misery, O that I were as in months past, as in the days
when god preserved me, when I washed my steps with (...), and the rocks powered
me out rivers of oil, Job 29.2, and 6. Memoria foelicitatis ptaeteritae he^^^
(...) ^^ire infaelititat.
once to have happy been,
Torments the memory of Jerusalem.
Of sorrows children this is eldest son,
To say of former joys, those days are done.
Her quondam pleasures she recounts full sad,
In deep affliction, which before she had,
Till the inundation of her enemies power,
Which has her land, self, people, all run over.
Help none appears. Her enemies seeing it, mock,
Yea her blessed Sabbaths are their laughing stock.
Verse. 8. Deeply she sinned, therefore she deeply smarts,
And Vagrant-like, wanders in foreign parts.
They that had waxen knees, in sign of honor
Rowing, do now despise, cry fie upon her.
Because they see her nakedness, with scorn
They think to cloth her. She, as one forlorn.
Draws out her soul in sighs, her face she hides.
Verse. 9. In her fonle skirts pollution much abides.
Wherefore from high, thus low she did descend,
Because she quite forgot her latter end:
No Comforter appears. O Lord behold
My miseries swelling tide, whiles enemies bold
Lift up themselves in pride.
Verse. 10. They make their prey
All her delights which hand can snatch away.
Nay, Lord, thy Sanctuary, that holy place,
Which all unhallowed feet of Heathen race,
Thou did inhibit to enter, these she sees
Pollute that sacred pavement, which bowed knees
Of worshipping Saints did kiss.
Verse. 11. See what rate bears
One little loaf of bread, when sighs and tears
Of the people cannot buy it. For pittance small
Of meat, which might the flitting soul recall
To fainting body one day more to live,
Their costliest jewelrie they do freely give.
My piteous case consider, Lord, mean while,
See how in every eye I am counted vile.
Verse. 12. O heavens! Are men turned flints, their heartstrings brass?
Has earth no bowels left? O Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my
friends, for the hand of god has touched me, lob. (...) hocest dolentium, ut
laborem suum to majorem caeteris aestimant, quo aliorum (...) non cog^oscunt,
quia quanto plus dolorem suum sentiunt, tanto minus ali rum hulc a dae^^ (...)
your in loc.
you that pass
With marbled ruthlesse hearts, and by me go,
Lending no pity to condole my woe.
Is all compassion fled? O that I were
Among the sweating stones, they would drop a tear
Amidst my groans, and seem to sympathize,
Whiles men go on with juy celesse pumice eyes.
Ah unaffected stocks, behold and see,
If e're you knew miseries hyperbole
Climb up so high. See how displeased God
Has printed all my flesh with his angry rod,
In blew and livid letters, all my read
A Lecture of his wrath fallen on my head.
Verse. 13. Each member bears some mark of his fierce ire,
Within my bones he has enclosed a fire,
It feeds on me as fuel. It Is no boot!
For me to flee, a snare has caught my foot.
Turned backward, desolate, fainting I remain
Till the Sun from East has rid to watery maine.
Verse. 14. My sins are bundled altogether in one,
And like an Iron yoke, or heavy stone,
Laid on my neck, how am I pressed down?
All strength and vigor is departed, gone.
In enemies hands the Lord has locked me sure,
Whence to escape are left no means, or power.
Verse. 15. In midst of the land my worthies, men of might,
The Lord has stamped, and trodden under feet.
Against my young men he has led a band,
Which crush and spoil that flower of my land:
As when grapes are pressed all their juice runs out: so the Lord has trampled
me to pieces in his anger, and squeazed out all my blood and moisture. Esaias
63.2, 3.
The virgin daughter of Judah is pressed sore,
As grapes in wine press, drowned in purple gore.
Verse. 16. Therefore mine eyes, mine eyes their rivers spend
And like to thriftlesse Prodigals make an end
Of all their watery store, because so far,
I am removed from my blessed Comforter,
That should relieve my soul. My children lie
Most desolate by prevailing tyranny.
Verse. 17. Zion spreads forth her hands, yet none draw near
To solace her. Jacob is drowned in fear
Of circling enemies, which have hedged him round
At Gods command. This is Jerusalems wound,
Lev. 18.19. Thou shall not approach to a woman to uncover her nakedness, as
long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.
Like women in pollutions all
her fly,
She is separate from all society.
Verse. 18. Lord thou art just, I from thy Law have swerved,
And thou have punished, all this I deserved.
Draw near all people, O see, and hear I pray
My sad laments, and sorrows gloomy day.
My beauteous Maids and Young Men captives go,
Form, face and feature cannot bribe the foe.
Verse. 19. O Egyptians and others that the Jews trusted in for helpers, Ier.
43. Ier. 44.11, 12. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the
streams of brooks they pass away. Job 6.15.
you my lovers, whose
promises kissed the sky,
Where are your windy vows? will none draw nie,
Have all deceived? None answer at my call?
Ah my poor Priests and Elders, how they fall,
Breathing their final gaspes whiles they seek meat,
They fall down famisht in the open street.
Verse. 20. (...) thou thine eyes, O Lord, to my distress,
My rolling bowels, I cannot express,
And tossing heart, what grief does them perplex,
For my rebellions did my God much vex.
No face of safety is seen, sword scorns the sheath,
Killing abroad, at home no guest but death,
Verse. 21. Slaying by famine. All my foes do know
How I do sigh and sorrow laid full low,
Disconsolate. It Is matter of joy to them,
To see black clouds hang over Jerusalem.
But Lord their course is next when mine is done,
Their day comes on when they shall have my room.
I know when thou have tried and humbled me,
Thou'wilt use the rod to scourge mine enemy.
When I have drunk thine angers bitter cup,
As I have dined, so shall mine enemies sup.
Verse. 22. Set all their wickedness before thy face,
Make them decline afflictions in my case:
As I have sinned so have they, let them smart
As I have smarted. For my fainting heart
Is ready to break through these walls of clay
with bouncing sobs, thus spend I every day. Haec est regula mund, ut non det
bonum prandium, nisictiam det malam coenam. Stella de con^e^^^ mundi, Lib. 1.
cap, 5,

Verse. 1. HOw does the city sit solitary that was full of people how is she
become as a Widdo^^ she that was great among the N^^ ^^tions, and Princess
among th^^ Provinces, how is she become tr^^ butary?

Verse. 2 She weepeth sore in that night, and her tears are on her^^ cheels:
among all her lovers sh^^ has none to comfort her, all her friends have dealt
treacheron (...) with her, they are become h^^ enemies.

Verse. 3 Judah is gone into captivity, because of affliction, (...) because of
great servitude: she dwells among the Heathen, (...) finds no rest; al her
perse^^ toues overtooke her between (...) straits.

Verse. 4 The ways of Zion (...) mourn, because none come to (...) solemn
feasts: all her gates (...) desolate: her Priests sigh: her Virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

Verse. 5 Her adversaries are the chief her eu^^ies prosper: for the Lord has
afflicted her; for the multitude of her tramigressims, he children are gone
into captivity before the enemy.

Verse. 6. And from the daughter of Zien all her beauty is departed: her
Princes are become like Heart, that find no pasture, and they are gone without
strength before the pursuer.

Verse. 7. Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction, and of her
miseries, a I her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her
people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her, the adversaries
saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths.

Verse. 8. Jerusalem has grievously finned, therefore she is removed: all that
honored her, despise her, because they have soon her nakedness: yea, she
figheth and turns backward.

Verse. 9. Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembers not ber last end,
therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter: O Lord, behold my
affliction for the enemy has magnified himself.

Verse. 10. The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things: for she has seen that the beathen entered into her Sanctus ^^ ary, whom
thou did command that they should not enter into thy congregation.

Verse. 11. All her people sigh, they seek bread, they have given their
pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O Lord, and consider: for I
am become vile.

Verse. 12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce wrath.

Verse. 13. From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it prevails
against them: be has spread a net for my feet, he has turned me back: he
has made me desolate, and faint all the day.

Verse. 14. The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand ^^ they are
wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he has made my strength to fall, the Lord
has delivered me into their hands, from whom I shall not be able to rise up.

Verse. 15. The Lord has tr^dden under fo^^ all my mith men in the mad lest
(...) the has called an assembly against me (...) crush my (...). The Lord
(...) (...) righter of (...).

Verse. 16. (...) with (...) that shou (...) far from me (...) children are
desolate be (...) the enemy y^ev^nled.

Verse. 17. Zion s^ea leth forth her hands, and there is name to comfore her:
the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round
about him; Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

Verse. 18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his
commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my virginis
and my young men are gone into captivity.

Verse. 19. I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my Priests and mine
Elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to relieve
their souls.

Verse. 20. Behold, O Lord, for (...) I in distress: my bowels are troubled:
mine heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the
sword here^^ veth, at home there is death.

Verse. 21. They have heard that I sigh, there is none to comfort me: all mine
enemi^s have heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou have done it: thou
will bring the day that thou have called, and they shall be like un^^ me.

Verse. 22. Let all their wickedness come before thee: and do unto them, as
thou have done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are many, and my
heart it faint.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. WIth what a duskie cloak of foggie cloud
Is Zion clad, which does her glory shroud,
And teneb^ize her beams? The angry Lord
Has kicked her down from Heaven as one abhorred.
She now lies soyl'd in dust, whom once right well
Each tongue did style the Beauty of Israel.
In wrath he does forget, and clean forsake
His goodly The Arc of the covenant is called gods footstool, 1 chronicles, 28, 2,
Psalm 132, 7, It is called his drength, and his glory, Psalm 78, 61,
footstool. He does riddance make
Verse. 2. Of Jacobs stock, which issued from him,
They are ^wallowed up without all pitying.
Judahs strong holds he has battered to ground
Defiled their kingdom, and their King discrown'd.
Verse. 3. His peoples flourishing Whatsoever is strong and high and excollent
it is called an horn in Scripture, It is drawn from ^easts, whose horns are
their strength, and are their ornament: Horn of David, Psalm 132, Horn of
salvation, Luke 1, 69,
horn on high set up,
In anger is all broke, asunder cut.
His strong right hand, of nations so well known
For Isreal's only help, is now withdrawn.
Round about Jacob his fiery fury burns,
Like raging flame it all to ashes turns.
Verse. 4. The Lord, as man of war, his bow has bent,
Whence never frustrate arrow yet was sent.
Zions most excellent ones, joy to the eye
Once to behold them, now in dust do lie,
Brought down and slain by his most mighty hand,
Whose wrath like fire is powr^d out on the Land.
Verse. 5. Isreal's palaces, forts are all destroyed,
Quite swallowed up, so much as erc she joy'd
She sorrows now. Poor Judahs common song
Are mournful Threnes and Lamentation.
Verse. 6. He has removed his Tabernacle thence
With violent hand, the lands securest fence,
Now its a hedglesse garden. Empty, void,
Are places of assemblies, lately cloyed
And surfeiting with throngs, so many guests
Did come to celebrate her holy Feasts.
These Sabbaths Male isti populo accidit, ubi Sabbatha Sabbathum habent, Levit:
26, 43,
solemn days are now forgot,
Both Kings and Priests are ceased, whose holy lot
Was Altar-service: these despised are gone,
Removed by God in indignation.
Verse. 7. The Altar is cast off and Sanctuary
Abhorred, the palaces given to the enemy:
When qui non audiunt attente concionem verbi Dei sonantem, coguntut audire
militem bombarba tonantem: Tarnovius in locum
pious souls on solemn days before
In the Lords house did meet for to adore,
They gave an heavenly sound in Psalms and praise,
There now alas the roaring enemies raise
An impious heathenish ^oyse, like that for sound,
But not for sense o^ harmony. To the ground
Verse. 8. Zions fair walls must fall, the Lord has past
His purpose for it. Yea his line is cast
And stretched upon it: his hand he does not turn
From utter ruin. He has taught to Ier, 14, 2, See Joel 1, 10, 12, Where when
the field is wasted, the land mourns:
mourn
The walls and ramparts, as if they had sense
To tune sad ditties for foes violence.
Verse. 9. Both gates and bars are broke, and sunk in ground
Yea all her Kings and Princes wander round
The Gentiles Country. Holy Law's no more,
Dicunt Rabbini, prophetia neque inter tristitiam, ne que inter pigritiam
habitat: and prophetia cessat tempore persecutiones and exilii: Moses Maimonid:
in more Nevochin.
Prophets want visions which they had before.
Verse. 10. Zions grave Elders Manner of mourners to cover their heads with
dust and ashes, as it were confessing they are not worthy to live, and worthy
to be laid in the graves and have dust thrown^on them.
on the earth are laid,
And earth is laid on them, for every head
Is crowned with ashes, dust, all silent, sad.
^ackcloth is the only Robe wherewith they are clad.
Jerusalems virgins, ripe with grief and fears,
Walk with down hanging heads like ripened ears.
Verse. 11. O eyes, your welsprings fail and watery store,
My troubled bowels within are panged sore:
My He cleaves my rei^es asunder and does not spare; he powers cut my gall
upon the ground. Job 16.13. If I enter into the city, then behold them that are
sick with ^ amine, Ie^. 14.1^.
liver as liquor is powered out on the earth,
Because so great a famine, murderous dearth
Does on the daughter of my people lie,
The silly sucklings famisht faint and die.
In every street their little corpse lie spread,
Verse. 12. They cry upon their mothers, give us bread,
We pine, we perish, who will our hunger stay?
One drop of wine to queneh our thirst we pray.
Poor babes in vain do cry and pule and crave,
Whiles mothers want to give what they would have.
Only in mothers bosom they swoon and die,
And laid in street preach pity to each eye.
Verse. 13. What shall I take or seek to earths utmost hem,
To witness for thee, O Jerusalem?
Rhetorique is bankrupt, thou have beggered the Arts,
Ovirgin daughter of Zion, all their parts
Cannot similitudes coin fit to expreile
Thy dolours deluge, all compares are less
Inferior much to thine. Could I but fetch
Example parallel from some dismal wretch,
Hence this small glimpse of comfort thou mighst see,
Thou we^^ not singula^ in misery.
Yet to the Sea thy sad estate compared,
Some part by that rude shadow is declared.
As those proud swelling waves the banks over reach,
Levelling high-crested earth with many a breach,
And fearful ruptures: thus tho waves of woe
Broke in upon thee, and ore run thee so,
As for thy breach small hopes of help remain,
Nothing can stop when waves slow in amain.
Verse. 14. Fie Dreaming prophets, Ier. 23.23. Daubing prophets E^^k. 22.28.
cushion and pillow prophets, or elbow and armhole prophets Ez^^^^ 18 Quam
ration. mchristo reddent ministri little, qui ipsorum culp^ perierunt, vel quia
tacenda dixerunt, vel quia dicenda tacuerunt? Figveiro in Mal. Hicrosolymas
de^^ruxerunt prophet titulis Italicis, a Episc Landensis Episc Adulensis Episc
placentinius
on all oily Serm^ns; flattering tongues,
Of sweet-run'd Prophets, that can sing no songs
But peace and safety. How could Zion stand
When please-eare Preachers did infect her Land?
All Is well cry they, thou have some sins indeed,
Yet desolating vastations no^e we read
In all our visions. Foolish things and vain
They see, but see not sin bring captives chain.
Had they set our Zions abhorred ways,
And all her sins, she had not seen these days
Of sad captivity, but their wi^s they spent,
To sift false causes of her banishment.
Verse. 15. Behold the passengers that traveil by
Do wag their heads, clap hands and hi^^ing cry,
Lo yonder ruined turrets, piles of stone,
Was the worlds beauty and perfection
Of all earths glorions Fabriches. Can this be
Jerusalems City we demolish^^ce?
Verse. 16. See how thine enemies together flock,
To vent the venom of their mouths, they mock:
Some Serpent-like do his^c, some Dog-like grin,
Every one s^^ive the Scorners prize to win,
In acting best upon Derisions stage,
See, see, she is fallen cry they in scornful rage,
She Is swallowed up: the day, the day is come
Of her woes, and our wishes; a sad doom.
Verse. 17. This is the time wel^okt for, long expested,
Gods purpose and dev^^e is now effected.
Long since he threatened he^ for sin of old:
His wrath sulfills what is patience did withold.
She Is tumbled down, no piteous ^^n lo^t^^ngu^
Draws ne^r, heef^^s rej^ice, their ho^n's made arong
Verse. 18. In the Lords c^rs their h^^rts aloud did cry,
O wall of Zion never more be dry:
Let slouds ve^ld ^o h^te ^^es, nee^ let sleeps key
Look up ^li^^ne^^s w^^p^eill essenigh^ and day.
Verse. 19. Ri^e up and b^ak thy mi^night ^u^^ed^est,
In nightly watches power ^ut he ^ta^d breast
Before the Lord in Prayers h^ld hands on high,
Crying, O save Dent 28 53 T^ou thalt eat the sru't of thine own bod^, the fl^h
of thy sons and daughters in the sieg^ and straitness wherewith thine enemies
shall d'stred^ d^^^.
(...) babes which fainting lie,
Stabbed through with hunger at h^ad of every street.
Verse. 20. O L^^d hehold a miserab^e s^g^t,
A spect cle of we, neverd d^eye
Read sad ler Argument of Tragedy.
Shall In the famine of Jerusalem Mary a rich and wealthy gentlewoman of per^ a
boiled her own son to eat him; Josephus in 7 book of Jews wars; Heressipp^s
bring, her in boldly inviting the Souldie^s that broke in, i^ving smelt mea^
saying to them I have male you a di^h of meat of my own^ bowe's: come taste and
^ee how sweet my sons flesh is; Be no^ more maidealy and modest then ^ mother;
what Soldiers more a e^ke and d^stardly them a woman? But the Soldiers stayed
their stomack^ with ^^^ot of the fact; Hegesip. 5. ^ook chap 41 When Scipio
took Numantia in Spain; so great was the famine that there were diverse mothers
s^und with the bodies of their children in their Iaps; of which they had eaten
the half; Petion, in sine Saryt. Under the Emperor lustinian there was so
great a famine in Italy that the greatest part of men and women died for
hunger; One says fifty thousand died by famine in one part of Italy, in selo
piceno; Two women of strangers that came and lodged at their houses in their
journey had killed 17 at several times whiles they slept; and having killed
them made them ready and eat them; They attempted it on the 18 but he wakening
ended both their famine and lives; Diverse mothers then did cook their own
children for dishes of mout^ Baronius (...) 39 Alstedius in Thesau to chronol
bowell-bleeding mothers take and eat
Their span-long sucklings? O abh^rred meat?
Alas, their childbed pangs were sport and mirth,
When traveling throws first brought these Infaats fo^th,
Compared with this: when mothers they must feed
Upon that flesh, which their own flesh did breed.
O heavy judgment of necessity,
Inventing food against Na^ures cookery:
^no bit of such sad break-fast's worse then all
Earths griefs, that under imagination fall.
Shall Priests and Prophets slain in Sanct^ary lie,
Finding no refuge, nor no Sanctuary?
Verse. 21. Both old and young in open streets lie slain,
My virgins and my young men drop like rain,
Falling by sword: no pity does thee stay
From slaught^ing all in this thy wrathful day.
Verse. 22. As at some solemn time they are grathred all,
Girt round with terrors here and there they fall,
Nothing I even I will tear and go away; I will take away and none shall
rescue him Hosea 5.14
escapes, for what can safe remain,
When God a day of anger does proclaim?
My babes the solace of my life, which I
Brought up with care and swadled, these mine eye
(Why have I eyes to see it?) sees a prey,
Unto destroying enemies every day.
Verse. 1. HOw has the Lord covered the daughter of Ziom with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beanty of Israel, and
remembered no^ his fcotstoole in the day of his anger?

Verse. 2. The Lord swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has not
pitted: he has thrown down in his wrath the strong hold^ of the daughter of
Iuda^: he has brought them down to the ground he has polluted the kingdom
and the Princes thereof.

Verse. 3. He has cut off in his fieres anger all the horn of Israel: he has
drawn back his right band from before the enemy, and be burned against Jacob
like a flaming fire whichd v^nreth round about

Verse. 4. He has ^ent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand as
an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye, in the Ta^ernacle of
the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.

Verse. 5. The Lord was an enemy: he has swallowed up Israel, he has
swallowed up al her palaces: he has destroyed his strong holds and has
in^reased in the daughter of Iudamourning and lamentation

Verse. 6. And he has violently taken away his Tabernacle, as if it were of a
garden, he has destroyed his places of the assembly; the Lord has caused the
solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion; and has despised in the
indignation of his anger, the King and the priest:

Verse. 7. The Lord has cast off his Altar^ he has abhorred his Sanctuary: he
has given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces: they have
made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast.

Verse. 8. The Lord has purpased to destroy the wall of the daughter of Z^on:
he has stretched out a line the has not withdrawn his hand from destroying:
therefore he made the rampart and the wall to la^ent they languished together.

Verse. 9. Her gates ^re sunle into the ground: he has destroyed and brolen
her bars: her King and her Princes are among the Gentiles: the lawis no more,
her Prophets also fi^d no v^sion from the Lord.

Verse. 10. The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and
leepsilence: they have cast up dust upon their beads: hey have girded
themselves with saclolo^th: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to
the ground.

Verse. 11. Mine eyes do fail with tears: my bow^s are troubled: my liver is
so ^r^d ^p^n the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people
because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.

Verse. 12. They say to their mothers, Where is corn and w^n? when they sw^ned
as the wounded in the sireets of the city, when their settle was pow^red out
into their mothers b^some.

Verse. 13. What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I
liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee th^^ I may
comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is great like the Sea^
who can heal thee.

Verse. 14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and f^olish things for thee, and they
have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity: but have seen
for thee fase burdens, and causes of banishment.

Verse. 15. All that pass by clap their hands at thee: ^^y visse and wag their
head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City that men call the
perfection of beauty, the jay of the whole earth?

Verse. 16. All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss
and gnash the teath: they say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is the
day that we looked for: we have found we have seen^t.

Verse. 17. The Lord has done that which he had devised: be has fuls^^e his
w^^d that he had commanded in the days of old: he has thrown down, and
has not pitied: and he has caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee, he has
set up the horn of thine adversaries.

Verse. 18. Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wa^l of the daughter of Zion,
let tears run down like a river, day and night: give thy self no rest, let
not the apple of thine eyes cease.

Verse. 19. Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning ^f the watches pon^r^
out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thine hands
toward him, for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the
top of every street.

Verse. 20. Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast^d me this shall the
women eat their fruit, and children of aspan long? shall the Priest and the
Prophet be slain in the Sanctuary of the Lord.

Verse. 21. The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins
and my young men are fallen by the sword: thou have slain them in the day of
thy anger: thou have killed and not pitied.

Verse. 22. Thou have called as in a solemn day by terrors round about, so
that in the day of the Lords anger, none escaped nor remained; those that I
have swadled and brought up, has mine enemy consumed.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. I Am I the that of christ; A man of sorrows orde^quai^ted with
grief Esaias 53
the son of sorrows, who have seen
Afflictions Center, and sore schoold have been
Under Gods stinging red.
Verse. 2. From lightsom walks
I am brought to sullen darkness, obscure vaults.
Deprived of joys of all eye-cheering light.
Verse. 3. Surely against me God turns himself to fight,
Under his heavy hand I daily groan.
Verse. 4. My wrizzeld skin neighbors too near the bone,
My wrinkled face and flesh my age belie,
Crown old with grief, not years. My bones do lie
Scatte^d and broken.
Verse. 5. He has built a wall
Against me; my ease is pain, my sweets are gall.
Verse. 6. Cles'd up in cells of darkness am I laid,
Like those whom death long since has prisoners made.
Verse. 7. When I would escape (cross to my hopes) I find
An high thorn I will bedge up her (...) with thorns and make a wall that she
shall not find her paths Hosea 3.6
hedge, where with the Lord dab bind
And keep me in.
Verse. 8. A heavy chain I bear,
Then do I cry and shout, but where is Gods care?
He shuts out all my prayers.
Verse. 9. Stops up my way
With hewn stones: yea, all my paths that lay
So straight, are crooked made.
Verse. 10. Like hungry Bear:
Or Thou huntest me as a fierce Lion. Job 10.16.
greedy Lion lurking close to tear,
And seize upon some prey, he watched for me.
Verse. 11. I walk in uncouth paths, compelled to flee:
Peece-meale he^ent me, tore me in his hate,
Then leaves me to my self most desolate.
Verse. 12. With He has taken me by the neck, and ^^ken me to pieces, he has
set me up for his mark. Job 16.12.
full bent bow he aims at me too
Sets me for mark: nor does he miss the white.
Verse. 13. O how his arrows do increase my pains,
Fixing their Iron teeth even in my reins!
Verse. 14. To all my people I am made Fio repent fabula and ludibrium, and
chriosae sum tabernae cantio. Buch^nanus. I became aproverbe unto them, I was
phesong of the drunkards. Psalm. 69.11, 12.
a scorn
And subject of their songs, whiles I do mourn
They rhyme all day upon me.
Verse. 15. Drunken sots
Would practice temperance at my wormwood pots,
And bitter cups, which I have drunk so sore,
As staggering full, now I can bear no more.
Verse. 16. Even as with gravel stones my teeth are broke,
I Am rolled in ashes, choakt with dust and smoke.
Verse. 17. Thou have divorced a lovely-linked pai^e,
My soul and peace, my prosperous days to fair,
Are quite removed, drow'nd in oblivion.
Verse. 18. That I am forced to say, my hope is gone.
Yea, perished from the Lord, all strength extinct,
Verse. 19. Whiles I remember how I lie fast linkt
In sore affliction, and to mind recall
My daily draughts of wormwood, and of gall.
Verse. 20. This I remember, and for this my soul
Is deeply humbled
Verse. 21 Yea, my heart does roll,
And busied seeks what sins do cause my woe:
I Will not despair, for humble hopes do grow.
Verse. 22. O the large sea of mercies in the Lord,
We merit the edge, he strikes with back of sword.
(...) Quicquid citra infernum est, uitrameritum est.
his transcendent grace which knows no end,
(...) for our sins he does not vengeance send,
(...) alt^erly destroy. O mercies rare,
(...) spare not sinning, God does smiting pare.
Verse. 23. So often as Sun does every morning rise,
(...) merc^es are p^esented to our eyes.
(...) faithful is our God in truth and love^
Verse. 24. My My lot is fallen in a fair place, I (...) a goodly herit age,
Psalm. 16.6.
soul has chosen thee, O Lord above,
Whiles others seek for wealth, ease, honors store,
lord thou art my portion, I desire no more,
Therefore I Will hope in him in lowest state,
Verse. 25. For God is good to all that on him wait
Verse. 26. It Is a good thing, and piece of rarest Art,
(...) darne to wait on God with patient heart.
(...) with soule-calming hopes to rest possessed,
^^ill Gods saving health be manifest.
Verse. 27. It Is good our shoulders be inured betime
(...) bear Gods yoke even in our youthly prime,
^arly acquaintance with Gods scourging hand
^^^^ns his servants, makes them understand.
Verse. 28. He sits alone, with silence bolts his lips,
(...) bursting out into impatient sits.
(...) why such burdens he has borne before,
Verse. 29. Therefore he is The godly in afflictions, ponit in pulvereos suum,
as (...), but the ungodly ponit in coelum os suum. Psalm. 73.9.
silent, hopes God will restore.
Verse. 30. Unto the smiting hand he gives his cheek,
(...) filled with reproaches does not seek
any revenge.
Verse. 31. This comfort he does gather,
(...) may correct, but casts not off for ever.
Verse. 32. For some short time his Saints are tried with grief,
(...) then Gods tender heart, beyond belief,
(...) ravells with pain deliverance to send,
(...) endless mercy seeks our miseries end.
Verse. 33. Oh how Deus non maestitia afficit ex ^^orde s^e, non ex animo.
Tremel. and Jun.
unwillingly does our gracious God
(...) forth his hand to take sins smarting rod,
^o scourge rebellious men.
Verse. 34 He hates that might
Which ^reades down thralled captives under feet.
Verse. 35. He does adhorre unjust oppressione all,
When greatness bribed causes, right causes fall.
Verse. 36. Against all such he sets his hand and heart,
Who do the poor in rightful cause subvert.
Verse. 37 What are men's words, decrees but wind and sand?
Things only come to pass by Gods command.
Verse. 38. What punishing evil, or what pleasing good
Meet we withal, which comes not all from God?
Both come at his decree.
Verse. 39. O men mo^^ vain,
Why d^e ye murmr, or at all complain?
No bitter draughts vex us without, within,
Which first we did not brew and tun in sin.
Verse. 40. Let us then in ou sufferings search and try,
What sins in heart or life do cherisht lie,
Verse. 41. Turning to God with lift up hands and heart,
Praying the Father in heaven to ease our smart.
Verse. 42. We Lord have sinned with great rebellion.
Thou scourgest us with sharp correction,
Thou spar'st us not.
Verse. 43. But in thy angry mood
Thou smitest, ^^yest, coverest us with blood,
Yea, thou exc^udest pity.
Verse. 44. When our prayers
Are climbed up to the top of heavenly stairs,
Hoping by this ascent to find thy grace,
Then do thou not asient, but hid'st thy face,
Masked with angers cloud O mise^ies mass!
When our poor prayers to Gods ear may not pass!
Verse. 45. We (...) counted base by vilest raffe of men,
Refuse and rubbish is our best es^eeme.
Verse. 46. Our e^emies all have opd their mouth as large,
Venting reproaches with a full discharge.
Verse. 47. Where is our safety? here fear, there a snare,
Woes and astations our best neighbors are.
Verse. 48. Mine Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes afountaine of
tears, that I might weep (...) and night for the slain of the daughter of my
people. Jer. 9.1.
eyes are full with briny-streaming tears
Because my peoples judgment beats mine cares.
Verse. 49. Mine eyes gutter my cheeks, I never cease,
Nor intermit my moan for Zions case:
Verse. 50. Until from heaven the Lord cast piteous eye
Upon my people in their misery.
Verse. 51. Mine heart affects mine eyes, mine eyes my heart
(...) in this wretched consort know their part. (...) daughters of my City to
deplore.
Verse. 52. Like At when one does hunt a Partridge in the mountains, 1 Samuel
26.20. Psalm. 11.1. Fly a^^ (...) to your mountain.
weake-wing'd bird, so am I chased
(...) my fierce foes, and guiltless without crime,
(...) ^^wk for harmless dove the clouds does climb.
Verse. 53. I lie in dungeons bottom as one dead,
With ponderous pressing stones upon me laid,
(...) strangle hopes of life.
Verse. 54. I Am drowned and gone,
(...) plenty Great afflictions are commonly compared to great waters, and
wa^^^ flands. Psalm. 42.7. Psalm, 69.1, 2. Psalm. 124.4, 5.
of waters have my head o're-flowne,
Which made me say, Lord thou have done enough,
How am I perished, I am quite cut off.
Verse. 55. Yet in the dungeon deep, Lord I did pray,
and called upon thy name.
Verse. 56. Turn not away
^^ine ear from my sad sighs, deep-breathed cries,
know thou heard'st me, O let comfort rise.
Verse. 57. Yea, Lord I gather hopes, for when I prayed,
^hou did draw near and say, be not afraid.
Verse. 58. The causes of my soul thou have pleaded well,
and have redeemed my life from lowest Hell.
Verse. 59. O Lord thou know my wrongs and injuries,
(...) and up for me and judge mine enemies.
Verse. 60. I do appeal for witness to thine eyes.
^ho saw their busy thoughts always devise^
^^ngeance and malice.
Verse. 61. Thou have known my reproach, and my (...) and my dishonor, all
mine adversaries are before thee. Psalm. 69, 19,
Their reproaches al
^^ine ears have heard, which they on me let fall.
Verse. 62. What their cursed lips did vent, who against me rose,
(...) plots their hearts invent, O Lord thou knows.
^hold their sitting down for to conspire,
(...) rifing up to act what they desire.
(...) their music, their best dish at feasts
^^on my broken head to break some jests.
^^ey call on minstrels when they merry be,
^^^'s hear the Song of Zions misery,
^^rusalems last good night. That pleasant stroke
(...) enemies sorrows, will our sorrows choke.
Verse. 64. Render to them, O Lord, a recompense,
According to their deeds and bad intents.
Verse. 65. Lay on their wicked hearts thy hardening curse.
That they may daily grow from ill to worse.
Verse. 66. Lord in thy wrath destroy them, be they driven
From all abiding undercope of Heaven.
Verse. 1. I Am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

Verse. 2. He has led me and brought me, into derknes, but not into light.

Verse. 3. Surely against me is he urned, he turns his hand against me all
the day.

Verse. 4. My flesh and my skin has he made old, he has broken my bones.

Verse. 5. He has builded against me, and compassed me with gall and traoell.

Verse. 6. He has set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.

Verse. 7. He has hedged me about, that I cannot getout: he has made my
chain heavy.

Verse. 8. Also when I cry and shout, shuts out my prayer.

Verse. 9. He has enclosed my way with hewn stone: he has made my paths
crooked.

Verse. 10. He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a Lion in secret
places.

Verse. 11. He has turned aside my ways and pulled me in pieces: he has made
me desolate.

Verse. 12. He has bent his bow, and se^ me as a mark for the arrow.

Verse. 13. He has caused the arrower (...) his quiver to enter into my re^^^.

Verse. 14. I was a derision to all my people, and their song all the day.

Verse. 15. He has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with
wormwood.

Verse. 16. He has also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he has covered
me with ashes.

Verse. 17. And thou have removed my soul far off from peace: I forget
prosperity.

Verse. 18. And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord.

Verse. 19. Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall

Verse. 20. My soulhe has them still in remembrance, and is humbld in me.

Verse. 21. This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

Verse. 22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not.

Verse. 23. They are new every morning; great is thy faithfulness.

Verse. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him.

Verse. 25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeks him.

Verse. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
sovation of the Lord.

Verse. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

Verse. 28. He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon
him.

Verse. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

Verse. 30. He gives his cheek to him that smites him, he is filled full
with reproach.

Verse. 31. For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

Verse. 32. But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according
to the multitude of his mercies.

Verse. 33. For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men.

Verse. 34. To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth.

Verse. 35. To turn aside the right of a^^ before the face of the most High.

Verse. 36. To subvert aman in bi^ (...) the Lord approves not.

Verse. 37. Who is he that says, (...) comes to pass, when the (...)
commands it not.

Verse. 38. Ous of the mouth of the (...) High proceeds not evil and go^^

Verse. 39. Wherefore does a living (...) complain, a man for the punishm^^ of
his sins.

Verse. 40 Let us search and try our (...) and turn again to the Lord.

Verse. 41. Let us loft up our heart (...) our hands unto Gods the he^^^^

Verse. 42. We bout trausgressed and (...) rebelled, th^n have not pardoned.

Verse. 43. Thou best covered with an^ and pers^enied us: th^^ have slai^ thou
bast not pitied.

Verse. 44. Thou have covered thy self w^^^ a cloud, that our prayer should
(...) pass through.

Verse. 45. Thou have made us at the (...) scouring and refuse in the ^^idst
the people.

Verse. 46. All our enemies have op^^^ their mouths against us.

Verse. 47. Fear and asnare is come up us, desolation and destruction.

Verse. 48. Mine eye ranneth down (...) rivers of water, for the destruction
the danghter of my people.

Verse. 49. Mine eye trickleth down (...) cease not, without any inter miss^^

Verse. 50. Till the Lord look down, (...) behold from heaven.

Verse. 51. Mine eye assecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my
city.

Verse. 52. Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause.

Verse. 53. They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

Verse. 54. Waters flowed over mine head, then I said, I am cut off.

Verse. 55. I called upon thy name, O Lord out of the low dungeon.

Verse. 56. Thou have heard my voyced hide not thy ear at my breathing, at my
cry.

Verse. 57. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: Thou saidest
Pear not.

Verse. 58. O Lord thou have pleaded the causes of my soul, thou have redcemed
my life.

Verse. 59. O Lord, thou have seen my wrong, judge thou my cause.

Verse. 60. Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their imaginations
against me.

Verse. 61. Thou have heard their reproach O Lord, and all their imaginations
against me.

Verse. 62. The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against
me all the day.

Verse. 63. Behold their sitting down, and their rising up, I am their music.

Verse. 64. Render unto them a recompense O Lord, according to the work of
their hands.

Verse. 65. Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

Verse. 66. Persecute and destroy them in anger, from under the heavens of the
Lord.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 1. HOw Such a question for degenerating by sin, (as this by affliction)
is that of Esaias, 1.21.22. How is the faithful city etc.
is the gold of Zions glorious frame
Grown dim and dark, not meriting the name
Of metals monarch? That which gilded was
With star-like burnisht gold, how dull as brass;
(Yielding no glistring luster to the eye)
Is it become? the heavenly Sanctuary
Cast down in every street may find her stones.
Verse. 2. Jerusalems children, the most precious ones,
Passing all pearls for price, for beauty gold,
How are they now as cheap as pitchers sold,
Esteemed as Potters ware?
Verse. 3. Can any kind
Of Earths or Oceans Animals be unkind,
And cruel as the daughter of Zion is,
Like See Job 39, 14, 15, 16. Contentions there are about this word Ostrich,
some will have it, struthio, some ^^culus, some Strix. Vide Cornel. a lap. and
Tarn. In Thren. Ierem.
hardened Ostrich in the wilderness,
That does her new hatched young forget, forsake?
Yet the Sea-calves as careful, dammes do take
Piteous affection, hold dugs to their young.
Verse. 4. But here the sucking-child with glued tongue
To roof of mouth, dried up with thirst does cry:
Younglings yell out for bread, ready to die
With extreme hunger. Yea, the dearth's so great,
As not one little loaf is left to eat,
Verse. 5. They who before had all delicious fare,
Whose trencher robbed the Earth, the Sea, the Air,
Now in the streets become the beggars mates,
Wishing the fragments of their ancient cates.
The Thus the great and glorious Bellisarius for whom in a triumph money was
coynd and thrown among the people, with this posie on it, Bel^isarius the
glory of the Romant, yet afterward he was cast so low, as both his eyes were
put out, and he daily begged his bread in the temple of S. Sopbia, often using
this speech, Give I pray one loaf of bread to Bellis. rine, whom virtue exalted
hie, and envy has thrown down as low, Pezel. Mellific. Histor. in Iustin^an.
1. Thus Hormisda a Persian-Noble came from scarlet to the dunghill, for in
that he would not deny Christ his Savior the Son of God, he was by the Persian
tyrant Isdigerdes despoyled of all his riches and honor, and clothing, and
turned naked, save there was given him one peasants garment to cover him, and
cast into the base servitude of leading Camels, and serving as some hostler.
Theodor in Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. cap. 39.
scarlet sirs, which on beds downe-hils laid,
Poor wretches now, their beds are dung-hils made.
Verse. 6. For Sions punishment exceeds far
Sodoms destruction, there is no compare.
Their sins were Cito periisse beneficii est imago.
scourged with a fiery lash,
But yet that judgment passed in a flash,
Made quick dispatch, and swallowed them up all;
This spun in length, like dripping rain does fall.
Verse. 7. Her Nazarites, those sober votaries,
Whom neither snow nor milk could equalize
For purest white, whose faces did appear
Ruddier then Rubies, polisht and more clear
Then any Saphires, now that glorie's gone:
Verse. 8. Their faces bracke as coal, not to be known
Of known familiars. Skin cleaves to the bone,
No flesh remains to make partition.
Like age in others is juycie, succulent,
These withered, dry as sticks, all moisture spent.
Verse. 9. Death opes an easier gate for them by far,
Who lose the^^^ aim of life by sword of war,
Then those whom Fames ultimum malorum omnium. Am Marcellin. Histor. lib. 19.
Quantum est in vobis fame, misexima omnium morte, confecistis. Salust, in
fragment. Epist. Pompeii ad Senate.
lingering famines sword does slay,
And bear to th'grave a long, and languid way:
When all the feeding flore of house, barn, field,
^ieads emptiness, and can no succor yield.
Verse. 10. Mother, whose bowels boiled with passionate heat.
Sore hunger-smit, their infants boiled for meat.
What mothers belly nine months had sod in blood,
Is cookt and sod for that same beilies food:
So great a famine, such a deep distress
The daughter of my people does oppress
Verse. 11. Now has the Lord his fury brought to pass,
Powered out his wrath which long since threatened was,
When God kindles his fire, it burns up all.
Zions foundations into ashes fall.
Verse. 12. Kings far remote, which had received the fame,
And earths Inhabitants which had heard the name
Of great Jerusalem, (how her forts and towers
Scorned all fears of strongest adverse powers)
Never would these believe, nor could devise
How any foe or force should it surprise.
Amongst Impossibles this thing was thought,
That Sion should to ruin ere be brought.
Verse. 13. Her Animarum medici fuerunt animarum venefici. Tarnovius.
Prophets most unprofitable were,
No soap, no nitre can her Priests wash clear
From guiltiness of sins, which were the cause
That all did end with such a bloody clause.
By them the just were slaughtered in the Land,
Whose blood shall be required at their hand,
For their examples full of sin and vice
Filled others, made sins measure fully rise:
To Idols these did innocent infants slay.
Verse. 14. In the This place in these two Verses is very hard to find out the
true sense of, I have chosen out of several expositors what I judged most
simple and best, because there are diverse applying of the words.
streets full of blood as blind they stray,
Legal pollutions no way can they avoid.
Where ere they touch their clothes are smeard with blood.
Verse. 15. Yet even as lepets, as they walk they cry,
Unclean, Unclean, keep off, O come not nigh:
The very Gentiles said, Sure God no more
Will such cursed wretches to their land restore:
Verse. 16. God in his fury has dispersed them far,
They have lost his guarding, and regarding care.
The holy Priests with them had no respect,
The hoarie Elders honor was neglect.
Verse. 17. Alas (deceiving hopes) our eyes with pain
B^ate like our pulses, whiles we look in vain,
Waiting for help from nations witherd hand,
As if whom heaven throws down earth could make stand
Verse. 18. Our steps they trace, and nets in every street
Our hunting Nimrods laid to catch our feet.
Our An evil, an only evil, behold is come. An end is come, the end is come,
it watch^^ for thee, behold it is come, Ezekiel. 7.5, 6.
and, our end draws near, heavens destined doom
Our sins have ripened wrath the day is come.
Verse. 19. Like Eagles aieric tyrants, birds of prey,
So are our enemies swift-wing'd us to slay
And us slow-flighted foul pursuing o're-take
On mountains, or entrap by lying wait
In the wild desert.
Verse. 20. Some apply this Christus Domini, as ^^ant of Christ. Others will
have it meant to be Josias wounded and slain by Pharaoh ^^ho. Thus the
Chaldee, Hebrew, Hierome, Thomas, Figueiro, Varablus. Others take ^o be meant
of Zedekiah, and that more truly. Some Hebrews, Maldonat. Tarno^s, Di^dati.
Our anointed King
Given by the Lord, our souls next dearest thing
Nostriss best breath, their pits did him devour,
Whose covering wings we counted refuge sure,
Looking his shadow would us safety give
Amongst the Heathen, in hopes again to live.
Verse. 21. Go to, O daughter of Edom, laugh a while,
Mock on Inhabitant of Uz, and smile,
Fleering at our so sad, so low estate.
(...) shall thou not Gods cup of wrath escape.
It Is coming toward thee, thou shall drunken lie,
Showing thy nakedness to every eye.
Verse. 22. Chaere up O Sion, now the Lord has done
His task of Justice, all his wrath is gone.
What punishments on thee he did intend
To inflict for sin, are finished, at an end.
Never again shall thou so desolate be
Transported, carried in captivity.
But thou Panae Sionis tandem fient Babylonis. Judgment must begin at the
house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that
obey not the Gospel of God (...) 1 Pet. 4.17.
O daughter of Edom that did stand
Laughing at Sion, shall sore feel the hand
Of God, for all thy sins correcting thee,
Laying on thine head thine own iniquity.
God in his people will sin scourge and hate,
Much less shall sinful Edom scourging escape.
Verse. 1 HOw is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the
stones of the Sanctitary are powered out in the top of every street.

Verse. 2. The procious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they
esteamed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter.

Verse. 3. Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their
young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in
the wilderness.

Verse. 4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth
for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them.

Verse. 5. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that
were brought up in searlet, embrace dunghills.

Verse. 6. For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is
gre^^er then the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was over thrown as in a
moment, and no hand stayed on her.

Verse. 7. Her Nazarites were pure^ then snow, they were whiter then milk,
they were more ruddy in body then rubies, their polishing was of Sapphire.

Verse. 8. Their visage is blacker then a coal: they are not known in the
streets their skin cleaves to their hones: it is withered, it is become like a
stick.

Verse. 9. They that be slain with the sword, we better then they that be
slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits
of the field.

Verse. 10. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children,
they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

Verse. 11. The Lord has accomplished his jury, be has powered out his fierce
anger, he has kindled a fire in Z^^^, and it has devoured the foundations
thereof.

Verse. 12. The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would
not have believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the
gates of Jerusalem.

Verse. 13. For the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her Priests,
th^^ here shed the blood of the just in the midst of her.

Verse. 14. They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
themselves with blood, so the men could not couth their garments.

Verse. 15. They cried unto them; Depart ye, it is unclean, depart, depart,
touch not, when they fled away and wandered: they said among the heathen, They
shall no m^re sosourne there.

Verse. 16. The anger of the Lord has divided them, he will no more regard
them: they respected not the persons of the Priests, they favored not the
Elders.

Verse. 17. As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our
watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.

Verse. 18. They bunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets: our end is
near, our days are fulfilled, for our end is come.

Verse. 19. Our persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of the heaven: they
pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.

Verse. 20. The breath of our nostrills, the anointed of the Lord was taken in
their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen.

Verse. 21. Rejoice and be glad O daughter of Edom, that dwell in the land
of Vz, the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shall be drunken, and
shall make thy self naked.

Verse. 22. The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of
Zion, he will no more carry thee away into captivity he will visit thine
iniquity, O daughter of Edom, he (...) discover thy sins.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1 O Lord, behold what weight upon us lies,
Ease this thy grievous hand with gracious eyes
Consider how thou sett'st us as the butt,
Where wicked men reproaches daily shoot.
Verse. 2. Our proper right, inheritance and lands
Strangers possess, they fall in aliens hands.
Verse. 3. Who ever saw orphans and fatherless
Used as thresholds, have seen our distress:
Our mothers mourn as those in widow-hood.
Verse. 4. We lay out money for every piece of wood:
A They shall eat bread by weight and with care, and they shall drink water by
measure, and with astonishment, Ezekiel. 4.16.
very cup of water cannot come
To quench our thirst without a little sum.
Both birds and beasts at Natures Inn may call,
Drink at each brook, and none for payment call:
Better their case then ours, we are not thus,
Even Natures Commons are enclosed to us.
Verse. 5. Our neck does crack with persecutions weight,
Pains spend the day, and restlesnesse the night.
Verse. 6. We All the labor of man is for his mouth and yet the appetite is
not filled, Eccles. 6.7.
sold our selves to the Egyptians side,
And to the Assyrians, to be satisfied
With bellies full of meat.
Verse. 7. Our fathers God cleares his justice, punishing the children of
sinful parents, Ezekiel. 18.2, 3. etc.
laid
These eggs of sin, which are our dinner made:
Our Ancestors (now dead) the grapes did eat,
Our teeth are edged, their sins their sons now beat.
Verse. 8. Though we be freemen, slaves do us command,
Nor's any left to help us from their hand.
Verse. 9. With danger of curlives our bread we bought,
When we sought meat, the sword us also sought,
And watched for us in the wilderness.
Verse. 10. Our skin the covering garment of the flesh,
All comely, beauteous hew it quite forscoke,
As Anieulae caminariae similis ex incendii suiigine extit^sti^: prosundis
rugis splendida prius and suavis t^n facies est atata. Nicetas choniat. in
Annal. in deploratione urbis Byzantii.
heated oven grown black with smudge and smooke,
So was it blackned by the famines force,
With^ring the body, hind^ing natures course.
Verse. 11. Besides our enemies (for to let us see
A perfect Map of misery) goatish be.
Ravishing Zions women in the heat
Of their most lustful rage: poor maids entreat
In Judahs cities, not t'unlock their shame,
Defloured, they depart who Virgins came.
Verse. 12. Every degree had share in mischief^s lot,
The Princes were hanged up and escaped not.
None gave respectfull reverence to the face
Of gravest Elders, their account was base.
Verse. 13. They caused our It seems they made their children slaves in
pistrino molam vertere, and for the Kitchen fasces ligni portate.
young men toil in servile
Drudging as slaves, to turn the mill and grind.
What cruel hand will weaklings shoulders try
With leaden load? yet our poor children ery,
And crying fall, contending all in vain,
Their wood and fagots burdens to sustain.
Verse. 14. Had great Jerusalem a comelier sight,
Then when the Elders in Hieron. in Zach. cap. 8. The Judges and Elders used to
sit in the gates of the City, Ruth 4. 1 Zach. 8.16. The reason is rendered for
easier dispatch of Justice, that contrymen need not be at cost to go for
into the city.
her gates did meet,
To weight in seals of equity right and wrong,
Aiding weak poor, against oppressors strong?
Now all the sea^ts are empty, no furred gown,
Or scarlet robe, lifts up right cause cast down.
The sportfull youth, which made the streets resound
With A sign of de solation it is when in a city there is heard no voice of
harpers, musicians or pipers. Rev. (...)
music, now lament, all mirth is drowned,
Never a merry twang of harp or lute
Is heard, the stroke of sorrow strikes all mute.
Verse. 15. Our hearts and joy break off acquaintance all,
Our dance is done, to m^u^ning now we fall.
Verse. 16. The The glory and excellency of a people is som^ties called cornu,
sometimes coron^. Prove. 49 Esaias 28. (...) Ezekiel. 16.12. Phil. 4 1. 1 These. 2, 19.
erowne of glory which adorned our head
Is fallen and with it all our glory fled.
Woe, woe to us, whose sins create this cross
Of miseries highest gain, joys d^^pest loss.
Verse. 17. For this ^ur heart is faint, this dims our eye,
Weeping, and waiting long for remedy.
Verse. 18. Alas poor Zion, who can spare his eyes,
Seeing how des^late thy m^untaine lies?
Where best of men frequented, now the beasts,
And ^avening A desolate place is called a habitation for foxes, Psalm, 63.10,
becau^^ they and other beasts that are hunted, do not ordina^ily haunt places
where men do frequently live (...) converse,
Foxes make their dens and nests.
Verse. 19. Such is the fickle state of humane things
Composed of mutables, where each day brings
Exchanging passages of joy and sorrow,
This days success, excess of grief to morrow:
But Lord thou do remain the same for ever,
I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed Mal,
3, 6,
Immutable and changelesse altogether,
Thou have a stable kingdom, steady throne,
Lasting beyond last generation.
Verse. 20. Why do thou Lord shut up thy gates of love
For ever? Shall we never once more prove
Thy truth and goodness? Can thou so forsake
Us like to strangers, and no notice take?
Verse. 21. Return O (...) nob is, tihi nos, Deus o converte preeamur, Make us
glad according to the days wherein thou have (...) flicted us, and the years
wherein we have seen evil, psalm, 90, 15,
Lord, and turn our hearts to thee,
And thine to us, so shall we turned be:
Renew those days of peace we had before,
O let thy grace thy servants now restore.
Verse. 22. But O our dying hopes, thy vengefull wrath
Quite casts us off: Lord make us live by faith.
Verse. 1. REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our
reproach.

Verse. 2. Our inheritance is turned unto strangers, our houses to aliants.

Verse. 3. We are o^phanes and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

Verse. 4. We have d^unken our water for money, our wood is sold unto us.

Verse. 5. Our necks are under persecution: we labor and have no rest.

Verse. 6. We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be
satisfied with bread.

Verse. 7. Our fathers have sinned and are not, and we have borne their inquity.

Verse. 8. Servants have ruled over us: there is none that does deliver us our
of their hand.

Verse. 9. We gate our bread with the ^erill f^our lives, because of the
wilderness.

Verse. 10. Our skin wash ^acke like an oven, because of the terri^le famine.

Verse. 11. They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of
Judah.

Verse. 12. Printes are hanged up by their hand: the fares of the Elders were
not honored.

Verse. 13. They took the young men to grind, and the children f^ll under the
wood.

Verse. 14. The Elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their
music.

Verse. 15. The joy of our heart is ^^^^sed, our dance is turned into m^^^ning.

Verse. 16. The crown is fallen from (...) head: Woe unto us that we (...)
sinned.

Verse. 17. For this our heart is fai^^ for these things our eyes are dim^^^^

Verse. 18. Because of the mountain (...) Zion, which is desolate, the (...)
wake upon it.

Verse. 19. Thou, O Lord, remain^^ for ever, thy throne from generation to
generation.

Verse. 20. Wherefore do thou forg^^ us for ever, and forsake us so lo^^ time.

Verse. 21. Turn thou us unto thee, (...) Lord, and we shall be turned: (...)
our days as of old.

Verse. 22. But thou have utterly rejected us: thou art very wroth against us.

FINIS.

