THE CASE OF THE Hamlet of Wapping, In Answer to White-Chappel, concerning
Their HIGHWAYS.
I. WApping is at great Expense in maintaing the Common-Sewers and Outlets,
which receive and convey a great part of the Water of White-Chappel, which has
lately cost the Inhabitants of Wapping some Hundreds of Pounds, of which
White-Chappel (notwithstanding they receive the Common Benefit) contribute not
a Farthing.

II. White-Chappel (in respect of the Parish) has the only Advantage in point
of Trade, by the Road which they represent, as so very Chargeable, having in
particular an Hay-Market in Their Street thrice a Week, and from every Hay-Cart
they receive 2 d. for their Scavengers, The Scavengers have let their Profits
of the Hay-Market for 25. l. per Annum.
and 2 d. to each House before which they stand; besides all other Advantages
in respect of Custom to their Houses, etc. but not the least Benefit accrues to
Wapping by White-Chappel Highway, That being hear a Mile and a Half distant
from it.

III. Wapping never paid more than Six Pounds per Annum, toward the Repairs of
White-Chappel Highway, till the Year 1679, till which time they had Surveyors
of their own, and having by that time, at the great Expense of near 700 l.
(which is above 40 l. per Annum Interest) Paved then Highways, which were
Gravelled at yearly Charge; White-Chappel then took the Advantage of breaking
the Old Contract of 6 l. per Annum, and have since most unjustly Collected
Arbitrary Sums, in particular, in the Year 1692, They Collected 17 l. more than
they brought to Account.

IV. Two Substantial Inhabitants of White-Chappel, (one of which has been
formerly Surveyor) did this very Year offer to maintain their Highways at 100
l. per Annum, for Seven Years successively, and give Security to the Parish to
save them from Damage.

V. There will be, without Wapping, in White-Chappel Parish at least 3000
Houses, (and more are still building from new Foundations) and supposing but
2000 Inhabitants should perform Statute Labor, or pay for so doing but 1 s.
per House, it will make up the Sum proposed by the Undertakers, which discovers
that their Charge is inconsiderable.

VI. The Parish of St. Anns (which they bring as a President) did never (as an
Hamlet) lay out 700 l. on their own Highways, distinct from the Parish at
large, as Wapping has done; Neither have they Common-Sewers beneficial, and not
chargeable to the other Parish, neither any Damms against the River of Thames,
which create a continual Charge unto the Inhabitants: So that the Case is not
at all alike. But contrary to this the Hamlet of Shadwell was separated from
Stepney, a Neighboring Parish to White-Chappel, by Act of Parliament in the
Year 1670, without being made Contributary to Stepney Highways,
notwithstanding Stepney has above six times more Highways than White-Chappel.

VII. As to the Charities, it is wonderful with what Confidence they can offer so
great a Falsehood to this Honorable House, to detect which, we here set forth
what They are, according to their own Book and Rent-roll.

l. s. d. The Total of the Rent-roll produced before the Honorable Committee
129 14 04 per Annum. Of this there is (as appears by their own Books)
restr^ined to White-Chappel, exclusive of Wapping the following Charities; 1.
Mrs. Agnes Smith, gave to the upper part of the Parish 2 0 0 per Annum. 2. Mr.
Fabian Postilath, 2 0 0 per Annum. 3. Mr. Thomas Morris, 1 0 0 per An. 4. The
Vinters Company, 1 0 0 per An. Mrs. Alice Row gave in Cash, -- 50 l. 5. Mr.
Brown, 2 0 0 per An. 6. Mr. Biggs, 2 0 0 per An. Mrs. Paradine 100 l. Alderman
Hillard 50 l.
With they Purchased, 11 0 0 per An. 7. Mr. Holbrook, 2 19 0 per An. In all 24
10 00

This is a most true Account of their Book and Rent-Roll; except a new Purchase
disputable, not in the Rent-Roll: But besides, there are several Almshouses;
100 l. given by the last Rector, A Free School already built and endowed by him
with 40 l. per Annum, after two very old Lives: All which Wapping shall lose
the benefit of by being made a Parish.

VIII. Tho Wapping maintain their own Poor, yet as appears even by
White-Chappel Book, (as well as other Evidence) which has restrained some
Charities to the upper part of the Parish which implies that the rest are not
restrained) They ought to have their part of the Public Charities, which have
been demanded, particularly by Philip d' Assigny late Chappel-Warden, though
shiftingly refused, and unjustly detained, by the Upper Hamlet.

These things having been more fully made appear to the Honorable Committee,
before whom this Matter was Hoard, Wapping therefore does hope, that this
Honorable House will make no such Reservation, as is unjustly desired by the
Upper Hamlet, since passing the Bill without it, will rather be an Advantage,
than Prejudice to White-Chappel.

Wapping's Answer to White-Chappel.


