AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE LAWS OF ENGLAND, Touching Treasons, Rebellious Murders,
Conspiracies, Burning of Houses, Poysonings, and other Capital Offenses.

With such Readings thereon as show the several ways whereby Offenders in such
cases may become Guilty.

By John Bridal, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for John Bellinger, in Cliffords-Inne-Lane, and Tho. Dring at
the Harrow at Chacery-Lane-End in Fleet Street. 1679.

The general Titles contained in the TABLE.
ACcessories. Affrayes. Appeals. Approver. Assemblies. Arraignment. Attainder.
Battery. Bribery. Burning of Houses. Causes Criminal. Challenges of Jurors.
Chance-Medley. Clergy. Conspiracies. Vide Treason. Conviction. Council. Duels.
Errors. Execution. Extortion. Felo de se. Felony. Gifts. Homicide. Indictment.
Judgment Criminal. Jurors. King. Larceny. Ligeance. Lex Talionis. Libels.
Laws. Life. Mispristons. Murder. Malice. Mayhem, Offenses. Petit Treason.
Poison. Piracy. Punishment. Principals. Pain, Fort, and Dure. Pardon. Rape.
Riots. Robbery. Roues. Rumors. Rebellion. Vide Treason. Se Defendendo.
Striking in the Kings Court. Theft. Treason. Verdict.
Advertisement.
THE Campaign of the French King in the Year 1677. In which is described
Exactly the Three Sieges and taking in of Valenciennes by Assault, and of the
Town and Citadel of Cambray, and of St. Omers. With an Account of the Battle of
Cassel. Printed for T. Dring in Fleet Street.

JVs CRIMINIS: OR THE Law of ENGLAND, TOUCHING Matters Criminal.
JVS CRIMINIS, or the Obligation of Crime, is whereby a Subject for a Delict,
or Offense against the Imperial Crown of England, is obnoxious, and liable to
punishment. And a delict, or offense is, whereby the King, and Commonwealth
(which make but one) are injured.

Of Offenses, commonly termed Pleas of the Crown, some are perpetrated mediatly
against the Crown (though not principally, yet consequentially;) And some
immediately are said to be committed against the King Himself, who is Head of
the Commonwealth, and in whom all general Injuries reside, and to whom the
Reformation of all Public wrongs does inseperably appertain.

The former kind may be divided into 3 Classes, (viz.)
1. Into those that have Relation to life it self, such as Homicide. 2, Into
those that respect the Body and Members, as Battery, Mayhem, and Rape. 3. Into
those that belong to Dominion, or property, such as Theft, and burning of
Houses.
The latter kind do comprehend High Treason, Misprision of Treason, Robbing the
King's Treasure, Bribery, Extortion, striking in any of the King's Courts,
where He resides Personally, or by Representation, and all manner of Breaches
of the Public Peace; such as Conjurations, Routs, Ryots, Affrayes, Duels,
Lybels, and false Rumors. Of these several kinds in their Order.

1. Of those Crimes that are committed mediatly, contra Coronam and dignitatem
Regis, and do relate to Life it self, as Homicides.
In Homicide, are worthy of Observation, the Etymology of it, and its general
Division.

Est homicidium, Lib. 3. c. 4. nu. 3. de corona.
says Bracton, hominis Occisio, ab homine facta, si enim a Bove, Cane, vel
alia re non dicetur proprie Homicidium, Est dictum Homicidium, ab komine, and
Caedo. quasi hominis Caedim: And with Bracton does Concur in this matter,
another ancient Author viz. Mr. Horn, whose very words are these: Homicide est
Occision de Home per Home fait, Mirror. c. 1. Sect. 9.
car si soit per best, ou mischeance nest Homicide. Thus much of the
Definition, and Origination of the word Homicide: As for the right division of
Homicide, take this as follows: Of Homicides some be done.

1. Proposito, voluntarily, and of malice forethought, as petty-Treason, and
Murder,

2. Impetu, voluntarily, and not of malice forethought: Of these some be
Felony, as Manslaughter, and some be no Felony; Of which, some be in respect
of giving back inevitably in defense of himself, upon an assault of Revenge;
Co. 3. Jnsti. f. 54.
and some without any giving back, as upon the Assault of a Thief, or Robber,
upon a man in house, or abroad. Some upon the Assault of one, that is under
Custody, as the Sherif, or Jailer assaulted by his prisoner; some in respect
that he is an Officer, or Minister of Justice, without any assault in Execution
of his Office or Lawful warrant.

3. Casu, such as be no Felony, neither forethought, nor voluntary, as
Man-slaughters by misadventure. Having showed the Reader Sr. Edward Cook's
division of Homicide; I begin with the first Branch, viz. Homicide voluntary,
and of malice forethought, and this conteines petit Treason, and Murder.

Treason (being derived from Trabir) which is treacherously to betray, Trahue
betrayed, 1 Petit Treason.
and Trahison per Contractionem, Treason is the betraying it self, it is
divided into two parts, into High Treason, and petit Treason: It is called
High, or Grand Treason in respect of the Royal Majesty against whom it is
perpetrated, Co. 3. Inst. f. 4. and 20.
and Commparatively it is styled petty Treason, in respect it is committed
against Subjects, and inferior persons; so that this petit Treason is when
wilful Murder (in the Estate Oeconomical,) is committed upon any Subject, by
one that is in subjection, and owes Faith, Duty, and Obedience to the party
Murdered; as in these three Cases following, which are only mentioned by the
Statute of 25. E. 3. C. 2. de prodicionibus; and likewise by Britton Cap. 8.
and 22.

1. When a servant slays his Master: This was petit Treason by the Common
Law, for it appears by the Book 12. 12 Ass. pl. 30.
Ass. that a woman servant killed her Mrs, wherefore she had Judgment given to
be burned, which is the Judgment at this day of a woman for petit Treason. And
herewith agrees 21 E. 3.17.

Upon the Act aforesaid, if the servant kill the wife of his Master, 19 H.
6.47. Flowdens Com. 86. b. Crompt. 20.
it is petit Treason, for he is servant both to the Husband and wife.

A servant upon malice pretended, shoots at a stranger and misseth him, and
kills his Master, being by; this is petit Treason in the servant (though he
intended no hurt to his said Master yet) because he intended Murder thereby.

A Servant commands one to beat his Master, Crompt. 20.
and he kills him, this is petit Treason in the servant if he be present.

If a servant has an intent to kill his Master, Co. lib. 1. Shellies case 99b.
10. H. 6.47. Plowdens. Com. 260. Co. 3. Inst. f. 20.
and before the Execution of his purpose, departs out of his Masters service,
and being out of his service, put his Intent in Execution, and kills him, who
was his Master; this is petit Treason: for the Execution of the Act, has a
Retrospection to the Original Cause, which was malice conceived when he was a
servant.

A maidservant conspires to kill her Mistress, Moors Reports. nu. 227. f, 91.
it is petit Treason in her, and Murder in the Actor.

2. When a Wife slays her Husband.

The wife maliciously kills her Husband, this is petit Treason in her: But if
the Husband maliciously kills his Wife, this is only Murder: the reason of
this diversity is, for that the one is in subjection, and owes Obedience, and
not the other.

The wife poysoneth an Apple, to the intent to poison a stranger therewith,
Cromp. 20.
and laid it to that purpose in a secret place, and the Husband by chance
eats of it, and dies thereof, within a Year and a day; this is petit Treason
in the Wife, for that she intended Murder thereby; so if the Wife poysoneth an
Apple, or other thing, and delivers it to B. (knowing of the poison) to give
to C. and B. gives it to the Husband (without the assent of the Wife) who
eats thereof in the Wives absence, and he dies thereof, this is petit
Treason in the Wife: But if the Wife poysoneth a thing, Plowd. Com. f, 474.
to the intent to poison her Husband therewith, the Husband eats of it, and
becomes very sick, but recovereth: after a stranger eats thereof, and dies
thereof, this is only murder in the Wife.

If the Wife and Servant conspire the Husbands death, he is killed by the
Servant, Co: 3: Just f: 20.
in the absence of the Wife, this is petit Treason in them both, and the Wife
shall be burnt. But if it had been a stranger, it had been murder in him only,
and petit Treason in the Wife.

Baron, and Feme out of affection were resolved to go out of the World
together; The Wife buys poison, both take it, the Husband dyed; It is a quaere
in the Book, whether this were murder in the Wife.

A Woman compasses with her Avowterer, The Woman's Lawyer, lib. 3. sect. 44.
the death of her Husband, they assailed him, Riding on the Highway, beating,
wounding, leaving him for dead, and then they fled: The Husband got up, levied
Hue and cry; came before the Justices; they sent after the Offenders, which
were gotten, arraigned, and the matter found by the Verdict, the Adulterer was
hanged, the Woman burned to death, the Husband living: This Judgment was given
when voluntas reputabatur pro facto, Sic Metellus Celer Sergium damnavit, and
non factum, sed animus in questionem deductus est: Plusque voluisse peccare
nocuit, quam non peccasse profuit: But at this day in case of Felony, Non debet
obesse Conatus, ubi injuria nullum habet effectum.

3. When a Secular, or Religious man stays his Prelate, Ordinary, or
Superior, to whom he owes Faith and Obedience.

Note, that unto the Bishop of every Diocese, the Clerks within their Diocese,
do owe Faith and Obedience, which is called Canonical Obedience.

Note likewise, that whatsoever Act will prove murder between strangers, the
same will make petit Treason from the Servant to his Master, from the Wife to
the Husband, from the Clerk to his Prelate, or Ordinary, Mutatis Mutandis: But
whether from a Child to the Father, or Mother, etc. may be a Quaere, for some
hold that it is petit Treason, and others that it is not.

If the Child maliciously kills the Father, or Mother, this says one is
petit Treason (although the Father or Mother at the same time gave neither
meat, drink, or Apparel, nor wages to such Child) in respect of the duty of
nature violated, vide 21. E. 3.17 Book Treason 6.

A Bastard kills his Mother, Crompt' 21.
this seems petit Treason; for the Mother is certainly known.

The Son, or Daughter in Law, kills the Father, or Mother in Law, with whom
they dwell, and do service, and have meat, Dalisons Rep. 1. Mar. 1.
and drink, it is petit Treason; although such Child take no wages, but the
Indictment shall be by the name of Servant.

But my L. Coke says thus; If the Child commit Parricide in killing his Father
and Mother (of which Solon interrogatus cur nullus parricidio supplicium
indixisset? Se id neminem facturum putasse respondit. The Lawmakers never
imagined any child would do) this case is out of the Stat. of 25. E. 3, c. 2.
unless the child served the Father, or Mother for wages, or meat, drink, or
apparel, for that it is none of those three kinds specified in the Law
aforesaid: And yet (says he) the offense is far more heinous, and impious in a
child, than in a servant, for, peccata contra naturam sunt gravissima; but the
Judges are restrained by the said Act, to interpret it, a simili, or a Minore
(...) Majus. The hainousness of this Parricide appears by that punishment,
which is ordained in the civil Law, for those that are guilty of the Crime:
Paena parricidij more Majorum haec instituta est, ut parricida virgis
sanguineis verberatus, deinde culleo insuatur cum Cane, gallo gallinaceo, and
vipera, and simia, deinde in more profundum Culleus jactetur, D. 48.9, 9. Thus
much of petit Treason.

Murder comes of the Saxon word Mordrue, ^, Murder, Co, Litt, 287, b,
Stamfords Plees of Crown, Lib, 1,
or Mordren, and Mordridus is the Murderer even until this day amongst them in
Saxony, from whence we have most of our words: or, it may be derived of Mort,
and Dire, as Mors Dira, a Cruel or Horrible death.

This Murder in our Law is Twofold, either of himself, or of another.

1. Of Murdering a man's self, called Felo de se.
Felo de se (says Coke) is a man, or woman, which being Compos mentis, of
sound memory, and of the Age of Discretion, kills himself, which being
lawfully found by the Oath of Twelve men; all the Goods and Chattels of the
party so offending are forfeited: And the Reason, why Felo de se does forfeit
all his Goods and Chattels is, because it is an offense against the King, who
by that perpetration is deprived of a Subject: And indeed no man by the Law of
nature has such power over his own life, as to take it away, or to oblige it
by any Contract, or Bargain, vide Grot. Lib. 2. c. 21. nu. 11. Lib. 3. c. 11.
nu. 18. Having showed the Description of Felo de se, and the Reason of
forfeiting his Chattels, I propose these Queries with their Resolutions.

Whether a person that is non compos mentis, giving himself a mortal wound, and
after recovering his memory, before death ensues, be Felo de se?

If one during the time that he is non compos mentis gives himself a mortal
wound, Felo de se; And the Reason is because the stroke, which was the cause of
his death, was given, when he was not Compos mentis. Et actus non facit Reum,
nisi meus sit rea: And this is agreeable to the civil Law: Maleficia voluntas,
and propositum distinguit: D, 47, 253,
voluntas and propositum maleficium delinquentis distinguit: Delictam cessat,
ubi delinquendi animus non est.

Whether a man can be said to be Felo de se upon an involuntary Act?

A man may be so; As if A. give B. B. draws his knife, and holds it up for
his own defense: A. in have, meaning to fall upon B. 44 E, 3, 44, 3 E, 3, Cor
286, Co, 3, Inst, f. 54,
to kill him, falls upon the knife of B. whereby he is wounded to death, he
is Felo de se: For B. did nothing but that which was lawful in his own defense;
Et vim vi defendere says the civil Law, omnes leges, omnicque jura permittunt,
D. 9.2, 45, 4.

Whether the goods of Felo de se be forfeited before it be found of Record,
that he is Felo de se?

No Goods be forfeited, Felo de se: Plowd. fol, 360, b.
And this does belong to the Coroner, super visum Corporis, to enquire thereof:
and if it be found before the Coroner, super visum Corporis, that he was Felo
de se, the Executors or Administrators of the dead shall have no Traverse
thereunto. Co, Lit, f, 114, ab, l, 5, f, 109.
And this is the reason that no man can prescribe to have Felons goods, because
they are not forfeited until it be found of Record, that he is Felo de se.

How a Felo de se shall be enquired of, where the body cannot be found?

If a man be Felo de se, Coroner cannot have the view of the body, Hill, 37
Eliz; in the King's Bench by the whole Court, in the Case of one Laughton of
Cheshire.
and by consequence cannot enquire thereof: In this case it may be inquired
thereof by the Justices of Peace of that County, for they have power by their
Commission to inquire of all Felonies. But if it be found before them, the
Executors, or Administrators of the dead may have a Traverse thereunto, but not
to the Indictment taken before the Coroner, super visum corporis, as before is
said.

Whether a joint Tenant of Chattels personals, becoming Felo de se, does
forfeit the whole?

There is a diversity between Chattels personals in Action, 8 E, 4, 4, 7 E, 4,
7, a, Plowd, Com, 259, b,
and in possession: for if a debt be owing to two, unless it be in case of
Joynt-Merchants, and the one is Felo de se, he does forfeit the whole: but
otherwise it is of goods in possession, for there he forfeiteth but his part.

Whether a debt upon a bare Contract be forfeitable?

If a man that is Felo de se has a debt upon a bare contract, and not upon
specialty, Resp, Dyer 262, a,
this shall not be forfeited unto the King. Thus much of Felo de se.

2 Of Murder in respect of another.
Bracton defines this kind of Murder to be Homicidium, quod nullo praesente,
Lib, 3, c, 15, nu, 1, de Corona Britton, c, 6,
nullo sciente nullo audiente, nullo vidente, clam perpetratur: And of the same
mind is Britton, whose words are Murdre est occision de home disconu
feloniousment fait dount home ne poit scaver per qui, ne per quex: As also
Fleta: Est murdrum occulta hominum occisio, Lib, 1, c, 30,
a manibus hominum nequiter perpetrata, que nullo sciente vel vidente, facta
est, preter solum Interfectorem, and suos coadjutores and fautores: yet Fleta
says also, that it was not murder, except it were proved, that the party slain
were English, and no stranger: But as Stamford says, the Law in this point
has received an alteration by the Stat. of 14. E. 3. 14 E, 3, c, 4
And therefore this murder is now otherwise to be defined, or described: It is
when a Reasonable Creature (be it man, woman, child, Subject born, or Alien,
persons outlawed, or otherwise attainted of Treason, Felony, or praemunire,
Christian, Jew, Heathen, Turk, or other Infidel, being under the Kings peace)
is slain, or killed by a man of sound memory, and of the age of discretion,
with malice forethought either expressed by the party, or implied by Law.

Touching the former, viz. Malice expressed, take these Queries with their
Solutions:

Whether this same malice, though it be intended against one, it shall be
extended toward another?

This Malice is so odious in Law, as though it be intended against one, it
shall be extended toward another; Sol,
And therefore Bracton's words are; siquis unum percusserit cum alium percutere
vellet, Co, Lib, 9, Gores Case 81,
in felonia tenetur: As if A. put poison into a pot, to the intent to poison B.
and set the same in a place, where he supposes B. will come and drink thereof,
and by accident one C. unto whom A. has no malice, comes, and of his own will
takes the pot, and drinks thereof, of which poison he dies; This is murder
in A. for the Law does couple the event with the intention, and the end with
the cause: But herein is a diversity between the principal, and the Accessory;
For if A. command B. to kill I. S. and B. kills I. D. mistaking him for I. S.
this is murder in B. because he did the Act, which sprang out of the Root of
malice, Plowd, Com, Saunders Case,
but A. is not Accessory, because his own commandment was not pursued: But on
the other side, if A. command B. to kill I. S. by poison, and he does it by
violence, as by weapon, sharp or blunt, Gun, Cross-bow, Crushing, etc. in this
case notwithstanding the fact be not executed according to the mean prescribed;
yet A. is Accessory nevertheless; for the commandment was to kill, which
ensued, though the mean was not followed.

Whether killing a man by poison be more detestable, than by any other means?

To kill a man by poison, says Coke, Sol,
is the most detestable of all, because it is most horrible and fearful to the
nature of man, and of all others can be least prevented, either by Manhood, or
providence: This offense was so odious, 22 H, 8, c, 9,
that by Act of Parliament it was made High Treason, and it inflicted a more
grievous and lingering death, than the common Law prescribed, viz. That the
Offender shall be boiled to death in hot water: upon which Statute Margaret
Davy a young woman was attainted of High Treason for povsoning her Mistress,
and some others, Anno 33 H, 8,
was boiled to death in Smithfield the Seventeenth of March in the same year:
But this Act was afterward repealed by 1. E. 6. c. 12. and 1. Mar. c. 1.
Having given you the words of Sir Edward Coke, touching poisoning, I shall
mention something in the civil Law concerning it:

Plus est hominem extinguere veneno, Cod, 9, 1, 8
quam occidere gladio. For Clam interficere, says Gothofredus on the Text,
gravius est, quam palam.

Plus est hominem veneno extinguere, Doctores ad Just, 4, 18 5, Just, 4, 28, 5,
D, 48, 81, and 3,
quam gladio occidere.

Lege Cornelia, and veneficij Capite damnantur qui artibus odiosis, tam
venenis, quam susurris magicis homines occiderint; vel mala medicamenta public
vendiderint.

Whether an Infant within the age of Nine years, can be guilty of Murder?

Un Infant deins age ix ans occist un Enfant de ix ans and Confess le Felony,
Sul, (...)
and auxi fuit trove que quant il luy avoit tue, il luy occult and auxi le
Sanke que fuit sur luy effundes, si il ceo excuse; And the Judges held, that he
ought to be hanged. 3 H, 7, 1, b.
But Fairefax said, that the words of Fortescue were, viz. That the Reason why
a person is executed for Murder, is for example, that others may fear to
offend; But such punishment can be no example to such an Infant, or to a person
that has not discretion.

Le Recorder de Londres monstre coment un enfant entra le age de x. ans, and
xii. ans fuit endite de mort, and il fuit appose de ceo, and il dit, que il
guard barbettes ove cestuy que est mort and ils happen a variance per que il luy
ferist en le gule, puis en le Test and issint en diverse Lieux del corpse tanque
qu'il fuit mort, 3 H, 7, 12, b
and donques il trahist le corpse en le corn, and les Justices pur sonrendr',
and pur ceo que il narroit le matter playnem ent respite le Judgment, and
plusours Justic' disont, que il fuit deigne mort etc. And the Reason is, quia
malitia supplet etatem: with this our Rule do concur the Roman Laws.

Impunitas delicti propter etatem non datur, si modo in ea quis sit, in quam
crimen, quod intenditur, Cod 9, 47, 7, do Poenis, Gothofredus, Qu, 4,
cadere potest; i. e. si modo sit proximus pubertati, and ea sentiat in quibus
deliquit.

Malitia minor is etatem justam esse representat, ae supplet, vel sic: Malitiae
non succurritur.

Whether Malice prepensed must be continuing, till the mort al wound given?

Albeit there had been malice between two, Sol,
and after they are pacified, and made friends, and after this upon a new
occasion fall out, Co, 3, Inst. f, 51,
and the one kills the other, this is Homicide, but no murder, because the
former malice continued not.

So if A. command B. to kill C. and before the Act be done, A. repents, and
countermandeth his Commandment, and charge B. Ibid,
not to do it; if B. after kills him, A. is not accessory to it; for the
malicious mind of the Accessory ought to continue to do ill, until the Act
done.

Whether Murder can be committed of a child in utero matris?

If a Woman be quick with Child, Sol,
and by a Potion, or otherwise kills it in her womb; or if a man beat her, 22
E. 3 Cor 263. 8 E. 2, Cor. 418,
whereby the Child dies in her Body, and she is delivered of a dead Child,
this is a great misprision, and no murder: But if the Child be born alive, and
dies of the Potion, Battery, or other cause, this is murder; for in Law it is
accounted a reasonable Creature, in rerum natura, when it is born alive.

The Law holden in Bracton's time was, si aliquis, qui mulierem pregnantem
percusserit, vel ei venenum dederit, per quod fecerit abortivus si puerperium
jam formatum fuerit; and maxim si fuerit animatum, facit homicidium. And let
us now see what the civil Law says, de partu abacto; si mulierem visceribus
suis vim intulisse, D, 48, 8, 8,
quo partum abigeret, constiterit, eam in exilium preses Provinciae exiget.

Cicero in oratione pro Cluentio Avito scripsit, D, 48, 19, 39, de partu abact^,
Milesiam quandam mulierem, cum esset in Asia, quod ab heredibus secundis
accepta pecunia partum sibi medicamentis ipsa abegisset, rei Capitalis esse
damnatam.

Whether it be murder in a Mother to conceal the death of her Bastard Child?

It is Enacted, Sol,
That if any Woman be delivered of any Issue, Male, or Female, which being born
alive, 21 Jac, c, 27,
should by the Laws be a Bastard, and she endeavor privately, either by
drowning, or secret burying thereof, as that it may not come to light, whether
it were born alive, or not, but be concealed; In every such case the said
Mother so offending, shall suffer death as in case of murder, except such
Mother can make proof by one witness at least, that the Child, whose death was
by her so intended to be concealed, was born dead.

Whether he that stabbeth another to death shall suffer, as in case of wilful
murder?

It is Enacted, Sol,
That every person, which shall stab, 1 Jac, c, 8,
or thrust any person, that has not then any Weapon drawn, or has not then
first stricken the party, which shall be so stabbed, or thrust; so as the
person stabbed, or thrust; shall thereof dye, within the space of six months,
although it cannot be proved, that the same was done of malice forethought; yet
the party so offending, and being thereof convicted by the Verdict of Twelve
men, Confession or otherwise, according to the Laws of this Realm, shall be
excluded from the benefit of his Clergy, and suffer death, as in case of
wilful murder.

Whether a Murder committed out of the Realm, can be tried by the Common Law?

If two of the Kings Subjects go over into a Foreign Country, Sol, 13 H, 4,
5, and 6,
and fight there, and the one kill the other, Stamf: pl. cor. f. 65. Co. Lit.
70. a, b
this Murder being done out of the Realm, cannot be for want of Trial heard,
and determined by the common Law of England; but it may be heard and determined
before the Constable and Marshal, whose Sentence is upon the testimony of
witnesses, and combat; and accordingly where a Subject of the King was slain in
Scotland by others of the Kings Subjects, the Wife of the party flain had her
appeal therefore before the Constable and Marshal; and so it was resolved in
the 35th, year of Queen Elizabeth, in the case of Sir Francis Drake, who struck
off the head of Dowtie, in partibus transmarinis, that his Brother and Heir
might have an appeal.

So if a man be mortally wounded in Franee, Co. Lit. 70. b. Co. 3 Inst. 48,
and dies thereof in England, it is said that an Appeal does lie upon the
statutes of 12 R. 2. c. 2. and 1 H. 4. c. 14. for it is not punishable by the
common Law, because the stroke was given there where no Visne can come, and
therefore the same shall be heard and determined before the Constable and
Marshal: Thus much of Murder proceeding from Malice prepensed and expressed; as
for Malice employed, it happens in three cases.

1 In respect of the manner of the deed; Co: lib. 9. Mac. Rellyes.
as if one kills another without any provocation of the part of him that is
slain, the Law implies malice: if one make a wry, or distorted mouth, or the
like countenance upon another, and the other immediately pursues, and kills him,
it is murder, for it shall be presumed to be malice precedent; and that such a
slight provocation is not a sufficient ground or pretense for a Quarrel. Cro.
1. part Wats v. Brain f. 779.


One Halloway was Indicted and Arraigned at Newgate for Murdering one Pain,
the Indictment was, that he Ex malitia proecogitata tied the said Pain at the
Horses tail, Cro. 3 part Hallow. case 131.
and struck him two strokes with a cudgel, being tied to the said Horse,
whereupon the Horse ran away with him, and drew him upon the ground three
Furlongs, and thereby brake his shoulder, whereof he instantly dyed, and
murdered him: Upon this Indictment he being arraigned, pleaded nor guilty, and
thereupon a special Verdict found, that the Earl of Denbigh was possessed of a
Park called Austerly Park, and that the said Halloway was Wood-ward of his
Woods in the said Park, and that the said Pain with others unknown, entered the
said Park to cut Wood there, and that the said Pain climbed up a Tree, and
with an hatcket cut down some boughs thereof, and that the said Halloway came
riding into the Park, and seeing the said Pain on the Tree, commanded him to
descend, and he descending from thence, the said Halloway stroke him two blows
upon the back with his cudgel, and the said Pain having a Rope tied about his
middle, and one end of the Rope hanging down, the said Halloway tied the end of
that Rope to the Horses tail, and struck the said Pain two blows upon his
back, whereupon the said Pain being tied to the Horses tail, and the Horse
running away with him, drew him upon the ground three Furlongs, and by this
means brake his shoulder, whereof he instantly dyed, and the said Halloway
cast him over the pale into certain bushes, and whether upon all this matter
found, the said Halloway be guilty of the Murder prout, they pray the
discretion of the Court, and if the court shall adjudg him guilty of Murder,
they find him guilty of Murder; if otherwise, they find him guilty of
Manslaughter; and this special Verdict by Certiorari was removed into the
Kings Bench, and depended three Terms; and the opinion of all the Judges and
Barons was demanded, and they all (besides Hutton, who doubted thereof) held
clearly that it was Murder: for when the Boy who was cutting on the Tree came
down from thence upon his command, and made no resistance, and he then struck
him two blows, and tied him to the Horses tail, and struck him again,
whereupon the Horse ran away, and he by that means slain, the Law implies
malice, and it shall be said in Law to be malice prepensed, he doing it to one
who made no resistance; he was adjudged to be hanged, and was hanged
accordingly.

If a man give poison to another person, Co. 3. Inst. 52.
of which poison the party dies within the Year, this implies malice, and is
adjudged wilful Murder of Malice prepensed.

Note, that a man may be poisoned Four manner of ways.

1 Gustu, by Taste, that is by Eating or Drinking, being in fused into his meat
or drink.

2. Auhelitu. by taking in breath, as by a poisonous perfume in a Chamber, or
other Room.

3 Contactu, by touching.

4. and lastly, Suppostu, as by a Glister, or the like. Thus much of malice
employed in respect of the manner of the Deed.

2 Malice employed does happen in respect of the person slain.

And therefore it has been resolved, that if any Sheriff, Co: lib: 9.
Mackalleys case, Cro: 2 part, Mackalleys case, Co. lib: 4. Youngs case.
Undersheriff, Sergeant, or Officer who has execution of Process be slain in
doing his Duty, it is murder in him who kills him, although there were not any
former malice betwixt them; for the Executing of Process is the life of the
Law; and therefore he who kills such an Officer shall loose his life; for that
Offense is Contra potestatem Regis and Legis, and therefore in such case there
needs not any inquiry of malice.

The same Law is, if any Justice of Peace, Constable, or any other Officer, or
any who comes with them in their Assistance, for the preservation of the peace
be slain in executing their Office, it is murder through malice employed: so if
a Watchman be killed in staying Night-walkers, it is murder:

One Thomas Pew was Arraigned for the murder of one Gardener, and upon evidence
it appears that the said Gardener was a Bailiff Sworn and known, Co. Inst. f.
52.
and Under-Bayliff to the Dean of Westminster; and he having the Sheriffs
Warrant to Arrest the said Thomas Pew, upon a Capias out of the common Bench,
and seeing him in Shyre-lane within the liberty of Westminster, the said Pew
seeing him, drew his Sword, and the said Gardener approaching to lay hold upon
him; (not using any words of Arrest (as was proved,) Thomas Pew said (as it was
proved upon the Examination of two Witnesses before the Coroner) stand off,
come not near me, I know you well enough, come at your peril; and the Bailiff
taking hold of him, he thrust him with his Sword that he dyed immediately: It
was held by all the Court that it was murder, for he coming as an Officer to
Arrest, and not offering any violence, or provocation, although he used not
words, I Arrest you, or showed him any Warrant, because peradventure he had not
time, nor was demanded the cause, the Law presumes it to be malice and murder
in him that so kills one being an Officer, and coming to execute process.

Resolved that if there be Error in Awarding of process, Cro: 2 part
Mackalleyes case,
or in the mistake of one process for another, and an Officer be slain in the
Execution thereof, the offender shall not have the Advantage of such Error no
more then a Sheriff who suffers a prisoner to escape, shall take advantage of
any Error thereby; but the Resisting of an Officer when he comes to make an
Arrest in the Kings name, is murder: But a man shall take advantage against an
Officer where he is slain in doing an unlawful act; so likewise upon a variance
in an essential part of the parties Name.

As to the former, take this Resolution:

One Cook was Indicted for the Murder of Marshal, upon his Arraignment pleading
not guilty, it was found that the said Marshal was a Bailiff to the Sheriff of
-- and had several Warrants upon several Capias ad satisfac. Crook 3 part,
Cooks case 573.
against the said Cook, and his Father directed unto him, and other Bailiffs,
and that they by virtue or color thereof, entered into the said Cooks stable
and out-house, and hid themselves all Night, and at 8 of the clock next morning
coming to Cooks dwelling House, called to open his doors, and suffer them to
enter, because they had such Warrants upon such Writs at the Suit of such
persons to Arrest him, and willed him to obey them: But the said Cook commanded
them to depart, telling them they should not enter, and thereupon they brake
the Window, and afterward came unto the door of the said House, and offered to
force that open, and brake one of the Hinges thereof, whereupon the said Cook
discharged his Musket at the said Marshal, and struck him, of which stroke the
day following he Dyed; and whether upon all this matter he be guilty of Murder
or Manslaughter, was the doubt. After Argument for Cook at the Bar, all the
Justices delivered their opinions, that it was not Murder, but Manslaughter
only; for although he killed a Bailiff, yet he killed him not in duly executing
process; for it is not Murder, unless there be Malitia praecogitata, or Malitia
implicita, as to Murder one suddenly, or in Resistance of an Officer doing his
Office by serving the process of Law wherein he is assisted Cum potestate Regis
and Legis. But here this Bailiff was slain in doing an unlawful Act, in seeking
to break open the House, to execute process for a Subject, which he ought not
to do by Law; although he might have Entered if the door had been open and
arrested the party, and it had been lawful, yet he ought not to break open the
House, for that it is not Warranted by Law, and especially lying there in the
night, and in the morning breaking the Window, and offering to force the door,
which is not sufferable, for under color thereof one may enter who has not
any such Authority, and every one is to defend his own House; yet they all held
that it was Manslaughter, for he might have resisted him without killing him,
and when he saw him, and shot voluntarily at him, it was Manslaughter.

As to the later touching the parties name, take this Resolution:

Sir Henry Ferrers was Indicted by the name of Sir Henry Ferrers Knight, for
the Murder of one Stone whom one Nightingale Feloniously murdered, and that the
said Sir Henry was present, aiding and abetting etc. Upon this Indictment Sir
Henry Ferrers being Arraigned, said that he was never Knighted, which being
confessed, Co. 3 part Ferrers case, f: 371, 372.
the Indictment was held not to be sufficient; wherefore he was Indicted de
novo, by the name of Sir Henry Ferrers Baronet, and being Arraigned, pleaded
Not Guilty, and was tried at the Bar, and upon Evidence it appeared that he was
Arrested for Debt, and that Nightingale his Servant in seeking to Rescue him as
was pretended, killed the said Stone; but because the Warrant to Arrest him was
by the name of Sir Henry Ferrers Knight, and he never was a Knight; it was held
by all the Court, that it was a variance in an Essential part of the Name, and
they had no Authority by that Warrant to Arrest Sir Henry Ferrers Baronet: So
it is an ill Warrant, and the killing of an Officer in executing that Warrant
cannot be murder, because no good Warrant.

3. There is malice employed in respect of the person killing.

As if A. assault B. to Rob him, and in resisting A. kills B. this is Murder
by malice employed, albeit he never saw, or knew him before.

So if a prisoner by the Duress of the Jailer comes unto an untimely death,
this is murder in the Jailer, and the Law implies malice in respect of the
cruelty; Co. 3. Inst. f. 52, and 91.
and this is the cause, that if any man dies in prison, the Coroner ought to
set upon his Body, to the end it may be inquired of, whether he came to his
death by Duress of the Jailer, or otherwise.

So if the Sheriff or other Officer where he ought to hang the party attainted
according to his Judgment, Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. c. 41. Co. 3. Inst. f. 52.
and 217.
and his Charge, will against the Law, of his own wrong, burn or behead him, or
e converso; the Law in this case implies malice in him.

So if a Capias be directed unto the Sheriff, to take a man in an Action of
Debt, or Trefpass, Doct. and St^d: lib, 2. c. 42.
there no man can take the Party but he must have Authority from the Sheriff;
and if any man attempt of his own Authority to take him, and he Resists, and
in Resisting is slain, he that would have taken him is guilty of Murder.

So if the Sheriff will by the Authority which the Law gives him, Co. Lit.
161, a, Co. 3. Inst. 221. 4 H. 7.20. 14 H, 8.18
Arrest any man for Felony, which is not guilty, the party may Rescue himself,
and if upon the Rescous the party is slain by the Sheriff, he is guilty of his
death. But if A. be Indicted of Murdet, Robbery, Burglary, or other Felony, and
the Sheriff by virtue of a Capias offer to Arrest him, and he Resists and
flies, the Sheriff may kill him, if otherwise he cannot Arrest him, although
in truth the party be Not Guilty, nor any Felony done: So by this we see that
there is a diversity between a Warrant of Record, and a Warrant and Authority
in Law.

Thus much of Homicides Voluntary, and of Malice forethought, viz. Petit
Treason, and Murder.

It was the Law of Numa Pompilius: Si quis Hominem Liberum dolo sciens morti
duit, parricida est.

As there are Homicides that are voluntary, and of malice fore thought, so
there are some that be voluntary, and not of malice forethought; of which some
be Felony, as Manslaughter, and some be not Felony, as Se Defendendo, etc.

1. Of Homicide, which for Distinction-sake we call Manslaughter.
Manslaughter is when one is slain with a man's will, Co. Lit. 287. b.
but not with malice prepensed upon some sudden falling out, or Quarrel; as if
two meet together, and striving for the Wall the one kill the other; this is
Manslaughter and Felony. So if two fall out upon a sudden occasion, and agree
to fight in such a field, and each of them go and fetch their Weapon, Co. Inst,
51. and 55.
and go into the field, and therein fight, the one kills the other; here is
no malice prepensed, for the fetching of the Weapon, and going into the field,
is but a continuance of the sudden falling out, and the Heat of the Blood
kindled by Ire, was never cooled till the blow was given. But if they appoint
to fight the next day, that is malice prepensed, and consequently not
Manslaughter, but Murder.

One Royley was Indicted of the Murder of William Derman, and upon his Trial a
special Verdict was found, which was removed into the Kings Bench by
Certiorari; Cro, 2. part ^. Royleys case, 296.
whereupon the case was found to be such, that William Royley Son of the said
Royley fighting with the said Derman, and the said Derman beating him so as his
Nose bled, he thereupon went to his Father, telling and complaining unto him of
that Battery; whereupon the Father instantly went into the field, and finding
Derman, called him Villein, and other opprobrious terms, and struck him with a
little cudgel, of which stroke he afterward dyed; and whether that were
murder, or only manslaughter, they doubted, and prayed the discretion of the
Court, and all the Court Resolved, that it was but manslaughter, for he going
upon the complaint of his Son, not having any malice before, and in that anger
beating him, of which stroke he dyed, the Law shall adjudg it to be upon that
sudden occasion, and stirring of Blood, being also provoked at the fight of his
Sons blood that he made that Assault, and will not presume it to be upon
malice, unless it be found. And although the distance of the place where his
Son complained was a mile, it is not material, being all upon one passion. So
if one hear that his Brother, Cousin, or Servant is fighting upon a sudden
occasion, and he go to the place where they are fighting, (although a mile or
more distant,) and finding the Adversary, fights with him, and kills him, it is
not Murder, but Manslaughter, and being before the general Pardon, was
discharged thereby.

Thus much of Manslaughter, that is not of malice prepensed, but yet Felony.

3. Of Se Defedendo, that is Voluntary, and not Felony.
Se Defedendo is voluntary Homicide, and yet being done upon an inevitable
occasion, is no Felony; as if A. be Assaulted by B. and they fight together,
and before any mortal blow given A. gives back until he comes to a hedge,
wall, or other straight beyond which he cannot pass, and then in his own
Defense kills the other, this is voluntary, and yet no Felony; and the Jury
that find it was done Se defedendo, ought to find the special matter.

But yet there are some Cases wherein a man is bound to give back; as

1. Fleta lib. 1. c. 23. Co. 3. Inst. 56.
If A. Assault B. so fiercely and violently, and in such a place, and in such a
manner as if B. should give back, he should be in danger of his life, he may in
this Case defend himself, and if in that Defense he kills A. it is Se
Defedendo, because it is not done Felleo animo, and consequently Justifiable;
with our Law dos Concur the Law Imperial: D: 1.7, 3.
Jure hoc evenit, ut quod quisque ob tutelam Corporis sui fecerit, D. 47.9, 3.7.
jure fecisse existimetnr. Non injuria fecit, qui so tueri voluit, cum alias
non posset.

2. Co. lib. 5. Semaynts case 21. 1 H, 7. 39 Co. 3. Inst. 56.
If a Thief offer to Rob or Murder B. either abroad, or in his House, and
thereupon Assault him, and B. defend himself without any giving back, and in
his Defense kills the Thief, this is no Felony, for a man shall never give
way to a Thief, etc. neither shall he Forfeit any thing, and so it is declared
by the statute of 24 H. 8. c. 5.

One Cooper being Indicted in the County of Surrey of the murder of one W. L.
in Southwark, he pleaded Not Guilty; Cro. 3. part Cowpers case, 554,
and upon his Arraignment it appeared that the said Cooper being a prisoner in
the Kings Bench, and lying in the House of one Anne Carrick, who kept a Tavern
within the Rules, the said W. L. at one of the clock in the Night assaulted the
said House, and offered to break the staple thereof, and swore he would enter
the House, and slit the Nose of the said Anne Carrick, because she was a Bawd,
and kept a Bawdy House; and the said Cooper dissuading him from these Courses,
and reprehending him, he swore that if he could enter, he would cut the said
Coopers Throat; and he brake a window in the lower Room of the House, and
thrust his Rapier in at the window against the said Cooper, who in defense of
the House, and himself, thrust the said W. L. into the eye, of which stroke he
dyed. The Q^estion was, whether this were within the Statute of 24 H. 8. and
the opinion of the Court was, that if it were true that he brake the House with
an intent to commit Burglary, or to kill any therein, and a party within the
House, (although he be not the Master, but a Lodger or Sojourner therein) kill
him who made the Assault, and intended mischief to any in it, that it is not
Felony, but excusable by the Statute of 24. H. 8. which was made in the
affirmance of the Common Law; wherefore the Jury were appointed to consider of
the circumstances of the Fact, and they being a substantial Jury of Surrey,
found the said Cooper not Guilty upon the Indictment, whereupon he was
discharged.

3. 22 Ass. pl. 55.
If a prisoner assault the Jailer, the Jailer is not by Law enforced to give
back, but if in defense of himself he kill the prisoner, this is no Felony.

4. 3 E. 3. Cor. 290.
If any Officer or Minister of Justice that has lawful Warrant, and the party
assault the Officer, or Minister of Justice, he is not bound by Law to give
back, but to carry him away; and if in execution of his Office he cannot
otherwise avoid it, but in striving kill him, it is no Felony.

Note, if men tilt or turney in the presence of the King; or if two Masters of
Defense playing their prizes kill one another, this is no Felony, 11 H. 7.23.
a. Hobarts Reports, Weaver v. Ward f. 134. And the reason given is, for that in
Friendly manner they contend to try their strength, and to be able to do the
King service in that kind as occasion should be offered.

Hitherto of Homicides that be voluntary, and no Felony, whereof some be in
respect of giving back inevitably in defense of himself, upon an assault of
Revenge, and some without any giving back, etc. I now proceed to that Homicide
that is not Felony, neither forethought, nor voluntary, and this we call
Manslaughter by misadventure, or Chance-medley.

3. Of Homicide by misadventure.
Chancemedley, or per Infortunium, Co. Litt. 287.6.
is when one is slain casually, and by misadventure, without the will of him
that does the Act, whereupon death ensues. 11. H. 7.23. a. 21. H. 7:28. a. 6.
E. 4.7.
Or Homicide by misadventure is when a man without any evil intent does a
lawful thing, or that is not prohibited by Law, and another is slain or comes
to his death thereby, as if one shoot at Butts, or at pricks, and kill a man,
by swarving his hands, this is no felony; Bract. l. 3. c. 4. n. 3.
The same Law is of tiling an House, and a tile fall, and kills one. So if
one trained Soldier hurts another in skirmish, of which hurt he dies, this
being by misadventure is no felony. But in any of these Cases before put if a
man be hurt or maimed only, an Action of Trespass lies against him that was
the cause of the hurt, or maime, though it be done against the parties mind and
will; because in Civil Trespasses and injuries, that are of an inferior nature,
the Law does rather consider the damage of the party wronged, then the mind of
him, that was the wrong doer.

Vide Hobarts Reports Weaver against Ward f. 134. But to return from whence I
have made a digression: It is to be considered, whether he that commiteth this
Homicide by misadventure in doing a lawful Act, and likewise without an evil
intent; for if the Act be unlawful, or done with an evil purpose, it will prove
murder.

1. Touching an unlawful Act: If a man shoot at a Cock or Hen, or any fowl of
another man, and the arrow by mischance kill a man, this is said to be murder,
for the Act was unlawful. So if a man does beat another, and with intent not to
kill him, yet if the party be killed by this battery, it is felony.

So if two are fighting together, and a third comes to part them, and is
killed by one of them two, without any malice forethought, 11. H. 7.23. a.
yet this is murder in him, and not Homicide by Chancemedley, or misadventure,
because that they two that fought together, were in doing of an unlawful Act.
And if they were met with prepensed malice, the one intending to kill the
other, then it is murder in them both.

2. Touching an evil Intent: If a man knowing that many people come in the
street from a Sermon, throw a stone over a wall, intending only to fear them,
or to give them a light hurt, and thereupon one is killed, this is murder, for
he had an evil intent, though that intent extended not to death, and though he
knew not the party slain.

Note, though the killing of a man by misadventure, Co. 3. Inst. f. 57.
or by chance, be not felony, Quia in maleficiis voluntas spectatur, non
exitus. D. 48.8.14. yet the party guilty shall forfeit therefore all his Goods,
and Chattels, to the intent that men should be cautious, as they tend not to
the effusion of man's blood: I shall conclude this learning touching Homicides,
with somewhat appertaining to Physicians and Chirurgians.

If one that is of the mystery of a Physician, take a man in Cure, Co. 3. Just.
257.
and gives him such Physic, as within 3 days he dies thereof without any
felonious intent, and against his will, it is no Homicide: But Briton (cap. 5.
De Homicides,) says, that if one who is not of the mystery of a Physician or
Surgeon, take upon him the Cure of a man, and he dies of the potion, or
Medicine, this is, says he, Covert felony. In the Civil Law it is thus:
Medico imputari eventus mortalitatis non debet: D. S 18.6.7.
Ita quod per imperitiam commisit, imputari ei debet, praetextu humanae
fragilitatis delictum decipientis in periculo homines inoxium esse non debet.

Imperitia culpae adnumerontur: Just. 4.3.7.
veluti si Medicus ideo servum tuum occiderit, quia male secuerit: aut perperam
ei medicamentum dederit,

Thus much of the Pleas of the Crown, that have relation to the life of man; I
proceed now to those that respect the body and members.

2. Of those Crimes, that appertain to man's body, or members, and they are
Battery, Mayhem, and Rape.
Battery, 1. Of Battery.
is when a man assaulteth and beats another, this is against the Law and
Peace of the Realm, which ordains, that no man shall be his own Judge, or
revenger of his own private wrong, but shall leave this to the Censure of the
Law; (And this is agreeable to the Roman Laws: Cod. 3.5: 1.
Generali lege decernimus, neminem sibi esse judicem vel jus sibi dicere
debere. In re enim propria iniquum admodum est alicui licentiam tribuere
sententiae. D. 50.17.176.
Again: Non est singulis concedendum, quod per Magistratum publi^^ possit
fieri, ne occasio sit Majoris tumultus faciendi: wherefore he that is so beaten
may indict the other party, who upon it shall be fined to the King: But some
there are that may in a reasonable and moderate manner chastise, correct and
beat others.

1. In respect of power, proceeding from the Law of nature, as Parents may
correct their own Children.

2. In respect of Authority oeconomical, as the Master may chastise his
Servant, or Apprentice.

3. In respect of power arising from Civil Justice; as the Jailer and his
servant, the unruly prisoners; the Officers, him that is arrested, and will not
otherwise obey.

Also a man may justify the beating of another, in defense of his own person,
or of the person of his Wife, Father, Mother, or Master: But when any is
assaulted, or beaten in Church, or Churchyard, Cro. 2: part Frances. v.
it is not lawful for him to return or give any blows in his own defense, as he
may elsewhere in other places.

Mahim, 2. Of Mahim. Co. Lit. 126. a. F. 288. a.
or maime (Mahemium) comes of the old French (Mehaigne) a Maime a corporal
hurt, whereby a man loses the use of any member. The Canonists call it Membri
mutilationem, or Mayhem, is where by the wrougful Act of another any member is
hurt or taken away, whereby the party so hurt is made unperfect to fight: As if
a bone be taken out of the head: or a bone be broken in any other part of the
body, or foot, or hand, or finger, or joint of a foot, or any member be cut: or
by some wounds the sinews be made to shrink or other member, or the fingers
made crooked, or if any eye be put out, or the foreteeth broken, or any other
hurt in a man's body, by means whereof he is made the less able to defend
himself, or offend his enemy: But the cutting of an ear or Note, that to cut
maliciously the nose of another, is made felony by, a Law enacted in the Reign
of his now Majesty.
nose, or breaking the hinder teeth, or such like, is no Mayhem, because it is
rather a deformity of the body, then diminishing of strength, and that is
commonly tried by beholding the party by the Justices. And if the Justices
stand in doubt, whether the hurt be a Mayhem or not, they use, and will of
their own discretion, take the help and opinion of some skilful Surgeon, to
consider thereof, before they determine upon the Cause.

But whether a man may be indicted for maiming himself? Co. Lit. 127. a, b.
To this it answered, that he may; As it appears in the Case of one Wright,
anno 11. Jac. in the County of Leicester; who being a young, strong, and lusty
rogue, to make himself impotent, thereby to have the more color to beg, or to
be relieved, without putting himself to any labor, caused his Companion to
strike off his left hand, and both of them were indicted, fined, and ransomed
therefore, and that by the opinion of the rest of the Justices, for the members
of every subject are under the safeguard and protection of the King, to the end
that they may serve the King, when occasion shall be offered, and therefore not
in the power of a subject to maim or hurt his own body or limbs, or to cause
another to do it. And this is agreeable to the Civil Law, Nemo membrorum suorum
est dominus: Liber homo suo nomine utilem aquiliae habet actionem: directam
enim non habet; quoniam dominio membrooum suorum nemo videtur. D. 9.2.13.


By the ancient Law of England, he that maimed any man, whereby he lost any
part of his body, the Defendant should loose the like part, Co. 3. Instit. 118.
(as he that took away another man's life, should loose his own) And this was
grounded upon the Law of God, Levit. 24. v. 18, 19.20. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 21. It is
called among the Latins Lex Talionis, or Reparationis, among the Greeks,
(...), per quam quis patitur, quod alteri fecit.

This offense of May 'em is under all felonies deserving death, Co. Litt. 127.
a.
and above all other inferior offenses, so as it may be truly said of it, that
it is, Inter crimina majora minimum and inter minora maximum.

Rape, 3 Of Rape.
is the violent deflouring of a Woman against her will; and this offense is
felony, as well in the principal, as in his Aiders. Vide 11. Hen. 4. c. 13.1.
E. 4. c. 1. West. 2. c. 13. Cromptons Justice of Peace f. 43, 44. But my Lord
Coke defines it thus: It is when a man has carnal knowledge of a woman by
force, and against her will, Co. Litt. 123. b.
or Rape is felony by the Common Law, declared by Parliament for the unlawful
and carnal knowledge, and abuse of any woman above the age of ten years against
her will, Co. 3. Instit. f. 60.
or of a woman child under the age of ten years, with her will, and the
offender shall not have the benefit of Clergy. Vide 18. Eliz. c. 6.

If the party that is ravished, Stamf. 24.
conceive by the Ravisher a child at the time of the Ravishment, this is no
Rape, because she could not conceive, unless she assent.

Bracton in 24th chapter of his third book shows, that by the Antique Law of
King Athelstan, He that meeting a Virgin sole, or with company, did but touch
her unhonestly, was guilty of breaking the Kings Edict; If against her will, he
threw her on the ground, he lost the Kings favor; if he discovered her, and
cast himself upon her, he lost all his possessions: if he lay with her, he
suffers Judgment of life, and member: yea, if he were an Horseman, his
horse lost his tail and main. His hawk likewise lost her beak, Tallons and
train. And the Virgin had in recompense all his Land and money by the Kings
Warrant. This was in the King Athestans days; But in Bractons time, it seems
that these kind of Ravishers were other wise punished, they lost their eyes and
privy members. Co. Litt. 123. b. 29. H. 6. Tit. Coron. 17. Bracton lib. 3. f.
147.

The Civil Law: D. 48.6.6.
Punitur Lege Julia de vi publica, qui puerum, vel foeminam, vel quemquam per
vim stupraverit.

Hitherto of the offenses, that touch the body and members; viz. Battery,
Mayhem, and Rape.

3. Of those Offenses that dispoil men of their property.
Those Crimes or Pleas of the Crown, that deprive others of their property, are
two,. Furtum, or Theft, and Burning of Houses.

1. Of Theft.
In Theft are to be considered 3. things, the Etymology of the word Furtum, the
definition, and its several kinds.

Furtum, a furvo, id est, 1. The Etymology.
nigro dictum Labeo ait: quod clam and obscuro fiat, and plerumque nocte, vel a
frraude, ut Sabinus ait: vel a ferendo and auferendo: b. 47.2. 1. Just. 4.1, 2.
vel a Groeco sermon, qui (...) appellant fures: Imo and Graeci (...), id est,
a ferendo (...) dixerunt.

Bracton thus defines it, 1. The definition.
Furtum est secundum Leges, contrectatio rei alienoe fraudulenta, cum animo
furandi, invito illo Domino, eujus res illa fuerit. Lib: 3. f. 150.

The Civilians thus: Just. 4:1.1. D. 4.7.2.1.3.
Furtum est contrectatio fraudulosa, lucri faciendi gratia, vel ipsius rei, vel
etiam usus ejus, possession sve, quod lege naturali prohitum est admittere.

That Theft is forbidden by the Law of nature, is manifest by these Authors.

1. Cicero: In vita sibi quemque petere quod pertineat ad usum non iniquum est:
alteri surripere, jus non est.

Theft generally taken, 3 Its species or kinds.
does comprehend Larceny, Robbery, Burglary, and Pyracy: of these in order.

1. Of Larceny.
Larceny, by the Common Law, is the felonious and fraudulent taking, and
carrying away by any man or woman, Co. 3. Inst. 107.
of the mere personal goods of another, neither from the person, nor by night
in the house of the owner: This Larceny is twofold, the one so called Simply,
and the other Petit, or Little Larceny.

The first is where the thing stolen exceeds the value of 12. pence, and that
is felony.

The other (which is called little, or petit Larceny) is where the thing
stolen does not exceed the value of 12. pence, and that is not felony.

From the Description and Division of Larceny, I proceed to propose these
following Queries, with Resolutions on them.

Whether Larceny can be committed,

Larceny is perpetrated by an actual taking: Quod felonice abduxit is not good,
because it wants coepit. By taking, and not Bailement or delivery, for that
is a Receipt, and not a taking: and therewith agrees Glanvil, Lib. 10. c. 13.
Furtum non est ubi initium habet detentionis per dominum rei; But this Rule of
Glanvil has its exceptions; as appears by these Cases in our Law. Co. 3. Inst.
107.13. E. 4.9.
If a Carryer has a bale or pack of Merchandise delivered unto him to carry it
to an appointed place, and after he take the whole pack animo furandi, this is
Larceny: for the delivery had taken his effect, and the privity of the
Bailement is determined; so if he open the pack, and take any thing out Furtum
sine assectu furandi, non committitur: Just. 4.1.7.
animo furandi, it is Larceny.

If a Taverner set a piece of plate before a man to drink in it, and he carry
it away, this is Larceny: for it is no Bailement, but a special use to a
special purpose. 13. E. 4.9. Perkins sect. 191:


To conclude, our Law does make a distinction between a Possession and a
Charge; for when I deliver goods to a man, 21. H. 7.15, a, 12. H. 7.15. a. 3 H.
7.12. Cro. 1. part Holiday. verse. Hickes. 638.
he has the possession of the goods, and may have an Action of Trespass, or an
Appeal, if they be taken or stolen out of his possession. But my Butler or Cook,
that in my house has charge of my vessel or plate, has no possession of them,
nor shall have an Action of Trespass or an Appeal, as the Baily shall, and
therefore if they steal the plate or vessel, it is Larceny: And so it is of a
shepherd, for things be in onere, and non in possessione Promi, Coci,
Pastoris, etc.

Whether of goods found and converted animo furandi,

If one loose his goods, animo furandi, to his own use, yet it is not Larceny,
for the first taking is lawful.

So if one find Treasure Trove, Waif, 22. Ass. pl. 99.22. c 3. Cor. 265.
or Stray, and convert them cum affectu furandi: it is no Larceny, both in
respect of the finding, and also for that Dominus rerum non apparet: And non
esse, and non apparere tantundem valent quoad eum, cui non apparet.

Whether an Infant,

An Infant, until he be of the age of 14, Co. Litt. 247. b. Co. 3. Inst f. 4,
and 108.
or other felony; for the principal end of punishment is, that others by his
example may fear to offend: But such punishment can be no example to Infants,
that are not of the age of discretion:

But it appears by Lambard f. 2. nu. 7. that the Law was heretofore thus:
Infans december annorum furti reus censeatnr. But having given you a determination
according to our Law, I will mention the Law of the Romans and Greeks.

1. The Civil Law: Quaesitum est, an Impubes rem alienam amovendo, furtum
faciat? Et placuit, quia furtum ex affectu furandi consistit, Just. 4.1.14. D.
47.2.23. De furtis.
ita demum obligari eo crimine impuberem, si proximus pubertati sit, and ob id
inlelligat se delinquere.

Impuberem furtum facere posse, nisi jam dolis capax sit, Julianus lib. 22.
Digest. scrpsit. for Aetatis habetur ratio in delictis.

2. The Law of the Greeks: Aelian lib. 5. cap, 16. Varr. Hist. has this story:
When a certain Boy, who had stolen away a golden plate, that fell from Diana's
Crown, was brought in Judgment before the Areopagitae: Those Judges, caused
Cocke-Hall, Bones, Rattles, and the golden plate to be laid before the Child,
in whom perceiving an inclination again to the golden plate, rather then to the
Rattles and other things more suitable to his childhood, without pity to his
Infancy, they, condemned him to death, as a Sacrileger, thinking it fit to crop
that sin and wickedness, which they discerned to be in him, being yet but in
the blade, and herb.

Whether a Feme Covert can be guilty of Larceny?

If a man and his wife commit Larceny jointly, nor accessory, but it shall be
wholly adjudged the husbands fact, because the Law intends her to have no will,
in regard of the subjection and obedience she owes to her husband: But a woman
by her self, without the privity of her husband, Stamford. 26.2. E. 3. Cor.
160. Fitzh. The Woman's Lawyer lib. 3. sect. 43.
may commit Larceny or other felony, to become either principal or accessory:
As if she steal goods, or receive thieves to her house, etc. and if the husband
as soon as he perceives it, waive and forsake their company and his own house,
in this case the woman's offense makes not felony in the Baron. But if the Baron
commit felony, his wife not ignorant of it, may keep his company still
notwithstanding, and not be declared accessory.

Note, Stamford lib. 1. c. 19.
that a woman cannot be thief of her husbands goods, if she take and give them
away, the Receiver is no felon.

Whether Larceny can be committed of a thing,

If a man seeing the horse of B. Co. 3. Inst. 108. Co. 2. Inst. 242. Co. lib.
13. Sprat and Heales
and pretending the horse to be his, obtains the horse by Replevin, yet this
is a felonious and fraudulent taking, as it was resolved by the Judges, as
Catlin Chief Justice reported in the Kings Bench Pasch. 15. for the Replevin
was obtained in fraudem Legis; And fraus Legi fit, ubi quod fieri noluit, fieri
autem non vetuit, id fit.

Whether the removal of things felleo animo,

The removing of things taken, they be not carried away, is Larceny as if a
Guest take the coverlet or sheets of his bed, and rising before day, take the
coverlet or sheets out of the chamber, where he lay, 21. Ass. Pl. 39. Co. 3.
Inst. 108. and 109.
into the Hall, to the intent to steal them, and went to the stable, to fetch
his horse, and the Hostler apprehended him, and this was adjudged Larceny: and
the coverlet or sheets were carried away, to the Hall, albeit they were still
in the house of the owner.

So if a man's horse be in the close, and one takes him, and as he is carrying
him away he is apprehended, Justice Dalisons Report.
before he getteh out of the close, yet this is sufficient to to make it
Larceny.

Whether Larceny can be committed of personal goods,

Of personal goods, etc. though they be taken with a felonious intent, is not
felony, for that they are parcel of the freehold: But if the owner cut the
grass, or gather the fruit, then Larceny may be committed of them.

So it is of a Box or Chest with Charters, no Larceny can be committed of them,
10. E. 4.14. Co. lib. 8. Caleyes Case. 33. b.
because the Charters concern the Realty, and the Box or the Chest, though it
be of great value, yet shall it be of the same nature, the Charters be of: Et
omne majus dignum trahit ad se minus.

Whether Larceny can be committed of Winding sheets about dead Bodies?

At the Assizes at Leicester, 10. Jac. Regis; Haynes Case.
and buried the Bodies again: and Sr. Edward Coke, advising hereupon for the
rareness of the Case, consulted with the Judges at Serjeants-Inn in Fleet
street, where they all resolved, That Mors est, ^um quis e vivis excessit, qua
jus omne extinguitur quod person coheret.
although the dead Body is not capable of any property, yet the property of the
sheets must be in some body, and therefore in the Executors, Administrators, or
other owner of them: And according to the Judges resolution, he was indicted of
felony at the next Assizes, but the Jury found it but petit Larceny, for which
he was whipped, as he well deserved.

Whether a man may commit Larceny of his own goods?

If a man does Bail or send his goods to another, 7. H. 6.43. Cro. 1. part.
Stafford. Vide Poole. Co. 3. Inst. f. 110.
yet may he commit Larceny of them, by the felonious taking and carrying them
away, and in Judgment of Law, is said in this Case to take the goods of
another: For the Bailer has Jus proprietatis, and the Bailee has Jus
possessionis, or a special property. But let us see what the Civil Law says in
such Cases.

Aliquando etiam suae rei furtum quis committit: Inst. 4.1.12.
veluti si debtor rem, quam Creditori pignoris causa dedit, subtraxerit.

Si is qui rem commodasset, D. 47.2.59. De Commedato.
eam rem clam abstulisset, furti cum eo agi non potest, qui^ suum recepisset,
and ille commodati liberatus esset. Hoc tamen ipsa accipiendum est si nullas
retinendo causas is cui commodata res erat, habuit. Nam si impensas necessarias
in rem commodatam fecerat, interfuit ejus potius per Retentionem eas servare,
quam ultro commodati agere. Ideoque furti actionem habebit: Thus much of
Larceny.

1. Of Robbery.
Robbery is (says Coke) a felony by the Common Law, committed by a violent
assault, upon the person of another, by putting in fear, and taking from his
person his money or other goods of any value whatsoever: Or it is (says
another) a felonious taking away of another man's goods from his person or
presence, against his will, putting him in fear, and of purpose to steal the
same goods. We call it Roberia, and Rapina, and the Thief Raptor.

Out of which descriptions, the Reader may observe these special circumstances:
1. 5. Eliz. Dyer 224. b.
That it is not Robbery, unless the party be put in fear, as by assault and
violence, And this circumstance of fear, makes the difference between a Robber
and a Cutpurse: both take it from the person, but this latter takes it clam
and secret, without assault, and putting in fear, The latter by violent
assault, and putting in fear.

2, That the word (taking) necessarily implies that the Robber must be in
possession of the thing stolen; for example, Co. 3. Inst. f. 69.
If the bag or purse of the true man be fastened to his girdle, etc. and the
Robber more easily to take the bag or purse, do cut the girdle, whereby the bag
or purse, falls to the ground, this is not taking, for the Thief had never
any possession thereof; but if the Robber had taken up the bag or purse, and in
striving had let it fall, and never took it again, this had been a taking,
because he had it in his possession; for the continuance of his possession is
not required by Law.

3. Though Robbery is so called, because the goods are taken de la robe, from
the Robe, that is from the person; 14. E. 3. Cor. 11*
yet if the true man seeking to escape for the safeguard of his money, cast it
into a bush, which the Robber perceiving; This is a taking in Law from the
person, because it is done at one time.

But, the Quaere may be, Whether the Thieves reception only by such a taking in
Law, as to make it Robbery? It is answered, That a Thief's reception will make
it Robbery; As if Thieves rob a true man, and find but little about him, take
it, this is an actual taking, and by means of death, 44. E. 4.14.4, H. 4.2.
compel him to swear upon a book to fetch them a greater sum, which he does,
and deliver unto them, which they receive, this is a taking in Law by them, and
adjudged Robbery:; for fear made him to take the oath, and fear continuing,
made him bring the money, which amounts to a taking in Law.

4, 14. E. 3. Cor. 115.22. Ass. pl. 39. Just. 4.2. De vi bonorum raptorum.
and lastly: That an assault only to rob without taking some money or goods is
no felony, for somewhat must be taken.

Touching Robbers take somewhat of the Civil Law, Qui vires alienas rapit,
tenetur quidem etiam furti: Quis enim magis alienam rem invito domino
contrectat, quam qui vi rapit?

Non prodest ei qui vi rapuit, D. 47.8.5. De restitutione rei.
ad evitandam poenam si ante judicium restituat rem quam rapuit: Multo minus
(says Gothofredus on this Text) si poeniteat post delictum; vere enim ad
evitandam poenam sola poenitentia sufficit. Cur^ plus est rem restituere, quam
poenitere, and ita tenent Doctores omnes comuniter.

Thus much of the offense called in our Law Robbery.

3. Burglary.
Touching Burglary, there are 3 matters worthy of observation: viz. 1. The
Etymomology or origination of the word. 2. Its Definition: 3. Resolutions
concerning this offense.

The word Burglary, 1. The Etymology.
is derived of two words Burgh and Laron, Burgh signifying an House, Co. lib.
4. f. 39. Brooke's Case.
and Laron signifying a Thief, as it were a House Thief.

This crime, according to the acceptance of our Common Law is thus defined.

It is when one breaks and enters into the house of another in the night,
with a felonious intent to rob or kill, or to do some other felony; in which
cases, although he carry away nothing, yet it is felony, for which he shall
suffer death.

The Resolutions that are given upon this offense, are these following.

1. Touching fraction and entry: 4. The Resolutions.
If the door of a mansion house stand open, and the Thief enter into the house
with a purpose to steal, this is a breaking of the house in Law, and no
Burglary, because there must be an actual breaking, for the words of the
Indictment are, Felonice and Burglariter fecit, etc. which are to be understood
of an actual breaking of the house, and not of a breaking in Law. Co. 3. Inst.
f. 64.
So it is if the window of the house be open, and the Thief with a hook, or
other engine draws out some of the goods of the owner: this is no Burglary,
because there is no actual breaking of the house. But if the Thief breaks the
glass of the window, and with a hook or other engine draws out some of the
goods of the owner; this is Burglary, for there was an actual breaking of the
house.

If diverse come in the night to do a Burglary, and one of them breaks and
enter, the rest of them standing near to the door, 13. H. 4.13.
or about other part of the house, etc. to watch that no help shall come to
defend the owner, this is Burglary in all.

But sometimes Burglary may be committed by entry without any breaking: For
example; if a servant will conspire with other men to rob his Master, and to
that intent he opens his Masters doors and windows in the night for them,
that they come into the house by that way, this is Burglary in the strangers,
and the servant is a thief; but no Burglar. And this was the opinion of Manwood
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, at the Quarter Sessions holden at Canterbury in
January 1579. 21. Eliz.

2. Touching Mansion houses.
If upon accident a man and all his Family are out of the house, and one in the
interim breaks the house, and commit felony, it is Burglary, although neither
the owner nor any of his Family is in the house, for the Indictment of Burglary
is Domum mansionalem, Co. Lib. 4. Brokes Case. f. 39.
etc. fregit, etc. and this is domus mansionalis: And so it was resolved 38. of
Eliz. where a man has two mansion houses, and servants in both, and in the
night when the servants are out, etc. the house is broken, it is Burglary.

But whether a Church, a Booth in a Fair, or a Chamber of an Inns of Court, may
be termed Domus mansionalis? It is answered;

1. As to a Church: If a man do break and enter into a Church in the night with
intent to steal, this is Burglary, and Sacrilege; for Ecclesia est domus
mansionalis Omnipotentis Dei.

Concerning this horrible crime of Sacrilege, I shall present some learning
out of Justinian and Seneca.

Sunt Sacrilegi qui publica Sacra compilaverunt. At qui privata Sacra, Qui sunt
Sacrilegi vel non.
vel Aediculas incustoditas temptaverunt, amplius quam fures, minus quam
Sacrilegi, merentur. D. 48.13.9.1.

Quisquis id, says Seneca, quod Deorum est, sustulit and consumpsit, atque in
usum suum convertit, Sacrilegus est.

Sacrilegii poenam debebit Proconsul pro qualitate personae, proque rei
Condition, Poenas Sacrilegii.
and temporis, and aetatis, and sexus, vel severius vel clementius statuere. Et
fcio multos and ad bestias damnasse Sacrilegos: nonnullos etiam vivos
exussisse, alios vero in furca suspendisse. D. 48.13.6. Sacrilegi capite
puniuntur. D. 48.13.9.

2. As to a Booth or Tent.
A Tent or Booth in a Fair or Market, is not Domus mansionalis, but of another
name or kind; but that is provided for by the Statute 5. E. 6. c. 9. whether
the robbery be done in the night or in the day, the owner, etc. being within
the same, sleeping or waking.

3. As to Chambers, belonging to Inns of Court.
A Chamber of an Inns of Court, Cro. 3. part. Evans and Finches Case.
or Chancery broken open, is said to be Domus mansionalis of him who is the
owner of the said Chamber.

Thus much touching the Mansion houses.

3. Touching the intention of the Party.
If a man be Indicted, that he in the night time did feloniously break the
house of I. S. ad verberandum ipsum I. S. this is no Burglary, 13. H. 4.7.
because it was but to beat, and not to kill; But if it were ad interficiendum
I. S. then it is Burglary, though he never touched him, for the intent must be
to commit felony, and not trespass or other thing, that is not felony.

4. Touching that which is perpetrated In fraudem Legis.
If Thieves come in the night with hue and cry, pretending that they be robbed,
and shall require the Constable to search for the felons, and whilst he goes
with them into some man's house, they bind and rob the Constable and dwellers,
this is Burglary; Co. 3. Inst. f. 64.
for in Judgment of Law, it is their act; and that which is done in fraudem
Legis, the Law gives no benefit thereof to the Party.

You see by what has been said before, that Burglary the Common Law restrains
to a robbing of a house, by night or breaking in, with intent to rob or to do
some other felony; but the like offense committed by day, we call
House-breaking, or Robbing, (and not Burglary) and this kind of felony is
provided for by the Stat. 39. Eliz. c. 15.
of 39 Eliz. That if any man shall break a house by day, and take away thence
money or goods, to the value of five shillings, or more in any part of the
dweling house, or Out-house, belonging to the same, though no person be
therein, for this felony he shall lose the benefit of his Clergy; so as for
this offense the party shall suffer death, as in case of Burglary

Upon this Law, happened this Case following:

Evans and Finch were arrigned at the Jail delivery of Newgate: for that they
about 12. a clock in the fore-noon, brake open Domum mansionalem Hugonis
Audeley, Cro. 3. part. Evans and Finches Case.
in the Inner Temple, no person being in the said house, and stole from thence
40. pounds. And upon evidence it appeared, that the said Evans by a ladder
climbed to the upper window of the said Audeley's chamber, and took out thereof
the said 40. pounds: And that the said Finch stood upon the ladder in the view
of the said Evans, and saw Evans in the chamber, and was assisting to the
committing of the said robbery, and took part of the money. And all this matter
being found, it was adjudged, because the said Finch did not enter into the
chamber, that he was not within the Statute of 39. Eliz. which takes away
Clergy, where an house is broken open, and the robbery is above the value of
five shillings, no person therein, that he should have his Clergy, which was
allowed him. And as for Evans the special verdict found, that he was in the
chamber of Hugh Audeley, in the Inner Temple, and that the robbery was
committed between 12, and one of the clock in the day time, no person being
within the chamber at the time of the breaking thereof, but that diverse persons
were in the Inner Temple Hall, and in other places of the house: And whether
this be a breaking open the house, and taking of goods above the value of five
shillings; nnulla persona, being within the house, and within the said act of
39. Eliz. they prayed the discretion of the Court? And it was resolved upon
this special verdict (being removed by Certiorari into the Kings Bench, and the
prisoner removed by Habeas corpus) that this breaking open the chamber, and
taking 40. pounds out thereof, nulla persona being therein (although there were
diverse persons in other parts of the house) was within the Stat. of 39. Eliz.
which takes away Clergy from such offenders: Wherefore Clergy was denied to the
said Evans, and Judgment given in the Kings Bench, that he should be hanged.

Thus much of Burglary, and likewise of House-breaking.

4. Pyracy.
The word Pyrat, Co. Lit. 391. a. 3. Instit. f. 113.
in Latin Pirata, is derived from the Greek word (...), which again is fetched
from (...), a transoundo mare, of roveing upon the Sea, and therefore in
English a Pyrate is called a Rover, and a robber upon the Sea.

Having showed the Etymology, I propound these Questions with their resolutions
touching Piracy.

Whether Piracy were anciently treason?

Before the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. De proditionibus, if a Subject had
committed Piracy upon another, this was holden to be Petit treason, 40. Ass.
pl. 25.
for which he was to be drawn and hanged: because Pirata est hostis humani
generis, and it was contra Ligeantiae suae dehitum; but since the aforesaid
Satute, this is no treason in the case of a Subject.

Whether Piracy can alter property?

Piracy does not change property no more then theft at Land. Hobart's Reports
f. 78.

When goods are tortiously taken upon the Sea by Piracy, Cro. 1. part. Anonymus
f. 685.
it gains not any property in them against the owner; and being sold on the
Land, unless it were in Market overt, does not alter the property.

The Civil Law speaks thus:

A Piratis, aut latrenibus capti, D. 49.15.19.2.
liberi permanent.

Qui a latronibus captus est, D. 49.15.24.
servus latronum non est, nec post liminium illi necessarium est.

Piratae, quae capiunt, non mutant dominium. Grotius l. 3. c. 9. n. 16. De jure
belli.

Whether Attainder for Piracy does work corruption of blood, or forfeiture of
Lands?

If Piracy be tried before the Lord Admiral in the Court of the Admiralty,
according to the Civil Law, and the delinquents there attainted, yet shall it
work no corruption of blood, nor forfeiture of his Lands, otherwise it is, if
he be attainted before Commanders by force of the Statute of 28. H. 8. c. 15.

Whether a Pardon of all felonies shall extended to Piracy?

About the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Venice in amity with the Queen,
Co. Lit. 39. a.
being not known, obtained a Coronation Pardon, whereby amongst other things,
the King pardoned them all felonies: It was resolved by all the Judges of
England, upon conference and advisement, that this did not pardon the Piracy;
Hill. 2 Jac. Regis.
for seeing it was no felony, whereof the Common Law took Conusance, and the
Stat. of 28. H. 8. did not alter the offense, but ordained a Trial, and
inflicted punishment; therefore it ought to be pardoned especially, or by
words, which tantamount, and not by the general name of felony, and according
to this Resolution, the delinquents were attainted and executed. Thus much of
Piracy.

5. Burning of Houses.
Burning is a felony at the Common Law, committed by any that maliciously and
voluntarily in the night or day, Co. 3. Inst. f. 66.
burns the house of another.

Out of which we may observe two circumstances.

First; To make it felony, it must be done with malice and will; for if it be
done by mischance, or negligence, it is no felony. But whether the Law does
sometime imply that the house was burnt maliciously, and voluntarily, may be a
Quaere? It is answered, it does: As if one intend to burn the house of A. only,
and not the house of B. and yet in the burning the the house of A. the house of
B. is burnt, in this case the burning of the house of A, is felony, Co 3. Inst.
f. 67. Plowd. Com. f. 475.
because it proceeded of the malicious and voluntary burning of the house of A,
and the event shall be coupled to the cause, which was voluntarily and
malicious: And the rule is, Involuntarium ex voluntario ortum habens, moraliter
pro voluntario habetur.

Secondly; to make it felony, it must be the house of another, and not his own
house: As for example:

One W. Holmes was indicted in London, for that he being possessed of an house
in London, in Throgmorton street, Cro. 3. part. Holmes's Case. f. 377.
in such a ward for six years, the remainder to Is. for three years, the
Reversion to the Corporation of Haberdashers in fee. He vi and armis felouice,
voluntary, and malitiose igne combussit, etc. his own house: Upon this being
arraigned at Newgate, he was found guilty: add before Judgment this Indictment
was removed by Certiorari into the Kings Bench, and being argued by Grimston,
that it was not felony.

By Richardson, Jones, and Berkcley it was held that it was not felony to burn
an house, whereof he is in possession, by virtue of a Lease for years: For they
said, that burning of houses is not felony, unless that they were aedes
alienae: And therefore Britton, and Bracton mention that is felony to burn the
house of another: and the Year-Books and Co. lib. 11. Powlters Case, which say,
that burning of houses generally are to be intended de aedibus alienis, and de
non propriis: And although the Indictment be ea intention ad comburendum
felonice, etc. yet intent only without fact, is not felony: Also Barkeley and
Jones held, that it cannot be said vi and armis, when it is in his possession;
and therefore it was resolved that it was not felony, wherefore he was
discharged thereof: But because it was an exorbitant offense, and found, they
ordered that he should be fined 500. pounds to the King, and imprisoned during
the Kings pleasure, and should stand upon the Pillory, with a paper upon his
head, signifying the offense at Westminster, and at Cheap Side, upon the Market
day, and where he committed the offense, and should be bound with good sureties
to his good behavior during life.

Note, 22 and 23. Car. 2. nunc Regis.
there is a late Act made, to prevent the malicious burning of houses, Stackes
of Corn and Hay, and killing and maiming of Cattle.

Touching burning, the Civil Law speaks thus:

Qui aedes acervumque frumenti juxta domum D. 47.9.9.
positum combusserit, vinctus verberatus, igni necari jubetur, si modo sciens
prudensque id commiserit. Si vero casu, id est, negligentia, aut noxiam sarcire
jubetur, aut si minus idoneus sit, levius castigatur.

Si fortuito incendium factum sit, D. 49.9.11.
venia indiget, uisi tam lata culpa fuit, ut Luxuriae, aut dolo sit proxima:
Hitherto of criminal Pleas, that are perpetrated against the King and
Commonwealth mediately, but principaliter in singulas personas.

I proceed to those that immediately touch the King, and his Crown; and they
are:

1. High Treason. Crimen laesae Majestatis.

Stamford tells us that the King is the Preserver, nourisher and defender of
all his People, and that by his great travel, study and labor, his People only
enjoy their Lives, Lands and Goods: And as the body of Man cannot live without
a Head, but will fall to the ground, so the Realm cannot be governed without a
Head, which is the King. Agreeable to that of Seneca, Ille est vinculum, per
quod Respublica cohaeret, etc. And therefore we his loving Subjects, are
obliged to watch for that him, wakes for us; And, primum virtutis opus est,
servare servantem caetera.

If so, what an abominable thing must it be, to be a violator of Kingly
Majesty: Crime de Masesty (says the Mirror) est un peche horrible fait al Roy,
etc. Tacitus calls Crimen Majestatis, vinculum, and necessitatem silendi;
Omnium acousationum complementum: And in the Civil Law, it is said thus: D.
48.4.1.
Proximum Sacrilegio crimen est, quod Majestatis dicitur. id est, crimini quo
divina Majestas pulsatur.

High Treason does extend to several parts or kinds, viz. Death, to Violation,
to Leaving of War, to Adhering to the Kings Enemies, to Counterfeiting the
Great Seal, Privy Seal, and the Kings Coin, to the bringing into this Realm
counterfeit Money to the similitude of His Majesty's Coin, of these several
parts in their order.

1. Touching Death.
1. To compass or imagine the death of the King, is Crimen laesae Majestatis,
as appears by Britton and Fleta.

Briiton thus: Grand Treason est a compasser nostre mort.

Fleta has this words: Si quis mortem Regis ausu temerario machinatus fuerit,
etc. quamvis voluntatem non perduxit ad effectum.

To depose the King, or to take the King by force and strong hand, and to
imprison him until he has yielded to certain demands; this is a sufficient
overt Act, to prove the compassing and imagination of the death of the King:
for this is upon the matter to make the King subject, and to despoil him of his
Kingly Office of Royal Government. And so it was resolved by all the Judges of
England Hill. 1. Jac. Regis, in the Case of the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, Watson
and Clarke Seminary Priests.

So if diverse conspire the death of the King, and the manner how, and thereupon
provide weapons, powder, poison, assay harness, send Letters, etc. or the like
for execution of the Conspiracy, this is a sufficient overt act to prove the
compassing and imagination of the Kings death.

If any man shall attempt to make himself so strong, that the King shall not be
able to resist him, he is guilty of Rebellion. In the like manner, the Law
interprets that in every Rebellion there is a machination against the life of
the King and his deposing: For a Rebel will not suffer that King to live or
reign, which may afterward punish or revenge such the treason or Rebellion.
These things are confirmed:

1. by the Imperial or Civil Law, Vide D. 48.4.1. ad Legem Juliam Majestatis.
whereby to do any thing against the safety of the Prince is holden to be
treason.

2. By the force of reason, because it cannot be that which has once given Law
to the King, should ever permit that the King should recover his former
Authority, or live, least at any time he should recover it.

3. By examplss drawn out of our English History, as of Edward the Second, and
Richard the Second, who being by force of Arms gotten by Subjects into their
power, were not long after deposed also, and made away.

The Civil Law; Quamvis regulariter ratione solius consensus nemo ad poenam
obligatur; sed secuto demum actu: Aliud tamen obtinet in crimine in Principe,
in quo voluntas, punitur; sed intellige talem voluntatem, cum qua conjunctum
est initium facti, i. e. factio, vel conjuratio: Sola enim and nuda voluntas
puniri nequit.

Note, that there is difference taken by our Law between felony and High
treason; for it is not felony, unless there be some act done: Non efficit
conatus, nisi sequatur effectus: But if one compass or imagine the death of the
King, who is the Head of the Commonwealth, and declares his compassing or
imagination, by words or Writing, it is High treason: Doct. and Stud. lib. 2.
cap. 41. Co. 3. Inst. f. 5.12. H. 8.36. b. 13. H. 8.13. Bendlones Rep. Smith v.
Spurle.

And therefore these following words were adjudged High treason, viz.

If the King dye without Issue Male, that he would be King: and also the party
arraigned spoke, that if the King should commit him to Prison, that he would
kill him with his dagger.

So one Crobagan, an Irish man was arraigned of Treason; for that he being the
Kings Subject at Lisbone in Spain, Cro. 3. part. Crohagans Case. f. 332.
used these words, I will kill the King ( innuendo Dominum Carolum Regem
Angliae) if I may come unto him; and that in August 9. Car. Regis, he came into
England for the same purpose. To this he pleaded Not-guilty, and was tried by a
Jury of Middlesex, and it was directly proved by two Merchants, that he spoke
these words at Lisbone in Spain, in great heat of speech, with Captain Baske,
and added these words, Because he is an Heretic; and for that his traitorous
intent and the imagination of his heart, is declared by these words, it was
held High treason by the course of the Common Law, and within the express words
of the Statute of 25. E. 3. And he coming into England, and being arrrested by
Warrant for this cause, most insolently put his finger into his mouth, and
scornfully pulling it out, said, I care not this for your King, etc. all which
speeches and actions, though he now denied, the Jury found him guilty,
whereupon he had Judgment accordingly. He confessed that he was a Dominican
Friar, and made Priest in Spain. And although this, and his returning into
England, to seduce the Liege-People, were Treason by the Stat. of 23. Eliz. yet
the Kings Attorney said, he would not proceed against him for that cause, but
upon the Stat. of 25. E. 3. of Treason.

So one Henry Challercomb was indicted of Treason for words, and was found
guilty, and executed.

So John Williams was also indicted, found guilty, and executed, for writing a
Treasonable Book, called Balaam Case. These two last Presidents you may see
cited in Pyne's Case, in Crokes third part of his Reports.

It is commonly said, That bare words may make an Heretic, but not a Traitor,
without an overt Act: And therefore to make compassing by bare words or
sayings, High treason, it must be by some particular Statute, such were the
Statutes of 26. H. 8. c. 13. 1. E. 6. c. 13.1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. c. 9.1.
Eliz. c. 6.13. Eliz. c. 1. and 14. Eliz: c. 1. but all these are either
repealed or expired: Co. 3 Inst. f. 140.
yet compassings or imaginations against the King by word, without an overt
Act, is an High misprision.

Note, that there is a Law made for the Preservation of His now Majesty's
Person and Government, 13. Car. II. Reg. c. 1.
against Treasonable and seditious practices (during his natural life, which
God long continue) proceeding from Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious
and advised speaking.

Note further, that to calculate or seek to know by setting of a figure, or
Witchcraft, how long the King shall Reign or live, Co. 3. Inst. f. 6.
is no Treason, for it is no compassing or the imagination of the death of the
King, within the Stat. of 25. E. 3. And this appears by the Judgment of the
Parliament in 23. Eliz. whereby this offense was made felony, during the life
of Q. Elizabeth, which before was punishable by fine and imprisonment.

But Scipio Gentilis in his first Book De conjuratione says; De vita Principis
inquirere praesertim per Astrologos capitale esse: neque hoc solum, sed etiam
de ea dubitare, vel desperare pro crimine Majestatis bahitum esse; si ea
desperatio indiciis esset aliquibus patefacta.

Thus much of the King himself.

If any do compass or imagine the death of the Queen Confort, or Prince, 25. E.
3. c. 2. De proditionibus.
(the Kings Son being Heir apparent to the Crown for the time being) and
declare it by some overt Act, the very intent is Treason, as in case of the
King himself.

If a man slay the Chancellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justices of the one
Bench, or the other, Justices in Air, or Justices of Assize, and all other
Justices assigned to hear and determine, 25. E. 3. c. 2.
being in their places doing their Offices: And the reason wherefore it is
Treason in these Cases is, because sitting judicially in their places (that is
in the Kings Courts) and doing their Office in administration of Justice, they
represent the Kings Person, who by his Oath is bound that the same be done.

2. Touching violation, or Carnal knowledge.
To violate or to carnally know the Kings Companion, 25. E. 3. c. 2.
or the Kings eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of the Kings eldest Son,
and Heir apparent, is High treason.

The reason that the eldest Daughter only is mentioned in Stat. of 25. E. 3. is
for that for defaut of Issue Male, she only is inheritable to Crown.

3. Touching War.
To levy War against our Lord the King is High treason: 25. E. 3. c. 2.
This was so by the Common Law, for no Subject can levy War within the Realm
without Authority from the King; for to him it only belongs. F. N. B. 113.
Co. lib. 2. Wisemans Case f. 15. b. In the Codes of Justinian is extant the
Constitution of Valentinian and Valens; Nulli prorsus nobis insciis, atque
inconsultis quorumlibet Armorum movendorum copia tribuatur: Huc pertinet illud
Augustius: Ordo naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, ut
suscipiendi Belli auctoritas, atque Consilium penes Principes sit.

If any levy War to expulse Strangers, to deliver men out of Prison, to remove
Counselors, Co. 3. Inst. f. 9.
or against any Statute, or to any other end, pretending Reformation, this is
levying of War against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority,
which is against the King.

So if any with Strength and Weapons, invasive and defensive does hold and
defend a Castle or Fort, Co. 3. Inst. f. 10.
against the King and his Power, this is levying of War against the King within
the Statute of 25. E. 3.

One Thomas Bensted was indicted and arraigned before special Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer in Southwark, Cro. 3. part. Bensteds Cafe. f. 583.
wherem all the Justices and Barons were in Commission, and present; at which
time upon Conference with all the Justices, it was resolved;

First, that going to Lambeth House in warlike manner, to surprise the
Archbishop, who was a Privy Counselor, (it being with Drums, and a multitude,
as the Indictment was, to the number of 300. persons) was Treason. And,

Secondly, It was resolved by ten of the said Justices seriatim, that the
breaking of a Prison, wherein Traitors be in Durance, and causing them to
escape, was Treason, although the Party did not know that there was any
Traitors three, upon the Stat. of 1, H. 6. c. 5.

And so to break a Prison, whereby Felons escape, is felony, without knowing
them to be imprisoned for such offense.

Note, A Compassing or Conspiracy to levy War, is no Treason; for there must be
a levying of War de facto.

4. Touching Adhesion to the Kings Enemies.
If a man be adherent to the Kings Enemies in his Realm, 25. E. 3. c. 2.
giving to them aid and comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, it is High treason.

Having given you the words of the Stat. 25. E. 3. I propose these Queries:

Whether the delivery of a Castle or Fort to an Enemy be an Adhering to the
Kings Enemy?

To deliver or surrender the Kings Castles or Fort by the Kings Captain thereof
to the Kings Enemy within the Realm, or without for Reward, etc. is an Adhering
to the Kings Enemy, and consequently Treason declared by the Act of 25. E. 3:

Whether the Aiding or succouring of a Rebel beyond Sea be Treason?

A, Resp.
is out of the Realm at the time of a rebellion within England, and one of the
Rebels does fly out of the Ream, Co. 3. Inst. f. 10. 13. Eliz. Dyer f. 298.
whom A, knowing his treason, does aid or succor, this is no Treason in A, by
the Stat. of 25. E. 3. because the Traitor is no enemy.

Vtrum Exteri, qui cum Subditis contra Principem militant, Rebels sint
habendi?

An Enemy coming in open hostility into England, Resp.
and taken, shall be either executed by Marshal Law or ransomed; Dyer 4. Mar.
f. 145. a. Co. Lib. 7. Calevins Case.
for he cannot be indicted of Treason, for that he was never within the
Protection or Ligeance of the King, and the Indictment of Treason says, Contra
Ligeantiam suam debitam.

But if a Subject join with a Foreign Enemy, and come into England with him, he
shall not be taken prisoner here, 13. Eliz. Dyer f. 298.
and ransomed or proceeded with as an Enemy shall, but he shall be taken as a
Traitor to the King.

Whether an English Man born consulting with a Foreign Prince, to invade his
Country, may be charged with High treason?

A Consultation was had concerning John Story Doctor of Law, Cambdens Eliz. f.
144 and 145. An. 1572.
the Duke of Alva's Searcher, whether he, being an English Man born, who in
Brabant had consulted with a Foreign Princ eabout invading his Country, and
had showed the means of Invasion, might have been charged with High treason?
The skilfullest Lawyer affirmed that he might.

Whereupon he was arraigned, and being to be charged with Treason, for that
(amongst other things) he had showed to the Duke of Alva's Secretary the means
to invade Eugland, raise Ireland into rebellion, and excite the Scots to bteak
into England; all at once: He refused to submit himself to Trial, and to the
Laws of England, and affirmed that the Judges had no power over him, for that
he was not a Subject sworn to the Queen of England, but to the King of Spain.
But he was condemned according to the ordinary form of Nihil dicit, Co. Lit.
f. 129. a. 13. Eliz. Dyer 300. Doctor Story's Case. Co. lib. 7. Calvin's Case.
Cod. 10.38.4.
and suffered the death of a Traitor; for that no Man can shake off his
Country wherein he is born, nor abjure his native sail, or his Prince at his
pleasure; Nemo Patriam in qua natus est, exuere, nec Ligeantiae debitum ejurare
possit. With this Law does concur the Civil Law: Origin propria neminem
posse voluntate sua eximere manifestum est.

5. Touching Fausonnery. Crimen falfi.

If a Man counterfeit the Kings Great or Privy Seal, or his Money, it is High
treason.

All ancient Authors agree that this was High treason by the Common Law (as
Braction, Britton, Fleta, and the Mirror. 25. E. 3. c. 2.


The Forging of the Kings Coin is High treason, without utterance of it; for by
the Act of 25. E. 3. the Counterfeiting is made High treason.

One Morgan and two others were indicted for Counterfeiting twenty Shilling
Pieces of the Kings Coin; Cro. 3: part. Morgans Case 383.
and Morgan for uttering those Pieces to the Kings Subjects, knowing them to be
counterfeit; and being there. upon arraigned, he pleaded Not guilty. And
evidence being pregnant against Morgan, he was found guilty, and the others
were acquitted: And Judgment given that he should be drawn and hanged; but not
to be quartered, according to the opinion of Stamford f. 182.

Note, that by the Stat. of 5. Eliz. to clip, wash, 5. El. c. 11.
round, or file, for wicked lucre and gain is declared High treason. So by the
Statute of 18. Eliz. it is enacted, that diminishing, 18. E. c. 1.
scaling or lighting of the Kings Coin within this Realm, is High treason.

Touching Money, the Civil Law speaks thus:

Qui falsam monetam percusserint, si id totum formare noluerunt, suffragio
justae paenitentiae absolvuntur. D. 48.10.19. De falsa Meneta. Falsa
monetadeprehenditur ex materia, pondere, and formaadulterina, Gothofredus.


Quicunque Nummos aureos partim raserit, partim tinxerit, vel finxerit: si
quidem liberi sunt, ad bestias dari: si servi, sum supplicio affici debent.
D. 48.10.8.

6, and last: Bringing into the Realm Counterfeit Coin.
If a Man bring false Money into this Realm counterfeit to the Money of
England, knowing the Money to be false, to Merchandise or make payment, in
deceit of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of his People, it is High treason.

But note, that the uttering of false Money in England, though the Person know
it to be false and counterfeit to the Likeness of the Coin of England, is no
Treason within the Statute of 25. E. 3. unless he brought it from a Foreign
Nation; for the words of the Statute are, Si Home apport faux Money en cest
Realm.

Having related the several parts or kinds of Treason, within the Statute of
25. E. 3. I shall add these few Queries touching High treason, and so conclude.

Whether a mad Man may be guilty of High treason.

The ancient Law was, Resp.
that if a mad Man had killed, or offered to kill the King, it was holden for
Treason; Co. lib. 4. f. 124 b. Beverleys Case.
and so it appears by King Alfreds Law, before the Conquest, and in Beverleys
Case; for the King is Caput and Salus Reipublicae, and a Capite bona valetudo
transit in omnes, and for this cause Kings Persons are so Sacred, that none may
offer them violence, without being guilty of High treason; Et pereat unus ne
pereant omnes.

But now by the Statute of 25. E. 3. and by force of the words, Fait compasser
ou imaginer la mort; he that is Non compos mentis, Co. 3. Inst. f. 6. Co. Lit.
247. b.
and totally deprived of all compassings and imaginations, cannot commit High
treason, by compassing or imagining the death of the King: for furiosus solo
f^rore punitur; and furor in the Civil Law is continuata mentis alienatio, qua
quis omni intellectu caret.

If a Man commit Treason, and confesses the same, or be thereof otherwise
convict, if afterward he become de non sanae memoriae, he shall not be called
to answer; or if after Judgment he become de non sanae memoriae, Co. 3. Inst.
f. 4. Lib. 4. Beverleyes Case.
he shall not be executed; for it cannot be example to others.

The Civil Law:

Culpam non admittit, qui suae me^ttis non est.

Si per furorem aliquis parentem occiderit, D. 48.9.9.2.
impunitus erit, Divi Fratres rescripserunt super eo, qui per furorem matrem
necaverat. Nam sufficere, furore ipso eum puniri?

Whether an Alien residing here,

All Aliens that are within the Realm of England, Resp. Co. Litt. 192. a. Dyer
144. Co. lib. 7. Calvin's Case. Co. 3. Inst. f 4 and 5.
and whose Sovereign are in amity with the King of England, are within the
protection of the King, and do owe a Local or Topical obedience to the King,
are within the Act of 25. E. 3. and if they commit Treason against the King,
they shall be punished as Traitors; and the Indictment shall say contra
Legeantiae debitum.

Whether the killing of a Foreign Ambassador residing here, be High treason?

Albeit the malicious killing of an Ambassabour be justi belli causa, Resp.
and contra jus Gentium, yet the killing of him is no Treason, within the Stat.
of 25. E. 3. until itl be so declared by Parliament, as it was in the Case of
Kerby and Algere, Co. 3. Inst. f. 8.
who were attainted for the killing of John Imperial, Ambassador from the
State of Genoa; but that Declaration was taken away by the Statnte of 1. Mar.

Whether an Ambassador,

Such an Ambassador has by the Law of Nations, and by the Civil Law of the
Romans, Resp.
forfeited all the Privileges of an Ambassador, and is subject to punishment.

If a Foreign Ambassador, says Coke, commits here in our Realm any crime,
Hill. 14. Eliz. The Bishop of Rosles Case. Co. 4. Inst. f. 153. Bulstrodes
Reports. 3d part. The King v. March.
which is contra jus Gentium, as Treason, Felony, Adultery, or any other crime
which is against the Law of Nations, he loses the Privilege and Dignity of an
Ambassador, as unworthy of so high a Placc, and may be punished here as any
other private Alien, and not to be remanded to his Sovereign, but of courtesy.

But if any thing be malum prohibitum, by any Act of Parliament, Private Law or
Custom of the Realm, which is not malum in se jure Gentium, nor eontra jus
Gentium, an Ambassador residing here shall not be bound by any of them: but
otherwise it is of the Subjects of either Kingdom, etc. And the reason why
private Aliens are bound by our Acts of Parliament, Lib. 2. c. 2. nu. 5. De
jure belli ac Pacis.
Private Laws and Customs, is given by the learned Grotius, viz. Quia ad
gubernationem Populi moraliter necessarium est, ut qui ei vel ad tempus se
admiscent, quod fit intrando territorium, ij conformes reddant ejus Populi
institutis.

Whether a Foreign Prince,

When a Foreign Prince comes with leave into England, Resp.
he subjects himself under the Protection of the King of England, and as by
well doing he enjoyes the benefit of the Laws, so by ill doing he is subject to
the Equity thereof, according to that saying of the Lawers, He deserves not
the benefit of the Law, which offends against the Law. Otherwise better were
the condition of a Foreign Prince offending in another Princes Kingdom, than
his that reigns well: He is thought also to be a Subject, though not
originary yet temporary, because two absolute Princes in respect of Royal
Authority, cannot be in one Kingdom at once; and therefore it is a received
opinion of the learned in the Laws, A King without his own Dominions (except it
be in an Expedition of War) is but a private Man; and consequently can neither
confer, nor exercise Royalties.

Moreover it is said, that such a Prince by his offense loses merum Imperium,
his mere and absolute Sovereignty, and that such are subject by their dwelling
only and place of abode, might commit Treason, and that a Prince has power or
Jurisdict. over another Prince that is his equal as often as any has subjected
himself under the Judgment of his Equal either by express words or Covert,
Contract, or by offending within the Jurisdiction of his Equal.

Vide Cambdens Eliz. in 29. year of her Reign, touching the Queen of Scots.

2. Misprision of Treason.
Touching Misprision, 4 things are to be principally observed; The Etymology of
the word, its Description, its Division, and the Punishment therefore.

1. The Etymology or Origination of the word:

Misprision, comes of the French word Mespris, which properly signifies
neglect or contempt; for (mes) in Composition in the French signifies mal, Co.
3. Inst. f. 36.
as mis does in the English Tongue: as mischance, for an ill chance, and so
Misprise is ill apprehended or known.

2. Its Description:

In legal understanding Misprision of treason, is either when one knows, that
another has committed treason, and will not discover him to the King or to the
Council, or to any Magistrate, but does conceal the same; it is when one has
committed some heinous offense under the degree of treason.

3. Its Division:

Misprision of treason is twofold: 1. Passive, called Crimen omissionis, as in
concealment, or not discovery of treason: And therefore by the Statute of 5.
and E. 6. concealment or keeping secret of any High treason, is declared only
Misprision of Treason.

As for example: 13. El. c. 2.
It is Misprision of High treason in concealing of a Bull from the Pope of Rome.

So the receiving of one that has counterfeited the Kings Coin, Dyer f. 296
Coyners Case.
and comforting of him, knowing him to have counterfeited the King Coin, is but
a Misprision.

But by the Common Law, concealment of High treason, was Treason, as appears
in the Case of the Lord Scrope anno 3. H. 5, and by Bracton lib. 3. f. 118. b,
and 119. a.

And with our Common Law, the words of Isocrates to Nicooles are agreeable; viz.
Eadem poena digni sunt supprimentes hujusmodi facinus, qua facinorosi.

2. Active, called Crimen commissionis, as in committing some heinous offense,
under the degree of Treason; 37. H. 8. Br. Tit. Treason.
as when one fixes an old Seal of a Patent to a new Patent of Non-Residence,
this is holden to be a Misprision of Treason only, for it is an abuse of the
great Seal, and not counterfeiting of it.

So if a man know Money to be counterfeit, and bring the same out of Ireland
hither into England, Co. 3. Inst. f. 140.
and utter it in payment, this is but a Misprision, and no Treason.

So the compassings or imaginations against the King by word, without an overt
Act, is a High Misprision.

4. The punishment of this offense.

In all Cases of Misprision of Treason, the party offendour shall forfeit his
Goods and Duty for ever, and the profits of his Lands for term of his life,
and to be imprisoned during life.

From which punishment if any will save himself, that knows of any High
treason, he ought with as much speed as conveniently he may, to reveal the same
to the King, or some of his Privy Council, or any other Magisirate.

Note, that in every Treason or felony, is included Misprision, and where any
has committed Treason or felony, the King may cause the same to be indicted,
and arraigned, but of Misprision only, if he will,

3. Robbing the Kings Treasure. Crimen peculatus.

The Robbing the King of his Treasure, Co. 3. Inst. f. 112. Co. litt. 90. b.
131. b.
or Money, is accounted Damnum inaestimabile; for the Kings Treasure is the
sinew of War, and the honor and safety of the King in time of Peace.

The Civil Law does accord with our Law in this point: Pecuniae nervus
Reipublicae, seu belli. Cur ita? Imperium sine vectigalibus nullo modo esse
potest. Cicero: Militares expensae, and Hostium Incursiones multa regent
diligentia, and non possunt citra pecuniam haec agi. N. 8.2.10.2.

Fourscore and one persons, (whereof the Abbot of Westminster and 48 of his
Monks were part) brake into the Receipt, Co. 4. Inst. f. 112.
and feloniously robbed the King of a hundred thousand pounds: All these
fourscore and one were indicted of this felony, and committed to the Tower of
London, etc. and this was the occasion of the new building of both parts of the
Exchequer, which were before of ancient building, and weak.

The punishment of this crime in the Civil Law, is this:

Peculatus poena aquae and ignis interdictionem, in quam hodie successit
deportatio, continet. Porro qui in eum statum deducitur, sicut omnia pristina
jura, ita and bona amittit.

4. Bribery.
Bribery (says Coke) is a great Misprision, Crimen Repetundarum.
when any man in Judicial place takes any Fee or Pension, Robe or Livery, Gift,
Reward, or Brocage of any person that has to do before him any way, for doing
his Office, or by color of his Office, but of the King only, unless it be of
meat, and drink, and that of small value, upon diverse and grevious punishments.

Having given you a description of Bribery, I propose these Queries with
Resolutions upon them; and then show what the Civil Law says touching Bribery,
and Reward.

Whether Bribery can be committed, in foro contentioso?

Bribery may be committed not only when a Suit depends in foro contentioso,
Resp.
but also when any in Judicial place does any thing, virtute or color Officii,
though there be no Suit at all.

For example, Co. 3. Inst. f. 148.
if the Lord Treasurer for any gift or brocage, shall make any Customer,
Controller, or any Officer, or Minister of the King, this is Bribery, for he
ought to take nothing in that Case, Laws made contra Ambitus.
by the Statutes of 12. R. 2. c 2.5. E. 6.5.6. Co. Litt. f. 234. a. Co. 3.
Inst. f. 154. Hobarts Reports, Roy v. Bishop of Norwich f. 75. but that he make
all such Officers, and Ministers of the best and most lawful Men, and
sufficient for their estimation and knowledge. These Laws aforementioned, made
contra crimen Ambitus are worthy to be known by all; but more worthy to be put
in execution, for they prevent Bribery and extortion; They that buy, will sell.

Whether this offense of Bribery can be perpetrated, Qu. 2.
by one that has a Judicial place in the Ecclesiastical Court?

The Statute of 5 E. 6. c. 16. Co 3. Inst. 148. Cro. 2. part. Trevons Case. f.
269.
and therefore any Chief Judicial Officer Ecclesiastical, taking any thing
virtute or color Officii, for any Office Ministerial or Judicial, is guilty of
Bribery.

Touching Gifts and Bribery, take notice what the Civil Law says:

Non in totum Xeniis abstinere debebit Proconsul, sed modum adjicere, 1. De
Xeniis.
ut neque morose in tetum abstineat, neque avare modum Xeniorum excedat, quam
rem Divus Severus, and Imperator Antonius elegantissime epistola sunt moderati,
D. 4.16.6.3.
cujus epistolae verba haec sunt: Quantum ad Xenia pertinet, Audi quid
sentimus. Vetus proverbium est, neque omnia, neque quovis tempore, neque ab
omnibus. Nam valde inhumanum est, a nemine accipere, sed passim vilissimum est,
and omnia avarissimum.

Imo non est inhumanum. Nam and munera excoecant oculos sapientum, ac
pervertunt verba Justorum: verum hic agitur (says Gothofre. dus) de muneribus
quae dantur Proconsuli, ut hospiti, non ut Judici.

Et hic aperte Xenia: and ut appellat quoque hic Jurisconsultus, Xeniola,
distinguntur a dono and munere, seu munerum qualitate: Aliud ii est munus,
aliud Xenion and Xeniolon.

Lege Julia repetundarum tenetur, 2. De Repetundis. D. 48.11.3. D. 48.11.9.
qui cum aliquam potestatem haberet, pecuniam ob judicandum; decernendumque
acceperit.

Qui munus public mandatum, accepta pecunia, rumperunt, crimine repetundarum
postulantur.

5. Extortion.
Extortion is a Misprision by wresting, or unlawfully taking by any Officer by
Color of his Office, any money or valuable thing of or from any Man, either
that is not due, or more then is, or before it be due, Quod non est debitum,
Co. Litt. 368. b.
vel quod est ultra debitum, vel ante tempus, quod est debitum.

Of this crime it is said, that in no other than Robbery; and another says,
that it is more odious than Robbery; Co. Lit. 368. b.
for Robbery is apparent, and has a face of a crime, but extortion puts on the
vizor of virtue, for expedition of Justice and the like, and it is ever
accompanied with that grevious sin of perjury; we call it in Latin Crimen
expilationis, seu concussionis.

But the Quaere may be whether Extortion and Exaction are all one? It is
answered, They are not, for there is this difference taken between Exaction and
Extortion: Extortion is where an Officer demands and wresteth a greater sum
or reward, than his just Fee: And Exaction is where an Officer or other Man
demands and wresteth a Fee or reward, where no Fee or reward is due at all.

6. Striking in the Kings Courts, where he resides personally, or by
Representation.
If any Man in Westminster Hall, Co. 3. Inst. f. 140.
or in any other Place, sitting the Courts of Chancery, the Kings Bench, the
Common Bench, the Exchequer, or before Justices of Assize, or Justices of Oyer,
and Terminer, shall draw a weapon upon a Judge; or Justice, though he strike
not, this is a great Misprision, for the which he shall loss his right hand,
12. E. 3.13.
and forfeit his Lands and goods, and his Body to perpetual imprisonment; The
reason is because it tends ad impedimentum Legis terre: So it is if in
Westminster Hall, or any other Place, sitting the said Courts there, or before
Justices of Assize, or Oyer and Terminer, and within the view of the same, a
Man does strike a Jury, 3. Eliz. Dyer 188.
or any other with weapon, hand, shoulder, elbow, or foot, he shall have the
like punishment; but in that case, if he make an assault, and strike not, the
offender shall not have the like punishment.

One Peter Carry was indicted for drawing his sword in Aula Westminster. sedentibus
Curiis, Cro. 1. part. Cary's Case 405.
and in disturbing the Sheriff, in making an Arrest upon one T. by force of a
Bill of Middlesex: and being arraigned and found guilty, had Judgment of
perpetual Imprisonment, and to pay one hundred pounds to the Queen: And note,
that upon the evidence it appeared to be upon the stairs, ascending the Court
of Wards, and so out of the view of the Courts: But Popham said, although it
were out of the view of the Courts, yet if the Indictment had been as it ought
to have been: viz coram Domina Regina, the Judgment should have been, that his
right hand should have been cut off, and that he should forfeit all his Lands
and Chattels, and have perpetual Imprisonment.

Sr William Waller was indicted, for that he in the Palace of Westminster near
the Great Hall, Cro. 3. part. Sr. William Wallers Case f. 373 and 374.
the Justices in the Kings Bench, Chancery, and Common Bench, judicially
sitting to hear Causes, made an assault, and affray upon Sr Thomas Reignolds,
and beat him, in disturbance of the Law, and contempt of the King, etc. and
upon this being arraigned, and found guilty, because the Indictment was not,
that he did it in presence of the Justices, nor in the presence of the King,
all the Judges agreed that the Judgment of cutting off his hand should not be
given; and so seriatim they delivered their opinions: But because this offense
was in the Palace, near the Hall door, whereby tumults might have been made,
and because it was found sitting all the Courts, and in disturbance of Justice
and Law, and in contempt of the King, the Court awarded, that he should be
imprisoned for the said offense during the Kings pleasure, and should pay 1000
pounds fine.

Thus much where the King is present by Representation.

If any strikes in the Kings Palace, 33. H. 8. c. 12.
where the Kings Royal Person resideth, he shall not lose his right hand,
unless he draw blood; but if he draw blood, then his right hand shall be
stricken off, he perpetually imprisoned, and fined, and ransomed.

By what has been said, a Man may perceive a great differenee between a blow,
or stroke in, or before the said Courts of Justice, where the King is
representatively present, and the Kings Courts, where his Royal Person
resideth; for in the Kings House, blood must be drawn, which needs not in, or
before the Courts of Justice, when the Judges are doing of that which to
Justice appertains; and the reason is, Quia Justitia firmatur Solium.

7. Routs.
A Rout is when People do assemble themselves together, and after do proceed or
rid, or go forth, or do move by the instigation of one or more, who is their
Leader: This is called a Rout, because they do move and proceed in Routs and
members.

Also where many assemble themselves together upon their own common Quarrel,
and brawles, as if the Inhabitants of a Town will gather themselves together,
to break hedges, pales, or such like, to have Common there, or to beat another,
that has done to them a common displeasure, Co. 3. Inst. 176. Lamb. lib. 2. c.
5.
or such like, that is a Rout, and against the Law, although they have not
done, or put in execution their mischievous intent, if so be they do go, ride,
or move forward after their first meeting.

Note, that there is diversity between committing of a great Rout, or the like,
and Levying of War, for example, as if three or four, or more do rise to burn
or put down an Enclosure in Dale, Co. 3 Inst. f. 9 and 10.
which the Lord of the Manor of Dale has made there in that particular
place, this or the like is a Rout, a Riot, or an unlawful Affembly, and no
Treason,

But if they have risen of purpose to alter Religion established within the
Realm, or Laws, or to go from Town to Town generally, and to cast down
Enclosures, this is a Levying of War (though there be no great number of
Conspiratours) within the perview of the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. because the
Pretense is public and general, and not private in particular. As it was
resolved, Pasch. 39. Eliz. by all the Judges of England, in the case of Richard
Bradshaw Miller, Robert Burton, -- Mason, and others of Oxfordshire.

8. Riot.
Riot (in Latin Riotum) comes of the French word Rioter, id est, Rixari; Co.
3. Inst. f. 176.
and in the Common Law signifies when three or more do an unlawful Act, as to
beat any Man, or to hunt in his Park, chase or warren, or to enter or to take
possession of another Man's Land, or to cut or destroy his corn, grass or other
profit, etc.

By the Statute of 17. R. 2. and 13. H 4. 17. R. 2. c. 8.13. H: 4. c. 7.
the Justices of Peace, and Sheriff are to arrest those that commit Riot, and
to record that which they find done in their presence against the Law.

Each Man that is able, 2. H. 5.8.
ought to help to repress Riots, upon pain of Imprisonment, and to make fine to
the King.

Evans, and Cottington and 7. others, were indicted for a Grand Riot, that they
with others there named, to the number of 1000. persons, made a Rescous, and
assault upon Henry Smith a Baylif, who by virtue of a Warrant upon a Bill of
Middlesex, against William Clear, had arrested him, and was carrying him to
Prison, and they procured him to escape. The Arrest was at Charing Cross in the
Parish of St. Martins; aad after the Arrest, they assaulted the Bayliffes, and
beat them; and the Bayliffes putting the Prisoner into an house for safe
keeping against the tumult, they assaulted the house; and notwithstanding a
Justice of Peace, assisted with three Constables, made proclamation for keeping
the Peace, and for their departure, yet they continued their assault, breaking
open the house, and with ladders taken from the Kings House of White Hall,
(where the King with His Court was resident) upon the 24. of March 13, Car. in
the afternoon of the said day, made this Riot and Rescous, and carried the
Prisoner away through the Kings House, and caused him to escape. Upon this
Indictment 9. of them being arrested, pleaded Not-guilty, and 4. of them viz.
Evans, Cottington, Groom and Heatly being arraigned, were found guilty, and 5
of them were found Not-guilty, but against three of them was probable evidence,
that they were aiding to this Riot and Rescous, but the Jury acquitted them;
wherefore because it was so great a Riot, and offense, being committed so near
the Court, it was adjudged, that the said four persons, which were so
convicted, should be committed to Prison, and every one of them should pay 500.
pounds fine to the King: And that every of them should stand on the Pillory at
Westminster, and Charing Cross, where the Riot was done; and that Thomas Groom,
who was a Cobbler, and entered into the house with a drawn sword, and a kettle
upon his head, as an helmet to defend himself, should stand on the Pillory with
a sword in his hand, and a kettle upon his head, and should be bound with good
secuties for their good behavior, before they should be delivered: And the
three which were acquitted, against whom there was such probable evidence, were
bound to find securities for their good behavior.

Note, Co. 3. Inst. f. 176.
An unlawful Assembly is when three or more assemble themselves together, to
commit a Riot or Rout, and do it not.

One or more, says the Lord Coke, may commit a force; Co. Litt. 257, a. Co. 3.
Inst. f. 176.
three or more may commit an unlawful Assembly, a Riot, or a Rout: A multitude
(as Some have said) must be ten, or more. Multitudinem december faciunt. And so
(said they) it is said, de grege hominum. But Coke tells us, that he could
never read it restrained by the Common Law to any certain number, but left to
the discretion of the Judges.

In the Civil Law thus: December homines populum, tres Collegium, Bartolus.
duo Congregationem and quindecim turbam constituunt in Jure Civili, sed Jure
in Communi Angliae tres turbam faciunt.

9. Affraies, Single Combats, and Challenges, etc.
Single Combats, 1. Single combat.
or Duels between any of the Kings Subjects of their own heads, and for private
malice or displeasure, is prohibited by the Laws of this Realm; for in settled
State governed by Law, no Man for any injury whatsoever ought to use private
revenge; because it belongs to the King, who is the Supreme Magistrate, and
Gods Lieutenant on Earth. And the Law herein is grounded upon the Law of God;
Deuteronomy. 32.35. (...) 12.19. It is also against the Law of na^^^^ and Nations; for
a Man to be Judge in (...) own proper Cause, especially in Duels, where fury,
wrath, malice, and revenge are the rul^ of the Judgment.

Hinc est, says one, qu^d Legum reperta est sa ra reverentia, ut nihil manu,
nihil proprio ageretur impulsu. Quid enim a bellica confusione pax tranquilla
distat, si per vim litigia terminantur?

But it may be objected, vim vi repellere, therefore private revenge is lawful:
The reason of the consequence is because by revenge force by force is repelled.

It is answered, Vim vi repellere licet cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, in
casu ultimae, and indeclinabilis necessitatis, non semper and quocumque modo.

Note, that Duels are lawful, if they are warranted by public Authority, such
as heretofore our Trials by batail, ad probandam veritatem litis; and such was
the Duel betwixt David and Goliath, which was stricken by public warrant and
authority.

Vid. more of this in Grotius lib. 2. c. 1. nu. 15. and cap. 23. nu. 10.

Note further, that albeit upon the Single Combat (that proceeds not from
public authority) no death ensue, nor blood drawn, Affray.
yet the very Combat for revenge is an Affray, and a great breach of the Kings
Peace, an Affright and terror to the Kings Subjects, and is to be punished by
fine and Imprisonment, and to find sureties for their behavior.

When any Affray is made by Single Combat, any stander by, that is no Officer,
Co. 3. Inst. f. 178.
may endeavor to part them, and prevent further danger, and the Law does
encourage them thereunto, for if they receive any harm by the Affrayours, they
shall have their remedy by Law against them; and if the Affrayours receive any
hurt by the endeavoring only to part them, the standers by may justify the
same, and the Affrayours have no remedy by Law. 8. E. 2. Cor. 295.22. Ass. Pl.
56.
But if either of the Parties be slain or wounded, or so stricken as he falls
down for dead, in that case the standers by ought to apprehend the Party so
slaving, etc. or to endeavor the same by the Hue and Cry, or else for his
escape they shall be fined, and Imprisoned. But if the Sheriff, Justice of
Peace, Constable, or other Conservatour of the Peace do not part the
Affrayours, for the preservation of the Kings Peace, and apprehend them being
within his view, or do not his uttermost to part, and apprehend them, they may
be imprisoned for their neglect thereof, for they may command others to assist
them, and therefore the rule holds in them; qui non prohibet, 3. H. 7.10.6.
Bedingseilds case.
cum prohibere possit, in culpa est. And if any be commanded to assist them
therein, and refuse or neglect the same, it is a contempt in them, to be
punished by fine and Imprisonment.

The words Affray and Assault be indifferently used of most Men, and that also
in some of our Book Cases; but yet (according to Lambards opinion) there
wants not a just difference between them: For Affray is derived of the French
(Effrayer) which signifies to terrify or bring fear, which the Law
understands to be a common wrong, and therefore is it enquirable in the Turn
of the Sheriff, or in a Leete 4. H. 6.10, and 8. E. 4.5. otherwise it is of an
Assault, as it seems by those very Books: yet may an Affray be without word,
or blow given; as if a Man shall show himself furnished with arms, or weapon,
which is not usually worn and born, it will strike a fear into others that be
not armed as he is: But an Assault, as it is fetched from another fountain,
namely from the Latin Assultus, which denotes a leaping (or flying) upon a
Man: so can it not be performed without the offer of some hurtful blow, or at
the least of some fearful speech. And therefore to strike at a Man (although he
were neither hurt or hit, with the blow) was adjudged an Assault 22. Ass. Pl.
60. For this Assault does always necessarily imply a hitting; and therefore in
Trespass of Assault and Battery, a Man may be found guilty of the Assault, and
yet be excused of the Battery. 40. E. 3.40, and 45. E. 3.24.

3. Challenges. Co. 3. Inst. f. 158. v. Hobarts Reports. Barrow. v. Llewillen
f. 62. Hickes case 215.

If any Subject by word, Message, or Writing challenge another to fight with
him, this is an offense before any combat be performed, and punishable by Law,
and it is contra Pacem, Coronam, and Dignitatem Regis. For, prohibetur cum
aliquid, prohibentur etiam media ad illud tendentia.

The means of such evils as well as the end are to be prevented.

10. Libells.
A Libel signifies a criminous report of any Man cast abroad, be he
Magistrate, or a private Person, or otherwise, unlawfully published in writing,
and therefore for distinction sake it is called an Infamous Libel, or Pasquil.

It matters not whether the Libel be true or false, or whether the Party be of
good fame or ill fame; for it inciteth all the same Family, Kindred, or Society
to revenge, and so tends by consequence to the effusion of blood, and to the
breach of the public Peace, and therefore such Libelling, be it true or false,
is punishable by our Law.

It was resolved in the Star Chamber 44. Eliz. Hallywoods Case, that if any
find a Libel, and would preserve himself out of danger, if it be a private Man,
the finder may either burn it, or presently deliver it to some Magistrate; but
if it concern a Magistrate, or Public Person, he ought to give it to the
Magistrate.

One Jeffes was indicted for that he exhibited an infamous Libel, Cro. 3. part.
Jeffes case f. 175.
directed unto the King, against Sr Ed. Coke, late Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, and against the said Court, for a Judgment given in the said Court, in
the Case of Magdalen College, affirming the said Judgment to be Treason, and
calling him therein Traitor, perjured Judge, and scandalizing all the
Professors of the Common Law, and containing much other scandalous matter: and
fixed this Libel upon the great Gate at the entrance of Westminster Hall, and
in diverse other public Places: And being upon this arraigned, prayed that
Council might be assigned, which was granted, and he had them, but would not be
ruled to plead as they advised; but put in a scandalous plea, and insisting
upon it, affirmed that he would not plead otherwise, whereupon it was adjudged,
He should be committed to the Marshall, and that he should stand upon the
Pillory at Westminster, and Cheapside with a Paper mentioning the offense; and
with such Paper be brought to all the Courts at Westminster, and be continued
in Prison until he made his submission in every Court, and that he should be
bound with sureties to be of good behavior during his life, and should pay a
thousand pounds fine.

Adam de Ravensworth was indicted in the Kings Bench for the making a Libel in
writing, in the French Tongue, Mich. 10. E. 3. Coram Rege Rot. 92. Ebor.
against Richard of Snowshal, calling him therein Roy de Raveners, etc. wheupon
he being arraigned, pleaded thereunto Not-guilty, and was found guilty.

So by what has been said, a Libeller or publisher of a Libel, commits a
public offense, and may be indicted therefore.

The words of the Civil Law touching Libellers are these:

Injuria committitur; Just. 4.4.1.
si quis ad infamiam alieujus Libellum, aut Carmen, aut Historiam scripserit,
composuerit, ediderit, dolove malo fecerit, quo quid eorum fieret.

Si quis famosum Libellum sive domi, Cod. 9.36. De famosis Libellis.
sive in publico, vel quocumque loco ignarus repererit: aut corrumpat priusquam
alter inveniat, aut nulli confiteatur, inventum. Si vero non statim easdem
Chartulas, vel corruperit, vel igni consumpserit, sed vim earum manifestaverit:
sciat se quasi authorem hujusmodi delicti capitali sententiae subjugandum.

11, and last, False Rumors; and slanderous news.
None shall report slanderous news whereby discord may arise between the King
and his People, 3. El. c. 34.
or Great Men of the Realm: And he that does so shall be taken and kept in
Prison, until he has brought him into the Court, which was the first authors
of the tale.

The penalty is the same for telling slanderous lies of the Great Men of the
Realm. 2. R. 2. c. 5.


But by the 12. 12. R. 2. c. 12.
R. 2. it is enacted, that when any such is taken and imprisoned, and cannot
find him, by whom the Speech be moved, that he be punished by the advice of the
Council, notwithstanding the said Statutes.

Note, Inter Leges Alvaredi c. 28.
the Law before the Conquest was, That the Author and Spreader of false Rumors
amongst the People, had his tongue cut out, if he redeemed it not by the
estimation of his head.

To conclude: It may easily and manifestly appear to all such as have been
conversant in our Chronicles, how pernicious and dangeto this our Kingdom,
unlawful Assemblies and false Rumors have been in all precedent Ages; yea,
such as at the first were very small, and inconsiderable, and began upon very
small occasions, yet not being repressed in time grew to such greatness and
height, that they afterward put in hazard the State and Government of this
Land: And therefore it is behoveful and good wisdom for all Magistrates, and
Justices of Peace to endavour by all good means to quench the beginnings and
first sparks of such offenses, as knowing that for want of timely restraint,
they may soon grow to like danger again. And the axiom in our Law is:

Interest Reipublicae, ut pax in Regno conservetur, quaecumque paci adversentur
provide declinentur: i. e,

It it most necessary in a Commonwealth to provide, that tranquillity and peace
be continued in the Realm, and that all things being contrary thereunto, may by
foresight be eschewed.

Thus much of the first Part of my Treatise, I proceed to the Second.

Judicium Criminis, OR THE JUDGMENT OF ENGAND, Touching PLEAS OF THE CROWN.
CONCERNING Judgments Criminal, I shall present these particulars, worthy of
the Candid Readers observation: 1. The Definition of punishment. 2. The end of
punishment. 3. The Division or several kinds of punishment found in our
Authors. 4. The rules to be observed by our Judges for the inflicting of pains
or punishments. 5. The circumstances to be weighed in relation to punishments.
6. The persons to be considered in Criminal Judgments. 7. The matters of
Judgments Criminal. 8. The Judicial Acts, according to our Law.

Of these in their order.

1. Of the Definition of punishment.
Punishment in general signification is, Malum passionis quod infligitur ob
malum actionis; Mirror c. 4 sect. 12.
but particularly it is defined by Mr Horn thus: Pain est a satisfaction de
Trespass, (...) de peche.

2. Of the end of punishment.
The principal end of punishment in our Law is, that others by example may fear
to offend, Co. 3. Inft. f. 4. 6. 108. Co. Lib. 4. Beverleys Case 124. a b 3. H.
7. 1. b.
Vt poena unius sit metus multorum; and therefore a Man that is non compos
mentis, or an Infant that is within the age of discretion, is not (un Home)
within the statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. de proditionibus; for the end of
punishment is that others may be deterred from the perpetration of similar
offenses. But such punishment can be no example to mad Men, or Infants, that
are not of the age of discretion.

Touching the end of punishment, I shall offer the saying of Quintilian and
Seneca.

Quintilian has these words: Omnis paena non tam ad delictum pertinet, quam ad
exemplum.

Seneca thus: De C. C. l. 1. c. 21.
In vindicandis injuriis haec tria Lex sequuta est, quae Princeps quoque sequi
debet; ut aut eum quem punit emendet, aut ut paena ejus caeteros meliores
reddat, aut ut sublatis malis securiores caeteri vivant.

3. Of the Divisions or several modes of punishment.
The kinds or modes of pain, whereby delinquents are asserted are these, says
Bracton:

Sunt quaedam quae adimunt vitam, Lib. 3. c. 6. Tract. 1. de Actionibus.
vel membra: sunt quae auferunt Civitatem, Burgum, vel Provinciam. Sunt quae
continent auxilium, perpetuum vel ad tempus, vel coercitionem ss.
Imprisonamentum, vel ad tempus, vel ad perpetuum. Sunt quae fustigationem,
verber ationem, poenam Pilloralem, and Tymboralem, and damuum cum infamia
inducunt: sunt etiam quaedam quae dignitatis and ordinis inducunt depositionem
vel alicajus actus privationem, vel probibitionem.

The Division of Fleta is thus:

Personalium injuriarum, quaedam sunt criminales, and quaedam Civiles: Lib. 1.
c. 16.
Criminalium quaedam sententialiter mortem inducunt, quaedam vero minime.

Horn thus: Mirror c: 4. sect. 12.
Of pains violent there be two sorts, Corporal and Pecuniary: of Corporal some
be Mortal, and some be Venial.

Having given the Reader the several punishments in our Law, it will not be
amiss to show briefly the several sorts of inflictions used amongst the Jews
and Romans.

1. Amongst the Jews: Their punishments were either Capital, or not Capital:
Their Capital contained four sorts of Death. 1. La^idation or Stoning. 2.
Goodwius Civil, etc. Ecclesiast. Rites used by the Jews lib. 5. c. 7 and 8.
Combustion or burning. 3. Decollation or Beheading. 4. Suffotation or
Strangling.

The manner of burning was twofold; some ^hey burnt with wood and fagots, this
was ^ermed by them, the Burning of the Body: Others they burnt by pouring in
scalding hot ^ead, in at then mouths, which descending unto their bowels,
killed them, the bulk of their Body remaining whole; and this was ^enned
therefore, the burning of the Soul.

The lesser punishments not Capital, were chiefly four: 1. Imprisonement: 2.
Restitution: 3. Talio or Retaliation: 4. Scourging.

2. Amongst the Romans:

Punishments publicly insticted on Malefactors were either Pecuniary mulcts o^
Corporal punishments: Godwins Roman Antiq. lib. 3. sect. 3. c. 1 and 2.
The Pecuniary mulcts were two sorts, either an appointed sum of money was
required of the party guilty, and then it was called Mulcta; o^ his whole State
was seized on, and then i^ was termed a Confiscation of his Goods.

The Mulct was twofold, the one termed Mulcta Suprema, the other Mulcta minima.

Again; The Corporal punishments were either such as were Capital, depriving a
Man of his life: or Castigatory, such correction^ as serving for the humbling
and reforming of the Offender, or for the destroying o^ him.

Those punishments that deprived of lif^ in ordinary use, and of which there is
mo^^ frequent mention in Roman Authors, are these which follow; Furca, Crux,
Carcer, Culeu^ Equuleus, de Rupe Terpeia Dejectio, Scalae* Gemoniae, Tunica,
Damnatio in gladium, i^ Ludum, ad bestias.

Note, That Capital punishments we^^ sometime taken in a Civil acception for
the loss of freedom, which the Romans called C^pitis deminutionem,
disfranchizing; becau^^ in every Freeman thus disfranchised, on^ head of the
Corporation was as it were (...) off: and sometime (as is said before) it (...)
taken for the loss of ones life; and this they called Vltimum supplicium.

Thus much of the kinds of punishments used amongst the English, Jews and
Romans.

4. Of the Rules for inflicting punishments.
The Rules that concern the Infliction of punishments, are these following;

Respiciendum est Judicanti, ne quid aut durius, aut remissius constituatur,
quam causa deposcit, nec enim aut severitatis, aut clementiae gloria affectanda
est: sed propenso Judicio, prout quaeque res postulat, statuendum: Bract. lib.
3. c. 16. de Actionib.
In levioribus causis, leviores esse debent, ad lenitatem. In gravioribus autem
poenis, severitatem Legum cum aliquo temperamento benignitatis subsequi. Et
poenae potius molliendoe sunt quam exasperandae.

2. Poena gravior ultra Legem posita, Co. 3. Inst. f. 219.
oestimationem conservat. Or;

Majore poena affectus, quam Legibus statutum est, non est infamis.

With this Rule in our Law, the Civil Law Text does concur;

Poena gravior ultra Legem imposita existimationem conservat: ut and
constitutum est, D. 3. 2. 13. 7.
and responsum: ut puta si eum, qui part bonorum multari debuit, Proeses
relegaverit: dicendum erit duriori sententia cum eo transactum de existimatione
ejus, idcircoque non esse infamem.

3. Carcer ad homines continendos, Co. Lit. f. 260. a. Co. 3. Inst. f. 35.
non ad puniendos haberi debet: And therefore where the Law does require that a
Prisoner should be kept in salva and arcta custodia, yet that must be without
pain or torment to the Prisoner.

For severas facit Justitia, non inhum^n^s facit.

With our Law is agreeable the Law Imperial.

Solent Pr^^sides in carcere continendos damnare, D. 48 19.8.9.
aut u in vinculis contineantur, sed id eas facere non oportet: nam hujusmodi
poenae interdicto^ sunt; carcer enim ad continendos homines, non ad puniendos
haberi debet.

4. Co. lib. 4. Mudson and Lees Case f. 43.
Nemo ^is punitur pro eodem delicto.

In an Appeal one H. counted that the Defendant, etc. felonice maimed him in
his left hand, the Defendant pleaded, that before, etc. the Plaintiff recovered
in Trespass for the same Battery, and wounding 200 pounds and satisfaction
acknowledged; resolved, that the Bar is good, for where the Plaintiff is to
recover damages only, (as in this Case of Appeal) he shall not be twice
satisfied for the same thing.

Vide Co. lib. 8. Doctor Bonhams Case 118. b. lib. 11. Fosters Case.

5. Co. 2. Inst. 442. Co. Litt. 145. b. Hobarts Reports Moore. v. Hussy f. 94.
Quis pro alieno facto non est puniendus: no Man, if guiltless can be punished
for another fault: And the reason is because the obligation to punishment has
his rise from defect, which being only personal, cannot extend to another,
neither ought it to go in succession.

The Rules of the Civil Law do run with our Law.

Omnis noxalis actio caput sequitur. Justit. 4.8.

Et delicta and noxa^ caput sequuntur. D. 16. 3.1.18.

Delictum injuria adfecti personam non egreditur.

6. Poenam in corpus patitur, qui in oere nihil habet.

By the Statute of Westminster 1. c. 20. de Malefactoribus in parcis, it is
enacted, that if any be attainted at the suit of the Party, he shall be fined,
if he has whereof, if not, he shall be impisoned.

This rule holds good in the Romans Law. Vide D. 48. 19. 1. D. 2. 1. 7. 3. D.
47. 9. 9.

7. In dubiis interpretationibus ad mitiora deflectendum est. Co. 4. Inst. f.
66. Hob. Reports. Courteens Case.


And therefore general Acts of Parliament, which inflict punishment, viz. sur
ferfeiture de Corpse and de Avoir, etc. ought not to be expounded to extend to
life or member, but to imprisonment.

This holds good also in the Imperial Law: D. 50. 17. 192. 1.


In poenalibus causis benignius interpretandum est.

Interpretatione Legum poenoe molliendoe sunt potius, quam asperandoe. D.
48.19.42.


Judicandum est Legibus, non exemplis. Co. 3. Inst. 212.


5. Of the circumstances that ought to be weighed touching Pleas of the Crown.
In all crimes or offenses public, that are brought before a Judge, Bracton
lib. 3. c. 6. de generibus poenarum. Fleta lib. 1. c. 16. de Actionibus
criminalibus. Mirror c. 4. sect. 12.
are to be considered six circumstances.

1. Causa, ut in verberibus, quoe impunita sunt a Magistro, vel a Parente, nisi
modum excedant, quia emendationis non injurioe gratia videntur adhiberi, and
puniuntur, cum quis per iram ab extraneo pulsatus est.

2. Persona, nam magis delinquit, qui patrem, vel matrem, vel dominum
interficit.

3. Locus, qui facit, ut idem sit furtum, vel sacrilegium, and secundum hoc
minor poena, vel major.

4. Tempus, hoc discernit proedonem a fure, and a Burglatore, furemque diurnum
a nocturno.

5. Quantitas; hoec discernit furene ab Ambiguo, plus enim peccat qui gregem
surripuerit, quam qui ovem.

6. Eventus; ut si ex voluntate and conscientia certa fecerit quis aliquid,
sicut homicidium an ex eventu: Et secundum hoc, aut erit felonia, aut
infortunium.

Gothofredus on the Digest has these words.

In factis, dictis, scriptis and Consiliis, Causa, Persona, Locus, Tempus,
Qualitas, Quantitas, and Eventus consideranda sunt. Quintil. 6. Inst. Atrocitas
crescit ex his, quid factum sit, a quo, in quem, quo animo, quo loco, quo
tempore, quo modo.

6. Of the Persons to be coesidered in Criminal Judgments.
The Persons that constitute Judgment criminal are. Parties, Assistants, and
Judge. 1. Of the Parties in Judgment


Of these in their order.

The Parties are, Accuser, and Accused, called sometime Appellor, and Appellee,
sometime Indictor, and Indictee.

Britton tells us, Cap. 22.
that it is not for every Person to accuse or appeal; for a Man outlawed,
neither he that has forjured the Realm, nor a Man attainted, nor an Approver
that has failed in his probation, nor an Infant within the age of 14 years,
nor a mad Man, nor an Idiot, nor a mute, nor one that is deaf, nor a leper, nor
a Man within Holy Orders, are not receivable in Appeals, etc.

The Mirror says, that Women, Infants, Idiots, Lepers, c. 1. sect. 3.
or Professors in Order of Religion, or Clerks, or Persons attainted of
felony, or non compes mentis, cannot be Approvours.

Now, an Approvour is he who has committed some felony, which he confesses,
and appealeth or approves, that is to say, accuses others, which were
coadjutours or helpers with him, in doing the same or other felonies, which
thing he will approve; and this proof is to be either by Battle or by the
Country, at his election that appealed.

This Accusation is often done before the Coroner, who either is assigned to
the felon by the Court to take and record that which he says, or is called by
the felon himself, and required for the good of the Prince and Commonwealth,
to record that which he shall say.

If upon his appeal all those Partners be convicted, the King ex merito
Justitioe is to pardon him. But it is in the discretion of the Court either to
suffer him to be an Approver, 21. H. 6.29. b. and 34. b.
or after his approvement to respite Judgment and execution, until he has
convicted all his Partners.

Note; If a Man that is of good fame be appealed by an approver, by which he is
apprehended and kept in prison, yet het may have a writ, to be directed to the
Sheriff, commanding him to suffer the Party appealed to be Bayled by good
sureties. But if a Man appealed by an Approver, be kept in prison, and
afterward the Approver dies, there he may sue a Writ directed to the Sheriff,
to suffer him to be Bayled upon good surety, if he be not a notorious felon,
although he be not of good fame, Fitzh. N.B. 250. d.

Note further, that before Indictment no person can approve, because if his
approvement be false, 43. Ass. Pl. 39.15. E. 3. Cor. 113.11. H. 7.5.
no Judgment (whatsoever he confessed) can be given against him, unless he be
indicted, and no Judgment can be given against him, if his Appeal be false; but
of the offense contained in the Indictment, and so are the Books to be
understood.

Thus much of the Party accusing.

As for the party accused or appealed, he is always arraigned either as
principal, or accessory.

Of these distinctly and apart.

1. Of Principals.
It is a sure rule, that in alta proditione, Co. 3. Inst. 138.
nullus potest esse accessorius, sed Principalis solummodo.

As if many men conspire to Levy War, Co. 3. Inst. f. 9.
and some of them do Levy the same, according to the conspiracy, this is High
treason in all, for in Treason all be principalls.

If a man commits Treason, 19. H. 6.47. 3. H. 7.10. Co. 3. Inst. f. 138.
and thereby becomes a Traitor, if any other man knowing him to be a Traitor,
does receive, comfort and aid him, he is guilty of Treason, as principal, for
that there be no accessaries in High Treason.

Note, Co. Litt. 57. b. Co. 3. Inst. 20 and 21.57. Inst. 20 and 21. Co. 3.
Just. 138. Co. lib. 4. Va^xes Case. Plowd. Com. 47^ Saunders's Case. Co. lib.
9. Gores case.
that in the lowest offenses there are no accessaries, but all are principals,
as in Riots, Routs, etc.

There is another rule; Nullus dicitur felo principalis, nisi actor, aut qui
proesens, aut auxilians actorem ad feloniam faciendam.

But this rule has his exceptions; for in ease of poisoning, if one lays
poison for one, or infuseth it into a broth, or the like, albeit he be not
present, when the same is taken, and either the party intended, or another is
poisoned, yet he is a principal: and in that case, both the principal and
procurer or accessory may be absent.

So there is a felony wherein all be principals, Co. 2. Just. 138. Co. 3. Inst.
f. 61.
as well before as after, though they be absent at the doing of the felony, but
this is specially provided by the Statute of 3. H. 7. c. 2. of Taking Women
against their wills.

Note, If any be present, abetting, and aiding any to do an Act, Co. 3. Inst.
f. 59. 3 and 4. P. and M. Justice Dalisons Reports.
though the offense be personal, and to be done by one only, as to commit a
Rape, not only he that does the Act is a Principal, but also they that be
present, abetting and aiding the misdoer, are principalls also.

2. Of Accessory.
In case of felony, as there be principals, so there be Accessories, and
accessories be of two sorts, by the Common Law, and by the Statute Law.

Accessory by the Common Law is also of two sorts.

1. Accessory before the offense or fact; and it is he that commands or
procures an other to commit felony, and is not there present himself, when the
other does it, but if he be present, then he is also a principal: As where I.
S. does hold I. X. and commands I. D. to kill him, whereupon I. D. does give
him a wound to his heart, whereof he instantly dies, It is held that both be
principals, because both are parties to the wound. 13. H. 7.10. a.

So a Woman servant conspired to rob her Mistress, and brought a Stranger to
the Bedside, where the Mistress lay asleep, the Stranger killed, the servant
silent, nothing doing, 2 and 3 Eliz. Dyer f. 128.
but holding the candle, the two Chief Justices and Hare, thought the Servant a
Traitress and a principal.

If a Man counsels a Woman to murder the Child being in her Body, Dyer f.
186.
and after the Child is born, and then is mudered by the Woman in the absence
of him that so gave the Counsel; yet he is accessory before the fact, by his
counselling, before the birth of the Infant, and not countermanding it.

Note, Co. lib. 4. f. 44. a.
that in Manslaughter a Man cannot be accessory before the fact, for
Manslaughter ensues upon a sudden debate or Affray, for if it be
premeditated, it is murder.

2. Accessory after the offense, and it is he, that receives, favors,
aideth, or comforteteth any Man, that has done any murder or other felony,
whereof he has knowledge, such an accessory shall be punished, and shall have
Judgmenn of life and member, as well as the principal, which did the felony.

But the Quere may be, whether one may be accessory to an accessory? It is
answered, that one may; if one feloniously receive another, that is accessory
to felony, there the receiver is an accessory.

Thus much of accessories by the Common Law.

Accessory by the Ssatute Law, is such a one that abbeteth, counsels, or
receives any Man, which commits, or has committed any offense made felony
by Statute; for although the Statute does not make mention of accessories, Co.
3. Inst. f. 59 and 7^.7. E. 6. Dyer 88.
abettours, etc. yet they are included by the interpretation of the said
Statutes: Because whenever an offense is made felony by act of Parliament,
there shall be accessories before and after, as if it had been made a felony by
the Common Law.

For the further understanding of accessories, it will not be unnecessary to
give the Reader some certain Rules touching them; and then some Queries.

Accessorius sequitur naturam sui principalis: Dyer 16. Eliz. 332. a. Saunders
case. Co. 3. Inst. ^. 20 and 139.
and does it accordingly, in this case the Wife being absent, is but accessory,
and shall be hanged and not burnt, because the accessory cannot be guilty of
Petit treason, where the principal is not guilty but of murder: and accessorium
naturam sequi congruit principalis, The accessory must follow the nature of the
principal.

2. Vbi factum nullum, ibi fortia nulla: Et ubi non est principalis, non potest
esse accessorius.

As if the principal and accessory be arraigned, Co. 3. Inst. 114.3. H.
7.1.6.12.6. Co. lib. 4. Syers case.
and both found guilty, and the principal has his book before Judgment: It was
adjudged, the accessory shall be discharged; and also if the principal confess,
and has his book, the accessory shall be discharged, because Judgment was new
given against the principal.

So where the principal before attainder is pardoned, the accessory is
discharged.

It is resolved, that where the principal was found guilty of Manslaughter,
and not guilty of murder, and had his Clergy, Co. lib. 4. Syers case. Cro. 1.
part. Goss. v. Byby f. 541. Co. lib. 4. Bibithes Case.
the accessory shall be discharged, for till Judgment, it does not appear
judicially that there was a principal: But if the principal prays his Clergy,
after he has had Judgment, or if he be pardoned, yet the accessory shall be
arraigned, for it appears judicially that there was a principal.

By what has been said, you see that the accessory ought not to be condemned,
but where the principal is attainted, and not where he is convicted only, and
had his Clergy; which Clergy is a Refuge provided by the Common Law in favor
of Learning, Of Clergy.
to save the life of an offender Literate in certain cases; I say in certain
cases, because the benefit of the Clergy is taken away in many particulars, as,

1. For stealing of horses 1. E. 6. c. 33.

2. For robbing dwelling houses, etc. in or near the high way. 5. E. 6. c. 9.

3. For burning of houses, or Barns 5. Ph. and M. c. 4.

For stealing of 5 Shillings in any dwelling house, or any place adjoining, 39.
Eliz. chap. 15.

5. For Burglary and Rape, 18. Eliz. c. 17.

6. For stealing 12 pence or more, without the knowledge of the Person, etc. 8.
Eliz. c. 4.

7. Co. ^. Inst. f. 39.
For killing one that has no weapon drawn. 1. Jac. c. 9, etc,

But to conclude this learning of Clergy; It is a Rule whenever felony is
made by any Statute, and the benefit of Clergy is not taken away, the offender
shall have his Clergy.

The accessory ought not to be put to answer, 9. H. 7.19. b. Co. 3. Inst. f.
231.
before the principal be attainted; for Juri non est consonum, quod aliquis
accessorius in Curia Regis convincatur, antequam aliquis de facto fuerit
attincius: And consequentially by the Reversal and acquittal of the principal,
the dependant Judgment against the accessory cannot stand.

And this is agreeable to the Rules of the Imperial Laws;

Cum principalis causa non consistat, D. 50.17.178.
plerumque ne ea quidem, quoe sequuntur locum habent.

Quando res aliqua sit accessoria principali, Alciolus.
vitiato principali, corruit accessorium,

Thus much of the Rules, and now for the Quaeries with Solutions.

A Man being made accessorie to two,

If an Appeal be brought against two, Co. 2. Inst. f. 183.
in this case both of them must be attainted, before the accessory be outlawed,
and if one of the principals be found not guilty, the accessory is discharged,
for the Plaintiff made him accessory to two, and therefore he cannot be found
accessory to one.

Qu. 2. Whether the Writing of Letters etc. in Favor of a Felon can make him
an Accessory?

Resp. If a man write Letters for a Felons deliverance, or in favor of him, or
the like, 26 Ass. p^ 47,
he is no Accessory, for that he received not the Felon.

Qu 2. Whether the Instructing of a Felon to Read will make the Person
Instructing an Accessory?

Res. A Vicar Instructing an Approver which could not Read, Co: 3. Inst. f. 139,
whilst he was in prison, to Read, whereby he escaped, was adjudged not
Accessory to the Felony.

Qu. 3. Whether the persuading Witnesses not to Appear to give Evidence against
a Felon will make one an Accessory to the Felony?

Res. Catlin and Brown Justices of Assize in the County of Suffolk put this
Case to all the Judges: Mich: 11 and 12 Eliz: the Case of Roberts the Attorney,
A man committed Felony in the County of Suffolk, for the which he was
committed to the Goal, and R. an Attorney advised the Friends of the Felon to
persuade the Witnesses not to Appear to give Evidence against him, which was
done accordingly; And it was Resolved, that neither the Friends, nor the
Attorney were Accessories to the Felony, but it was a great Contempt and
Misprision, for which they might be fined and imprisoned.

Hitherto of the Parties in Judgments Criminal.

The Assistants in Judgments Criminal are of two sorts, 2 Of the Assistants,
the one appertaining to the King, as the Kings Sergeants, his Attorney, and
Solicitor General, and the Clerk of the Crown; the other to the party Arraigned
assigned to him (upon his prayer) by the Court.

The Duty of the Kings Council learned in the Laws is to manage the Evidence
against the prisoner at his Trial, and the Function of the Clerk of the Crown
is to frame, read, and record all Indictments against Traitors, Felons, and
other Offenders Arraigned in the Kings Bench upon any public Crime.

Note by the Statute of 2 H: 4. this Clerk of the Crown, 2 H: 4, c: 10,
if fourscore or a hundred men be Indicted of Felony, or Trespass, of one
Felony, or one Trespass, and they plead to an Issue, as not Guilty, the said
Clerk ought not to take for the Venire Facias, nor for the Entering of the Plea
but two shillings only, and not two shillings for every one, which Act is made
in affirmance of the Common Law. So if one man be Indicted of two several
Felonies, or Trespasses, and is acquitted, 26 Ass: pl: 24,
he shall pay but for one Deliverance.

As to the Council belonging to the Party Arraigned, the Law of England is
thus; where any person is Indicted of Treason or Felony, and pleads to the
Treason or Felony, Not Guilty, which goes to the Fact best known to the party;
it is holden that the party in that Case shall not have an Advocate assigned to
defend his Cause, or allege any matter for him; but if the party Arraigned
has any matter of Law to plead, he shall have Council assigned by the Court,
to plead the same, as to plead a general Pardon, or a particular Pardon, or to
plead in Arrest of Judgment, if the Verdict be found against him, that the
Trial came not out of the right place, Co. lib. 6 f 14, Arundels case.
as it fell out in Arundels Case convicted by a Jury of wilful Murder, or any
other matter of Law.

Sir Humphrey Stafford had an Advocate assigned him concerning the privilege
of Sanctuary, 1. H. 7.^ 22, b.
from whence he was drawn by force; but for the matter of High Treason he
pleaded his own Cause.

But though the party Arraigned upon an Indictment of Treason, or Felony, and
pleading to the Treason or Felony, Not Guilty, which goes to the Fact, cannot
have Council to give in Evidence, or alledg any matter for him; yet in Appeals
which are the Suites of the Subject, Council is allowed; and the Reason why
Council is not prohibited in an Appeal as it is in an Indictment may be this:
There is no Appeal brought, Doctor and Stud. lib. 2. c. 48.
but that of common presumption the Appellant has malice against the Apellee;
and therefore if the Judges should in those Cases show themselves to Instruct
the Appellees, the Appellants would grutch, and think them partial, and
therefore as well of the Indemnity of the Court, as of the Appellee in that
Case that he be not guilty, the Law suffers the Appellee to have Council; but
when a man is Indicted at the Kings Suit, the King intends nothing but
Justice with Favor, and that is to the rest and quietness of his faithful
Subjects, and to pull away Misdoers among them charitably, and therefore the
King will be contented that his Justices shall help forth the Offenders,
according to the Truth, as far as Reason and Justice may suffer.

Note, Co 3. Inst. 29.
that in Scotland, in all Criminal Cases, yea in cases of High Treason Pars rea
may have Council learned. Thus much of the Assistants.

There is in Criminal or Public Judgment a twofold Judge, ^ Of the Judge.
one of matter of Fact, and that is the Jury, whose Office is to find out the
truth of the Fact; Co Lit. 226. a. lib. 4. Heydons case, ^2 a. lib. 9. Dowmans
case f: 13, a.
the other of Law-matters, and that is the Kings Justice, whose Office is to
find out the truth of the Law, Ad questionem facti nen respondent Iudices, ita
ad quoestionem Iuris non respondent Iuratores. Of these particularly.

1. Of the Jury.
Jurors ought to be persons competent, and that they be such, it is required
that every Juror that is returned for the Trial of the life of man, Co: Lit,
1^5, b, 272, a, 78, b.
ought to have three qualities.

1. He ought to be Dwelling most near to the place where the question is moved,
for Lex intendit vicinum vicini facta scire. Stat. 2. H, 5 c. 3, Stat. 2.


2. He that passes in an Enquest of Life, and death, ought to have Lands and
Tenements, to the value of 40 Shillings.

3. He ought to be least suspicious, that is to be indifferent, as he stands
unsworn; and then he is accounted Liber and legalis homo, otherwise he may be
challenged, and not sufferred to be sworn.

The Determination of the matter of fact by Jurors, Co Lit. 226. a. Co. lib. 9.
f. 13. a. Dowmans Case.
is termed in our Law, a Verdict, in Latin Veredictum, quasi dictum very satis.

And of Verdicts some are general, some special, or at large: It is called a
Special Verdict or at Large, because the Jurours find the special matter at
large, Co. Lit. f. 226. b.
and leave the Judgment of Law, thereupon to the Court: Of which kind of
Verdict it is said, Omnis conclusio boni and very Judicii sequitur ex bonis and
veris praemissis, and dictis Juratorum. Touching special Verdicts in Crown
matters, Vide Cro. 3. part. Hallowayes case; Cooks case f. 537.

2. Of the Judge in matters of Law.
The Judges (that are to decide, and discuss matters in Law) are bound to
observe these particulars.

1. They ought to judge secundum allegata and probata: Quotiescunque sententiam
fert Judex, secundum allegata, and probata far debet.

2. They ought to see, that the Indictment, Co. 3. Inst. f. 1^7.
Trial, and other proceeding be good, and sufficient in Law, otherwise they
will by their erroneous Judgment attaint the Prisoner unjustly.

3. The Court ought to be, instead of Countel for the Prisoner, to see that
nothing be urged against him contrary to Law and right; Co. 3. Inst. f. 29.
nay, any Learned Man that is present, may inform the Court, for the benefit
of the Prisoner, of any thing that may make the proceedings erroneous.

4. The Jadges ought not to deliver their opinions before hand of any Criminal
cause, that may come before them judicially, to the end that The Trial may be
more indifferent, seeing the safety of the Prisoner consists in the
indifferency of the Court: Co. 3. Inss. 29.
And how can they be indifferent, who have delivered their opinions before hand
without hearing of the party, when a small addition or substraction may alter
the Case?

5. Judges ought in giving Sentence, especially in ambiguous Cases, Co. Lib 9.
Dowmans Case 13. a.
to avoid precipitation, because ad poenitentiam properat cito qui judicat.
Festinatio Justitiae noverca.

Touching Temerity or Hastiness, take these foreign Authors:

Temeritas est, damnare quod nescias, says Seneca.

Temeritate omnis actio vacare debet; Ciccro 1. Offic. Nihil teme^itate
turpius; Id. d^ Natura. Nihil a gravitate Sapientis temeritate disiunctius. 4.
Academ.

Deliberabo; Lex vult nihil temere fieri: says Seneca lib. 2. Controv. 11.

Hitherto of the Persons that are conversant in Judgment touching public
Crimes, or offenses.

7. Of the Matters of Judgments Criminal; and how they are brought to a
judicial Decision.
The things or matters of public or criminal Judgments are Causes proceeding
from High treason, Felony, or other Misdemeanors.

Touching High treason and Felony, two things are to be observed.

1. In ancient time, every Treason was comprehended under the name of Felony
(but not e contra;) 2. E. 4.14.18. E. 4.10.23. Ass. Pl. 49.
and therefore in our ancient Books, by the Pardon of all felonies, High
treason, or Counterfeiting the Great Seal, and of the Kings Coin, etc. was
pardoned. But the Law now is, and of long time has been otherwise holden: And
therefore by the Law at this day under the word Felony, in all commissions,
etc. Co. Litt. 391. a.
are included Petit treason, Murder, Homicide, Burning of Houses, Burglary,
Robbery, Rape, etc. Chancemedley, Se defendendo, and Petit Larceny; but not
High treason, for it is not comprehended under the word Felony; and therefore
ought to be especially named, in the Kings Pardon or Charter.

2. That criminal, or public Causes are called Pleas of the Crown, Co. 2.
Inst. f. 22.
but they are not so called, as some have said, because the King Jure Coronae,
shall have the Suite and Common Pleas, because they be held by Common Persons,
for a Plea of the Crown may be holden betwixt Common Persons, as an Appeal of
Murder, Robbery, Rape, Mayhem, etc. and the King may be party to a Common Plea,
as a Quare impedit, and the like,

But now, how these criminal matters are brought to a judicial hearing, is the
question; It is answered, that they are brought by way of Accusation, and
Exception.

Accusation does proceed either by way of Appeal, 1. Of Accusations.
or by way of Indictment; and first of Appeals. Appeal.


Appeal, Appellum, comes of the French word Appeller that signifies to
accuse, Co. Litt. 123. b. 126. b.
or to appeal, or appeach. An Appeal is therefore an Accusation of one upon
another, with a purpose to attaint him of Felony, by words ordained for it.

Now Appeals are of three sorts: Co. Litt. 287. b.


1. Of wrong to his Successor, whose heir he is, and that is only of Death,
which is of two sorts, of Murder, and of Manslaughter; but of Chancemedley, no
Appeal does lie.

As touching Appeal of Murder this Quaere is put.

Qu. Whether Trial of Murder by Appeal ought to be brought in the County, where
the fact was committed?

Resp. It is adjudged, that in an Appeal of Murder, the writ shall abate if it
be not brought in the County, where the fact was committed; for it is against a
fundamental Rule of Law, that a Trial of murder by Appeal, or otherwise, Cro.
3. part. Sontley, v. Price 247.
shall be out of the County where it is perpetrated: And for this cause, it was
doubted at the Common Law, where a stroke were given in one County, and death
ensued in another, how it should be tried? And to avoid this doubt the Stat. of
2. E. 6. was made.

But it always was clear, that a fact in one County ought not to be tried in
another.

Note, the Stat. of 26. H. 8. c. 6. allows that Indictments may be in County's
next adjoining; but there is not any mention of Appeals; and for this reason
Certioraries have been granted, to remove Indictments out of the Grand Sessions
in Wales.

2. Of wrong to the Husband, and is by the Wife only of the death of her
Husband to be prosecuted: Co. Litt. 33. b.
Touching this kind of Appeal I propose these Queries, with Resolutions on them.

Qu. 1. Whether a Wife de facto, shall have an Appeal?

Resp. Some do hold, and so do I, that a Wife de facto, shall have an Appeal of
the death of her Husband, but only she that is Wife de jure in favorem vitae;
and that there ne unques accoupse en loyal Matrimony, shall be taken de jure
strictly.

Qu. 2. Whether the Wife can have an Appeal, although she cannot have a Writ of
Dower?

Resp. The Wife shall have an Appeal, Co. Litt. 33. b.
where she cannot have a Writ of Dower, as if she Elope, etc. she is barred of
her Dower, but not of her Appeal; West. 2. c. 34. Co. Litt. 33. b. 37. a. Co.
3. Inst. f. 215 35. H. 6.63.
and the reason is, for that the Stat. barreth her of her Dower, but not of her
Appeal.

So if the Husband be attainted of Treason, or Petit treason, his Wife shall
not be endowed; and yet if any do kill him, the Wife shall have an Appeal; for
notwithstanding the Attainder he remained her Husband.

Qu. 3. Whether she ought to be sole and unmarried, that brings an Appeal of
her Husbands Death?

Resp. It is requisite, that she be sole and unmarried, (...) The Woins Law. b.
5. ct. 1.
that makes this Appeal; for if she marry again, her Appeal is gone, though the
new married Husband be dead within the year and day, after his death that was
slain.

Qu. 4. Whether the taking of a second Husband after Judgment, and before
Execution, can hinder the Execution of the Judgment?

Resp. Not only a Widow, which has an Appeal hanging, abateth her Appeal, and
loses it force, by new Marriage; but also if after Judgment and before
Execution, sma H. 4.41.
she take an Husband, she loses the Execution of the Judgment.

Qu. 5 What is the true reason, why a Woman has an Appeal de morte Viri?

Resp. The reason wherefore this Action is given to a Widow, is not as Glanvil
makes it, Quia una caro est vir and uxor; for then the Baron might have an
Appeal de morte uxoris, The Woman's Lawer lib.
which is never granted, but her heir shall have it: But the true reason why a
Woman has the Appeal de morte Viri, is because by his death she is thought
less able to live and maintain her self, and that therefore when she takes
another Husband, cessante causa, ceffat effectus; and her Appeal is gone, as la
Widows Quarentine is determined, when she is once remarried.

3. 1. Robbery.
Of wrong done to the Appellants themselves, as Robbery, Rape, and Maihem.

If in an Appeal of Robbery, Co. 3. Inst. f. 227.
the Plaintiff omit any of the goods stolen, they are forfeit to the King, for
the favor, which the Law persumeth the Plaintiff bears to the Felon: and for
that he cannot have restitution for more then is in his Appeal.

If the Jury find in an Appeal of Robbery for goods, 2. E. 3. Cor. 367, and 368.
that the Defendant found them in the Highway, in this case the Plaintiff for
his false Appeal, seeking the blood of the Innocent, shall forfeit his goods to
the King.

If any Virgin, 2. Rape.
Widow or single Woman be ravished, she her self may sue an Appeal of Rape,
prosecute the Felon to death, and the Kings Pardon cannot aid him.

But if a Feme Covert be ravished, she cannot have an Appeal without her
Husband, as appears 8. H. 4.21. If a Feme Covert be ravished, and consent to
the Ravisher, the Husband alone may have the Appeal, 11. H. 4.13.
and this by the Stat. of 6. R. 2. c. 6. And the Husband that this Statute
speaks of, which may sue the Appeal, must be a lawful Husband, in Right and
possession; for He unques accouple en loyal Matrimony, is a good Plea against
him.

An Appeal of Maihem was brought by one Milles. 3. Maihem.
and the Maihem was assigned in his shoulder; and the Defendant demanded the
view, and it was said, that he should not have it, because it was done de son
tort demesue: 21. H. 7.23. b.
also it was said, that Surgeons may heal and cure him, and although he shall
be tried by Inspection of the Court, or by Surgeons, it was held be it one
way or other, it is peremptory for him, etc.

It was held by all the Justices of the Kings Bench, 21. H. 7.40. a.
that in an Appeal of Maihem, if the Defendant pray that the Maihem may be
examined; if the Justices or Surveyors which they require, be in doubt whether
it be a Maihem or not, the Judges may refuse the examination, and compel the
Party to put it upon the Country.

Thus much of wrong done to the Appellants themselves.

I shall conclude this Learning touching Appeals with these Queries.

Qu. 1. Whether all Appeals ought to be sued in proper Person?

Resp. It is answered, that all Appeals are to be sued in proper Person, and
not by Attorney, 21. E. 4.72, and 73.
as Appeal of Maihem must be in proper Person. A Woman, which was Grossement
euseint, The Woman's Lawer lib. 5. sect. 2.
sued this Appeal; and the Defendant was attainted, the Woman's Appearance was
recorded for the whole Term; and yet by the better opinion, she might not pray
Execution by her Council, but ought to come in proper person: therefore one of
the Judges did ride to Islington to her, to see if she were alive, and desired
Execution, which she required, and the Defendant had Judgment.

Qu. 2. Whether an Appeal may be commenced more then one way?

Resp. It is answered, that Appeals are commenced two ways, either by Writ, or
by Bill.

1. By Writ, when a Writ is purchased out of the Chancery by one Man, against
another, commanding him that he shall appeal a third Man of some felony, or
other offense by him committed, and to find Pledges, that he shall do this with
effect, and this Writ is to be delivered to the Sheriff to be recorded.

2. By Bill, when a Man of himself gives his Accusation of another Man in
Writing to the Sheriff, or Coroner, and takes upon himself the burden of
appealing him that is named in the said Writing.

And note, that there is a diversity worthy of observation, betwixt an Appeal
by Bill, and by Writ: for in the Appeal by Original Writ both principals and
accessories, Co. 2. Inst. f. 183.
are generally charged alike, without any distinction, who be principals, and
who be accessories: but otherwise in the Appeal by Bill.

Thus much of the Accusation by way of Appeal. I proceed now to speak of the
other kind of Accusation; viz. by Indictment.

Indictment comes of the French word Enditer, Indictment Co. Litt. f. 126. b.
and signifies in Law an Accusation found by an Enquest of 12 Men, or more
upon their Oaths, and the Accusation, in Latin is called Indictamentum. And as
the Appeal is ever the Suite of the Party, so the Indictment is always the
Suite of the King, and as it were his Declaration.

For the clearer understanding of Indictments, take these following Rules.

That there be words so appropriated to offenses criminal, Reg. 1.
that they cannot be Legally by any other words, or Periphrasis.

The word Rapuit, Rape.
in an Indictment of Rape, must be used, for carnaliter cognovit eam, or the
like will not serve.

Co. Lit. 124. a. Co. 2. Inst. 180. Cro. 2. part. Fitzwilliams Case.

An Indictment, Murder.
Quod felonice, and ex malitia sua praecogitata occidit, such a one without
saying, Murdravit, is no Indictment for Murder, although these words
Tantamount. Cro. 3. part. Fitzwilliams Case Co. l. 4. Brooks Case 39. b. 8. E.
6. Dyer 69. a. 304. b.

No Indictment can be of High treason, High treason.
without this word (proditorie) Co. 3. Inst. f. 15, and 4.

In an Indictment of Maihem (Maihemavit) cannot be expressed by any word,
Maybem.
as mutilavit, truncavit, or the like, Co. Litt. 126. b.

The word Felonice, Felony.
must be used in all Indictments of Felony, and cannot be expressed by any
other word. Co. Litt. 391. a.

False Latin shall not quash an Indictment, if the word be sensible. Reg. 2.
Co. leb. 5. Lowes Case.

It is moved in Arrest of Judgment, that an Indictment was not good, being
fecerunt, Cro. (...) part. Cholme leges Case.
whereas it was found only Billa vera against one; sed non allocatur: Because
it was exhibited against two, and it is but false Latin.

Misrecital of a Statute, Reg. 3.
being fatal in Indictments, the sure way is to draw the Indictment with
conclusion contra formam Statati, and with no Recital of the Act. Co. l. 4. 48.
a.

Every Indictment ought to have the Addition of the Party indicted, Reg. 4.
and his place of Abode. Cro. 2. part. Reads Case, and Johnsons Case, 610.

In all Cases of death, the word percussit, Reg. 5.
ought to be used, except in case of poisoning. Co. lib. 5. Longs Case.

Where a Man indicted, is not convicted, Reg. 6.
or acquitted, he may be arraigned upon a new Indictment. Cro. 3. part.:
Withipools Case.

Where the substance of the Indictment, Reg. 7. Co. Litt. f. 282. a. lib. 9.
Mackaleyes Case.
no matter for circumstances: As if A. be indicted of murder, viz. that he of
malice prepensed killed IS: A. pleads, that he is not guilty modo and forma;
yet the Jury may find him guilty of Manslaughter, without malice prepensed,
because the killing of IS. is the matter, and malice prepensed is but a
circumstance.

From Accusation (both by way of Appeal and Indictment) which is as it were the
Declaration. I proceed to the Pleas of the Parties accused, which are
denominated exceptions.

Now, the Pleas or Exceptions in Indictments or Appeals, are these.

Anterfoitz attaint d'un auter offense, Auterfoitz Acquit, Auterfoitz convict
de mesme le Felony devant Judgment, Auterfoitz convict d'un auter Felony, and
auterfoitz attaint de mesme le offense.

Of these briefly in order.

1. Auterfoitz attaint d'un auter Offense.
It is a sore saying, which some Men have to plead for themselves, viz. That
they are already condemned to be hanged, and ask Judgment, whether during the
attainder, they should answer to the felony, whereof they are condemned, or to
any other: And this plea serves where the Party condemned has already
forfeited, as much as he can forfeit; so that it is to no purpose to travel him
any further. But in some special cases, when there is some end of it, a Man
already condemned, may be arraigned again.

As if a Man attainted of felony, Co. 3. Inst. f. 213.
were guilty of Treason also, at the time of the felony committed, he may now
be put to answer the Treason, notwithstanding his Attainder of felony, because
the King thereby was entitled to have the forfeiture of all his Lands, of
whomsoever they were holden. 1. H. 6.5. Otherwise it is, if the Treason were
committed after the Felony; or at the least, if it were after the Attainder had
of the felony, for then the Title vested in the Seigniours, before the Kings
Title, might not be devised by matter accruing ex post facto: but if a Man be
attainted of Treason, he cannot be after attainted of a former Treason. v. Cro.
2. part. Sr Walter Rawleighs Case: 495.

But the Queries may be,

Qu. 1. Whether in diverse Appeals of Robbery against one Person, he shall be
attaint at every one of their Suits?

Resp. It is answered, The Woman's Lawyer lib. 5: sect. 13:
that if diverse Men have diverse Appeals of Robbery against one, to the end that
every Man may have again his goods, were of he was robbed, by making fresh
Suit, he shall be attaint at every one of their Suits.

Qu. 2. Whether an Appeal of Robbery does lie for a Robbery done before the
felony, of which the Party was attainted?

Resp. It is answered, that the Party may have his Appeal of Robbery, Co. 3.
Inst. f. 213.
for a Robbery done before the felony, whereof he was attainted; because in the
Appeal he is to have Restitution of his goods, besides Judgment of death.

Qu. 3. Whether a Man attainted of Petit Larceny, can be after attainted of
Felony?

Resp. It is answered, If a Man be attainted of Petit Larceny, Ibid.
he may be attainted of felony, for the which he shall have Judgment of death,
because it is an higher offense, and is to have another Judgment.

Qu. 4. Whether a Man attainted of felony* and pardoned, shall answer at the
Kings Suit, to other felonies committed before, and whereof he was not indicted
at the time of the Attainder?

Resp It is answered, that per aliquos videtur quod ita, as well as at the Suit
of the Party in an Appeal, yet some held otherwise, 10. H. 4. That a Man can
die but once at the Suit of the King, and he that is pardoned, is as a New Man,
all Judgments, as against the King, being determined.

But note, If a Man be adjudged to his Penance of Pain, Dyer 14. Eliz. 308.
Cobhams Case.
Fort, and Dure; yet he may be impeached for any former felony, because the
Judgment is not given for the felony, but for his Contumacy.

2. Auterfoitz acquit.
This Plea the Common Law does allow, because it commands, that a Man's life
should not be put in Jeopardy twice for one, and the same offense. But then the
Acquital must be of the very same offense, or else his Plea is to no purpose:
Therefore if two Men be indicted of felony as principals, and afterward by
another Indictment, it is found, that one of them did the felony, and the other
did feloniously receive him, after the felony committed; he that is secondarily
indicted, and arraigned as accessory, shall not be discharged, by pleading
arraignment, and acquital upon the first Indictment, for the offense is not
supposed the same, and one, but committed at diverse days, 27. Ass. Pl. 10. And
this for Accessaries after the felony: But when felony is done by force of
Commanding, and procurement of another, he that shall be arraigned as
Accessory, may plead that he was acquit, etc. though it were as principal, and
the offenses were at diverse days; for vulnus, praeceptum and factum, sunt
quasi unum factum.

Note, in an Indictment or Appeal of death, Co. 3. Inst. f. 213, and 214.
if it be found that he killed him in his own defense, he is acquitted of the
felony for ever.

3. Auterfoitz convict de mesme le felony devant Judgment.
If a Man commit murder, and be indicted, Co. Lib. 4. Holecrofts case.
convict, or acquitted of Manslaughter, he shall never answer to any other
Indictment, of the same death, for all is one; and the same felony for the same
death.

Wetherel brought an Appeal against Darby of murder, Co. lib. 4. fol. 40. a.
the Defendant pleaded Nan culpable, and was found guilty of Manslaughter, and
had his Clergy; afterward he was indicted of murder, and upon it arraigned at
the Kings Suit, and he pleaded the former conviction in the Appeal at the
Parties Suite, and it was adjudged a good Bar, ad thereupon discharged, for
this was a good Bar at the Common Law, and restrained by no Statute, and the
reason is, because the Life of Man shall not be put twice in Jeopardy for the
same offense.

4. Auterfoitz convict d'un auter felony.
Before the Statutes of Qu. Eliz. c. 4. and 18. Eliz. c. 6. If a Man had
committed diverse felonies, if he had been indicted of the last, and had the
benefit of his Clergy, he could not have been impeached for any of the former
felonies; albeit for the same he could not have had his Clergy: by the Act it
is provided, that notwithstanding the allowance of such Clergy, he may be
impeached for any former offense, for which he could not have had his Clergy.

5, and last, Auterfoitz attaint de mesme le offense.
Auterfoitz attaint of the same felony, was a good Plea, Co. 3. Inst. 213.
as well in an Indictment, as in an Appeal at the Common Law: But by the Stat.
of 3. H. 7. c. 1. in an Appeal of death, at the Suit of the Party, auterfoitz
attaint de mesme le mort, is no Plea at this day: But in case of an Indictment
of death at the Suit of the King; auterfoitz attaint de mesme le mort in Appeal
is a good Plea.

Auterfoitz attaint de murder, is a good Plea to an Indictment, Co. 3. Inst. f.
213.
etc. of Petit treason of the same death; for in effect it has the same
Judgment, and the self same forfeiture.

So likewise a Man may be attainted of Manslaughter, it is a good bar to an
Indictment of murder of the same death, and e converso.

Thus much of matters Judicial in criminal offenses, I go on now (according to
our first proposed Method) to the Acts Judicial.

8. Of Judicial Acts, relating to publik Crimes.
Touching these Judicial Acts, there are worthy of consideration these
particulars.

The manner how Causes criminal are brought to Trial. 2. The Judgment or
Sentence upon that Trial or Arraignment. 3. The Execution of that Sentence. 4.
The means whereby the Judgment or Execution may be escaped, or delayed.

No Man is said to be arraigned, 1. The manner of Arraigning a delinlinquent.
Co. Litt. 263. a.
but merely at the Suit of the King, upon an Indictment found against him, or
other Record, wherewith he is charged. And there the Arraignment of the
Prisoner is to take order, that he appear, and for the certainty of the Person,
to hold up his hand, and to plead a sufficient plea to the Indictment, or other
Record; whereupon they which follow for the Ring may orderly proceed.

If the party accused of Treason or Felony, etc. do at his Arraignment before
the Judge deny the offense; or as we say, plead Notguilty, then shall he be
tried by a Jury of 12 Men, dwelling nigh to the Vill, where th offense was
committed, such Men as to the Party accused be nothing allied, to certify the
Judge upon the truth of the fact: which at their appearance, the Party
arraigned may challenge peremptorily upon his own dislike, without showing any
cause, in favorem vitae, the number of twenty in murder, and other Felony: And
in case of High treason, Petit treason, Co. Litt. 156. b Co 3. Inst. f. 227 and
228.
and Misprision of treason, he may challenge to the number of 35: And if he
challenge peremptorily above 35 in case of Treason, or Petit treason, he
forfeiteth his goods, and Judgment of pain, fort and dure shall be given
against him, as one that refuses the Trial of Law, by challenging 3 full
Juries.

Otherwise in case of Felony, for no Law gives forfeiture for challenging
above twenty; but the Court is to overruled the Challenge.

But note, Co. Litt. 156. b.
that in case of Treason or Felony, the Party arraigned may challenge for just
cause, as many as he can.

2. But if the Party upon his Arraignment, in case of Felony, refuse to answer,
according to Law, or say nothing, he shall not be Judged to be hanged, Co.
Litt. 391. a. Co. 3. Inst. 14, and 217.
but for his contempt, he shall undergo pain, fort and dure, which makes no
Attainder for the felony, nor forfeiture of his Lands, nor corruption of Blood:
Otherwise in case of High treason; for if the Party refuse to answer according
to Law, or say nothing, he shall have such Judgment by Attainder, as if he had
been convicted by Verdict or Confession.

3. Co. Litt. 391. a.
If the Party arraigned be found Guilty by Verdict or Confession, then he is
said to be convicted, which is before he has Judgment or Sentence; and
thereupon he does forfeit his goods and Chattels.

But note, that the begging of the goods or Estate of the Delinquent, indicted
of any Treason, Felony or other offense, before he be convicted and attainted
is utterly unlawful, Co. 2. Inst. 43. Co. 3. Inst. 1^7 and 229. Co 3. Inst.
229.
because before Conviction and Attainder nothing is forfeited to the King, nor
granted by him.

And besides it either makes the Prosecution more violent and undue, then quiet
and equal proceeding of Law and Justice would permit; or else by under hand
Commission and agreement, hinder the due course of Justice, for examplary
punishment of the offender.

Note further, that before Indictment, the goods or other things, 2. Of the
Judgment or Sentence pronounced.
of any criminal cannot be searched, Inventoried, or in any sort seized, nor
after Indictment seized and removed, or taken away, before Conviction, or
Attainder.

Thus much of the manner touching the Arraignment of a Delinquent.

As Soon as Judgment, or Sentence is pronounced by the Judge, the Party
arraigned is said to be attainted, and mort en Lev: But though the Delinquent
by the Attainder be a dead Person in Law, Co. 2. Inst. f. 215, 213.
yet maugre the Attainder, his Body may at the Suit of a Subject be taken in
execution, upon a Judgment or Stat. etc. Cro. 1. part. Og^^ll, v. Paston. Cro.
1. part. Trussells Case.
And he may be executed for Treason, or felony, notwithstanding such Execution
had against him.

As to Attainder, take these Queries, together with Solutions.

Qu. 1. Whether there be a diversity betwixt an Attainder and an Entry into
Religion?

Resp. There is a great difference between an Attainder of treason or felony,
and an Entry into Religion; for he that is attainted of treason or felony, Co.
3. Inst. f. 215.
has capacity, and may purchase Lands to him and his Heirs; but so cannot he
that is entered into Religion.

Qu. 2. When a felony is perpetrated, whether there be a Discrimination in Law
betwixt purchasing of Lands before, and after Attainder?

Resp. If a Man commit felony, and after purchase Land, and then is attainted,
he has capacity to purchase, but not to hold it, for in that case the Lord of
the fee shall have the Escheat: Co. Litt. f. 2. b.
But if a Man attainted of felony purchase Lands, in this case the King shall
have it by his prerogative, and not the Lord of the fee; for a Man attainted
has no capacity to purchase, but only for the benefit of the King.

Qu. 3. Whether a Person attainted after a Pardon, can have an Action of
Battery, etc. committed before the Pardon?

Resp. If a Person be beaten, Co. 3. Inst. 215.
or maimed, or a Woman attainted, be ravished, after Pardon, they shall have an
Action of Battery, Appeal of Maime, or Rape.

It is to be known, Co. Litt. 390. b. Perkins ss. 27.
that there be two manner of Attainders; the one after appearance, and that in
3 manners: by Confession, by Battle or by Verdict, the other upon Process to
be outlawed, which is an Attainder in Law: But upon every one of these Judgment
ought to be given, otherwise it shall not be said an Attainder.

Now, as upon conviction a Delinquent forfeiteth his good and Chattels; so upon
Attainder, that is by Judgment given, his Lands and Tenements are forfeited:
But touching the forfeiture of Lands, there is a diversity betwixt an Attainder
of felony, by outlawry upon an Appeal, and upon an Indictment; for in the case
of an Appeal of death or other felony, Co. Litt. 390. b, and 13. a, b.
Process being awarded against the Defendant, and hanging the Process the
Defenfendant conveyeth away the Land, and after is outlawed, the conveyance is
good, and shall defeat the Lord of his Escheat: But if a Man indicted of
felony, and hanging the Process against him, he conveyeth away the Land, and
and after is outlawed, the conveyance shall not in that case prevent the Lord
of his Escheat, For in the case of the Appeal, the Writ contains no time,
when the felony was committed; and therefore the Escheat can relate, but to the
outlawry pronounced; but the Indictment contriveth the time, when the felony
was committed; and therefore the Escheat upon the outlawry shall relate to that
time.

But note, that in case of an Indictment, there is also a difference observed;
for (as has been said) it shall refer to the time alleged in the Indictment
for avoiding of Estates, Charges and Encumbrances made by the Felon, Co. Litt.
390. b. Plowd. Com. f. 488. b.
after the perpetration; but for the mean profits of the Land, it shall relate
only to the Judgment, as well in the case of outlawry, as in other Cases.

There is a Question raised in the Case betwixt Gross and Gayer; viz. Whether
an Attainder to a praemunire, Cro. 3. part. f. 172 and 173.
shall have relation to the offense for the forfeiture of his Lands, or only to
the time of the Judgment pronounced: But the Judges did give no Resolution of
it, being a point of difficulty:

Note; Perkins sect. 29.
All the Attainders, as to Goods and Chattels, shall have relation but unto the
Judgment given; so that a gift, etc. made of such Goods, by a Felon before the
Judgment, is good.

Touching Alienations by a Criminal, the Civil Law says thus:

Post contractum capitale Crimen donationes factae non valent ex constitutione
Divorum Severi and Antonini. D. 39.5.15.


Si quis mortis causa donaverit, D. 39.6.7.
and poena fuerit capitis affectus, removetur donatio ut imperfecta, quamvis
caeterae donationes fine suspitione poenae factae valiant.

Having showed the Law touching Alienations, I shall present to the Reader's
view the things implied at this day, both in the Judgment of Treason and Felony.

1. In the Judgment of High Treason.
In the Judgment relating to Crimen laesae Majestatis, is implied at this day,

First, Co. 3. Inst. 211. Co. 3. Inst. 19. 26. H. 8. c. 13.33. H. 8. c. 20.5.
and 6. E. 6. c. 11.
the forfeiture of all the Traitors Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in Fee simple, or in Fee Tail, of whomsoever they be holden.

Also of Rent-Charges, Rents seck, Commons, Corodys, and other Hereditaments,
which are not holden, for in case of High treason, the Tenure is not material.

Also of Uses, 33. H. 8. c. 20.5. E. 6. c. 11. Co. lib. 7. Inglefields Case.
Conditions (unless inseparably knit to the Person) of Rights of Entry, of
Lands in the Right of the Wife, during the Coverture; of the profits of Land,
which the delinquent has for life, during his life; of trusts in Chattels
Reals; but not of Freehold. Cro. 2. part f. 512. Pl. 23. vid. Andersons
Reports* Inglefeilds Case, Co. lib. 12. f. 6. Dyer 288. b, and 289. a.

Note, that Rights of Actions, where the Entry is taken away, are not
forfeitable.

Secondly, his Wife to lose her Dower.

Thirdly he shall lose his Children, for they become base and ignoble.

Fourthly, he shall lose his Posterity, for his Blood is stained and corrupted,
and they cannot inherit to him, or any other Ancestor.

Fifthly, all his Goods and Chahttels are forfeited, etc. and reason is (says
Coke) his Body, Lands Coods, Posterity, etc. should be torn, pulled asunder,
and destroyed that intended to tear and destroy the Majesty of Government.

2: In Judgment of Felony.
A felon impliedly is punished in these particulars.

1. Co. Litt. f. 41. a. 392. a, b. Co. 3. Just. 47.
He does lose his Children, that they shall become base and ignoble.

2. He shall lose his Posterity, for his blood is stained and corrupted, that
they cannot inherit unto him, or any other Ancestor.

3. He shall forfeit all his Lands and Tenements, which he has in Fee, and
which he has in tail, during his life.

4. All his Goods and Chattels.

Note, that before the Stat. 1. E. 6 c. 2, and 5. E. 6. c. 11. the Wife of a
Person attainted of Misprision of treason, Murder or Felony, losed her Dower;
but since she is dowable by these Statutes. Hitherto of the Judgment or
Sentence it self.

In doing of Execution, 3. Execution of the Judgment pronounced.
both in Treason and Felony, two things are worthy of the Reader's notice.

Co. 3 Inst. f. 52.211.212.

1. That it be done by the right Officer, as the Sheriff or Marshal, for if any
other execute offenders it is felony.

Execution must be made by the Sheriff or Marshal, according to the Judgment*
for it is a maxim in the Law of England, Non alio modo puniatur quis quam
secundum quod se habeat Condemnatio.

Punishment may be avoided or escaped, 4. Of the means by which the Judgment or
Execution may be avoided in part, or in all.
in part or totally, either 1. By the means of Justice, as By Writ of Error, or
Falsifying the Attainder.
2. By the means of Mercy, as By the Kings Pardon, or By Restitution: of these
in their order.



2. Of Writs of Error.
If the Judgment be erroneous, both the Judgment and Execution thereupon and
all the former proceedings shall be reversed by Writ of Error: but if the the
former proceeding, and the Execution be erroneous, the Execution only shall be
reversed.

2. Of Falsifying Attainder.
To falsify in Legal understanding is to prove false, that is to avoid, Co. 3.
Inst. f. 210.
or to defeat the Attainder, in Latin Falsare, seu falsificare, falsum facere.

Wheresoever the Judgment is void, or coram non Judice, Co. 3. Inst. f. 231.
the party is not driven to his Writ of error, but may falfify the ^ttainder by
Plea, showing the special matter, which proves it void, or coram non Judice:
In which case the Party forfeiteth neither Lands, nor Goods.

If a Man commits Treason, or felony and is thereof attainted in due form of
Law, and after this Treason or Felony, is pardoned by a general Pardon, hereby
the foundation is self, viz. Treason or Felony, being by Authority of
Parliament is discharged and pardoned; Dyer 20. Eliz 135. Co. Lib. 6. f. 13 and
14 in Arundels Case.
the Attainder (being builded thereupon) cannot stand, but may be satisfied and
avoided by Plea, for he has no other Remedy by Writ of error, or otherwise.

If A, be indicted before the Coroner for the death of another, and that A,
fled for the same, hereby are all the Goods and Chattels of A, forfeited, Co.
^. Inst. f. 233.
which he had at the time of the Verdict given: and this cannot be falsified by
Traverse. If the Party be arraigned upon the same Indictment before Justices of
Gaol delivery, and is by Verdict acquitted of the Felony, and that he did not
fly for the same; yet he shall forfeit his Goods and Chattels: Co. Litt. 373. b.
But such a fugam fecit may be satisfied by matter in Law; for if the
Indictment be void or insufficient, there is no forfeiture.

3. Of Pardons.
Touching Pardons, these particulars are worthy of observation.

Pardon in Latin is called Perdonatio, 1. The Etymology of the word Pardon. Co.
3. Inst. f. 233.
which is derived a per and dono: per is a Preposition, and in the Saxon Tongue
for is orvor: as to forgive is thoroughly to remit, and fore-think is to repeat,
and forbear is to bear with patience.

A Pardon is a work of Mercy, whereby the King does remit, or forgive a
felonious offense, 2. The Description of a Pardon.
perpetrated against his Imperial Crown, either before Attainder, or
Conviction, or after.

A Pardon (says one) is twofold, 3. The Division of Pardons.
one ex gratia Regis, the other per Course del Ley, by Course of Law. Pardon ex
gratia, is that which the King in some special regard of the Person, or other
circumstance, shows or affords upon his prerogative Royal or power. Pardon
by course of Law, is that which the Law in equity affords for a light
offense, as Homicide casual, when one kills a Man having not such meaning.
West. Part. 2. Symb. Tit. Indict. sect. 46.

All Pardons of Treason or Felony (says Coke) are to be made by the King, and
in his Name only; and are either general, or special: All Pardons either
general or special, are either by Act of Parliament (whereof the Court in some
Cases shall take notice) or by the Charter of the King (which must always be
pleaded:) And these again are either absolute, or under Condition, Exception or
Qualification.

General Pardons are by Act of Parliament, Co. 3. Inst. f. 234.
and if any of these Pardons be general and absolute, the Court must take
notice of them, though the party plead it not, but would waive the same.

No particular Pardon, be it at the Coronation or any other, 4. The Allowance
of Pardons.
or any offense or offenses whatsoever, that is absolute without any condition,
etc. need any Writ of Allowance; but when the Pardon is conditional by force of
the Act of 10. Co. (...) Inst. f. 234, 235.
E. 3. c. 2. there a Writ of Allowance out of Chaucery, testifying that the
Condition is performed, viz. surety found according to that Act, may be had, or
the Party may plead the finding of Surety, etc. and vouch the Record.

Touching Allowance of Pardons, I shall mention two Cases out of Crokes Reports.

First, upon the 14 day of November 1640, Sir Matthew Men's, Cro. 3.
part-Mints his Case.
Knight of the Bath (who was convicted of Manslaughter, and had his Clergy and
his burning in the hand was respited: and now he pleaded his Pardon, whereby
the burning in the hand, and all other Felonies committed by him, and alia
malefacta, before 8th of July last were pardoned: and there was an especial
Clause, that he should not find Suretys for his behavior, and the Pardon bore
date 31 of October. last. And although there were many misdemeanors by him after
the said 8th of July, for which he deserved to be bound to the good behavior;
yet he had his Pardon allowed, and was discharged from finding Suretys, etc.

Secondly, Sir Henry Linley, who was indicted of Treason, Cro. 1. part.
Linley's Case.
being brought to the Bar, and demanded, whether he could say any thing why the
Court should not proceed upon the Indictment, which was before Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, he produced the Queens Pardon, without any Writ of Allowance
thereof. And Pope Second Clerk of the Crown, informed the Court, that the
Presidents were, that in case of Treason, it was used to allow of the Pardon;
but not in Felony; whereupon the Pardon was allowed.

Thus much of Pardons.

4. Of Restitutions.
All that is forfeited to the King by any Attainder, etc. he may restore by his
Charter, But if by the Attainder the Blood be corrupted, that must be restored
by Authority of Parliament: and the reason wherefore the King may by his
Charters pardon the Execution, and restore the Party or his Heirs to the Lands
forfeited by the Attainder, and remaining in the Crown, is for that no Person
has thereby any prejudice, but to make restitution of his Blood, the King
cannot do it, but by Act of Parliament, because it should be to the prejudice
of others.

And the Rules are,

Non poterit Rex gratiam facere cum injuria, and damno aliorum.

Quod alienum est, dare non potest Rex per suam gratiam.

Quacunqne forma Princeps alienat, salvum manet Jus tertii.

Aliorum honores, aliis damnorum occasionem fierinon oportet.

Note; Of Restitutions by Parliament, some be in Blood only, (that is to make
his Resort as heir in Blood to the Party attainted, and other his Ancestors,
and not to any Dignity, Inheritance of Lands, etc.) and this is Restitutio
(...), secundum quid, seu in partem. And some be general Restitutions, to
Blood, Honors, Dignities, Inheritance, and all that was lost by the Attainder;
Co. 3. Inst. 240.
and this is Restitutio in integrum; and Restituere (generally) nihil aliud
est, quam in pristinum statum reducere.

Thus now, concluding this slender Treatise with the Kings Mercy, that is
conveyed to his Subjects by Pardons and Restitutions, I humbly apply to our
most Gracious Sovereign the words, which Seneca did once intimate to the Roman
Emperor.

Occidere contra Legem nemo potest: servare nemo praeter te.

The Author has written somewhat (touching the Satutes of Hue and Cry, for the
better and more speedy apprehension of such as are guilty of Robberies) which
should have been placed before under the Title of Robbery; but it being by some
inadvertence there omitted, the Printer has thought it not much amiss to put it
at the end of this Discourse, by way of Appendix. And thus the Author treats
concerning the Statutes of Hue and Cry.
BY the Statutes of 13. E. 1. of Winton, c. 1.28. E. 3. c. 11; and 28.1. c. 17.
13. E. 1. c. 1.
the Country shall answer, if the Robbers be not taken.

By the Statute of 27. Eliz. c. 13. are enacted these particularities. 27.
Eliz: c. 13.


1. That the Inhabitants of a hundred shall be chargeable with the moiety,
where a fresh Suit shall cease.

2. That the Clerk of the Peace shall prosecute the Suit: which Suit commenced,
shall not cease upon the death, or remotion of the said Clerk of the Peace.

3. A Remedy for those, against whom the Recovery and Execution is had, to have
Contribution.

4. That there shall be no penalty, where any of the offenders be apprehended.

5. The Suit shall be commenced within one year next, after such perpetration,
or Robbery, or else the Person, or Persons robbed, shall not take any benefit
by virtue of any of the said former Laws or Statutes.

6. That the Party robbed must give notice and intelligence of the Robbery
committed unto some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village, or Hamlet near
unto the place, where any such Robbery shall be committed.

7. That the Party robbed shall not have any Action, upon any of the Statutes
aforesaid, except he shall first within twenty days next after such Action to
be brought, be examined upon his Corporal Oath before some Justice of Peace of
the County where the robbery was committed, whether he does know the Parties
that committed the Robbery, or any of them; and then shall become bound to
prosecute the offenders.

Having given a summary of these Statutes upon Hue and Cry, I shall present to
the Reader several Resolutions given at the Courts of Westminster, upon the
Statute of Winchester, and the Stat. of 27. Eliz. The former, you must kow,
gives penalty and Remedy, the latter shows how the Examination shall be, and in
what time before the Action brought.

1. Resolves on the Stat. of Winton.
A Robbery for which the hundred must answer by force of the Statute of Winton,
Co. Lib. 7. Sendills Case f. 6.
is to be done openly; so as the Country may take notice thereof themselves:
but a robbery done secretly in the House, the Country cannot take notice
thereof, for every one may keep his house as strong as he will at his peril;
for it was adjudged in Ashpoles Case, that the Party robbed needed not to give
notice thereof to the Country; for it may be the Party robbed was bound, or
Maimed, etc. so as he could not make Hue and Cry to give notice.

A Robbery was done in January presently after the Sunsetting, during day
light; Ibidem.
and it was adjudged, that the hundred shall answer for the same, for it was
convenient time for Men to travel, or to be about their Business.

A Robbery was done in the Morning, Co. Lib. 7. Milbornes Case.
ante lucem, the hundred shall not be charged.

It was held by Anderson, and all the Justices that whereas the Stat. of
Winchester speaks of Robberies done in the day, Cro. 1. part. Ridgeley, v.
Hundred of Warrington 70.
before night; yet if a Robbery be committed in the Morning before day, or in
the Evening after the day, in any time of the night, in which Men use commonly
to travel, that the hundred is answerable for it; but if it be at twelve or one
of the Clock in the night, at which time every one is intended to be in bed,
the hundred is not answerable for the Robbery.

The Jury found, Cro. 2. part. May, v. Inhabitants of Hundred de Morley 106.
that the Robbery was done post lucem ejusdem diei, and ante Solis ortum,
Anglice, After daybreak, and before Sunrising; and upon this the Court
advised, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, and a President shown
Pasch. 28. of Eliz. Rot. 130. where the Robbery was done post occasum Solis,
and per diurnum lumen; Anglice, day light, and there adjudged for the Plaintiff.

If an house be robbed in the day; and the Felons escape, Cro. 1. part.
Ano^ymus 753.
Hue and Cry being made, whether the hundred shall answer for that Robbery, by
the Stat. of Winton? Gaudy and Popham conceived, that the hundred shall not be
charged: For the Stat. of Winton extends only to Robberies done to the Person:
And was principally made for safeguard of travellors. But every one ought to
keep his own house at his peril; for it is his Castle, and no other ought to
meddle there: and therefore it is not reason, that any should be charged, if he
be robbed there.

Robbery done on a Sunday shall be chargeable to the Country. Cro. 2. part.
Wait, v. Hundred of Stoke f. 496.


2. Resolves on the Stat. of 27. Eliz.
By the Stat. of 27. Eliz. c. 13. none shall have Action upon the said Statute,
Co. Lib. 7. f. 6. Sendils Case.
except the Parties robbed, so soon as he may give notice of the same to any of
the Inhabitants of any Village, Town, or Hamlet, next to the place where the
Robbery was done, and if they in pursuit apprehend any of the offenders, that
will excuse the Town.

Action upon the Statute of Winton, Cro. 1. part. Greens case f. 142.
for that one Brook his Servant was robbed; and alleges that the Plaintiff
himself came before a Justice of Place, and was sworn according to the Stat. of
27. Eliz. And after Verdict, it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that the
Servant was to be sworn, and not the Master; and so was the opinion of the
Court: For the Servant might know the Persons, when the Servant was robbed, and
the Master was not in company: and the Intent of the Stat. is, that he that had
notice, shall be sworn, and thereupon Judgment was staid.

Action upon the Stat. of Winton, Cro. 3. part. Reymond, v. Hundred de Oking
37, and 38.
whereas one Palmer, the Plaintiffs Servant was robbed within the hundred of 68
pounds, by Persons unknown, and had made Hue and Cry, according to the Stat.
and one of the Thieves were taken, and the said Palmer had made oath before
such a Justice of Peace, of the said County next adjoining to the said hundred
within 20 days, before this Action brought, that he did not know any of the
Parties, who robbed him, that the said hundred had not made him any recompense.
And upon Not-guilty pleaded, and tried at the Bar this Term, and found for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this Action lies not,
because the Plaintiff himself was not sworn, that he knew not any of the
Parties, who did the Robbery; for it is not sufficient, that the Servant who
was robbed was sworn, for by the Statute of 27. Eliz. the Party who brings the
Action ought to make that Oath, and it was argued, that the Servant who was
robbed ought to have brought the Action, and then his Oath would have been
sufficient: But when the Master brings the Action, he himself ought to be
sworn, that he knew not any of the Robbers, otherwise he might not bring it;
and therefore the Action lies not. But it was resolved by the Court, that the
Action well lies for the Master, and that the Servants Oath was sufficient, for
it is properly in his notice, that he was robbed, and did not know any of the
Robbers, and the Master knows it not that he was robbed, or who were the
Persons, but by the report of his Servant; and it would be inconvenient, if the
Master should not bring the Action, but the Servant might release, or compound
or discontinue the Suit, and so the Master should have the loss by his
falsehood; therefore the Master shall bring the Action, and have his Servant,
who was robbed, be his witness: whereupon it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Action upon the Stat. of Hue and Cry, supposing that he was robbed in such a
High way, in divisis Hundredorum, Cro. 2. part. Foster, v. Inhitantes
Hundredorum de Spehar f. 675.
and that he gave notice thereof to the Inhabitants of the Hundred near to the
Place where he was robbed. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that this declaration is not good, because he does not
show, that the High way is within any Hundred. And in truth, it out to be given
to the Inhabitants of both Hundreds, and so be diverse Presidents that notice
was given in the other Hundred, to the Inhabitants of that hundred: Sed non
allocatur; wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Hue and Cry made in the next Vill adjoining, though it were in another County,
Cro. 3. part. Tutter, v. Inhabitants of Daccorar.
is good enough: for a Stranger cannot know the division of Countys.

Vide Cro. 3. part. Merrik. v. Hundred. de Rapesgate 379.

Action upon the Stat. Co. 2. part. Andrews, v. Hundred of Lewknour 187.
of Winton of Hue and Cry, and shows in his Count the said Statute, and that
such a day he was robbed of so much within that Hundred; and that he made Hue
and Cry: and shows according to the Statute of 27. Eliz. And that within 40
days before the Action brought, he was sworn before such a Justice of Peace,
that he was robbed of so much, and did not know any of the Felons; and that as
yet the Defendants had not taken any of the Felons, nor satify'd him contra
formam Stat. praedict. unde Actio accrevit. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it
was moved that this Declaration was not good, because the Action is founded
upon two Statutes, and both mentioned in the Declaration; yet he concludes,
contra formam Statuti praedicti, which is not good; and the Court thereupon
doubted, and appointed Presidents to be searched; and after diverse Presidents
of this Court, and the Common Bench shown unto them, wherein some were Contra
formam Stat. praedicti, and some Statutorum praedictorum: And the Court held
that the best form was Statuti praedicti. For the Action was grounded only
upon the Statute of Winton, which gives penalty, and remedy (the other shows
only how the Examination shall be, and in what time before the Action brought,
otherwise he shall not have the Action) and Statuti praedicti refers only to
the Stat. of Winton, which gives the Action therefore the best form to declare
is Contra formam Statuti praedicti.

Thus much of the Satutes touching Hue and C^y.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Accessories. IN what offenses Accessories may be, and in what not. 123 The
several sorts of Accessories. 124 Accessories by the Common Law what. 124, and
125 Accessories by Statute Law what. 125, 126 Where the Common Law, or Statute
Law makes a Felony, Accessories are still included. 126 Rules touching
Accessories. Id. Where an Accessory cannot be guilty of Petit-Treason, when the
principal of Felony. Id. Where the Accessory shall not be tried, if the
Principal has his Clergy, or be pardoned. 126, 127 Writing of Letters in
favor of a Felon will not make the Party an Accessory. 129 Instructing a Felon
to read will not make an Accessory. 129 Persuading Witnesses not to appear will
not make an Accessory. 129 Quaeries touching Accessories. 128, 129. etc.
Affrays. The derivation of the Word Affray, and the diversity betwixt it and
an Assault. 106 The punishment of an affray. 103 What persons are bound to part
Affraies. 103 The punishment of those, that refuse to part Affraies. 103, 104
Affraies inquirable in Leetes. 106
Appeals. The Description and Derivation of an Appeal. 136 Who may, and who may
not Appeal, accuse, etc. 121 Where the Wife shall have an Appeal of the death
of the Husband, and where not. 137, 138 Where the Wife shall have an Appeal;
and yet not be endowed, and e converso. Ibid. The true reason why the Wife has
an Appeal de Morte Viri. 138, 139 She ought to be Sole and unmarried, that
brings an Appeal. 138 The taking of a second Husband after Judgment, and before
Execution, hinders the Execution of the Judgment. 138 An Appeal ought to be
sued in proper Person. 140, 141 Appeals how many ways commenced. 141 A
Diversity betwixt an Appeal by Bill, and by Writ. Ib.
Approver. Who may, and who may not be an Approver. 123 His Description. Ib.
Where none can be an Approver upon an Appeal. 122 Where a Man appealed by an
Approver, and thereupon kept in prison, may be Bailed by good Sureties given.
122
Assemblies. Assemblies unlawful, how dangerous in former times. 110
Arraignment. Arraignment of a Prisoner what. 149 The manner of Arraigning of a
delinquent. 149
Attainder. Where a Man attainted shall be liable to Arrests, and Executions
for debt. 151, 152 A Diversity betwixt an Attainder, and an Entry into
Religion. 152 A diversity betwixt purchasing of Lands before, and after an
Attainder. Ib. A Person attainted after a Pardon, may have an Action of
Battery, etc. done before the Pardon granted. Ib. The several sorts of
Attainders. 153 A difference betwixt a Person attainted, and convicted. Ib.
Where upon an Attainder of Felony in an Appeal, the Defendant shall forfeit no
Lands, but those he had at the time of Outlawry pronounced, secus in an
Indictment. Ib. Attainders as to Chattels, shall relate but unto the Judgment
pronounced. 154

Battery, What it is. 50 Who may chastise and correct in a moderate manner. Ib.
Where a Man may return blows in his own defense, or in the defense of another.
51 Where a Man may not return or give any blows in his own defense. Id.
Bribery. Bribery what. 94 It may be committed, though no Suit depending in
foro contentioso. 94, 95 It may be committed by one, that is a Judicial
Officer, in the Ecclesiastical Court. 95 Difference betwixt it and Extortion. 97
Burglary. The Etymology, and definition of it. 64, 65 What shall be said an
entry into and breaking of an House, to make it Burglary. Ib. Where it shall be
Burglary, though but one does enter. Ib. Where a Man may commit Burglary,
though he breaks not the House. 65, 66 What shall be said a Mansion House,
the breaking whereof makes it Burglary. 66, 67 A Chamber of Innes of Court, or
Chancery is a Mansion House. 67 To break an House, to the intent to beat
another, not Burglary. 68 House breaking. 68, 69, 70
Burning of Houses. Its Description. 72 What shall be said Burning of Houses to
make make it Felony. 73 Where the Burning of an House, without an intent to do
it shall be Felony, and wheren ot. Ib. The Burning of a Man's own Houses is no
Felony. 73, 74

Causes Criminal. Why Causes Criminal are called Pleas of the Crown. 135, 136
How they are brought to a Judicial hearing. 136 Challenges to fight. 107
Challenges of Jurors. What number the Party may challenge, and what not. 156
Chance-medley, What it is. 47 One Trained Soldier hurting another by
mischance. 47 Where the killing of another by misfortune shall be murder, and
where not. 48 Where it is Homicide in a Physician, and where Covert Felony. 49
Clergy. In what particulars the benefit of Clergy is taken away at this day.
127 A Rule touching this Clergy. 128
Conviction. When a Man is said to be convicted. 151
Council. What advantages a Prisoner may take in case of Treason, or Felony to
have Council assigned him. 131 Council allowed in Appeals, but not in
Indictments; the reason of the diversity. 131, 132 A Prisoner may have Council
in matters of fact. 130, 131

Duels. They are against the Law of God, Nature, and the Laws of the Realm. 102
The punishment of Duellists, though no blood be shed. 103 What Duells lawful.
102, 103. Error. 157

Execution. Where it ought to be done by a right Officer. 156 Where it ought to
be according to the Judgment. Id. The means by which Execution may be avoided.
157
Extortion, What it is. 96 More odious then Robbery. 97

Felo de se. The Description of a Felo de se. 8 The reason why he forfeits
Goods. Ib. Where a Man shall be said Felo de se, and where not. 9 How Felo de
se shall be enquired of, where the Body cannot be found. 10 His Goods not
forfeited till found of Record. 9, 10 Where a Joyntenant becoming Felo de se,
shall forfeit but part, and where the whole. 10 A Debt owing to Felo de se upon
a bare Contract, is not forfeitable to the King. 11
Felony. A Pardon of all Felonies is no Pardon of Treason at this day. 135 The
extent of the word Felony. Ib. To break a Prison, where by the Felons may
escape, is Felony. 83 The begging of the Estate of a Delinquent before
conviction and Attainder, is illegal. 151 Where none may seize the Goods of any
Person before conviction. Ib. No Goods of an Offender ought to be fearched, or
Inventoried before Indictment, nor removed before conviction. Ib. Falsifying
Attainders. 157 Gifts. 95, 96

Homicide. The Etymology of the word Homicide. 2 Its right division. Ib. How
many sorts of Homicides there be. 3 What Homicides are Felony, and what not.
Ib. The Description of Homicide. 2 Homicide voluntary, what it contains. 3 Jus
criminis what. 1

Indictment. The signification and derivation of the word Indictment. 141, 142
The difference betwixt an Appeal and Indictment. 142 In Indictments words are
so appropriated to offenses, that they cannot be expressed by any other words.
Ibid. Rules touching Indictments. 142, 143

Judge. No man to be Judge in his own Cause. 50 Judges in criminal Causes
ought to deliver their opinion before hand. 134 The duty of Judges. 133, 134
Who Judges of Fact, and who of Law. 132, 133
Judgment criminal. The Persons considered in it. Assistants in it who. 130
Their duty. Ib. In Judgment of High Treason or Felony, what is employed. 155,
156
Jurors. The properties of Jurous. 132, 133

King. His Treasure the sinews of War. 96 Head and health of the Commonwealth.
1, 75, 87 Making War solely appertains to him. 82

Larceny. Larceny what. 55 Its twofold. 55, 56 What shall be said a felonious
taking, and what not. 56, 57 Whether an Infant unper the age of discretion can
commit Larceny. 57, 58 Where there must be a felonious taking, as well as a
felonious carrying to make a Larceny. 56 Where, and where not a Feme Covert may
be guilty of a Larceny. 58, 59 Where the Wife cannot steal the Goods of her
Husband. Ib. It may be committed of a thing that is delivered by Replevin. 59
What shall be said a felonious carrying away to make it a Larceny. 59, 60
Larceny cannot be committed of Personal Goods that savor of the Realty. Ibid.
Where it is Larceny to steal the sheets from the Dead. 61 Where a Man may steal
his own Goods. Ib.
Ligeance, It cannot be shaken off. 85 Lex Talionis. 53
Libels. Libel what it signifies. 107 Libelling, be it true or false, is
punishable by our Law. Ib. How a Man must demean himself, that finds a Libel.
106 A French Libel punishable. 107 A Libel punishable by Indictment. Ib.
Laws. The Greek Law touching a Child's stealing of Goods. 58 What the Civil is
touching these following particulars,. Self-Defence. 9 A Man's Intention. 9 44
Poisoning. 13 Malice. 14 A Woman pregnant. 15 Physicians and Surgeons. 49 A
Man's Limbs. 52 Life. 8 Theft. 55 An Infants stealing. 58 Death. 61 A Man
stealing his own Goods. 61, 62 Robbery. 64 Sacrilege. 66, 67 Pirates. 71 Burning
of Houses. 74, 75 Treason. 78 Calculation. 80, 81 Authority of making War. 82
Ligeance. 85 Fausonnery. 86 Madmen. 88 The Custom of places. 90 Treasure. 93
Robbing of Treasure. 94 Gifts and Bribery. 95 96 Rape. 54 Riots, etc. 103
Force. 102 Libels. 107 Punishments. 114, 117 Personal offenses. 118, 119
Doubtful Interpretations. 119 Circumstances. 120 Principal and Accessory. 128
Alienations. 154
Life. No Man has power over his own Life, nor members. 8, 52

Misprisions. The Derivation of the word, and its Derivation. 91 It is twofold.
91, 92 The punishment of Misprision of Treason. 93 Every Treason and felony
includes in it a Misprision. 193 Where words without overt Act are as
punishable as Misprision of Treason. 92
Murder. Its Derivation. 8 How divided. Ib. Murder how heretofore, how at this
day defined. 11 Where a mistake in the principal shall make the Accessory
guilty of murder, and where not. 12 What Persons are capable of being murdered.
11 Poisoning the worst of Murders. 13 Whether an Infant within the age of 9
years can be guilty of Murder. 13, 14 Where there ought to be a continued
malice to make it murder, and where not. 14, 15 Where it is no Murder to kill an
Infant en ventre de sa mere. 15 Murder in a Mother to conceal the death of her
Bastard-Child. 16 Stabbing another, where wilful murder. Ib. What murders
tryable before the Constable and Marshal. 32, 33 What Officers it is murder to
kill. 36
Malice. Where to kill another without provocation, is malice implied. 33, 34
How many kinds there be of malice impli'd. Ib.
Mayhem. The signification, and derivation of the word Mayhem. 51 In what cases
a Mayhem may be done, and what not. 51 Judges may use the help of Surgeons, in
point of a Mayhem. 51, 52 Mayhem how termed by the Canonists. 51 Where a Man
was indicted for mayming himself. Ib. The ancient punishment for him that
maimed another. 52 Maliciously to cut the nose, is felony at this day. 51 The
degree of this offense, called mayhem. 53

Offenses. An offense, or delict what. 1 How many ways offenses are committed.
Ib. What offenses despoil Men of their property. 54 Offenses, that injure Man's
Body or members. 50 Offenses, relating to life. 2

Petit Treason, What it is. 3 How many ways it happens. 3, 4 What may be said
Petit Treason in a Servant. 4 Execution of a Servants Act, has a retrospection
to the Original cause. Ib. What may be said Petit Treason in a Wife. 5
Parricide whether Petit Treason, or not. 6, 7
Poison. How many ways a Man may be poisoned. 35, 36
Piracy. The Etymology of the word Pirat. 70, 71 Piracy where anciently
Treason, where not. Ibid. It alters not property unless it be in Market overt.
Ib. Where there shall be no corruption of blood in case of piracy. 71, 72 Where
a Pardon of all felonies shall not extend to Piracy. Ib.
Punishment. Its definition. 113 The true end thereof. 114 Its several sorts in
our Law, in the Jewish, and Roman Laws. 114, 115, 116, 117 Circumstances
observable, relating to punishments. 120
Principals. In Treason all are principals. 123 Rules touching principals. Ib.
Where a Man may be principal, though he be not present at the Act. Ib. Where a
Man may be principal as well before as after, though he be absent at the doing
of the fact. 124 Where the being present and abetting an offense makes all
principals, though the offense be personal. Ibid. Where the Attainder of an
Accessory, depends upon the Attainder of the principal. 128
Pain, Fort, and Dure. In what cases a Man that stands mute, shall have
Judgment of Pain, Fort, and Dure, and in what not. 150 Where the Judgment of
Pain, Fort, and Dure, shall be no Plea to a former felony. 146
Pardon. The Description and Etymology of it. 158, 159 How many sorts of
Pardons there be. Ib. Where a Writ of Allowance is necessary to a Pardon, and
where not. Ib. 160

Rape, etc. 83, 84 Riots. The Description of a Riots, and its derivation. 101
Stat. touching Riots. Ibid. What number of Persons may commit a Riot, a Rout,
ad unlawful Assembly. 103
Robbery. Its definition. 60 The Difference betwixt a Robber, and a Cutpurse.
63 What shall be a taking in case of Robbery, and what shall be said a taking
from his Person. 63, 64, 65 The Thieves reception only may make a Robbery. 64
Routs. The description of a Rout. 98 The difference between a Levying of War,
and committing a great Rout, etc. 100, 101
Rumors. The punishment before the Conquest, and what since of those that are
authors of false Rumors. 110 They were heretofore very dangerous to our
Kingdom. Ib.

Se Defendendo. What Homicide se defendendo is. 44 Where a Man ought to give
back to prevent Homicide, and where not. 45, 46 Sacrilege. 68, 69, 70
Striking in the Kings Court. A diversity betwixt a stroke in, or before the
Courts of Justice, and the Kings Courts, where His Royal Person resideth. 99
Where to strike in Westminst. Hall, or the Kings Palace, is a great Misprision,
and the punishment of it. 97, 98

Theft. The Etymology of the word Furtum. 55 Its Definition. Ib. Forbidden by
the Law of Nature. Ib. The several sorts of Theft. Ib.
Treason. Its derivation, and how divided. 3 Violation of Royal Majesty, a most
abominable thing. 75, 76 To compass or imagine the death of the King, High
Treason. 76 What are sufficient overt Acts to prove the imagination of the
Kings death. Ib. 77 In every rebellion by Interpretation of Law, there is a
machination against the Life of the King. 77 A diversity betwixt Treason and
Felony. 78 Where words or Writing are sufficient overt Acts of Compassing the
Kings death. Ibid. Where words may make a Heretic, but not a Traitor. 80 No
words are Treason, unless made so by some particular Statute. Ib. No Treason at
this day, but what is made by the Stat. of 25 E. 3. Where to set a figure to
know how long the King shall live, or Reign, is no Treason. Ib. Where to
practice to depose the King, to imprison him, or to take him into their power,
shall be Treason. 76, 77 The compassing or imagining the death of the Queen, or
Prince, is High Treason. 81 Where slaying the Chancellor, etc. shall be High
Treason. Ib. Carnal knowledge of the Kings Consort, the Kings Eldest Sons Wife,
or of the Kings Eldest Daughter, Treason. Ib. What shall be said Levying of
Wartomake it Treason. 82, 83 To go in Warlike manner with a multitude to
assault a Privy Councellor at his House, is Treason. Ibid. The breaking of a
Prison, wherein Traitors be in Durance, and causing them to escape is High
Treason, though the Parties did not know there were any Traitors there. Ib.
There must be Levying of War de facto, to make it Treason. Ib. What shall be
said an adhering to the Kings Enemies to make a Treas. within the Stat. of 25.
E. 3. 83, 84 Where a conspiracy with a Foreign Prince, shall be Treason, and
where not. 84, 85 The aiding and succouring a Rebel beyond Seas, is no Treason.
Ibid. Who shall be said Enemies, and who Traitors. Ibid. To counterfeit the
Great-Seal or Money, is Treason. Ib. Forging the Kings Coin, without uttering
it, is High Treason. 85, 86 Bringing into the Realm counterfeit Coin, High
Treason. 87 By the Ancient Law a Madman might be guilty of High Treason. 88
Where a Non compos mentis cannot be guilty of High Treason at this day. Ib.
What Aliens may commit Treason. Ib. Where the killing of an Ambassador was
adjudged High Treason. 89 An Ambassador shall loose the Privileges of an
Ambassador, for committing High Treason. Ib. A Foreign Prince by residing here,
may commit Treason. 90, 91 The Judgment in Treason for Counterfeiting Money. 86

Verdict. The signification and derivation of the word. 133 Several kinds of
Verdicts. Ibid.


