THE CASE OF Sir WILLIAM PORTMAN, and JOHN SANDFORD, Esquire BURGESSES for the
Borough of TAVNTON.
THE said Borough is but a part of one of the Parishes of Taunton, to which
Three other Parishes lie contiguous, by Reason whereof the Inhabitants (being
more numerous than the Potwallers (the Name by which the Electors are known)
use to be the Occasion of Disturbances at the Poll: And therefore before, and
at the Election, Sir William Portman, and Mr. Sandford took what care they
could to prevent such Disturbances.

On Friday the 11th, of January, the Mayor (having made a place for himself,
and the Officers with Mr. Roe and Mr. Purchase for Sir William Portman, and Mr.
Sandford: And Mr. Baker and Mr. Wey for Mr. Trenchard, etc. to take the Poll,
and also a Bar to let in the Potwallers, and to keep out those who had no
Voices) proceeded quietly for some time; at length, after some Disturbances
begun, upon Mr. Trenchards desire the Mayor adjourned for an hour, and then
returned and continued the Poll peaceably, polling on both sides, till almost
night, and then adjourned till next morning, stayed two hours on the place, and
by open Proclamations, called for Mr. Trenchards Friends to Vote, but none
coming, shut up the Poll, and Proclaimed Sir William Portman and Mr. Sandford
to be the Burgesses.

As to the Complaint by the Petition concerning the Disturbance and Soldiers,
the Truth is.

That some Leading Men of Mr. Trenchard's party, that were dissatisfied with
this Election, and their Abettors, having invited Mr. Trenchard to stand; and
having not Votes enough to carry it for him, were the occasion of the
Disturbances; in this manner.

First within the Bar, by fighting without Sticks, and then without the Bar, by
provoking and railing Speeches, and by fighting with Sticks, and threatening the
Mayor and Gentlemen as they went home toward his House after the Adjournment,
that if Mr. Trenchard was not chosen, they would have the blood of some of
them. Which Disturbances they also repeated, after the Mayors return to the
Poll.

Also by untrue Allegations of pretended dangers, they dissuaded Mr. Trenchard
from returning to the Poll, or sending his Voters thither, both after the first
Adjournment and the next Morning, when all was quiet.

And by many other unfair practices; as before the Poll, by threatening to send
in people to get it for Mr. Trenchard, if not by fair means by force: And since
the Poll, by offering money to persuade people to come to London to be Witnesses
against Sir William and Mr. Sandford, of things they never knew; and by
threatening several poor people, to turn them out of work, only in case they
Voted for Sir William Portman and Mr. Sandford, which since they have done
accordingly.

As to the pretense of any thing done by Soldiers, the Truth is; about twelve
Inhabitants Potwallers of Taunton, who had taken up Arms for the Prince of
Orange in Colonel Lutterells Regiment, having left their Wives and Families in
Taunton, by leave from their Officers, came without their Arms, in peaceable
manner to the Election, and gave their Votes for Sir William Portman and Mr.
Sandford, as they had done, at other Elections.


