The CASE of the Contractors with the C'ZAR of MOSCOVY, for the Sole
Importation of Tobacco into his Dominions.
THEY were encouraged to enter into a Treaty with the Czar for a Free
Importation of Tobacco into his Dominions, by a BILL that was Depending in the
House of Commons for Enlarging the Trade to Russia, by an Easy Admission into
the Freedom of that Company; and they deferred the Concluding any Absolute
Agreement, till the BILL had passed that House, and had Deferred it till it had
Passed the House of Lords and the Royal Assent, but that the C'zar and his
Ministers, were then upon their Departure.

They thought a Thing of that Nature, so greatly and unquestionably
Advantageous to this Kingdom, and by which no Man's Property was Invaded
(because the BILL made no Alteration in their Charter, but only fixed the Fine
for Admission; which neither their Charter nor the Act of Parliament that
Confirmed it, takes any notice of) would not have met with any Opposition.

They paid the C'zar 12000 l. immediately upon Signing the Contract, and it
cost them above 1000 l. more in other Charges to obtain it; and this they did
before one half of the Sum was subscribed that was intended for a Stock
sufficient to Carry on the Trade. But when the BILL was opposed, all further
Subscriptions ceased; every body being sensible that without a Freedom of the
Russia Company, the Trade could not be Carried on to any Advantage; and unless
the Terms of Admission were very easy, those Persons that were but little
concerned in the Tobacco Contract, would not take their Freedom: And except
every Man concerned were Free, the Trade could not be driven: thus the whole
Burden of that Undertaking fell upon the Shoulders of Seventy or Eighty
Persons, who were the First Subscribers; and some of those upon the
forementioned Discouragements, do refuse to pay their Proportion of the 13000
l. or be any ways concerned in the Trade.

Nevertheless the rest thought it needful to send some Tobacco, and thereby
show their willingness to Comply with their part of the Contract, lest the
C'zar should take an Advantage by their Neglect, and so they might lose the
12000 l. paid Him, and all their other Charges; and the Nation the Advantage of
that Liberty which had been so long desired.

But the BILL not passing, and the Russia Company having power to seize any
Englishmens Ships and Goods that Trade to Russia without their License, they
could not send any Tobacco from hence directly for Archangel, the only Port of
Russia: Therefore they ordered about 110000 Pounds of Virginia Leaf (that were
first sent from London to Holland) to be sent from Holland thither. What more
they could get ready for that Season, which was about 180000 Pounds of Role and
Cut Tobacco, with Tobacco Pipes, Boxes, etc. they were forced to send from
hence by way of Narva, a Sweeds Port; which has proved very prejudicial to
them, because the Sweeds demand upon the Role 17, and upon the Cut 34, per
Cent. Custom, according to the true value: all which might have been saved, if
they had had Liberty to have sent it directly to Archangel.

Their Factors in Russia have sold part of the Tobacco that was sent them, and
write that in a few years a very considerable Quantity may be Vended there; but
being a New Thing, it will require Time and a great Charge, to put it into a
Right Method, and make it Diffusive throughout that Vast Empire.

They hope their Undertaking being of such National Advantage, and by which
they have at present so little Prospect of Profit to themselves, will meet with
all due Encouragement from the Public.

If they cannot obtain their Freedom of the Russia Company this Sessions, upon
Moderate Terms, they shall not be able to Comply with their Contract with the
C'zar, but must be forced to throw up their Patent, or dispose of it to the
Dutch on the best Terms they can; for the Russia Company will neither make use
of it themselves (tho the Contractors have proffered it them and a Large Sum of
Money, to accept of it) nor suffer others to do it, that would, except upon
such Conditions as cannot be Complied with.


