A Just and True REMONSTRANCE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MINES-ROYALL IN THE PRINCIPALITY
OF WALES, Presented By Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmor of the said Mines-Royall,
to his MAJESTY.

SHREWSBURY, Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

Most high and mighty Sovereign,
WHereas Your Majesty was graciously pleased not only to command the
employment of my Service in Your Highness Mines-Royall, occasioned by some
discourse of them at Enston-Rock, Your Majesty vouchsafing to honor that
place with your presence, but also to give your Majesty a true relation what
they were when I entered upon them, what they are since at present, and of what
hope for the future, if diligently pursued and cherisht by your Royal aspect:
In obedience whereunto, I do in all humility affirm, That the Mines at my
first entrance were drowned with water, and consequently not worth the working,
as by several certificates hereunto annexed appears, which did then much
disencourage my undertakings; but considering how deeply your Majesty's many
favors had engaged me, the meanest of your Subjects, I conceived my self
obliged to adventure upon the undermining of the adjacent Mountains, thereby to
make trial, whether those Mines (if once discovered at the surface of the
earth) would not prove richer in their deeper search; of which, having received
several opinions from the best Mineral-masters of our age, as Sir Francis
Godolphin, M. Alexander Roberts, M. Joseph Hexsteter, and M. Walter Barksby,
with diverse others well practiced in that way, encouraging me therein; I then
resolved to hazard my fortune on them, assuring my self that all Mines and
Minerals were to be discovered by some one or other, because originally created
for man's use, and Gods glory: and thus having settled my former irresolute
thoughts, I began with a cheerful heart to cut through five several
mountains, at their lowest level, which by the Art of Dialling appeared to be
some sixty, some eighty, and some an hundred fathoms perpendicular, and so
continued these battery-works four years, night and day, before my hopes could
give me any happy assurance that the Minerall-beds of these subterraneall
riches lay fast locked in those barren Rocks, until my charge grew so great,
that I became pitied of my friends, and insulted over by my enemies, which did
anew perplex my mind: yet when I considered that I was not born for my self,
but for the Service of God, your Majesty, and my Country, and that I had not
only that heavenly guider to direct me, but also your sacred Majesty to
encourage me, I then began to cast off my former justly conceived fears, and
(notwithstanding any opposition or seeming disswasive arguments) to pitch on
this resolution, that better it were for me to suffer shipwreck in my poor
estate and credit, then that such treasures should lie buried in the BOWELS of
those vast mountains, and not be made both known, and beneficial to your
gracious Majesty, being inherent to your prerogative, as by the Declaration
under the hands of learned Counsel hereunto annexed appears, which hills,
although large in extent, yet are not considerable in herbage, nor fit for any
other plough, then the Miners sledge, gad, and twybill.

That which first wrought in me a desire to try and fathom those Mines was a
sensible discourse delivered me by a Portugal, in presence of Sir Francis
Godolphin (by whose death I lost the hope of a most knowing Partner) who had
for many years been employed under the King of Spain in his West India Mines,
purporting that if his Master were Sovereign Lord of those British hills, as
is your Majesty, he should not doubt but to make them a second Indies, deeply
protesting that the greatest riches in those Mountains lay in their lowest
levels, which I find to be true by undeniable experience in those five
mountains. For by this way of driving through the depth of Rocks, we are not
only freed from the danger and deluge of waters, but have also discovered the
veins to prove richer in quantity and quality, some containing twenty pound,
some fifteen, some ten, and some six in Silver, in the Tun of Lead upon
the great Pest, which are answerable to most of the Mines of the King of
Spain, the Emperor of Germany, and the Duke of Saxony; finding moreover, that
by mixing and smelting these several veins together, the one proves a good
additament to the other, and becomes thereby a means to advance the
Mines-Royall, and in them the good of your Kingdom and Subjects.

We have many gracious testimonies how much the Almighty is pleased with these
our innocent labors, by continual preservation of the workmen amidst their
hourly dangers, especially in one accident, which lately befell, by driving an
Addit into one of those mountains called Tallibont; but because I was no
eyewitness of it, I humbly desire your Majesty's perusal of the narration
thereof (as I received it) being then in London, from a Minister resident
Preacher to the Mineral men, hereunto annexed.

And as I am bound to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, so must I further
humbly acknowledge your Majesty's large addition to your former Royal favors
in granting me (the meanest of your Creatures) liberty to give your Majesty's
impression to such Silver as the Mole-like Miners cast out of the Earth, for
their speedier payment, they being the men who make the Rocks their resting
place, and expect no other reward or benefit for their sweaty brows then what
they gain from out of the dark Cavernes of the earth by importunate labor.

And for declaration of part of my poor endeavors, your humblest suppliant
begs a perusal of the annexed remonstrance, presented by your honorable and
grave ministers of Justice, and other noble Gentlemen of quality, residing
within your Principality of Wales, whose eyes have been spectators, as your
servant, a diligent labourer in those Mineral Vineyards. And having thus far
traced out, and d^ved into the secrets of natures treasures, and by the
influence of your Majesty's favors, overcome those amazing difficulties, which
hindered the entrance of these great adventures, (I then, for better improvement
of the works, caused a meeting of Myners, Monyers, Smelters and Refiners, to
consult, debate, and try, whether fuel of turfe would not separate the oar,
extract the silver, and reduce the litharge, as well as the vast expense of
whole Forests of woods formerly consumed for that purpose; and upon an exact
trial made thereof, by altering the earthy substance of turfe into charkie
cynders, we found by infallible experience, that your Majesty's Turfaries will
furnish Your Mines Royal with Fuel to all future ages. So that there
remains nothing more to make the inside of these barren Mountains produce an
addition of gems to your Crown, but to finish the building of your princely
foundation by your Royal recommendation thereof to your High Court of
Parliament, whose judgments will quickly discern how much these Mines would
redound to the general good; your Majesty's gracious Letters having already
caused sundry Merchants, and Gentlemen of quality to take a personal view of
the gain, which accrewes from this public work of the Mines Royal, as a
means to enrich Your Subjects the ancient Britains of those parts, with the
free trade and vent of their Home made cloth, and to enable them to become
Merchant-adventurers, as well by land as sea. Many others also of eminent
ability will be encouraged by these apparent possibilities of profit, to hazard
a portion of their present fortunes as a lot, so as they may be secured to
enjoy those prizes which divine providence shall cast and confer upon them in
these their so honest adventures. And for manifest proof of my proceedings in
this business, I shall, with Your Royal assent, humbly desire a Commission
from the High Court of Parliament, to examine the former and present state of
the Mines Royal, and your Majesty's riches that are buried under the most
inconsiderable herbage of these vast Mountains, which in time may alter the
name of Welsh Rocks into Welsh Indies, and make it plainly appear to any, (who
is not merely of an earthly and avaricious temper, and can in any measure
resent the true support of a flourishing State) that they (if followed) cannot
but prove flowers to the Crown, a glory to the Kingdom, and a rich blessing to
the Subject.

Be pleased therefore, most gracious Sovereign, to vouchsafe that the beams of
your Royal favor may cherish the growth of this hopeful design, so as it be
not blasted in the bud, and then my affectionate endeavors prove as fruitless
to this Commonwealth, as was the neglected tender of Columbus his discovery of
the West-Indian Mines in the reign of Henry the seventh.

And to make it in some measure appear to your Majesty, how desirous I am to
advance your revenew in an employment so much conducing to the public good, I
do, in all humbleness offer (as an increase of rent after the expiration of
the Lady Middletons lease assigned to me, and yet in being) one thousand pounds
by the year for and during the continuance of another lease thereof granted to
me in reversion; for confirmation of which leases by your Majesty, and your
High Court of Parliament, I do further humbly present 1000 Marks as a prefine
to your Majesty's Privy Purse, over and above the benefit of your Majesty's
Mintage, the increase of shipping, and he importation of necessary commodites,
occasioned hereby, which as I am informed by Merchants of good worth that drive
the trade, will amount to 4000 li. per annum. And for grant of the custom of
exportation of such Lead only, out of which the silver is refined, I will (so
it please your Majesty) be bound to double the yearly Revenew of the Farmers
book, according to a medium, of seven years cast up for that Port of Dovy:
your Majesty having not from any former undertaker, or Farmor of those Mines,
ever received either fine or penny of rent, all which I submissively propose,
and desire the rather, to encourage my Coadventurers, who as they were first
invited by Your Princely letters of assurance, so will they now (things b^ing
thus honorably settled) be most willing to expose their fortunes for the
consummating of so advantageous, so honorable, and so public a good work.

Having thus made to your Majesty a true relation of the state of your
Mines-Royall in Wales, and a faithful explication of my loyal intendments, and
of other Mineral men's opinions conceived of those Mines, I profess before God
and your sacred Majesty, that I therein have no other ends, then the glory of
my Maker, the honor of your Majesty, and the good of my Country. Let me
therefore, on a bended knee, humbly implore your Sovereign goodness, not only
to peruse these Petitions and Certificates annexed, but also to pardon the
constrained prolixity of

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted Servant, Thomas Bushel.

The Declaration of learned Lawyers, what a MINE-ROYALL is acording to former
presidents.
ALthough the Gold or Silver contained in the base metal of a mine, in the
lands of a Subject, be of less value then the baser Metal, yet if the Gold
or Silver do countervaile the charge of the refining, or be of more worth then
the base Metal spent in refining it, this is a Mine-Royall, and as well the
base Metal, as the Gold and Silver in it, belong by prerogative to the Crown,
Sir Ralph Whitfield. His Majesty's Sergeant at Law. Sir Edw. Harbert At. Genesis
Oliver Saint John's. Solicitor John Glandvill, Sergeant. John Wild, Sergeant.
Richard Creswell, Sergeant. Or. Bridgman the Pr. Solic.


Esquires.
Robert Holborn. John Hern. Edward Bagshaw. Thomas Lane. Richard King. Edmund
Prideaux. John Maynard. Edward Hide. John Glyn. Christopher Fulwood. Harbottle
Grimston. John white. George Peard. John Francklin. Richard Weston. John
Glover. William Ellis. Thomas Culpeper. John Goodwin. William Sanford. John
George. James Haward.
To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble Petition of THOMAS BUSHEL
Your Majesty's Servant.
Most humbly Shows,
THAT whereas your Royal Father, of ever blessed memory, who was truly styled
the King of Peace, and mirror of mercy to the sparing of life and blood, was
graciously pleased, for saving the lives of such malefactors as were condemned
to death by the Law for Petty fellonies, being such as were not any scandal to
the Church or State, nor had imbrewed their hands in blood, to admit their
transportation to the East India, and Virginia-Companies, for furtherance of
their plantations. In which action doubtless he did also cast his eyes upon
the warrantable proceedings and presidents of other most famous Princes in the
like kind, as the late Queen Elizabeth, who put certain Galleys of purpose for
employment of such kind of offenders, of strong and able bodies, as might
attend her memorable designs at Sea, especially upon all sudden and resolute
enterprises; it being the usual course of other Christian Princes, as the King
of Spain, both for the supply of his Galleys against the Turks and Moors, and
especially for the enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver,
Quicksilver, and the like, and his conquests of Mollocco, Goa, Ormus, and other
rich and populous Islands. The King of France for his Gallyes at Marsellis. The
State of Venice. The Duke of Florence, who by such kind of saved offenders
built Ligorne (one of the most famous Seaports within the Straits) In all
which States and Services, diverse of these malefactors by good encouragements
have sought, not so much by surviving, as by their incredible labors,
effecting matters, otherwise held invincible, to obliterate their former
ignominies by merit of rewards. And whereas in this your Majesty's populous
Kingdom, too many such offenders are most untimely cut off in their best
abilities of service, so is there within the pale of this Your Kingdom, and
without any occasion of Sea, or foreign service, means of employment for such
persons, to redeem their lost reputation, by endeavoring to do faithful
service for their Countries honor, and the Kingdoms good, in that happy
work, begun by your Sacred Majesty, for the better discovery of Your Silver
Mines. His most humble suit therefore is, that You would be pleased, out of all
these weighty considerations and beneficial consequences, tending so much to
your Honor, Crown and Dignity, and good of the Commonwealth, to grant your
Majesty's Commission, (if it may be thought fit by the advice of your High and
Honorable Court of Parliament) for the choosing of such several persons out
of the prisons in this your Kingdom, as are and shall be condemned for small
offenses, and of able serviceable bodies, by the approbation of Your Judges,
and shall implore your Majesty's mercy to be employed by your said subject in
the works of your Mines-Royall, they giving security for their good behavior,
with such limitation of time, and allowance for their sustentation, as to your
Majesty's said High Court of Parliament shall be thought fit, that by their
dutiful and laborious performance therein, they may afterward come into the
happiness of your Majesty's pardon of grace for their former offenses;

And your Petitioner shall ever rest, etc.

To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THE Loyalty of my faithful service will not suffer me to conceal a
bequeathed Legacy to your Majesty by the last Will and Testament of your most
Loyal Subject John Bishop of Worcester lately deceased, of a treasure
discovered by him, and committed to my trust, for revealing thereof to your
Majesty.

Who perceiving the inclination and affection I had to Mines and Minerals, much
commending it, as the most honest gain and greatest good to a Commonwealth,
began this ensuing discourse unto me.

Mr. Bushel,
YOur own eyes see how near I am to the dwelling of death, by my gray hairs,
which are the true records of fourscore and fourteen years of age, next my
limbs which have no more strength then those that are lap't in the Sepulcher of
their winding sheet, only my intellectual parts are yet preserved to ascribe
God the glory, and to disclose the secrets of two rich Mines, the one holding
some quantity of Gold worth the extracting, the other in Silver worth the
refining, to your trust and fidelity, with a confidence that your charity
cannot conceive me guilty, of betraying your judgment with an imaginary
treasure, when my soul and body are so near the approach of death, as I must
suddenly give an account in the other world, besides I have taken upon me the
calling of a spiritual profession, and have this day received the Sacrament,
as a pledge of my redemption, which I trust are sufficient motives, to believe
truth from a dying man's tongue, who has no other end, then that the
hopefulnesse of such riches may not be buried by my dissolution, but that the
honor and profit thereof might redound to his Majesty, and his royal
posterity, as a living and loyal remembrance of his Princely favors to me and
mine.

And thereupon he did enjoin me, upon the integrity of my allegiance, to
consecrate the first fruits of my labors therein, as his discovery and service
to your sacred self: And thus having made a true relation of his discourse to
me, I leave it to your Majesty's wisdom, to approve or dislike.

Your Majesty's most humble Servant Thomas Bushel.


TO The most Illustrious PRINCE CHARLES Prince of Wales.
Most High and Mighty Prince,
AS the smaller Rivulets, by their natural motions, make haste to pay their
tribute unto the vast Ocean, as well as do the greatest Rivers; So come I with
humble assurance, that your Highness will not despise this poor present,
extracted out of your Welsh Mines, wishing the coin could speak that language
of Ophir, as it does this of Cardigan, wherein I trust by Divine Providence,
and your princely prevailing with the most honorable Court of Parliament, for
the confirmation thereof; nothing doubting but that in process of time, I
shall be able, with the assistance of my Coadventurers, and help of their
greater purse and fortunes, to make these British hills, as in situation, so
in esteem too; resemble the West Indies, or at least wise those renowned Mines
of Saxony.

Thus I most humbly take leave of your Highness, hoping your Princely
goodness will pardon my presuming to present so great a Prince with so poor a
present, as does in all humbleness.

Your Highness devoted Beadsman. Thomas Bushel.

TO Our Dread Sovereign Lord the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
WE do most humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that Your Majesty's vouchsafing
to this your Principality the trust of a branch of your Royal Mint, is an
honor that neither our Ancestors nor our selves durst wish for; and we do as
humbly and as thankfully acknowledge and confess, that by it you have not
only honored us more then any of your Royal predecessors, but have thereby
offered us the means to enrich our selves, to the making of us happier then our
fathers, in freeing us from the cares and fears that hindered us from diving
into these Mountains that promise a mass of treasure. For be pleased to know,
that before Your Majesty vouchsafed unto us this great favor, we were
fearful to adventure far into the Mountains, because we had far to send
before we could make the silver current, that we should at charge recover. Nor
was our care of carriage and recarriage the least hinderance to our
proceedings, from all which, by your Majesty's goodness, and the endeavors of
your industrious and faithful servant Thomas Bushel, we are happily freed;
for which favor, we whose names are hereunto subscribed in the behalf of all
the inhabitants of this your Principality of Wales, do render all humble and
hearty thanks, and for them, and our selves, do hereby promise to Your sacred
Majesty, that we will do our utmost endeavors to find out that measure,
which we believe God and Nature from the Creation has preserved for Your
Majesty's use; that thereby we may approve our selves your Majesty's loyal and
most obedient Subjects and humble Servants.

Thomas Milward Knight, Chief Justice of Chester. Marmaduke LLoyd Knight.
Richard Price Knt. Baronet. James Price Knight. Sampson Eure Knight. John Lewis
Knight. Timothy Turnor Esquire. L. Littleton Esquire. Walter LLoyd Esquire.
Thomas Price Esquire Robert Corbet Esquire Evan Gwin Esquire Morgan Herbert Esquire. John
Vauhan Esquire Vincent Corbet Esquire Humfrey Green Esquire John LLoyd Esquire David LLoyd ap
Reighnald Esquire Thomas Phillips Esquire John Edmund Esquire. Hugh LLoyd Gentleman.
David Rees Gent. John Bowen Gent. William Watkin Gent. John Meredith Gent.
James Kegitt Gent.


A Certificate from the Miners, presented to the Right Honorable, the Lords
and other of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
May it please your Lordships,
ACCORDING to your commands, We whose names are under written, being Miners,
Smelters, Refiners, Carryers, Washers, and Monyers belonging to his Majesty's
Mines-Royall, in the County of Cardigan, in all humility do certify of our
certain knowledge and experience, concerning the new works lately discovered by
Gods providence to Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmer of his Majesty's Mines-Royall
in these parts, That the said Master Bushel at his inestimable charge, having
cut six hundred Fathom through the Rock at the lowest levels, North and South,
for discovering the lost vein of Cum-sum lock, lying East and West, two
hundred Fathom through the Mountain of Tallibont, at sixty Fathom perpendicular,
three several Addits at Koginean, one above another, twenty, and thirty Fathom
center, another at the Darren, to come under the Romans work, at an hundred
Fathom center, another at Bryn LLoyd fifty Fathom in length, and thirty Fathom
center, working day and night for the Drayning of the water, which formerly in
the time of Customer Smith, and Sr. Hugh Middleton in their working of the
Mines-Royall was never used, they only working upon the Superficies of the
Earth, the works being drowned with water before they could sink to the best of
the vein, both for quantity and quality, and so the charge made to exceed the
benefit, which danger is prevented by the aforesaid Addits, and the Royal
Mines become more hopeful, especially by the assistance of his Majesty's Mint,
for the speedy payment of all those that are employed in the said works, and
Mr. Bushells own invention to save Wood, by reducing the Ore into Lead, and
Silver, with Turffe and Seacole Charked, which happy invention had it not been
found out, the works must needs have been left unwrought, the Country not able
to have supplied necessary Fuel. And further, by the prohibition of
transporting Ore unwrought, that holds silver worth the refining, which His
Majesty in his Princely wisdom saw to be very prejudicial, even to the utter
overthrow of his Mines-Royall.

We have therefore great reason to be confident that his way of working, with
the restraint of transporting Ore, will in short time greatly increase the
Bullion of this Kingdom, for the honor of the King, and good of the
Commonwealth, together with the employment of many hundred poor people, which
would be otherwise an unsupportable burden to this barren Country, who by
their present labor in these Mines are able to subsist with their Family, and
thousands more might be daily set on work, if Mr, Bushells undertakings in the
Mines-Royall may be confirmed for a certain time by this present High Court of
Parliament

Miners.
David Fowls. William Rashly. Henry Cockler. David Bebb. Joseph Iefferies.
George Turner. Robert Lowning. Thomas Fletcher. David Evans. George Dixon. Hugh
Mason. David ap Richard. David Loyd. David Williams. Henry Emblin. Maurice
Tailor. John Emblin. Edward Reece. Hugh Reece. William David's. George Scotsmer.
Thomas Brickhead. William Griffith. Peter Baltiser. Francis Pierce. Maurice
Lewis. Peter Edriser. Edward Blewys. Rob. Emblin. Rob. Tailor. David Iinkins.
Joseph Acherson. Thomas Blewys. Michael Sanders. Morgan Williams. Thomas
Clocker. Thomas Green. Barthol. Clocker. Francis Fisher, Hugh Benn. John Mason.
George Tickle. John Mason. John Fisher. Edmund Poole. Edward Bebb. John Mason
sen. William Ficharett. Evan Thomas. John Harris. Will. Tyson. Watkin Reece.
John Smith. Morgan Pritchet. Griffith John. William Reece. John Tuddar. John
Huson. Philip Benn. Thomas James.
with two hundred more, whom for brevity we omit to name.

Moniers.
Henry Such. John Corbet. Richard Arnold.


Refiners.
John Estopp. David Estopp. Samuel Johnson. Edward Gibbon. Thomas Parker.
Arthur Elissa.


Smelters.
Thomas Botham. Hugh James. Griffith Evans. John Watkin. Iinkin Owen. John
Epslie. John Evans. John Jews. James Meredith.


Washers.
John Wringe. Morgan John Lewis. Davy John. John Iinkins. Morgan Griff. John.
Edmund Symons. Reece Morgan. Charles Williams. Thomas Adams.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS and others of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable
Privy Council.
ACcording to your Honors command, we have enquired and considered how the
Mines-Royall were left to Master Bushel by the Lady Middleton, and do in all
humility declare, that the silver Mines were not worth the working, until M.
Bushel, at his great charge, discovered rich Ore in the adjacent mountains,
which in all likelihood will both increase the Bullion, and by his way of
working, in short time give his Majesty a true trial what the invaluable
riches of these his Welsh mountains are: for whereas the Mines in these parts
were formerly wrought by Pumps, and so growing deep were left drowned with
water, Master Bushel cuts through the main Rocks, at the lowest level, to an
hundred fathom perpendicular, according to the German manner of working, which
though chargeable, yet certain, having four several Addits which he
continues driving day and night into four several mountains, his industry
also has outstript former times; for by melting the poor fusible Ore with the
rich, he produces a third part more of silver with the same charge: and for
accommodating the works with all materials fit for Mines Royal, he has
spared no cost about repairing the Milles, has also built in his Majesty's
Castle of Aberystwith a fair Mint, has contracted with Merchants of our own
and other Nations to supply the peoples necessity with Corn and other
provisions, and pays the Miners and carriers at the Scales, and doubts not
to make them able Pyoners, and fit Soldiers to do his Majesty and their
Country service upon any assault of an enemy. All which we commend to your
honorable consideration, praying, etc.

Your Lordships humbly to be commanded, Joseph Hexsteter, chief Steward of the
Mines. Samuel Reynish, Assay-Masters of the Mint. Water Barkesby, Assay-Masters
of the Mint. Humphrey Owen, Clerk of the Mines.


DIE SABBATI 14. Aug. 1641.
WHereas this house has been informed, that Thomas Bushel Esquire, undertaker
of his Majesty's Mines-Royall in the County of Cardigan, by his great charge
and industry in cutting Addits has gained His Majesty's old drowned and
forsaken works of Tallybont, and other works, and made new discoveries of
Royal Mines there, which are already very considerable; And whereas diverse
persons of quality encouraged by his Majesty's Letters to them directed, do
intend to adventure great sums of money in the said works, which in time (if
well encouraged) may prove of great Consequence, both for honor and profit to
His Majesty and the Kingdom. And whereas also it appears unto this House by
diverse Affidavits and Certificats of credit that some persons ill affected to
these honorable and public services who in time may receive deserved
punishments, have disturbed the possession of the said Tho. Bushel in some of
his Majesty's Mines-Royall, and Edifices appertaining to the Royal works, and
have plucked up diverse Plumps cast in the rubbish, drowned, and (so much as in
them did lie) destroyed the said works, so as it has been a labor of four
years night and day to recover the same. And that also the said Thomas Bushel
has been disturbed in the getting of Turf and Peat for the Service of His
MAJESTY'S works, being an invention of his own, very commendable and commodious
for the preserving of Wood, which has been heretofore by the former
undertakers much wasted in those parts. Now for the remedy of the said
mischiefs, and that the said Thomas Bushel and his Assigns, and such persons
as are or shall be Undertakers and Adventurers with him in the said Service may
receive all due Encouragement and Assistance in those Chargeable undertakings;
It is ordered by the LORDS in the upper House of Parliament now assembled, That
the Speaker of this House, in the Name, and by the Authority of the same, shall
direct His Letters unto the Judges of Assise, and Justices of the Peace of the
said County of Cardigan: Requiring them, that they do in all lawful things
endeavor to advance, and encourage the said service in His MAJESTY'S Royal
Mines, and assist the said Thomas Bushel and other Undertakers, in all things
so far as lawfully they may, both for the continuance of his lawful
Possessions, and the quiet and peaceable working of the said Mines, until he
shall be evicted by due course of Law, as also for getting and working of Turf
and Peat, according to his Legal right upon his MAJESTY'S Wastes, and other
places lawful, and all other lawful accommodations of necessary passages, and
other Legal things, which may any ways advance His MAJESTY'S service in the
said Royal Mines.

JO. BROWN. Cler. Parliament.

A letter from the L. KEEPER to the Justices of Assise, etc.
AFter my very hearty Commendations, I have here enclosed sent you an Order
made in the House of the Lords now assembled in Parliament, which you are
carefully to observe and perform according to the directions thereof in all
things, so far as Lawfully you may. So not doubting of your readiness therein,
Ibid you heartily farewell, and rest

Excester-house, 26. Aug. 1641. Your very loving friend ED. LITTLETON Cust. Sig.

A letter to Mr. Bushel, relating some strange accidents, which happened in
the MINES.
Honored Sir,
SUffer my congratulations of your late success at Tallybont to be admitted
amongst the rest who have represented the same to your imagination; not so much
for the historical report of it, as for speculation on it; So it becomes my
quality, for the rest are interessed, I a looker on your Addit or great drift
of Tallybont, after above 200 fathom in four years driving to come at the
chief shaft of the old drowned work of 38 fathom deep, being pierced by the
water of the old work, June 27, at midnight there befell two memorable
accidents. The four workmen about one in the night (as their manner was)
withdrew to take Tobacco within ten fathom of the Addits mouth, lest in the
Forefield it should damp the air, which was conveyed to them by your Leaden
pipes with bellows: Their smoakie banquet was not yet at an end when they
heard a mighty and fearful noise, which some of them said was thunder: But
old Bartholmew Clocker (a well experienced Miner) although he left the work
without any suspicion of so near an approach, resolved suddenly, the work is
holed, come let us away. No sooner had they gotten the free air, but out
gusheth the torrent of water with an incredible fury, such a breach it made in
the solid Rock, that it arose a full yards height at the Addits mouth, and
drove away above 100 Tun of the rockie deads, affrighting the people of
Tallybont, who heard the noise, and felt the water in their houses. I do not
remember that I was ever more astonished at the prodiglousnesse of any
spectacle, to see what perdition was threatened to the poor men, and they so to
escape it. About four hours after, the violence of water being past, Fisher,
one other of the Miners, went in with more curiosity then wit, to see what
effect it had wrought there: and being some sixty fathom in, creeping very low,
his candle enkindled a vapor, which came on him with three or four flashes,
and he suddenly returning had his hair burnt off, and his clothes scorched,
in which conclusion it gave a crack like the report of a piece, and in a fierce
gust of wind blew out the Candles of three more coming after him. To omit the
Philosophical inquisition of natural causes, I account his preservation in as
high a degree of wonder as the first. Thus happy are you here when least you
think of it, for I find the subterranean spirits, the supposed guardians of
concealed treasure, as officious for you as if they were in pay with you. But
in a style more proper to my pen, Behold Sir, how dear you are to Providence,
which for your sake has vouchsafed to digress into a miracle, and such an one
as is able to convert the most Sophistical Atheist, whence your piety will
infer, that the gracious Author of this incomparable bounty, expects from
you some grateful service, as high above ordinary (according to mortal
capacity) as this favor has been extraordinary. We are all deeply in the same
engagement, and have learned by this experiment, that these Addits or
Approaches (for that's, the sense of the name of old deluge works) are attempts
of desperate hazard. Me thinks these Mountains are as so many pregnant wombs,
and now in labor call for your fortunate hands to deliver them, to the honor
of your Royal Master, and perpetuated glory of the Nation.

What should you doubt in an employment so serenely smiled upon, by the highest
both of Heaven and Earth? You use no Enchantment, or Magneticall Rod to
discover the veins; your only Magic is an ingenuous conjecture of
probabilities, with a cheerful and indefatigable industry, which has hitherto
succeeded beyond expectation of most, and (peradventure) the desires of some.
Lib. 1. de R. M.
But who (as Agricola makes the question) that is not of a nature impoysoned
with Envy, and Maliciousness, can bear unfriendly thoughts to him, whose
substance is in a manner presented by the hand of God.

I know it would be a motive of very feeble operation to tell you how Princes
and States have raised their Crowns, by descending into such Thysseses as
these; with some of whom wanton Antiquity has been pleased to sport her self,
and to play upon the simplicity of many, as Midas, Gyges, the Argonauts,
Croesus, with the States of Athens, over whose Minerals was that renowned
Thucydides a Prefect, as you are here; of which Pliny delivers what may be
worthy your attention, when he says of them, that they were in a fruitless
soil, and on the hills, (as these with us:) and wheresoever one vein was
found, it was not far from another; among which was one called Bebelo, that
afforded him 300 pound weight of Silver a day.

These were then the veins which conveyed the blood and spirit of life through
all the limbs of his victorious Host. And have you not here our Britains
Asturia before you? Who knows whether it may not yield a Bebelo? at least a
Sneberg or Anneberg, who has heretofore dreamt of a Mine at Comsomloch, or of
the happy lot you lat^ly drew from the Mountains of Keginian, Talybont, the
Darren, Broom-Floyd and Cum-mervin? What did the outside of these promise you
more then the countenances of their neighbors? But the complaint of learned
Dr. Iurdan may here take place, That much Silver was lost, for want of taking
it out of Lead-Ores. For whereas those Ores which are rich in silver are
commonly hard of fusion, our Minerall-men neglect those Ores. No doubt many are
concealed by reason they are Mines Royal.

Where had been the Woods and Forests yet undestroyed on these bald-headed
Promontories that might suffice, had you not taught the earth to afford you
all, and the worthless Valley to meet the barren Hill, by sending in fuel,
to give form to the matter: so that here is a rich bequest you leave to
posterity, I mean your eternizing the works, by preventing the excess of
water, and defect of fire. I have no more, but to signify my confidence, that
as your desires are set on the material Rocks of Wales and Enstone, so will
your better affections be firmly grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus, that no
tempest may be able to shake you, when the sandy projects of other will be
laved to nothing by the floods they are built upon: Which will give more
comfort and satisfaction to you then can be expressed by

Your true friend and servant, Tho. Brodway.
Iulii 4. 1641.
An Answer to Mr. Broadwayes LETTER.
M. Broadway,
YOur true Relation, and lively expression of the miraculous delivery of the
poor Miners from the deluge of waters, which issued forth, upon the cutting
through of Tallibont mountain, seems by the contents of your Letter to
promise no other reward to the first discoverers, then imminent danger of
present death, in which, as in all things, we must ascribe the glory to God
alone, and as the Children of Israel were to meet with many hard accidents in
those Deserts, so must we resolve to encounter with many bitter storms before
we can discover Natures riches hidden in those Mountains, and who can express
my sufferings, prising my reputation above life or fortunes? For Fame flying
with the wings of Malice, desirous to put a period to these my harmless
endeavors, has made, as you partly know, my supposed friends, to become my
professed foes, and my nearest in blood, my greatest sorrow, leaving me as
naked as was Job in his greatest affliction, some construing these my Mineral
adventures to be but the Fabric of a fantastic brain, others alleging that
the greatness of my charge would ruin both me, and those who gave me credit,
whereby those friends that conferred on me timely courtesies, instead of
increasing, or continuing them, were moved to press me for speedy payment,
tha^ my present abilities were able to make good. What throes of sorrow
perplexed my midnight thoughts in these deep engagements, I leave to you to
judge. I will therefore hasten my coming down, to settle the affairs of this
great work, that I might redeem the misspent time of my youth by some
memorable design in my age, the hopefulnesse whereof you are pleased so to
amplify, which I trust will give livelihood to many, injury to none, and be
of much honor to our Nation, which was ever the height of my ambition,
resolving to rest content with whatsoever the wise Diposer of all should
confer upon me, and hereafter to leave those friends in trust, whom I found
firmest, thereby both to pay themselves, and satisfy others, to whom I stand
engaged. And thus with many thanks for your kind Letter, and good counsel, I
shall ever remain,

Your faithful Friend Thomas Bushel.


