THE CASE OF THE Children and Grandchildren OF Sir John Maynard, and also of
Mrs. Elizabeth Maynard, Widow, Relict of Joseph Maynard, Only Son of Sir John
Maynard: Together with Some REASONS most humbly Offered to Consideration on
their Behalf, AGAINST A BILL Endeavored to be Obtained by the Right Honorable
the Earl of Stamford, and Dame Mary his Countess, Sir Henry Hobart and Dame
Elizabeth his Wife (Daughters and Heirs of the said Joseph Maynard) Entitled,
An ACT for the Settling of the Estate of the said Sir John Maynard.
THAT Sir John Maynard had Issue Joseph his only Son and Four Daughters.

1. Elizabeth, Married to Sir Duncomb Colchester, by whom he has Issue Maynard
Colchester, Esquire; and other Children. 2. Honor, Married to Edward Nosworthy,
Esquire; by whom she left only one Child, Jane, now the Wife of Sir William
Rawlinson, Sergeant at Law. 3. Joane, Married to Thomas Leigh of Adlington,
Esquire, deceased; by whom she has Issue, John Leigh, Esquire, and other
Children. 4. Martha, Married to Edward Gresham, Esquire (eldest Son to
Marmaduke Gresham) by whom she has Issue Elizabeth.
That Sir John Maynard having provided Portions for the said Dame Mary, and
Dame Elizabeth, the Daughters of his said Son Joseph.

Makes one Will (every Word writ with his own Hand.) September. 28. 1676.
Whereby, he gives all his Mannours and Lands (except one Manor in
Leicestershire) for Default of Issue Male of his Son Joseph, The One Moiety
thereof to his said Grand daughters Dame Mary, and Dame Elizabeth, and their
Heirs, as Tenants in Common: and the other Moiety thereof to his Daughters, the
said Lady Colchester, Mrs. Leigh, and Mrs. Gresham, and to the said Jane
Nosworthy (now the Wife of Sir William Rawlinson) and their Heirs, to hold also
as Tenants in common equally to be divided.

Note. This Will is made before the Act against Frauds and Perjuries.

September. 9th. 1686. And Republished and Confirmed Sep. 27th. 1687.
The said Sir John Maynard, having Married his said Granddaughter Elizabeth to
Sir Henry Hobart, and given her 10000 l. for her portion, Makes another Will,
whereby he gives to his said Granddaughter Mary (since his Death Married to
the Earl of Stamford) the like Sum of 10000 l. for her Portion.

And as to his Real Estate, Thereby Devises his Mannours of Clifton and
Hardmead in the County of Buckingham (1500 l. per annum) upon the Failure of
Issue-Male of his Son Joseph, to the said Sir Henry Hobart for his Life, and
the Life of the said Dame Elizabeth his Wife Jointly Living, the Remainder to
the said John Leigh, and Maynard Colchester and their Heirs, during the Life of
the Lady Hobart, and during the Life and Lives of all and every the Son and
Sons, Daughter and Daughters, which the said Sir Henry Hobart has, or shall
have by his said Wife (in Trust to preserve the contingent Remainders) then to
the use of the Second Son of Sir Henry Hobart by his said Wife ( when he shall
attain the Age of Twenty one years) for Ninety nine years, if such second Son
shall so long live, Remainder after his Death, or other End of that Estate, to
the Heirs Males of the Body of such second Son; the Remainder in like manner to
all and every other Son and Sons of the said Sir Henry Hobart, and his said
Wife (the Eldest Son only excepted) for Ninety nine years determinable on their
respective Deaths, with Remainders to the Heirs Male of the Body of every such
Son, the Remainder to all and every their Daughters which shall attain the Age
of Seventeen years, and the Heirs of their respective Bodies, as Tenants in
Common.

The Remainder to Mrs, Leigh, Mrs. Gresham, the Lady Rawlinson and Maynard
Colchester (his Children and Grandchildren) and the Heirs of their bodies, as
Tenants in Common and not Jointly.

Note He purposely passes over the first Son of Sir Henry Hobart, that he shall
take nothing by his Will, declaring that he presumes Sir Henry Hobart will take
care of his first Son out of his own Estate.

Note Sir Henry Hobart has no second Son born, nor any Daughter or Daughters
that are near seventeen years of Age, or above seven or eight.

And as to the Manor and Capital Message of Gunnersbury in Middlesex, he by
the same Will gives the same to his Wife (since his Death Married to the Earl
of Suffolk) for her life, and 300 l. per annum Rent Charge.

And after her Death and failure of Issue Male of Joseph Maynard, (who has
left no Son) he thereby gives the said Manor of Gunnersbury, his Manor of
Beer in Devonshire, and Burleon in Lincolnshire ( Tot. 2000 l. per annum or
more) to the said Mary Maynard his Grandchild (now Countess of Stamford) for
her Life. Remainder to the said John Leigh and Maynard Colchester and their
Heirs during the Life of the said Mary, and of every Son and Sons, Daughter and
Daughters which she shall have (in Trust to preserve contingent Remainders)
Remainder to the first Son of the said Mary for 99 Years if he shall so long
live, with other Remainders over, as Clifton and Hardmead, are limited to the
second, and other Sons and Daughters of the Lady Hobart.

The Remainder of all these Manors of Gunnersbury, Beer and Burleon, to the
said Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Gresham, the Lady Rawlinson and Maynard Colchester, and
the Heirs of their bodies as Tenants in Common and not Jointly.

Note The Countess of Stamford has no Issue either Son or Daughter.

So that these Remainders have a fair prospect to be very valuable, the rather
because of this next Clause, viz.

And whereas I have before limited several Estates to John Leigh and Maynard
Colchester and their Heirs (in Trust to preserve the contingent Remainders)
upon the said several Estates for lives. He further Wills, that if there shall
be any occasion for them to Enter for any Act to be done to disturb or destroy
any the contingent Estates, that they shall take the Rents and Profits to their
own use, without account, during the Life of such Person or Persons that gave
Occasion for such Entry.

Then he thereby charges the Premises (inter alia) with 400 l. per annum to the
said Eliza. Maynard (the Relict of his Son Joseph) for her Life, 2. Annuity's.
in lieu of Dower or Jointure, and with 100 l. per annum to Mrs. Gresham for
her Life, and gives some personal Legacies, and then Directs, that all the rest
of the Rents and Profits, and all the Surplus of his Personal Estate (after
Debts and Legacies paid) shall be disposed of in a Purchase of Lands of
Inheritance, and that the same, when purchased, shall be settled upon the Lady
Hobart and the Countess of Stamford for their Lives and first Sons, March 21st.
1689. There Is another Will of Sir J. Maynard's produced, Entitled thus,
etc. as before; with Remainders over to the said Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Gresham, the
Lady Rawlinson, and Maynard Colchester, and the Heirs of their bodies
respectively. And makes his Wife and the Lord Gorges his Trustees and
Executors, to see all this done accordingly, and that Conveyances be
accordingly Executed.

Viz. A Duplicate of my Last Will, and is my Last Will, if the Original Blotted
or Interlined miscarry.

Note The Original the Countess of Suffolk does not produce.

By this Will the said Manor and Capital Message of Gunnersbury is given to
his Wife (the now Countess of Suffolk) for her Life; and then the Reversion
thereof, and all the said other Manors of Clifton, Hardmead, Beer, and
Burleon, are given to the said Lady Hobart and Countess of Stamford for their
Lives, or 99 Years determinable on their Deaths, and to their first and other
Sons for 99 Years; with Remainder over to the Heir male of every such first and
other Sons for 99 Years, if he live so long; with the Remainder to their Issue
in Tail present.

With this difference only, That if one of them fail to have Issue, and the
other has, the same is given over in like manner to the Issue of the other:
Whereas it is not so by his former Will in 1686/7. but if either of them fail
of Issue, her share is immediately given over to Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Gresham, the
Lady Rawlinson, and Mr. Colchester, which is omitted in this last Will, and a
Blank in that place in this Duplicate or last Will; and so the Daughters and
their Children are not named by Name; A Blank
but in Case of failure of such Issue, they take as next Heirs in course by
descent: With these Two further restrictive Clauses in this Will, viz.

First, That after the said Estates for Lives and 99 years respectively, He
devises all his Manors and Lands whatsoever to the said John Leigh, Maynard
Colchester and Henry Colchester, and their Heirs, during the Life and Lives of
the said Sir Henry Hobart and Elizabeth his wife, and of the said Mary (now
Countess of Stamford) to preserve the contingent Remainders aforesaid.
Secondly, That by this Will, here is no Legal Estate at all given or devised
either to the said Sir Henry Hobart or his Lady, or to the said Countess of
Stamford, or any their Sons; but the Legal Estate of the whole is Vested in the
Lord Gorges, Mr. Colchester, and the Countess of Suffolk, and their Heirs, in
Trust ( after the Death of the said Countess of Suffolk) to convey and settle
the same for the respective Terms and Estates aforesaid.
So that by this Will also, there is a very strict Intayle of the whole, to
prevent any Alienation of any part out of his Family; he having a full prospect
and resolution that all his Real Estate, if his Grand-daughters (the Lady
Hobart and Countess of Stamford) had no Issue, should come to his own three
Daughters, and the Lady Rawlinson, (who stands in the place of the fourth) and
that they should have all his Inheritance, and should not be prevented thereof
by any Act to be done in the mean time.

And therefore besides the Lands Devised ut supra, he by this Duplicate gives
his said Granddaughter (the Countess of Stamford) 10000 l. certain for her
Portion (as he had done before to the Lady Hobart) besides what he has given
to each of them of his Inheritance, if they should have Children.

By this Will also, Annuity's.
he gives to Mrs. Elizabeth Maynard (the Relict of his Son Joseph) 300 or 350
l. per Annum for her Life; whereas by the former Will it was 400 l. per Annum.

And to Mrs. Gresham he gives 30 l. per Annum Rent charge for her Life; whereas
by the former it was 100 l. per Annum.

And, by this Will, there is the like Clause as in the former, That all the
surplus of this Estate Real and Personal (after his Debts paid, and particular
Legacies) shall be invested in Purchase of Lands of Inheritance; and when
Purchased, to be Settled and Intailed in the same manner as his other Manors
thereby are Intailed; so that if the Lady Hobart, and Lady Stamfords Children
should fail, or they have none that should live to attain 21. That the same,
with the other Inheritance, might and may come to his said three Daughters, and
the said Lady Rawlinson, as is before mentioned.

Note, It is not yet by Law settled or determined which of these Three are the
true last Will of Sir John Maynard.

Touching this last of the 21. of March, 1689. there is a special Verdict
depending in the Kings Bench, upon the Act of Frauds and Perjuries, whether it
was duly Signed and Sealed by the Testator, in the presence of Three Witnesses,
so as to be either a good Will, or a good Revocation of the said former Will in
1686/7.

Touching that Will of 1686/7. there is a Bill depending in Chancery for the
said Mrs. Maynard (the Widow of Joseph) to have 400 l. per Annum for her Life,
according to that Will; which Cause is at Issue, and will be heard in Chancery
the next Term, if not prevented by the Privilege of the Earl of Stamford, or
Countess of Suffolk: And if neither of these two be good Wills within the said
Act against Frauds and Perjuries, then the first mentioned Will in 1676. will
certainly be good, being all of his own Hand, and made before the said Act.

Note, The whole purport of this Bill in Parliament which the Earl of Stamford,
Sir Henry Hobart, and Countess of Suffolk would get passed, is, To Enact this
Will of the 21. of March, 1689. in Terminis, to be the true last Will of the
said Sir John Maynard, and set it out in haec Verba.

Before it be Tried at Law whether it be the true Will or not.

And then all the rest of the several Proviso's and Paragraphs of this Bill, Is
for them and the Countess of Suffolk to endeavor thereby to get more for
themselves of the said Sir John Maynard's Estate, and in other manner than by
that very Will is given them, and consequently to lessen the Share of the said
other Persons so as aforesaid concerned, and also to lessen that Surplus of the
Personal Estate, and which may accrue out of the Rents and Profits of the Real
Estate during the Countess of Suffolk's Life, and which by both the said Wills,
is expressly directed to be Invested in the Purchase of Lands of Inheritance,
and when purchased to be so settled as the said other Manors thereby are, so
as not to be aliened but upon Failure of Issue of the said Countess of Stamford
(who has no Child) and the said Lady Hobart, who has no second Son, or any
Daughter above nine years old, is to come to the said Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Gresham
and to the said Lady Rawlinson, and Mr. Colchester, and the Heirs of their
Bodies respectively.

To prevent and defeat them of all which, This Bill is endeavored to be got
passed into an Act.

Upon this whole Matter, Quer. I. Whether it be not very unreasonable to
attempt to get an Act of Parliament to Enact that Writing, to be Sir John
Maynard's last Will, which has not hitherto been settled or determined by any
Court in Westminster Hall to be his Will. II. When there are three Wills
produced, all of Sir John Maynard's hand, and two of them in Contest in two
several Causes in Westminster Hall, before either of them be judicially
determined, to endeavor to get such an Act of Parliament, be not to prevent
the said other Persons, so as aforesaid concerned, from Trying their Right in
Westminster Hall, and from their having the Benefit of the Law. III. Whether
the several Proviso's and Paragraphs in the said Bill in Parliament, whereby
more or greater or other part of the said Sir John Maynard 's Estate is enacted
to be given or provided to or for the said Earl of Stamford, Sir Henry Hobart,
and Countess of Suffolk, than by the said Will (sought to be enacted) is given
to them, or in other Manner than the same is given them, whereby to vary or
lessen the Interest of the said Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Gresham, and of the said Lady
Rawlinson and Mr. Colchester against their Consent, and without any Recompense
or Consideration to them respectively made or given, be not equally
unreasonable? IV. In the same Bill, to enact the Will of 1689. and yet, in the
self same Act, to vary the Trusts and Bequests in that very Will, and this
without Consent, be not also very extraordinary.


Especially when by the said Bill, they have put in a Clause to enact them the
said Earl of Stamford, etc. to be Tenants of the Freehold, and to have Estates
in all the said Manors, etc. for their own Lives, whenas the said Will does
not give them any such Estate, and thereby to endeavor to put themselves in a
Capacity to make an Alienation of the said Manors and Lands out of the Family,
which the said Sir John Maynard by both the said Wills, has with so great care
and exactness studiously avoided, on purpose to entail and preserve the same
for his said other Children and Grandchildren, if the Issue of his said Son
should fail.

Whether this, be not at the same time, they seek to enact the said Will even
in the very same moment, to endeavor to destroy the true Intent thereof.

Particularly, The Earl of Stamford, who married the said Mrs. Mary Maynard
(since the Death of Sir John Maynard) and before such his Marriage, was fully
acquainted with the several said Wills, and how the said Estate was thereby
settled and intailed, and upon what Terms it was thereby given to his Lady, and
what her Fortune was, and yet nevertheless was contented to proceed and to
accept her Person and Estate with those Cloggs upon it, as they be now Called.

All which is humbly offered to consideration as a just ground to oppose the
passing of the said Bill into a Law


