THE EFFIGIES OF M GIACOMO BAROZZIO DA VIGNOLA

W Sherwin sculpsit et ex^u^l^^
portrait of Giacomo Barozzio da Vignola

THE Regular Architect: OR THE GENERAL RULE OF THE FIVE ORDERS OF ARCHITECTURE
OF M. GIACOMO BAROZZIO Da VIGNOLA.

WITH A New Addition of MICHAEL ANGELO BUONAROTI

Rendered into English from the Original Italian, and Explained, By JOHN LEEKE
STUDENT and TEACHER of the MATHEMATICS, For the USE and BENEFIT of Free
Masons, Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers, Plaisterers: In
General For all Ingenious Persons that are concerned in the Famous ART of
BUILDING.



LONDON, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, and William Sherwin, and are to be sold
at their shops at the Sun and Bible in Postern-street near Moor-gate, and next
door to the Star in Little Britain, MDCLXIX.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Intend here briefly to declare, for the better understanding hereof, what
was the occasion that moved me to make this small Work, and afterward to
publish it for the common service of those that take delight therein. Having
Exercised this Art of Architecture for diverse years in sundry places, I have
been always pleased to see the Opinions of as many Writers as I had,
concerning this practice of the Ornaments, and by comparing them both among
themselves, and with the Works of the Ancients, which are seen yet in being, to
draw from thence some Rule, on which I might rely with such security, as might
please, if not all, yet at least the greater part of them that are capable to
judge of this Art, and that only to serve my own use, without any other end.
Therefore laying aside many things of those Writers, from whence arises no
small difference, to the end to rest more secure, I proposed to my self the
ancient Ornaments of the five Orders which are seen among the Antiquities of
Rome; and considering all together, and examining them by diligent Measures, I
have found that those which seem most beautiful to common judgment, and which
represent themselves with most grace before our Eyes, those I say have a
certain correspondence and proportion of Numbers among themselves not
intricate, seeing that each of the lesser Members measure the greater,
punctually distributing them into so many parts. From whence considering more
nearly, that all our Senses are pleased in this Proportion, and displeasing
things are different from it, as the Musicians do most sensibly demonstrate in
their Science; I have taken Pains these many years to reduce the said five
Orders of Architecture under one brief Rule, easy, and which might readily be
put in practice; and the manner which I have observed in it is thus. Desiring
to bring to this Rule the Dorick Order, for an Example I have found the Theater
of Marcellus to be the most commended among all others, according to the
judgment of every one, and therefore also I have taken it for the Foundation of
the Rule of the said Order; of which having determined the principal parts, if
afterward certain of the lesser Members have not so exactly answered to the
proportion of Numbers (a thing which often happens by the work of the Tools, or
other accident, which may often be in these small things) that I have fitted to
my Rule, not differing in any thing of importance, but accompanying rather that
small license with the authority of other Dorick Orders, which also are
esteemed beautiful; from whence I have taken the other smaller parts, always
when it was necessary to supply it. Not as Zeuxis did of the Virgins among the
Crotoniacks, but as my judgment has led me. I have made this Election of all
the Orders, taking them purely altogether from the Ancients, and not mixing any
thing of my own, except it be the distribution of Proportion, founded on simple
Numbers, not having regard either to the Braces, Feet, or Palms of any Place,
but only to one Arbitrary Measure, called A Module, divided into so many parts
as from Order to Order may be seen in its proper place. And by this means I
have so facilitated this part of Architecture (otherwise difficult) that any
mean understanding, if he have but only some taste of the Art, may comprehend
the whole at one view; and easily use the same, without taking much pains in
reading. Yet had I no intent to publish this Work, if it had not been for the
entreaty of many of my Friends which desired it; and much more by the
Liberality of my perpetual, most Illustrious, and most Reverend Lord, Cardinal
Farnese; which, besides that I have received such courtesies from his
Honorable House, which has given me favor to make this diligence, has also
given me the mean to be able to satisfy my Friends in this particular, and to
give you suddenly other greater things on this Subject, if this Part be so
accepted of you as I hope it will be. And seeing that in this place it is not
my design to answer Objections, which I know will be propounded by some, that
being not my intention; so leaving the charge to the Work it self, which being
acceptable to the Judicious, will cause them to answer for me against the
Objections of others: I say only, That if any one shall judge this Work to be
vain, maintaining that there can no firm Rule be given, because that according
to the opinion of all, and namely of Vitruvius, there must oftentimes be added
and subtracted to the proportions of the Members of the Ornaments, to the
intent to supply by Art in those places, where our sight may be deceived by any
accident. To that I answer, That it is wholly necessary in that case to know
how we would have them represented to our Eyes, which shall be always a firm
Rule, which in another place I have propounded to be observed, seeing that we
proceed therein by certain curious Rules of Perspective. The Practice whereof
(so much as is necessary to this Art, and to Painting both together) I hope to
give you suddenly, in such manner as I am assured will be dilectable to you.

My intention, as I have said, was none other than to be understood by those
only, which have already some taste of the Foundation of the Art, and therefore
I had not added the Name to any particular Member of the Five Orders,
presupposing them to be already known. But finding afterward, by experience,
that the Work was very acceptable to diverse Persons of Quality, moved by the
desire they had to be able to understand with little labor the entire of this
Art concerning the Ornaments, and that they desired no other thing than the
particular Names, I was willing to add them according as they are ordinarily
called at Rome, and in such order as you may see, only advertising that the
Members which are common to diverse Orders, after they have been only once named
in the first Order, there is no mention made of them in the other Orders.

G. Barozzio.

The TRANSLATORS PREFACE. To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
COnsidering that those things are easiest comprehended and best retained in
memory, which is taught by the fewest Precepts, therefore we have made choice
of this Author as an Introduction to the Ornamental part of Architecture, and
have styled him, The Regular Architect, because he sets down one general Rule
for the Principal Numbers of all the Five Orders; which Rule our Author found
from the Observation which he made of the Antiquities of Rome. The Author being
perspicuous of himself, we have endeavored to render him in his own Sense, only
adding here and there a word upon occasion to explain his meaning more fully.
If this find acceptance, expect in a short time the Rules of Practical
Perspective of the same Author, From him, who is

A Lover of all ingenious Artists, JOHN LEEKE.

TVSCANE DORICK IONICK CORINTHIAN COMPOSITA


Intending to treat of the five orders of Columns; that is to Say the
Tuscane, the Dorick the Ionick, the Corinthian, and Composita. it is convenient
at the beginning to show the figure of each kind of Which I am to speak,
although their particular measures are not set down, being that they are only
here put to show a general rule, which afterward shall be declared particularly
in each order

architectural diagram

Finding no Tuscan order among the antiquities of Rome, from whence J might
have formed a rule as J have found in the other four orders; the Dorick,
Ionick, Corinthia, and Comparita, J have taken the authority of Vitruvius in
his fourth book and seventh Chapter, where he Says, that the Tuscan Column
ought to be in height with the base and Capital Seven times his own diameter
or thicknes In the rest of the ornaments namely the Architrave Fries and
Cornice, it is convenient to observe the rule, which J have found in the other
orders, that is, that the Architrave Frise and Cornice may be the fourth part
of the height of the Column, which is 14 modules with the Base, and Capital,
as is Seen set down by numbers; so also the Architrave, Frise and Cornice
Shall Be 3 modules, which is the fourth part of 14, the particular members
shall be exactly Set down in their proper place,

architectural diagram

Being to make the Tuscan order with out a pedestal, the whole height Shall Be
divided into 17 parts and each of those parts shall be called a Module, which
again we divide into 12 equal parts, and by these measures at the Said
order is formed with every particular member thereof, as is Seen in the
design Set down both in whole numbers and fractions

architectural diagram

But being to make the Said order with a pedestal the whole height is to be
divided -- into 22 parts and which is done, because the pedestal requires to
be in height the third part of his Column with Base and Capital, which being
14 modules, the third part is 4 modules and which added to 17 modules and make
together 22 modules and

architectural diagram

Although a pedestal is sildome made to the Tuscan order, yet have I put it
here in design to follow order, giving you to understand that in the five
orders I have observed it for a general, and that the pedestals with their
ornaments ought to be a third part of their Column with Base and Capital, as
all the ornaments above, that is to Say, the Architruve Frise and Cornice ought
to be a fourth part of the Same, Form which being understood and presuposed
there arises this great facility in the work that being to make any of these
five orders after the height which it ought to have is determined it is to be
divided into 19 parts with its ornaments (then 3 parts being left above for
the Architruve and 4 below for the pedestal, the 12 parts remaning are for the
height of the Column with the Base and Capital, which being taken, and making
the division of the modules, according as it shall be either Corinthia or Dorick
or the other orders, and then the whole order is made by that module divided
into its parts, as Shall Be Seen in its due place; A the Body or Shafe of the
Column: B: Cincta Regula or list: C: Torus: D: the Blinth-E-listello a name
most general and used in differently in all the like members whether the be
lesser or greater F Cimatum. G the Pedestal H listelo I the Blinth of the
Pedestal,

architectural diagram

Having before described in general the principal measures for drawing the
Tuscane order, J have here and in the foregoing page, designed the parts in
great to the end that you; may See Particularly, the division of every one of
the Smalest parts, together with their projectture and that the clearenesse of
the design with the numbers adjoined may be Sufficient to make you understand
the thing without many words, as any one may easily know of himself with Small
consideration

A. Ouolo. B. Rundel. C. Listello. or. Regula. D. Corona or Dropstone. E.
Listetto. F. Cymatium G. Frise H. Facia or List of the Architrave I. Architrave
K Chimatium or list of the Abacus L Abacus M Echinus N List, O Frise of the
Capital, P Astragal Q Collar of the Column R the Body of the Column

architectural diagram

The Manner to make the divisions of this Dorick order is this The whole height
is divided into 20 parts, and of one of those parts is made the module, which
is also divided into 12 parts, like as was done in the Tuscan Order the Base
with the list or lowest Cincture of the Column Shall Be one module, the trunck
or Shaft of the Column without the Base Shall Be 14 modules, the Capital shall be
one module and then the ornament, that is to Say the Architrave Frise and
Cornice shall be 4 modules, which is the fourth part of the Column with the
Base and Capital as We have Said before, The Architrave ought to be 1 module
the Frise 1 and the Cornice 1 which added together make 4 modules, and being
added to the rest make 20

architectural diagram

When you would make the ornament of Galeries or Porticos according to the
Dorick order the light (as has been Said) must be divided into 20 parts, and
from thence the module must be formed, Then the breadth, must be divided so as
between the Pilasters there may be 7 modus and that the Pilasters may have 3
modules, For so the -- breadth is divided with the height, (...) to the
proportion of the opening of the light, of twice the breadth in height, and the
distribution of the Metopes and Trigliphs falls right as you See. It Remains
only to Consider that the Column ought to Come forth of the Pilaster of a
module more than the half which is done to the intent that the projectures of
the imposts may not exeede half the Columns and this Shall Be a general rule in
the like cases of all the -- orders

architectural diagram

Being to make Galeries with their pedestals according to the Dorick order, the
whole height ought to be divided into 25 parts and, and one of those parts
Shall Be a module, the breadth between the pilasters Shall Be 10 modules, and the
breadth of the pilasters Shall Be 5 modules for so the distribution of the
metops, and Trigliphs shall fall out right and the void of the Arches in Such
proportion that the height shall be double to the breadth which in height as you
may See is of 20 modules

architectural diagram

The Pedestal of the Dorick order ought to have 5 modules and in height the
impost of the Arch designed there above one module and the particular members
thereof are to be divided according to the members as they are there Set down
A the Chan^ells of the Column B the lowest Cincture of the Column which ought
so to be understood of all the orders C Rundel or little stafe

architectural diagram

This part of the Dorick order is taken from the Theater of marcellus at Rome,
as I have said in the preface by way of example, and being designed it retains
the same proportion A Hollow of the upper list, B Denticuli, C Capital of the
Trigliph, D Trigliph in which the parts (...) inward are called Channells and
the square space of the frise which Remains between one Trigliph and the
other is called metope, E Guttae, dropps, or small bells F Cymatium G Annul^t^,
cinctures or Lists

architectural diagram

This other piece of the Dorick order is taken from diverse relics among the
antiquities of Rome, and such a composition is made thereof, which I have found
to prove well in work A Cymatium, B Modilions a name by which They are al
called althought they be of different forms, when they do the office to
sustain the Coruice, C Astragal.

architectural diagram

Being to make the Ionick order without apedestal, the whole height ought to be
divided into 22 parts, and of one of those parts is made the module, which is
divided into 18 parts, because this order being more gentile then the Tuscane
and Dorick, has olso the parts thereof more slaider, The Column ought to
have 18 modules comprehending the base and Capital, the Architrave 1 module,
The frise 1 the Cornice 1 which numbers being added together, make the
Architraue Frise and Cornice 4 modules, which is the 4 part of 13 modules the
height of the Column

architectural diagram

When you would make Galeries or Porticos according to the Ionick order, The
breadth of the Pilasters shall be 3 modules and the distance between the
Pilasters shall be 8 modules and the height 17 modules which is the double of the
breadth, which is a rule which ought to be observed constantly in all arches of
the like ornament, if necessity does not Constrain to do otherwisse

architectural diagram

But when you would make Porticos or Galeries according to the Ionick order
with Pedestals, the whole height is to be divided into 28 parts, The pedestal
with his ornaments being 6 modules, which is the third part of the Column
with base and Capital which is to be obsarved in all the orders as we have
said, The breadth between the Pilasters shall be 11 modules the height of the
arch 22 modules. The breadth of the Pilasters shall be 4 modules, as you may see
noted (...) numbers in the design.

architectural diagram

The Cornice of the impost set above is one module in height, and the
projecture thereof is the particular members may be known by the numbers, as
also those of the pedestal and (...) A Scotia or upper hollow B Astragals or
Rundles (...)

architectural diagram

The manner to make the Ionick Capital, as it is here designed in this present
figure with the plane and profil for the more Claire (...) understanding there
must be two perpendicular lines drawn, all the distance of two modules the one
from the other, which may pass b^the (...) of the eyes of the volutas, which
are called (...) The whole voluta ought to be 16 parts of a module in height
whereof 8 are above the eye (...) it (...) being two parts and the other 6
remains (...) the eye. The manner of drawing the voluta (...) designed in the
following leaf, where also (...) Shall Be explain (...) much as the space will
pe^^ the manner (...) which you are to proceed

architectural diagram

Having drawn the Cathetus of this first voluta, and another line Square to it
by the center of the eye, the Said (...) ^ided in the manner expressed above
in the figure A, and is began from the first point marked i^, and there is
drown a fourth part of a Circle with the compasses then from the point marked
2 is drawn another fourth part (...) proceeding the three turns come to be
accomplished, Then to make the breadth of the list so as it may be afourth
(...) which is left above by the first tract so each part which Sawes for
Centers is divided into 4 and afterward drawing (...) of circles, they Shall Be
accomplished by those centers. But to make the voluta after the manner
represented underneath the line called (...) be drawn, which shall have the
h^^ght of 16 parts of a module, whereof a shall be above the center and ^
beneath and one the Said center, you shall divide the circumference into 8
equal parts, as you See it designed Then afterward the triangle BCD ought to
be made, so as the (...) BC ^ay be 9 parts of amodiu^, and the line CD. 7. and
because that it may be Seen and understood by the design (...) ^^d marked with
numbers it is sufficient that I have drawn (...) afterward the points of the
line BC ought to be (...) (...) ^ide the circumference of the voluta, as (...)
by numbers, and then b^acing from point to (...) the (...) found^ (...) the
first foot of the compasses (...) ^ning the other foot to the center (...) of
the eye of the (...) circumference within the Saie^ (...) the Compasses you put
the first point on the point (...) where (...) that part of, circumference
(...) ^halbe (...) circumference from 1 to 2 then Set the (...) foot of the
compasses on the point and put in the other to the co^ (...) the voluta and
then drawing an arch of a circle as before then without remo^ing (...) Set
(...) foot upon the point 3 and turning the other foot where it cutts the Said
arch Shall Be the other center which (...) ^^aw (...) the voluta from 2 to 3. And
so you ^hal proceed from point to point

architectural diagram

(...) this Corinthian order without a Pedestal the whole height is divided
into 25 parts, and the (...) made of one of them, which is divided into 18
parts, as it was in the Ionick order the other principal (...) seen in the
figure, and the distance from one Column to the other ought to be a modules
and, as well that the architrave above be not overcharged, as to accomodate the
modilions above in the Cornice as they (...) thy to the middle of the Columns
in their (...) ^ment

architectural diagram

To make the Arches of Galeries according to this Corinthian order, you ought
to proceed as it is here noted in numbers So as the opening of the Arch may be
9 modules in breadth and 18 modules in height, and the Pilasters shall be 3
modules

architectural diagram

But to make Galeries with pedestal, the whole height shall be divided into 32
parts, and of one of them Shall Be made the module, 12 of them Shall Be the
breadth, and 25 the height of the opening: and although it passes two squares,
it is Convenient in this order in respect of the ^landernesse thereof. The
pilasteres shall be 4 modules as it is Set down in the design

architectural diagram

If the pedestal of this Corinthian order be the third part of the Column, it
shall be Six modules and, but it may be made of Seven modules for the more
Soliditie, very Conformable and agreeable to this order; and also to the end
that the pedest^l without the Cimatium and Base, may be two Squares, as may be
Seen by the numbers the rest, that is to Say the Cimatium and base, Seeing
that the are Set down in their Smalest parts, as also the impost of the Arch
there needs no farther description of them. A the upper Torus. B the lower
Torus.

architectural diagram

By the ground plat and profil of this Corinthian Capital all the measures may
be known, by the ground plat the breadths are measured by making a square
whose diagonal line shall be 4 modules, and on one of the Sides of the Square is
made an Equilateral triangle as you see in the figure, and Setting one foot of
the Compasses in the Angle marked the hollow of the Abacus is drawn, in the
profil the height of the leaves, Stems and Abacus, and the extente of the
leaves and stems is taken by the line which comes from the point of the Abacus
to the round of the Column, as may be seen by the design of the profil, the
rest may be easily understood with a little Consideration

A (...) together are called the Abacus of the Capital, but for better
understanding A is taken for the Cimatium of the Abacus. C the stem, D the
lesser leaves, E the middle leaves, F (...) under leaves, G the slower.

architectural diagram

This Corinthian Cornice is taken from diverse places at Rome, and principally
from the Pantheon or Temple of the round, and from the three Columns which are
in the Romain market, and Compairing their principal members, I have Set down
their rule before not differing any thing from the ancients, and reducing itt
to that proportion, that a modilion is over the middle of the Column, and that
the eggs, denticles anchors and spondyles answer directly the one to the
other, in good order as you may See the measures are supplied by numbers made
of modules and parts of modules, the module being divided into 18 as has bin
Said

architectural diagram

This Composita Pedestal keeps the proportion of the Corinthian and has no
other difference of members but in the Cymatium and basment, as may be Seen.
And because the ornaments of the Composita have the Same proportion with the
Corinthian, I have supposed it not necessary to make these Column and Arches
aparte, reffering to the Corinthian Columns and Arches. Only (...) given the
diversity of the Base and Capital, and other ornaments, as may be Seen in
their peaces

architectural diagram

This ground plat and profil of the Composita Capital, proceeds in the Same
manner as the Corinthian before described, it only differs in this, that where
the Corinthian has its Stems, the Composita has volutas made after the Same
manner with the Ionick. The ancient Romans taking one part of the Ionick and
another part of the Corinthian have made this Composition to unite together as
much as was possible all that which was beutiful in one only part

architectural diagram

This piece of the Composita order, that is to Say the Capital, Architrave,
fr^se, and Comice, is also drawn from diverse places among the Antiquities of
Rome, and is Reduced to proportion as has bin Said of the Corinthian which
being noted with numbers is sufficiently Clear of it self

architectural diagram

Among the antiquities of Rome there are found almost infinite varieties of
Capitals which have noe proper name, but may be Comprehended altogether under
that general word Composita, and also they follow the principal measures of
other Compositas, derived only from the Ionick and corinthian, It is true that
in Some of them we shall See the images of liueing Creatures in stead of
stemes, in others Cormicopias, and in others diverse other things according as
they found them to Saw their purpose in their designs, as may be Judged by
this present design, the which has 4 eagles inplase of the Stem, and in place
of the slowers 4 faces of Jupiter with lightening underneath, as you may
easily, that it was in a Temple consecrated to Jupiter, the Same may be Said
of the other which has 4 griffens in place of stems, and 4 eagles in the middle
with a dog in their claws, that it: was appropriated to some other of their
Idols, there proportion except the Images of the living creatures, is like to
the Corinthian.

This base is called Attick by Vitruvius in his 3d book and 3d chap: as being
first found and put in work by the Athenians, in our time it is used to be Set
in work in differently under the Corinthian Composita, Ionick and Dorick, but
it has more affinity with the composita than with any other order, and is
also tolerable in the Ionick, when we use not the proper base thereof, but,
under the other orders IIudge it altogether impertinent and can give many
Reasons for it, but I will not trouble my Self to Speak of things past built,
with So great license, It is sufficient in the same order as before that I Show
the Partition thereof, which arises from amodule divided into 18. parts, as
in the Ionick and Corinthian

architectural diagram

Columns are diminished in diverse manners, two whereof I Set down here which
are excep^ (...) fast and most known is, that the height and thicknes of the
column being terminated, and how much (...), at the third part upward from
the base where the lessening begins is drawn a Semicircle, and (...) parts of
the Semicircle which are without the perpendicular lines falling on the Said
circle from the lesser part of the column are divided into as many equal
parts as you will, and also the two thirds of the column is divided into as
many parts by transvers lines and where the perpendicular and transvers lines
meet Shatbe the terms of the diminishing as may be Seen in the figure, this
sort of column is used in the Tuscane and Dorick The other manner I have
found of my self by considering, and although it be less known yet it is
easy to comprehend by the lineaments, I Say only that all the parts being
terminated as is Said, an indeterminate right line ought to be drawn at the
thi^ (...) base, which begins from C and passes by D, then taking the measure
D and Setting it from A (...) the perpendicular in the pound, and extend AB to
E where it intersects the line CD prolonged, and from E draw as many lines as
(...) by the perpendicular to the circumference, and set the measure CD or each
of these lines from the perpendicular toward the circumference both above, and
beneath the third parle and you have the limits of the (...) this sort of
Column maybe used in the Ionick Corinthian and Comp^^^^^ These Straight
Columns being drawn as you see if you (...) them as these are at St Peter's
Church at Rome you must draw the ground plat as here you see, and the Small
Circle in the middle (which is as much as you would wreath it) and divede it
into 8 equal pts, and draw ^ lines parallel to the perpendicular then divide
the whole Column into ^8 parts and form from thence the Spiral line in the
middle, which (...) column from line to line as you see (...) you must observe
that the (...) numbers 1 2 3 4 marked on the ground plat serves (...) the
beginning ought to be from (...) you must follow the turning of the Small
Circle to (...) the rest you (...) as below

architectural diagram

This Cornice, (...) I have (...) any time^ for the finishing of Frontispi^^^
and (...) found it to be very acceptable and (...) it be of my one invention I
have not thought it impertinent to place it here at the end ^f (...) Small
work to satisfy those that would use it, the proportion with the Frontspi^^
is thus, the whole height being divided into 11 parts, there remains one for
the Cornice and 10 for the fronti^ ^^^e, the re^^ is Clear

architectural diagram

Palmi. 11.

Palmi Romani ^on li quali e'fatto il pres en^^ dis^gno

The Port of the fabric of the most Illustrious and Reverende Cardinal
Farnese at Caprarola

architectural diagram

This Port is of Rustic work, and the stones are so well Composed together,
Althought there were neither Mortar nor any other mixture, it were sufficient
to rule all the Structure be it never so great

architectural diagram

A Port designed for the Service of the most Illustrious and Reverende
Cardinal Farnese for the Principal entrance of the Pa^ais of the Chancerie

architectural diagram

The Port of St Lawrence in Damaso, a work of Vignola, although the palais is
of other Architects

architectural diagram

MICHAEL ANGELVS BONAROTVS PATRITVS FLORENTINVS ANAGENS. LXXIII

THE NEW AND LAST ADDITION OF PORTS OF ARCHITECTVRE of Michael Angelo Buonaroti
The most excelent Florentine Painter Sculptor and Architect

architectural diagram
This Ch^^^ (...) is ma^^ (...) ^^ture of diverse Co^ (...) of the most (...)
Reverend^ Card^^^^ St A^^^^l^ in his p^^^^ (...) Rome

architectural diagram

PIUS IIII PONTIF MAX POR^^M IN HANCAMP L^^VDINEM EXTV LIT ^AM ^^AMINIAM
STRAVIT ANNO III

The P^rt^ (...) ^al^d del (...)

architectural diagram

The design marked with A is the profil of the before going Port ^el Pop^lo

The design marked with B is the profil of Porta Pia (...)

architectural diagram

PIUS IIII PONT MAX PORTAM PIAM SV^LA^A NVMENTANA EXTRVXIT VIAM PIAM AEQVATALTA
SEMITA D^XIT -

Porta Pia of the m^ention of Michael Angelo

architectural diagram

A new work at the Capitole of the invention of Michel Angelo

architectural diagram

The Port of the Gardin of the most Illustrious Lord the Duke of Sforza

architectural diagram

ANTONVS - GRIMANVS -- D - V -

The Port of the vineyard of the most Reverende Patriarich Grimano in Strada
Pia

architectural diagram

The Port of the vineyard of the Cardinal of Sermoneta, which begins at the
foot of mount Quirinale, and is extended to the top of strada pia anciently
called alta Semita

architectural diagram


