Time well spent. OR, Opus Irae and Labor Benevolentiae. In eight Books. viz.

A compendious Retractation for Bookmaking, a godly zealous Prayer, for Peace
and Salvation, a Warning Piece for England, a Lamentable Complaint, a
Patheticall Apology, a Potent Vindication, a Paradox, and the Authors Disaster
for Bookmaking, with his Ship in Division.

Containing many brief and pleasant meditations very useful for these
distracted times, worthy observation and imitation.

Dies Ascensionis Domini nostri and salvatoris in Caelis.

11. May. 1643.
Whereas Edward Brown sometimes servant to Sir James Cambell, Knight and
Alderman of London, deceased, has presenteed to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty and the Lords and Commons in Parliament two Petitions wherein is
briefly described the miserable condition of this distracted Kingdom as well
as his own particular grievances, it is therefore ordered that not only his
desire therein shall be granted, but that His time well spent in Print shall be
forthwith publisted.

per Clericum Duiman ad Jgnoramum.

London, Printed in the year, 1643.

The first of these is sufficiently answered in my Disaster, Paradox, and
Vindication, and the latter is likewise answered in my Addition to those in my
Apology.

But therein I did forget to give his Worship hearty thanks, for his kind
respects toward me and now I could wish that I had followed his grave advise,
then should I have neglected the consures of men upon me and my Books, and so
have been victorous by Patience, which is much better then strife and
contention: For I do humbly acknowledge that I have overwatched or overwrought
my self in making Books, and therefore think it is now best to surcease and
leave; yet my mind is very much troubled which is the greatest misery that can
happen to a man in this world, as the wiseman has it in Pro. 18.14. The spirit
of a man may bear bodily infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
Therefore to ease my mind of this intolerable burden I have lately supervised
my works, and therein find some litterall faults escaped in the Press, by
reason of my haste to have them printed: But all the wit I have cannot find so
many substantial errors, as to make it the work of the devil, as some
affirm, except that be one in my bitter Pill, where I do affirm that my
supposed grand Adversary has vilyfied as honest a man as himself, but pray let
my modesty excuse my smooth language toward him, for though he does, I do not
delight in railing terms, because I know that in me, that is in my flesh
dwells no good thing, that I am not able of my self to think a good thought,
that I am the greatest of all sinners: and therefore have nothing whereof to
boast, but my infirmities, and those I glory in for sure I think it is the
finger of God that by my foolishness has struck to the heart root some guilty
persons hypocritically and maliciously affected: and therefore to those that
say my Books are like a rope of sand which will not hold together, but crumble
and moulder into inconsistent, useless, and unprofitable things, I affirm and
declare, that my Heavenly and Divine Ejaculations, and my Moral Satyricall
Fancies are so far unlike that simile, that they are as strong as a chain of
Iron, as true as Steel, and as precious as Gold. For the ground of the first
work is apparent in the Epistle to the Reader; and how firmly at hangs thereon
all men may judge. And if any new inspired Teacher, with assistance of the most
Orthodox Divines in this Kingdom dare set pen to paper against my Angry
Labors of good will to satisfle a troubled mind, which spring from the two
former Letters, and some opprobrious speeches of any malignant parties. I have
already by the assistance of the Almighty on these my weak endeavors, made it
manifest in the view of all men, in my Disaster, Paradox, etc. that as the
Hydrean heads of the Hypocrite began to appear in my view, so according to my
skill I have cut them off with the two-edged sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, and Reason, which I hope is so potent that all my malicious adversaries
are not able to break one link thereof with the said instrument; though I must
acknowledge they may abuse me with their Militia, which they have made Malitia,
as some have done to diverse others of far better worth then I am for smaller
matters. And therefore to expend my money in printing my own fancies, though
never so good, I will not for all that their malice can do unto me, much less
will I trouble my self for what they may falsely say of me.

And I do once more challenge great Goliath and the Philistines to defy me with
any propositions against Monarchy and Episcopacie, as it is established in
this kingdom: let them if they dare put forth their knotty Riddles, and tie
their Foxes tales one to another, with all the craft and cunning they can, and
I hope with David to stick a stone in the forehead of great Goliath, which I
shall find in the brook of Gods word and other little Rivers, and with the
help of my Fathers Heifer I trust to untie, break, and plow up the hard
Rocks in their fraudulent Riddles, that it shall be eaven and plain ground,
and set such firebrands between their Foxes tales that shall burn and consume
their seeming corn to ashes. For it grieves my very soul to see and hear
rare men abused and contemned, but such malignant VVoodcockes as Peter's and
other New England Apostles, applauded to the very Heavens. And certainly if
they be suffered to continue long they will bring misery, Calamytie, and
destruction upon us all. For thus I heard one say in his Pulpit yesterday, That
they are no people which have not God among them: which cannot be, for God is
everywhere by his Omnipresence and Providence, though it is true his particular
soul saving presence is only with his Saints. But hereby this fellow and
diverse others of his garb would infer, That all the wicked must utterly be
destroyed from the face of the earth, which is very false and pernicious
doctrine; for God set a mark upon Cain, lest any man finding him should kill
him. And Christ says expressly, the Tares must grow with the Wheat until the
Harvest. But envy, malice, treason, (...)

MAster Walmesley and Mistress Vanpaine, of all Sir James his kindred I did
think you had been the most truly religious, and therefore was bold to
present unto each of you a Book, which I thought you would kindly accept of
because it was of my composing, who was a poor servant when you dwelt with my
master, rather then for any worth in the thing it self: but it seems my
expectation therein was frustrated, for in stead of commending my expense of
spare time in such works, I understand you have vilified the same. Therefore
because you are so godly judicious, I would entreat you to peruse this fruit of
my labor likewise, and certify my faults therein with a pen, and then send
them unto me by some Porter, whose pains I will requite, and I shall esteem
it a favor showed to

Your poor servant, Edw: Brown.
4. Aug. 1643.

MAster Brown, I have perused your Books, and I find them useless for me. I
find in them light with darkness, holy things and vain unprofitable things
mixed, which are altogether inconsistent: and I am sure if you will not look
beyond the Moon, but fix your eyes a little, there you may find there a dead
fly which makes your books of ointment unsavourie, if there were no other
errors in your Book, the which there are many: but you must not expect that I
will take upon me to nominate the particular errors in your books for then I
should begin to be a book-maker as well as you: wherefore I will not now
begin to confute books, because God has not called me unto it. As for that
which was good in Sir James Cambel my dear deceased Uncle, I suppose I know as
well as your self, and therefore I need not your book to teach me the
knowledge of it: but if you will send me one of his pictures which you caused
to be drawn upon a board the bearer hereof shall content you for it. And here
according unto your desire I have sent you your two books, as also a book of
yours which my brorher Walmesley entreated me to send you: and thus I rest,
only advising you as a friend that you would cease to make more books unill
you be enabled to make such as may be for the glory of God, and edifying of
his Church, lest at length you be called unto account by the great God of
heaven and earth, for mis-spending of your precious time in dishonoring of him
in this way of book-making: and thus desiring of God that he would by his
saving and illuminating Spirit discover unto you the knowledge of Jesus Christ
and him crucified for you. And thus I commit you unto the protection of
Almighty God, and rest,

Your loving friend, Anne van Peene.
London, Aug. 11. Anno 1642.

The second Letter came from my reverend (...), in answer to those in my
Apology, thus.

Good Master Brown:
I Must desire you to consider that my leisure will nor permit me to read such
large Volumes, and beside, my eyes cannot master so small a print, otherwise I
should be glad to give you my furtherance in any course that might promote your
contentment. I do not yet well know why you sent me the copies of these Books
which I had before, niether was I able to read perfectly half of your Letter,
which might have acquainted me more fully with your mind: but, by what I both
see and conjecture, I conceive you overwatcht your business, and are too
tenderly affected with the censures of men upon your Book, and your self, not
remembering that the best victory is got by neglecting them. I am sorry you put
my name to your Testimonial in print, not as ashamed of it, but as unwilling
to have it public to a thing of no more moment: And for your Petition, my
judgment is, that to prefer it to the King you shall do great wrong both to
your Master, and the Executors, and your self; I the rather mind you of it,
because I would have you confident, that I will always be ready to do you
any good to my power, as fits

Your loving friend, Ri: Holdsworth.
Em: Coll: Ian. 6. 1642.


