THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable, The LORD MAYOR of London, With the Humble
ADDRESS OF THE MILITARY FORCES Of the same CITY, To The Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY.

With His MAJESTY'S most Gracious ANSWER Thereunto, And LETTER To the Lord
Mayor thereupon.

And all the Transactions incident thereunto.

Published by Authority

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno Dom. 1661.

THat highly deserving Gentleman, and faithful Subject, Sir Richard Brown,
Knight and Baronet, now Lord Mayor, and Major General of the City of London,
the Field Officers, Captains, and other inferior Officers of all the Trained
Bands, the Regiments of Horse, and Regiments of Auxiliary Forces of that famous
City, met on Tuesday the second of April, 1661. at the Guildhall of the same
City and there subscribed the following Address.

Dread Sovereign.
YOur most Loyal and most Devoted Subjects, Your Major General, Field Officers
and Captains, with all the Inferior Officers of the several Regiments of Your
Trained-Bands of Your City of London, whiles some men's zeal, through
unrighteous Seducements, seems a little cooled toward Your Majesty's Service,
Do with all humble boldness Remonstrate the Constancy of theirs; And in a deep
sense of their Duty and high Obligations to Your Sacred Majesty for Your
especial Indulgencies to this Your Native City, do Dedicate their Lives and
Estates to Your Majesty's Service; Hereby adding to their Oath of Allegiance,
That they will not only bear Faith and Obedience to Your Majesty, but upon all
Occasions joyfully employ and improve their uttermost power and vigilance with
their Lives and Fortunes to destroy Your Enemies in defense of Your Royal
Person and Authority, and securing all Your just civil Interests, with the
Interest of Religion as it is now established by Law: For, Your Majesty being
eminently the most Pious, Gracious, and Worthy Prince in the World, we cannot,
without exceeding all other Subjects in Loyalty and Affection, deserve the
Title of

Your Majesty's True, Dutiful, Humble, and Obedient Subjects and Servants.


The said Address was subscribed by the several Officers, as well Superior as
Inferior, of all the Trained-Bands, the Regiments of Horse and Auxiliary
Forces of the City, to the number of some five hundred persons; which being
already reprinted and published, is here forborne.

All which marched in an orderly Train on Foot, only the Lord Mayor leading
them in his Coach to the Court at Whitehall, and were instantly received into
the Banqueting House. His Majesty at their coming being in debate of some
important Affairs at the Council, was pleased in much favor to send a Person
of quality, and after him several other Gentlemen one after another, to
acquaint them with that occasion, and to bespeak their attendance till the same
would permit His absence from the Council: Notwithstanding, it pleased His
Majesty after a little while to spare himself from those Affairs at the
Council; and with great show of Princely favor and regard to receive the
Papers of Address into His own hand, being presented by the Lord Mayor after he
had delivered himself in this affectionate Speech.

THE Lord Mayors Speech.
May it please Your Majesty.
I Came accompanied with these Your Officers, who command all Your London
Forces both Horse and Foot: Pointing at them severally.
Here stand those that command Your Horse, these Your Trained Bands, The other,
Your Auxiliaries. When Your Majesty has taken a right view of them, You will
see Loyalty linked in an unchangeable Chain; These are they who will not swerve
from what they swear, that is fealty without falsity, and it were a shame not to
do so; seeing we sow in peace and reap the plenty which springs from so
excellent a Governor, so good a Government: If You please, to see our hearts,
these lines lead to them, and speak for them, which I here humbly present unto
Your Sacred Majesty in their names and under their hands, Beseeching Your
Majesty to accept them as a dutiful return of those many signal favors
vouchsafed by Your Majesty to Your Native City and Loyal Citizens.

Whereunto His Majesty replied, That He had stolen a time from very important
Affairs, on which He was in debate with His Council, to come to them; and gave
a most gracious answer, declaring His good esteem of them; His kind resentment
of their Address; His assured confidence in their faithfulness; His readiness
and desire to advance the welfare of the City; and many other expressions full
of Princely goodness and affection.

And after all this, was further pleased that night to send a worthy Gentleman,
Clerk of the Council, to the Lord Mayor, to give notice that His Majesty
intended the next day to send down some Lords of His Council to make a more
ample signification of His Majesty's gracious acceptance of the Address, and to
require a meeting of the Commanders and Officers for that purpose: But their
Lordships, being prevented by the Lords Commissioners sitting for Claims at the
Coronation, sent to excuse their personal coming by a Messenger to the Lord
Mayor, who also brought His Majesty's gracious Letter in these words.

CHARLES R.
TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well.
We have received your Address, wherein you do not only give Us a full and
acceptable Demonstration of your Duty, Love, and Loyalty to Us (which We do
Graciously accept) but also show forth an Eminent Example thereof to all other
Our good Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions. You may be assured that as
Our Royal Progenitors have always had a particular and extraordinary kindness
for that Our Capital City, so We shall not come behind any of them in Our
Princely care to make the same both flourishing and secure at home, and
glorious and renowned abroad. And so We bid you farewell. Given at Our Court at
Whitehall, this third day of April in the thirteenth year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, WILL. MORICE.

To Our Trusty and Welbeloved, Sir Richard Brown, Knight and Baronet, Lord
Mayor, and Major General of Our City of London, to be Communicated to the Field
Officers and Captains, with all the Inferior Officers of the several Regiments
of the Trained Bands, the Regiments of Horse, and the Regiments of Auxiliary
Forces of Our said City.

Which being read in presence of all the Field Officers, made deep impressions
of His Majesty's Grace and Favor upon their minds, and drew forth all
answerable acknowledgements in outward expressions, which they ordered
presently to be represented to His Majesty by Sir Richard Ford, Sir William
Vincent, and Sir Thomas Player, and directed them to beg of His Majesty this
Roy^l addition, That they might publish in print the Narrative of the whole
passage of their dutiful Address, and the most gracious reception thereof by
His Sacred Majesty, for the just support of those good Subjects, whose Loyal
affections attended that Remonstrance, and at once to stop the mouths of those
who detracted from the Royal acceptance of it, and to encourage them (if they
have any sense of Duty and Honor) to outdo the Remonstrants in the like real
profession of their bounden duty: for which the said Officers shall both love
and honor their new Rivals, and in all amity and mutual affections keep peace
with them, if they can.

Which His Majesty was graciously well pleased to approve of, and consent that
His Royal Letter, and all the preceding Passages should be made public.

FINIS.

