THE BARGAIN Which the DUKE OF LUXEMBOURG General of the Troops of France, made
with the DEVIL, to Win BATLES; AND To make his Name famous over all the
habitable Earth, and to be Loved of the Kings of France, and of all the Lords
and Ladies of that Court; With the Tricks and Cheats of the Devil. Containing
twenty four Articles.
In a Letter from Paris to one at London, June 10: 1692.
Translated out of French.
SIR
I Have according to your desire made diligent Enquiry after the Articles of
Compact, that the Duke of Luxembourg is said to have made with the Devil, and
with much ado found one Copy of them, which I here enclosed send you. I doubt
not but you may have heard, that when the said Duke was taken, and ^^nt to the
Bastile, upon suspicion of being concerned in the Poisoning Business, that ^^me
y^^^^ ago m^d^ such (...) noise all the Kingdom over, all his Papers were
seized, ^^d this of the Compact was found amongst them, and some time
afterward Printed ^^re at Paris. By this you will see what the Boundless
Ambition of a vain glorious ^an is capable of seting him upon, and that he will
make no difficulty to violate all ^ivine and Humane Laws, to satisfy the same;
But he who was a Liar and Deceiver ^^om the beginning, served him no better
then he always does all his Votaries, for not ^e of the Articles did he keep or
perform, this was the most powerful Argument that ^^evail'd with the Duke, to
believe that he was cheated by the Devil, and made him ^^pent of his Bargain.
The French King when he saw these Articles, asked the Duke, ^^y he would do so
abominable a thing? his Answer was, That he believed nothing ^nlawful that
could contribute to the Glory and good Success of his most Christian ^^jesties
affairs, both at Home and Abroad; And that he valued not what became of ^^mself
afterward, providing he could have the satisfaction, in this World, of being
(...) Chief Person in his favor, and be successful in War. The King it is said,
smiled the fancy, (...) thanked him for his Zeal; And sent Jesuits and other
Ghostly Fathers to ^^^ruct and disingage him of that Treaty; Which when they
had done, and made ^^ort thereof to the king. His most Christian Majesty has
ever since thought him (...) fittest Person in his Kingdom to be entrusted with
the Chief Command of his Army's (...) Flanders, and else where.

Monesiur Luxembourge to the Devil.
1. THou shall give me every Month during my Life, One hundred thousand Crowns
in good and Lawful Money, passable wherever I shall be, half Gold, and I Silver.

2. Thou shall make me win all the Battles I shall Fight, whither it be aainst
the ^^ng's Enemies whom I serve, or my own particular Enemies.

3. Thou shall preserve my Body from all Accidents, either from Wounds, Fire,
or ^^ord, ad from poison, and generally from all Accidents whatsomever.

4. Thou shall let me know in six hours time the Secrets of all Courts, and of
all the ^^uncels of Europe, with all the discourses they have in their
conversations, etc.

5. Thou shall make me agreeable to all sorts of persons, as well of the one
Sex as the other.

6. Thou shall make me Honored and Respected by all Nations, and particularly
by the Nations of Europe.

7. Thou shall give me a Spirit of Judgment and Understanding to do all things
easily that are necessary for me.

8. Thou shall make me know all Sciences and Arts, as well as the Mathematics
as Others.

9. Thou shall make me expert at all Exercises, either to Command the Armies,
or to manage ARms, Dance, or Ride the great Horse.

10. And when I am sick, thou shall give me Physic to cure me in three days.

11. Thou shall prolong my Life, my Days for thirty years, counting from the
day of making the Bargain between thee and me.

12. Which Conditions if thou shall perform, I promise to give thee my Body and
Soul to be disposed of as thou shall think fit. And for the Execution of my
promise, I sign the said Bargain with my own Blood.

The Devil to Monsieur Luxembourg.
1. I Will give you every month, during your life, One hundred thousand Crowns
o^ Good, and Lawful Money passible where ever you shall be; half Gold, and half
Silver

2. I will make you win all the Battles you shall Fight, either against the
Enemies o^ the King whom you serve, or your own particular Enemies.

3. I will preserve your Body from all Accidents, either from Wounds, Fire, o^
Sword, and from Poison; and generally from all Accidents whatsoever.

4. I will let you know in six hours time, all the secrets of all the (...),
and all (...) Councels of Europe, with all the Discourses which they have in
their private convertions.

5. I will make you agreeable to all sorts of Persons, as well of the one Sex,
as the oth^^

6. I will make you honored and respected by all Nations, and particularly by
(...) Nations of Europe.

7 I will give you a Spirit of Judgment and Understanding to do easily all
this that are necessary for you

8. I will make you know all the Sciencies and Arts, as well the Mathematics,
as oth^^^

9. I will make you expert at all Exercises, either to command the Armies, or
manage Arms, Dance, or Ride the great Horse.

10. And when you are sick. I will give you Physic to cure you in three days.

11. I will prolong your Life and your Days for thirty years, counting from
the (...) of making the bargain between thee and me.

12. Which if I perform, thou shall give me thy Body and Soul to be disposed o^
(...) I think fit.

Reprinted conform to the LONDON Copy, Printed for S. Daniel, 1692.


