THE CASE Of the Inhabitants of the Hamblet of Wapping, in the Parish of St.
Mary White-Chappel in the County of Middlesex.
Humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT of England.
THE Parish of White-Chappel, being very Populous about the Year 1617, the
Inhabitants of Wapping (being a Hamblet by themselves, choosing all their own
Officers, maintaining their own Poor, and being charged for all Kings Taxes, as
if they were a Parish) did by a Voluntary Contribution Erect a Chapel in
Wapping aforesaid, which was duly. Consecrated; and the Inhabitants and their
Successors have ever since repaired it, and by free Collections have maintained
a Minister there, without the Allowance of one Penny to the said Minister from
the Rectors of the said Parish.

And yet during all this time, the Inhabitants of Wapping have paid to the
several Rectors of White-Chappel, the full Rate of Tithes, in respect of their
Houses which was formerly paid, although they have had no benefit of their
Cure, and also have been Assest rather higher toward the repairs of the Parish
Church than any other of the Inhabitants.

Buried in the whole City of London the last Year 2740.
The whole Parish of White-Chappel consists of more then 4000 Houses, and the
Inhabitants by the lowest computation are between Thirty and Forty Thousand
Souls; so that the said Prish has many more Inhabitants in it then One Third
part of the whole City of London, which is 97 Parishes.

The Hamblet of Wapping has formerly been esteemed One Third part of the whole
Parish, In the Parish of White-Chappel 1048.
but now by the Building of Goodmans-Fields and other places, in which have
been Erected Six or Seven Hundred Houses within Ten Years last, and by a
moderate computation above 150^ Houses within about 30 Years, and this all in
the upper part of the Parish; so that the Hamblet of Wapping (which cannot be
increased by new Buildings (having no ground to Build upon) is now not one
Fourth part of the whole, and yet notwithstanding is charged as One Third part.

Within 24 Years last past, there have happened five dreadful fires in Wapping,
which totally consumed 500 Houses, with Goods, Merchandises etc. to the value
of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, which decayed diverse of its Inhabitants, and
ruined more; and since this present War, the Inhabitants being chiefly Seamen,
and depending on Sea Trade, are greatly Impoverished, and being burdened with
many Widows and Orphans, they are unable to pay Rate Tithes, to the Rectors of
White-Chappel (of whose Cure they can have no benefit, by reason of the great
distance of the Church from them; and the vast numbers of the Inhabitants,
which are so great, that the Parish Church cannot conttain One Tenth part of
them) and maintain their own Minister and support their own Chapel as
formerly: So that the Inhabitants will be constrained to let their Chapel
fall, and shall thereby become destitute of Divine Service, Sacraments, and
other Religious Offices there for the future; which must necessarily throw them
into a Defection from the Church in particular, or to all Religion in general,
which God Avert.

And for prevention of it, they beg the Assistance of this present Parliament,
praying they may be made a Parish distinct by themselves.

Obj. 1. Perhaps it may be Objected, That if Wapping be made a Parish, this
will become a damage to the Rectory of White-Chappel, and in particular to the
present Rector?

Ans. If Wapping be made a Parish, yet White-Chappel, through the Advantage of
the New Buildings (most of which are fair and large Houses and Inhabited by
Persons of great Wealth) will still be made better then it was 30 Years ago
with Wapping, and will (it is verily believed) be worth with the Perquisites,
above 400 l. per Annum.

Obj. 2. If Wapping be made a Parish, this will Exempt them from contributing
to the Repairs of White-Chappel-Church and Highways?

Ans. 1. White-Chappel without Wapping, will better be able, through the
increase of their Inhabitants, to repair their Church and Highways (of which
Wapping have no benefit) then formerly they could with Wapping.

2. Wapping has been at above 700 l. Charge of late Years in paving their own
Ways, which were formerly unpav'd,

3. They have been of late Years at many Hundreds of Pounds Charge in enlarging
the Out-lets of the Common-Sewers, and are still at great cost in maintaining
them, which do receive and convey the greatest part of the Water of
White-Chappel into the River of Thames, notwithstanding to which White-Chappel
contributes not one Penny; all which are great Advantages, but no Charge to
White-Chappel.

4. The Hamblet of Wapping are to have one Third part of all Public Charities
given to the Parish at large, one Third part of the Rent of the Parish Houses,
one Sixth part of all offerings, which (if they are made a distinct Parish)
they shall utterly lose.

All which considered will much more then compensate their present Charge to
the Church and Highways.

THE Hamblet of Waping White-Chappel 's CASE.


