The CASE of the Wholesale and Retale Dealers, in Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, etc.
In Relation to the Bill now depending.
THAT the first Excise which was known in England, was given since the
Restoration; and That, instead of the Court of Ward and Liveries, which had
been grievous to the Subject: And the Excise being very burdensome, attended
with many Inconveniences, Penalties, and Vexations, which must attend the fair
Trader in this Bill now depending, and will no Ways prevent the clandestine
Running of those Commodities, which (is humbly conceived) is intended by the
said Bill.

Fair Traders being obliged to enter their Shops, and Warehouses, etc. the
Smuggler will never have any Place entered, but carry on their Trade by unknown
Persons.

The Officers having a Power to enter by Night, must be of the utmost ill
Consequence to the Subject; exposing his said House and Warehouse to be
plundered, and his Family put in the utmost Surprise. Any Dealers increasing
their Stock by clandestine Running in the Night, may be discovered in the Day.

Permits will be found very troublesome, hindering the Dispatch of Business,
not to be obtained at all Times for the Supply of Country Chapmen, and very
often clandestinely procured to convey and carry off Smuggled or Run Goods with
Safety.

For Dealers to keep Books of Accounts of all Quantities of Coffee, etc. sold
by them, and to whom, is altogether impracticable; particularly to those who
cannot write.

Erecting Public Offices to roast Coffee-Berries, will be the entire Ruin of
many Families which are now supported by that Employment; and will also be a
great Hinderance of Business, the Dealers not having any Opportunity to roast
Coffee as usual.

It is humbly conceived by this Bill, the Duties will be advanced on the said
Commodities for Home Consumption, and lowered on Exportation; which will be an
Encouragement to the Running Trade, and the contrary to the fair and honest
Dealers for Home Consumption; and that to lower the Duties on Coffee and Tea,
etc. may have the same Effect as the Precedent on Pepper and Spice; increase
the Revenues, and support and encourage the fair Trader, and entirely put a
Stop to the clendestine Running of those Commodities.

The CASE of the Wholesale and Retale Dealers in Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, etc.
in Relation to the Bill now depending.


