The CASE of the Honorable Fytton Gerard Esquire Returned to Serve in Parliament
for the Borough of Clitheroe, against John Weddall Esquire appointed to be heard on
the 15th Day of this Instant January.
MR. Wilkinson, Uncle to Mr. Weddall, designing (as appears by many of his, and
his Agents foul Practices) to make a Return of his Nephew to serve in
Parliament for the said Borough, in the room of Anthony Parker Esquire put in to be
Chosen one of the Bailiffs of the Town, and Treated for that purpose, as since,
and before, he has been at the whole Charge for Mr. Weddall, whom he set up to
be Recorder of the Town; and by the Voices of a few, without the Consent of the
Majority of the Burgesses and Freemen, he got him declared Recorder, and sworn
Clandestinely in an Alehouse.

The next point which they thought essential to gain to serve their turn, was
to keep Men off from being found by a Jury according to Custom to have right to
be Burgesses or Freemen; in order to which, some of the Jury were practiced
upon to absent themselves, and force was used, so that there could not be a
full Jury, though the Foreman, with others, met and stayed in the Court some
Hou^s, and several Summons were sent to the rest, who were fined for their
Nonappearance. Upon which the Court was Adjourned to the next Day, but
Chippendale, one of the Bailiffs, pretended to have dismissed the Enquiry Jury,
though without the Consent, or Privity of Mr. Stock the other Bailiff, and
without causing Proclamation to be made of the Dismission, by Color only of an
Instrument signed out of Court by Mr. Chippendale, which Mr. Weddall sitting as
Recorder, ordered to be read: By which Trick several who had right to Vote in
the Choice of Bailiffs, and had offered their Deeds to Evidence their right,
were not found by the Jury, but their Votes, though they had a right, were
denied at the Election of Bailiffs: Notwithstanding which Mr. Mainwaring, a
Gentleman of Four or Five Hundred Pounds a Year, within a Mile of the Place,
besides Houses in the Town, and a good Estate in the County, and in Cheshire,
was in his Absence, without his seeking, or privity, duly Chosen out Bailiff,
whose place has always been accounted the Chief.

Mr. Mainwaring soon after offered himself to be Sworn according to the Custom,
but being refused, he brought two successive Mandamus's from the King's- Bench,
which were disobeyed: And Mr. Wilkinson, though never Chosen, pretending that
Mr. Mainwaring was incapable, as being under Age, was Sworn by Mr. Lister, who
himself had been Sworn but by one Bailiff, though the Custom requires that both
the old Bailiffs, if Alive and Well, should join in Administering the Oath. Upon
this Mr. Wilkinson took upon him to Act as Out-Bayliff, and he and Mr. Lister,
that they might discourage and strike a Terror into those who had declared for
Mr. Gerard, came with Ambrose Pudsey Esquire Thomas Lister Esquire and others Armed
into a Public House, where some of Mr. Gerard's Friends were peaceably
Drinking together, and fell violently upon them: Thomas Lister Esquire and Ambrose
Pudsey Esquire set Pistols to the Breasts of several of them, and Mr. John Lister
Bailiff, threw one of them to the Ground, and Trampled upon him, and for this
the pretended Bailiffs Mr. Wilkinson and Mr. Lister Committed them to Prison,
and ordered them to be laid in a Dungeon, without any Warrant or Mittimus.
After this, several who had right, some to Burgages, others to Freedoms,
proffered themselves at several Court Days to be admitted and Sworn, but were
refused: Whereupon they brought several Writs of Mandamus, but to defeat them
of the advantage thereof, and their Votes at the said Election, no return has
been made of either of the said Mandamus's.

A Writ for the Choice of a Burgess being delivered to the High Sheriff, he
being informed of these Irregularities, himself carried his Precept for an
Election, and coming to the Town on the 24th of November, sent to speak with
Mr. Lister, who declined speaking with him, but being acquainted by the Under
Sheriff, while Mr. Wilkinson was by, that a Precept was brought for Electing a
Burgess, Mr. Lister, with some Burgesses, and Mr. Wilkinson's Clerk, without
his Master, came to the Sheriff, who in presence of a great many of the
Burgesses, demanded who was the Out-Bayliff, and they cried out, Mr. Mainwaring
is our Out-Bayliff. Upon this the High Sheriff delivered the Precept to Mr.
Mainwaring, and Mr. Lister, as Bailiffs of the Town, and told them he expected
a return of it: And Mr. Mainwaring ask't Mr. Lister when they should meet with
some of the Burgesses to consider of a Day for the Election; but he,
notwithstanding he had been solicited with all Civility by Mr. Mainwaring,
refused to join; upon which, on the 25th of November, Mr. Mainwaring meeting
with several of the Burgesses, by their Advice appointed the Election to be on
the 30th, and caused it to be proclaimed in two places of the Town, upon a
Market Day, and published Papers to the like effect: but Mr. Wilkinson and Mr.
Lister, in Contempt of the Precept, caused Proclamation to be made by way of
Countermanding the Election. When the Day of Election came, Mr. Mainwaring came
to the Town Hall, and to prevent disorders adjourned into a Penthouse in the
open Street where the Precept was read: But Mr. Lister who was persent, being
desired by Mr. Mainwaring to join with him, without proclamation pronounced,
the Court Adjourned to the Town Hall, where he proceeded without a Precept, to
have a Poll taken for Mr. Weddall, while Mr. Mainwaring with the Precept,
proceeded on to the Election: And though Mr. Lister admitted persons
unqualified, to Vote for Mr. Weddall, Mr. Gerard had the Majority: Therefore
the Sheriff annexed to the Precept an Indenture Signed by Mr. Mainwaring and
several of the Burgesses who Chose Mr. G^rard.

This Mr. Weddall Complains of as irregular, upon pretense that Mr. Mainwaring
was not a Legal Bailiff, being under Age.

The Constitution of the Borough of Clitheroe, with the Right of Elections for
Bailiffs, or Members of Parliament.
THis Borough Consists of two Bailiffs, and Burgesses, and Freemen.

The Bailiffs are chosen out of the Burgesses by the Burgesses and Freemen.

The Burgesses are such as have free Burgages within the Borough, and they are
of two sorts, viz. Out-Burgesses, and In-Burgesses.

The Out-Burgesses are such as have a House or Land in Borough Tenure, and pay
Borough Rent, but are resident, and inhabiting out of the Borough.

The In-Burgesses are such as are so entitled, and are resident and inhabiting
within the said Borough.

The Freemen are such as are Tenants to some Burgess, that is Owner of some
Message or Burgage, House or Lands which pays some part of the Borough Rent.

There is, and has been time out of mind within the said Borough an Enquiry
Jury Impannell'd in January or February every Year, whose Duty and Business it
is (amongst other things) to find all Persons that offer themselves, and show a
sufficient right to be Burgesses or Freemen, and to present them as such to the
Bailiffs, who ought thereupon to Admit and Swear them, as has been always
accustomed; and this Jury is used to be Adjourned from Court to Court as
occasion requires, and is continued or dismissed at discretion of the Bailiffs.

In Case of the Elections for Bailiffs, or Members of Parliament, they are
Chosen by Burgesses and Freemen, and if the Burgess appear and Vote, the
Freeman, his Tenant, cannot Vote for the same Burgage, but if the Burgess Vote
not, then, in his stead, his Tenant as Freeman may.

Where a Burgess has several Burgages, he can but Vote for one, and his
Tenants as Freemen for the rest.

For free Borough Land none can Vote but the Landlord himself.


