THE CASE OF THE Poor BREWER Humbly Represented.
THE Excise on Beer and Ale is a considerable part of the Revenue, and for that
Reason the Brewer ought to be considered. That as to the complaints of the
Poor, it is very improbable they should occasion either their want or their
clamor. For the quantity of Corn, besides Molosso's which they use, is not
more than 3 millions of Quarters in a Year, and if there should be produced 3
hundred thousand Quarters more than what they use, surely that is enough to
supply the Poor, and other uses.

The Brewers are so advantageous to the Kingdom, that there are 3 Men who
consume more Malt in a year, than all the Distillers have done; and surely such
Men ought not to be laid by, tho but for one Year; for it is more to the
advantage of England certainly to let the whole Trade of Distilling be put
down, than for such Men to suffer, tho it should be by obliging them to brew a
little less Malt.

The Brewers are come to that perfection in their Trade, that they now fine
down their Wash, and make Drink of that which the Hogs used to eat before.

What if there is as much Malt Brewed into Strong Beer or Ale, as is consumed
by Distilling, and which pays no more Duty to the King, than single Beer and
Ale; yet surely the Excise for single Drink is enough for both.

What if there is a scarcity of Corn, is it necessary that the Brewer be
restrained in their use of Malt? Is it not sufficient to prevent Distilling?
For then Corn will be cheap and plenty; and when there is but one buyer no body
need fear that the Brewer will give too much for his Corn. The Farmer cannot
fatten Hogs with Barley to very great advantage, but if the Brewer once brings
Corn to such a cheapness, that it will be more profit to feed Poultry than
bring it to London Markets to sell them, the Poor will not surely complain of the
dearness of Corn, unless the Poultry should unhappily consume more than the
Distillers have done; for by the best computation, if they should consume as
much as has been supposed, it will amount to near Half a Peck to a man in one
Year; which being so considerable they ought to be put down. For the worst that
can come is, that we shall then import French Brandy, and that will be so much
to the advantage of England, that we only send ready Money out of the Land; and
if we export Malt Spirits, it will be of that pernicious consequence, that
'twill bring money home.

A great many other considerations might be offered; but it is hoped from these,
that no body will put it into the head if any man to move, that the Brewer may
be so much as considered in this matter.


