The CASE of the Inhabitants of the Town of Bradford.
We the Makers and others concerned in the Manufacture of Set-work (commonly
called Turkey work) Inhabitants of the Town of Bradford, and parts adjacent in
the West Riding of the County of York.

Do hereby Humbly Certify.
I. THat when our said Trade flourished and was at the highest, there were Ten
Thousand persons employed in and about the said Trade.

II. That then there was Eight Hundred packs of Wool consumed in the said
Manufacture yearly.

III. That then there was yearly expended in Dying the Woollen Yarn for the
said Set-work about Three Thousand pounds per Annum.

IV. That then there was yearly expended in making the said Set-work Three
Hundred packs of Hemp Yarn of the value of Six pounds a pack. All which
Materials, Wages and Returns (as near as we can compute) amounted to Fifty
Thousand pounds per Annum.

The Reasons Offered against this CASE,
Is by the Joyners, Turners, Sawyers, Carvers, and Caners in and about the City
of London. To which is Answered:

To their First, The Upholsters of London Declare, They knew nothing of the
Petition and Case from the Town of Bradford, nor solicited to the Town for it,
as is falsely asserted. They further say they knew not of the contrivance of the
summons to the Mermaid in Cornhil, nor did the Beadle of their Company, know
of, or deliver any such summons, though his name is affixt to it.

To the Second, This Reason much proves the truth of the Reasons given for the
encouragement of the Woollen Manufacture; because if Ten Thousand dozen of
Set-work, serge and Chamlet Chairs are now yearly made as they say, which
Consumes at least Fifteen Hundred packs of Wool yearly, then twice the
quantity of Wool will be consumed, when double the number of Chairs are made of
the Woollen Manufacture.

To the Third, It was once moved in Parliament 7 years since, That an Enacting
Clause might be added to the Woollen Bill for the prohibiting Cane Chairs; upon
the Question, the House divided, it was carried in the Negative; yet the
Members did say if it were in a Bill by it self they were much for it, and no
oppornity has offered till this present Parliament. As to the Dutch Matted
Chairs great quantities were brought to England by persons that sell Indian
Goods; and many dozens are Vended yearly which is much prejudicial to the
Consumption of Wool, and is provided against in the Bill now before this
Honorable House.

To the Fourth, The Joyner, Turner, Sawyer, will be still fully employed in
making Frames for Chairs, the Carver also employed: the Caner is by Trade a
Sive and Basket-Maker, and it is believed there is not above Ten Master Caners
at most, who have gone about with a Petition to the Joyners, and to several
have declared, if they would not subscribe it, and contribute toward their
charge, they would Cane no more work for them.

If Ten Thousand people employed in this Woollen Manufacture at Bradford, and
parts adjacent. What number may be accounted on, from Kidderminster, Norwich,
Linn, Taunton, Exeter, Colchester, etc. Which Woollen Manufactures were
formerly much used in Chairs: Besides the several other materials, which are
made at Bermicham, Dorset-shire, Somersetshire, etc. It is humbly conceived
not less then Forty Thousand persons employed.


