English Orthography: OR, The Art of WRITING AND ^^ELLING True ENGLISH, In
Three PARTS.

PART I. Contains all what is necessary for the Letters in Orthography, and
every Letter considered in particular.

PART II. Contains the Spelling part, with Rules and Directions for Reading,
Spelling and Understanding all hard Words, with the Abbreviations in Letters
and Figures; also plain and easy Rules to understand the Stops or Pauses, and
an Example on every one with all Marks and Directions.

Together with a Table of the most material Words that are spelt differently
and sounded alike, very necessary to be known, whereby those who have not
learned the Grammar may learn to spell True English.

PART III. Presents the Learner with ample and useful Instructions how to
write Letters of all Sorts, and to all manner of Persons, and the Titles of
Honor and Respects due to all Ranks, with Beginnings and Conclusions on many
Occasions.

Also usual Precedents for Common Affairs, very necessary for Persons of all
Ranks.

By JOHN CHALMER, Teacher of the Art of Writing and Accounts, etc.

Ingenium nisi sit studium flos est sine fructu
Haec duo conjuncta, fructificare solent.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, against the Royal
Ex^^ange in Cornhill. 1687.

English Orthography, Containing The Art of Writing Right And Spelling Well:
With Directions for Reading English and Writing Letters to Persons of all
Qualities. Very necessary for young Persons both Men and Women, especially
those who have not learned the Grammar. PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the Letters and Characters of the English Tongue.
ORthography is the Art of Writing Right and Spelling Well. This consists in
placing the true Letters and proper Characters, appertaining to every word, in
their due and rightful order.

The first thing, therefore, to be considered, will be the Characters or
Letters.

A Letter is the smallest part of a word that can be written.

In English there are twenty six Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z.

These following are the several Phenomenon or appearances of Characters
amongst us.

The great English Letters.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X Y Z.

The small English Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z.

The great Roman Letters.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z.

The small Roman Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z.

The great Italian Letters.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V V W X Y Z.

The small Italian Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t v u w x y z.

CHAP. II. Of Vowels and Diphthongs.
THE Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

The Vowels are a, e, i, o, u and y Greek.

A Vowel makes a perfect sound of it self, without a Consonant; as a man,
e-very, i-dolatry, o Lord, u-biquity, y-cleped: But this last sort of words are
now almost obsolete and out of use.

Two Vowels conjoined together make a Diphthong, which is either Proper or
Improper.

Proper Diphthongs are two Vowels written and sounded together, being 8 in
number: ai, ei, oi au, eu, ou, ee, oo.

But when 2 Vowels meet together, and but one of them is sounded, they are
accounted Improper Diphthongs, and commonly reckoned 6, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow.

The Proper ones occur in the beginning and middle of words: as aim, either,
oister, author, feud, found, bleed, book.

But when the same sound waits upon the end of a word, then they become
Improper Diphthongs; as, pray, prey, employ, draw, few, plow.

Au, eu, and ou are sounded like aw, ew, ow, and ordinarily appear in the front
and middle of words: but sometimes, when the sound is flattish, then the
Improper must be used; as, award, ewer, own, or Drawer, Brewer, Flower.

Sometimes 3 Vowels come crowding together, and must be pronounced, as eau in
Beauty, ieu in lieu [i. e. Place, a French word] uai in acquaint, uee in Queen.
These and the like, are by some styled Tripthongs, which not being of any
considerable use, are not much taken notice of.

But the Young Tyro, who begins to read,
Is not concerned such niceties to heed:
Though when more Wit and Reason do command,
Then it is fit such things to understand.
CHAP. III. Of Consonants.
COnsonants are Letters, which of themselves can make no sound, without the
assistance of a vowel; they are in number 20.

b, c, d, f, g, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, v, w, x, z.

Amongst these, 8 are Mutes, or dumb Letters, which make no sound of
themselves, but require the Letter [e] at the end, to help them out.

b, c, d, g, k, p, q, t.

There are, likewise, 8 which we may term semi-vowels, or half Vowels, because
they commence their sound with the vowel [e] and terminate in themselves: viz,
j, f, l, m, n, r, s, x.

Five are Liquids, because they lose their force and efficacy: as l, m, n, r, s.

When the strength of the sound of any word rests upon a Consonant in the
beginning, middle, or ending of a word, then the Consonant must be writ double:
as addition, common, contract, and the like words, very frequent in the English
Tongue.

Ingenious Youths the mystery will find,
If once they fix the notion in their mind:
And by their little doubtings will unscrew,
More than their Masters either taught or knew.
CHAP. IV. Of the Letters, in order.
TO speak or write exactly, is a work, which requires much time, and much care
and application; wherefore, that you may surmount all difficulties and
hardships of Orthography, I judge it expedient to consider the force and
propriety of every Letter in the Al^habet, by it self.

Many words have certain Letters in them that are not sounded, and others which
have not their proper sound; and some lastly, that are endued with the sound of
an other, which of necessity must create a mighty impediment to the Candidates
of our Tongue, both in pronunciation and spelling.

A is sounded flat before a double Consonant, as all, attract.

Sometimes it loses its sound, as in Isaac, Aaron, Pharaoh, Balaam.

B is not pronounced in Lamb, doubt, thumb, dumb.

C has two sounds, that of [k] and that of [s.] When it comes before a, o, oo,
u it imitates the sound of [k] as Cat, Comb, Cook, Custom: but when it precedes
e, i, y or ee, it sounds like [^] as Cell, Cider, Cypress, exceed.

Ch in all words of a purely English stamp, has a peculiar sound both before
and after a Vowel, as change, Cheapside, Checquer, Church, and after a vowel,
as reach, preach, much.

But in a word of Hebrew or Greek Origination [ch] emulates the sound of [k] as
in Chileab, Nebuchadnezzar, Malchus, Lysimachus, Eunuch, Stomach, Architect:
except some few words, as Rachel, Cherubim, and where a consonant follows, as
Archbishop.

C coming betwixt a vowel and [k] is not pronounced, but only fortifies the
sound of [k] as sack, mock, stock.

Also when it is written after s, it has nothing to do with its own peculiar
pronunciation in Conscience, Disciple and such as derive from the Latin: it
only makes the [s] somewhat sharper than ordinary.

D is not sounded in Bridge, Privilege, Pledge and such like; but yet it seems
to give a vigor to the pronunciation of them.

E is often written, but not pronounced at the end of a word, as virtue, house,
fire, frame: but it is otherwise in words of more immediate foreign derivation;
as Epitome, Conge, Jesse, Jubilee.

When it is placed at the end, it serves only to lengthen the word, and is
never pronounced at the end of a word truly English but in these Monosyllables
me, he, we, be, and the like: For it has no sound in a word of 2 Syllables.

E should never come after [ss] at the end of a word; I know it is not seldom
written and printed otherwise: yet being taken away from some words, it quite
alters the sense, as fire, made, fare; leave out the [e's] and the sense is
altogether lost, as fir, mad, far.

In many words [e] gives a softning relish to the sound, and prolongs the tone
of them, as price, force, Grace, age, Stage, etc.

When a word ends with a double Consonant it is needless to put [e] after it,
as contest, hall, construct, etc. In former times we find, they were so
enamored with this Letter, that they generally brought up the rear of every
word with it that could any ways bear it; and some indifferent Heads either
through inadvertency or obstinate ignorance carry on the humor still, which to
the understanding readers is sufficiently ridiculous.

F keeps its own natural force in all words and never loses its sound.

G has two sounds, one hard, as in Gold, Guide, Ghost, and another sharp, as
in George, General; both which sounds are sometimes found in one word, as in
suggest, exaggerate. But if a, o, or u follow the later sound, the word must
not be written with [G] but with [J] consonant, as James, Joseph, Justice.

It is also silent in many words, as in fl^gm, sign, Sovereign, foreign.

[gh] is sounded like [ff] in laugh, cough, enough, without any reason but
only what may be deduced from vulgar custom. Some imagine, it is, because the
English cannot guttural it nor pronounce any thing through the throat, with
whom I so far agree as to think, that most of them take no delight to do so.

In other words it is not at all pronounced; as in might, straight, weight,
right.

H the Romans by no means admit to be a Letter, and the Grecians reject it, for
that they have no Character, but only a poor point for it. But the English
have very kindly bestowed a Character upon it, so that it is allowed to be a
member of the family of Letters in general: But why it should not be so in
particular, I shall not stay here to determine, but leave it to another
opportunity.

I is rarely pronounced in such words as Christopher, Thomas, Rhetoric, Rheum;
and at the end of all Hebrew words it is lost, as Shiloah, Sarah, Jeremiah.

I Vowel is not sounded in Parliament, fashion and the like.

J Consonant, which I will take leave to style by the name of [jod] when
situated before a Vowel is sounded as g, and must be written different from an
[i] vowel, as in just, judge, with a long trole at the bottom.

I add [jod] and [vau] (for so I have presumed to call [v]) to the 24 Letters,
as two distinct and separate Letters, having as great discrimination from [i]
and [u] both in form, nature and sound, as any of the other Letters have from
one another.

K is never doubled in any English word, but has the addition of C to fortify
its pronunciation, as black, Clock; though in words of the Hebrew Idiom and
offspring it may be otherwise, as in Habbakkuk.

K is needless, and may be indifferently left out or put in at the end of all
words derived from the Latin, as in these words public, Physic, Arithmetic,
and the like.

L is omitted in many words, as half, calf, calm, Salve, Salmon, Faulcon: Yet
this happens according to the Gentileness of the mouth that pronounces it.

L is doubled at the end of all words of one Syllable, as Hall, small, call,
fill, kill, unless the Monosyllable have a diphthong, then it terminates with a
single [l] as hail, pail, fail.

All words exceeding one Syllable which end in [i] should conclude with a
single [l] although many Scholars take little notice of it in writing, as
substantial, Cathedral, General, real, continual, immortal, except when the
strength of the sound depends on the last letter; as rebel, compel, repel,
destill, etc.

M is never left out of any word, and is always unchangeable in its sound.

N is not pronounced in solemn, hymn, Autumn, condemn, words of Latin
Extraction.

O misseth its sound in many words, as Youth, courage, People, jeopardy.

[oo] is sounded like woo, as in choose, roof, nevertheless it sounds a short
[u] in good, blood, stood, hood.

P is not pronounced in Psalm, contempt, sumptuous, symptom, and the like.

Ph has the sound of [f] in many words, as Philip, Triumph, Theophilus.

Q is never written without [u] vowel.

R is nowhere superfluous, but is evermore expressed where it is written.

S loses its sound in Viscount, Island. It is sounded like [z] in many words,
as pease, busy, praise, raise, which may be ascribed to the vicinity and
neighborhood of the vowels and dihpthongs, causing the Tongue to dwell the
longer on the consonant.

Ti must be pronounced like [si] always before a vowel, as fruition,
contrition: but if no vowel follow, then it must be sound^d as it is written.
However; if [s] come before [ti] then it is pronounced, as it lies naturally
in the word, as question, combustion.

V consonant [or vau] differs very much from [u] vowel, and from [w] and ought
to be regarded with a very careful eye, seeing it is a grand error to write
[u] vowel for [v] consonant, as many do in such words, as love, vain, Vulture,
value, which look dismally altogether in vowels thus, love, uain, uulture, etc.

U vowel is omitted in the pronunciation of these words, guard, guest, guide,
etc.

W is seldom sounded after [o] or before [r] as shallow, meadow, widow, write,
wrath, wrangle.

X never begins any word without an [e] before it, except proper names, as
Xerxes, Xenophon, Xeno.

Y is put commonly at the end of many words for [ie] although [ie] is the
better, and most natural way, which I shall not here dispute, but leave every
man to his own judgment or caprice.

Y is never written in the middle of any word that is truly English: but we
oftentimes meet with it in words borrowed from the extraneous and dead
Languages, as Apocrypha, Gymnosophist.

Z is very rarely used in English, because [s] has the same sound in many words.

Blessed be the man, who Letters first did find,
To bless with nice Instructions all Mankind:
Surely the Heavenly Powers inspired his mind.
To slight such Sacred Gifts we should be sorry,
From whence we draw Profane and Sacred Story:
Let us be thankful, and give God the glory.
CHAP. V. Of Capitals.
THE Capital Letters are of great use (though extremely neglected) as being
proper on many occasions, especially these following.

1. In the beginning of all Writings, Paragraphs and Periods.

2. The first Letter of all Proper Names, Christian and Sirnames, and Titles of
all sorts.

3. Names of Arts, Sciences, Dignities, Offices, Trades and Employments.

4. All remarkable Passages and Sentences are usually written in great
Capitals, as Rev. 19.19. JESUS OF NAZARETH.

5. The Personal Pronoun [I] must be always a great Capital.

6. When we write to great and illustrious Personages, and nominate them either
by noun or pronoun, we are to use Capitals, as, We will and command you, etc.
Our will and pleasure is, etc. Your Grace's Petitioner, etc. Your Lo. commanded
me, etc. You are to appear before Us, etc.


7. In things Sacred and Divine: we should take care always to write [God] with
a great Letter to demonstrate the great aw we have of him, and the great
deference and veneration we pay him.

8. And lastly, every Line in Poetry must begin with a great Letter, as in the
ensuing verses.

If thou take pains in what is good, the pains
Does quickly vanish, but the good remains.
If thou take pleasure in a naughty thing,
The ill remains; the pleasure pains does bring.
What worse art thou for pains, when gone at last,
Or what avails pleasure, when it is past?
CHAP. VI. Of abbreviations in Capitals and other Letters, etc.
THE Romans used to make two, three, or more Capitals stand each for some
notable or customary words, as S. P. Q. R. stood for Senatus Populus-que
Romanus, The Senate and People of Rome. After them, we are accustomed to use
them several ways: As for marks upon Books, Plate, and Movables; and for
denotations of some eminent and memorable Names and Titles, as J. R. Jacobus
Rex, King James; M. R. Maria Regina, Queen Mary; A. C. Archi-Episcopus
Cantuariensis, The Archbishop of Canterbury; S. A. C. Summus Angliae
Cancellarius, The Lord High Chancellor of England, etc. S. S. T. D. Sacro
Sanctae Theologiae Doctor; or D. D. Doctor of Divinity; B. D. Bachelor of
Divinity; L. L. D. Doctor of Laws; R. S. S. Fellow of the Royal Society; M. A.
Master of Arts; V. vide, see; N. B. Nota been, note well; P. P. Penny Post;
Recipe.

In like manner, the Romans used Capitals for their numeral Letters and
Figures, which are still in use amongst most Christian Nations on Houses,
Monuments and Books, etc.

Their Characters, powers and significations are as follow.

I 1 One II 2 Two III 3 Three IV 4 Four V 5 Five VI 6 Six VII 7 Seven VIII 8
Eight IX 9 Nine X 10 Ten XI 11 Eleven XII 12 Twelve XIII 13 Thirteen XIV 14
Fourteen XV 15 Fifteen XVI 16 Sixteen XVII 17 Seventeen XVIII 18 Eighteen XIX
19 Nineteen XX 20 Twenty XXX 30 Thirty XL 40 Forty L 50 Fifty LX 60 Sixty LXX
70 Seventy LXXX 80 Eighty XC 90 Ninety C 100 One hundred CX 110 One hundred and
ten CXX 120 One hundred and twenty CXXX 130 One hundred and thirty CXL 140 One
hundred and forty CL 150 One hundred and fifty CLX 160 One hundred and sixty
CLXX 170 One hundred and seventy CLXXX 180 One hundred and eighty CXC 190 One
hundred and ninety CC 200 Two hundred D or D 500 Five hundred M or M 1000 One
thousand 5000 Five thousand 10000 Ten thousand 50000 50000 Fifty thousand
100000 100000 One hundred thousand 500000 500000 Five hundred thousand 1000000
1000000 Ten hundred thousand MDCLXXXVI 1686 One thousand six hundred eighty
six.

As thus Letters express Figures, so sometimes we find Figures expressing
Letters, as 4o for Quarto, 8o for Octavo, 12mo for Duodecimo, 9 for us, 7ber
for September, 8ber for October, 9ber for November, 10ber for December, Xian
for Christian.

Abbreviations are used in writing for the more convenience of writing short,
and dispatching business; and they are as follow.

Matie for Majesty Sa. Sacred Excll. Excellency Gr. Grace Higss Highness Lop
Lordship Lap Ladyship Bp Bishop Wop Worship Woll Worshipful Sr Sir Mr Master
Esquire; Esquire Yeo. Yeoman Sch. Scholar Qu. Question Ans. Answer Genll General
Govr Governor Govt Government Honble Honorable Illust. Illustrious Knight Knight
Ld Lord Capt. Captain Coll. Colonel Comr Commissioner Adml Admiral Admrs
Administrators Mercht for Merchant Exers Executors Cr Creditor Dr Debtor or
Doctor Obj. Objection Sol. Solution Dd Delivered Red Received Mrs Mistress Lievt
Lieutenant Lrs Letters obt. obtain Aug. August Chap. Chapter Ver. Verse P. Page
Lin. Line Fol. Folio Md. Memorandum St Saint Pnts Presents Petr Petitioner pd
paid Reqst Request Sevrl Several Trere Treasure Trery Treasury Yors Yours ye
the yt for that with what ym them and and viz. videlicet, to wit per per pro pro
pre pre qt containing qrs quarters which which with with etc. and so forth.
English Orthography. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of Spelling and Dividing of Syllables.
AFTER this brief Consideration of the several Letters in the Alphabet,
according to their single capacities, I shall now proceed to speak of them (as
it were) conjoined in society, with reference to others, being reduced within
the compass and dominion of words.

Those who have learnt the Grammar, if they but mind Orthography, accomplish
themselves in one (though not the least) part of learning. And although we find
many by a fatal experience to neglect it, and arrive only to a mediocrity of
perfection, and too frequently not that neither, to the reproach of pretenders
to Learning, Orthography being an essential part thereof: Yet my following
practical Rules are for the most part designed for the assistance of those who
never had (or have casually neglected) the opportunity of Learning.

I give these Rules from my own practice and experience, because I have taught
several of both Sexes, who were altogether ignorant of any Grammar, to spell
true English to a very great perfection, and indeed better than many who have
learnt the Grammar and other things also.

The only way for Ladies, and such who have not had Grammar-erudition, is to
observe carefully these following Directions.

1. When you have attained to write indifferently well, pry curiously into
every word you write, and diligently enquire how it is spelt, and written.

2. You must get somebody to read softly and easily to you according as you
can follow him at first, spelling as well as you can your own way; And when you
have done, let some who have skill, read over what you have written, and
correct it: by doing this frequently, you will not fail to attain a
considerable perfection in small time.

3. When you can spell pretty well, use your self to read what your Genius most
leads you to; and when you read, it is very convenient to keep an Alphabet of
all the hard words you find, of whose signification you are ignorant: and for
your farther instruction, ask some understanding person, or at your own leisure
apply your self to a Dictionary, where you may get the true meaning and
signification of any word you shall find.

By this method you will not only learn to spell well, and understand the
meaning of all words you meet with, but also to read well; that is, to have a
true notion in your mind of what you read: for, it is hardly possible for any
man to read well that which he does not understand. He may perform such a thing
sometimes, I confess, by chance, and accidentally; but it is granted on all
hands, that there is a Language of sound and of posture, as well as of Letters
and Syllables, and, that

He who does read, and knows not the full sense,
Has but the prattling Parrot's Eloquence.
But he that reads, and understands aright,
Humors the Sense, and charms you with delight.
Let some people read, and you can make nothing at all of the matter: Some
again of a truly ingenious frame, and nice constitution (for so I must esteem
him that reads well) do give such life and motion to the things, that they in a
manner inchant the hearers, and make them imbibe, and thoroughly understand the
Sense and meaning.

What makes Plays more taking from the Actor's mouth, than when the same words
are read in downright print, proceeds from this Source, because the Poet has
instructed the Player with the most intimate intrigue of his own mind, and (as
I may say) with the very heart of his intention. Whereas the print is only the
dead Letter, dull and insensible, having nothing but the stock of the Poet's
wit to subsist on, and engage the Reader, who, if he has seen the same Play
acted, is oftentimes compelled to be beholden to his Memory for his pleasure.

In writing you must not divide a Syllable, that is, you are not to write one
half, or one Letter of a Syllable in one Line, and the rest in the next: but if
your Line will not contain all your word, you must either divide it rightly, or
write all your word in the next Line, which is the best way.

When a Consonant is doubled, or when two Consonants come together, they are
divided thus: the one to the first Syllable; the other to the last: as Ad-der,
dif-fer, sel-dom, Trum-pet.

If a Consonant come between two Vowels, you must join the Consonant to the
Vowel following it: as be-came, re-port [x] only excepted, which is evermore
annexed to the Vowel going before: as Ox-en, ex-er-cise.

If a word consist of two words, and the first part of the composition had the
silent [e] in the simple word, it retains it in the compound, and is joined
to the Consonant before it: as where-of, where-in, where-by, safeguard.

If two or three Consonants which can begin words, come betwixt two Vowels,
they must not be parted, but must even strike in with the Vowel following: as
con-strain, con-struct.

These are the Consonants which begin words.

bl, br, cl, ch, cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, gl, gn, gr, kl, kn, kr, ph, pl, pr, sc,
sh, sk, sl, sm, sn, sp, sq, st, sw, th, tr, tw, wh, wr.

Sometimes there are three Consonants together at the commencement of words,
and these are chr, phr, scr, shr, spr, str; thr.

Thus in the world of Letters there is found
A beauteous harmony of place and sound,
As in the greater World and mystic Book
Of lovely Nature nothing is mistook:
So when each Letter has its proper place,
The words run sweet, and give the Writing grace.
CHAP. II. Of Monosyllables.
SPelling well is the dividing words into Syllables, and allotting to each
Syllable its due and proper Letters, as vi-o-lence, vi-li-fy.

Most words in the English Tongue are spelt according to the sound: but it is
best to adhere to the rules of true spelling.

For your better convenience and more happy procedure in this kind, I have
carefully collected and methodically digested the greatest part of those words
which have any difficulty in them of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and some of more
Syllables, whereby you may see how they are spelt, and from whence you may draw
such general deductions and observations, as may extend to the right
understanding and spelling any word you meet withal.

A Table of words of one Syllable.
A
Acre act ancle angle awl.
B
Bath badge breadth brought bought bough branch.
C
Christ church cleanse caught check cloth cough.
D
Dawn dearth drudge draught dough drought dumb dwarf.
E
Earn enough eight ews eyes.
F
Fault filth flight fraught friend fringe fright.
G
God glad ghost grief growth grudge guest guide.
H
Health hatch hearth height hymns.
J
Judge joint juice.
K
Knight knives knots.
L
League laugh length light.
M
Month might mouth mulct myrrh.
N
Naught neigh nigh night naught.
O
Ought oar oaths oaks.
P
Plight plunge plague pierce psalms.
Q
Quake quench quacks quick.
R
Reign reins right rough.
S
Schism scourge scour search school shrine shoo should slight slight sigh sign
strength.
T
Taught through tongue twelve twelfth though thought troughs twins.
V
View vaunt vow vail voice.
U
Urge Use
W
Wealth weight weave world wrought write wound wrath wreath wrung wool woo woe
whore.
Y
Young youth yaucht year yawn.
Z
Zeal Zone.

These are the words, to which though nature,
Has sting'ly lent but a small stature,
So as for Pigmies they may pass,
Yet they great virtues in small space
Do comprehend, and seem to be
That Artful Dames Brachygraphie:
For GOD himself and King, World, Man,
Are but the inch of words, not span.
Than GOD or World, what greater things,
Or, GOD'S Lieutenants, Sacred Kings?
Even Mar. who all words did invent,
Is with one Syllable content.
CHAP. III. An Alphabet of words of two Syllables.
A
Ab-ject af-flict an-guish as-swage ab-jure ac-quaint ac-count af-fright
as-sault aug-ment ac-cept.
B
Bap-tism birthright bless-ing blas-pheme be-lieve back-bite ban-quet
blame-less.
C
Coun-cil coun-sel charg-ing crea-ture chal-lenge cym-bals chan-ging case-ment
cau-sey con-duct com-pact con-duit.
D
Da-mage de-scribe dis-charge dis-solve dis-patch dis-tinct di-vorce doc-trine
dam-ned dis-ciples dis-charge daugh-ter.
E
E-nough eye-brow ex-cept ex-change earthquake e-schew ex-tinct e-vil.
F
Friend-ship feign-eth frus-trate fa-mine fe-male fierce-ness flou-rish
four-teenth fro-zen.
G
Gal-lant grum-ble grudg-ing griev-eth guard-eth gal-lows glut-ton gos-pel.
H
Hai-nous high-ness henceforth hus-band hys-sop he-rauld he-brew hire-ling
ho-nour.
J
Je-sus jus-tice judg-ing jay-lor jour-ney jea-lous
I
I-mage in-crease itch-ing.
K
King-dom kins-man know-ledge knighthood
L
Lan-guish laugh-ter lec-ture light-ning lov-ing lan-t^rns lat-ter laugh-ing
lea-thern leo-pard lodg-ings.
M
Mankind maid-en mar-tyr mis-chief mort-gage mer-chant mur-ther migh-ty
moist-ure
N
Neigh-bour naugh-ty nei-ther neg-lect nor-thern nour-ish.
O
Offspring ob-ject ob-scure op-press or-chard ob-tain o-racle.
P
Pru-dence par-lour pave-ment par-tridge penknife peo-ple pe-rish pil-grim
pic-ture priesthood preach-er purg-ing.
Q
Quak-er quar-rel quick-en.
R
Re-venge re-joice re-proach re-scue re-ceive reck-on re-straint ru-mours.
S
Sab bath scourg-ing scrip-ture sackcloth safeguard sa-lute scan-dal
scor-ner shipwreck slaugh-ter.
T
Trans-gress trans-late trea-sure threa-ten to-ken tres-pass tri-umph tri-bute
twilight.
V
Vain-ly val-ley va-pour ves-sel vineyard.
U
U-nite un-just use-ful.
W
Writ-ing wa-ges wed-lock weigh-ing whi-ther workman writ-ten.
Y
Yeo-man yel-low yiel-ding.
Z
Zea-lous.
Contemplate Virtue's charms: her very name
Does fill and sweeten all the breath of Fame.
Of old, fond Lovers, in the Bark of Trees
Incis'd their Mistress names, there to increase.
Virtue thy Mistress be: and write her name
Upon thy heart, as clear as is thy flame:
And then no doubt Virtue.
two syllables will soon
Bring unto thee wealth, honor and renown.
CHAP. IV. Paradigm 's of Words of three Syllables.
A
Ac-com-plish ac-know-ledge ac-cep-tance ac-cor-ding ac-quaint-ance ad-vo-cate
af-flict-ed af-ter-ward an-swer-ed as-sur-ance.
B
Back-bit-ers bap-tiz-ing bar-bar-ous be-guil-ed be-liev-ers blas-phem-er
bless-ed-ness bar-ren-ness.
C
Cham-pi-on chan-cel-lor ce-le-brate chas-tis-eth cheer-ful-ness chro-ni-cles
chris-ti-ans cir-cum-spect com-mon-wealth che-ru-bims car-bun-cles
care-ful-ness con-quer-ours.
D
Di-vorce-ment de-creas-ed de-ci-ded de-fam-ing de-scrib-ed de-sir-ous
dis-tri-bute drow-si-ness de-trac-tor.
E
En-large-ment en-dea-vours es-pous-als en-croach-ing en-cour-age en-graft-ed
es-ti-mate e-qual-ly ec-sta-cy.
F
Faint-heart-ed for-ward-ness frank-in-cense fil-thi-ness fa-vour-able
fur-ni-ture for-bid-den.
G
Gain-say-er gar-ri-son gor-ge-ous go-ver-nors griev-ous-ness.
H
Hand-ker-chief haugh-ti-ness he-re-sies hus-band-ry hy-po-crite.
J
Jea-lou-sy Jeo-par-dy.
I
Im-pla-cable Im-put-eth In-fam-ous.
K
Kens-ing-town kins-wo-man kind-heart-ed.
L
Liev-ten-ant li-ber-tines lan-guish-ed lov-li-ness.
M
Mi-ni-ster mes-si-as ma-jes-ty me-di-cine me-di-tate ma-gis-trate
main-ten-ance mis-chiev-ous.
N
Nigh-tin-gale nou-rish-ing ne-glect-ing ne-gli-gent.
O
Ob-serv-ed off-scour-ing of-ten-times o-ver-charge op-press-ing out-land-ish.
P
Pa-tri-arch pa-ti-ence per-ceiv-est per-swa-ding pleas-ant-ness per-ju-ry.
Q
Ques-ti-ons quan-ti-ty que-ru-lous qui-et-ness quar-rel-som.
R
Re-mem-ber re-ceiv-ed re-deem-er re-main-der re-proach-ed re-pro-bate.
S
Sa-cri-fice Sa-cri-ledge school-mas-ter se-pa-rate se-pul-chre soul-di-er.
T
Thank-ful-ness ta-ber-nacle ten-der-ness tes-ti-fie tri-umph-ing.
V
Vain-glo-ry va-ni-ties ven-ge-ance vic-tu-als.
U
Up-right-ly un-will-ing un-wor-thy up-per-most ut-ter-ance.
W
Wan-ton-ness wick-ed-ness wil-der-ness wit-ting-ly.
X
Xe-no-phon.
Y
Yoke-fel-low Yes ter-day.
Z
Zo-di-ack Zea-lous-ly.
I.
Hail great Tri-syllable! eternal Three!
Thou Three in One, and one in TRINITY!
Thou matchless and unfathomable Mystery!
II.
With Thee all should begin and all should end,
If it end well: If It would it self commend
To fame, and general use, it must have Thee its friend.
III.
Wherefore, let all true writers here agree,
And with thy Penmen all true Christians be,
And own this awful truth, which is well worthy Thee.
CHAP. V. Examples of Words of four Syllables.
A
Ac-com-plish-ment a-bo-lish-ed ac-know-ledg-ed af-fec-ti-on ap-pre-hend-ing
ac-cord-ing-ly al-to-ge-ther.
B
Bar-bar-ous-ness blas-phem-ous-ly burnt-sa-cri-fice blood-guil-ti-ness.
C
Cir-cum-cis-ing con-cu-pis-cence con-sci-en-ces col-lec-ti-on.
D
Di-mi-nish-ed de-ceit-ful-ness dis-ap-point-eth de-scrip-ti-on
dis-pos-sess-ed.
E
E-van-ge-list e-sta-blish-ed en-dea-voured.
F
For-get-ful-ness foun-da-ti-on fa-mi-li-ars.
G
Ge-ner-ous-ly gor-ge-ous-ly.
H
Hy-po-cri-sy hu-mi-li-ty hu-mour-som-ness.
I
Ig-no-mi-ny in-du-stri-ous i-ma-gin-eth i-ni-qui-ty.
L
Lov-ing-kind-ness Li-ber-al-ly.
M
Ma-le-fac-tors mar-vel-lous-ly mag-ni-fi-cence.
N
Not-with-stand-ing ne-ces-sa-ry ne-cro-man-cy.
O
O-ver-throw-ing op-pres-si-on.
P
Pre-sump-ti-on per-ad-ven-ture per-se-cut-er.
Q
Ques-ti-on-ing (...)
R
Re-bel-li-on re-proach-ful-ly righ-te-ous-ness re-demp-ti-on.
S
Sump-tu-ous-ly sa-cri-fi-cer sanc-tu-ar-ies.
T
Tem-pes-tu-ous trans-gres-si-on.
V
Va-li-ant-ly ver-tu-ous-ly
U
Un-mer-ci-ful un-cor-rupt-ed un-be-liev-ers.
W
Wel-be-lov-ed won-der-ful-ly.
Four Syllables if you would understand,
Mind well these words, how their divisions ly,
By which you may the hardest then command
And get perfection to your self thereby.
CHAP. VI. Words of five Syllables.
A
Al-le-go-ri-cal ad-mo-ni-ti-on a-po-the-ca-ry.
B
Be-ne-dic-ti-on.
C
Cir-cum-spec-ti-on con-sum-ma-ti-on con-fe-de-ra-cy con-tri-bu-ti-on.
D
Dis-o-be-di-ence de-li-be-rate-ly.
E
Ex-tor-ti-on-er ex-e-cra-ti-on ex-hor-ta-ti-on.
F
Fer-ment-a-ti-on.
G
Gu-ber-na-ti-on ge-ne-a-lo-gy.
H
Har-mo-ni-ous-ly hy-po-cri-ti-cal.
J
Ju-ris-dic-ti-on.
I
In-cor-rup-ti-ble in-sur-rec-ti-on.
L
La-bo-ri-ous-ness la-sci-vi-ous-ness.
M
Ma-li-ci-ous-ness mis-con-struc-ti-on.
N
Non-con-for-mi-ty.
O
Oc-cu-pa-ti-on op-por-tu-ni-ty o-ver-sha-dow-ed.
P
Pre-sump-tu-ous-ly pre-me-di-tat-ed.
R
Re-sur-rec-ti-on re-sti-tu-ti-on
S
Su-per-scrip-ti-on suf-fi-ci-en-cy su-per-sti-ti-on.
T
Trans-mi-gra-ti-on tri-bu-la-ti-on.
V
Vic-to-ri-ous-ly vi-si-ta-ti-on.
U
Un-righ-te-ous-ness un-ac-cu-stom-ed.
W
Whi-ther-so-e-ver.
Plenty o'erwhelms, but no delight affords
In musty Catalogues of Giant-words:
Therefore with their tall Worships I shall be
Short, in regard they have been long with me:
Pleasure and use lies in Epitome.
CHAP. VII. A Collection of Words of six and seven Syllables.
A
Ad-mi-ni-stra-ti-on af-fec-ti-o-nate-ly.
B
Be-a-ti-fi-ca-ti-on.
C
Con-fec-ti-on-ar-ies Cir-cum-lo-cu-ti-on.
D
Dis-si-mu-la-ti-on De-nun-ci-a-ti-on.
E
Ex-a-mi-na-ti-on ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on E-le-e-mo-si-na-ry.
F
Fruc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on.
G
Glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on
H
Hu-mi-li-a-ti-on.
I
Im-mu-ta-bi-li-ty In-ter-pre-ta-ti-on.
M
Mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on.
P
Pu-ri-fi-ca-ti-on.
R
Re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on.
S
Sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on.
V
Vi-li-fi-ca-ti-on.
The longest words, and the most tedious Arts,
Are overcome by willing hands and hearts.
What Art so hard, what Science so obscure;
That can the force of Industry endure?
The honor's high of power and great command,
But greater far it is to understand.
These words are sufficient for any Learner, abundance of words discourage more
than they instruct; for if a Youth can once spell these, he may spell any:
those of riper understanding and years need only read these words over; but it
is very convenient for Youth to be carefully instructed to know them all.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sentences.
ALL learned men in the several ages of humane race have highly approved of
short Sentences, or expressing a Thought in few words.

Those which are of a long Ciceronian strain do not yet either want their
excellencies or Admirers: but which of the two best deserves the Laurel, does
not belong to my purpose to dispute.

However, this is undoubtedly true of them both, that whether you are to write
either the one or the other, it is your best way to begin the Line at every
full stop, or end of a sentence. This direction indeed, if it were in all cases
observed, would take up too much room, and swell Books to a great Volume: and
therefore a great Letter has been appointed to begin each Sentence. But in
writing any business, where we have room enough, I may recommend it not only as
necessary, but beautiful for the Readers attention and delight.

Some men have that admirable dexterity of epitomizing things, and couching
such a world of excellent sense in a few happy expressions, that the Readers
not only admire them, but are rapt into an ecstacy in the contemplation. Examp.
Gr.

It is a madness in Youth, either not to endeavor good Advice, or not to
believe till their peril comes upon them, and makes them see it to their shame.

Errors by mistakes should not be too rigorously censured; but wilful Errors
should not be spared.

Pray often, because thou sinest always: Repent quickly, lest thou die
suddenly.

He is a happy man, that has all things he desires: but he who does not
desire, the things he has not, is happier.

Mistrust no man without some cause; neither be credulous without proof, etc.

Hear no ill of a Friend, nor speak any of an Enemy; Believe not all you hear,
nor speak all you believe, etc.

A Sentence is the miniature of Thought,
And of what is truly great, a little draught.
Life, briskness, and proportion there, combine
With an immensity of rays to shine.
Not Ophyr Gold or Oriental Spice
Is like to the perfume of Sage advice,
Or is so glittering: no not Solomon
More in his glory, than his Proverbs shone.
CHAP. IX. Of Points or Stops used in Sentences.
IN writing and reading of all Sentences and Writings, the Points and Stops are
to be judiciously observed; otherwise we certainly shipwreck the Sense by
sailing without these Guides. Upon which account I have here set down not only
the Stops and Pauses, but also all Marks and Characters used for the better
understanding of what we write or read.

Points or Stops.
1. Comma Uncharacterized thus, 2. Semi-colon; 3. Colon: 4. Period. 5.
Interrogation? 6. Admiration! Notes of Direction.
1. Asterism Figured in this manner * 2. Hyphen - 3. Caret 4. Obelisk or dagger
5. Separation = 6. Apostrophe ' 7. Quotation " 8. Index 9. Parenthesis () 10.
Crotchet [] 11. Section 12. Parallels 13. Paragraph

1. A Comma (,) is the least, but most frequently used of all, taking very
little breath, as being almost everywhere employed: As,

These filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities, Jude v. 8.

2. A Semi-colon (;) has somewhat a greater stress than a Comma laid upon it,
both as to the sense, and to the pause: As,

Their throat is an open Sepulcher; with their tongues they use deceit; the
poison of Asps is under their lips, Psalm.

3. A Colon is used when there is full sense expressed, but yet the Sentence is
not quite spent: As,

Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it
be to the KING, as Supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13.

4. A Period, or Punctum (.) concludes the whole Sentence: As,

Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear GOD. Honor the KING, 1 Pet. 2.17.

These four are truly entire Sentences of themselves, and are accordingly
written with Periods: but any man considering the dependence they have one upon
another, may write them and such like with Colons, except the last, which must
of necessity be concluded with a full point.

5. A Note of Interrogation (?) is always placed after a Question: As,

What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there in Circumcision?
etc. Romans 3.1.

6. A mark of Admiration (!) must not be forgotten, when men lift up their
hands or voices by way of wonder or exclamation: As,

Oh Death! where is thy Sting? Oh Grave! where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15.55.

The Explanation of the Notes of Direction.
1. An Asterism (*) is used commonly in the Bible, when any Sentence or History
is alluded to, or may be compared with another.

2. A Hyphen is (-) a Note of continuation, or connection; as Pal-mal,
Commonwealth, workman ship.

3. A Caret () is made under the Line, when a word or more is wanting and
forgotten, showing where it must be taken in.

4. An Obelisk or Dagger () in the larger sort of Bibles is accustomed to refer
from the matter to the margent, where it gives an account of the different
readings of the Hebrew and Greek Copies.

5. A Separation (=) is when one half of a word is written in one line, and the
other half, or a Syllable, is written in the next.

6. An Apostrophe (') is set over the place where a vowel is left out, as in
these, it is or it is for it is, trained for trained, business for business.

7. A Citation (") is, when an Allegation out of an Author is recited at length
in his own words.

8. An Index () points to some notable Saying or Sentence that ought not to
escape without some particular remark.

9. A Parenthesis () denotes, that the words enclosed must be sounded somewhat
different from the rest, as being an Appendix to the Sentence that would be
perfect without it.

10. A Crotchet [] is much of the same nature with a Parenthesis, and is used
when some extraordinary word happens, and ought to be distinguished, or another
Sentence, or something farther to explain the meaning after a Parenthesis.

11. A Section () is when an ample discourse is cut and divided into several
larger portions, called Sections.

12. Parallels () do often occur in the margents of Holy Writ, when a Sentence
according to the Original may be otherwise phrased, and the Sense not corrupted.

13. A Paragraph () usually precedes a Sentence which bears no dependence on
what went before.

Pointing is of such great concernment, especially to Scholars, and indeed to
all; that the neglect thereof make Writings hard to be understood or read; and
commonly that defect makes the true meaning either ignorantly or knavishly to
be mistaken: as

My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not: refraining thy feet.

Pointed otherwise, the Sense is perverted thus;

My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou; not refraining thy feet.

By misplacing of Stops, or altogether leaving them out, to be at pleasure put
in by persons concerned, much mischief has been done in many Places.

In England that unfortunate Prince Edward the Second was barbarously murdered
by his Keeper in Pont-fract Castle, (by the treachery of Isabella and
Mortimer.) The Keeper [it seems] sent to Mortimer to know what he should do
with the King, who answered him by his Letter thus: Edwardum occidere nolite
timere bonum est.

To kill King Edward refuse to be afraid is good.

This Passage in his Letter being without Stops, The Keeper well-knowing
Mortimer had no kindness for the King, did as Mortimer truly meant, that is,
killed the King; and when he was justly questioned, produced the Letter, which
Mortimer owned, but confidently alleged that his meaning was otherwise: such
base Tricks perfidious Villains have practiced to pervert Truth, and color
their Knavery.

Such Tricks are commonly imposed on the World by such villainous and
diabolical Miscreants and Impostors, who give such dubious Interpretations on
the holy Scriptures to the shame and confusion of Christianity, after the
Example of their Father the Devil, who knowing himself not able to answer any
thing truly out of the Heathen Oracles, replied to all questions cunningly, and
so dubiously, that which way soever the thing fell out, he was sure to seem to
be in the right.

For Instance. Doctor Heylin in his description of Delphos writes thus, Page
593, and 594.

Delphos renowned in old times for the famous Temple of Apollo, in which with
that of Jupiter Hammon in Marmarica (now reckoned as a part of Egypt) were the
most famous Oracles of the ancient Gentiles: Dark Ridles of the Devil, couched
and contrived with so much cunning, that the meaning of them was most hidden,
when it was thought most easy to be discerned; Instance of which, that given
to Croesus in the War by him projected against the Persians, which was thus
delivered;

Croesus Halyn penetrans magnam subvertit opum vim.

When Croesus over Halys goes,
A mighty Nation he o'erthrows.
which he interpreting according to his own hopes, crossed the River, was
vanquished by Cyrus, King of Persia, and his Kingdom conquered. The like we
find of Pyrrhus, King of Epyrus, who before he made war against the Romans,
consulted with the Oracle, and received this answer;

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse.
which doubtful Prediction he thus construed:

Te posse vincere Romanos.
That he should overcome the Romans; but he found it to his cost, that the
meaning was, Romanos posse vincere te, That the Romans should overcome him; as
indeed it happened.

By another kind of the same fallacy, which the Logicians call Amphibolia, did
this great Enemy of Mankind overthrow another, who demanding of the Oracle what
Success he should have in an Expedition which he was in hand with, received his
answer in these words;

Ibis redibis nunquam per Bella peribis
which he thus pointing

Ibis, redibis, unquam per Bella peribis.
Engaged himself in the War, and was therein slain: whereupon his Followers
canvasing the Oracle, found the meaning to be thus;

Ibis, redibis nunquam; per Bella peribis.
Several others, too long to relate, are written: such is the force of placing
Stops, that men have misconstrued their Friends meaning, either ignorantly, or
willingly, to excuse themselves.

Points are the Compass, and the guiding Star
By which good Readers all directed are.
The life of Reading sweetly flows from thence;
These ill-regarded shipwreck all the Sense.
The skilful Readers will the Sense pursue,
And charm their Hearers with their reading true,
Because they can give Stops and Points their due.
CHAP. X. Of Superfluous Letters, etc.
THere is a further perfection in Spelling, which I shall not much dwell upon,
as not being so material to my design: but because it is worthy of observation
to the curious I shall touch it a little;

And that is leaving out many superfluous letters, which may be omitted in
several words, and the sound and sense not lost: but to throw out all Letters,
that are not pronounced (as some desire) would quite mar the sense: for by the
same rule we leave out [ugh] in though, we ought to leave it out in bought,
dough, bough, thought, cough, etc.

It Is true we may leave out [ugh] in though, and the like when the sound will
be good without it; but when the sound and signification is lost by such
omissions it is not tolerable.

Some of late leave out [k] in Music, Arithmetic, Rhetoric, Logic, heroic
and the like, which is allowable, these being immediately derived from the
Latin, which have no k, though the original Greek has.

The superfluous and silent [u] may very well be left out in honor, favor,
etc. for the pronunciation is the same without it honor, favor, labor, and the
sound and signification are both preserved.

But why some are for such a thorow-reformation, as to omit [p] in tempt,
contempt, sumptuous, symptom, and the like, I know not, since the very strength
of the sound rests on [p.]

Neither can I be persuaded to leave [e] out at the end of bridge, pledge,
acknowledge, because the final [e] gives [g] its sharp sound: for by the same
reason we may leave out the [e] in oblige, huge, language, refuge, etc. which
would make [g] have its hard sound and quite alter the sense.

I could wish it were possible to make a general Rule in the English, and leave
out all superfluous Letters that are not in the pronunciation sounded; for then
[gh] might take its leave of many words: But first to satisfy the curious, we
must find some way to distinguish the sound of some words pronounced alike, but
written severally; as in the words following, so much imputed by strangers to
the imperfection of the English Language, viz.

John Wright the Wheel-wright,
Can neither write, nor read right,
Yet hates a superstitious Rite.
These words, likewise, are written differently, but pronounced almost alike,
white, weight, wait, wit, wett. This shows the impossibility of a general
Rule, so much desired. These and the like, make strangers a little uneasy; but
to please strangers and make our Language familiar to their palate, we must not
confound our selves, as some would have done, come, some, and the like written
thus, don, com, some, because strangers think they are pronounced do-ne, co-me,
so-me. By this means we must bring all other words, which more trouble them, to
their humor. There are few strangers that can pronounce these words,
forbidden, hidden, third, thought, truth, sloth, etc. so there needs no such
care for strangers, who can never attain to any perfection in English by Book:
the only way is by an able Teacher or by conversation amongst English people
which I judge the best way.

Words derived from the Latin must retain their natural Letters to show their
derivation, as contemn, condemn, resign, reign, phlegm, which come from the
Latin words, contemno, condemno, resigno, regno, flegma, etc.

Some words the English pronounce contrary to the true Orthography, without any
other reason (as I said before) but because they pronounce nothing through the
throat, and these are laugh, cough, rough, etc. which by custom are thus
altered, laff, coff, roff, which strangers also stickle at. For convenience we
pronounce also sigh as with th, etc.

CHAP. XI. Of Words, Spelt, or Sounded Alike, but of Different Significations.
MAny words in the English Tongue are spelt alike, and have diverse
significations: and some again have various intentions and are pronounced
almost alike, which gives trouble to young Learners.

To prevent which, and to encourage the Learner, I have collected the hardest
of these words in an Alphabetical order as follows,

A
ABator, an Intruder Abater, one that lessens Abettor, an Assister Account,
Esteem Account, of Merchants Advice, Counsel Advise, to give Counsel Altar, for
Sacrifice Alter, or Change Accidents, Chances Accidence, for Children Air,
Element Heir, of an Estate Appeal, to a higher Judge A peal, of Ringing A pail,
for Water A peel, for an Oven A Peer, or Nobleman A Pier, for Ships Appear,
before one A pear, fruit Aunt, a Father's Sister Ant, an Emmet Augur, a Wise
man Augure, to bore with Attract, to draw A Tract, or Discourse A Track, or
Path Attribute, given, or appropriate A Tribute, paid to a Prince Assent, to
consent A scent, or smell Ascent, or going up Sent, an errand
B
Batcheler, or single man Bachelor of Arts Ball, to play with Bale, or pack of
Cards or Silk Ball, a Company of Dancers Bawl, or cry out Baal, false God Bark
as a Dog Bark of a Tree Bark, or Barque, a little Vessel Bear, a Beast Bear, or
suffer Bare, naked Bier, a Corpse Beer, to drink Babble, talk Idly Baubles,
trifles Babel, confusion Bow, to shoot Bow, or bend Bough of a Tree Boar, a
Beast Bore a hole Buy with money By, the Preposition Buoy of a Ship Boy, or
Child By the Bie Blew as the wind Blue Color Brute or Beast Bruit, or Rumor
Bread to eat Breed, engender Bred, taught Bread of Silk or Worsted Bowl, a Cup
Boul, to play Breath, wind Breathe, to blow softly Beray, defile Bewray, or
disclose.
C
Cavalier, a Soldier Caviller, Wrangler Council of the King Counsel, advice
Councellor, privy Councellor Counselor at Law Crew as a Cock Crew, a Company
Censer, for Insence Censor, a Roman Officer Censure, or blame Cymbal, an
Instrument Symbol, a mark Cittern for Music Citron, fruit Canon of the Church
Cannon, a Gunn Cannion of breeches Carret, a Root Carract of Gold, whereof 18
make a Dram.
D
Dame, or Mother Damm, or bank Damn, condemn Deer, Buck or Do Dear, or costly
Dear, most affectionate Desert, forsake Disert after meat Desert, a Wilderness
Decent, orderly Descent, going down Descent of an Estate Dissent, disagree
Duke, a Title of Honor Duck, a Bird Demure, sober, mild Demurr, doubt or delay
Dew on the Grass Due, owing Do, Female-Deer Do, or act Dough, to make bread
E
Eminent, famous Imminent, at hand Exercise or labor Exorcise, to Conjure
Earnest, Serious Earnest, on a Bargain.
F
Fly, to make haste Fly, as a Bird Fly, an Insect Flea, or flegh Fowl, Birds
Foul, unclean Flower in a Garden Flour of wheat Floor of a house Fair,
beautiful Fare, entertainment Friese, course Cloth Freez, congeal Fawn, or
young Deer Faun, or flatter Form, or shape Fourm, to sit on Feign, falsify
Fain, desire.
G
Guilt, offense Gilt with Gold.
H
Heir to an Estate Air, or wind Hair of the Head Hare, a Beast Heart of any
thing Heart, a great Deer Head, or principal part Heed, mind Hoop of a Vessel
Whoop or hollow Hue, or Color Hue and Cry Hew, or Cut Hugh, a name.
I
Insight, skill Incite, stir-up Ingenious, witty Ingenuous, free, well-natur'd.
J
Joynter, a Tool. Jointure, a portion.
K
Kennel for Dogs Channel, water passage.
L
Latin, a Language Lattin, Tinn Loose, or untie Lose, or neglect Least,
smallest Lest, a word of caution Lettuce, an Herb Letice, a name Lattice, Cross
bars Leamons, Concubins Limons, fruit Luster, a desirer Luster, shining.
M
Manor, House Manure, to Till Ground Manner, fashion Mow, Hay Mow of Corn
Mortar, to build with Mortar, to bruise Morning, Sunrising Mourning, Lamenting
Mussle, a Shellfish Muscles of a Man Martial, warlike Marshal, an Office Mean,
between two Mien, visage Mean, poor Mold, Earth Mould, or frame.
N
Nice, a Town Niece, or Brother's Daughter Nice, or dainty Note, or mark Not at
all.
O
O, Exclamation! Ow, a debt Oh, alas Oar, or Gold dust Or this, or that Oar, to
Row Our, or ours Hour of the day One thing On, or upon Ordure, filth Order, or
Commission Off, or far away, out of Of, concerning Only, so much Only,
singular.
P
Pallet, to ly on Palate, or taste Pause, or stopp Paws, or Feet Person, or body
Parson, or Priest Precedent, forgoing President or Example Power or Authority
Pour out Pail, for water Peal, of Ringing Pale, ill-coloured Pall, or Hearse
Prophet, or foreteller Profit, gain Plane, a Field Plain, smooth Plan, or
Model.
Q
Quarry of Stones Quarrel of Glass Quack, or pretender Quake, to shake.
R
Right, or Just Rite, or Custom Wright, a Trade Write with a pen Reed, or Cane
Read a Book Red Color Retch out or stretch Reach or fetch Rome, a famous City
Rome, or wander Room, or Chamber Reign as a King Rein of a Bridle Row of Trees
Roe, or Deer Row a Boat.
S
Sun, that shines Son of a Father Soon, quickly Swound, or faint away Sound,
whole Sealing of Letters Ceiling of a House Stares, or looks earnestly Stairs
of a House Some, or part Sum of money Straight, even Strait, or narrow
Straight, by and by Statue, or Image Statute, or Law Suit at Law Suit of
Clothes Sex, kind Sects, factions Seller of Goods Cellar for Wine Smock, a
shift Smoke of fire.
T
Than, in Comparison Then, at that time The man or thing Thee, or thy self
Trade, or calling Tread under foot Tred as Birds There in that place Their
belonging to them To, or toward Toe of the foot Tow, a Rope Too, also Two in
number Tenor in Music Tennor, or form.
V
Vain, Idle Vein of blood Vial, a little Glass Viol, or Violin.
W
Wast-thou Waste, or spend Waste, Emply Waist, ones middle Weight of Goods Wait,
attend Wight, a man Whether of the two Whither do you go Week 7 days Wick of a
Candle Walk in the fields Wake, or awake from sleep Weak, not strong.
These are the chiefest and most material words which are sounded alike and
spelt differently, and ought to be carefully regarded.

It is very convenient, that Youth be instructed to know these words from
careful Tutors, who may set them a task to write over, and give a good Account
of as many of them at a time as they are capable of: By which method and the
other Rules in this Book prescribed, I have taught young Persons of both Sexes
to spell English very well who knew nothing of Grammar.

English Orthography. PART III. Containing directions for Writing and Folding
of Letters Missive or Epistles.
CHAP. I. Of Letters in General.
THE excellency and usefulness of Letters are so universally known and
acknowledged by persons of all conditions and degrees, that an Essay in praise
of them were as ridiculous as impertinent. All the world knows, how great their
power is in the management of humane affairs both public and private: No man of
sense can be ignorant what influence they have in the secrets of every
particular State, how frequently Plots and Conspiracies are discovered by them,
and that they are the best Fountains out of which an History can be drawn. It Is
sufficiently known, that by them not only Trade and Commerce are maintained in
any one Teritory but Traffic is maintained and upheld through the whole
habitable Earth; and in conclusion, all people agree, that they are the life
and soul of Amity and Love, and that Communication by Letters does almost
contribute as much to the preservation of civil Society amongst men, as the
sacred obligation of an Oath.

Wherefore, I shall not dwell upon these Topics, it being my Design only to
propose some plain instructions for the right writing, sealing and directing of
ordinary missive Letters, and if my Rules sometimes reach persons of a higher
Sphere, I intend them rather for Ornament and speculation than for use and
Practice.

First, it is a great grace to Letters, to be clearly and punctually written
without blotts or confusion.

But it is sufficient for men of Business to write Legibly and pretty free from
Blotts, although it is very necessary for young Gentlemen, Ladies and Youth in
General to write Letters as well as ever they can; for it looks like Idleness
or dis-respect in them not to write their best.

All Letters and Petitions to Superiors must be written fair and well, since
the very writing gives a high recommendation to them.

The main Grace thereof consists in spelling well, which has been the design
of the two former parts of this Book: nothing is more ridiculous, than Letters
ill spelt, it arguing a mighty defect of Education: whereas on the contrary, to
see a Letter from a Lady, or one who does not pretend to great Learning, well
spelt, does add a huge luster to their breeding, and is much praised and
admired.

This, though it be very necessary to good Education, and be esteemed no small
part thereof, yet is generally too much neglected: but it is certainly a great
Error in men's judgments; for a man that can spell well, is thought a Scholar,
though he have but little Learning, and Scholars who spell ill (as some do) are
thought Ignorant.

As it is not safe to speak, so it is much more dangerous to committ any secret
to paper, whether it concern the State, your Friend or your Self: for,
according to the Poet, Vox edita perit,
Litera Scripta manet.
Words vanish soon, and vapor into Air,
While Letters on record stand fresh and fair.


Letters may be miscarried; or they may be brought against you as a Witness,
and in Law they are commonly accounted the best witnesses.

Promises in Letters are bonds, and therefore it is prudence to write nothing
in a Letter, but what you needs must: how common is it to say, I have such a
man's Letter, can he deny his own hand?

While Oaths and Evidence shall bear the Cause,
Men of small Conscience little fear the Laws.
What Trade are you? a Witness, Sir draw near;
There Is Coin depose what I would have you swear.
But of deceit in Letters there is no fear.
CHAP. II. Of Superscriptions, and Appellations in Letters.
YOU are to consider first, to whom you write, so that you may pay respect
proper to the person, and give every man his due Title: and therefore you must
take especial care first of the Superscription, which is twofold.

The first lies within your Letter, and consists in beginning it aright, that
is, Appellations proper to persons of all Ranks and Orders amongst men. The
second I shall consider in its due place and time.

For your better Instruction I will here set down some examples, how to begin
Letters to persons of all Characters and Conditions, by which you may see, what
Respect and Deference is due to them. But when you write to persons you know
very well, or dare use familiarity with, you need not confine your self to any
Rules.

Amongst familiars and equals it is common to use no superscriptions at the
beginning but fall presently to the business in hand, putting your Epithet or
Title in a Parenthesis thus: Yesterday (My Lord) I received yours, etc.
I shall not fail (Sir) to obey, etc.
My urgent occasions (Dear Father) require, etc.
I came last night late from Windsor: (Dear Harry) come and let me see thee,
etc. and so on any exigence, etc.


Though it shows a profound respect to use Superscriptions especially to
Superiors, yet I leave every one to his inclinations: it is sufficient here to
tell what is most proper on such occasions.

Forms of Superscriptions or Appellations in Letters.
To the King: Sir (alias) May it please Yor Majesty: or, Sacred Sir: or, Dread
Sovereign. To the Queen: Madam, or, May it please Yor Matie, To the Princess:
Madam, or, May it please Yor Royal Highness. To a Duke: My Lord, or, May it
please Yor Gr. To a Duchess: Madam, or, May it please Yor Grace, To a
Marquess: My Lord, or, May it please Yor Lordship. To a Marquess's Lady: Madam,
or, May it please Yor Lap, To an Earl: My Lord (alias) Right Honle. To his
Lady: Madam, or, Right Honle. To a Viscount: My Lord, or, Right Honle. To his
Lady: Madam, or, Right Honle. To a Baron: My Lord, or, May it please Yor Lop,
To a Baroness: Madam, or, May it please Yor Lap, To all Ladies, and Gentlewomen
indifferently: Madam, To a Baronet: Sir, alias, Right Worshipful, To a Knight:
Sir, or, Right Worshipful, To an Esquire: Sir, May it please Yor Worship, To
any Gentleman: Sir, or, Much Honored,
At the end of your Letter, Repeat the same again toward the left hand, thus:

My Lord,

Yor Graces most, etc.

Though (as I said before) amongst equals and familiars you may use your
discretion without Ceremony, (which is inconsistent with common Affairs) yet it
is convenient to give Superiors rather too much than too little Respect.

The several Degrees of the English Nobility are also differenced and
Distinguished one from another by their Titles and Ensigns of Honor.

A Duke has the Title of Grace, and, when he is writt-to, may be styled, Most
High, Potent and Noble Prince. A Marquess: Most Noble and Potent Lord. An Earl
the same. A Viscount, Right Potent and Noble Lord. A Baron, Right Noble Lord.
When you write to a Person of Quality, you are to leave a great distance
between the Superscription or first line and the second line or beginning of
your Letter: for, the greater distance you leave the greater respect you show;
as you may see by the Examples of Letters, which I shall have occasion to show
in the last Chapter of this brief Treatise.

When you write to your familiars, near Relations or those you are very
intimate with, great and lofty Complements are not so well taken, which seem to
proceed rather from Affectation than a man's natural Address: so that the best
way is to use your own familiar and usual Expressions.

As the Title of Sir, or Master is generally given to all Gentlemen or others
(though sometimes mean Persons) so the Title of Madam or Mistress is universally
bestowed upon all Gentlewomen and others (provided they be not of very Low and
base Condition:) such is the frank and Bountiful courtesy of England above
other Nations to the Female Sex.

The Title of Lady is not only attributed to all the Nobility, but likewise to
others of lower Rank, that come under the notion of Gentlewomen, (who upon that
Account are much in Arrears to the English Civility and respect for them) both
in writing and speaking, although in Law it is not allowed.

To those Akin to us it is usual to ascribe their degree of kindred: as Dear
Father, or Mother, Honored Uncle, or Aunt, Loving Brother, or Sister, or
Cousin: or in what other Epithets you please to express your affection.

This is indeed the common practice of England, but it would be interpreted
great arrogance or dis-respect in all other the most polite and civilized
Nations: for no man ought to mention another's relation to him, but when it
must be acknowledged an honor to the person addressed to.

When Persons, who are of near kindred write one to another, the Person of
greater Quality may express the degree of kindred in the beginning, but it
better becomes those of a meaner Character to do it at the latter end.

And if your Condition be not conformable, it is wisdom to conceal any pretense
to great men, or to the rich; it being only proper for them to own you; and if
you truly deserve, they will. In men who are necessitated to live below their
birth, it is great discretion to wave pretensions to great things.

It Is generally observed, that true Gentlemen are silent on such occasions;
none but base and mean-born pretenders to Gentility impose their Extravagant
Brags on Company, and for their ridiculous vanity are still less esteemed.

"First, God's Commands, your Parents next obey:
"A thousand Snares, Pride, Lust and Avarice lay.
Pretend not blood, or kindred to the Great,
But when the Truth is backed with an Estate:
Who would not smile to hear a Servile Clown,
Pretending kindred, honor and renown?
CHAP. III. Of Proems, or Introductions to Letters.
IN the beginning it is customary and handsome to make some preamble or
Introduction, which may usher in the main subject matter: and when this is
done, your greatest trouble is past; for, then your thoughts, which were before
bounded up by themselves, run fluently, like an Exuberant River, that has found
a new passage for its waters,

I shall here for your farther direction set down Forms to begin Letters
withal, used amongst all degrees, which you may make use of at your pleasure:
and, though you are not confined to my words, yet you may by reading these, be
enabled to express your mind something better according to your own particular
fancy.

The best of Secretaries sometimes use this way of beginning, though they never
tie themselves up to Prescriptions or Rules: but it is very convenient, that
those of meaner quality should use such especially to Superiors.

Forms of beginning Letters.
YOU have obliged me so much, that I am wholly at your command, and therefore,
etc. There is nothing in my power, but you may very freely command, which is
but the least of my duty; seeing, etc. I cannot think of your goodness without
admiration, seeing I am so far below your notice, etc. I do acknowledge it is
my duty to receive your commands with cheerfulness, and, etc. Your merits have
rendered your condition so considerable, that you are the comfort and refuge of
your Friends: wherefore, etc. I esteem my self most happy in your
correspondency, for distance of place and length of time shall never alter me,
etc. Your absence is very grievous to me; so that either return quickly, or
write oftener, etc. If it were as easy to convince, as to accuse, men would be
in a much better state, and, etc. If you expect thanks suitable to your
favors, I beseech you teach me in what manner to return them, etc. The news of
your good Fortune was no small joy to me. If wishes would do, you may easily
conjecture what I would do. Having the opportunity of this Bearer, I could not
omit to tell you, that, etc. Yours I r^^eived Yesterday of the 13th instant,
wherein you are pleased to acquaint me, that, etc. All the News here in Town at
present, is that, etc. Your friendship is so necessary to me, that all my other
happiness would be imperfect without it, etc. Yours I received with great
satisfaction, and I return you many thanks for, etc. The obligations you daily
lay upon me, do very much surprise me, because I cannot find any occasion to
express my Gratitude. I received your kind Token by your good Friend J. R. for
which I return you my humble thanks. If you expect Complements from me, you may
chance to be disappointed; for I am a professed Enemy to them, being a gentile
way of telling a Ly. Though you are out of my reach, yet you are not out of my
remembrance: for, etc. I esteem my self very fortunate, because I retain your
good opinion, and, etc. The same observance that a Father may claim from a
Child, your kindness has obliged me to, etc. If you think me unworthy of an
answer, pray send me my own Letter back again. My last to you was of the 14th
of December last, but having received no Answer, etc. I presume my last came
safe to your hands, and therefore, etc. Since you have provoked me, I must make
bold to tell you, that Friends and Acquaintance would not know what to do with
themselves, if it were not for this blessed Art of Writing, etc. I no sooner
received yours, but, etc. If I had not a great esteem of your Sincerity, I
could hardly digest what I am told, etc. Were I as able as I am willing, words
should soon be turned into actions. It is gratitude to receive a good turn
civilly, to retain it in mind, and acknowledge it, but most of all to endeavor
to requite it: and therefore, etc. You need not request, but command me, since
by obliging you I content my self. If Letters were as swift as wishes, You may
assure your self, that, etc. You need not complement at this rate: for your
favor and correspondence is sufficient reward for my small endeavors. I need
not be put in mind of your Affairs: Your generous Actions will never be blotted
out of my memory, nor, etc. I hereby send you my due and humble thanks for all
your kindnesses, but especially for, etc. According to the advice you sent me
in your last, I, etc. Life is a load without Friendship, and therefore, etc. By
this I see, that honor and preferment are rather the rewards of Flattery and
Interest than of Virtue. You have given such demonstrations of your goodness,
that it would be ungrateful to question it. Complements will not pass among
those who can discern resemblance from reality: upon which account, etc. Since
I had the honor of your Acquaintance, I have frequently received testimonies
of your Love, and particularly, etc. The Court now affords little news, but,
etc. Gratitude is the poor man's virtue; and seeing I cannot be liberal, I will
endeavor not to be unmindful of, etc. Your favors to me are so far above my
merits, that they surpass my gratitude. According to my promise and that
portion of obedience I ow your Commands, I here renew my protestations (after
having rendered you many thanks for your last, and for the good news therein)
that I will certainly, etc. Next under God, I look upon you to be my best
Friend upon Earth: I have found it so, and I will evermore own it. You have
been ready on all occasions to oblige me, and therefore, etc.
Having once begun your Epistle with these or such like Expressions, you may
proceed according to your occasions, for that which is once well begun, is half
ended:

Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet.
He has his work half done,
That has it well begun.
CHAP. IV. Of the main Subject, and of the Conclusions of Letters
AFTER you have begun your Letters with some such Expression as I have
mentioned in the last Chapter, according to the quality of the person, or your
own discretion, you may proceed and declare your mind in your own natural
terms, using short periods.

Shun vain Repetitions and Cramp words; the easiest and plaines^ style being
most usual and commendable, as it is the style of al^ Languages and
Conversation: Wherefore let it be furnished and compacted with the best,
choicest and most familiar words, neither going before, or coming after the use
of the age you live in, nor consisting of either antiquated or such new upstart
words, as our Pamphlets and Novels daily introduce.

Avoid all obscurity in expressing your self in such terms, as men shall rather
admire than understand. Choice Sentences and witty Expressions being the best,
fitted to the humor and capacity of the Person you write unto. You are to
consider, what will be regarded with best attention, and next what will leave
the sweetest relish and impression in the mind.

Brevitie is a great grace to Letters: you are therefore to examine your self,
and study to express your mind in the most significant English words you can
think of, and convenient for the present business in hand.

This you may do by avoiding Idle Complements, Prefaces and Protestations,
keeping close to the matter before you without vain circuits of figures,
digressions, conjunctions and flourishes of pretended Rhetoric.

If you write to your Superior, you are bound to consider in him these things;
first, your interest in him, secondly, his capacity, (for all men are not alike
gifted) thirdly, his leisure. You are obliged to the greater brevity, as his
place is of greater concern, or care: For long and tedious Letters are very
troublesome to Readers.

And since practice and use in a thing brings perfection, therefore to be ready
and perfect you must write often.

Lastly, when you have said all you have to say, conclude your Letter with some
short asseveration of your affections in the following, or the like words, not
using always the same words, as many do.

Forms of concluding Letters.
IF I shall prove so fortunate, as to be remembered by you, it will be a great
obligation upon Your, etc. This great kindness shall never be forgotten by,
etc. Such great favors as I have received can never be forgotten but with
ingratitude by, etc. You have conferred such obligations undeservedly upon me;
that, since they can never be requited, they shall never be forgotten by, etc.
There is nothing I desire more than to be continued Yours, etc. There is
nothing I value more than your favor, so that I hope nothing can persuade you
that I am not Your, etc. That God would bless you with all earthly blessings,
and give you contentment here and hereafter, shall be the constant prayers of,
etc. When I think on your favors, and my deserts, I cannot but admire your
goodness, and shall on all occasions continue Your, etc. You have so much
obliged me, that upon all occasions I must acknowledge my self Your, etc. In
the mean time, remember, that I am Your, etc. I shall sooner forget my own
name, than the obligation to be Your, etc. There is nothing more pleasing to me
than to have an opportunity to show how much I am, etc. I humbly beg, that you
would be pleased to own me to be Your, etc. I must repay all your kindness with
the uncurrent Coin of thanks, being all the Treasure of Your, etc. Your favors
have so much surpised me, that I want words to express, how much I am Your,
etc. I am so far below your notice, that I admire your goodness the more in
bestowing your favors so liberally on a person, who was obliged to be Your,
etc. Your favors are so far beyond my merits, that they are altogether above
my gratitude: it lies only in my power to continue Your, etc. In doing this,
you will confer an obligation beyond expression upon Your, etc. And this I
desire may be registered amongst the rest of the obligations of Your, etc. It is
my ambition to be continued Your, etc. I know nothing more at present, but that
I am, etc. I esteem my self fortunate in having this opportunity to show, that
I am Your, etc. If this can pleasure you, you shall upon all occasions be
supplied by Your, etc. It is honor enough for me to be continued Your, etc.
Your Countenance is no small encouragement to Your, etc. I am very proud of
your acquaintance; and if you will honor me with the continuance thereof, you
will oblige Your, etc. I hope you will pardon my failings, your goodness being
as great as my desire to continue Your, etc. I assure you, no man living can be
more, than I am Your, etc. Whatever happens, I am resolved to continue Your,
etc. I cannot either be melancholy or miserable, so long as you are pleased to
continue me in quality of Your, etc. I wish I could be so fortunate, as to tell
you face to face how much I am Your, etc. Pray pardon my tedious Expressions,
since I cannot refrain to repeat the many obligations you have put upon Your,
etc. I shall be ready upon all occasions to discharge that duty, which your
kindness requires from Your, etc. If you will grant this my humble request, it
will be a great obligation upon Your, etc. I wish I had any suitable occasion
to demonstrate how much I am Your, etc. I hope you will accept of this
imperfect acknowledgment, till I am able to give a perfect testimony, that I
am, etc. There are many more able, but none more willing than, etc. If I had
power equivalent to my will, there should be no man more serviceable than, etc.
I so much honor you, that it is impossible you should want perfect happiness,
were it in the power of Your, etc. I wish it were in my power to make my
Actions demonstrate, how much I am, etc. Were my Actions as easy to me as
words, I should soon convince you that I am Your, etc. If in my employment I
could be any ways serviceable to you, it is my interest to be Your, etc. The
great obligations I have from you have engaged me to live and die Your, etc. My
living depends altogether on my liberty, and so for both I am obliged to be
Your, etc. This with my humble service is all from, etc. Live pleasantly,
banish melancholy, and remember Your, etc. Humbly begging the continuance of
your kindness, I rest Your, etc. Pray remember me kindly to all friends; and
when you can spare time, bestow a thought committed to a small piece of paper
upon Your, etc. This with my kind respects to you and your worthy Lady, and my
service where it is due, is all from Your, etc. So may all health and happiness
attend you, according to the wishes of Your, etc. Believe it, Sir, any Commands
from you shall be welcome to, etc. When any thing of moment or importance falls
out, I hope you will think upon, etc. Fare well, kind Sir, the continuance of
your correspondence in pure love and friendship will be very acceptable to
Your, etc. That you may have a prosperous Journey, and a happy return, shall be
the constant prayers of Your, etc. Many things are changeable, but I am still
Your, etc. If you think any thing can alter my affection, you are much mistaken
in Your, etc. I shall ever count my self happy, so long as you are pleased to
continue me Your, etc. You need not put me in mind of your affairs here, since
I am resolved to make no difference between your interest, and that of Your,
etc. In this I shall not implore your belief, desiring to let you see by
effects rather than words, that I am without complement Your, etc. You may have
more powerful and considerable Servants, but none more than my self Your, etc.
Keep your Complements for Strangers, and remember to use more familiarity with
Your, etc. I do not question your power or your will, which makes me believe
you will comply with this occasion to oblige Your, etc. If I had as often
occasions to serve you, as I have to write, my Actions should declare, that I
am, etc. Return your answer quickly, if you love the quiet of, etc. If I
thought my absence could occasion your disqui^^, or my presence were necessary
to your service, you should see by my speedy return, how much I am, etc. The
unwelcome news of your sickness is the greatest grief could happen to, etc. In
doing so, you will confer an obligation beyond expression upon, etc. Your
countenance is no small encouragement to Your, etc. If Idle Reports can disgust
you, it shall never alter Your, etc. It lies not in the power of either foes or
flattery, to alter my resolution to be Your, etc. If you doubt of the truth of
my Inclinations to serve you, your Commands will make the best proof that I am
Your, etc. I can never think of your favors, but it renews the remembrance of
my engagements to be Your, etc. There is nothing I hate more than ingratitude;
yet I am content to be called ungrateful when I shall cease to be Your, etc. I
shall never prove so ungrateful as not to confess my self Your, etc. When the
world speaks worst of me, it is some comfort to my Conscience that I find not
my self so vicious as to forget what obligations I have to be Your, etc. I beg
your acceptance of this testimony of my gratitude and my earnest desires to
deserve the name of Your, etc. Though there is a deficiency in my expressions,
yet there is none in my inclinations to be Your, etc. I take it as a great
favor that you employ me in any thing that may conduce to your contentment,
because I am very ambitious to be Your, etc. That God would send you a happy
Journey, and a safe return, shall be the constant prayers of Your, etc. Since
nothing else will serve you, I kiss your hands, and subscribe my self yours as
you deserve, etc. I will conclude at present, but never cease to be Your, etc.
I humbly desire the help of your prayers for the prosperity of Your, etc. When
you pray, I hope you will always remember Your, etc. And I hope the God of
Heaven will prosper the endeavors of, etc. You may freely command whatsoever
lies in the power of Your, etc. In which hopes I rest Your, etc. I am fully
convinced of your love by its good effects toward Your, etc. I would do a
thousand times more for your sake if it were in the power of Your, etc. This I
can assure you of, and likewise that I am Your, etc. I have often told you by
word of mouth that I love you, yet my Pen shall once more assure you that I am
Your, etc. Your desires have always been looked upon by me as commands, which
shall be ever valued by Your, etc. We both shall be much obliged to you, he as
your Petitioner, and I as Your, etc. God Almighty preserve all good Christians
from such things, especially your self, and Your, etc. God preserve his
Majesty, and the Royal Family, The Church, your friends and mine; this is the
daily prayers of Your, etc. All this shall be asserted by Your, etc. You shall
find me upon all opportunities Your, etc. All these are but the least part of
the duty of Your, etc.
Then you are to subscribe your Letters with this or the like tender of your
Service.

SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant J. C.

This must always be done according to the quality, condition, or relation of
the Person to whom you write: but herein you may use your own discretion,
giving every man his due.

CHAP. V. Of dating, folding and sealing of Letters.
WHEN you have thus concluded your Letter, read it all over, and what has
either escaped your mind or pen correct prudently.

Then date your Letter at the end toward the left hand when you write to your
Superior; otherwise you may date it at the top: but fancy may take more place
herein than judgment.

It is a Custom amongst Persons of quality to leave no margent: which though it
be a custom, for which no convincing Reason can be assigned, yet seeing they
use it, it is not amiss to use it to them.

But in Letters of Business a broad margent is very proper, because things may
be omitted, and the Person to whom you write, may mark every passage, the
better to answer.

In folding or making up Letters, many affect odd fantastical forms,
troublesome to themselves, and Readers, being frequently torn in the opening;
wherefore I would recommend the plainest and the easiest way, which amongst all
Secretaries, and men of parts, is the Custom.

Next you come to sealing, which is either with Wax, or Wafers, The first is
esteemed most respectful, though the later is tolerable, Wafers being ready on
all occasions without farther trouble.

To seal with Wax, and make a good and clear Impression, having lighted your
Wax, drop on the Paper enough to fill the Seal, then stir it about with the
stick of Wax until the black, or smoke of the Candle be gone. Then clap on the
Seal with a sudden jerk, holding it without moving till the Wax be cold, and
you shall be sure to have the full and clear Impression of your Seal to great
perfection.

CHAP. VI. Of External Superscriptions or Directions.
THE other Superscription or direction is on the Back of your Letter, which
must be writ very legible, and must contain the name and title of him to whom
you write, with the exact place of his residence.

As I said before it is improper to express any degree of kindred on the back
of a Letter; it concerns not the Bearer what alliance or relation is between
the Writer and Receiver, no more than the superfluous Addition of haste and
speed, contributes swiftness to the Post-boys Horse.

For your better information I shall here subjoin Superscriptions or Directions
to Persons of all Ranks and Degrees, as First, To the King: (alias) To the
King's most Excellent Major, To the Sacred Majesty of James the Second. To the
Queen: To the Queen's most Excellent Majesty. To the Prince: alias, To his
Royal Highness. To the Princess: To her R. H. To his Grace the Lord A. B. of
Cant. To his Grace the Lord A. B. of York. You may add, To the Most Reverend
Father in God: if you please. To the Right Reverend Father in God, The Lord
Bishop of L. All Bishops are so styled. All the Inferior Clergy: To the
Reverend Dr. A. B. with the Title of his Preferment, or Dignity. To his Grace
the D. of N. To the Right Honorable the Marq. of, etc. or Lord M. To the Right
Honorable the Earl of M. To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount of, etc. To
the Right Honorable the Lord, etc. All Sons of the Nobility are Honorable,
and ought to be addressed to with great Respect. To the Right Honorable Sir John
W. Knight and Baronet. To the Right Worshipful Sir T. M. To Sir J. L. These.
Every Privy Counselor is Right Honorable. To his Excellency L. E. of F.
Captain General of his Majesty's Forces. Lord Lieutenant of Ireland: His
Excellency. Ambassadors: Excellency. To the Honorable Colonel W. To the
Worshipful T. M. Esquire; To Mr. J. F. These. To the Right Honorable J. J. Lord
Mayor of the City of London. To the Right Worshipful, etc. Sheriff of L. All
those that have been Lord Mayors of London are Honorable. To the Worshipful
Alderman A. etc. All men who have been Mayors of Towns, Masters of Companies or
Corporations by the King's Charter or Commission, are afterward Esquires.


It is usual when we write to Persons of quality to put a cover on the Letter:
that is a piece of clean paper put about it and sealed, which is a token of
great respect.

When you write to any Superior, it ought to be done with very great respect
and honor; here too much is better than too little. It is not every one that
knows what is justly due to all degrees amongst men.

CHAP. VII. Examples of Letters.
FOrasmuch as Precepts without Examples are generally to little purpose, I
think it fitting here to add a small Packet of Letters, which may be a kind of
Rule of direction as to the entire composition and frame of Letters. And first,

A Letter of Complement and Congratulation to a Great Soldier returned from
the Wars against the Turks.
My Lord,
IF the general Joy which is now diffused through the hearts of all good
Christians, honest-minded men and Loyal Subjects in Christendom, besides the
particular obligations I have received from Your Lordship had not an equal (or
perhaps a greater) influence upon me than upon any man else, I should not have
presumed to have troubled Your Lordship at this time of public rejoicing, but
that I think by crowding in with the universal Acclamations of Christendom, and
in particular these Nations at once to commit and atone for the same Crime:
for, my Lord, give me leave to say this is intended not so much to congratulate
Your Lordships fortunate and honorable Escape out of those many and glorious
hazards, which a resolute and undaunted Valor in conjunction with a most
zealous Honor and Loyalty engaged You in, as to applaud to our selves the
happiness we are like to enjoy both in Church and State, occasioned by
overthrowing of the Enemies both of God and Man, the Infidels and Rebels; and
to give Your Lordship more particularly Your due, who being more ambitious of
Honor than of Life, who so nobly ventured Yours in these Heroic Exploits for
the Honor of Your Prince, and the Interest of Christianity. The Historians of
this Age will not be so ungrateful as to forget to deliver down to Posterity
this Illustrious Subject, where by your Warlike Achievements you strive to
demonstrate the greatness of your Ancestors, rather than by a vain and
unperforming Muster of their old Charters, Patents and Commissions: thus, My
Lord, You know that by Arms Honor was first acquired, which makes me thus
assume the boldness of this imperfect and short attempt in Your Lordship's
Encomium, not doubting Your pardon; which I have the greater reason to hope
for, because it is free from two Vices equally hateful to men of Arms, I mean
Flattery and long Harangues.


A Letter of Commerce to Mr. D. Bookseller at Cambridge.
Mr. D.
YOurs I received, and according to your desire herewith send you six of Grew's
Musaeum's Regalis Societatis; I am extremely glad to hear they sell so well at
that great Musaeum of all England, which as it is the best Judge, so it is the
best user and Repository of such Books. I have nothing to add at present, but
that your returns are accepted of by,

SIR, Your Friend to serve you Jos. Hindmarsh.


A Love Letter to Silvia.
SInce Madam Smith has been so kind as to take upon her the charge of this
Letter, I have ventured now to write to you. I know very well, I ought to do no
such thing, and by right, I should dream as little of You as you have thought
of me these three weeks. I went to look out for You with great earnestness at
my Lady -- House, but Silvia was not there nor any where else that I could hear
of; so that I was forced to leave -- without bidding You adieu: but though I
departed without seeing You, yet I see you but too plainly every day. What?
cannot threescore miles separate You from a Heart that you take so little care
of; and cannot this Heart, that is so indifferent to You, divide it self from
You? You have made it insensible to all the pleasures that here in this Town
crowd about it, to feel only its melancholy perplexities: they are its only
employment at present. Now I could wish You would somewhat qualify them by a
Letter or so: But now! do not write to me, a correspondence with You is very
dangerous, I am but too well acquainted what style You write in, and Your
Letters would complete my ruin, when I should read over a hundred and a
hundred times the Characters of a hand, that has so much wit at its fingers
ends; however, I lodge now at -- and this is my direction: Let what will
happen, I will not tell You by retail all that I have endured since my
departure with the greatest long-suffering in the world; why should Your Idea
thus incessantly haunt me every where; and is not London a place of Refuge
against that charming Image that always follows me? I could tell you a hundred
things more, but I am afraid I have said too much already: I expect an answer
with such an impatience as I wish You could conceive. Think sometimes of a man
that thinks of nothing but you, and be so gracious as to give me some hopes
that You are pleased to accept of me as,

MADAM, Your most devoted humble Servant J. R.


Every Subject has a distinct sort of style and Character, as may be seen by
these three Letters: The first is in a pompous and high way, most becoming the
Soldier. The second is concise and short in its diction: saying no more than
what is purely for bargain and interest. The third is a passionate and
uncertain way of expressing the mind, like the fond souls of Lovers, which bear
much resemblance to the Sea, from whence Love is said to have sprung.

Those that are arrived to any improvement by frequent writing of Letters, will
easily see these various differences, and will take care to accommodate
themselves accordingly, especially when they have once come to some moderate
knowledge in business and conversation; but for the younger and unexperienced I
shall add a few examples more.

A Letter to persuade a Friend to Marry.
Dear Harry,
AS thy Friend (and I am satisfied you think me so) I advise you as you love
your interest to marry. Age comes on apace, therefore change that melancholy
and uncertain state wherein you now live, for one infinitely more delightful:
the conveniences of which condition you have often admired in me by your own
words, That when my one half was abroad the other was at home. The pleasing
conversation of the Female Sex, which averts dull and melancholy thoughts, is
most certainly charming; and besides, your daily expenses now would go a great
way in a Family, I advise you also not to set your thoughts so much on riches
as on a good humor: If you find a virtuous good natured woman, educated by
worthy Parents, whom you can truly love, make no more delay (begging God's
assistance in such a great concern) If you chance to marry where you do not
love, you will love where you cannot marry. I have seen pretty lines on that
Subject which I recommend to your perusal, that is, Who makes the object of his
fancy Gold,
Grows cold in fancy when the money's told.
And she who feigns to love to live a Lady,
Is Honor's Faun, I know not what she may be.


To which I subjoin four more thus,

But those whom Love and Honor join in one;
Will love each other when the Money's gone
With mutual kindness laboring both for life,
Free from all grudging discontent or strife.
Be no more faint-hearted, but nobly venture, and mind not the silly morals
which old musty Batchelors and bad Husbands commonly have against that
honorable condition. This, dear H. I advise from my own experience, because I
enjoy all the comforts marriage can afford; think on this, and slight not this
cordial advice of,

Your most affectionate Friend, J. C.


An Answer to the foregoing Letter.
THere is nothing earthly (dear Jack) I value more sacred than Friendship, and
none so dearly as yours. I thank you heartily that you would be so free with
me: And to let you see that I have both courage to venture and faith to b^lieve
it my best course, as I have not (on that account) refused any reasonable
proposals, so neither shall I reject tolerable profers. I must confess I am
afraid to meet with a piece of Extravagancy and Ill Nature, which would as
certainly make me miserable as the other you propound would make me happy. That
I ought to marry for Love more than Money you know I am convinced it is my
Interest, and I not only am of the opinion of your first four Lines, but also
join with yours in the other; and were I sure to find such happiness in a
married life as I have found described in another Poem on that Subject, I
should not delay. The fancy is this, They were so one that none could truly say
Which of them ruled or whether did obey;
He ruled because she would obey, and she
In so obeying ruled as well as he:
What pleased him best it need no other cause
To please her too but only his applause.


Is there any man living that does not admire concord and mutual affection
between Man and Wife, the greatest comfort of humane life? and were I sure to
find such a Wife as God has blessed you with, I should soon alter the
condition you so little admire; but there is such cunning (as I may truly say)
on the Female side, that a man dares hardly begin; for if he once break his
mind, he must either proceed to his disadvantage, or retreat dishonourably with
these disingenuous reflections, He loves the Money better than the Woman, he
only comes for Money, not for a Wife, etc. which made a worthy Person ^^y, that
it was easier to gain a hundred new Mistresses than put off one old one. To
marry when a blessed opportunity offers is one part of my resolution, another
is to be on all occasions,

Your faithful Friend and humble Servant, H. R.


A Letter to persuade a young Man to mind his Business.
YOU have not many Friends or Relations to trust to, neither would I wish you
to be troublesome to those you have: It is both your duty and interest to mind
your Employment (which if prudently managed) will get you both Friends, Money
and Reputation. There is no Employment so mean but these three qualifications,
Ability, Industry and Sobriety will improve to a good account. The first you
have; the other two if you want it is your own fault. Custom is a second
nature, and if you find your self addicted to any ill one, strive to reform,
and Custom will be as kind on the better side. Some take pleasure to sit
amongst idle Company, spending both money and time in vain. But the worst is,
business neglected disobliges our Benefactors, and when they conceive ill
thoughts of our Conduct, certain ruin follows. Men of business ought to improve
every opportunity to oblige those by whom they live: this trouble is but for a
while; for it is time to take our pleasure when our interest will allow. It is
a great comfort (and it is looked upon accordingly) for a man to live by his
own industry without being troublesome to Friends, a thing grievous to a
generous Spirit. This pray consider, and deny your self your humor for a time.
If this my advice without design I lovingly give be prudently followed, you
will in time be sensible how much I am,

Your Friend and Servant.


A Letter to dissuade one from Disputes about Religion.
Dear Will,
THE esteem I bear you has prevailed with me to warn you of a weakness (you
seem to indulge) which if continued will expose you to many inconveniences; and
this is your readiness to engage in controversies about Opinions, but
especially to dispute points of Religion more passionately than consists with
good manners. Wary and prudent men shun such unpleasant and unprofitable
discourse, which rarely if ever produces any fruit but contention and dislike,
seeing all Disputants contend more for Victory than Truth. No good man
professes any Religion but believes it the best; so that he who undertakes to
impugn that, does but upbraid him with want of Judgment in such an important
choice. And as such attempts are very unmannerly so they are full of danger,
especially if the Opinions be established by public Authority; for thereby you
take upon you to arraign and condemn the Wisdom of the Nation, and the Justice
and Policy of the Government, which will be ever tender of its own Reputation:
such Disputes ought to be made as remarkable for their punishment, as they are
in themselves hateful for their folly. If any will needs thrust such discourse
upon you, it is best to affect as much indifferency and unconcern as you can,
and to propose your own sense rather as doubts wherein you desire to be
satisfied, than conclusions and fixed resolutions. Thus, Sir, I have adventured
to lay before you my weak Judgment in this nice Affair, wherein, if you
seriously reflect, I hope you will find no cause to impute it to officiousness
or impertinency in,

Your Affectionate Friend and Well-wisher, J. C.


A Letter to persuade a Friend to give his Children good Education.
Dear Sir,
I Am heartily glad to hear that your two Boys are so hopeful Scholars, pray
continue them at School, and give them no other Portions. That good Education
is the only earthly thing here necessary, no man will question; It teaches us
to preserve our Souls, Bodies and Estates. Breeding proves often a better and
surer Estate than Lands, Riches and Honor; These are subject to losses,
chances and revolutions; but Learning is an inestimable Treasure which cannot
be taken away: what charges we are at upon that account, is the best bestowed
of any. It is no disgrace (although a great inconveniencie) for a Gentleman to
be poor, but to be illiterate or rude is a great blot to his Reputation.
Education supplies all defects both of Birth, Riches and Honor. Amongst the
several parts of Learning I look upon Writing and Arithmetic not the least;
for those who have neglected other Learning, are thereby in little time, and at
small charge made capable for any Employment; the Pen is a certain Refuge when
Trades fail; you will rarely see any sober Person so qualified in want. This I
advise, not that I think you ignorant of what is proper, but only for the love
I bear to these young Gentlemen, which is the duty of,

London, March 12. 1685/6. Your most obliged humble Servant,


A Letter of Advice from a Father to a Son.
YOU are now of Age sufficient (Son) to govern your self, I have discharged my
duty according to my ability; and since you are to act for your self in this
troublesome World, I advise you, first, to be religious; show it rather in your
Actions than your Words: be also loyal to your King; obedience to your Prince
is part of your duty toward God. Secondly, Behave your self obligingly to all
men, especially your Neighbors both inferiors and equals; disoblige none
willingly, for one man disobliged will take more pains to be revenged, than an
hundred persons, you have obliged, will do to be thankful. Thirdly, Let your
Expenses be rather within, than either equal to, or above your Estate. It Is
better to have sufficient to keep up a middle rank, than to be forced to run in
debt to maintain a higher. It is a great inconveniency to be in debt, but if
you must, keep your word sacredly; if you expect Reputation. Fourthly, Shun all
Quarrels, Gaming and Lawsuits, and do every thing with a cheerful Countenance
and fair Language. Lastly, Shun evil and extravagant Company, use honest and
harmless Recreation; the rest I refer to your own discretion. These things well
considered will be the means of a comfortable life and a happy end; which that
you may have, and all good Christians, shall be the hearty Prayers of,

Your loving Father, Tr. P.


Forms of Bills, Bonds, Acquittances, etc. by which such Writings may be made
on occasion.
A short Bill of Debt. March 13. 1685/6.
BOrrowed and Received of James Lawson the Sum of Ten Pounds English Money,
which I do hereby promise to pay to him or his order upon demand; witness my
Hand, Day and Year abovewritten.

Thomas Howard.

A Bill of Debt.
KNow all men by these presents, that I Henry Compton of the Parish of Saint
James's Westminster, and County of Middlesex, Gentleman, do ow and am indebted
unto Thomas Stevinson of the Parish of Saint Martin's in the Fields, and County
aforesaid, Scrivener, The Sum of Twenty Pounds of good and lawful Money of
England, to be paid to the abovesaid Thomas Stevinson, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, in and upon the second day of June next ensuing the
date hereof, without fraud or farther delay: For the which payment well and
truly to be made, I bind me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators in the
penal Sum of Forty Pounds of like Money of England, firmly by these Presents.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the first day of March,
1685/6.

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of John Templer, Richard Johnson.
Henr. Compton.


An Obligation with a Condition.
NOverint Vniversi per praesentes me Johannem Trant, de Parochia Sancti
Margaretae de Westminster. and Com. Midd. Clericum, Teneri and firmiter obligari
Edwardo Tomlinson de eadem Parochia and Com. Generoso in Ducent. Libris bonae
and legalis Monetae Angliae, Solvend. eidem Edwardo Tomlinson aut suo certo
Attornato Executoribus, Administratoribus vel Assignatis suis, ad quam quidem
solutionem been and fideliter faciendam obligo me, Haeredes, Executores and
Administratores men's firmiter per praesentes, Sigillo meo sigillat. dat. sexto
die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi II. Dei Gratia Magnae Britanniae, Fran.
and Hib. Secundo Annoque Dom. 1686.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John
Trant, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall well and truly pay
or cause to be paid to the abovenamed Edward Tomlinson, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators the full sum of One hundred pounds, with lawful Interest of good
and lawful Money of England, in and upon the seventh day of July next ensuing
the date hereof, at, or in the Dwelling House of the said Edward Tomlinson
without fraud or farther delay, that then this present Obligation shall be
void, and of no effect, or else to remain in full force and virtue.

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of Tho. Manly, Robert Jacobs.
John Trant.


An Obligation in English.
KNow all men by these Presents, that I Thomas Hunter of the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields, and County of Middlesex, Gent. am holden, and firmly do
stand bound unto James Howel of the Parish of Saint James's Westminster, and
County aforesaid, Grocer, in the Sum of Forty Pound of good and lawful Money of
England, to be paid unto the said James Howel, his certain Attorney, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns whatsoever; to the which payment well and
truly to be made, I do hereby bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators firmly by these Presents; sealed with my Seal. Dated the first
day of May, in the Second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James
the Second, in the Year of our Lord 1686.

THE Condition of this Obligation, etc.
Upon payment of all Bonds, Bills, Accounts or Bargains whatsoever, it is
proper to take an Acquittance, besides seeing the Account, Bill or Bond
cancelled or crossed; and where Money is paid in part, only make mention, so
much paid in part of such a Debt, Bill, Bond or Account; but when you pay a man
all you ow him, it is very fit to take a general Release or Acquittance.

A short Acquittance. May 1. 1686.
REceived then of Abraham Baldwin the sum of Twenty Pounds in full for Goods
bought by him of me; I say, received in full for Goods and all other Accounts,
Debts, Dues and Demands which in Law, Justice or Equity I can any ways demand
of him preceding the date hereof, witness my Hand, Day and Year above-written.

A General Release.
BE it known unto all men by these Presents, That I William Chalmer of the
Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, and County of Middlesex, Gent. have
remised, released and quitclaimed, and by these Presents, do for me, my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, remise, release, and for ever quitclaim
unto Edward Bromley, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all, and
all manner of Actions, Suits, Causes and Accounts, Debts, Duties, Reckonings,
Sum and Sums of Money, Controversies, Judgments, Executions and Demands
whatsoever, which I the said William Chalmer ever had, or which I, my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of us, in time to come, can or
may have, to, for, or against the said Edward Bromley, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, for, or by reason of any matter, cau^^ or thing
whatsoever preceding the date hereof. In witness whereof I have hereunto put my
Hand and Seal the fourteenth day of July, in the second Year of the Reign of
our Soverain Lord King James the Second, and in the Year of our Lord 1686.

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of Jo. Stuart, Fr. Dalton. Will.
Chalmer.



