A Caveat for Cut-purses.
With a warning to all purse-carriers: Showing the confidence of the first, and
the carelessness of the last; With necessary admonitions for them both, left
the Hangman get the one, and the Beggar take the other.
To the tune of, Packingtons pound.




My masters and friends and good people draw near
and look to your purses for that I do say.
And though little money in them you do bear,
it cost more to get then to lose in a day:
you often have been told
both the young and the Old,
and bidden beware of of the Cutpurse so bold:
Then if you take heed not, free me from the curse
Who both give you warning, for and the Cutpurse
Youth, youth thou had better been starvd by thy Nurse
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.
It has been upbraided to men of my Trade,
that offtentimes we are the cause of this crime,
Alack and for pity, why would it be said
as If they regarded or places or time,
Examples have been
Of some that were seen
of Westminster hall yea the pleaders between:
Then why should the Judges be free from this curse,
More then my poor self is for cutting the Purse
Youth youth, etc.
At Worster, it is known well and even in the Iale,
a knight of good worship did there show his fa^^
Against the foul sinners in zeal for to rail,
and so lost, ipso facto, his purse in the place:
Nay once from the Seat
Of judgment so great!
a Judge there did lose a fair purse of Velvet,
Oh Lord for thy mercy how wicked or worse
Are those that so venture their necks for a purse!
Youth youth, etc,
At Plays and at Sermons, and at the Sessions,
it is daily their practice such booty to make,
Yea under the Gallows at Executions,
they stick not the stare-abouts purses to take,
Nay one without grace
At a better place
at Court and in Christmas, before the Kings fa^^
Alack then for pity must I bear the curse,
That only belong to the cunning Cutpurse
Youth youth thou had better been starvd by the (...)
Then live to be hanged for cutting a pu^^.




But oh! you vile Nation of Cutpurses all,
Relent and repent, and amend and be sound
And I now that you ought not by honest men's fall
advance your own fortunes to dye above ground.
And though you go gay
In Silks as you may
It is not the highway to Heaven as they say
Repent then repent you for better for worse
And kiss not the Gallows for cutting a purse
Youth youth thou had better been starved by thy Nurse
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.
The Players do tell you in Bartholmew Fair
what secret consumptions and Rascals you are,
For one of their Actors it seems had the fate
by some of your Trade to be fleeced of late,
Then fall to your prayers
You that are way-layers,
they are fit to chouse all the world, that can cheat Players
For he has the Art, and no man the worse,
Whose cunning can pilfer the pilferers purse.
Youth youth etc.
The plain Country man that come staring to London
if once you come near him he quickly is undone,
For when he amazedly gazeth about
one treads on his toes and the other puls't out,
Then in a strange place
Where he knows no face,
his money is gone it is a pitiful case.
The Devil of hell in his trade is not worse
Then Gilter, and Diver, and Cutter of purse,
Youth etc.
The poor servant maid wears her purse in her placket
A place of quick feelling and yet you can take it,
Nor is she aware that you have done the feat
Until she is going to pay for her meat.
Then she cries and rages
Amongst her Baggages,
and swears at one thrust she has lost all her wages
For she is engaged her own to disburse,
To make good the breach of the cruel Cutpurse
Youth etc.
Your eyes and your fingers are nimble of growth.
But Dun many times he has been nimbler then both
Yet you are deceived by many a slut,
But the Hangman is only the Cut-purses cut,
It makes you to vex
When he bridles your necks
and then at the last what becomes of your tricks
But when you should pray, you begin for to curse
The hand that first showed you to slash at a purse,
Youth, etc.
But now to my hearers this Counsel I give,
And pray friends remember it as long as you live,
Bring out no more cash in purse pocket or wallet,
Then one single penny to pay for the Ballet,
For Cutpurse does shroud
Himself in a Cloud,
there is many a purse has been lost in a crowd
For he is the most rogue that does crowd up and curses
Who first cries my Masters beware of your purses.
Oh youth thou had better been starved by thy Nurse
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.
Printed for W. Gilbertson.


