A CATALOGUE OF LATE BOOKS: By That Reverend Divine MR. Thomas Beverly, Is now
Published Gratis; for the Satisfaction of Many that Desired it, who Live Remote
from London; and with the Lowest Prices to each Book, that they may know how to
Send for them: They are Printed for, and Sold by William Marshall at the Bible
in Newgate-Street, and John Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street near
Cornhil.
1. A Solemn Persuasion to Most Earnest Prayer, for the Revival of the Work of
God, Bringing Forth the Kingdom of Christ, whenever it appears Declining under
his Indignation: Whether 1. In our own Souls: 2. In the Nation to which we
belong: 3. In the Churches of Christ throughout:
Upon occasion of the Late Stroke of Divine Displeasure in the Death of the
QUEEN of Blessed Remembrance: Amos 7.2, 5. Price 6 d. 2. The Loss of the Soul;
The Irreparable Loss Opened and Demonstrated, 1. By the Excellency of the Soul:
2. The utter Incompetency of the World to answer it: 3. The Misery of a Soul
Lost: 4. The Eternal Sting of that Question, What shall a Man give in Exchange
for a Lost Soul?
In a Sermon on Mat. 16.26. What shall it Profit a Man, if be gain the whole
world and lose his own Soul? or, what shall a Man give in Exchange for his
Soul? Price 6 d. 3. Jehovah-Jireh: Or, In the Mount will the Lord be Seen:
Opened and Applied, in a Practical Discourse, on a Day of Seeking God in
Prayer: Month 10th. Day 19. 1694. Price 6 d. 4. The Blessing of Moses on the
Tribe of Asher; Opened and Applied in the Mystical and Spiritual Sense, to
every Saint and Servant of Christ: In a Sermon on Deuteronomy. 33.25. Thy Shoes shall
be Iron and Brass; and as thy day is, so shall thy strength be: Price 6 d. 5.
The Great Gospel Grace of Faith: Its Nature Opened, Illustrated and Argued from
Scripture Principles, as so often Affirmed in the word of God, to be Faith by
which we are Justified: being the substance of Several Discources on John
17.7.8. Price 6 d. 6. The Faith by which we are Justified in Scripture Sense,
according to Scripture, Opened, Explained and Applied on Romans 5.1. In Six
Sermons. Price 1 s. 7. The True State of Gospel Truth, Established upon the
Free Election of God in Christ: The Agreement, and yet Difference; between Law
and Gospel; so that the Gospel cannot be styled Law: The Inconditionateness of
the Gospel Salvation, the Procedure of the Day of Judgment. Price 6 d. 8. A
Compendious Assertion and Vindication of the Eternal Godhead of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the Blessed Spirit; in Answer to a Paper Cast into Both Houses
of Parliament in Denial thereof. Price 6 d. 9. An Exposition of the Divine
Standard of Prayer, Styled The Lords Prayer; Particularly Treating of the
Preface, Of every Petition of it, And of the Conclusion; as of the Prayer of
the Kingdom of Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ; according to that of the
Evangelists Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11.1. Showing that according to its True Elevation,
it is the Prayer of the Kingdom, viz. Of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ
in the New Heaven, or Jerusalem Above; and in the New Earth or Jerusalem Below:
Price 1 s. 10. A Brief View of the State of Mankind in the First Adam, and in
the Second Adam; being the sum of many Large Discourses upon that Great Context
of the Redemption and Mediation of Jesus Christ. Price 4 d. 11. The Model of a
Discourse of the Great Point, or Doctrine of Holiness to the Lord. From 1 Pet.
1.15, 16. Price 2 d. 12. A Conciliatory Discourse upon Dr. Crisp's Sermons; on
the observation of Mr: William's Disatisfactions in them: in which the
Unsearcheable Riches of Christ, and the Covenant of Grace passing Knowledge, is
yet Aspired to be made known: Humbly Presented to the Preachers of the
Merchants Lecture at Pinners-Hall; to the Sustainers of it, and to the
Congregation usually Assembled there. Price 6 d. 13. A Conciliatory Judgment
concerning Dr. Crisp' Sermons and Mr. Baxters Disatisfactions in them. Price 2
d. 14. A Discourse being the substance of several Sermons on the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; wherein the True Spiritual Nature thereof is Opened and
Unfolded: Showing also in what Sense it is that True Believers do Eat and Drink
the Body and Blood of Christ: with Exhortations to Come to that Ordinance; and
Several Directions in order to a Constant Habitual and Actual Preparation for
it: 1 Cor. 11.23. This is my Body. Mat. 26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19. Price 6
d. 15. Evangelical Repentance unto Salvation, not to be Repented of; upon 2
Cor: 7.10. and a most Seasonable short Consideration on that Great Context,
Heb. 12.26. Yet once more I shake not only Earth, etc. Upon the Solemn Occasion
of the late Dreadful Earthquake in Jamaica, and the latter Monitory Motion of
the Earth in London, and other parts of the Nation, beyond the Sea, whereunto
is Adjoined a Discourse of Deathbed Repentance; on Luke 22.39. Price Bound 1
s. 6 d. 16. A Discourse of the Greatness of the Soul, Price Bound 1 s. 6 d. 17.
The Command of God to his People to come out of Babylon, Rev. 18. Price 6 d.
18. The Kingdom of Jesus Christ Entering its Succession at 1697. according to a
Callendar of Time. Price 1 s. 19. The Pattern of the Divine Temple, Sanctuary
and City of the New Jerusalem: Measured according to Ezekiels Last and Greatest
Vision, Chap: 40. to the end; which Temple shall be seen opened in Heaven in
the days of the Seventh Trumpet, that there may be a daily Conformity to it.
Price 6 d. 20. The First part of the Line of Time, Presenting its several
Joints, in a clear and bright view: from the First to the Last Sabbatism; whose
mutual Aspects upon one another, and upon the whole Line; are diligently
observed, as a most considerable proof of such a Line; and from thence a very
Momentous Confirmation of the Christian Sabbath, or Lords Day, is given:
Together with Inferences Tending to Practice, and Particulars moving to a
discerning of the Signs of the Times, and what ought now to be done in regard
of the nearness of the Blessed Sabbatism: A judgment is also drawn from the
Situation of the Joints of this Last part of Time: Containing Twenty Eight
Sheets of Large Paper: Price 2 s. 6 d. 21. The Scripture Line of Time, from the
First Sabbath, to the Great Sabbatism of the Kingdom of Christ, with the Vision
of the Wheels, Explained; and the Vision of the Temple: with a Treatise on the
whole Line of Time. Price 6 d. 22. A Demonstrative Scripture Proof from
Mohammedan Times; the Kingdom of Christ must needs be in its Succession, 1697.
Price 6 d. 23. The Prophetical History of the Reformation, or the Reformation
to be Reformed; in that Great Reformation that is to be Speedily, according to
the Divine Table, or Vision of it, Rev. 10. Compared with other Visions;
especially of the Churches, for the further Assuring that Grand Joint of the
Line of Time, viz. 1260 Years, allowed to the Beasts Kingdom, or to the Roman
Apostasy (which because it is to End 1697. must therefore have begun 437) to
which is adjoined the Apocalyptical Vision of the Witnesses, Heb. 9.10. Carnal
Ordinances imposed until the Time of Reformation: Price but 1 s. tho before
Sold for more. 24. A Scheam of Prophecies now to be Fulfilled, Price 1 d. 25. A
Fresh Memorial of the Kingdom of Christ, Demonstrating from the Solemn Oath of
Christ, Rev: 10. by Express Letter of Scripture, and most Historical matter of
Fact; it must needs Enter its Succession 1697. and begin so Great and Happy an
Era of Time, that in Regard to it, it might well be Sworn, there shall be time
( viz. such as had been) no more, or no further for Ever: wherein there is
several Objections answered: Being an Alarm both to wise and foolish Virgins,
Price 6 d. 26. A Table of Sabbatical Time: with a Scale of Years. Price 2 d.
27. A Discourse upon the Powers of the World to Come, or the Miraculous Powers
of the Gospel and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; and their certain Return at
the Kingdom of Christ in its Succession: To which is Adjoined, the Great
Charter for the Interpretation of the Prophecy of the Scriptures, and more
praticularly of the Prophetic Number of Time; Evincing the Kingdom of Christ
in Succession at 1697. and consequently Miracles shall then Return. Price 2 s.
28. Those that are minded to have the Discourse upon the Powers of the World to
Come; or the Miraculous Powers of the Gospel and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and their certain Return at the Kingdom of Christ in its Succession;
without the Great Charter, may have it for 1 s. Price. 29. A Model of Gospel
Sanctification in several generals: drawn especially according to the Romans,
chapter 7. chapter 8. following that Great Discourse, Romans 5.12. by way of comparison
between the First and Second Adam: To which is Adjoined a Chain of Principles,
concerning The Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; Humbly offered by way of
Appeal to all Christians, espeacially to the Pastors and Doctors of the
Churches: that if there be Errors in any of the Principles; or weakness in the
Concatination, it may be Publicly Testified and Convinced; for all is founded
upon express Scripture, and Reasoned from it, according to Acts 17.3. Price 3
d. 30. The Catechism of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Thousand
Years: Showing by Scripture, 1. That the Great Articles of the Redemption, 2.
The Resurrection, 3. The Mystery of the Saints not Dying but Changed, 4. The
Judgment, 5. The Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All; cannot be
Explained at full Dimensions without it:
The Second Edition, Revised and Corrected, with considerable Additions. Price
6 d. 31. A paraphrase with Annotations on the Revelations, by Another Hand,
much agreeing with Mr. Beverly: Price Bound, 5 s.
There are some other Pieces of Mr. Beverly 's that are out of Print.

Advertisement.
These Books are likewise Sold by William Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-Street, and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street near
Cornhill.
1. Mr. Carryl's Exposition on the Whole Book of Job, in Two Large Volumns in
Folio; both Volumns in Quires 30 s. and Bound 40 s. 2. Mr. Pools's Synopsis
Criticorum, Latin; In Two Volumns on the New Testament, with the Index; in
Quiers 20 s. Bound 30 s. 3. Mr. Bunyan's Works, Containing Twenty Books in
Folio; Ten of them formerly Printed, very Scarce; and Ten Left by the Author,
Fitted for the Press; in all Twenty Books, with the Map of Salvation: The
Impression being almost gone off, there will be a few more Sold for 14
Shillings Bound. 4. Meliticium Chyrurgiae: Or the Marrow of Chyrurgery, with
the Anointing of Humane Bodies, according to the Modern Anointings: Illustrated
with many Anatomical Observations: Institutions of Physic with Hypocrates
Aphorisms Largely Commented upon: The Marrow of Physic, Showing the Causes,
Signs and Cures of most Diseases Incident to Humane Bodies: Choice Experienced
Receipts for the Cure of Several Distempers: The Fourth Edition, Enlarged with
many Additions; Illustrated in its Several Parts with Twelve Copper Cuts. By
James Cook of Warwick, Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgery: Licensed by the
College of Physicians. Lowest Price Bound 6 s. 5. Mr. James Cook's Observation
of English Bodies, with Directions about the Use of the Bath Waters: Price
Bound 2 s. 6. 6. Tachenius his Hipocrates Chynicus, Discovering the Ancient
Foundation of the late Viperine Salt: To which is annexed his Clavis to the
Ancient Hippocratical Physic or Medicine, made by Manual Experience in the
very Fountain of Nature; whereby through Fire and Water, in a Method unheard of
before, the occult Mysteries of Nature and Art are unlocked, and clearly
explained, by a compendious way of Operation. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d. 7. Multum
in Parvo: Or, A Compendious Spelling Book, to be used so soon as Children know
their Letters; by the help of which in a very short time, Children may be able
to divide and read the hardest Words. Set forth for the benefit o^ little
Children; and the Rules may help those that be of better capacit^es. Price 2 d.
8. A Solemn Scriptural Call: Or, An Epistle to the JEWS, Price 1 d. 9. A New
Methodized Concordance, for the Use of Families. Price 6 d.
You may likewise be Supplied at the place above mentioned with most of Dr.
Owen's Works: and also the Effigies of Several Divines, as Mr. Carryl, Mr.
Pool, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Bunyan, Dr. Owen, Dr. Crisp, Dr. Manton, Mr. Samuel
Clark. Price 6 d each.


