I. St PETER'S College or House was Founded 1256.
HVGO de BALSHAM Prior of Ely, in the year 1256. placed a Master and Scholars
in the Hostle of St. John in Cambridge in the year 1284. he being Bishop of
Ely, separated them from the Master and Friars of St. John's Hostle and seated
them in two Hostles adjoining to St. Peter's Church, (now called Little St.
Mary's) without Trumpington-gate in the place of which two He then Founded this
College, Endowed it, and placing in it a Master and 14 Fellows: Since which
time, by the Liberality of Simon de Langham, John de Fordham, Bishops of Ely;
John Laceby, William Irby, Thomas de Castro, Bernardi Master of this College,
William Nonion, Dr Holbrooks, Dr Lant, Dr VVarkworth, Dr Denham, Dr Hornby, Dr
B^rgoine, Dr Edmonds, Dr Shirton, Archbishop VVhitgist, Dr Pern, John Blyth
Fellow, Dr Richardson Master, Dr Hale Master, John Cofins Bishop of Darham
Master, and other Benefactors, (this College or House being the first that was
built in this University) there are in it a Master, 22 Fellows, 45 Scholars, a
Bible-Clerk, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other
Students, in all about Ninety. -- Dr Joseph Beaumont Master, Margaret Professor.

II. CLARE-HALL Founded 1326.
RICHARD BADEW, born at Great Badew in Essex, by License from Edward the
Second, Founded this College in Milnstreet near St. Zacharies Church, placing
there a Principal, under whom the first 16 years the Students lived at their
own Charges; after Walter Thaxted Principal, with the consent of the said
Richard Badew, Richard Ling Chancellor of the University, Anno 1340 resigned
the first Foundation into the hands of Elizabeth Grandchild to Edward the
first, second Daughter and Coheir of Gilbert Earl of Clare, from whom it bare
the Name, Clare-ball: She Rebuilt and Endowed the same, which many other
Benefactors have since increased; as Walter VVorleigh, Ralph Scrivenor, Tho.
Cave, Thomas Paske, Benjamin Oley, Arthur Ld Capel, Peter Gunning Ld Bp of Ely,
Dr Hacket Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Dr Heaver and others: There are in
it a Master, 18 Fellows, 41 Scholars, beside Officers of the Foundation, and
other Students, to the number of 100. -- Dr Dillingham Master.

III. PEMBROKE-HALL was Founded 1343.
MARY de St PAVL Countess of Pembroke, having first Built and Endowed Denny
Abbey in this County, She procured a License from King Edward the third, in the
17th of his Reign, and then Founded this College or Hall of Mary de Valentia,
after Pembroke-hall, in which, as it now stands, are the Ancient Hostles of the
University, and S. Thomas, Knaptons, Boltons, and Cosins places, with part of
the Chantry-house of Little St. Mary's, and Endowed the same with Lands,
Impropriations, and Patronages, Plate, Jewels, and other Ornaments: Since it
has been much enlarged by the Bounty of King Henry the 6th, by the Donations
of John Langton Bishop of St. David's, Lawrence Booth Archbishop of York,
Edmund Grindal Archbishop of Canterbury, Lancelot Andrews Bishop of
Winchester, Benjamin Laney late Bishop of Ely, Dr Mark Frank, Sir Philip Booth,
Sir Roger L'Estrange, all of this College, beside others who have settled
Lands, or given sums of money, as Sir William Hussy Lord Chief Justice of
England, Mr Thomas Watts, Thomas James, Thomas Hobs Esquire, William Marshal, John
Holmes, with others, who not long since repaired the Old Court of this
College, and New Buildings were Erected by Sir Robert Hitcham sometime of this
House, Richard Ball Fellow D. D. and now Master of the Temple, William Quarles
late President; also a fair New Chapel was Built, and Endowed, and Furnished by
Matthew Wren sometime Fellow, President, and late Lord Bishop of Ely: the
Master, Fellows and Scholars, with other Students, Officers and Servants of the
Foundation are about 100. -- Dr Coga D. D. Master.

IV. CORPVS-CHRISTI College was Founded 1351.
HENRY of MONMOUTH, Surnamed (Torto Collo) Son and Heir of Henry of Lancaster,
Lord of Monmouth and Pontefract, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, Derby, and
High-Steward of England, succeeded his Father in all his Honors, and was by
King Edward the 3d Created Earl of Lincoln, and one of the Knights of the first
Foundation of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Duke of Lancaster, etc. of
the Fraternity or Guild of Corpus Christi, and Blessed Mary the Virgin, near
unto Luthborn-Lane, and the Hostle of St. Bernard in the East, whereof himself
was then Alderman, Founded this College in the year 1351, among other things
appropriating unto the same, the perpetual patronage of St. Benedicts Church:
This College since has been much beautified with Buildings, and increased
with Revenues, by the Lady Elizabeth Brotherton Duchess of Norfolk, Thomas
Cambridge, and Sir John Cambridge gave Stone-hall toward the Augmentation of
the same, John Meers Esquire Beadle, Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir
Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Roger Manors Earl of R^tland,
Lord Roos of Hamlake, Belvoir and Trusbut, etc. Roger Manors his great Uncle,
William Benedict, Leonard Causton gave 18l. 3s. 4d. for maintenance of 3
Scholarships, and Mr John Booth B. D. sometime Fellow of this College gave 3l.
per Annum, beside diverse other Benefactors: Here is at present a Master, 12
Fellows, 37 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with
other Students, to the number of 150. -- John Spencer D. D. Master, and Dean of
Ely.

V. TRINITY-HALL was Founded 1350.
WILLIAM BATEMAN born in Norwich, Doctor of the Civil Law, after 18 year Bishop
of that Sea, for the exchange of certain Parsonages in the 24th of King Edward
the third, Anno 1350. obtained an Ancient Hostle, near adjoining to the
University House, where in former times Students lived at their own charges, he
made thereof a College or Hall, and dedicated it to the honor of the Holy and
Blessed Trinity; Endowing the same with Lands and Possessions for Students of
the Civil Law: Since Richard Ling D. D. Chancellor of this University,
Archibald of Norwich, Simon de Rekenhall, and Walter Elverton gave four
Tenements; Robert Stratton, John Trunch, Walter Baketon, Walter de Aldersey,
and Peter de Bittering gave two Messuages, and seven pieces of Ground, one
called Drakes Entry: Since John de Botisham Bishop of Rochester, Richard Nix
Bishop of Norwich, Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of
England, Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Mouse, Dr Harvey, Dr
Cowel, Doctor of Laws, and Kings Professor, Sir George Newman, Thomas Eden Dr
of Law, Chancellor of Ely, George Gaell; and by other Benefactors this
College has been much enlarged, so that here is a Master, 12 Fellows, 14
Scholars, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students
to the number of 70. -- Sir Tho. Exton Master.

VI. GONVILL and CAI. College was Founded 1348.
EDMOND de GONVILL younger Brother of Sir Nicholas Gonvill, and Rector of
Rushworth, and Terington in Norfolk, obtained of Edward the third License to
Convert his three Messuages, with a Garden and the Appurtenances, situate in
the Parish of St. Botolphs and St. Benedicts into a perpetual College of a
Guardian, or Warden, and 20 Scholars, Students in Logic, and other Sciences,
and to give it what Name he would; who by his Deed dated on Thursday in the
week of Pentecost, the 23d of Edward the 3d 1348. Founded this College
accordingly, and gave it Statutes of his own, and called it by the Name of
Gonvill-hall, and while he lived maintained the Guardian and Scholars or
Fellows with his own money, but he dying An. Dom. 1350. left William Bateman
Bishop of Norwich Executor of his Last Will, leaving him a great sum of money
in trust to the intent he should perfect his Foundation, and Endow his Hall
with competent Possessions, who in 1353. prevailed with the Masters and Fellows
to remove to a place near his own College, where he purchased diverse Messuages
and Tenements on which he Erected the same, by the Name of Gonvill-hall:
afterward John Caius Dr of Physic, a great Antiquary in An. Dom. 1557. was
made a Co-founder by Letters Patents, and caused it to be called Gonvill and
Caius College: He added to it a fair Building of Freestone, increased the
Treasury with new Revenues for the maintenance of three Fellows, twenty
Scholars and a Porter. Since, the Ladies, Mary Pakenham, and Ann Scroop,
Elizabeth Clear, Dr Bailey, Stephen Smith, Dr Knight, Dr Whitacre, Dr Parker
Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Wendy, Dr Bishby, Sir William Paston, Dr
Batchcroft, Dr Gostlin, Dr Cosi^s Bishop of Durham, and other Benefactors have
much increased the buildings and number of Scholars; so that here are twenty
six Fellows, one Chaplain, seventy five Scholars besides Officers and Servants
of the Foundation, and other Students, to the number of one hundred and forty.
-- Doctor Brady M. D. Master.

VII. KINGS-COLLEDGE was Founded 1441.
HENRY the Sixth, called Henry of Windsor, King of England and France, Lord of
Ireland, Surnamed the Holy, Proclaimed in his Cradle, Crowned in his Infancy,
and in his riper years Renowned in France; in the 19th year of his Reign, An.
Dom. 1441. began his Royal Foundation of this College, dedicating the same to
the honor of our Blessed Lady Mary the Virgin, and St. Nicholas, and called it
Kings College, which having so Royal a Founder, we acknowledge no other for
the Maintenance thereof, in which at this present is standing one of the most
Famous Chapels in the World, conformable to which he intended to make this his
College, but by reason of the Civil Wars between the Houses of York and
Lancaster, he was in a short space deprived both of his Kingdom and his Life,
and so left it unperfected for some of his Successors to finish: Accordingly
Henry the 7th finished the outward Fabric, and was cut off by death; but Henry
the 8th adorned it with glorious Windows, and beautified it with Seats, and a
rich carved Rood-loft, and diverse other Ornaments, and gave to it this Coat of
Arms, (viz.) in a Field Sable three Roses Argent, and that it might appear to
be the work of a King, he caused a part of his own Arms to be placed on the
Chief of the Eschocheon, (viz.) party per Pale Azure and Gules; on the first a
Flower of France, on the second a Lion of England: In this College is one
Provost, 70 Fellows and Scholars, three Chaplains, one Master of the
Choristers, six singing Clerks, 16 Choristers, and 16 College Officers and
Servants, the whole number being 113. all maintained by the Bounty of Her Royal
Founder King Henry the sixth. -- Sir Thomas Page Provost.

VIII. QVEEN-COLLEDGE was Founded 1448.
MARGARET ANDEGAVENSIS, Daughter of Reiner Duke of Anjou, Titular King of
Sicily, Naples and Jerusalem, Consort of King Henry the 6th obtained License to
build this College, upon part of the Ground belonging to the Carmelite Friars,
and purchased Lands to the value of 200l per An. for the Endowment thereof,
dedicating the same to St Margaret and St. Bernard, but she died and left it
unperfected: Queen Elizabeth Wife to King Edward the fourth obtained License to
finish the same, which she did; afterward by the Liberality of Andrew Ducket
first President of this College, George Duke of Clarence, Cicely Duchess of
York, Richard Duke of Gloucester, the Lady Ann his Wife, Edward Earl of
Salisbury, Maud Countess of Oxford, Marmaduke Lumbey Bishop of Lincoln, Dr
Thimbleby, Dr Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, Dr Mountain Bishop of London, Dr
Roberts Bishop of Bangor, Dr Gell, Dr Smith, Edward Kemp B. D. and other great
Benefactors, it is so increased, that there is in it a President, 19 Fellows,
27 Scholars, 12 Bible Clerks, 3 Lecturers, of Hebrew, Arithmetic and Geometry,
beside other Officers and Servants of the Foundation; the whole number is about
124. -- Doctor James President.

IX. KATHERINE-HALL was Founded 1475.
ROBERT VVOODLARK D. D. born at VVakerby in Northumberland Founded this
College or Hall in a place called Milnstreet, he dedicated the same to the
Honor of St. Katherine the Virgin and Martyr; He obtained of King Edward the
fourth, a License of Mortmain for the Endowment thereof, which was confirmed to
him and his Successors for ever, wherein he Established a Master and six
Fellows: Since it has been enlarged by the Liberality of Isabel Canterbury,
William Tailor, Katherine Miles, the Lady Elizabeth Bernardiston, Dr Sharton,
Mr St. John's, Dr Green, Dr Thimbleby, Dr Midleton, John Cholmley, John Duke,
Sir John Claypool, John Gostlin, M. D. a large and bountiful Benefactor, Thomas
Buck Fellow, Senior Beadle Esquire, Peter Phesant, Ann Lady Cocket, Ann Lady
Bernardiston, Dr William Gouge, Mr Coulson, Mr Cradock, Robert Skerne Esquire a
great Benefactor, John Lightfoot D. D. Here is now a Master, 6 Fellows, 18
Scholars, 9 Exhibitioners besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with
other Students, 156. -- Doctor Echard Master, D. D.

X. JESVS-COLLEDGE was Founded 1496.
JOHN ALCOCK born at Beverly in Yorkshire, Doctor of the Civil Law, Bishop of
Ely, Lord Chancellor of England, procured License of King Henry the seventh,
to Convert into a College an Ancient Nunnery, the Nuns whereof all were dead
but two and dispersed, and the House much wasted: He also obtained License
under the Great Seal of England to appropriate all the Land that belonged to
it, to this his College, and Dedicated it to the blessed Virgin St. Mary, and
St. John the Evangelist, and the glorious Virgin St. Rhadegund, commonly called
Jesus College, wherein he Established a Master, five Fellows, and six
Scholars: Since it is much increased by the accessory Foundations of James
Stanly Bishop of Ely, Richard Pigott Sergeant at Law, Sir Richard Read Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, John Andrews Prebend of St. Paul's, Dr Fuller, Sir
John Risely, Thomas Thirleby Bishop of Ely, John Batemanson, L. L. D. Dr Duport
late Master, Tho. Sutton Esquire, Tobias Rustat Esquire Yeoman of the Robes to King
Charles the second, with diverse other Benefactors; so that there is now in the
same a Master, 16 Fellows, 26 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the
Foundation, with other Students, in all 116. -- Edmund Boldero, D. D. Master.

XI. CHRIST-COLLEDGE was Founded 1505.
MARGARET Countess of Richmond and Derby, in testimony of her love to Learning,
obtained License of King Henry the seventh, to Erect a College without
Barnwell-gates in Preacher-street, of four Messuages and Gardens belonging to
the Abbot of Tilti, and Prioress of Denny, where King Henry the sixth had
founded a House called Gods House, Dedicating the same to the honor of our
Savior Christ, the Lady Margaret Endowing it with Lands and Revenues for a
Master and 12 Fellows, 47 Scholars, and King Edward the sixth added the 13th
Fellow, together with three more Scholars: Since Dr Thompson, Dr Hawford, Dr
Carey, and Dr Bainbridge Masters, Dr Patison, Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir John
Wentworth, Dr Grindal Archbishop of Caterbury, Anthony Watson Bishop of
Chichester, Mr Joseph Mede, Edward King, Mr John and Mr Josias Alsop, Sir
Thomas VVidderington, Dr Gell, Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, Sir Sidney
Mountague, George Earl of Rutland, Sir Justinian Isham, Sir Thomas Willis, Dr
Honiwood, Dr Gray, Dr Shute, all great Benefactors, gave Scholarships, Houses,
Moneys or Books; so that here is a Master, 13 Fellows, 55 Scholars, beside
Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with other Students, to the number of
206. -- Doctor Ralph Cudworth Master.

XII. St. JOHN-COLLEDGE was Founded 1508.
THE aforesaid Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, Mother to King Henry
the seventh, obtained License of her Nephew King Henry the Eighth, to Convert a
House of Regular Canons Founded by Nigellus second Bishop of Ely, in An. Dom.
1134. afterward translated to a Priory, and Dedicated to St John the Evangelist
in the Jury, by Hugo de Balsham, tenth Bishop of Ely, now called St John's
College, the perfecting whereof she left to her Executors Richard Fox Bishop
of Winchester, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert
and others, who most justly performed the Trust reposed in them: Since it has
been much enlarged by John Morton Bishop, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Cardinal, Hugh Ashton Archdeacon of York, Roger Lupton Provost of Eaton, Sir
Robert Wood, Dr Dee Bishop of Peterborough, Sir Ambrose Cave, Stephen
Cardinal, Thomas Tompson D. D also John Barwick Dean of St Paul's a bountiful
Benefactor, a fair Court was built by Mary Countess of Shrewsbury, and the Case
of the Library by John Williams Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper, Sir Ralph
Hare, Robert Johnson, and other good Benefactors; so that here is a Master, 52
Fellows, 94 Scholars, beside Officers of the Foundation, with other Students to
the number of 372. -- Francis Turner D. D. Master.

XIII. MAGDALEN-COLLEDGE was Founded 15^9.
EDWARD STAF-FORD last Duke of Buckingham of that Name, Earl of Stafford, Earl
of Heresord and Northampton. Founded this College by the Name of Buckingham
College, in a place where the Priory of St Giles had formerly been Situated;
it was an Hostle or Hall inhabited by diverse Monks of several Monasteries to
reside and study in: Afterward in 1542 Thomas Audley Baron of Waltham, and Lord
Chancellor, obtained License of Henry the Eighth to alter the Name, and call
it St Mary Magdalen College; unto which he gave Lands and Revenues; the Right
Honorable James Earl of Suffolk, being now by Inheritance Patron thereof, Hugh
Dennis Esquire, Sir Christopher Wray Chief Justice, and John Spenluffe Esquire, Edmund
Grindal Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Parkinson Rector of Wivelingham,
William Roberts of Norsolk Esquire, John Hughes Chancellor of Bangor, Thomas
Sutton Esquire, Founder of Sutton's Hospital, the Honorable Lady Frances Countess
Dowager of Warwick, John Smith late Fellow, all great Benefactors, Robert
Holmes Merchant of Exeter, born at Wisbich, James Duport D. D. and other
Benefactors who have much increased this College; so that there is a Master,
15 Fellows, 31 Scholars, besides Officers and Servants of the Foundation, with
other Students, being in all 120. -- James Duport D. D. Master, Dean of
Peterborough.

XIV. TRINITY-COLLEDGE was Founded 1546.
KING HENRY the Eighth, after the suppression 1546. United Kings-Hall, Founded
by King Edward the Third, Michael House Founded by Henericus de Stanton
Chancellor of the Exchequer to Edward the Second, into one College, and
Dedicated it to the undivided Trinity, which he Endowed with 1640l per An.
Queen Mary added to her Fathers Foundation the yearly Revenue of 385l,
increased the number of Fellows and Scholars by a third part; Founded a Quire,
and laid the Foundation of a large Chapel, which after her Death was finished
by the Society: Since Thomas Allen gave two Scholarships and Lands to other
Uses, Sir Edward Stanhope gave maintenance for a Library Keeper, and a Servant
under him, the Lady Ann Bromley gave five Scholarships, Mr Hope gave the
perpetual Patronage of North-Runcton, Dr Nevil Master of this College expended
3000l in building the back-Court, Dr John Hacket late Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield gave 1200l to Erect a Building by the Name of Bishops Hostle, the
Rent whereof is to remain a constant Revenue to the Library; so that this
College is one of the Goodliest and most Uniform Colleges in Europe: In this
College is a Master, 60 Fellows, 67 Scholars, 3 public Professors, 4
Conducts, 13 Poor Scholars, a Master of the Choristers, 6 Secular Clerks, 20
Beads-men, besides Exhibitioners, Officers and Servants of the Foundations,
with many other Students, being in all above 400. -- John North D. D. Mr.

XV. EMANVEL-COLLEDGE was Founded 1584.
SIR WALTER MILDMAY Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Privy Counselor to
Queen Elizabeth, Founded and Erected this College to be a Nursery of Divines,
in the place where formerly inhabited the Black Friars, and Constituted therein
a Master, three Fellows, four Scholars with inferior Officers: Since it has
been much increased by the Noble Bounty of Queen Elizabeth of Famous Memory: As
also by Henry Earl of Huntington, and his Brother Sir Francis Hastings, Sir
Samuel Leonard, Sir Robert Jermin, Sir Francis Walsingham, and others; Dr John
Wells Master of this College; Francis Ash Master of the Muscovian Company
London, has settled on this College 170l yearly for diverse Charitable Uses, Dr
Sudbury Dean of Durham has given 500l to the College, which is laid out in
Lands and Tenements, Dr Benjamin Whitchcot late Fellow has given 1000l, which
is laid out in Lands and Tenements for four Scholarships of the Foundation: The
New Chapel and Library were first undertaken by the Encouragement of Sir
Robert Gayer, by his Noble Gift of a 1000l; others since have Contributed to
that Good Work, as Charles Earl of Westmorland, John Cosins Bishop of Durham,
Sir Thomas Rich, Sir Samuel Sterling late Lord Mayor of London, Dr William
Sandcroft present Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Clark Dean of Winchester,
Matthew Pindar Esquire and others: Here is at present a Master, 14 Fellows, 50
Scholars, 10 Poor Scholars, beside Officers and Servants of the Foundation, the
whole number is about 170. -- Doctor Holdbeach D. D. Master.

XVI. SIDNEY SVSSEX-COLLEDGE was Founded 1598.
FRANCES SIDNEY Countess of Sussex Founded this College by the Name of the
College of the Lady Frances Sidney-Sussex in a place called the Gray Friars,
which Fryery was built by Henry the First, suppressed 1546 by Henry the Eighth,
and given to Trinity College in Cambridge, and was since by Act of Parliament
conveyed to the Executors of the said Countess, Henry Gray Earl of Kent, John
Lord Harrington of Exton in Fee-farm, for the building and perfecting of this
her College; She gave by her last Will, besides her Goods, 5000l, wherewith
her Executors aforenamed Built and Endowed it with Lands for the maintenance of
a Master, 10 Fellows, afterward reduced to 7, and 20 Scholars which being
increased by the accessory Foundation of Sir John Heart, Leonard Smith of
London, Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton, Dr Paul Micklethwait sometime Fellow
of the College, etc. It has at present a Master, 13 Fellows, 32 Scholars, and
for the further enlarging thereof Sir Francis Clark has built 20 Chambers for
Students, Founded 4 Fellowships, with 8 Scholarships more, and Augmented the
Stipends of the Scholarships of the Foundation: Since John Lord Harrington the
younger, the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford, the Lady Ann Harrington, James
Mountague Bishop of Winchester, George Lord Goring, Sir John Breerton, John
Young D. D. Sir Richard Wilmore, Francis Combs Esquire, Richard Dugard, and
Charles Pendr^t B. D. and late Fellow: The whole number of Students with
Officers and Servants of the Foundation are 122. -- Richard Minshal Master D. D.

The Total Number of all Degrees in this University, that have N^nes in every
particular College, with the Magistrates and daily Officers thereunto
belonging, beside diverse young Scholars that are Relieved, that have no Na^, in
any of the Colleges aforesaid, are near Three Thousand.

FINIS
A CATALOGUE of all the COLLEGES in the Famous UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE With
the Names of the Principal FOUNDERS and BENEFACTORS, with the Time of their
FOUNDATION, and the Names of the present MASTERS and GOVERNORS, with the
Number of STUDENTS in every COLLEGE.
THe Learned Antiquaries have diversely written about the Foundation of this
University of Cambridge, s^ affirming it was Founded by Cantaber, a Prince of
Spain, Brother to Partholinus King of Ireland, Son in L^ to Gurguntius King of
Great Britain; but the Chiefest conclude that Sigebert King of the East-Angle^
was the Principal Founder thereof, about the Year 630, or 636, who assigned
diverse Hostles and Houses for Students to inhabit in, giving them large
Privileges and Charters, whereof some are yet extant, procuring also great
Im^ties from Pope Honorius the First, which Sergius the First Confirmed. Much
Honor this place has received b^ the Sons and Nephews of Kings, being Earls
thereof, (viz.) William Brother to Ranulph Earl of Chester, (...) Earl of
Henault Uncle to Philip le Beau King of France, William Marquess of Juliers,
Edmund of Lang^ Duke of York, Edward Duke of York, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
Richard Duke of York, James Marqu^ ^amilton Earl of Arran, his Successor James
Marquess of Hamilton Master of the Horse to King Charles the (...) the
Illustrious Henry Stewart Duke of Gloucester, fourth Son of King Charles the
first; since Charles Duke of Cambridge, James and Edgar Dukes of Cambridge, all
Sons to the most Illustrious Prince James Duke of Yor^ his Highness James Duke
of Monmouth being present Chancellor thereof.

With Allowance. March 6. 1678. To. L'Estrange.


