CAESAREM and FORTUNAM Vehis PARAPhRASEd.

OR A

Caesarem and Fortunam Vehis, PARAPHRASED: OR A POEM on the Kings Resolution of
going for Ireland.
GO Stately Argonaute! may prosperous Gales
All from above conspire to fill thy Sails;
Thy Cargo is Three Crowns, Caesar to boot;
And he alone worth more, from Head to Foot:
Let Neptune waft thee! and his Trident sway
St. George's Channel, to make smooth his way,
Until thou do arrive unto that Land,
Where Teagues inhabit, which he should command.
No sooner put a Shore, there may thou be
As soon a Conquest, as we late did see
England subdued; where thou did only Land
And we were saved, with Heaven in every Hand.
Great! is thy Character; Success, thy Name,
To add to William-Henry's greater Fame.
Thou needst not fetch St. Peter's Keys from Rome,
No, nor St. Patrick's Cloak out of the Loom,
To bless thy Enterprise. Victorious Youth,
Thou do not steer by Legends, but by Truth:
Thou have a greater Influence, better Guide,
Thy Convoy both by Land and Sea beside.
Methinks I see thee drein up every Bog,
Methinks I see thee root out every Log.
And that each Man about thee in thy sight
Another Strongbow is, to claim thy right.
And every Bullet in its place did lurk,
When sent abroad, ordained to do thy Work.
Methinks I see Transub, with Irish Breeding,
With his Heart aching, and his Nose a bleeding,
Distracted with his Teagues, all giving ground,
When William's Drums do beat, his Trumpets sound.
Guilt is a Poltron, Innocence is stout;
And from the Jaws of Hell helps Virtue out.
Methinks I hear along the River Shannon
Hundreds bid, for a Guide to Balilanon;
As my Lord Lile (of old) did to Dunganon;
Thence to escape; giving the Teagues the Loose, The French King.

To his Dear Joys; first brought him to this Noose.
St. Patrick purged the much more harmless Beast,
Of Venom, in the Men we see encreast.
Great Monarch! that is left to thy sole Powers,
Peopling anew that Land, and to call it yours;
In spite of Grumbletonians, halting Knaves,
Who fondly know not, why they would be Slaves.
But Orange! he has fenced us, while we see
The Belgic Lion with our Three ag^^e.
Let Lewis Rhod'mont^de, and J^mmy whine,
King William will drink Rhenish Claret Wine
One Day in France, for to control the Seine:
And when his Troops the Macs and O's reduces,
Le Grand or Rhoan's Whelp, woe to thy Flower de Luces!
He breaks thy Triple League, formed to become
The Ruin and the Bane of Christendom.
The Ottoman's baffled, Jemmy's Hook's in 's Nose;
And Devil's-gift Lewis, he too has his Throws,
No Midwifry will serve to save him blows,
No, tho the Maid of Orleans interpose.
Until he be reduced by the Empire's Lance
From all is Encroachments, to his Isle of France:
There behold Jemmy, Lewis drawing Cuts,
Who best Shoots Rovers, having lost their Butts;
When in comes William-Henry, spoils their Sport,
And hits the Mark, blessed be Providence for it.
So with Augustus having cleared the Age
Of every violent Humor, wilder Rage
He seems, all Storms and Tempests being furled,
To settle Truth and Peace over all our World.
London, Printed for G. Wallup. 1690.


