THE CASE Of the Petitioners, William Strode and John Speak, Esquires.
IN the Borough of Ivelchester, in Somerset, it has been the Custom and
Usage, for only all Housekeepers, to give Votes for choosing Members to serve
in Parliament.

Joseph Winter, a Barber, being Baliff on the Election Day, did partially,
contrary to the Custom, when he had Polled himself, and called for all that
were Polled for Sir Edward Wyndham, Baronet, and Mr, William Helyar, admitted
of several Non-residents, Tablers and Lodgers, amongst them, whereas they were
all severally excepted against, by some of the Inhabitants, to have no right;
alleging, that they did not Rent Houses, and could not be called
Housekeepers. Whereupon, the Petitioners Clerk marked the Names of fifteen of
that Poll he took when they were thus objected against: So afterward, Mr.
Strode and Mr. Spekes, Voters, waiting in the Hall, at length were allowed to
Poll for Mr. Strode. There were fifty two unquesionable Housekeepers, whereof
fifty were also for Mr. Speak; but then, at Last, some real Housekeepers, who
offered to Poll for the Petitioners, were refused.

There are but fifty eight, on the Poll, for Sir Edward Wyndham and Mr. Helyar,
whereof not above forty three are Housekeepers ^ Neither have they there any
Freemen, or other Electors, then Housekeepers, who are not effectively one
hundred in all the Borough; so that the Petitioners will plainly prove, a good
Majority of the said Housekeepers, as they now stand on the Poll, without
adding those who were refused them; and consequently, the Petitioners are duly
chosen.

As for the Charter, it gives none any right to choose Members for Parliament,
it only makes a Corporation consisting of a Baliff and twelve Capital
Burgesses: and by the express words of the said Charter, the Baliff, and said
Capital Burgesses, upon Death or removal of any, they are required to go to a
new choice of some Inhabitant to be a Capital Burgess: Although, contrary
hereunto, the Balisf and Burgesses of late years, have Elected four Gentlemen,
Non-residents, and did allow one of those Gentlemen to be their Baliff, for
some years successively whilst living at least three miles then out of their
Borough.


