THE Remonstrance and Declaration of George Cha^berlaine Gent. declaring to the
World all passages concerning his lawful Marriage with Ione Hele, sole daughter
and heir of Andrew Hele Esquire late of the County of Devon. deceased since whose
decease one Samuel Massey married the Widow of the said Andrew Hele, being
Mother of the said Ione Hele, and how the said Samuel Massey drew in the said
George Chamberlain to mary with his said daughter in law both by his and his
wifes, and the said Jones consent, and by Articles of Agreement under hand and
seal; And also how the said Samuel Massey and his said wife, since and before
the said marriage, has defrauded the said George Chamberlain of above six
hundred pounds in money, besides Watches, Rings, Jewels, and Apparel for his
wife, and how, and by whom, and by what means the said Mr. Chamberlain should
have been poisoned, with other foul and notorious misdemeanors by the said
Massey, and his said wife, perpetrated against the said George Chamberlain, by
keeping his said lawful wife from him; and by diverse frauds in offering the
said wife of the said George Chamberlain in marriage to diverse persons, since
she was lawfully married to the said George Chamberlain, by which practice the
said Massey did delude and defraud diverse and several persons of several
valuable sums of money, together with other remarkable passages, of absolute
transcendent knavery, acted by the said Massey, and fit to be discovered and
made known to the view of all men.
IN and before the month of November, in the year of our Lord, 1651. The said
Samuel Massey and his wife, and Mistress Jone Hele, Masseys daughter in law,
being sole daughter and heir of one Andrew Hele, by the said Masseys wife, all
of them being then in the Strand, and fame speaking her to be heir at Law unto
about 2000 l. per annum free-hould lands of inheritance, besides many thousand
pounds due unto her for the arrerages thereof, diverse young Gallants and others
were Suitors unto, and highly and costly Courted the said Massey and his wife,
to admit them but to see or be suitors for marriage unto their said daughter,
whereby much money by many persons was spent, upon the said Massey, and his wife
and daughter, in feasting and entertainements, besides many costly Watches and
Rings, were presented to the said Massey and his wife from several persons,
hoping thereby and by their means to Ingratiate and degree themselves into the
favor and liking of the young Lady, so that the said Massey and his said wife
for a time, did drive on a very pretty trade, until such time that it begun to
be too commonly known to be a meare cheat; but before the Market was quite
done, one Master John Samine had gotten Intelligence of that great pretended
heirs estate and wealth, and he being no less full of desire then credulity,
makes means to the said Massey that Master Samines brother in law, Master
George Chamberlain, might have the sight of his daughter in law, and that he
might be a suitor for marriage unto her, which accordingly was assented unto.
This assent begets an Interview and meeting between Master Chamberlain and his
friends, and Mistress Jone Hele, and her friends: it so pleased God a liking was
had between them, the said Master Chamberlain and Jone Hele, and by the
consent of themselves, and friends on all parts, the said Massey her father in
law, being her Guardian by order of Chancery, and the said Mistress Jone Hele
being above the age of fourteen years, and so consequently of the full age in
law to consent to marriage, on the eighteenth day of November, in the year of
our Lord 1651. There were Articles of agreement entered into, sealed and duly
executed, by and with the consent of the said Jone and her mother, by and
between the said Samuel Massey of the one part, and the said George
Chamberlain on the other part, to this effect hereafter following. First, That
is to say, that the said George Chamberlain by Gods grace and providence did
intend to marry and take to wife Jone Hele sole daughter and heir of Andrew
Hele Esquire, deceased, and daughter of the wife of the said Samuel Massey, on
or before the first day of May then next following. Secondly, that the said
Massey and his wife during their lives, and the life of the longest liver of
them, should hold and enjoy one full third part, in three parts to be divided,
of all such Manors, Messages, Lands, and Tenements, as should be recovered in
the right of the said Jone Hele, as heir to her said late Father Andrew Hele,
or as heir unto one Walter Hele, and Eise Hele deceased. Thirdly, it was
agreed by and between the said parties, that all such Rents, Arrerages of
Rents, Issues, and profits whatsoever, that should be recovered in the right of
the said Ione Hele, should be equally divided between him the said George
Chamberlain and the said Samuel Massey and his wife, if the said marriage do
take effect. Fourthly, that out of the fines and profits of the estate when it
shall be recovered, the said George Chamberlain shall pay unto the said Samuel
Massey, the full some of 1^00 l. Fifthly, that the said George Chamberlain
shall lend and pay unto the said Massey the full some of 500 l. and that the
said Massey shall secure the repayment thereof by statute of 1000 l penalty, if
the said marriage take no effect, by or before the aforesaid first day of May,
and that if the said marriage take effect, the said five hundred pounds not to
be repaid, for in truth that money was paid toward the young Gentlewomans
education, and for bearing the charge of the recovery of the estate due unto
her. Sixthly, it was fully agreed by and between all the said parties; That the
said Massey and his wife should permit and suffer, the said George Chamberlain
with their free and Voluntary consents to be a suitour for marriage unto the
said Jone Hele with freedom at all fitting and convenient times, and that the
said George Chamberlain should enter into one statute of the penalty of 2000
l. to the said Massey, to perform the Articles of agreement in all points,
which was accordingly performed and entered into. Seventhly, That if the said
marriage took no effect, by, or before the foresaid first day of May in the
Articles of agreement mentioned, that then it was agreed that the said Massey
should repay the said 500 l. without Intrest unto the said George Chamberlain,
within six months after the said first day of May, and that if the said
marriage did take effect according to the said Articles of agreement, that then
the said 500 l. to be quit to the said Massey, etc. After which said Articles
of agreement so sealed and duly executed, all fair and friendly societies,
meetings, and invitations, to feast and enjoy each other societies of
themselves and friends reciprocally, with all Joy and amicable love on both
parts: after which it was unanimously agreed, by the full and free consent of
the said Jone Hele, and the said George Chamberlain, and by the full and free
consent of the said Massey and his wife, and by the consent of the friends of
the said George Chamberlain, that on the fifth day of the month of February
then next after the date of the said Articles of agreement, which was just two
months and 17 days after the Articles of Agreement were sealed: That then,
and upon the said fifth day of February, there should be a lawful marriage had,
and solemnized, by, and between the said George Chamberlain and the said Jone
Hele, which accordingly was lawfully and willingly had and performed, by a
lawful Minister in a lawful Church, the doors being open at a lawful hour,
the said Massey her Father in law, and her natural Mother being then
personally present, and the said Massey and his wife bringing her thither in
company, with the said George Chamberlain in a Coach for that purpose, and the
said Massey her Father in law, in the presence of her natural Mother, and by
and with all their consents, the said Massey giving her in marriage in the said
Church, unto and to be the lawful wife of the said George Chamberlain, in the
presence of diverse credible witnesses, Into which sacred bonds of marriage, she
the said Jone Hele did enter into, with the said George Chamberlain, with all
cherefulnesse and willingness, and did answer the Minister, with such a
willing, forward, and audible voice, to the admiration of all the spectators of
that marriage: and that it may appear when and where, and by whom they were so
lawfully married, you shall have next following, the Certificate printed, under
the Minister, and Parish-Clarks hands, of the said Parish, to testify their
said lawful marriage.

Here follows the true Copy of the true Certificate of the lawful Marriage
had and solemnized between Ioane Hele, and the said George Chamberlain,
attested under the hands of the Minister and Clerk of the Parish Church where
they were lawfully married, as follows, etc.
But first you must take notice, that the said Massey had received the
aforesaid sum of five hundred pounds of the said George Chamberlain.

THese are to certify whom it may concern, that George Chamberlain and Joane
Hele were lawfully married as man and wife together, at, and in the Parish
Church of S. Margarets Pattens, London, near Towerstreet, the fist day of the
month of February, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Fifty,
and One, as appears by the Register Book of the said Parish Church, whereunto
we have subscribed our hands, the day and year abovesaid.

Robert Chamberlain, Minister. William Prescot, Parish Clerk.


Hereafter follows such Copies of Depositions as prove the said Marriage,
sworn before a Master in Chancery, and recorded in that Court.
RObert Chamberlain, Minister of Gods Word, and William Prescot, Parish Clerk
of the Parish of Margarets Pattens, near Tower-street, London, do make Oath,
that on the fifth day of the month of February, which was in the year of our
Lord, One thousand, Six hundred, Fifty, and One, George Chamberlain and Joane
Hele were very lawfully and willingly by their free consents, without any force
or fraud, which at that present appeared to us, according to the constitution
of the Laws of England, married together, and so became lawfully man and wife,
which solemnity of Marriage was performed by this Deponent Robert Chamberlain,
in the foresaid Parish Church, the Church doors being open, about the hour of
ten of the clock in the morning of the same day, and in the presence of diverse
persons, and especially in the presence, and with the consent of the natural
Mother of the said Joane, and also of Samuel Massey, the reputed Father-in-law
of the said Joane, who at that present time gave her in Marriage to the said
George Chamberlain. And these Deponents do further make Oath, that the
foresaid Joane, at the time of the said Marriage, with the greatest
cheerfulness, plainness, forwardness, and extraordinary willingness, did
answer unto all things which on her part were to be performed, as in relation
to the form and ceremonies of the said Marriage.

Robert Chamberlain, Minister. William Prescot, Parish Clerk.

Sworn the last day of July, 1653.

ROBERT AYLETT.



John Samine of London, Merchant, and Elizabeth his wife, do make Oath, that
they these Deponents were personally present at and in the Parish Church of
Margaret Pattons, near Tower street, London, on the fifth day of the month of
February, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty and one, about
the hour of ten of the clock in the morning of the same day, at which time and
place they these Deponents did see Ioane Hele, willingly and very cheerfully
intermarry and take to be her lawful Husband one George Chamberlain Gent.
which said marriage was so had and solemnized between them, by and with the
full and free consent of the natural Mother of the said Ioane, and in her
mothers presence, and by and with the consent of one Samuel Massey father in
law and Guardian unto the said Ioane, whereby the said George Chamberlain and
Ioane Hele became lawful man and wife, and the said Massey gave her in
marriage in the Church unto the said George Chamberlain.

John Samine. Elizabeth Samine.

Sworn this last day of July 1653.

ROBERT AYLETT.



GEorge Lambert of London, Salter, does make Oath, that on the fifth day of
the month of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty
and one, he this Deponent was personally present, at and in the Parish Church
of Margarets Pattens, near Tower street, London, about the hour of ten of the
clock in the morning of the same day, in company with one George Chamberlain
Gent. and one Ioane Hele, at which time and place he this Deponent was present,
and did see the said George Chamberlain, and the said Ioane Hele lawfully
intermarried together, by one Robert Chamberlain, a Minister of Gods word. And
this Deponent does make Oath, that the said Marriage was had and solemnized
between them, by the free consent of the said Ioane, and of her natural
mother, and her father in law Samuel Massey, who gave her in the Church to be
the said Mr. Chamberlains wife, in the presence of her said natural mother:
and the said Ioane did then say over after the Minister the words which belong
to the consummation of Marriage, with willingness, plainness, and
cheerfulness, to the admiration of this Deponent.

George Lambert.
Sworn the second of August 1653.

ROBERT AYLETT.



John Titus, Gent. makes Oath that one Samuel Massey about five months since
did contract with this Deponent for the Marriage of his Daughter in Law, Mrs.
Joane Hele, and withal told this Deponent, that there was a drunken contract
made between his Daughter and one Mr. George Chamberlain, which if it could
not be nulled by Law, then the said Massey said that he this Deponent, and one
Major Bishop should prepare a dose of deadly poison, and the said Massey said,
that he would give it to the said Mr. Chamberlain himself, which would not
only make his Daughter free for this Deponent, but keep him the said Massey
from being troubled for diverse sums of money which he owed unto the said Mr.
Chamberlain. And this Deponent further deposes, That the said Massey since
has combined with one John Nelson, sent to make a supposed Marriage between
the said Mr. Chamberlain and the said Mrs. Hele void. And that the said Massey
has made a contract to that purpose with the said Nelson, as this Deponent
verily believes. And further the said Massey desired this Deponent to send him
word from London when the said Mr. Chamberlain was to go into Devonshire,
upon which notice being so given, the said Massey vowed to give him the said
Mr. Chamberlain such an entertainment, as should suddenly take him out of this
world.

John Titus. Witness John Samine.

Sworn the 21. of March, 1652.

ROBERT AYLETT.



John Bishop, Gent. makes Oath, that one Samuel Massey being in company of
this Deponent, and one Mr. John Titus, the said Samuel Massey did desire the
said Mr. Bishop and Mr. Titus to prepare an effectual dose of poison, which
the said Massey with his own hands would give unto one Mr. George
Chamberlain; and by that means to be freed from many troubles which were then
upon the said Massey by the reason he had a desire to marry his Daughter to
another man.

John Bishop. Witness John Samine.

Sworn the 21. of March, 1652.

ROBERT AYLETT.



WHen the foresaid Samuel Massey caused an assault to be made upon, and wounded
the person of the said George Chamberlain in the quiet possession of his said
Wife in Chancery Lane, in Trinity Term, 1652. by which means he the said
Massey gained away the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlain, and conveyed her to a
private Lodging, to the house of one Mr. Halsey, unknown unto the said Mr.
Chamberlain, she the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlain did then and there say
and acknowledge, that she should never enjoy any comfort or happiness in this
world, unless she might enjoy the Company and society of the said Mr.
Chamberlain, who was then her lawful Husband; as then, and as diverse other
persons of worth and quality that will depose the same, or words to the like
effect, both at that, and at severell other times spoken by her self, and upon
her own accord and free will.

Moses Holebrooke of Islington in the County of Middlesex does make Oath, That
he this Deponent in the later end of the year of our Lord, One thousand, Six
hundred, Fifty, and One, did serve one George Chamberlain, Gent. as his then
servant, which said George Chamberlain was then lately before that time
married unto one Mrs. Joane Hele, a young Gentlewoman, Daughter in Law unto one
Samuel Massey of Lawrence Clift, in the County of Devonshire. And this Deponent
does make Oath, that the said Joane and George Chamberlain, for above the
space of ten weeks together did live as man and wife together, and so declared
themselves to be, and this Deponent coming many mornings to wait on the said
George Chamberlain in his said Chamber, he has found the Chamber door
bolted, and the door being unbolted, he has found the wife of the said
George Chamberlain with him in the said Chamber, undrest and in secret privacy
as man and wife; and the said George Chamberlain has acknowledged that
although his said wife was not then full 15 years of age, yet he the said
George Chamberlain had knowledge of her body as his Wife. And this Deponent
does further make Oath, that he this Deponent has bought and paid for diverse
necessaries for the said Wife of the said George Chamberlain both by his and
her consent, and at the cost of him the said George Chamberlain; and that at
the departure of her said Husband out of the Country for London, she did shed
many tears for his absence and desired his enjoyment.

The mark of Moses (-) Holebrooke.
Sworn the 6. of August, 1653.

ROBERT AYLETT.



John Sessons of Houghton parish in the Bishopric of Durham, Gent. does make
Oath, That one George Chamberlain Gent. having lately made a very sad
complaint unto this Deponent, that he the said George Chamberlain having
lately inter-married and taken to be his lawful Wife one Joane Hele, sole
Daughter of one Andrew Hele, deceased, and informing this Deponent, how that
his said Wife was shifted from place to place, and hidden and detained from
him, whereby he could not have her, nor enjoy her as his said Wife, nor could
he have any access unto his said Wife, either by word or Letter, and that the
said George Chamberlain had lately discovered that his said Wife was in the
house and hands of one Colonel Gravener at the Mews, near Charing-Crosse;
where, and to which place the said Mr. Chamberlain desired and prevailed with
this Deponent to carry a civil Letter from the said Mr. Chamberlain unto the
said Col. Gravener, concerning the delivery of the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife
unto her said Husband; and also desired this Deponent to present and deliver
one other godly and loving Letter unto his the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife;
which Letters, the one of them this Deponent did deliver to the hands of the
said Col. Gravener his own hands, and the other Letter from the said Mr.
Chamberlain, directed to his said Wife, the said Col. Gravener did refuse to
deliver, or to suffer this Deponent to deliver the same Letter unto the wife of
the said Mr. Chamberlain; and he the said Col. Gravener did acknowledge unto
this Deponent, that one Mris. Joane Hele was in his house; but whether she were
the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlain or not, he said he did not know; but if
that she was the Wife of the said Mr. Chamberlain, the marriage was illegally
had, and did absolutely deny to have the Letter from her Husband delivered unto
her, and seemed very angry with this Deponent for bringing the said Letter, and
gave some threatening speeches that he would have and obtain an Act of
Parliament for the dissolving the said marriage between the said George
Chamberlain and the said Joane his now wife: And the said Col. Gravener did
then threaten to secure this Deponents person, if in case he this Deponent did
trouble him with any more Letters of this nature, yet this Deponent has upon
earnest request of the said George Chamberlain, and pitying his condition, in
being deprived of his Wife by a strong hand, did once more adventure to deliver
a second Letter to the said Col. Gravener, which Letter the said Colonel did
absolutely refuse to receive.

John Sesson.

Sworn the 10. of August. 1653.

ROBERT AYLETT.


This Affidavit does manifest that Col Gravener did refuse all civil
Applications by Letter to himself, or to Mr. Chamberlaines Wife from the said
Mr. Chamberlain.



BY all which the foregoing premises you see a lawful marriage, fairly gained
by the full and free consent of the said Jone, her natural Mother, and of her
father in law, the said Massey her Guardian, and as truly proved by the
forgoing depositions, by honest persons of quality, and known honesty and
integrity, who were at the foresaid marriage, and who also well know that after
the said marriage, the said George Chamberlain was at a great charge, for the
apparrelling of his wife with rich attire, as Satin Gown and Peticoats, and
the like, and that they lived in the Country as man and wife together, for
about ten weeks time, or a quarter of a year, and his said wife accepted of a
Watch from him, and all other necessaries as her lawful Husband: and so owned
him in all points, until the said Samuel Massey and his said wife, for their
own base sinister ends, and for filthy lucre sake, did most wickedly and
unjustly detain my said lawful wife from me, contrary to the laws of God and
man; Since which time of their wicked separation, the said Massey and his wife
have confederated themselves with one Colonel Gravenor, who lives at the Mewse
near Charen-Crosse, who now do go about to that horrid act of nulling of the
said lawful marriage, and so consequently the cursed separation of that my
dearly beloved wife, in whom my soul delights, with a resolution to rend my
said lawful wife from me by the hand of power, intending to marry her to some
other person, to enrich themselves, because my said wife is in a capacity to
recover a valuable estate in law, which if ever recovered, I hope to manage it
with prudence, if the Lord will allot it to me, in providence, so that in the
next place I am (although very unwilling) yet vastly necessitated to make this
my Declaration public to the world, thereby not only to clear my Innocence
from any fraud, or force, by me intended or acted, in the obtaining of the said
lawful marriage, but also to unmask to the public view, all those
hell-hatcht, black, and horrid practices, and unparraleld, Insufferable,
Injuries, oppressions, cosenages, and frauds that the said Massey the father in
law and his wife, with their horrid adherents have practiced, and do daily put
in action, to rob and disrobe me of my lawful wife, whom God by his holy
ordinances has lawfully made my wife, and that if by the power of the potency,
and the arm of flesh rended from me, will make me cry out with David, Judge
and revenge my cause O Lord; and I am confident, that if God shall be pleased
to suffer them to prevail against me, to deprive me of my lawful wife, yet
the Lord for that fact will shower down the Viols of his Just vengeance upon
the pates of them, their wives and children, that shall act, though never so
secret, for such a horrid separation of man and wife.

Here follows the true and perfect discovery of what will be made manifest,
and evidently proved against Samuel Massey and his wife, and others their
hellish abettors of his black conspiracies, against my innocent self and wife,
only to ruin me, and to enrich himself, and those his conspirators, that take
part with him in this hellish design, etc.
THat the said Samuel Massey, before the said marriage between the said Master
Chamberlain and his now wife did take effect, did invite one John Titus Gent.
to be a suitor for marriage unto the now wife of the said George Chamberlain,
by which means he the said Massey defrauded the said John Titus, of a rich
Watch, a rich Sword and Belt, and a Gilded Dagger, and several other valued
things, besides the expense of much money, And that the said John Titus
travailing beyond the Seas, and in the interim, the said marriage between the
said George Chamberlain and the said Ioane Hele taking effect, And the said
Master Titus, after the said marriage returning into England, the said Massey
most fraudulently and wickedly, persuaded the said Master Titus that the said
Ioane Hele was not legally married unto the said George Chamberlain, but that
it was only a drunken contract that might easily be avoided; and the said
Massey did persuade the said John Titus, that the said Joan Hele did
passionately love him, and that he had oftentimes heard her declare, that
Master Titus was her first love, and that she could never have any hearty
affection for any other person in the world besides himself, and therefore
with all strong and delusive persuasions, invited the said John Titus to be a
suitor for marriage unto the said Jone Hele, which in truth the said Massey
well knew to be the lawful wife of the said Master Chamberlain; by which
wicked and undue practice, the said Massey defrauded the said John Titus of,
and drew the said John Titus to expend above the sum of two hundred pounds
current money; and that when the said John Titus discovered the frauds of the
said Massey, and that the said Jone Hele was very lawfully married unto the
said George Chamberlain. And then the said Massey did use means to poison the
said George Chamberlain, unto which horrid plot and practice he the said
Massey did invite the said John Titus, and one John Bishop Gent. with all
secrecy, to consent, and to prepare the said poison, and he the said Massey
affirming that he would give the said Master Chamberlain the said poison with
his own hands.

THat since the foresaid marriage took effect, between the said George
Chamberlain and the said Jone Hele, the said Massey has willingly, falsely,
fraudulently, and corruptly, had diverse conferences and communications, with
diverse persons and their agents, both in the Counties of Devon. and Cornwell,
and other places, and also with diverse other persons, in and about the City of
London, for, and concerning a marriage for the self same Jone Hele, now the
lawful wife of the said George Chamberlain, and the said several persons of
quality, to the great damage and oppression of the said Master Chamberlain.

That the said Massey, since the foresaid marriage, so had, and solemnised
between the said George Chamberlain and the said Jone Hele, that is to say, in
the month of February last past, did enter into some Articles of Agreements,
or Covenants in writing, that the said wife of the said George Chamberlain,
should within convenient time, Intermarry, and take to be her husband, one John
Nelson Gent. as in and by the said Articles remaining in the hands of the said
Nelson and Massey, or one of them may at large appear: and that the said
Massey in Hillary Term last past, did enter into one Judgment in the Court of
upper Bench at Westminster, of the penalty of ten thousand pounds to the said
Nelson, to perform the said Articles: By which horrible and wicked practices,
the said Massey having the said Master Chamberlaines wife in his keeping, and
hiding her from place to place where the said George Chamberlain cannot find
her, nor have access unto her, either by word or letter, he the said Massey
by adulation, and base flattery, has alienated the heart and affection of the
wife of the said George Chamberlain, and has and still does offer and expose
her to no better then public sale for marriage unto diverse persons, to the
great damage, wrong, and heavy oppression of the said George Chamberlain.

That the said Massey and his said wife, by their practice and conspiracy with
Mr. Dike, the Master Keeper of Newgate, and other Confederates since the Month
of February last past, did conspire to hide, keep and detain the lawful wife
of the said George Chamberlain from him, and to effect their wicked and
unlawful purposes, they the said Confederates did hide, detain, and keep the
wife of the said Mr. Chamberlain, in secret manner in the dwelling house of
the said Mr. Dike, at or near Newgate, London, and when the said George
Chamberlain had discovered his said wife to be there, then the foresaid
Conspirators, Massey, and Dike, with much subtilty and secrecy, caused the wife
of the said Mr. Chamberlain to be conveyed unto Vintners Hall, and to be put
in the custody of some friend of the said Mr. Dikes, and being there not long
before she was discovered to be there, then the wife of the said George
Chamberlain, was by the conspirators conveyed away from thence unto the golden
Suger-loafe in Holborn; and not thinking her to be hidden safe there from her
lawful husband, she was thence conveyed and hid and kept at Wimbleton, at the
house of one Mr. William Massey, a kinsman of the said Samuel Massey, and all
to the great wrong and heavy oppression of the said George Chamberlain, and
contrary to the Laws of God and man.

You are to take notice that under the color of Mr. Chamberlaines wife, being
a reputed great heir to about 2000l. Lands per annum, and so declared by that
black-sould, treacherous, false father in law Samuel Massey, all these
horrible plots, practices, and unheard of villainies do proceed; The first
cause and ground of his villainy arising because Mr. Chamberlain would not
suffer himself to be cozened of 250l. more in money, over and above the
foresaid five hundred pounds before paid unto the said Massey by the said Mr.
Chamberlain, which 250 l. being refused to be parted withal by the said Mr.
Chamberlain, to the said Massey, he the said Massey for that and for no other
cause at all, did settle upon a resolution, and did protest and declare, that
the said Mr. Chamberlain should never have his said wife, but that the said
Massey and his said wife would keep and hide her from him, and would utterly
dissuade her against the said George Chamberlain her lawful Husband, which
will be proved upon Oath by sufficient and good witness.

But now to return where the old Kennell of Foxes have left the young one, at
VVimbleton; for by this time it must be believed, that at the Accademy and
University of Newgate, in the Jaws of a Jailer, there must needs be infused
into her tender ear such sordid literature and learning, as is able to
separate man and wife, and so consequently to undo body and soul, to bring
about the wicked ends of those Conspirators.

Being now lodged at VVimbleton, notice thereof is given unto the said Mr.
Chamberlain that she is there, and that a person of Honor, a Lord of this
Nation, by the false information of her Father in Law, is invited to believe
her a great Heir, and not married, is to give her a visit for marriage, and
that if the marriage take effect, the conspirators shall have 12000 l.

Then Mr. Chamberlain her Husband is advised and does apply himself to the
Lord Chief Justice, who grants his Warrant to take the said M^ssey for his
misdemeanors; Mr. Chamberlain with the Warrant takes a Coach and goes with the
Warrant to Wimbleton, takes a Constable with some other friends, and in a
peaceable manner searches the house of William Massey for the body of the said
Samuel Massey, and in that search finds his lawful wife, courts her into the
Coach, and brings her to London, as was just and lawful so to do; the
perfidious Father in Law, and the rest of the Conspirators have notice of this
sudden change, they use instruments to be in the Chamber with them, to keep
man and wife from lying together, or from having any private conference; the
Conspirators pretend a force and a Riot, and charge the husband and the wife
before a Justice of the Peace, one Mr. Peter Bradshaw; this Justice, it being
Sessions time at Hicks Hall, directs a Constable to bring Mr. Chamberlaines
wife in custody to that Sessions, which was the very last Sessions held in July
1653. there the said Jone is brought, and her husband goes in voluntarily,
expecting good justice to be done; and for that it did appear to that Court,
and for all there were diverse witnesses to prove that the said Master
Chamberlain and the said Jone were lawfully married together, and so became
lawful man and wife, yet by the strong influence of one Colonel Gravener, who
now lives in the green Mewes by Charing-crosse, and who formerly did live in
Pater noster row, London, I say by this Colonels procurement, the said Mr.
George Chamberlain was taken from his lawful wife, and committed to the New
Prison, when if there was any force or Riot at all, the fact was committed in
Surrey at Wimbleton, and not in Middlesex

So that the said Colonel G^avener taking part with the said Massey, the
father in law, having gotten the lawful husband of the said Jone in the Goal,
being a courteous, kind Gentleman, does take away the lawful wife of the
said Mr. Chamberlain from him, and in his Coach carries her away, without any
lawful Warrant or Authority whatsoever, to his house at the Mewes, where she
is now mewed up from her husband: my conscience tells me that there is not such
another courteous person in this Commonwealth, that has such a conscience to
take away a man's lawful wife from him, and to imprison him, and to measure out
so much and so large London measure of oppression; and although he be
reported to be Quartermaster General to this noble Army, yet that ever
Heroic, and honored Lord General, nor all, nor any his worthy Officers of
the Army will be pleased to think it fit or reasonable, that Quartermaster
General Gravener should be so wanton with his wits, or so far to go beyond his
Commission, as to rend man and wife asunder, and then to take up quarters for
another man's wife, whether her husband will or no; it is not the way to be
Quartermaster, but to be whole Master of another man's wife; therefore every
man had need have a care of his wife, if the Col. go on with such a trade, and
if he go so far beyond his Commission, it may please the noble Governors of
this Nation to give him a Writ of ease.

But to take a man's Wife from him in the face of a Court, under the color of
Justice without any Warrant, and when a noble Parliament and honorable Council
of State is sitting, nay when this Nation and all the eyes of Christendom are
upon our Supreme Authorities, expecting Justice to be done to every man, poor
and rich; and Judgment to flow like a mighty stream; at this time that is
expected, that the weary and heavy laden should be eased, and the wrongs of the
oppressed should be righted; it is strange that at this time, and so near the
Supreme Authority, the Parliament of England, the said Col. Gravener should
attempt to do so irreligious an act, as to part man and Wife.

Now the said wife of Master Chamberlain, being at the whole Master Generals
house at the Mewse, it is fit the lawful husband of her, Master Chamberlain
should know of her welfare, and how she does do, or how, or by what way he may
enjoy her, to live in the fear of the Lord comfortably together, as man and
wife ought to do, and upon a strict inquiry, Mr. Chamberlain has discovered
that the Master Goalor of Newgate, the said Massey the father in law of the
said Master Chamberlaines wife, this noble Colonel Gravener, and a blunt, rich,
able person, well friended and well monyed, and well reputed, whose name shall
go free, and be yet and at this time exempted, if he prove to be a peacemaker,
have all of them together, with some other persons that may be named and shamed
in time, set up a resolution in a contentious way, as they call it, to bring
the said Mr. Chamberlain and his miswandred wife together, or at least some
what near unto one another, and in order thereunto the foresaid confederates by
their foresaid confederacy having gotten the said Master Chamberlaines said
lawful wife into the power of the Army (as the said Massey reports) (and which
no wise man will believe, that the noble Army will patronise or protect any
such horrid thing) and in order to this their new design they the said
conspirators have framed penned, contrived, abetted, and fomented a false,
untrue, and scandalous Petition, in the name of the said Mr. Chamberlaines
wife, to the honorable Council of State against her foresaid lawful Husband
the said Master Chamberlain, and against diverse other innocent persons, and by
the insinuating power of some or one of the aforesaid conspirators, that
transcendant and incomparable Col Gravener, did procure a Warrant from the said
honorable Council of State, for to apprehend and secure the person of the
said George Chamberlain, and other innocent persons, as namely Robert
Chamberlain, Minister of Gods word, which was that Minister that did marry the
said Mr. Chamberlain and his said wife together, William Prescot the Parish
Clark, John Samine and his wife, George Lambert, and all others that were at
the foresaid Solemnity, or which could prove the lawful marriage of the said
Mr. Chamberlain and his lawful wife together; but it is to be noted, that the
name of that Fox Massey must be also put into that Warrant, and it must be
contrived to avoid suspicion, or that the plot may not be discovered, but that
it may be so carried on, that the said Massey may draw in the said Mr.
Chamberlain, and all his foresaid friends together at some known place of
meeting, and that then he the said Massey might betray them all, and that then
a file of Musketteres might come in and take the said Massey, and all the rest
together.

Now the Warrant is under Seal, the Marshall General, that gallant clear
honest hearted man, is prepared to execute the said Warrant with some
Soldiers, Although no person named in that Warrant had any relation, as being
a soldier or capable as being a prisoner of war, but to make it the greater
terror and bugbear, nothing is wanting but that Judas part of Massey to be
acted, Massey as being set on by the fury of his thirsty, villainous revenge,
Clokes his knavery under the species of a fair pretense, Courts Mr.
Chamberlain and his friends to a fair compliance of the ending of all
differences between them by indifferent men; Mr. Chamberlain assents
thereunto, a meeting of all parties is had, for the end of settling peace and
unity between both parties the third of August 1653. at the Paul head Tavern
near Doctors Commons, Mr. Chamberlain by himself and friend Engage that no
affront or surprisall either by Sarjeant, or by soldiers shall be offered, to
Massey, Massey and his friend one Mr. Leigh do engage, that Mr. Chamberlain
nor his friends should come by any damage, nor surprisall by any Officer,
Sarjeant, or soldier during the time of that treaty, Massey, binds up his
Engagements by many execrable oaths, wishing that his flesh might rot from his
bones, and that his Wife and Children might for ever perish, etc. If he meant
any ill, or if any Sarjeant or Soldier should interrupt that Treaty for peace;
the Treaty for that peace thereupon proceeded, and all parties being met for
that purpose, then, and not till then did that black Villainy of the said Massey
and the rest of the conspirators appear, for in the debating of the business,
in comes the Marshall General, with Graveners man, who pulled the Warrant out
of his pocket, and six Soldiers, musketteers, with a Warrant from the Council
of State, obtained by the said Gravener, and the consent of Massey, and the
rest of the conspirators, and the Warrant not mentioning any crime at all, the
said Marshall and the said Soldiers, forced the said George Chamberlain and
others his friends to the Marshalls prison at the Muse, where they have
remained prisoners ever since the third day of this present August 1653. And
being there restrained, and kept prisoners by the Marshall General, and by the
souldierie, the said Massey again insinuated himself into the society of the
said Mr. Chamberlain, he being a prisoner, and offered unto him, that if he
would pay unto the said M ssey the sum of one hundred pounds in money, that
then he the said Mr. Chamberlain should have, and enjoy his said wife, and
that he, the said Massey and his wife, would join together and would reduce
her out of the hands of the said Gravener, and deliver her to the said Mr.
Chamberlain, that they may enjoy each other, and live as man and wife
together; and the said Massey having made the said offer at the house of the
said Marshal General, whilst he was a prisoner, he the said Massey did send for
a quart bottle of Sack at his own charge, and did there with drink unto the
said Mr. Chamberlain by the name of his son Chamberlain, and to his wife,
being the daughter in law of the said Massey, whereby it is evident that Mr.
Chamberlain is deprived of his said wife by a strong hand only, and for no
other cause but for that the said Mr. Chamberlain will not suffer himself to
be defrauded of any more money by the said Massey, Mr. Chamberlain, upon all
Masseys flatteries, will not be defrauded of any more moneys by the said
Massey, Massey he works by Gravener to continue Mr. Chamberlain prisoner, Mr.
Chamberlain, endeavors to send letters to his lawful wife, Gravener denies
the reception of them or the delivery of any letter unto her, yet acknowledged
that the said Mr. Chamberlaines wife by the name of Joane Hele is in his house:
Mr. Chamberlain Courts Gravener with several Letters, one whereof he
receives, the other he denies to receive; both Letters are herewith printed,
together with the said Mr. Chamberlaines Letter to his Wife, at Graveners
house, that the world may know, that the said Mr. Chamberlain has left no
fair way unacted, unattempted, or undone for the reducing, and regaining of
his said lawful Wife, unto the cohabitation of the said Mr. Chamberlain her
husband; all which applications proving fruitless, the said Mr. Chamberlain
was enforced to set forth to the view of the world this modest following
Declaration, wherein Col. Graveners name was not at all mentioned.

To the Honorable Colonel Gravener, at the Mewes these present.
Honored Sir:
YOU are the person by the report of diverse, that have in your habitation, a
Gentlewoman that you call Mrs. Ioane Hele, which in truth is my most dearly
beloved and lawful wife; I have sent her by this Bearer a Letter from my
self, and do desire that you would be pleased to permit that Letter to be
safely delivered by this bearer to her own hands, leaving the success thereof to
the searcher of hearts. Sir, it would be a great obligation unto me, and a
great manifestation to the world of your honor and integrity, if you would
either deliver me my wife, or admit and command that I might have her delivered
unto me, or might have a safe and fair access for conference with my wife:
Truly Sir, you will find for all the false aspersion of my enemies, that she is
my true and lawful wife, nor will God bless the seperators of man and wife;
and therefore I desire you in the fear of the Lord, and as you expect to
answer it at the great and terrible day of Judgment, and as you expect a
blessing from Heaven upon you and yours, and as you hope to enjoy what ever is
dear unto you, Do not, oh do not, patronize, promote, abet, or countenance,
the rending of my lawful wife from me; a curse must follow the contrivers
thereof, I hope you are none, yet vastly suspected by some; be pleased to do
your self that honor, and me that right, but to have a fair and friendly
examination of the truth of all things in controversy, and then I am confident
your noble soul will inform you, that I have been vastly abused; Sir, be
pleased to suspend your judgment until you know the truth of things, and
where you do not know the truth, charity invites you to think the best, and
leave the rest to the searcher of all hearts; and then I hope, I shall find you
a noble sold person toward me, and hope to have just cause to manifest my
self to be, Sir,

Your servant, and ever honourer, Geo. Chamberlain.
July 27. 1653.
The true Copy of a Letter sent by George Chamberlain, Gent. unto his Wife,
being by diverse dangerous persons and practices unduly detayned from him. To
his dearly honored and beloved Wife, Mris. Joane Chamberlain, these with
fidelity present.
My faithfully beloved Wife:
GOD by his providence has made you my lawful Wife, nor shall I ever by any
means whatsoever, whilst I live, be drawn to leave you or forsake you; and
therefore in the name of God, and in obedience to all his holy Commands, I do
hereby with all faithful affection entreat you speedily to admit me to speak
with you, and with the forgetting of all unkindnesses to enjoy you: what can
you desire of me, as in relation to your own happiness, or concerning your
Fatherlaws freedom, or your Mothers future felicity, but you may absolutely
command my just rights in the enjoyment of you as my dearly beloved Wife, will
be your Fathers Freedom and your Mothers felicity? and therefore be not cruel
to them, when the sweet smiles of a faithful heart by you my dear Wife,
together with your desired self thrown into the arms of me your faithful
Husband, may yet make up the breach of all unhappy differences; let no voice
nor power flatter you into a belief of dissolving that sacred knot of marriage
that Heaven has knit between us, and let God shoure down the Viols of his
just vengeance upon all those that seek that horrid separation; remember my
Dear how sweetly and solemnly in that sacred Bands of Marriage in the presence
of God and Man you were lawfully married to me; remember your then solemn
Promises you made to me before the Lord, keep those Promises, for God will not
be mocked, and in the name and fear of the Lord return unto me, which am
resolved faithfully to receive you, carefully to love you, plentifully to
provide for you, and most contentedly and charitably to pass by all things,
any thing of injury from any person or persons. This (my Love) is the way to
Peace, this is the way to Love, and this is the true way to draw down the
blessing of the Lord upon us, which can only make us happy both in this life,
and also to eternity; be so kind to your own soul as to consider what the
Lord has given me leave to write to you, and the great God of all hearts
incline you to return me your Answer (like the innocent Dove with the Olive
branch) with sweet tidings, which will be great joy to my soul to see the
return of my innocent misled and almost lust Lamb into my bosom, which are
the hearty desires and prayers of,

Your faithful loyal loving Husband, GEO. CHAMBERLAIN.
July 27. 1653. This Letter above written I sent unto my wife the 27. of July,
1653. unto her, to the house of Col. Gravener, at the Mewes, who has and does
most unjustly keep my said wife from me, and now has most wickedly by foul
practice, caused me to be kept prisoner at the Martial Generals house at the
Mews, for no cause at all; wherefore I am enforced to make this public
Declaration to the world hereafter following.

George Chamberlain.



The Declaration of George Chamberlain, Gent. to all persons of this Nation,
concerning the undue practice of diverse persons which do most unjustly and
illegally detain his lawful Wife from him, for their own sinister ends and
purposes, etc.
WHereas according to the known Laws established in this Nation, I George
Chamberlain Gent. have lately and lawfully inter-married and taken to be my
wife Joane Hele, sole daughter and heir of Andrew Hele Esquire, of the County
of Devon. her late Father, deceased, which said Joane my said wife, is by the
foul practice and conspiracy of one Samuel Massey, who married the mother of
the said Joane, and by the undue means of the said mother, persuaded and
prevailed withal to withdraw, absent, and hide herself, from me her lawful
loving and faithful husband; and she being so unduly kept from me and seduced
by evil Counsel and most destructively advised against me by the said Samuel
Massey and his wife, and others their Agents and Confederates, by base flattery
and adulation, whereby she is now prepared not only to deny me to be her
lawful husband, but also to believe that the said lawful marriage shall be
nul'd and made void, and she be put in a capacity to marry with some other
person of honor, so that those cursed Counsels and Instruments have wrought a
resolution in her tender years not to live or cohabite with me her lawful
husband: and as being bound in conscience, so with great care and diligence
have I sought all lawful ways and means, and made all uncessant and civil
applications both by letters and otherwise for the begetting of a true
understanding whereby I and my said wife might have enjoyed each other with
comfort, and in the fear of the Lord, as man and wife ought to do, all which
my most faithful endeavors proving fruitelesse by reason of that hell hatched,
black destroying influence, and sordid interposition that the said Massey and
his wife and their flattering false hearted instruments and Agents have had and
practiced upon my too much credulous and misled wife, being altogether in their
unhappy custody, and shifted from place to place unknown unto me, I am now
with great grief of heart, constrained to publish and Declare to the world
these my unparalleld and heavy oppressions above said; and to the end the said
Massey and his said wife shall no longer delude any young gallant by exposing
their daughrer (my lawful wife) to sale, under the notion of a young great
heir, which the said Massey and his wife have done since she has been my
lawful wife; and since she has been rended and torn from me. And therefore
I the aforesaid abused George Chamberlain do hereby publish, declare, and make
known to all people that the foresaid Jone is my real and lawful wife, and
that the said marriage was had, and solemnized between us according to the
known laws of this nation, and by and with the free and full consent of her
self the said Massey her father in Law, and her natural mother, and before
them and in their presence and in a lawful Church, and by a lawful Minister
without force or fraud: for in truth before the said marriage did take effect,
I the said George Chamberlain did pay unto the said Massey and his said wife,
in consideration of the cost that they had been at in the education of my said
wife, the full and just sum of five hundred pounds current money, which the
said Massey and his said wife received accordingly. Besides I bestowed above
one hundred pounds current moneys in apparel and other necessary
accommodations for my said wife: and therefore, through Gods assistance, I do
speedily resolve to use all lawful ways and means to reduce my said lawful
wife to her sweet cohabitation with me, that we may live together in the fear
of the Lord, and to gain her out of the hands of those destroying flatterers,
whose accursed keeping man and wife asunder, God will never bless. I do
further declare sincerely from my heart, that I never gave my said dearly
beloved wife any just cause, by word or deed, to withdraw her desired self
from my society, but am resolved by Gods Grace, faithfully to love and honor
her, and plentifully to provide for her all the days of my life, according to
Gods holy Laws and Commandments. And further I declare and publish my free
resolution by Gods Grace to pass by, and bury in eternal oblivion all former
prejudices whatsoever, either by her tender too much credulities, or by her
harkening more to the voice of flattery then the heart of loyalty, nor shall I
take advantage of any thing heretofore perpetrated by her mother or father in
law against me, unto whom I shall yet have a civil and very tender regard, if
complied withal in time, and shall obliterate all former unkindenesses, with
these strong weapons of true love and gentle courtesies, wherein I hope all
persons and power, both millitary and civil, understanding the candor and
truth of the premises will abhor to take part with those, who most indirectly
go about to separate my self and my dearly beloved wife, whom God by his holy
orders has lawfully joined together.

Lastly, I do hereby further Declare, that from the day of the date hereof, I
do give public notice and warning to all people whatsoever, that they do not
lend or trust my said Wife for any moneys, wares, goods, or chattels, food, or
raiment, or for any other thing whatsoever, without my Warrant and authority
first had and obtained in writing, at their and every of their perils. All
which I have been most tenderly unwilling to declare to the world, but that I
am enforced thereunto, by reason of those malignant advisers that have a vast
prevailing influence upon my Wife, and daily go about to implunge her in great
and vast debts, thereby to supply and bring about their wicked purposes, and
contract great debts upon me to hasten my overthrow, which they desire. Dated
under my hand this 28. day of July, 1653.

GEORGE CHAMBERLAIN.
The full substance of this Declaration above written is fully proved upon
oath, by seven substantial honest and undeniable Witnesses, and by Gods grace
shall be maintained to be full of Candor and truth, with hazard of the life and
fortune of my self her lawful Husband.

George Chamberlain.



To his honored and dearly beloved Wife, Mrs. Ioane Chamberlain, these with
fidelity present, at Colonel Graveners house in the Mewes.
My most dear Wife:
HAD I not been debard of all civil applications, (by Colonel Gravener) in my
personal waiting on you, or in the delivery of my Letters, I doubt not but
that I should have given you so clear a demonstration of my true integrity, and
so plainly have disclosited the wicked conspiracies of these most hell-hatcht
Incendiaries (which now I fear sit at the stern of thy tender years, and seek
this accursed dissolution between us) that their most suttlest inventions could
never have had power to have made these delusions penetrate upon thy tender and
innocent soul. Truly, my Love, I hope you cannot but be sensible before this,
how these irreligious counselors endeavor to make a prey of thee and thy
reputation, to bring about their ungodly and selfish designs, which tends to
no other purpose then the destruction both of thy body and soul. And
therefore, my heart, it is my souls desire, that thou would shun these
abominable advices, and return into the bosom of thy dearest Husband, which at
present (for thy sake) is exposed a Prisoner at the Marshall Generals house in
the Mues, not far from thee, (or at least a civil visit) where thou shall
receive the best of welcomes, from him that dares challenge no longer a being,
then he is most cordially devoted in his inclination to be, My Dear,

Thy most affectionate, and I hope inseparable Husband, GEORGE CHAMBERLAIN.
August 8. 1653.
These to the Honored Colonel Gravener present.
SIR,
BY a person of civility and quality, I did present you with a Letter from my
self, thereby inviting you no longer to detain my lawful wife, under that
fallacy of Mrs Ioane H^le; I have printed some papers unwillingly to the view
of the word, declaring her to be my lawful Wife, of which I am confident you
cannot be ignorant; but to leave you without excuse of that knowledge, I have
desired and prevailed with this Gentleman to present one to you. Sir, under
your good favor, I did take it unkindly from you, that a Gentleman of your
quality, honor, and fame, should not permit, or in charity promote the
delivery of that Letter that this Gentleman was pleased by your permission, and
my direction, to deliver to my misled Wife, unjustly detained from me and
harbored in your house. Sir, I pray God it be not palpably proved, that you
have some valuable self ends and interest as in relation to the endeavoring
to deprive me of my lawful Wife. I am most confidently assured, that it stands
not with the Laws of God, nor of this Nation, nor with the honor nor honesty
of any conscientious Christian, to be the means, the ayder, a better, or
separater of man and wife. Sir, I charge you before the face of Heaven, to
consider what I have writ, and to lay it to heart, and to examine your own
conscience therein, and to write me back a civil answer like a good Christian,
and like an honest man; For let me be rendered to you never so inconsiderable by
the basest of depraving tongues, yet know, that I will not by you, or by any
man else, be fooled out of, or from that Wife that God by his Ordinance has
lawfully made mine, which is the unalterable resolution of Sir,

Your servant and abused friend George Chamberlain.
Broomly Hall this 2. of Aug. 1653. near Stratford Bow.
To the Honored Colonel Gravener, these present.
Honored Sir,
THrough that Civil respect I have to your self, being (as I am informed) a
member of this worthy Army, to whom under God we must ascribe all praise, for
our lives, liberties, and fortunes; I have thought good once more to invite you
to a clear understanding, whereby you might not be led unto utter darkness,
through the false lights of self intrest, or misinformation, which will but
add torments to the afflictions of a burdened conscience: I presume you spend
not your time so irreligiously, but that you are very sensible what a bitter
curse the Lord has laid upon the seperators of man and wife; as in many places
of Gods word does appear (therefore if you cannot have so much civilty to me,
to return me my lawful wife, which you most impiously and illegally detain
from me, being under the protection of your roof, besides your unjust
confining me to the most heavy, and unheard of oppression of imprisonment, for
no other cause then demanding my best of rights, my most lawful wife) be so
kind to your own soul, as not to draw down the just curse of the Lord upon
you. Pray, summon all your intellects, and examine whether Heaven be to be
purchased with money, or by obeying the command of Almighty God: O then hazard
not unspeakable, nay undeterminable comfort in your future life, by wilfully
drawing down Gods Just vengeance upon your head. It is not I that say it, but
the great God of all hearts, whom at this time has permitted me to write this
Letter unto you that you might know, it is not yet too late to repent of evil
doing. But as the Lord has commanded us to deal unto all men, as we would be
dealt unto our selves, if we expect the comfort of his sweet smiles upon us;
Therefore in obedience to his most Holy and divine commands, my charity bids me
not to believe these wicked actions proceed from your natural inclinations,
but are rather infused into you, by harkning to the base adulations perpetrated
by Samuel Massey, and his black society, who as I am informed is very often in
your company: Therefore I must confess, I cannot much wonder why you so
violently persist in evil doing, associating your self, certainly with the
most corruptest of villains, which is long since proved by Affidavit before a
Master in Chancery, The best of Judgments may be corrupted if but one party
heard; but to leave you without excuse: This is to remember you that I have
forme^ly made all civil and modest applications, thereby to invite you to have
a Just sense of my honest cause (but instead of a kind return of my
civilities, I have ranckounterd many of your threa^s; And so likewise has Mr.
Sisson who delivered my Letters, wherein some of them you have been as good as
your word, but as to what else can be done unto me, I defy all those black
instruments that attend your ears, with delusive falsities presuming by your
power and means, to snatch away my just rights from me) To which purpose J now
write this Letter, and in point of Charity advise you to balm up the deep
wounds that will lie upon your reputation if not your conscience, by reuniting
and delivery of my wise into that safe harbor the bosom of a Cordial loving
husband, and that Immediately, or else you must expect I shall no longer lie
under this agony without giving the world a true account, who are the Patrons
of so foul a practice, wherein I cannot avoid your name, my unwillingnesse to
bring you upon the stage, made me spare you in my first Declaration, lest the
world should read your hypocrisy so often ventring your life to suppress what
you now must promote, the great tyranny and oppression is inflicted upon the
most innocents. Sir, thus do I make a Civil return for your unkindnesse, in
your secret practices, in the endeavoring not only my ruin in this
transitory life, but the loss of the soul of that innocent and misled Lamb,
my Wife. Sir, believing the foulness of your practice may be veiled by the
darkness of your Judgment, being cloud^d with false informations, I shall
commit you to your Prayers to God, that he may brighten your understanding, so
that you may tread no longer in the paths of ignorance, if not willfulness,
which are the most humble and hearty desires of,

(Sir) Your most injured, and most oppressed servant, GEORGE CHAMBERLAIN.
This Letter was sent as by directions, but produced no effect.



YOU are to understand, that during the time of this Controversy, there has
been used by Massey, and the rest of the Confederates, all those knacks of
Knavery that mortals can invent to null this lawful marriage, and to defraud
that honest Mr. Chamberlain of his lawful Wife, as namely the said Massey,
and those his hell-hatch'd Conspirators did lately cause a Petition to be
preferred by and in the name of the said Mr. Chamberlaines Wife, by the name of
Joane Hele, against the said Massey, and his Wife; by which Petition there was
a Commission under the great Seal obtained for the ^voyding and dissolving of
the said marriage, if good witnesses could have proved any thing material for
to have ground equity for the Lords Commissioners to have decreed the avoiding
of the said marriage; but that trick, although cunningly and strongly carried
on by power was quickly discovered, so that they durst never execute that
Commission, for fear it would make for their greater condemnation; so that,
that Commission is now out of date, and will not be owned.

The next plot set on foot was, that Massey and his Wife alleged, that Mr.
Chamberlain had never lain with his Wife nor known her, as her Husband; to
this Mr. Chamberlain answers, that he has known his Wife carnally, as a
Husband ought to do, and does offer for the deciding of that controversy, by
putting it to the trial of Midwives, or a Jury of Women: this (propose) did
very much trouble Massey and his Wife; for if Mr. Chamberlain her Husband had
not been there, the question would be who had been there.

This stabbing question puts Massey to advise with the best of his old femall
acquaintance and Counsel about London and the Covent Garden, where he did
find advice to deceive a whole Jury of Midwives, as he conceived; which advice
was, to make surfling or restringent water with Alome, and some other
ingredients, and to make application by injection thereof unto and into the
secret parts, as per direction, etc. and that without doubt will so contract
her body, as that it shall be hardly discernable whether she had ever known man
or not, probatum est, ut dicitur: This will be proved by good witness.

Thus you see that Massey and his Conspirators have been traced out in all
their several unheard of frauds and villainies; and it is desired, that all
things herein set forth and declared, may be by authority drawn into
examination and proof, that the Practisers, and Actors therein may be made
exemplary, and that the Noble and Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the
Common wealth of England will provide remedy against such practices and
oppressions for time to come, and that no person whatsoever shall hereafter
dare to make use of the Authority of the honorable Council of State, and of
their Warrant, to imprison men's persons by the Soldiery, or otherwise to bring
about their own ends, and unjust designs, as the said Col. Gravener has done
in this Case, by imprisoning the person of the said George Chamberlain and
others upon his business and account, ever since the 3. of August 1653. until
this present of they being all freeborn persons of this Nation, and ought not
so to be imprisoned by the Laws of this Commonwealth, which is their right
and inheritance, and that the Justice of those Laws ought not to be denied to
any freeborn man of this Commonwealth of England.

Thus have I declared the sad Case and Condition of me the said George
Chamberlain, who have patiently (through the Lords Mercy) hitherto under gone
all those heavy oppressions formerly related, with as much brevity, and through
the mercy of my God, notwithstanding this my hard imprisonment at the Mewes, do
expect and hope for a speedy and happy deliverance, to the comfort of my soul,
and to the shame of those Conspirators that se^l thy ruin. Dated from my
Prison in the Mewes, near Charing Cross this day of August (...).

GEORGE CHAMBERLAIN.


