THE CASE OF THE Petitioners of making the River Dun more Navigable, in the
West Rideing of the County of YORK.
THAT Three large Market Towns are Situated upon the River of Dun in the said
Rideing, viz. Sheiffeild, Rotheram and Doncaster; where diverse considerable
Tradesmen do Live, whose Goods, Wares and Merchandises, are Brought up and
Carried down the said River too and from Hull. But the said River Dun not being
Navigable, at all times in the Year, further then Fish-Lake, which is Seven
Miles below the said Town of Doncaster; the said Goods, Wares and Merchandises,
are brought up by Land-Carriage to the Towns abovementioned, which very much
Inhaunces the Prices of the said Goods and Merchandises.

That great Quantities of Cheese are brought out of Cheshire and Lancashire, by
the Way of the said Town of Doncaster; being the readiest and most easy Why
for Conveying the same down for Hull, to be sent from thence to the City of
London.

That great Quantities also of all Sort of Grain and Corn, and particularly
Wheat, is bought by the Corn-Merchants of the City of London, in and about the
Town of Doncaster and other Places thereto adjacent in the said Rideing; both
for the Use of the City of London and for Exportation beyond the Seas, it
having a great Reputation there. So that making the said River Dun more
Navigable, the same will tend to a Public, good Benefit and Advantage of Trade
and Commerce, by affording a more easy and cheaper Conveyance of Corn and
other Commodities too and from Doncaster, and Places adjacent.

That the Banks of the said River Dun, between the Town of Doncaster and the
Place where the lowest Lock is designed to be made upon the said River, is
about Eight or Nine Foot high; whereas Three Foot of Water deeper then the same
Runs now, which will not be above Five Foot in all, will make the said River
more Navigable; and is as much as is designed by the Bill depending in this
Honorable House.

That the Dreins or Revolets running into the River of Dun, fall into the said
River much below the Place, where the lowest Work for stopping the Water is
designed to be made, save two; which two have been Surveyed by several skilful
Artists, who find the said Dreins will have a considerable Fall into the said
River when the Water is held up the Height it is designed.

That the said two Dreins Run through the Parish of Bently cum Arksey; and are
found to do no Damage to that Parish or any other Place.

That since the said Dreins have been Surveyed, the Lord, Freeholders and
Tenants of the said Parish, have Presented a Petition, desiring the Bill
brought ino this Honorable House may Pass into a Law.

The Petitioners leaves this to Your serious Consideration, and Humbly Desire
Your Hohnours will be Pleased to Vote the said Bill may Pass.

Note, The chief Opposition to this Bill, proceeds from a Gentleman who is
Interested in some Wharfs upon the River at Bawtreys, about 6 Miles from
Doncaster; as whose Instance many of the Petitions against the Bill have been
procured: And is apprehensive, That in Case this River be made Navigable, the
Traders and Inhabitants of the Country adjacent thereto, will have a more Easy
and Cheap Coneyance for their Goods then they have at present by the River at
Bawtrey: And that the Yearly Income of his Wharfs will be lessened thereby.

And therefore the Case is only, Whether this Gentleman's Private Interest, or
the Public Good of a Populous, Industrious and Trading-Countrey, shall have
the Preferrence.

THE CASE OF THE PETITIONERS FOR Making the River Dun more Navigable.


