THE XXXth. OF JANUARY. OR, AN ANNIVERSARY.

BEING A POEM DEDICATED TO THE QVEENE OF GREAT BRITAIN, AT THE LOVRE: January
the 30.th 20.th


Printed at PARIS. M.D.C.LII.

TO THE ROYAL MAJESTY OF HENRIETTA MARIA Queen of great Britain, France,
and Jreland, etc.
MADAM,
IT is now high time that your Princely Eyes should no longer contract redness
from tears but a brave fire from Revenge, That you should deal with your
Passion as the generous ORMOND with that infamous firebrand of the world that
Canker to the Royal Stock and Branches CROMWELL, suffer it to possess some
Outskirts and frontiers of your Soul, that by the expansion of his
encroachments its Spirits may be wasted and laid open for Ruin; And your
victorious Reason (contracting all its forces) sweep all such treacherous
Invaders from the face of the world, and leave nothing of it in Nature but a
Memory, which may make it sti^k^ to all Posterity.

^o^cia's Coals are of no further use for d^spai^e, all they can be
serviceable in, is to create a flame to which the barbarous Rebels must be
fuel, and the fire may be a Purifier to the Region of Sovereignty, clearing
all the Air from those two greatest Plagues to Order and Mankind Rebellion and
Rigicide. God has now ripened them for the Sickle of Revenge; it is highly
opportune to shake them from the trees of Authority and Rapine whereon they
hang, and since hanging is natural for such Gomorrah Apples, Tyburne in
England is the properest place in the world for such fruits, if their
rottenness be not too violent Eye-sores to the view, and of too great a
Stench to the Nosethrils of Passengers.

The 30.th of January shall be reckoned amongst those Ominous days which are
fatal to the repose and safety of Nations, which though it antecede here
that in ENGLAND by ten days, yet my passion of Revenge, and my engagement to
follow that Standard of your Heroic Son, which must carry with it a
Restitution of the World to Laws, Liberty, Religion, Conscience, and all
Obligations divine and Humane, has made me make use of the Calendar in
FRANCE, and present an Anniversary upon the most horrid Murder the Sun ever
viewed; not to stir up your un-exampled Piety to Tears, but to awake your
own Royal and all other Loyal Bosoms to revenge; which, when it shall
break forth in its just magnitude and demensions, the Rebels will confess,
that Our long Silence is like a Calm, whose unsuspected tranquillity is
followed by nothing less dangerous then totally subverting Earthquakes, or
universally consuming Thunders.

MADAME. Persian Princes had a constant Monitor to remember them of Greek
affronts and injuries, may this Anniversary be your Remembrancer that all
Europe is engaged to your assistance; that you have a fate more noble impending
then to live in exile, or un revenged; that you have a Son, who, by his fiery
persecutions and Virtues, will, one day, make good in his examples, all which
is ever related of the most excellent Princes; That there is a Nation which
with infinite groans implores its restitution to Monarchy, its redemption from
Rebellion, in which it is fatally captivated and engulphed, and (which, MADAME,
deserves a Lower rank amongst those more Majestique concernments) let it be a
speaking testimony to the World, that J am (in Spite of all Revolutions
occasioned by Thieves, Rebels, and Regicid^s.)

Your MAJESTY'S, and all your Royal Fami^i^^ Most humble, and never changeable
Servant Subject, S. C.

ALLEGIANCE TO THE MEMORY OF OUR LATE MURDERED SOVEREIGN CHARLES THE I.
SUch was the Pride of Murder in our loss,
To dubbe the Scaffold equal to the Cross.
Since the world's Crucifixe; all butcheries
The Jury finds Chance-Medley, unto this.
The Primitive and Modern Martyrs all,
Members of CHARLES his Body Mystical.
The universal Bill of Martyrdom,
In him, contracted to a Total Sum.
It Is thought thy Savior, only Priest, would dye,
And leave his Kingly sufferings to thee.
In Life and Death his Viceroy, as if all
His Offices were Hypostaticall.
How durst they think he mortal was, or say
He less then Angels, were assumed Clay?
Fooled Tyrant Wretches who believe him dead,
Who from Humanity but vanished.
Faith being weak, a Demonstration's He,
To loose the Riddle of Theanthrophie.
To all Religious understanding Eyes,
Humanity was but his Late disguise.
But so much Deity may justly grudge,
To be condemned, and Barrabas his Judge.
When every drop of Blood he shed, was much
Too precious, to redeem the Souls of such.
For had old ADAM spawned no better seed,
The Eternal Son had never lived or dyed.
If his Posterity had all been such,
The blood of Bulls and Goats had been too much.
Lord, was it not enough, thy self to dye,
But thou must suffer too by Deputy?
Who his pure Breath a prey to Villains gave,
Not worthy to be Sextons to his Grave.
Shov'ling his Monarchy, as if it must
Follow like Earth to Earth, and Dust to dust.
How will the Hoogen Chandlers scorn our fate,
When HEWSON vampes and underlayes the State?
When PRIDE in Ale, and Dray-man Buffe shall sing
I Have slain Goliath with a Small-Beere Sling.
And drawn out Royalty so near the Lee,
This Hand must tappe a well hopp'd Anarchie.
Their Babby- General is a fine thing,
Such I have seen, in Childrens feastings, King.
Whose bloody Treasons only him engage
As Obligation sealed under age.
Now all is dispatched; were he demanded why
He must send Post to CROMWELL for a Lie.
It Is time to pass from this infernal host,
From whom I rise as from the Nethermost:
And pass, as through a Purgatory flame,
To a prepared Bliss in CHARLES his Name.
Whilst I with trembling and Religious care,
Do go unto my mourning, as my Prayer.
I do repent, I have profaned his Hearse,
And Sacred Ashes, with un-hallow'd Verse.
To whom, as one Religious Votarie,
Three Pilgrim Kingdoms owe their Piety.
Though Saint's too mean a Name for him, we know
His Virtues Canonized him below:
In Navigation, as the Mariner
Steer's not by the Pole, but by the nearest Star.
So that devotion erres not from the Text
Which he inspires, whose Virtue was the next;
So far the same, they differ not at all,
But as the Copy from the Original.
GOD did to him so much his Likeness deal,
'T might seem his second Precept to repeal.
Whose indisputable Divinity,
None (but this Arrian army) dares deny.
And now, to view his Constellation,
Sadduces yield a Resurrection.
So he all Heresies seems to confute,
Which, at his Masters death, were in dispute.
Clothed now with Light no Contrary he knows,
Except the utter darkness of his Foes.
What Comets should have ushered his fall,
Do wait as Torches at his Funeral.
He so be-dayes the Night, the Astrologer
That GOD has snuff'd the Firmament does swear.
He appears not only Star to every sense,
But Sphere; and he his own Intelligence.
So glorious, that this Riddle he begets,
The Sun then solely rises when he sets.
Whose Guide his saving light is, ere they rest
Shall over-take the Wisemen of the East.
Who so his wisdoms just Admirer is,
Says Solomon's was Typical to his.
Had they, and Shebah's Queen, lived at one time,
With what desire would she have Cuckol'd Him!
Although his Continence was so divine,
He it alone embraced as Concubine.
A Vestall might have layne with Him in Bed,
And rise with her Religious Mayden-head.
How did he in St. Michael's Angell-vein
Confute those Devils which durst him arraigne!
If we the Muster-roll of Virtues call,
The Name of CHARLES may answer for them all.
As what we attribute to God must be
It self, the absolute Divinity.
So Reason coupled with morality,
This Definition gets that they were he.
Who now for either seeks (he being spent)
Without a Substance looks for Accident.
But, as the Sun sets only unto Us,
And never shines himself less glorious,
Our Sol's eclipse was to improve his Light,
But smother us in an Egyptian Night.
As Earthquakes do destroy from Mile to mile,
And fast foundations Filip Cross and Pile,
The Center yet being never stirred at all;
So we (not CHARLES) are bruised in his Fall.
His Execution was his Subject's Pain,
They lost their King, and yet their King does reign
Not as a Deaths-head Shell, or a Gravestone,
Memento's are for Mortals of their own.
In this sad Paper every one may see,
His Epitaph, in his own Elegy.
Without a Contradiction 't may be said,
Though he did Dye, not he, but we are Dead.
What dying life is ours, that He must dye,
And we, that do survive him, Putrify?
But stay his Urne is warm; and, at his Name,
His Ashes start, and wake into a flame.
Through all the Shop of sublunary things,
Two are immortal, Phoenixes, and Kings.
Like Angels, each a Species, makes alone,
Yet neither dies without Succession.
Draw, draw, great Son; and let thy thirsty Steel,
Their Bowels tappe till thy full vengeance reele.
Ride like a Whirlwind driving on the flood,
That Thames may know no full Sea, but of blood.
He that not follows may he drown in the Stream
Till brave Revenge has swept the Land so clean
That all thy blasted Enemies we see,
Like Sodomes Apples rot upon the tree.
And Travelers praise thy Executions,
For Paving Road-wayes with the Rebels Bones.
FIN.

