MARRIAGE-MUSICK or Nuptial-duties, directed in a fatherly Admonition, to
William Beard and Sarah Whiskard, by Z. C. their fatherly friend.
THE PREFACE.
William and Sarah; both my children dear:
Unto the words that I shall speak give ear:
Providence (still guiding the Creation)
You has joined; in Natures next relation:
Since hand is joined in hand; let your heart
In no condition from each other part.
SECT. I.
God that brought you into this relation;
Fall down before with daily adoration:
The glory of his Name esteem most dear:
Let all your ways be guided by his fear:
His People prize, to them associate;
They will upon you blessings supplicate.
SECT. II.
Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
Marriage is the explaining History
Of Union with Christ; that dark mystery.
Heb. 13.4
Marriage is an estate of Honor:
Stain you 't not with spot of least dishonor.
Marriage for joint help, Genesis 2.20.
the Deity designed:
To burden bear, your strength must be combined.
SECT. III.
That of this state, you may reap the comforts:
Live each with other, as Christian Consorts.
Adhering each to other, Mar. 19.5.
as faithful Doves:
Delighting each the other with chaste Loves.
Checking, cheering, counselling each other;
Duly praying, each with and for the other.
The duties all, of this relation near;
Yield each to other with affection dear.
Crosses, and the cares of this condition:
Prepare your selves to bear; with submission
Affections quicken, but your passions curb:
Those duty spur; these heart and house disturb.
SECT. IV.
And now, Prove. 18.22.
my son; the wife that thou have gained,
Receive as favor from the Lord obtained.
In her alone, (of thy youth the glory)
Delight, Prove. 5.19 20.
let it be her chiefest Dowry
Thee to enjoy; in Natures sweet communion:
1 Cor. 7.3
And all the effects of this endeared Union.
Thy wise to counsel, Numb. 30 6.8, 11, 13 14.
contradict, command;
God thee allows; as Lord, Head, Husband.
In all those actions, see that thou approve;
Ephesians. 5.23 v. 25.
The Leading-Line, to be thy dearest Love:
Love renders meek; all thy contradiction.
Love courts, Col. 3.19
cudgels not; enjoined submission.
Loving counsels, will be curtain Lectures:
Serious, not passionate conjectures.
Love is the limit of Sovereignty:
Prohibiting all cruel tyranny.
Thou art her Lord: Give with full affection,
This thy wife; all cherishing protection.
Thy servants and thy children subject make
To her, that of thy power may well partake:
Thou 'rt her Head: all wants of her condition,
Ephesians. 5.29.
Supply with all nourishing Provision.
She Is vessel weak, 1 Pet. 3.7.
her honor still repair;
For that she is, of Christian grace an heir.
On loving duty, if Comment thou do crave;
Review thy self; Ephesians. 5.28.
a Pattern thou shall have
Conformity to this, 1 Pet. 3.7.
speaks thy knowledge:
Thy wife constrains, thy Headship to acknowledge
SECT. V.
My daughter, dear, to thee I now apply
My counsel; unto which thy heart must ply:
Rebecaah-like, Genesis 24.
thou have with diligence
Forsaken friends, to follow Providence.
This lesson's well learned; take out another:
Thy heart give husband more; less to brother.
God has decreed him the object of thy desire; Genesis 3.16

Him only to enjoy do thou aspire.
Sarah, play Sarah's part, 1 Pet. 3.5
give reverence
To this thy Lord; who has pre-eminence
'Bove thee; by the Law of God and Nature:
Yield thou it him in heart, word gesture.
His counsels hear, Ephesians. 5.22.
contradictions bear,
Commands obey, Col. 3.16.
in all submissive fear:
Usurp not on him, 1 Pet. 3.1.2. 3.4.
left authority,
To him submit with all alacrity.
Nature's God this duty has assigned thee;
This chastisement justice has designed thee.
God made Adam first in the Creation; 1 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13, 14.

And placed Eve in this subject relation;
Justice found Eve first in the Transgression;
For 't assigned her; this submisse affliction:
Let thy obedience ever spring from Love: Titus 2.4.

Its a principle will carry thee above
Difficulties: causing thee consider;
Though he command, 1 Samuel 25 18, 19.
thou may counsel tender.
His state to guide, to mutual comfort;
Thy self approving a Prove 19 14.
prudent Consort.
His secret counsels to thy self reserve
The honor of's bed and board with care preserve.
In all estates be of him most tender,
To his household, portions duly render:
Thy hand and maids with diligence employ: Prove. 31. from v. 10 to the end of
the chapter

That penury may not his house annoy;
A meek and quiet spirit, (which in Gods sight,
As pearl of greatest prize does shine most bright,)
Possess: 1 Pet. 3.4
it will dull thy husbands passions,
And attract to thee his full affections.
These duties well discharged will give the fame,
To thee of Sar' and Scripture-matrons name,
Whose pattern thou must with care cut after,
As thou desir'st to be deemed their daughter.
EPILOGVE
These duties now, my children dear, I charge
You well consider, and the same discharge;
The joint discharge of them will plainly show,
You both inherit Grace that Gospel-dew, 1 Pet. 3.7.

You will be to others a living story,
To your selves a crown of constant glory: Prove. 12.4

Your prayers then shall not be interrupted;
No, nor comforts of your state corrupted:
The object of my hope and intercession,
For you will be Abram and Sarahs portion.
Then will I pray
And daily say Psalm. 128 Bartons Translation.

Blessed are all that fear the Lord,
And walk as God commands,
For thou shall eat the plenty stored
By labors of thy hands;
All welfare shall to thee betide,
And happy be thy life;
Like fruitful vine on thy house side,
Lo, such shall be thy wise.
Thy children round about thy board,
Like plants of Olive Tree,
Behold the man that fears the Lord,
Thus blessed shall he be;
From Zion God shall prosper thee
And bless thee every way;
And thou Jerusalem's good shall see
Unto thy dying day.
Yea, with great joy thou shall behold
A plentiful increase;
Of childrens children (being old,)
And Isreal's published peace.

