PROPOSAL, By Doctor Hugh Chamberlen, For a Land Credit, presented to the
Parliament, By the Committee, to whom it was referred to be Considered.
PRimo, That by an Act of Parliament, The Sum of 300000 lib. sterling, should
be struck, and made current in Talleys or Notes, of different Denominations.

Secundo, That an Office, consisting of private Persons, should be appointed by
the Parliament, for lending these Talleys out at 5 percent, upon the best Land
Security.

Tertio, That the principal Sums borrowed in these Talleys, shall never be
repayed, only the Lands of such who borrow, shall be burdened with the said 5
per cent interest, for the space of 25 years.

Quarto. That four of the said five per cent interest, paid yearly in Talleys
shall be destroyed by the Office, so that at the end of 25 years or thereby,
there shall not be one Talley in the Kingdom.

Quinto. That one per cent of the said five of Interest, should be employed for
defraying the necessary Charge of the Office; Or, otherwise, as the Parliament
shall think Convenient.

An Example of this Proposal:
IF 300000 lib. sterling in Talleys, be lent out at five per cent Interest,
Then this Interest will Extend to 15000 lib. sterling yearly, of which 15000
lib. sterling. The Sum of 12000 lib: sterling being 4 of the said five per cent
shall be paid in Talleys and yearly destroyed by the Office, but the remaining
3000 lib. being one of the said 5 percent, shall go for defraying the necessary
Charges of the Office.

The Heretors who borrow the said 300000 lib. sterling, shall continue paying
punctually the said 5 per cent Interest for the same, during the space of 25
years, at the end of which Term their Land shall be free, and the principal
shall never be returned, for by destroying the foresaid 12000 lib. sterling
yearly of the Talleys, all shall be returned in the foresaid space of 25 years,
because 12000 multiplied by 25^ makes 300000. which is the complete Sum of the
Talleys.

The Honorable Estates of Parliament, may be pleased here to observe That the
Doctor does not limit this Proposal to a certain definit Sum, nor to a certain
limited time; for the Parliament, if they think it proper, may condescend upon
any Sum, greater, or lesser, to be repayed within any Term of years.


