two angels crowning a cockerel, which stands on the back of a lion, as the
lion lies on the ground GLORIA DEO. Finis coronat Opus.



ON The Crowing Cock And Lion Couchant, OR, A POEM To Express the Gallantry of
our Royal Chanticlere. The uncertainty of War and Cockfighting. The
Magnanimity of a brave General and Judicious Cocker: Writ on the NEWS of the
Surrender of NAMUR, in Incomium of Unparalleled Fortitude and true English
Valor, Recorded in the Parable of the Game Cock, to Congratulate His Majesty's
Happy Return to London, leaving future Success to the disposal of Divine
Providence.
THE King of Beasts does Couch and Tremble here,
And dreads the Challenge of our Chanticlere,
As Monsieur does our British Monarch fear.
The Epedemick Leo knew no Bound,
And would devour (even Satan like) around,
Till daring Russel caught him in his Pound.
His vain Ambition strikes at all above,
Would be Earths Emperor and the World's great Jove,
A Christian Monarch in a double Sense,
With Laws Divine and Humane can dispense,
Enslaves his Subjects, scorns all Piety,
Both to Promote and masque his Tyranny,
Interest his Idol is, his Money Charms,
The Power of War and Conquers more than Arms,
Heaven grant to King and Parliament such Coin,
That all may fight like us! like us may join
TO increase our Victories whilst his decline,
Thus the great Monarch's Pride, his vast desire,
Will like vain Phaeton in Flames expire,
With points of War he cannot well dispense,
Or dares to fight -- no; not in his defense?
But on Advantage with brave Insolence.
The innate Virtue of our Faiths Defender,
Makes Lewis l'Ore and great Forts Surrender,
Gallus Gallinaceus France his Dunghill Cock,
With Poop unsavory and Langue-Dock,
To our Game Warrior is obliged to knock,
Some love to set their Neighbors by the Ears,
But dread a change when horred Death appears,
Proud Kings and Tyrants, Athist, God deny,
Prove greatest Cowards when they come to dye,
So Gallick Cock, once tried by narrow heel
Of Brittain's Chanticleres (as true as steel,)
Will start and dance (like Crow in Gutter strut,)
And give his head for Cock's-Comb to be cut,
With fallen Hackle Courage down must creep,
Shoot Pit by Land and strike Sail on the deep,
We dread no Colors, scorn all Aesop's Breed,
And stomachs have to fight as well as feed,
Whilst God's with us proud Lucifer must bleed,
Ride Triumph over his Coasts the Name of Wills,
Make Monsieur scamper on their own Dunghils,
And send Victorious Echoes to their Hills,
We Crowing stand with shrill and louder cries
Then e're was Eccow'd yet from rended Skies,
Our Youth and Fortitude speak Victories.
Our Royal Cock in Battle takes delight
To stimulate his Combitants to Fight,
We hit at Sparring Blows, but French Sa, Sa,
Is a short flying flurt, English Huzza
Makes Lions tremble, great ones run away,
And Forts Impregnable our Arms obey.
France showed their Teeth and meanly did oblige
Our Conquest to attest not raise the Siege,
Whilst Villeroy with many thousand Men,
Did as they wont, march down the Hill again,
Like Nero, viewed the Flames, never struck a stroke,
To Our Haughtboys Danced and vanished in Smoke.
When our Great Victor bravely crossed the Boyn,
Where French and Irish did against him join;
He viewed their Arms, and boldly said, March on;
No sooner said, but he the Battle won.
Thus Royal Presence, with true Courage clad,
Vanquished his Foes, and made his Subject glad.
Gallick Bellona, like the Grecian Dame,
Astonished at Namur's most dreadful Flame,
Yielded the Fort, but did her Flowers retain,
In hopes of Resurrection from the Main.
Where e're Great William does in Arms appear,
The Flower-de-Luces fade, the Mightiest fear.
England's Plumed Hero will hold out to the end,
As well-bred Steed upon the Spur will mend;
Give Stab for Stab, both weak expiring lie
Will yet look Blows within each others Eye.
A well-bred Branch of War will not refuse
To Fight, although (by chance) the best may loose.
Sometimes the knockt-down Foe (dead in a Trance)
Hazards a Blow, and makes the Devil dance.
And then the Ten-pound Bett he does confound;
The Battle wins, with Honor he is Crowned;
Even after Death he sent the nicking Blow,
And left in Honor's Bed his Bleeding Foe.
Great Odds were lost when Fortunatus Fought it,
And gave the Bag unto a Who-had-thought-it.
But lo! Namur's Re-gained; not by a Chance,
By Blows, true Fight, God's Wrath Impending France,
Our Victor's Trumpets make Grand Mounsieur dance.
WILLIAM's the Cock of Game, who bids Defy on
Most Christian Monarch, Turk and Roaring Lion.
Bouflieurs at Head on's Arms, at Royal Pleasure,
Is made a Pledge to Ransom England's Treasure.
Our Albion Sons of Mars, are by good Fate,
Now free to March, nay Enter Paris Gate,
Whilst Gallick Tyrant may prove Abdicate.
To the King of Kings French Jupiter must quake,
When English Arms does make all Europe shake.
Our Hackles tite, the Lyon's Tail is down;
An ominous Presage to the French King's Crown.
We treat with Sword in Hand, will hear no Truce;
Wait Heaven's Fiat, for the Flower-de-Luce.
When Swords to Plowshares turn, who wins the Crown?
A Conqueror Revived stands on Renown.
THERE was of late, and from the German Stock,
A large and beautiful, but wondrous Cock:
A spacious Orange did his Crest adorn,
From whence there issued out (at top) a Horn.
While yet that Prince, who does his glorious Name,
From that known Title, by his Valor claim;
And had not yet acquired by his Sword,
That nobler Style of Albion's Great Lord,
This lived. But when Great William took our Throne,
It languish'd, and straight died -- Fate here does own
By this strange Omen, that the Brave Nassaw,
Who only once did keep the Dutch in awe;
Now in possession of a Diadem,
Those smaller Dominations should Contemn.
The Prince, who set a mighty King, does rise
A true Asserter of our Liberties.
The N-E-W-S must spread, that France, who aimed at all
And did design to bring our World in Thrall,
With soaring Icarus (...).
The CONCLUSION.
THE Covetous, and most Opinionate,
Often meet in the Fortune's frowns; the Gamester great
Judiciously can Cock above Cross Fate,
And wants not Courage to be Fortunate.
Fortitude never fails Bold Britain's Cocker,
And is as serviceable to Love's Smocker.
But He (by Heaven) is called to fight God's Cause,
Preserve Religion, Liberties and Laws;
Over Death and Satan Croweth, and shall be
The World's Grand Victor to Eternity.
The Man of God, whose Sword at Trumpet sounds,
Victorious Triumphs writes in Blood and Wounds,
With Peace and Plenty Christendom abounds.
The Loyal Wish.
MAY Fate with Honor, and with Laurels Crown
Our Mighty HERO, till his vast Renown,
Through all the Spacious Globe his Worth resound.
May his Victorious Arms extend as far,
As from the Eastern, to the Western Star;
Till He with Glory to his Albion come,
Like Great Augustus, to Victorious Rome:
And thus to us in Triumph does advance,
From the Saved Netherlands, and Conquered France.
AMEN.
Finis Coronat Opus.
Epigram.
IN Eighty-Eight, Spain sent a Vast Armado;
In Ninety-Two the French made their Bravado.
The Attempt of both did equally prove vain;
France bragged as much, and lost no less than Spain.
Grand Lewis Royal Sun is Set at last,
And Namur all their Daylight overcast.
By a True Cocker, And no less Loyal Subject. Gerrard Cater, Esquire;


