A Brief REMEMBRANCER, OR, The Right IMPROVEMENT OF CHRIST'S BIRTHDAY.
THe Glorious Day does now begin to dawn;
Now is the Curtain of thick darkness drawn:
Now does the Lord of all things condescend
To take up in a Stable, and be penned
Within a dirty Manger: Now you are blessed
Ignorant Inn with this most Glorious Guest.
And now the Savior of the World's revealed
From Heaven to Shepherds watching in the Field.
The Glory of an Angel did surround them:
The Glory was so great, it did confound them.
Fear not, said he, perceiving them afraid,
Fear not all, be not at all dismayed:
It Is Joyful Tidings that I come to bring,
This Day is born your Sav'our and your King;
In Bethlehem you will find it as I said,
The Babe's wrapped up, and in a Manger laid.
And hardly had the Angel made an end,
But there whole Quires of Angels did attend
That King with Hallelujahs to adore,
That sits on the Throne for evermore.
Glory to God on High, Peace on the Earth,
Good will to Men they Sung with holy Mirth.
Then ran the Shepherds to the Town, and saw
Mary and Joseph, and the Babe in Straw.
They filled the Town with Fame; and their Relation
Filled all that heard the same with Admiration.
But Mary pondr'd all things in her Heart:
And they with Joy and Praise to God depart.
Him at the Time prefixed they circumcised,
Naming Him Jesus, as they were advised.
Some Five Weeks after that, his Parents went
Up to Jerusalem him to present.
Now while they were in the Temple, came to them
Old upright Simeon of Jerusalem.
Who by the Spirit had been certifi'd
Of seeing God's Anointed, ere de died.
Filled with the Holy Ghost he came in have,
And in his Arms that Holy Child embraced.
Now let thy Servant Lord (said he) decease
According to thy holy Word in Peace;
For I have seen the thing I waited for,
Now I have seen my LORD my Savior.
Anna, a Proph'tess also thither came
To render Praise and Glory to his Name,
Affirming Jesus to be Christ, to them
That waited for him at Jerusalem.
The Wisemen from the East enquire for one
Born amongst them to sit on Judah's Throne:
We Have seen said they the Star of your Great King,
And came to worship with our offering.
Herod's Amazed with this strange sudden News,
With all the Learned Rabbis of the Jews:
And having asked the Hebrew Doctors, where
Messiah should be Born? 'twas made appear
That Beth'lem was the Place: from Bethlehem
Micah sends forth this Ruler over them.
Then Herod, after private Conference
About the Star's appearing, sent them thence:
Desiring them to search and find him out,
Then to Return, and tell him where about.
But warned of God to flee the Tyrant, they
Returned home again another way.
But seeing he was mocked, in cursed Fury
Resolves the Death of every Child in Jury.
But the all-piercing Eye this secret views,
And unto Joseph swiftly sends the News.
Up (said the Angel) Take the Child, and's Mother;
This place is not secure, go seek another.
Herod has Murderous thoughts, his rage is stirred,
Go dwell in Egypt, till I bring you word.
Joseph obeyed, and there he stayed, till thence
God called his Son, as he had done long since.
Christ's four Houses.
His first House was the Blessed Virgin's Womb;
The next a Cratch, the third a Cross, the fourth a Tomb.
We often read our blessed Savior wept;
But never laughed, and seldom that he slept:
Ah sure his heavy Eyes did wake and weep
For us that sin, so often, in mirth and sleep.
O thou that were the King of Heaven and Earth,
How mean was thy Attendance at thy Birth!
A Manger was thy Cradle, and a Stable
Thy Privy Chamber, Marys Knees thy Table.
Thieves were thy Courtiers, and the Cross thy Throne.
Thy Diet Gall; A wreath of Thorns thy Crown;
All this the King of Glory endured and more,
To make us Kings that Rebels were before.
Faith in this Jesus is the substance of things not seen, and the Evidence of
things hoped for: By which Faith Abel offered, Enoch was Translated, Noah
warned and prepared an Ark, to the saving of him, and his condemning the World;
Abraham by this Faith, when called obeyed, and was a Sojourner in the Land of
Promise; Through Faith Sarah conceived when she was past Age; After this
Abraham being tried offered up Isaac; By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau
concerning things to come; By Faith Jacob when he was dying blessed the Sons of
Joseph; By Faith Joseph when he dyed made mention of the departure of Israel
out of Egypt. By Faith Moses when he was born, was hid, and at Age refused to
be called the Son of King Pharaoh's Daughter, rather choosing to suffer
affliction with God's Israel in affliction; For the Esteem of the reproach of
Christ, he forsook Egypt, kept the Passover, passed through the Red Sea. By
Faith the Walls of Jericho fell, and Rahab the Harlot by Faith escaped. Faith
upheld Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jephtha, David, Samuel, and the Prophets, who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of Fire, etc. Women received their dead raised to life,
others were tortured, others tried with cruel mockings and scourgings, others
were stoned, sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword; And others wandered
about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of
whom the World was not worthy; they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and
in Dens and Caves of the Earth, and these all obtained a Good Report through
Faith in this Jesus.

Let the perished unbelieving Israelites mind you of Infidelity, and the
condition of fallen Angels reserved in chains awake you, the suffering Sodomites
in eternal fire affright you to leave off these spots of feeding without fear,
of drinking without measure: foam not out your own shame; Leave off ungodly
Deeds, hard Speeches, rash Censures; Mock not at Piety, but hate the Garment
spotted by the Flesh; Oh all you that pretend to keep Christ's time and to
observe Christ's Day, be in love with Christ's Ways and Worship, which is in
Spirit and Truth.

Collected by T. C.
Reader, there is Lately Extant Divine Examples of God's severe Judgments upon
Sabbath Breakers in their unlawsul Sports, Collected out of several Divine
Subjects, viz, Mr. H. B. Mr. Beard, and the Practice of Piety: A fit Monument
for our present Times, etc.

Licensed and Entered According to Order

London Printed by E. T. and R. H. for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in S.
Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North door. 167^


