A Challenge, by the Divines of the Army, to the Divines of Sion-Colledge:
Concerning THE LEAGUE AND COVENANT.
Every Plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up
Math. 15.13.
IN your Exhortation for taking the Covenant, it is said; That Oaths not
warranted by the Laws of God and the Land, call for Repentance and not
Pertinacy (in those that have taken them) and consequently, ^^ey are not to be
taken by others.

Hence we make this Quere:

By what Law of God and the Land, respectively, the Noble men, Barons, Knights,
Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all
sorts, in the kingdoms, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, are Warranted,
without, and against, the Command of their Respective King, to enter into
League, and to Swear and Covenant, to Intermeddle of themselves Mutually in
each kingdom in point of Religion, to Alteration (as in the first Article) And
to Extirpation (as in the second Article) And in point of the Privileges of
the Parliaments and of the Liberties of the several Kingdoms, and of the
person and Authority of the King in each kingdom (as in the third Article)
And of the Conjunction of the kingdoms in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity (as in the fifth Article) And to assist and defend, in each kingdom,
all those that adhere to them (as in the sixth Article) And to bring to condign
punishment, in each Kingdom, all that oppose them (as in the fourth Article)
And lastly, To encourage the People of other States and Churches to join in
the same, or like Association and Covenant (as in the Conclusion thereof.)

The Challenge upon the Quere.
NOw if you can clearly set forth, The Law of God and the Land respectively
warrantiug this Covenant, We also will readily take it: If you cannot
(according to your own Principles) Repent, that you have taken it, and
exhorted others to take it, and that at this time you press the observing and
keeping of it.

How much better were it (after his Majesty's return to the Parliament, which
we both seem to desire) That the differences in Religion be freely debated and
stated by us in a public Convention (as the Civil differences are like to be
in Parliament) And all established according to the results of Truth and
Justice, rather then to be prejudged by you, and your unwarranted, and to be
repented of; English-Scottish-Irish Covenant.

As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do you also resist the Truth: but
you shall proceed no farther, for your folly shall be manifest to all men, as
theirs also was. Tim. 1.3.9.

You are blind leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the Ditch. Mat 15.13.

And let all your Party know, that after this Conviction, it is not as you
Preach, Fidelity and Constancy; but as your Exhortation declares, Pertinacy and
Obstinacy for them to pursue or own this illegal and unjustifiable League and
Covenant.

And if they sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sins. But a certain fearful looking for,
of judgment and fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. Heb.
10.26.27.


