HIS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT: Thursday,
October 21. 1680.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Swintoun, one of His MAJESTY'S Printers: Anno
DOM. 1680.

HIS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Thursday, October 21, 1680. My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE several Prorogations I have made, have been very Advantageous to Our
Neighbors, and very Useful to Me: For I have employed that time in making and
perfecting an Alliance with the Crown of Spain, suitable to that I had before
made with the States General of the United Provinces, and they also had with
Spain, consisting of mutual Obligations of Succor and Defense: I have all the
reason in the World to believe, that what was so much desired by former
Parliaments, must needs be very grateful to you now; for though some perhaps
may wish, those Measures had been taken sooner, yet no Man can with Reason
think, that it is now too late; for they who desire to make those, and they who
desire to break them, show themselves to be of another Opinion.

And as These are the best Measures that could be taken, for the Safety of
England, and the Repose of CHRISTENDOM, so they cannot Fail of their End; And
to Spread and Improve Themselves farther; if Our Divisions at Home, do not
render Our Friendship less Considerable Abroad.

To prevent These as much as may be, I think fit, to Renew to You, all those
Assurances which can, be Desired, that Nothing shall be wanting on My Part, to
give You the fullest Satisfaction Your hearts can wish, for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, which I am fully Resolved to Maintain against all the
Conspiracies of Our Enemies; and to Concur with You in any Thing which shall be
Proposed, that may Consist with the Preserving the Succession of the Crown, in
its Right and Legal Course of Descent.

And in Order to this, I do Recommend it to You, to Pursue the Farther
Examination of the Plot, with a Strict and Impartial Enquiry. I do not think My
Self safe, nor You neither, till that Matter be gone Through-with: And
therefore it will be Necessary, that the Lords in the Tower may be brought to a
Speedy Trial, that Justice may be done.

I need not tell you what Danger the City of Tangier is in; Nor of what
Importance it is to Us to Preserve.

I Have with a Mighty Charge and Expense, sent a very Considerable Relief
thither; But constantly to Maintain so great a Force as that War will require,
and to make these New-Works, and Fortifications; without which the Place will
not long be Tenable, Amounts to so vast a Sum, that without Your Support, it
will be Impossible for me to undergo it. Therefore, I lay the Matter Plainly
before You, and desire your Advice and Assistance. But that which I value above
all the Treasures in the World, and which I am sure, will give Me greater
Strength and Reputation, both Home and Abroad, then a Treasure can do, is a
perfect Union amongst Our Selves. Nothing but this can restore the Kingdom to
that Strength and Vigor which it seems to have lost, and raise Us again to that
Consideration which England has usually had. All EUROPE has their Eyes upon
this Assembly, and think their Own Happiness, or Misery, as well as Our's, will
depend upon it.

If We then be so unhappy, as to fall into such a Misunderstanding amongst Our
Selves, as would render Our Friendship unsate to trust to, it will not be to be
wondered at, if Our Neighbors should begin to take Resolutions, and perhaps
such as may be Fatal to Us.

Let Us therefore take care, that we do not Gratify Our Enemies, and
discourage^ our Friend, by any unseasonable Disputes.

If any such do Happen, the World will see it was no fault of Mine; For I have
done all that was possible for Me to do, to keep You in Peace while I live, and
leave you so when I Dye.

But from so great Prudence, and so good Affections as Yours, I can fear
nothing of this kind; But do Rely upon You all, that You would use your best
Endeavors to bring this Parliament to (...) good and happy Conclusion.

CHARLES REX.

FINIS.

