His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH Together with the Lord Chancellors, To both
Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Monday, October 27. 1673.

By His Majesty's special command.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by ANDREW ANDERSON, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1673.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thought this day to have welcomed You with an honorable Peace; My
preparations for the War, and Condescentions at the Treaty, gave Me great
reason to believe so; but the Dutch have disappointed Me in that expectation,
and have treated My Ambassadors at Cologne, with the Contempt of Conquerors,
and not as might be expected from men in their Condition.

They have other thoughts then Peace.

This obliges Me to move you again for a Supply, the Safety and Honor of the
Nation necessarily requiring it: It must be one proportionable to the Occasion;
and I must tell you besides, that if I have it not speedily, the Mischief will
be irreparable in My preparations for the next Spring: The Great Experioene I
have had of you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, will not suffer Me to
believe, that the Artifices of Our Enemies can possibly divert you from giving
Me this Supply, or that you canfail of adjusting the proportion of it.

I hope I need not use many words to persuade you that I am steady in
maintaining all the Professions and Promises I have made you concerning
Religion and Property: And I shall be very ready to give you fresh instances of
My Zeal, for preserving the established Religion and Laws, as often as any
occasion shall require.

In the last place, I am highly concerned to commend to your consideration and
Care the Debt I owe the Goldsmiths, in which very many other of My good
Subjects are involved; I heartily recommend their condition to you, and desire
your assistance for their relief.

There is more that I would have you informed of, which I leave to the
Chancellor.

THE Lord Chancellors SPEECH To Both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons.
HIs Majesty had reason to expect, That He mould have (...) you (...)
Olive Branch of Peace: His Naval Preparations, greater then in any former
years, together with the Land Forces He had ready for any Occasion, gave Him
assurance to obtain it before this time. And the rather, because His aims were
not Conquest, unless by obstinacy enforced; But His Condescentions at the
Treaty have been so great, That the very Mediators have declared they were not
reasonably to be refused. He could not be King of Great Britain without
securing the Dominion and Property of His Own Seas; The first by an Article
clear and not elusory of the Flagg; The other by an Article that preserved the
right of the Fishing, but gave the Dutch permission, as Tenants, under a small
Rent, to enjoy, and continue that gainful Trade upon His Coasts. The King was
obliged, for the Security of a lasting Peace, as also by the Laws of Gratitude,
and Relation, to see the House of Orange settled, and the Lovestein, that
Carthaginian party, brought down. Neither in this did the King insist beyond
what was moderate, and agreeable to their Government: And what the Princes
ancestors enjoyed amongst them. Besides these, there was necessary to the Trade
of England, that there should be a fair Adjustment of Commerce in the
East Indies; where the Kings Demands were reasonable, and according to the Law
of Nations; and their Practice of late years has been Exorbitant, and
Oppressive, suitable only to their Power and Interest, and destructive, if
continued, to our East-India-Company. These were all, of any moment, the King
insisted on; as judging aright, That that Peace that was reasonable, just, and
fair to both parties, would be sacred and durable. And that by this means, He
should depress the Interest, and Reputation of that Lovestein party amongst
them, who sucked in with their milk an inveterate hatred to England, and
transmit it to their posterity, as a distinguishing Character, wherein they
place their Loyalty to their Country. In return to this Candid, and fair
proceeding on the Kings part, His Majesty assures you he has received nothing,
but the most scornful, and contemptuous treatment imaginable; Papers delivered
in to the Medatiors, owned by them to bestuffed with so unhandsome Language,
that they were ashamed and refused to show them. Never agreeing to any Article
about the Flagg, that was clear or plain: Refusing any Article of the Fishing,
but such a one, as might sell them the right of Inheritance, for an
inconsiderable sum of money, though it be a Royalty so inherent in the Crown of
England, that I may say, (with His Majesty's pardon for the Expression) He
cannot sell it. The Article of the Prince of Orange, and the Adjustment of the
East-India-Trade had neither of them any better success; And to make all of a
piece, they have this last week sent a Trumpetter with an Address to His
Majesty, being a deduction of their several Offers of Peace, as they call them,
and their desires for it now; but it is both in the Penning and the Timeing of
it, plainly an Appeal to His Majesty's People against Himself; And the King
has commanded me to tell you, He is resolved to join issue with them, and
Print both their Address, and His Answer, that His People and the World may see
how notorious falsehoods and slights they endeavor to put upon Him. In a word,
in England, and in all other Places, and to all other Persons of the World,
they declare they offer all things to obtain a Peace from the King of England:
But to Himself, His Ministers, the Mediators, or His Plenipotentiaries, it may
with confidence and truth be affirmed, that to this day; nay, even in this last
Address they have offered nothing. They desire the Kings Subjects would believe
they beg for Peace, whilst their true request is, only to be permitted to be
once Masters of the Seas; Which they hope, if they can subsist at Land, length
of time may give them: And if once got, is never to be lost; Nor can it be
bought by any State or Empire, at too great a rate. And what Security their
Agreement with us in Religion will afford when they shall have the Power,
former Instances may give Demonstration of. Joint Interests have often secured
the Peace of differing Religions, but agreeing Professions has hardly an
example of preserving the Peace of different Interests.

This being the true and natural state of things, His Majesty does with great
assurance throw Himself into the Arms of You His Parliament, for a Supply
suitable to this great Affair He is engaged in. When you consider we are an
Island, it is not Riches nor Greatness we contend for; yet those must attend the
Success; But it is our very Beings are in question: We sight (...) and (...) in
this (...). We are no longer Freemen, being Islanders, and Neighbors, if they
Master us at Sea. There is not so lawful or commendable a jealousy in the
World, as an Englishmans, of the growing Greatness of any Prince or State at
Sea. If you permit the Sea, our British Wife, to be ravished, an eternal mark
of Infamy will stick upon us; Therefore I am commanded earnestly to recommend
to you not only the Proportion, but the Time of the Supply. For unless you
think of it early, it will not be serviceable to the chief end of setting out a
Fleet betimes the next Spring.

As for the next part of the Kings Speech, I can add nothing to what His
Majesty has said. For as to Religion, and Property, His heart is with your
heart, perfectly with your heart: He has not yet learned to deny you any
thing; and He believes your Wisdom and Moderation is such, He never shall. He
asks of you to be at Peace in Him, as He is in You, and He shall never deceive
you.

There is one word more, I am commanded to say concerning the Debt is owing to
the Goldsmiths. The King holds himself in Honor and Conscience obliged to see
them satisfied. Besides, you all know how many Widows, Orphans, and particular
persons, the public Calamity has overtaken; and how hard it is, that so
disproportionable a burden should fall upon them, even to their utter Ruin.
The whole Case is so well and generally known, that I need say no more. Your
great Wisdoms has not done it at the first, peradventure that the Trade of the
Banker might be suppressed; which end is now attained. So that now your great
Goodness may restore to those poor people, and the many innocent ones that are
concerned with them, some life and assurance of Payment in a competent time.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I have no more in command, and therefore shall
conclude with my own hearty Prayers, That this Session may equal, nay exceed
the honor of the last; That it may perfect what the last begun for the Safety
of this King, and Kingdom; That it may be ever famous for having established,
upon a durable Foundation, our Religion, Laws, and Properties; That we may not
be tossed with boisterous Winds, nor overtaken by a sudden dead Calm: But that
a gentle fair Gale may carry you in a steady, even, and resolved way into the
Ports of Wisdom and Security.

FINIS.

