HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION AGAINST THE FRENCH.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY,
1666.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION AGAINST THE FRENCH.
CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to (...) Our Lion, King at Arms, and his brethren
Heralds, Pursevants and Macers, conjunctly and severally specially constitute,
Greeting: Forasmuch as the French King pretending the execution of a Defensive
Treaty with the States General of the United Provinces, and thereby determining
Us to be the Aggressors and Invadors of them (the contrary of which is most
notoriously known to all the World) did on the 16/26 of January last declare
War against Our Subjects, making himself thus the Aggressor, and rendering the
Peace We have always desired with the said States more difficult, toward
which the French Kings Ambassadors never offered either satisfaction for past
Injuries done to Our Subjects, or a fair Regulation of the Commerce for the
future; We relying upon the help of GOD Almighty in the Justice of Our Cause,
and being assured of the Valor and Affection of Our Subjects in the Defense
thereof, have thought fit to Declare, and by these presents do Declare, That We
will oppose the French King, and vigorously prosecute this War which he has so
unjustly begun, with the utmost of Our Force by Sea and Land, in the
maintenance and defense of our Subjects; enjoining hereby Our right Trusty and
right Entirely beloved Cosen and Councellor John Earl of Rothes Our
Commissioner, and Commander in chief of all Our Forces in Our ancient Kingdom
of Scotland; and Our right Trusty and right Entirely beloved Cosen and
Councellor, Charles Duke of Lennox and Richmond, Our High Admiral of that Our
Kingdom, and all Officers and Soldiers under them both by Sea and Land, to
oppose all attempts of the French King or his Subjects, and to do and execute
all Acts of Hostility in the prosecution of this War against the French King,
his Vassals and Subjects; Willing and requiring all Our Subjects to take notice
of the same, whom We henceforth straightly forbid upon pain of Death, to hold
any Correspondence or Communication with the said French King or his Subjects
(those only excepted who are necessitated thereunto for the withdrawing their
Persons and Estates out of France.) And because there are remaining in Our
Kingdoms many Subjects of the French King, and likewise of the States General
of the United Provinces; We do declare and give Our Royal Word, That all such
of the French and Dutch Nations, as shall demean themselves dutifully toward
Us, and not correspond with Our Enemies, shall be safe in their Persons and
Estates, and free from all molestation and trouble of any kind. And further, We
do declare, That if any of the French or Low Country Subjects, either out of
affection to Us or Our Government, or because of the oppression they meet with
at home, shall come into Our Kingdoms, they shall be by Us protected in their
Persons and Estates, and especially those of the Reformed Religion, whose
interest shall ever be most particularly owned by Us.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twenty one day of February, 1666. and of
Our Reign the eighteenth year.
EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1666.


