His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, On the 29. day of
August, 1660. At the Passing of the ACT for FREE PARDON, INDEMNITY and
OBLIVION, And several other Acts.

PVblished at the desire of the Lords in Parliament, and by His Majesty's
Allowance.

Whereunto is annexed the SPEECH Which the Speaker of the House of Commons made
to the KING In the House of Lord's, at His Passing of the BILLS therein
mentioned, August 29. 1660.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, 1660.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
His MAJESTY'S Gracious SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament on the 29. day of
August 1660. at the passing of the Act of Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion,
and several other Acts.
My Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
I Have been here some times before with you, but never with more willingness,
than I am at this time: And there be few men in the Kingdom, who have longed
more impatiently to have these Bills passed, than I have done to pass them,
and I hope they will be the Foundation of much Security and Happiness to us
all.

I do very willingly pardon all that is pardoned by this Act of Indemnity, to
that time which is mentioned in the Bill; Nay, I will tell you, that from that
time to this day I will not use great severity, except in such cases where the
malice is notorious, and the public Peace exceedingly concerned. But for the
time to come, the same discretion and conscience which disposed me to the
clemency I have expressed, which is most agreeable to my Nature, will oblige me
to all rigor and severity, how contrary soever it be to my Nature, toward
those who shall not now acquiess, but continue to manifest their Sedition and
dislike of the Government, either in action or words. And I must conjure you
all (My Lords and Gentlemen) to concur with me in this just and necessary
Severity; and that you will in your several Stations be so jealous of the
public Peace, and of my particular Honor, that you will cause exemplary
justice to be done upon those who are guilty of seditious Speeches, or
Writings, as well as those who break out into seditious Actions: And that you
will believe those who delight in reproaching and traducing my Person, not to
be well affected to you and the public Peace. Never King valued himself more
upon the affections of His people than I do; nor do I know a better way to make
my self sure of your affections, than by being just and kind unto you all: And
whilst I am so, I pray let the world see that I am possessed of your affections.

For your Pole-Bill, I do thank you as much as if the money were to come into
my own Coffers; and wish with all my heart, that it may amount to as great a
sum as you reckon upon. If the work be well and orderly done to which it is
designed, I am sure I shall be the richer by it in the end; and upon my word,
if I had whrewithall, I would my Self help you, so much I desire the business
done. I pray very earnestly, as fast as Money comes in, discharge that great
burden of the Navy, and disband the Army as fast as you can, and till you can
disband the rest, make provision for their support.

I do conjure you, as you love Me, let Me not hear the noise of Free Quarter,
which will be imputed to My want of Care and Government, how innocent soever I
am; and therefore be sure you prevent it.

I am so confident of your affections, that I will not move you in any thing
that immediately relates to my Self, and yet I must tell you, I am not richer,
that is, I have not so much money in my Purse as when I came to you; the truth
is, I have lived principally ever since upon what I brought with Me, which was
indeed your money; for you sent it to Me, and I thank you for it. The weekly
expense of the Navy, eats up all you have given Me by the Bill of Tonage and
Poundage. Nor have I been able to give my Brothers one shilling since I came
into England, nor to keep any Table in My House but what I eat my Self. And
that which troubles Me most, is, to see many of you come to Me to Whitehall,
and to think that you must go some where else to seek your Dinner.

I do not mention this to you, as any thing that troubles Me, do but take care
of the public, and for what is necessary for the peace and quiet of the
Kingdom, and take your own time for my own particular, which I am sure you will
provide for with as much affection and francknesse as I can desire.

The Speech which the SPEAKER of the House of Commons made unto the King, the
29. of August, 1660.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
NOt many months since, England was but a great Prison, where the worst of men
were our Governors, and their vilest lusts the Laws by which they governed.

The great and most wise God, conveyed divine intelligence into Your patient
and pious Soul, and taught You how by suffering for us, to deliver us from our
sufferings; to knock off our shackles, and set Your people at liberty, when
neither Power, nor Policy could effect it. So soon as Your Majesty set Your
Foot upon Your English shore, our Prison was turned into a Paradise of
pleasure, and the whole Nation filled with Joy, and Love, and Peace.

Sir, This great Blissing is already registered in Your Peoples thankful
Hearts; and they desire that the memory thereof might be perpetuated; and
therefore they have laid it up amongst their choicest jewels, and annexed it to
their Magna Charta; which they are willing to pawn unto Your Majesty, upon
condition, when they forget this, to forfeit that and all.

Sir, Amongst Your many Illustrious Titles, which like fair and beautiful
flowers do adorn and be-deck Your Royal Crown, there is one exceeds and excels
all the rest, as well in Virtue as in Beauty, and that is Your Title of
Defender of the Faith. Sir, As that Title is Your Honor, so the truth of it, is
our happiness, Neither the highest Provocations, nor the strongest temptations,
that ever Prince met withal, have been able to shake Your Victorious Faith,
nor abate Your holy Zeal; witness Your first Act, after Your return to the
exercise of Your Regal Power, in Your early and timely suppressing Prophanenes,
and discountenancing Debaucht persons, who know not how to express their
thankfulness unto God for mercies, but by a sinful drinking them away, a
practice Your Soul abhors.

And as it is Your highest Honor, to be the Defender of that Faith which we
profess; so it is the greatest interest, prerogative, and Privilege Your
Majesty can be endowed and invested withal in this world, and will be Your
most lasting comfort in the world to come, That God who has hitherto been a
Sun to direct You, will be a shield to protect You; and that Faith which You
defend, will defend You against all Your enemies, maugre the malice of the
Devil, and all his wicked instruments.

Royal Sir,
Your eminent Virtue, and those excellent Qualifications that God has bestowed
upon You, to make You every way worthy and fit for Government, invites us at
this time, with joyful hearts, to make our humble addresses unto Your Majesty,
and to give You a cheerful account of our proceedings in this Parliam. wherein
we have spent our whole time upon public Bills; some we must confess of very
great concernment to Your Majesty, and all Your People, are not yet ripe, nor
brought to perfection: But though like an after-crop, yet with the fair weather
of Your Majesty's wonted patience, we hope likewise to Inn them well at last,
to Your Majesty's full satisfaction, and the great contentment of all Your
Loyal and Faithful Subjects

Some Bills are passed both Houses, and already lodged here, which attend and
wait for Your Majesty's Royal Assent, and I shall humbly beg the favor only
but to touch upon some of those of most public concernment, by the way, and in
transitu, to that Bill here in my hand.

Sir, There is one Bill now before You, entitled, An Act for the Confirmation
of Judicial Proceedings; the scope and intendment of that Bill, is to settle
Men's Estats, which is the way to quiet their minds; and when their minds are at
rest, there will be no fear of their breaking the Peace, or forfeiting their
good-behavior any more in time to come.

There is another Bill, entitled, An Act to prevent the taking of Excessive
Usury. The restraining men of avaritious minds, whose Consciences are as large
as their Bags, will be a great ease to Your People, and an inablment to Your
Merchants the better to go on with their Trades. They are the Laborious Bees
that bring in Honey into your Majesty's Hive; and Usurers are the lazy, idle
drones, that rob your Hive of the Honey.

There is another Bill, Entitled, An Act for a perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving to be observed and kept upon the 29. of May: A day that God
himself was pleased to honor and adorn with a new and additional Star, never
seen before nor since; a Star of rare aspect, which declared to all the world
at once, the happy news of your Majesty's Blessed Nativity: And as it was your
Majesty's Birthday, so it was the day of your Restoration to your Kingdoms,
Parliament, and People: And likewise the day of your Peoples re-Creation out of
a Chaos of confusion and misery. And therefore they humbly pray, That not only
we (for there would need no Act for that so long as we live) but that our
posterity, and the ages that shall succeed us, might for ever be obliedged to
set a part that day, as a holy day, to dedicate their Praises and thanksgivings
up unto Almighty God for his miraculous Deliverance of this poor Nation, when
it lay in dust and ashes, in a most miserable, desperate, forlorn and
deplorable condition.

There is another Bill, Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion. It may well be called a Free Pardon: for Your Majesty
was pleased to offer it before we had confidence enough to ask it, and at a
time when Your People had most need of it: And it may as truly be called a
General Pardon, in respect of the extensiveness of it. But looking over a long
black, prodigious, dismal Roll and Catalogue of Malefactors, we there meet not
with men, but Monsters guilty of Blood, Precious Blood, Precious Royal Blood,
never to be remembered without tears; incomparable in all the kinds of Villainy
that ever was acted by the worst of Miscreants, perverters of Religion,
subverters of Government, false to GOD, dissoyal to the best of Kings, and
perfidious to their Country: And therefore we found an absolute and
indispensable necessity incumbent upon us, to except and set some apart for
Treacle, to expel the poison of Sin and Rebellion out of others, and that they
might be made sacrifices to appease Gods wrath, and satisfy Divine justice.

And now I am come to that Bill here in my hand, which I am commanded humbly to
present Your Majesty withal.

Royal Sir, Your Commons, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now assembled in
Parliament, taking into consideration the great and unsupportable Burden of the
Armies and Navy, that Your people do now groan under; and knowing, as Money is
the sinews of War, so as the Sat of Affairs now stand, that it is likewise
the best Medium that can be used, in order to the attaining that end we have
all so much desired, and so long prayed for, The settlement of a happy Peace;
and therefore they have passed this Bill, Entitled, An Act for a speedy
Provision of Money, to pay off and disband all the Forces of this Kingdom both
by Sea and Land, upon which they hope such a Sum will be advanced and brought
in, as may be sufficient fully to discharge and dispatch that work. And they
humbly pray Your Majesty's gracious acceptance thereof, and Your Royal assent
thereunto.

I am further to inform and assure Your Majesty, that Your people have passed
another Supply and Revenue unto Your Majesty, which far surmounteth all they
have already done in value, and that is, their Hearts and Affections; having
their hearts, Your Majesty may command their purses.

Most Royal Sovereign, We have nothing more to offer, or to ask at this time,
but your Majesty's gracious favor, so soon as your Service, and the Public
Affairs will permit, that we might have leave to go into our Countries, where
we shall make your people sensible of their happiness, in having such a King to
govern and rule over them; and as we praise your Majesty, so likewise to pray
for your Majesty, that you may Live long, and Reign prosperously.

FINIS.

