C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation requiring all such as have any Office or Command in Ireland, to
make their speedy repair thither to attend their Employments.
WHEREAS diverse of Our Subjects that have Commands in Our Armies or Garrisons
in Our Kingdom of Ireland, and which have Offices or Places of trust or
public employment in that Kingdom from Us, and by Our Grant or appointment
touching the administration of Justice, and Government or Our Revenue there,
have of late years withdrawn themselves from their said Commands, Offices,
Places, and employments, and make their residence here in several parts of
this Our Kingdom of England or elsewhere, which We find at this time to be
prejudicial in a very extraordinary manner to the State of that Our Kingdom of
Jreland, and Our present Affairs there; Our Will and Pleasure therefore is,
and We do by this Our Proclamation, straightly charg and command, That all
persons of what estate, degree, or quality soever they be, that have any Place,
Office, or Command in Our Armies or Garrisons in Our said Kingdom (...)
^^^land, and all Our Officers and (...) whatsoever that have any place or
Office of Inheritance for life, or at Our pleasure, or for any other estate or
term, or that have any public trust or employment, touching or concerning
the government or administration of Justice, or Our Revenues in that Kingdom,
(other then such as are hereafter mentioned to be excepted in this Our
Proclamation) shall within forty days, next after the publishing of this Our
Proclamation, repair thither, and make their abode and residence there, and
diligently attend and apply themselves to their several Commands, Charges,
Places, Offices and employments, as they will answer the contrary at their
peril, letting them hereby know, that for their default or neglect herein, We
shall proceed against them to the forfeiture and disposal of their Commands,
Places, Offices and employments, and otherwise to their punishment as far
forth as We may in Justice, and according to the Laws of that Kingdom.
Nevertheless Our pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare, That this Our
Proclamation shall not be construed to extend to such persons as are now under
imprisonment in this Our Kingdom of England, for so long time as they shall
continue prisoners, nor to such as are now actually in Our service in this
Kingdom, or in any of Our Armies or Garrisons, so long as they shall so
continue, nor to such to whom for Our especial and immediate service We shall
give license or dispensation to the contrary under Our Royal Sign Manual;
but that such persons shall be understood to be excepted out of this Our
Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this 17th of March, in the Twentieth year of
Our Reign. 1644.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1644.


