CALEDONIA'S FAREWELL To the most Honorable JAMES, Earl of PERTH, etc. LORD
High CHANCELLOR; AND WILLIAM, Duke of QUEENSBERRIE, etc. Lord High THESAURER
of SCOTLAND, When Called up by the King in March 1685.
GO on, My Lords, and prosper: Go, repair
To Court; and Kiss the Hands of the TRVE HEIR
Of Fivescore Kings and Ten, Four Diadems,
And Kingdoms Three: an Heir, whose Royal Stems
From British, Saxon, Danish, Norman Blood;
With Scots and Irish, makes His Title good
Against all Seclusion. And whose Entry's blessed
With an auspicious Peace, and He possessed
OF the Thrones of His Ancestors, without stir
From any discontented snarling Curr.
An Heir refused (but by no Builders) strange,
Is now Chief Cornerstone! O happy change,
And never a Sword Unsheathed! Lo, Slighted He,
Seems strangely by the Pares, ordained to be
The Basis of Our Rest: Let those go pry,
Who hidden Virtues say, in Numbers ly,
What Speaks the The number of an hundredth and eleven, when Ciphered, is but
the first Figure in Arithmetic, by position thus thrice repeated (III) and
which, by advancing of the middlemost, after this manner disposed III makes,
when handsomely in right angles conjoined, a straight cornered aequilateral
Triangle and such is reckoned to be the first Figure in Geometry (parallel
Lines without some closing Ligament, never being looked upon as any denominated
Figure) and this Triangle is said to be in Architecture, of all adisicial
Superstructures, the first truest and firmest Basis whence the Grecians
denominated a King (...). Again, tick me but here the Arithmetical Figure
abovementioned, and what made just now an hundredth and eleven (III) shall by
virtue of the numerical Letter I, thus dwindle down to three (iii) which
multiplied by it self, makes 9. and that so multiplied by it self also, gives
the quadrat 81. whereunto add its root, the first quadrat 9, and the product is
90. Which being in like manner added to the former hundredth and eleven, there
comes forth 201. where casting away the interjected Cipher, the two significant
Figures remaining, do by addition return back to the first Root aforementioned
3. (iii) Come then, and count me from Hengist, by Egbert, to the Conqueror
down, and you will find of Saxon Monarchs, and Kings of England 35. add the three
interposed Danish Kings, with all from the Conqueror to His present MAJESTY
(which maks 26.) so you have in all, of Saxons, Danes and Normans, 64. for
England. Then waft but over with Hendry the Second to Ireland, where you may
find of Lords and Kings thereof, before our SOVEREIGN 22. which added to the
former 64. swells in all for both England and its Conquered Ireland, to 86, Add
again this to the Scots III. you have 197. then state me here our LEIDGE-LORD,
who now Reigns, Still one in the Catalogue, as well of the Saxon, Danish,
Norman, and Irish Princes (for all SECLUSION must be now out of Doors) and you
cannot miss to make 4. add this to the List of the Princes departed 197. and
you have upon a just Calculation, exactly ad-aequated the former mentioned
number of 201. and if you can but in this cryptick way of compting, allow the
three ticks to pass for Crowns, see then but, reflect, and consider, by what
strange and mysterious Algebra, this our Hundredth and eleventh KING, may be
said, and is found to be, (...), these his three Kingdoms of ENGLAND. IRELAND.
SCOTLAND.

III.


HUNDREDTH and ELEVENTH; since HE
Stands such from FERGVS, in the Royal Tree.
Consult but Euclid, take the Architect
Along; try, what One Figure does direct
Those Arts of Kin; see, what supports the All
Of the Cementing Trade: You need not call
For SPENSE, or others, to unfold the thing;
Eye but the Margin, you will guess such a KING,
May (without Book) Teach docile Boys to Speak
What Is true, and Bearded-men what is Loyal Greek.
A Riddle, opened with a thinking Skill,
Might well have made the COMMONS cast their BILL
Then, tell this Mighty Monarch; tell, My Lords,
In plain, unfeigned, and with hearty Words;
That CALEDONIA was His before,
But His now more than formerly: She bore
Respect for Fergus, and his Race She hopes,
Shall (maugre Asaph) flourish still for Propes
Of Bliss and Peace to the whole Isle. Tell JAMES,
She nourisht Six before of the same Names;
And knows that He, a Nursing-father will
Prove to His old, kind CALEDONIA still.
Tell Him, and tell but Truth, that She Condoles
There be wild Rogues, who skulk from Holes to Holes,
And call Her Mother; whom She does disclaim
For Bastard-brood: with all who dares defame,
Or Him, or (...) break their (...)
Such, and all such, She holds and deems as Foes.
But as the fairest Face may have some Wren;
So these black Spots, those cursed unhallowed Men,
She hopes Her JAMES, by Your most prudent Care,
Will soon wipe off, that She more bright and fair
May in His sight appear; since She can tell,
That CALEDONIA loves the STVARTS well.
Nay, tell Him all Her Thoughts; tell, what is fit
For Him to know of Her: So shall You knit
His Love to Her, and Here Is to You, which Ty,
Of twisted Duty, Love and Loyalty,
'Twixt Him, and You, and Her, shall make a Name,
In the long Annalls, of embalming Fame.
Since CALEDONIA, can scarce Sing choiser Themes,
Then Praises to Your selves, and Blessings to KING JAMES.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most
Sacred Majesty, anno DOM. 1685.


