C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS MESSAGE TO THE HOUSE of COMMONS.
CHARLES R.

WE have had too ample a manifestation of your Affection and Duty toward Us,
the good effect whereof is notorious to the World, to make the least doubt of
the continuance and improvement thereof, or in the least degree to dislike what
you have done, (...) to complain of what you have left undone. We know well the
weight of those Affairs which depend upon your Counsels, and the time that must
unavoidably be spent in Debates, where there must naturally be difference of
Opinion and Judgment, amongst those whose desires of the Puplique Peace and
Safety, are the same; And neither We nor You must be over much troubled, if We
find Our good Intentions, and the unwearied pains We take to Reduce those good
Intentions into Real Acts, for the quiet and security of the Nation,
misrepresented and mis-interpreted, by those who are in truth, afflicted to see
the Public Distractions, by Gods blessing, so near an end; and, by others
upon whose weakness, fears and jealousies, the Activity, and cunning of those
Ill men, have too great an Influence.

How wonderful, and miraculous soever the great harmony of Affections between
Us and Our good Subjects is, and that it is so visible and manifest to the
World, that there scarce appears the view of any clould to overshadow or
disturb it; yet, We must not think that God Almighty has wrought the Miracle
to that degree, that a Nation, so miserably divided for so many Years, is so
soon, and entirely United in their Affections and Endeavors as were to be
wished; but that the evil Consciences of many Men continue so awake for
Mischief, that they are not willing to take Rest themselves, or to suffer
others to take it: And We have all had too sad experience of the unhappy
effects of Fears and Jealousies, how groundless and unreasonable soever, not
to think it very necessary to apply all timely and proper remedies to those
Distempers, and to prevent the Inconveniences and Mischiefs, which too
naturally flow from thence: We well foresaw, that the great violation which the
Laws of the Land had for so many years sustained, had filled the hearts of the
People, with a terrible Apprehension of Insecurity to themselves, if all they
had said and done should be liable to be examined and punished by those Laws,
which had been so violated; and that nothing could establish the Security of
King and People, but a full Provision, that the returning to the Reverence and
Obedience of the Law, (which is good for Us all) should not turn to the Ruin
of any, who are willing and fit to receive that Protection hereafter from the
Law, and to pay that Subjection to it, that is just and necessary, and
therefore We made that free Offer of a General Pardon, in such a manner as is
expressed in Our Declaration, and how ready and desirous We are to make good
the same, appears by Our Proclamation, which We have issued out upon, and
according to your Desire.

However it is evident, that all We have, or do offer, does not enough compose
the minds of Our People, nor in their Opinions can their Security be provided
for, till the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion be passed; and We find great
Industry is used by those, (who do not wish that Peace to the Kingdom they
ought to do) to persuade Our good Subjects, that We have no mind to make good
our Promises, which in Truth We desire to perform for Our own sake as well as
Theirs: And We do therefore very earnestly recommend it to you, that all
possible expedition be used in the passing that most necessary Act, whereby Our
good Subjects generally will be satisfied, that their Security is in their own
Hands, and depends upon their future Actions, and that they are free for all
that is past; and so all the Endeavors of ill Men will be disappointed, which
would persuade them not to do well now, because they have heretofore done
amiss. And We are the more engaged to this Our Recommendation, because upon
the Reflection of your eminent Zeal and Affection for Our Service, and hearty
Concurrence with Us in all We have desired from you, men are apt to persuade
others (though they do not believe it themselves) that the passing this Act is
therefore deserred, because We do not enough press the Dispatch of it; which
We do desire from our heart, and are confident you will the sooner do, upon
this Our earnest Recommendation.

Wednesday, June 20. 1660.
ORdered, That his Majesty's gracious Message to the House, delivered by Mr.
Secratary Morris,the 18. of June instant, and then Read, be forthwith Printed
and Published.

Will. Jessop Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.

Reprinted at Edinburgh by a Society of Stationers, 1660.


