HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE Sent to the PARLIAMENT, April, 8. 1642.

Concerning His Resolution to go into Ireland for suppressing the Rebels there.

LONDON: Printed for JOSEPH SMITH, 1642.

C R

royal insignia
HIS MAJESTY'S Message sent to the Parliament the Eighth of April, 1642.
Concerning his Resolution to go into Ireland, for suppressing the Rebels there.
HIs Majesty being grieved at the very soul, for the calamities of His good
Subjects of Ireland, and being most tenderly sensible of the false and
seandalous Reports dispersed amongst the people, concerning the rebellion
there, which not onlywounds His Majesty in Honor, but likewise greatly Retards
the reducing of that unhappy Kingdom, and multiplies the Distractions at home,
by weakening the mutual confidence betwixt Him and his People: Out of his pious
Zeal to the Honor of Almighty God, in establishing the true protestant
profession in that Kingdom, and his princely care for the good of all His
Dominions, has firmly resolved with all convenient speed to go into Ireland,
to chastise those wicked and detestable Rebels ( odious to God aad all good
men) thereby so to settle the Peace of that Kingdom, and the security of this,
that the very name of Fears and Jealousies may be no more heard of amongst us.

As his Majesty doubts not, but that His Parliament will cheerfully give all
possible assistance to this good work; so He requires them and all His loving
Sobjects to believe, That he shall upon those Considerations as earnestly
pursue this Design (not declining any hazard of his person, in performing that
Duty which he owes to the defense of Gods true Religion, and his distressed
Subjects) as for these, and only these Ends he undertakes it: to the sincerity
of which profession he calls God to witness, with this further assurance, That
His Majesty will never consent (upon whatsoever pretense) to a Toleration of
the Popish profession there, or the Abolition of the Laws now in force against
popish Recusants in that Kingdom.

His Majesty has further thought fit to advertise his Parliament, That toward
this Work He intends to raise forthwith by his Commissions, in the Counties
near Westchester, a Guard for His own person (when He shall come into Ireland)
consisting of 2000. Foot, and 200. horse, which shall be Armed at Westchester
from his Magazine at Hull: At which time all the Officers and Soldiers shall
take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: The charge of raising and paving
whereof His Majesty desires His Parliament to add to their former Undertakings
for that war which His Majesty will not only well accept; But if their Pay be
found too great a Burden to His good Subjects, His Majesty will be willing (by
the advice of His Parliament) to sell, or pawn any of His Parks, Lands, or
House toward the supplies of the Service of Jreland: with the addition of
these Leavies to the former of English and Scots agreed upon in Parliament, He
hopes so to appear in this Action, that (by the assistance of Almighty God) in
a short time that Kingdom may be wholly reduced and restored to peace, and
some measure of happiness. whereby he may cheerfully seturne, to be welcomed
home with the Affections and blessings of all his good English people.

Toward this good work, as his Majesty has lately made dispatches into
Scotland, to quicken the Leavies there for Vlster, So he heartily wishes that
his Parliament here would give all possi expedition to those which they have
resolved for Munster and Conaught: and hopes the encouragement which the
Adventurers (of whose interest His Majesty will be always very careful (will
hereby receive (as likewise by the lately signing of ^ Commission for the
Affairs of Ireland, to such persons for were recommended to him by both houses
of Parliament) will raise full sums of Money for the doing there of.

His Majesty has been likewise pleased (out of of His earnest desire to
remove all occasions, which do unhappily multiply M^s-understandings between
Him and His Parliament) to prepare a Bill to be offered to them by His
Attorney, concerning the Militia, whereby He hopes the Peace and Safety of
this Kingdom may be fully secured, to the general satisfaction of all men,
without violation of His Majesty's just Rights or prejudice to the Liberty of
the Subject. If this shall be thankfully received; He is glad of it. If
retused; He calls God, and all the world to judge, on whose part the default
is: one thing his Majesty requires, (if this Bill be approved of) That if any
Corporation shall make their lawful Rights appear, they may be reserved to
them.

Before his Majesty shall part from England, he will take all due care to
entrust such persons with such authority in his absence, as he shall find to be
requisite for the Peace and Safety of this Kingdom, and the happy Progress of
this Parliament.

FINIS.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms


