THE KINGS MAJESTY'S LETTER Directed to the COMMITTEE of ESTATES, of His Kingdom
And His Majesty's PROCLAMATION for Disbanding of all Forces with (...) raised
by His Authority, and not allowed by Parliament, Secret Council, or Committee
of Est^^^
Charles R.

RIght trusty and Right welbeloved Cousins and Counselors, Right trusty and
Right welbeloved Cousins, Trusted and wel^^^^ved Counselors, and Trusty and
welbeloved; We greet you well. After so long and sad an interruption of the
happy understanding betwixt Us and Our good Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland
(which has exceedingly afflicted Us) and lest the sad effects thereof may have
alienated the affections of many of that Kingdom from Us, and preferring
nothing to the love of Our Subjects, on which Our Safety and Greatness most
depends, and without which We propose not to Our selves any Happiness; We have
thought fit to labor to dispossess them of all prejudice, rather by showing
them Our present resolutions, then remembering them of Our former differences,
having come hither with a full and absolute intention to give all just
Satisfaction to the joint defires of both Our Kingdoms, and with no thought
either to continue this unnatural War any longer, or to make a division bewixt
the Kingdoms, but to Comply with Our Parliaments and these entrusted by them in
every thing, for settling Truth and Peace. Your Commissioners have offered to
Us diverse Papers in your name, expressing your loyal intentions toward Us,
for which We cannot but return you hearty thanks, and shall study to apply Our
selves totally to the Counsels and advices of Our Parliaments: We have
already sent a Message to the two Houses of our Parliament of England, and
your Commissioners at London, which We hope will give satisfaction; We have
likewise written to all such within Our Kingdom of Scotland as have any
Commissions from Us, to lay down Arms, Disband their Forces, and render their
Garrisons; and have written to Our Agents and Ministers abroad for recalling
all Commissions issued forth by Our Authority to any at Sea, against any of Our
Subjects of either Kingdoms; and have sent Letters to the Governor of Our
City of Oxford, to quit that Garrison upon Honorable Conditions, and disband
Our Forces there, which being granted to him, We have resolved presently to
give the like order to all Our other Garrisons and Forces within this Kingdom.
And that the truth of all these Our Real intentions may be made known to all
Our good Subjects in Scotland, We desire the enclosed Proclamation may be
Printed and published together with this Letter, at all convenient places;
hoping none will believe but that this is our voluntary and cordial
resolution, and proceeds from no other ground, then Our deep sense of the
bleeding condition of Our Kingdoms, and that Our real intentions are (with the
Blessing of God, and his favorable assistance) to join with Our Parliaments
in settling Religion here in purity (after the advice of the Divines of both
Kingdoms assembled at Westminster) and Our Subjects of both Kingdoms in freedom
and safety: So expecting your Counsels and advices in every thing wherein We
shall be concerned, We bid you very heartily farewell.

From Newcastle the 19 of May 1646.
HIS MAJESTY'S PROCLAMATION
Charles R

CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith. To Our Lovits Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds and Pursevants, Our Sheriffs in that part, Greeting. Whereas nothing
has been more grievous to Us then the sad effects have flowed from the
unhappie Differences betwixt Us and Our good Subjects; for the remedy whereof
We are resolved to leave no means unassayed, which may bring a happy
understanding betwixt Us and them: And for that end, to comply with the desires
of Our Parliaments and those entrusted by them, in every thing which may
contribute to the speedy settling of Truth and Peace in all Our Dominions; That
with Gods assistance, We may see Our Subjects happiness under Our Government,
equal to the best times of Our Royal Progenitors: And that all Marks and
Signs of Differences betwixt Us and them may be removed, and all Acts of
Hostility may cease, and none cover or shelter themselves under the pretense of
any power or authority from Us; We have resolved to recall and discharge, Like
as hereby we do recall and discharge, all Commissions by Sea or Land, issued
forth by Us, to any person or persons, under what pretense soever, within Our
Kingdom of Scotland. And therefore Our will is, And We charge you straightly and
command, That incontinent their Our Letters seen, you pass, and by open
Proclamation hereof at the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, Stirling, Glasgow,
Dundee, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Innernesse, and other places needful, In Our
name and authority, Command and Charge, All persons, of whatsoever quality or
degree within Our said Kingdom of Scotland, who are now in Arms by virtue or
warrant of any Commission or authority flowing from Us, which is not allowed by
Our Parliament, or Committee of Estates, or Secret Council there, under what
pretense soever, That they and every one of them, forthwith after the
Publication hereof, lay down Arms, Disband their Forces, and render their
Garrisons to any whom the Committee of Estates of Our Kingdom of Scotland shall
appoint; With certification, That if any person or persons, of what quality or
condition soever, shall refuse, or delay to lay down Arms, Disband their
Forces, render their Garrisons; or that shall hereafter, under pretense of Our
Service, or of any former Commission from Us, commit any hostile Act or Acts,
shall be immediately pursued and proceeded against by all manner of ways,
without Mercy. Likeas, hereby We disavow and disclaim all Acts of Hostility
that shall be done hereafter, by any person or persons whatsoever, under
pretense of Our Service, or of any such Commission or Warrant from Us, which is
not approven by Our Parliament, Secret Council, or Committee of Estates of
that Kingdom of Scotland. The which to do, We commit to you Our full power by
their our Letters.

Given under Our Sign Manual at Newcastle, the 20. day of May, and of Our
Reign the 22. year. 1646
Edinb. 23. May. 1646.
THe Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Having read and
considered His Majesty's Letter and Proclamation above written, Do with all
duty and thankfulness acknowledge His Majesty's gracious goodness, in giving
such large expressions of His Resolution to comply with His Parliaments and
these entrusted by them, for settling Truth and Peace in all His Dominions. And
that the same may be known, to the satisfaction of all His good Subjects, the
Committee, according to the Warrant, of His Majesty's Letter, Ordains the said
Letter and Proclamation to be Printed, and Published at the Market Crosses of
all the Royal Burrows of this Kingdom: And that the Burrows and others His
Majesty's good Subjects witness their thankfulness therefore by Ringing of
Bells, putting on of Bonefires, and others expressions of joy formerly used in
cases of the like kind.

Arch. Primerose

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.


