His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Thursday the
21st of October, 1680.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings
most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1680.

His Majesty's Gracious SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe several Prorogations I have made, have been very advantageous to Our
neighbors, and very useful to Me; for I have employed that time in making and
perfecting an Alliance with the Crown of Spain, suitable to that which I had
before with the States of the United Provinces, and they also had with Spain,
consisting of mutual obligations of succor and defense.

I have all the reason in the world to believe, that what was so much desired
by former Parliaments, must needs be very grateful to you now; For, though
some perhaps may wish these measures had been taken sooner, yet no man can with
reason think that it is now too late; for they who desire to make these
Allyances, and they who desire to break them, show themselves to be of another
opinion: And as these are the best measures that could be taken for the safety
of England, and the repose of Christendom, So they cannot fail to attain their
end, and to spread and improve themselves farther, if Our divisions at home do
not render Our friendship less considerable abroad.

To prevent these as much as may be, I think fit to renew to you, all the
assurances which can be desired, that nothing shall be wanting on My part, to
give you the fullest satisfaction your hearts can wish, for the security of the
Protestant Religion, which I am fully resolved to maintain against all the
Conspiracies of Our Enemies, and to concur with you in any new remedies which
shall be proposed, that may consist with the preserving the Succession of the
Crown in its due and legal course of descent. And in order to this, I do
recommend it to you to pursue the further examination of the Plot, with a
strict and an impartial inquiry: I do not think my self safe, nor you neither,
till that Matter be gone through with; and therefore it will be necessar, that
the Lords in the Tower be brought to their speedy Trial, that Justice may done.

I need not tell you what danger the City of Tangier is in, (...) of what
importance it is to Us to preserve it. I have wit^ mighty Charge and Expense
sent a very considerable Relief ^ther: But constantly to maintain so great a
Force as that W^ will require, and to make those new Works and Fortificatio^
without which the place will not be long tenable, amounts t^^ vast a Sum, that
without your support, it will be impossible (...) Me to undergo it. Therefore I
lay the matter plainly bef^^ you, and desire your advice and assistance.

But that which I value above all the Treasure in the wor^^ and which I am sure
will give Me greater strength and reptation both at home and abroad, than any
Treasure can do, is perfect union amongst Our selves. Nothing but this can
rest^ the Kingdom to that strength and vigor which it seems to ha^ lost, and
raise Us again to that consideration which Englan^ has usually had.

All Europe have their eyes upon this Assembly, and thi^ their own happiness or
misery, as well as Ours, will depend upon.

If We should be so unhappy as to fall into such a misunde^ standing amongst
Our selves, as would render Our Friendsh^^ unsafe to trust to, it will not be
to be wondered at, if Our Neig^bours should begin to take new Resolutions, and
perhaps such (...) may be fatal to Us.

Let Us therefore take care that We do not gratify Our En^mies, and discourage
Our Friends by any unseasonable Dispute^^ If any such do happen, the world will
see it was no fault of Min^^ for I have done all that was possible for Me to
do, to keep you (...) Peace while I live, and to leave you so when I die.

But from so great Prudence and so good Affections as yours can fear nothing of
this kind; but do rely upon you all, that y^^ will use your best endeavors to
bring this Parliament to a go^^ and happy Conclusion.

FINIS.

