Causes of a solemn Fast and Humiliation to be kept, by Ordinance of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, in all the Kirks of this Kingdom, and
in our Armies at home and abroad, upon the last Lords Day of October, and the
Wednesday following.
WE have great cause to be humbled in solemn manner by Fasting and Prayer,
because we see the anger of God is kindled against us, in an unwonted and
extraordinary way, as is evidently seen and felt. 1. By the slow progress of
the much-wished and desired Work of Reformation and intended Uniformitie in
Public Worship and Church government in all his Majesty's Dominions. 2. By the
long continuance of these bloody and unnatural Wars within these Kingdoms.
3. By this unhappy Division betwixt the King and his Subjects, fomented by the
Popish and Praelaticall Faction, with their adherents, Malignants and
Delinquents. And 4. By the breach already made by a contemptible crew, naked
and unarmed, upon our dear Brethren in Stratherne, Fyfe, Aberdeen, and other
parts in the North, with effusion of much Christian blood, forcing of women,
and spoiling of goods, whereby many honest women are made desolate Widows, many
children Fatherless, and whole Families brought to extreme poverty.


I. It is to be lamented, that notwithstanding these judgments while the Lord
is thus sharply chastising us, yet we look more to the immediate and second
Causes of these evils than to the Supreme, Gods Providence and Permission in
his justice correcting us.

II. There is no Reformation of our lives, notwithstanding of our solemn Vows
made by our Covenants, and promises of amendment in our frequent Humiliations
by Fasting and Prayer; Family Exercises being neglected, and by many mocked;
The Lords Sabbaths profaned, and Fornications, Adulteries, Incests,
Drunkenness, and other heinous sins still abounding.

III. The great and fearful sins of our Armies abroad (as we are informed)
meeting with our sins at home, ^as uncleanness, blasphemy, spoil and rapine
indifferently, of our friends, as well as of these who are disaffected, whereas
before their piety and devotion was admired, and so they were the more
formidable to their enemies, now little diffe^ence twixt ours and the Malignant
Armies, save in the formality of Worship.

IIII (...) (...), nor of their carriage afterward, nor of Judges and other
Members of Civil Courts ^^d Judicatories, as this present Reformation requires.

V. Impunitie, or slight censure, or punishment, of known Incendiaries and
Malignants, wherein both Ecclesiastical and Civil Judicatories are faulty,
and thereby themselves made guilty likewise of the cruelty, villainy, and other
mischiefs committed by these un-naturall Contrymen, and their Followers.

VI. Perjurie, in not discovering and delating Incendiaries and Malignants,
conform to our vow and promise in our late solemn League and Covenant; for
Malignant Ministers are not delated for wresting the good intentions of the
chief Instruments of this Work of Reformation; for carping at the equity and
lawfulness of our Covenants, and of our defensive Wars, or for their silence
in not informing and confirming from time to time the people therein: Neither
are Professors, whereof there are a great number, delated for their Malignancie
in taxing our Covenants, and the proceedings of Persons and Judicatories in the
public Cause (...)

VII. Perjurie, for not assisting our Brethren joined with us in Covenant, in
person, or by our means and moyen in this present Cause, according to our
promise in our Covenants.

VIII. Confidence in our Armies at home and abroad, and their Commanders, and
an arrogant conceit of our own valor and zeal to the purity of Religion; for
at first when we were naked men without Arms, without experience of the
Discipline of War, without the mutual help of our Neighbor Nation, we did
depend on God who fought for us, and made us see his salvation: But now
presuming upon our power, number of Men and Arms, skill in War, and of our
confederacy with England, and puffed up with our former success and Victories,
we have fallen off from God, leaned to the Arm of Flesh, pleasing our selves
in the name of courage, to which our late punishment by Gods just judgment is
made suitable; for being left to our selves, albeit armed and carrying Bows,
with Ephraim we turned back in the Day of Battle, and fled as the Israelites
before Ai, so we fled before a base un-armed, and inconsiderable Enemy.

IX. Thanksgivings for any victories the Lord has given us, either coldly
performed, or soon forgotten.

X. The great and deep security we are into, not being wakened by the noise of
Gods judgments on the Churches of Germany, England, and Ireland, neither yet
being sensible of the judgments hanging over this Land, yea, begun to fall
already, the bloody Sword which heretofore threatened us at our Borders, being
come even to the heart of our Kingdom; Nor have we that fellow-feeling of the
pitiful estate of our afflicted Brethren, far from Uriah and Nehemiahs
zeal, who sympathized in their Brethrens crosses, yet who is moved amongst us,
or lays to heart.

A. Ker.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.


