A Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD, for having made His
HIGHNESS the PRINCE of ORANGE, The Glorious Instrument of the Great Deliverance
of his Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power.
To be used in the City of London and Ten Miles distant thereof, on the 31 of
January Instant, and throughout the whole Kingdom on the 14 of February next.
Die Martis, January 22. 1688/9
ORDERED by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, That the
Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Bishop of
Norwich, the Lord Bishop of Ely, the Lord Bishop of Chichester, the Lord Bishop
of Gloucester; the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Lord Bishop of
Peterborough, the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Bishop of Bristol,, and the
Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, be, and are hereby desired to draw up a Form of
Prayer and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for having made His Highness the
Prince of Orange, the Glorlous Instrument of the Great Deliverance of this
Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power, to be used in the City of London, and
Ten Miles distance thereof, on the 31th of January Instant, and throughout the
whole Kingdom on the 14th of February next.

JO, BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.



The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy days in all
things; except where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.

Morning Prayer shall begin with this Sentence:

I Beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a
Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service.
Romans 12.1. In stead of Venite Exaltemus, shall be sung or said this Hymn
following; one verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People:

O That Men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the wonders
that he does for the children of men! (Psalm. 107. v. 21.) Let them give thanks
whom the Lord has redeemed: and delivered from the hand of the enemy, ( ver.
2. I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak
peace unto his People, and to his Saints. that they turn not again. (Psalm. 85.
v. 8.) For his Salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in
our Land. (verse. 9) The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous
works, that they ought to be had in remembrance, (Psalm. 111. v. 4.) He sent
redemption unto his people: he has commanded his covenant for ever; holy and
reverend is his Name. (verse. 9.) They got not the land in possession through
their own sword: neither was it their own arm that helped them. (Psalm. 44. v.
3.) But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance:
because thou had a favor unto) them. (verse. 4.) For the Lord will not fail
his people: neither will he forsake his inheritance, (Psalm. 94. v. 14.) Until
righteousness turn again unto judgment: all such as are true in heart shall
follow it. (verse. 15) The righteous will consider this and rejoice: and the
mouth of all wickedness shall be stopped, (Psalm. 107. v. 42.) Whosoever is wise
will ponder these things: And they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord (verse. 43) Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.
Proper Psalms. XLVI. CXV. CXXIV.

Proper Lessons. The first, Zachary, VIII.

Proper Lessons. The second, Romans XII.

In stead of the Collect for the Day, this following shall be used.

O God, the Defender and Savior of all that trust in Thee, we give Glory to
thy holy Name, for the blessed Reformation of this Church, in the days of our
Forefathers, from the detestable Superstitions and Corruptions of Popery, and
for our Deliverance from the intolerable Yoke of the Romish Church. We praise
Thee for that Light of the Gospel, that Purity of Doctrine and Worship, Thou
have ever since vouchsafed unto us; and for the many wonderful Preservations,
by which Thou have manifested thy Fatherly Care of us, and Presence with us.
More especially at this time we magnify Thy Goodness for our late great and
happy Deliverance, whereby we trust Thou have established to us all Thy former
Mercies. Give us Grace, O Lord, to walk worthy of this Thy mavelous Loving
Kindness, that Thou may still delight to dwell among us, and to do us good:
That the same Temporal and Spiritual Blessings we now enjoy, may by Thy mighty
Protection, be continued to us and our Posterity for ever. And this we beg for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. After the general Thanksgiving ( Almighty God,
Father of all Mercies,) shall this be used:

O Almighty and everliving God, who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises, doing wonders; We most humbly present our selves this Day at the
Throne of Thy Grace, to bless and adore the unspeakable Wisdom and Goodness of
Thy late Gracious Providence toward us. We acknowledge it was Thy Infinite
Mercy alone, that has raised this Church and Nation from their low estate, and
caused Light to spring out of Darkness unto us. It was because Thy Compassions
fail not, that our Holy Reformed Religion was not overwhelmed with Popish
Superstition and Idolatry, that our Laws and Liberties are rescued from the
Hands of Violence and Oppression. We confess our Sins had justly provoked Thee
to pour down these fearful Judgments upon us, This was the Portion due to our
Unthankfulness and manifold Backslidings: Yet Thou have not dealt with us
according to our Deserving, but in the midst of Judgment have remembered Mercy.
Blessed be Thy Name, who have raised up for us a mighty Deliverer, by whom thou
have wrought this great Salvation without the effusion of Blood. It is Thy
doing, O Lord, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. Wherefore not unto us, not
unto us, but to Thy Name be the Glory, for Thy loving Mercy and for Thy Truths
sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. In the Communion Service, immediately
before the Epistle, let that Prayer which is in stead of the Collect for the
Day be repeated, [ O God, the Defender, etc.] For the Epistle,

ANd they sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy Works, LORD GOD Almighty; just and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O LORD, and
glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy: for all Nations shall come and
worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest. (Revel. 15. v. 3. to
v 5.) The Gospel. ANd when he had called the people unto him, with his
disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me; For whosoever will save his life
shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels,
the same shall save it: For what shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

(Mark 8. v. 34.) After the Prayer for the whole State of Christ's Church, these
Pravers following shall be used.

O Eternal God, the blessed and only Potentate, the Prince of Peace, Accept, we
beseech Thee, the Thanksgivings and Praises of thy Servants, for our
Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers, wherewith we were compassed.
It is of Thy Mercy, O Lord, that we were not utterly consumed, that our
Religion was not destroyed, nor our Liberty subverted: but that we still freely
profess Thy Sacred Truth, and join in Thy most Holy Worship, and possess the
Rights and Inheritances of our Fathers. Go on to perfect, O Gracious God, the
Work that Thou have begun amongst us. Bless and prosper the Hands, by which
thou have conveyed this Mercy to us. Direct our Governors with the Spirit of
Wisdom and Righteousness. Rule Thou in the midst of our Public Councils, for
the Advancement of thy Glory, and the lasting Welfare of this great People.
Dispose the Hearts of the whole Nation to all Lowliness and Meekness, and
Forbearance of one another in love, that no Seditions may disturb this State,
no Schisms distract this Church: but as Members of one Body, Professors of one
Faith, Sons of one Father, and called to one Hope, we may earnestly endeavor
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and with one Heart and
one Mouth Glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be ascribed
all Honor and Praise now and for ever, Amen.

O Lord we beseech Thee to keep Thy Church and Household continually in Thy true
Religion, that they who do lean only upon the hope of Thy Heavenly Grace, may
evermore be defended by thy mighty Power through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe Peace of God which passes all Understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, he amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

FINIS.

