ARTICLES COLLECTED Out of the Rubric of the BOOK of Common Prayer, and other
Ecclesiastical Laws now in force.

For the help and assistance of the Churchwardens and Sidemen (with the
Assistance of their Ministers) of every Parish within the ARCH-DEACONRY OF
NORFOLK. IN The VISITATION of the Reverend Edward Reynolds M. A. Archdeacon of
the Arch-Deaconry of Norfolk.

In the Year of our Lord God, 167

Sir JUSTINIAN LEWYN Knight. and Dr. of Laws, OFFICIAL.

London, Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple-Barr,
1671.

The Form of the Oath.
YOu shall swear, that you will well and truly execute the Office of
Churchwarden, to which you are lawfully Elected within your Parish for this
present year, in all things agreeable to a good Conscience, and as far as by
Law you are bound. So help you God, by the contents of his Holy Gospel.

The Side-mens Oath.
YOu shall swear that you will well and truly execute the Office of Side-man or
Questman within your Parish, that is to say, you shall assist the
Churchwardens for this year in Inquiry and Presentment of all Offenders and
Offenses against His Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, in all things agreeable to
a good Conscience, and as far as by Law you are bound.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY within the Arch-Deaconry of NORFOLK.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for the
Roof, Windows, Floor, and Seats?

2. Has any part of your Church, Chapel or Steeple been demolished, or pulled
down? what part, and how long since? or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezelled or sold, and by whom?

3. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a cover, and does the same stand at or
near the nether end of your Church, in such manner as anciently and usually
Fonts have stood for the baptizing of children? Is there a decent
Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and another covering of
white linen, to be spread thereon at the time of the Administration of the
Lords Supper? and have you a seemly Chalice or Communion cup, with a cover, and
one or more Flagons?

4. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service, a Pulpit
with a decent cloth or cushion, a large Bible of the last translation, and a
book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the book of Homilies set
forth by authority, and a printed table of the degrees within which marriages
are prohibited, and a book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a
decent Surplice and Hood for the Minister to Officiate in, and are the ten
Commandments set up on the Cast end of your Church or Chapel, and are the
Kings Arms set up in some fitting place of your Church or Chancel.

5, Have you a Register-book in parchment of Christnings, Burials and
Marriages? and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use?

6. Have you a book for the Churchwardens accounts? as also a chest with 3
locks and keys, wherein to keep the said Book? together with the other books
and vestments and utensils of your Church.

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any door into it, and how long since?

2. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good
repair? have any of them been defaced or pulled down without license? have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient marks or
bounds removed or changed? and by whom?

3. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pen^ions, Ratetythes, and Portions of Tyches, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your M^nister? and by whom, as you know, or
have heard.

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England? and has he been legally instituted and inducted
into his Benefice?

2. Is he resident among you? how many weeks has he ben absent from you
without urgent necessity?

3. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith?

4. Does he observe the Holy Days and Fasting-days, the Emberweeks, and the
yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as is appointed by the Rubric?
particularly the 5. of November. the 30. of Jan. and 29. of May.

5. Does he neglect or delay to visit the sick, or to Baptize any Infant that
is in danger of death? Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers,
or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own
Children?

6. Has your Minister married any person without publishing the Banes on three
Sundays or Holydays without license first obtained, or hash he married any in
private Houses, or not between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the morning?

7. Does your Minister Catechize the Youth and ignorant Persons of his Parish,
according to the Canon in that behalf? and if not by whose default is the same
not done?

8. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober life and
conversation? or is his carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister, and wherein does he so misdemean himself?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. IS there any in your Parish that refuse to come unto the public
Assemblies, Prayers or Service of the Church? If there be any, what are their
names?

2. Is there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common fame, or
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards
within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any
that are noted to be Raylers, unclean or filthy talkers or sowers of sedition,
faction and discord amongst their neighbors?

3. Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel upon
Sundays and holy days, and there decently and orderly, as well during Divine
Service, as Preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reverently, uncovering
their heads, kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and Gospel are
read?

4. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be
baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them
to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they baptized after other form than is
appointed? or are they kept unbaptized longer than is allowed? or is there any
Infants or more aged persons as yet unbaptized?

5. Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age who does not receive
the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any refuse to receive it kneeling?

6. Are there any in your Yarish that be denounced and declared excommunicate
for any crime committed, How long have they been so excommunicated?

7. Are there any living in your Parish who have been u^lawfully married, viz.
without publication of Banes, or License first obtained, or within the degrees
prohibited.

8. Are there any married women in your Parish who after their delivery from
the peril of Child birth, refuse or neglect to make their public thanksgiving
to God in the Church at times convenient for the same, and who by name?

9. Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter offerings, or refuse
to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging?

10. Do any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? and are there any Wills and Testaments of persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? or any Goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

11. Are there any in your Parish guilty of Ante-nuptial Fornication? that is,
which have used carnal copulation together before lawful marriage, and who they
are?

12. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary.

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-clark, aged 21 years
at the least? is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholds the same from him?

2. Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent, in
toking and ringing the Bells before Divine Service, and when any person is
passing out of this life, does he upon notice toll a Bell, that the neighbors
may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of
God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all ^ther things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

3. You are further to understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wiue, according to the
number of Communicants.

FINIS.

