ARTICLES Given by (...) and delivered to the Churchwardens to be considered,
and Answered in his Visitation holden in the year of our Lord God. 1671

LONDON, Printed for George Daws, over against Lincolns Inn Gate in Chancery
Lane, M.DC.LXXI.

The Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworn men.
YOu shall swear truly to execute the Office' of Churchwardens for the year
ensuing, and (upon due consideration of the Articles delivered unto you) to
enquire with the best diligence that you may; and as far as you are bound by
Law, to present every person of your Parish that has done any offense contrary
to the Ecclestastical Laws of this Kingdom now in force, or omitted any duty
thereby required. And this you shall do with uprightness, and without
partiality. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES. Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches
Possessions.
IMprimis, Whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the whole
Bible of the largest Volume and newest Translation, and the book of
Commen-Prayer, lately set forth by Act of Parliament, both fairly and
substantially bound; A Font of stone, set up in the ancient usual place; A
convenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other
decent stuff, continually laid upon the same at the time of Divine Service, and
a fair linen cloth thereon, at the time of receiving of the holy Communion? And
whether it is so used out of time of Divine Service, as is not agreeable to the
holy use of it, as by sitting on it, throwing hats on it, writing on it; or is
it abused to other prophaner uses? and are the ten Commandments set up in your
Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other
sentences of holy Scripture written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

2. Whether you have in your said Church or Chapel a convenient seat for your
Minister to read Service in, together with a complete Pulpit set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion-cup, with a Flagon of Silver, Tin, or Pewter, to put
the Wine in, whereby it may be set upon the Communion Table, at the time of the
blessing thereof, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the
celebration of Divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments? And
whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor, with three Locks and
Keys, and another Chest for keeping the Books and Ornaments of the Church, and
the Register Book? and whether have you a Register Book in Parchment, for
Christnings, Weddings, and Burials; and whether the same be kept according to
the Canons in that behalf provided? And is the Mothers Christian name therein
Registered as well as the Fathers, and a transcript thereof brought in yearly
within one month after the 25 of March unto the Lord Archbishopor Bishop of the
Diocese his principal Register? And whether have you in your Church or Chapel,
a Table set, of the degrees wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

3. Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancels thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicarage-house, and other Church-houses in good reparations: and
are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses? Is your Church, Chancel,
and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as without, and the seats
well maintained, according to the 85 Canon in that behalf provided? Or have any
Patrons or others decayed the Parsonage houses, or keep a stipendary Priest or
Curate, in place where an Incumbent should be possessed? whether is your
Churchyard well fenced with walls, rails, or pales? and if not, in whose
default the same is, and what the defect or fault is? And whether any persons
incroached upon the ground of the Churchyard, or whether any person or persons
have used any thing or place Consecrated to holy use, profanely or wickedly?

4. Is your Church or Chapel decently paved, and is your Churchyard well and
orderly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred or laid
up in some fit place, as beseems Christians: And is the whole Consecrated
ground kept from Swine, and all other nastiness, as becomes the place so
dedicated?

5 Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleab-land, Medows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements and portions of Tithes (whether
within your Parish, or without) belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken
by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the said Terrier be
laid up in the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands any of them are now? And if
you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the Church wardens and
Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence with your
Minister are to make diligent enquiry and presentment of the several
particulars following, and make, subscribe and sign the said Terrier as
aforesaid.

1. How many several parcels of Gleab-land do you know, or have you credibly
heard to belong unto your Rectory, Church, Parsonage, Vicarage, etc. and by
what names are they (or any of them) commonly called and known? And what yearly
Rent have you known, or heard to have been paid unto the Parson, Vicar, or to
his or their Assigns for every, or any of the said parcels?

Concerning the Clergy.
WHether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate distinctly and reverently say
Divine Service upon Sundays and Holydays, and other Holy Days appointed to be
observed by the Book of Common Prayer, as Wednesdays and Fridays, and the Eves
of every Sunday and Holy Day, at fit and usual times? And does he duly observe
the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the said new Book of
Common Prayer; as well in reading in the public Prayers as the Litany, as also
in administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, vistting the Sick,
burying the Dead, Churching of Women, and all other the Rites and Offices of
the Church, in such manner and form as in the said Book of Common Prayer he is
enjoined, without any omission or addition? And does he read the Book of the
last Canons yearly, and wear a Surplice according to the said Canons?

2. Does your Minister bid Holy Days and Fasting-days, as by the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to the
Parishioners, for the receiving of the Holy Communion? and whether he does
administer the Holy Communion so often and at such times as that every
Parishioner may receive the same, at the least thrice in every year: whereof
once at Easter, as by the Book of Common Prayer is appointed? And does your
Minister receive the same himself, on every day that he administreth it to
others? and use the words of institution according to the Book at every time
that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as by the proviso of the 21
Canon is directed? And does he deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant
severally, and kneeling? Whether he has admitted to the holy Communion any
notorious Offender or Schismatic, contrary to the 26. and 27. Constitutions,
or put any from the Communion, who are not publicly infamous for any notorious
crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or baptize in any Basin,
or other Vessel, and not in the usual Font? or admit any Father to be Godfather
to his own child, or such who have not received the Holy-Communion; or baptize
any children that were not born in the Parish; or wilfully refuse to baptize
any Infant in his Parish, being in danger, having been informed of the weakness
of the said child? and whether the Child dies through his default without
Baptsim?

3. Whether has your Minister married any without a King, or without Banes
published three several Sundays or Holy Days in time of Divine service in the
several Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the Book of
Common Prayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice published,
without a License or Dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop of the
Diocese, his Chancellor, or other Ordinary of the place, first obtained in that
behalf, or not betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon? Or have
married any in any private house, or if the parties be under the age of 21
years, before their Parents or Governors have signified their consent unto
them?

4. Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian Burial;
or defer the same longer than he should: or bury any in Christian burial, which
by the constitutions of the Church of England, or Laws of the Land, ought not
to be so interred; as felo's de se, and excommunicated Persons?

5. Is your Minister a Preacher lawfully licensed?

6. Does your Minister (being licensed) preach usually according to the Canons?
Or whether does he or his Curate upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon,
read an Homily, or some part thereof? or in case he be not licenced to Preach,
does he take upon him to Preach or Expound the Scriptures in his own Cure, or
elsewhere? If so, then you are to present the same, the time and place, when
and where he did it.

7. Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, and for
the Queens Majesty, and all the Royal Progeny, with addition of such Style and
Titles, as are due to their Highnesses, and exhort the people to obedience to
his Majesty, and all Magistrates in Authority under him? And does he also pray
for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclestastical persons?

8. Is your Minister constantly resident unto his Benefice, and how long time
has he been absent and in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he
cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied according to the Canons? Or in case
he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate,
sufficiently licenced to preach in that Cure where he himself is not resident?
Or otherwise in case the smalness of the living cannot find a preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his Benefices usually?

9. Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday or Holy Day before Evening
Prayer, for half an hour or more examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his Parish in the ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief, and in
the Lords-Prayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in the
Catechism, set forth in the Book of Common Prayer only? and if he do not, where
is the fault, either in the Parents and Masters of the Children, or in the
Curate neglecting his duty? And is he careful to tender all such youth of his
Parish as have been well instructed in their Catechism to be confirmed by the
Bishop in his Visitation, or any other convenient time, as is appointed by the
Book aforesaid?

10. Does your Minister in the Rogation days go in procession or Perambulation
of the Parish, saying and using the Prayers, Suffrages and Thanksgiving to God
according to ancient custom, thanking God for his blessings, if there be plenty
on the earth: Or otherwise to pray for his grace and favor, if there be a fear
of scarcity?

11. Has your Minister admitted any Woman gotten with child in adultery or
fornication to be Churched without license of the Ordinary, having not done
penance?

12. Has your Minister or any other Preacher or Parson baptized Children,
Churched any Woman, or Ministered the Holy Communion in any private house
otherwise than by Law is allowed?

13. Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from time
to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat as they can spare to Godly
and Charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments?

14. Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as by
the 47. Canon is enjoined? is he of sober behavior, and one that does not use
such bodily labeur or trading as it is not seemly for his function and calling?

15. When any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, has he
neglected to visit him: and when any have been parting out of this life, has
he omitted to do his last duty in that behalf, being requested thereunto?

16. Does your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their Sermons, deliver
such doctrine as tends to obedience, and the edifying of their Auditory in
Faith and Religion, without intermedling with matters of State, not fit to be
handled in the Pulpit, but to be discussed by the wisdom of his Majesty and his
Council? And if you find any fault herein, you shall present them.

Schoolmasters.
1. Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School
without a license of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now
established? And does he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear Divine
Service and Sermons? And does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established in this Church of England?

2. Does your Schoolmaster teach and instruct his youth in any other Catechism
than is allowed by public Authority? And what Catechism is that he so teaches?

3. Is any Living or means given toward the erection or maintenance of any
School witholden back, or otherwise employed, and by whom?

4 Does any keep School in the Chancel or Church, by which means that Holy
place and the Communion Table are many ways profaned, and the windows broken?

Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you a fit Parish Clerk, aged twenty years at least, of honest
Conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud according to the custom of your Parish? if not, then by whom
are they so defrauded and denied? by whom are they chosen? and whether the said
Clerk be approved by the Ordinary? And has he taken an Oath, as in such Cases
is fit and required? and is he diligent in his Office, and serviceable to the
Minister? and does he take upon him to meddle with any thing above his Office,
as Churching of women, burying the dead, or such like?

2. Does your Clerk or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church through his default? Are the
Communion Table, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
clean? Does he suffer any unseasonable Kinging, or any profane exercise in
your Church? Or does he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect to toll
a Bell, having notice thereof?

Concerning the Parishioners.
1. WHether any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards, or
others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, do absent
themselves from your Parish Church upon Sundays, or Holy Days at Morning and
Evening Prayer? Or who come late to Church, and dep^rt from Church before
Service be done upon the said days? Or who do not reverently behave themselves
during the time of Divine Service, devoutly kneeling, when the general
confession of sins, the Litany, the ten Commandments, and all Prayers and
Collects are read, and standing up when the Articles of the Belief are read; or
who do cover their heads in the Church during the time of Divine Service,
unless by wearing a Cap or Coif? Or who do give themselves to vabling, talking,
or walking, and are not attentive to hear the Word preached, or read? Whether
any of your Parish being of sixteen years of age and upwards, do not receive
the Holy Communion in your Church thrice every year: whereof once at Easter,
and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof? And whether
any having diverse houses of remove, do shift from place to place on purpose to
defeat the performance of their Christian duties in that behalf?

2. What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present
their names, qualities, or conditions, Whether they keep any Schoolmaster in
their house, which comes not to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive the
Communion? what is his Name, and how long has he taught there, or elsewhere?

3. Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other Schismatics do labor
to seduce and withdraw, others from the Religion now established?

4. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their Children Baptized* or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him; and what causes or exceptions do they allege? or have
any married wives refused to come to Church, according to the Book of
Common Prayer, to give God thanks after their Childbirth, for their safe
deliverance? And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have their
children Baptized in your Parish Church, according to the form prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer?

5. Do any of your Parish usually go to other Parish-Churches to hear Divine
Service or Sermons? Or do they communicate or Baptize their Children in any
other Parish?

6. Whether there be any in your Parish who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to public Prayers appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, making
a Schism or diviston as it were between the use of public Prayer and Preaching?

7. Has any Person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister; or have stricken or quarrelled with any other person
in your Church or Churchyard; or demeaned himself disorderly in the Church, by
filthy or profane talk, or any other base or immodest behavior? Or has
disturbed the Minister in the time of Divine Service or Sermon; or has
libelled or spoken standerous words against your Minister, to the scandal of
his vccation: or defamed any of his Neighbors touching any crime of
Ecclestastical Cognifance?

8. Whether any person in your Parish, do exercise any Trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open Shops or Warehouses upon any ^unday by themselves, their
Servants, or Apprentices; or have otherwise profaned the said days, contrary
to the Orders of the Church of England? And whether there be any Innkeepers,
Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, or other persons, that permit any persens in
their Houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the time of Divine Service or
Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoon or afternoon, upon those days?

9. Whether the sifch day of November be kept holy, and thanksgiving made to
God for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to the
Ordinance in that behalf And the 30th. of January be kept as a day of
humiliation for the murdering of King Charles the Martyr? and other days
appointed by authority?

10. Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any Conventicles or private
Congregations; or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any such
Assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against the
Book of Common Prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, in Anno. 1562. or against the Kings Supr macy
in Causes Ecclestastical, or against the taking the Oaths of Supremacy, or of
Allegiance? Or against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England
now established, or against the Government of the Church of England, under the
Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and
other Officers of the same?

11. Whether any in your Parish have married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, and where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your Parish,
being lawfully married, live apart one from the other, without due separation
by the Law?

12. Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
Authority, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in your Parish
any wills not yet proved, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left
unadministred, by Authority in that behalf? You shall not fail to present the
Executors and all other faulty therein.

13. Whether any withhold the Stock of the Church, or any goods or other
things, given to good and charitable uses?

14. Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame
or report, which has committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any which
has impudently bragged or boasted, that he or they have lived incontinently
with any person or persons whatsoever; or which are commonly reputed to be
common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy name, common Swearers, common
Slanderers of their neighbors, and sowers of Discord, filthy and lascivious
Talkers, Simoniacal Persons, Bawds, or Harborers of women with Child, which be
unmarryed, or conveying, or suffering them to go away before they have made
satisfaction to the Church; or any that have heretofore been presented, or
suspected of any the aforesaid crimes, have for that cause departed the Parish,
and are not returned again? or any which have committed any perjury in any
Ecclestastical Court in an Ecclestastical cause, and the procurors and abettors
of the said offenses? You shall truly present the names of all, and singular
the said offenders, and with whom they have committed the said offenses, in
case they have not been publicly punished to your knowledge for the said
crimes?

Physicians, Chirurgions, and Midwives.
HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Midwives have you in your Parish? How
long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what Authority?
And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their profession?

Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. WHether your Predecessors the Churchwardens, Questmen or Sidemen, have
done their diligence, in not suffering any idle person to abide either in the
Churchyard or Church Porch, in Service, or Sermon time, but causing them
either to come into the Church to hear Divine Service, or to depart, and not to
disturb such as be hearers there? and whether they have in their time
diligently observed that the Parishioners have duly resorted to the Church
every Sunday and Holy Day, and there remained during Divine Service and Sermon?
And whether they have suffered any plays, feasts, drinkings, or any other
profane usages, to be kept in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyards; or have
suflered any person or persons to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or
Victualling-house in your Parish during the time of Divine Service or Sermon,
or Sundays and Holy Days?

2. Whether, and how often have they admited any to preach within your Church
or Chapel, which was not lawfully licensed? And whether any stranger have
usually come to your Church from their own Parish Church?

3. Whether have there been provided against every Communion, a sufficient
quantity of fine white-bread, and good and wholesome Wine for the Communicants
that shall receive? And whether that Wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing Pot of Pewter, or of other purer metal?

4. Whether have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their
time, and delivered by Bill indented the mo^ey, and other things belonging to
the Church which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the Church faithfully
distributed to the use of the poor?

5. Whether any man do trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

6. Whether there be any Legacies withheld, given to the Church or poor
people, or other pious uses: in whose hands is it, by whom was it given, and by
whom is it withheld?

7. Do you know any thing that has been complained of, that is not redressed?

FINIS.

