THE CAUSES OF A PUBLIC FAST, AND HUMILIATION,

To be kept with all convenient diligence:

By all the Members of this KIRK and Kingdom OF SCOSLAND.

Set down by the Commissioners of the General Assembly.



ABERDENE, Imprinted by James Brown, ANNO 1650.

CAUSES OF A FAST, After the defeat, Sept. 3. 1650.
ALBEIT The Solemn Public Humiliations, has been much slighted, and gone
about in a formal way, by many in this LAND: So that it is not one of the
least of our provocations, that we have drawn near to GOD with out mouths,
and kept our hearts far away from Him. For which the LORD has turned the
Wisdom of the Wise, into Folly; and the Strength of the Strong, into Weakness.
Yet, seeing it is a duty, that has often proven comfortable unto us; Unto
which GOD now calls us in a special way, by a singular dispensation, and
knowing that all that are acquainted with GOD in the LAND, will make conscience
of it; We conceive it expedient, the whole LAND be humbled, FOR THE CAUSES
following:

THE Continued ignorance and profanitie of the Body of the Land: And the
obstinacy and incorrigibleness of many; not-with-standing all the payns that
GOD has taken upon us, by His WORD, and by His Works, of Mercy and Judgment,
to teach us, in the knowledge of His Name and Way, and to reform us, from the
evil of our ways.

II THE Manyfold Provocations of the Kings Houss; Which we fear are not yet
thoroughly repented of; nor forsaken of him, to this day: Together with the
crooked and praecipitant ways, that were taken by sundry of our Statesmen,
for carrying on the Treaty with the King.

III THE Bringing home with the King a great many Malignants; and endeavoring
to keep some of them about him, and many of them in the Kingdom yet;
not-with-standing of Public Resolutions, to the contrary.

IV THE Not purging of the Kings Family, from Malignant and Profayn men; and
constituting the same of Well-affected and Godly persons; Al-be-it it has been
often pressed upon the Parliament and Commissioners of Estates; and undertaken,
and promised, to be performed by them.

V THE Levying of a most Profane and Malignant Gaurd of Horses, to be about
the King: Who being sent for, to be purged some two days, before the Defeat,
were suffered to be, and fight in our Army.

VI THE Exceeding great slackness of many, and aversness, and vntowardness of
some, in the chieff judicatories of the Kingdom; And in the Army, in good
Motions, and Public Duties: Especially, in these things that concern the
Purging of judicatories and the Army, from Malignant, and Scandalous persons:
And not filling all Places of Power and Trust, with men of known integrity,
and of Blameless and Christian Conversation: Together with greater
inclinations, and endeavors, to bring and keep in Malignants, to the
judicatories, and the Army; As though the Land could not be guyded, nor
defended, without these; And great repyning, and crying out against all that is
done, in the contrary; And studying to make the same ineffectual.

VII THE Exceeding great Diffidence of some of the chieff Leaders of our Army;
And others amongst us: Who thought, That we could not be saved, but by a
numerous Army: And who when we had gotten many thousands together; Would not
hazard to act any thing; Not-with-standing that GOD offered sundry fair
opportunies, and fitted the Spritis of the Soldiers, and for the carnal
confidence, that was in many of the Army, unto the despysing of the Enemy;
and promised Victory to themselves, without eying GOD.

VIII THE Looseness, Insolency, and Oppression, of many, in the Army; And the
little, or no care, that was taken by any to preserve the Corns: By which it
has come to pass, that very much of the Food of the Poor people of the Land,
has been needlessly destroyed: And whylst we remember this, we wish, that
the Profanitie and Oppression of sundry of our Officers, and Soldiers, in
ENGLAND; Whylst we were fighting, for the Assistance of the Parliament of that
Kingdom, may not be forgotten, Because as it was matter of great Stumbling to
many in the Land: So is it like, That it is one of the CAUSES of the LORDS
Indignation, now manifested against us, by the hands of these men.

IX OUR Great Unthankfulness, for former Mercies, and Delyverances: And, even
for many Tokens of the LORDS Favor, and Goodness, toward our present Army;
whylest they were together; and the great Impatience of Spirit, that was to be
seen in many these weeks past; which made them to limit the LORD, and complayn;
and weary of His Delay, to give Delyverance.

X THE Owning and eying of the Kings Quarrel, and Interest, by many, without
Subordination to Religion, and the Liberties, and Safties, of these Kingdoms.

XI Next, the Carnal Selfe-seeking, and crooked-wayes; of sundry of our
judicatories, and Army; Who make their places and employments, rather a matter
of Interest, Gayn, and Praeferment to themselves, than of advancing Religion,
and Righteousness, in the Land.

XII THE Not putting difference, betwixt those that serve GOD, and those that
serve Him not, in our Services, our Company, and Employments; But accounting
all men alyke, many times praeferring those, who have nothing of GOD in them.

XIII AND Lastly: The Exceeding Great Neglect, That is in Great Ones, and
others; in performing of Duties, in their Families; Not-with-standing of our
former acknowledgement of this Sin: As also, The Neglect of Duties, of
Mutual Edification, and great Fruitlessness, and Barrenness, that is to be
seen in all sorts of persons; together with the following of Duties, with a
great deall of mixture, of Carnal Affections, and Fleshly Wisdom; Which
grieveth the Spirit of GOD; And takes away much of the LORDS Image, from our
judicatories; As we would be humbled for these things: So would we also
entreat the LORD; That He would sanctify this sad Affliction, to His People,
That they neither despise His Chastisments; nor faint, when they are rebuked of
Him: But that they may bear His Indignation patiently; And cleave steadfastly,
to the TRUTH, and the COVENANT, and the CAUSE of GOD: Without yielding to the
Fury of the Enemy; Or receaving their Errors; or complying either with them
on the one Hand; or Malignants on the other Hand: And, That the LORD would power
out His Spirit, upon His People; That their Spirit may be raised unto their
Duty: And that they may be fitted, and furnished of GOD, with Wisdom, and
Resolution, to act against their Enemies; For the Honor of GOD, and their own
Praeservation: And, That the LORD will not suffer them to be tempted, above
that they are able to bear: But that He would break the Yoke of their
Oppressors from off their Necks; And give them Salvation, and Delyverance:
AMEN.

FJNJS.
A LETTER, TO THE PRESBYTERIES, From the Commissioners Of the General
Assembly.
Right Reverend and dear Brethren,
WE persuade our selves, that ere this come to your hands, you are deeply
affected with the sad report of the Lords displeasure, declared against the
Land by the Defeat of our Army, instant September 3. And by the woeful
co^sequences and desolation which is like to ensue thereupon, if the tender
Mercies of the Lord do not speedily prevent us, and move Him, for His Names
sake, to lift up a Standart against that Enemy, which is now come in as a flood
upon us, and is prevayling and rageing in our bosoms. And we doubt not, but
you are seriously bethinking your selves about your duty, and what the Lord
is calling you to as the watchmen of His people in so dark a time. We believe
you have gotten the Letters sent to you from such Members of the Commission,
and other Ministers who had been with the Army bearing their advyce for
keeping of a Solemn public Humilation with your several flocks, according to
the CAUSES which were sent you. The Commission being now met, thought good to
write unto you, and require you in the Lord, as we do also confidently expect
of you, that you will be careful and diligent, to make your people sensible of
the Lords Hand, that they do not dispyse and slight so great a wrath; so to
stir up, and encowrage them to she duties, which this time and the Lords
dispensation calls for at their hand; that men be not found now with their
hands upon their loins, as women in travail, fainting under the chastising and
rebukes of the Lord: for though it be the day of Jacobs trouble, he shall be
saved out of it, for we are not to doubt, but if we shall return and seek the
Lord with all our heart, after all this that is come upon us, that there is
hope in Israel, concerning His work and people which are in the dust for the
time. In a special way, we do recommend to you, that you do carefully and
instantly warn your people, against the snares, which they for their trial
may meet with, to draw them to compliance with the present Enemy, their errors
and way: and that they patiently wait on the Lord, until the indignation
passover, and not fear their fear, neither be dismayed, but would sanctify
the Lord God in their hearts, that He may be their fear and their dread, so
that they do not for their safety and preservation choice the courses of flesh
and blood, tending either to compliance with Sectaries on the one hand, or
Malignants on the other. But that the work of God may be carried on, and His
people may, follow and adhere unto it in their stations and places according to
the Covenants and former grounds, and principles. We conceive, that these who
fear the Lord and make conscience of duty, and desyr to be faithful, will be
so far from slacking their hands in their duty, and in a straight way of
persueance thereof for any thing chat has befalle^ now, that they will rather
look upon themselves, as called and obliedged to their duetyes, in a more
special way of strictness and watchfullness than formerly, and that the
present difficulties and dangers of the time, be not abused for flattering of
men in any way, that may tend to turning aside to crooked courses. And because
the Lord is trying us, how far we will follow our duty, in the faith of His
strength, in a weak and low condition; and there being some endevors at this
time for making up the Army, We expect that you will not be wanting in your
stations, according to your power, for furthering of the levies appointed by
the Committy of Estates, and for the speedy returning of such Officers and
Soldiers, who are come home, since the Army was broken, also such of your own
number, who were appointed to wait upon Regiments of horses, and are now at
home, your selves would appoint to repair with all diligence to Sterling, where
the Randivouss is appointed: for there is of every Regiment a considerable
number remaineing, and are together here, and about, without Ministers, though
this be a time wherein they have most need of them. Thus praying the Lord to
power out upon His people and servants through-out the land, such a measure of
the life and consolation of His Spirit, as may furnish them, for their duetyes
and trials, at such a time as this, We remayn

Sterling, 12. Sept. 1650. Your affectionate Brethren in the LORD, The
Commissioners of the General Assembly. M. Robert Douglas, Moderator.

This short Declaration herewith sent, we desire, That at your first
opportunity, you read publicly in your several Congregations: And we
desire seriously, That you will be instant in your prayers unto GOD, in
private and public: That He would preserve with us the Ordinances of JESUS
CHRIST, the Kingdom, the Kings Majesty's person, and Ministry, from the Fury
of this Enemy: Who is seeking the Overthrow of all.

Sterling, 12 Sept. Postmerid. 1650.
A short Declaration and Warning, to all the Congregations of the Kirk of
Scotland; From the Commiss. of the General Assembly.
ALBEIT The LORD whose judgments are unsearchable; And whose ways past
fynding out, has brought the Land very low, under the hand of a prevayling
Enemy: Yet must not we be silent; Nor forbear to declare the Mind of GOD;
Nor others refuse to hearken thereunto. It were superflous, to give answer to
the many Calumnies and Reproaches, that are blazed abroad: For, albeit in every
thing, we can not justfie the Conduct of the Army: Yet we hold it our
Duty, to desire every one not to believe groundless Reports: But rather to
Eye the LORD, and to look up to the Hand that smyteth them.

1. AND therefore, in the first place, we exhort and warn all the Inhabitants
of the Land, to search out their iniquities, and to be deeply humbled before
the Lord; that He may turn away His Wrath from us: The Lord has wounded, and
chastised us sore, which says, that our iniquities are many, and that our
sins are increased: It concerns the King to mourn for all these grievous
Provocations of his Fathers Houss, and for all His own guiltiness, and to
consider, that if he have come in to the Covenant, and joined Himself to the
Land, upon politic interests, rather for gaining a Crown to himself, than to
advance Religion, and Righteousness; that it is an iniquity which GOD will not
forget, unless it be speedily repented of. It concerns also our Nobles and
Judges to consider, whether their carriage in public matters, be straight and
equal, or rather savouring of seekeing themselves, and the things of this
world, and how they walk in their Families, and in their private conversations:
There is in many a great deall of Perverseness and incorrigibleness, in reguard
of forsakeing some sins, and performing some Duetyes, not-wish-standing of
public confessions, and engagements; and this can not but highly provoke the
Lord: And it concerns the Officers of the Army, especially these who are
Chief amongst them, to weygh well what the Lord has against them, and to
repent of their Diffidence, and Carnal way of acting, and undervalueing Gods
people: And Ministers have also need to search themselves concerning their
faythfulness and diligence, doubtless even amongst these is much Negligence and
Unfayhfulness to be found, for which GOD is angry.

2. Albeit the Lord has suffered that Army of Perfidious and Blasphemous
Sectaries to prevayll, yet GOD forbidd that the Land should comply with them,
what ever may be the plausible and fair carriage of some in their Army: yet
doubtless there is a Leaven of Error and Hypocrisy amongst them, which all the
Lovers of Truth and Sincerity, would discern and avoid. As the Lord has tried
the stability and integrity of His People in the Land heretofore, by the
prevayling of Malignants, so does He now try them, by the prevayling of
Sectaries; and we trust, that they will think it their duty and commendation,
to prove steadfast against the one, as well as against the other.

3. Neither would men be less careful and active in opposing this Enemy, than
in opposing of Malignants. Our Religion, lyves, Liberties, and Estates are as
much in hazard now as ever: All the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, in this Land,
are in danger, and the foundations like to be overturned, by these men, who are
obliged by the Band of the Covenant, to mayntayn all these; and it were a
great guiltiness to lie down, and crouch under the burden of the strange
impositions, that they will lay upon us, and as men without heart to suffer our
Land, to be brought in Bondage, and our selves to be robbed off all these
things which are most precious and dear to us,: If we should do so, the Lord
would be angry with us, and our Posterity, could not but curss us.

4. We would not think, that all Danger from the Malignants is now gone; seeing
there are a great many such in the Land; who yet maintain their former
Principles. And therefore, we would with as much watchfulnes and tenderness,
now as ever, avoid their snares, and beware of compliance, and conjunctions
with them, and take heed that under a pretense of doing for the Cause, and for
the Kingdom, they get not Power and Strength into their hands, for advanceing
and promoting their old malignant Designs: Douhtless our Safety is in holding
fast our former Principles, and keeping a Straight Path, without declyning to
the right hand, or to the left.

5. IT Concerns all the Inhabitants of the Land, to beware of murmuring, and
complaining against GOD, His Dispensations, and questioning the truth and
goodness of their Cause, or quarrelling with GOD, or blameing, or casting off
the COVENANT, because of any thing has befallen them; That were a great
iniquity not to be pardoned; Let us bear the Indignation of the LORD
patiently, because we have sinned against Him, until He plead our Cause, and
execute Judgment for us: He will bring us forth to the Light, and we shall
behold His Righteousness.

A. Ker.


