ARTICLES OF INQUIRY CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical, EXHIBITED To the
Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within the
Arch-Deaconry of DURHAM.

Anno Dom. MDCLXIII.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait. 1663.

The Oath to be given unto the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish.
YOU shall Swear to inquire with the best diligence that you may, and to make a
true answer unto every Article of this Book now given you in charge, presenting
every Person of your Parish that has done any offense, or omitted any duty
therein mentioned. And this you shall do without any favor or hatred, or fear
of displeasure; So help you God and the contents of this Gospel.

Directions to the Clergy.
YOU are desired by your Ordinary, to read these Articles distinctly unto the
Churchwardens, and to warn them of their Duty, so often as you shall see
occasion: but especially to meet together some day before they are to give in
their presentiments, and that then you confer with them, in directing them about
their said Presentiments, for the better preventing of perjury on their part.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and INQUIRY EXHIBITED To the Churchwardens and
Sidemen of every Parish in the Arch-Deaconary of DURHAM. Anno MDCLXIII.
TITUL. I. Concerning the Fabric, Repairing, Keeping clean, and Furnishing of
Churches and Chapels.
1.IS there in your Parish a Church or Chapel with a Tower or Steeple adjoined
to it and a Chancel at the East, all well and fairly built, duly kept, and
maintained, for the honor of God and for the performance of Religious duties?

2. ARE the Roofs thereof well leaded or slated without? well cieled within?
the windows well glazed? the walls well plaistered? the Tables of the Ten
Commandments, and other sentences of Scripture well placed? the floors well
paved? the seats well framed? and all things so decently ordered, as may best
beseem the house of God?

3.HOW many Bells are there in the Tower or Steeple of your Church or Chapel?
have any of them that formerly belonged to it, or any lead of the roofs of the
Church or Chancel, been imbezelled and sold away? and if any such thing has
been done, who did it? and who consented to it? and what was the value of the
thing so sold or imbezelled?

4. IS there a Font of Marble or other stone decently wrought and covered, set
up at the lower part of your Church, for the administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism? Is there a partition between your Church and your Chancel a comely
fair Table there, placed at the upper part of it, for the administration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Are there two fair and large Coverings for it,
one of silk-stuff, or fine cloth, another of fine linen, with a Plate or Paten,
and a Cup or Chalice, of silver, and two fair flagons of pewter or purer metal
belonging to it? Have none of all these things been purloined, destroyed or
made away by any person whom you can name? and if they have been taken away,
are they again restored, or other such provided in their place?

5. HAVE you in your Church or in your Chancel, a convenient seat erected for
your Minister wherein to read the daily Morning and Evening Service, a Desk
whereat to say the Letany in the midst of the Church, according to the
Injunctions set forth in the time of Q. Eliz. and a Pulpit for Sermons with a
comely cloth before it? Are you provided of a Bible in the largest volume, and
of the last approved Translation, and in what year was it printed? have you two
books of Common Prayer set forth by public authority, according to the late
Act of Uniformity? and are they both also of the largest volume, one for the
Minister and another for the Clerk, to use at the celebration of all divine
offices? Have you likewise a book of Sermons or Homilies that were set forth in
the time of King Edward the sixth, and in the Reign of Queen Eliz. together
with the works of Bishop Jewel in defense of the Church of England, which King
James commanded to be had in all Churches, and a book of the Constitutions or
Canons Ecclesiastical, and a Table of marriages prohibited by the Law of God?

6. HAVE you a large and decent Surplice (one or more) for the Minister to wear
at all times of his public ministration in the Church, and another for the
Clerk, if he has heretofore been accustomed to wear it, when he assisteth the
Minister? Are not either of their Surplices now grown old and torn? and what
are they at this time worth? or if new have been lately bought, how much did
they cost by the yard?

7. HAVE you in your Vestry a Hood or Tippet for the Minister to wear over his
Surplice, if he be a Graduate? a book of Parchment wherein to register the
Christnings, Marriages and Burials of your Parish? another book of paper,
wherein to record the licenses of strange Ministers that are admitted at any
time to preach in your Church or Chapel? and a third book wherein to write down
the accounts of the Churchwardens, and to keep an Inventory of all things
provided and belonging to your Church? Have you a strong Chest with Locks and
Keys wherein to keep all these Books, and other Furniture for divine services
in safe custody? And lastly, have you a Box, wherein to put and keep Alms for
the poor, and a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the burial of the Dead.

TITUL. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Parsonage-house, Almshouse, Glebe, and
Tithes.
1.IS your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced? Is it decently kept,
without sufferance of any beasts to enter in and annoy it? Has any person
incroached upon it, or made a new door into it out of their own habitation or
ground about it?

2. IS The House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, well built and kept up (with
all outhouses thereunto belonging) in good and sufficient Repair?

3. HAVE you a true note or Terrer of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards,
Tenements, and portion of Tithes appertaining to your Parsonage or Vicaridge?
Is it kept in your Vestry, and a Copy of it delivered into the Bishops Registry?

4. IS there any Almshouse, Hospital or Free School in your Parish? Who was
the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof?

TITUL. III. Concerning Ministers, Preachers and Lecturers.
1.IS your Minister, Parson or V icar, a Deacon or a Priest ordained by a
Bishop according to the Laws of the Church of England?

2. WAS he without any Simoniacal Compact, promise or payment, freely presented
instituted and inducted into his benefice? and did he within two months after
his Induction publicly read in your Church upon some Sunday or Holy Day in the
time of Divine Service, and in the Audience of his Parishioners all the 39
Articles of Religion, set forth and established in the Church of England by
Authority? And did he then profess and publish his assent unto them all,
subscribing his name thereunto, in the presence of the Church wardens, and
other persons of your Parish, who can bear witness of the same? Do you not
know, or have you not heard, that in his reading, or pretending to read these
39 Articles of Religion, be omitted* or skipped over some one or more of them?
what Article was it, or what part thereof, that he left unread?

3. DOES he use any other words or form than what is prescribed in the Book of
Common prayer, in the public reading of the daily Morning any Evening Service,
and in the Letany which is to be added to the Morning Service upon Sundays,
Wednesdays and Frydays weekly, and at all other times when it is appointed by
the Bishop* as likewise at the reading of the Communion-Service, and the
Administration of the two Sacrament, (Baptism and the Lords Supper) at the
Celebration of Matrimony, Churching of Women after Childbirth, burying the
Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners? And does he
all their without omission, addition, or alteration of any of them, using all
the Rites and Ceremonies appointed in that Book? And particularly does he give
due warning before the celebrating of the holy Communion, that the people may
come better prepared? And whether does he in particular (according to the tenor
of the exhortation before the Communion) seriously admonish the people
committed to his charge, not to presume to come to that holy Sacrament, before
they have sincerely endeavored to be reconciled, as to God, by true repentance
and humble confession of their sins to God, and if need be, for the quiet of
their own Conscience, to Gods Priest also; So in case of offense to be
reconciled to their neighbor, both by acknowledgment, and likewise farther to
their power by making restitution and satisfaction for any wrong by them done,
or for other men's ill-gotten goods heretofore at any time usurped under
whatsoever public or private pretense, that so they may come to the Lords
Table as they ought, with clear and a quiet Conscience. And whether if any
persons sick or in health, having confessed their sins privately unto him, for
the unburthening of their conscience, and receiving of spiritual comfort by the
ministerial absolution, the said Minister has revealed to any person
whatsoever, such crimes and offenses so committed to his trust and secrecy,
contrary to 113 Canon.

4. DOES he always at the reading or Celebrating and divine Office in your
Church or Chapel, constantly wear the Surplice, and other his Ecclesiastical
habit according to his Degree? And does he never omit it?

5. DOES he diligently instruct the youth of your Parish in their Catechism,
and visit the sick, as he is directed for the performance of both those Offices
in the Book of Common Prayer.

6. DOES he bid and observe the Holy Days and Fasting day, appointed by the
Book of Common prayer, as they occurr from time to time in the whole year?
together with the 5 of Nov. Jan. 30. and May 20?

7. IS he a Graduate in either of the Universities of this Realm, and to what
degree has he been there admitted?

8 HAS he been Licenced by the Bishop to preach? And does he constantly preach
in your Church or Chapel, or (when he is hindered by sickness or by some other
urgent cause) does he procure a Sermon to be preached by a discreet, able and
approved Substitute, every Sunday, besides the Anniversary days of Christ's
Nativity, and his Passion at the least: And if there be no such Sermons
preached, both he, his Substitute or Curate, read one of the Sermons or
Homilies appointed by public authority, for such several times and occasions?

9. DOES he or his Curate observe the Three Rogation days before the Feast of
our Lords Ascension, saying the Letany, the Ciii. and the Ciiii. Psalm, with
the Churchwardens, and other that accompany him, in the perambulation of your
Parish? and when the perambulation is ended, does he go into the Church with
them, and read unto them divine Service and one of the Sermons set forth and
appointed for that purpose?

10 WHETHER does your Preacher before his Sermon use a Prayer of his own
private intention? or does he only exhort the people so pray for Christ's holy
Catholic Church, the Kings Majesty etc. as is prescribed in the 55 Canon? And
does he once every month at least, on the Lords day, read divine service both
morning and evening, and likewise administer the holy Sacraments publicly, in
his Surplice and Habit, with other Rifes of the Church, in manner as is
prescribed by the Book of Common prayer; according to the late Act of
Uniformity?

11. DOES he preach unfeigned faith and obedience to Gods holy Commandments,
Submission and Loyalty to the King and his Laws, together with true Christian
Plety and Charity among the people? And has he not at any time to your
knowledge, or as you have been sold by others that do know it) preached any
false, heretical, seditions, or schismatical. Doctrine in his Sermons, whereby
the people may be led into any Sect or Faction against the peace and unity of
the Church or Realm?

12. IS there any Lecture preached in your Parish? Is he who preaches it (one
or more) allowed so to do by the Bishop? Does he before his Lecture read the
public Service of the Church appointed for that day by the Book of Common
Prayer? At the reading whereof does he wear a Surplice? when he Lectureth does
he use the Ecclesiastical habit appointed for all Ministers of the Church? Does
he administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper twice in the year
at the least, according to the prescript form of the public Liturgy? And
lastly does he before the preaching of his Lecture constantly observe the Form
of Prayer which is enjoined him in the 55 Canon of the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions?

13. DOES your Minister endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other
Sectaries (if there be any such inhabiting within your Parish) to the unity,
obedience and true Religion established in the Church of England? Does he
prepare and present the youth of your Parish to be confirmed by the Bishop?
Does he admit any of them to the holy Communion, or to be Contracted in
Marriage, or to be Godfather or Godmother in the administration of Baptism,
before they can give an Account of their Faith and Religion, according to the
Questions and Answers contained in the Church Catechism? Has he admitted any
woman to her Thanksgiving after Childbirth, before she has done her Penance,
if her Child was born or begotten out of lawful Matrimony? Does he presume to
marry any persons in private houses, or such as being under the age of 21 years
having not the consent of their Parents or without the Banes first published on
three several Sundays or Holydays in your Church or at any other hours than
between 8 and 12 in the forenoone unless he has a license or dispensation to
the contrary?

14. HAS your Parson or Vicar any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prehend or
Dignity? Does he reside upon his Living among you, or how long in the year is
he absent from it? Has he a Curate to assist him in his Ministry, and what
Stipend does he allow him? Is that Curate an able, learned and discreet person,
admitted by the Bishop to serve in your Church or Chapel? And does he serve in
any other Church but your?

15. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man studious of innocence and
Sanctity in his life? of a sober, chaste, unblamable and religious
conversation? Does he refrain the Company of ungodly and vicious persons, such
especially as he excommunicated for their obedience or pravity ano looseness of
life? Is he noted to be a frequenter of Laverns or Alehouses? to be an
ordinary Gamester, or Hunter, or a Common Swearer or intemperate drinker? a
riotous or disorderly person in any kind whatsoever? Does he wear his hair of a
moderate and comely length? Is his Apparel grave and decent, in fashion and in
color such as is enjoined him by the Canons of the Church? Does he not employ
himself in any Mechanical Trade, or servile labor unbesitting his sacred
Office or Ministry? And is there any other in your Parish, who having been
heretofore ordained a Deacon or Minister, has relinquished the exercise of his
holy Orders, and now in the course of his life bears himself as one of the
Lasty, and not as a Minister of God and the Church?

16. DOES your Minister or Curate wilfully refuse or delay the time to baptize
any Infant that is in danger of death? and if the Child be baptized in private,
and does afterward recover, is it brought into the Church, and the baptism of
it there certified to the Congregation according to the Form prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer, and the Administration of the Sacraments? Is there any
Child past his Infancy, or other person of more years through your Ministers
default, yet remaining unbaptized among you? And does he in the Administration
of that Sacrament, admit any Parent to be Godfather or Godmother to their own
Children?

17. DOES he in the presence of your Churchwardens write and record in your
Register Book the names of all thepersons baptized, married and buried within
your Papish from time to time, together with the names of their Parents? and
does the subscribe his own and the Churchwardens or Overseers names to every
page of that Book, yearly transmitting the copy of those christnings, marriages
and burials so subscribed into the Bishops Registry?

18. WHETHER does he suffer any that are enjoined to do their public penance
in the Church, in the face of the Congregation, to perform the same privately,
as in the Vestry, or otherwise at other time when the Zongre ation is not
assembled?

TITUL. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. IS there in your parish any person who is commoly known or reputed to be an
Heretic or Schismatic? any Papist, Presbyterian Familist, Anabaptist,
Independent, Quaker, or other Sectary that refuse to come unto the public
assemblies, prayers or services of the Church, or that make profession of any
other Religion than what is established in the Church of England? and if there
be any such what are their names?

2. IS there any person in your Parish, who by common fame, report or vehement
suspicion has committed adultery, fornication or incest, or any receiver and
harbourer of such incontinent lewd persons in their houses? are there any Common
drunkards within your parish, any that be usual swearers, or blasphemers of
Gods name, or any that are noted to be railers, unclean and filthy talkers, or
any sowers of sedition, faction, and discord among their neighbors?

3. DO any of your Parish employ themselves upon the Sundays or Holydaies in
their bodily and ordinary labor? or do they permit their servants so to do?
Are any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or
other Victuallers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or
game in their houses upon those days?

4. DOES every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holiday appointed for divine
service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order, and
decency, during all the whole time of Common prayer, preaching, or other
service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the
preaching, and not to the Common prayers of the Church?

5. DOES every person at his entrance into the Church reverently uncover his
head, and so continue all the time of divine Service and Sermon, until his
departure thence? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up
when the Creed is said, and when the Gospel is read, making due reverence when
the name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned? Do they join with the Clerk of the
Church in answering at the Psalms, Hymns and other parts of the Service, as is
appointed for them?

6. ARE there any in your parish that refuse to send their infant children unto
the Sacrament of Christian Baptism in your Church, there to be baptized
publicly, unless in case of urgent necessity and danger, when the child may
be baptized at home by your own lawful Minister, after the form and rites
appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send their children to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after any other form, or by any other Minister abroad? Or do
they keep them unbaptized any longer time after they be born, than the Church
allows in the rules prescribed for the administration of that Sacrament? And
are there any Infants or more aged Children in your Parish that be yet
unbaptized?

7. DOES every householder in your Parish cause their children and servants duly
to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as
he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holydays, as
in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed? And when thy are well instructed in
that Catechism, are they sent or brought to the Bishop at fit and convenient
times to be confirmed?

8. IS there any person in your Parish who being 16 years of age, and well
instructed in Religion does not frequently receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, or at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be
one: Do they leave their common seats and draw near to the Communion Table when
they are to receive that Sacrament, all decently behaving themselves and humbly
kneeling upon their knees in honor of our blessed Savior, whose precious
death and passion is then set forth and remembered by the Church?

9. DOES any in your Parish refuse to receive that holy Sacrament from the
hands of your own Minister, or repair for it to other Parishes, and Ministers
abroad? Or are there any strangers not being of your Parish, that forsake their
own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it?

10. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any disobedience or crime committed by them? How long have they been so
excommunicated? And do any others of your Parish keep society with them before
they be reconciled to God and the Church?

11. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully married
contrary to the laws of God? or any that being lawfully separated and divorced
have been married again, the former husband or wife still living? Or any that
being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of law, do yet
live a sunder, and cohabit not together?

12. ARE there any married-women in your Parish who refuse after their safe
delivery from the peril of Childbirth, to come and make their public
thanksgiving to God in your Church, as they are required to do by the Book of
Common Prayer? And when they come so to do, do they come decently veiled and
make their offerings according to custom?

13. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, and pay
the rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chapel, and for
the providing of such books, furniture and ornaments, as be requisite for the
performance of all divine offices there?

14. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your parish
that be yet unproved before lawful authority? Or any Goods administered without
a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere leave
any legacy to your Church or Chapel, or to the use of poor and needy persons
among you, or to any other pious and charitable put poses? What were those
legacies and how have they been bestowed?

15. IS there any Cospital, Almshouse or Free School founded in your parish?
And is the same well governed and used, according to the foundation and
Ordinances thereof?

16. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron or other person in your
Parish, having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical benefice, who
has made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any
bargain, either for money or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or
any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever?

17. IS there no strife and contention among any of your Parish, for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? And whether have they erected any Pews in your Chancel
or elsewhere in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave and license
from the Ordinary?

18. KNOW you any person or persons that have presumed to brawl, fight or
strike one another in your Church, or in your Churchyard? And if any such be,
what are there names?

19. Whether have you any profane persons, who showing thereby the little
regard they have to the house of God, make water against the Church walls, or
use other unseemliness about the same?

20. Whether have you any Innkeeper, Vintner, or Alehouse-keeper, who in time
of divine Service, entertain any one either drinking or gaming?

TITUL. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1.HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chapelry a Parish Clerk aged 21 years
at the least? Is he of honest life and Conversation? and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in reading, writing, or singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all divine Services at the Church?
Does he wear a Gown when he so attends, and a Surplice over it, if heretofore
the Custom has been such among you? Are his wages duly paid unto him? or who
withholds the same from him?

2. DOES he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep you Church or Chapel clean from noisome dust,
cobwebs, litter, straw, or any other annoyance? Does be toul or ving the Bells
at the due accustomed hours before the beginning of divine Service morning and
evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any
person is passing out of this life, does he upon notice given him thereof, go
and toul a Bell, as has been accustomed, that the neighbors may thereby be
warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favor of God.

TITUL. VI. Concerning Curates, Schoolmasters, Physicians, Surgeons and
Midwives.
1, IS there any Curate or Minister employed under the Parson or Vicar of your
Parish? Is he admitted and licensed to serve in that office by the Bishop of
the Diocese? Does he demean himself soberly, gravely and religiously in his
place? Does he instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Catechism appointed
them? Is he diligent in visiting sick persons, examining them in their
Christian faith, exhorting them to works of Charity, if they be able to do
them: to make restitution where they have done any wrong, to remit all injuries
that they have received, and to ask forgiveness of God, and all others whom
they have offended?

2. DOES any man in your parish practice Physic, or Chirurgerie, or any woman
the office of a Midwife without approbation and lawful License of the Ordinary.

3. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your parish, but such as
be allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does he teach his
Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authority? Does he cause them
upon Sundaies and Holi-daies, orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? and
see that they behave themselves there quietly and humbly, during the time of
divine Service and Sermon?

TITUL. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1, ARE the Church-werdens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your minister and Parishioners, or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

2. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens, given up their due Accounts to the
Parish and delivered up to the succeeding Church wardens the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel, by Bill indented?

3. DO you the Churchwardens and Side men take diligent care, and see who of
your Parishioners be absent from the divine Service and Sermon in your Church
or Chapel, upon Sundaies and Holidaies? And if you find any to have absented
themselves without a sufficient cause, do you by Warrant from some of the
Justices of Peace, levy of them by way of distress upon their goods the sum of
12 pence for every such day of their absence according to the Act of Parliament
in that case provided? And do you distribute the several sums so levied among
the poor of your parish, according to the Law?

4, DO you note them that come late to Church after divine Service is begun or
depart before it be ended? Do you suffer none to stand idle or talk together in
the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or Church Yard, during the time of
prayers, preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

5. DO you suffer no misbehaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or
servants or children in your Church or Chapel? Are you careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do you permit no
Minstrels, no Morisdancers, no dogs, hawks, or hounds to be brought or come
into your Church, but set your Sexton to keep them out, that the Congregation
and the Minister performing divine Service, or preaching his Sermon, may not be
disturbed by them?

6. DO you against the time of every holy Communion apppointed in your Church
or Chapel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good
Wine, according to the advice and direction given you by your Minister for the
number of Communicants?

7 DO you cause all Preachers (coming from other places to make Sermons in your
Church or Chapel) to subscribe their names the same day they preach, in a Book
provided for that purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed
them to preach in this Diocese? and do you permit no other to preach?

8. HAVE you the Churchwardens and Sidemen now sworn to give in a true answer
unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, had a
sufficient time to draw up your presentiments, and therein consulted or
entreated your Minister for his faithful assistance?

FOR know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of your Office, is the
chief means whereby public Disorders, Sins, and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and
faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of
them by public fame; That in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to
proceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful
omission and Perjury.

THe Minister of every Parish may join in Presentment with the Churchwardens,
and Sidemen: and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves being
the persons that should have the chief care for the suppressing of sin and
impiety in their parishes, may present the crimes aforesaid, and such things as
shall be thought to require due reformation. Can. 113.

There must be several presentiments made to every several Article.

FINIS,

