A DECLARATION Of Her Sacred Majesty OF SWEDEN, Concerning the settling of
CONVOYS about Gothemburg.

Given at Stockholm the 16th of August, 1653.

LONDON, Printed by W. D. 1653.

A DECLARATION of her Sacred Majesty of Sweden, concerning the settling of
CONVOYS about Gothemburg.
Given at Stockholm the 16th of August, 1653.
WE CHRISTINA by the Grace of GOD, Queen of the Swedes, Goths and Vandales,
great Princess of Finland; Duchess of Eastland, Carelen, Bremen, Verden,
Stetin, Pomeren, Cassuben, and Venden; Princess of Rugen; Lady of Ingermanland
and Wismar; do make known, That whereas most grievous complaints have several
times com to us, from diverse of our Dominions and Kingdoms; how viz. the means
of livelihood of our Kingdom, and of our faithful Subjects, are intercepted;
but especially, how the liberty of Maritim Navigation being disturbed, they
are forced at this time to sustein all kinds of losses, damages and dangers,
partly by Pirates, who, under pretense of the disturbance of a public War,
being often altogether unknown, do infest the Seas with a promiscuous and
undiscerning storm; partly by other Frigots, who, under diverse sorts of
Commissions, and covering themselves under the color of a prosecution of a
lawful Enemy, do often invade and spoil in open Sea, and in their free course
the Merchant ships of our Subjects, and do take and carry away many of them;
which afterward, contrary to all moderation, being detained, are much
misused. Therefore, both the equity and the faithfulness of Roial Protection
(on which our faithful Subjects do repose their trust and relief) requiring it,
we have therein diligently used our endeavors for the utter removing of such
damages and hindrances from our Kingdom, and the Subjects thereof; Which
troubles, as from the beginning of this dangerous War by Sea, between the
Commonwealths of England, and of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, we
did easily foresee should happen to such as go to Sea; so we then used our
due and provident care, not only betimes to remove the same, but further also
we freely and seriously did strive, by amicable ways, to quench the burning
flames of that bloody War. Moreover, as to this day we have been willing
carefully and sincerely to maintein the amity, which has been of old between
our Kingdom of Sweden and the Confederate and friendly States, so we hope to
have still the same confidence of mutual amity equally enterteined between
them. And therefore, least We, or our faithful Subjects, should have that
Character put upon us, as if, under pretense of amity and free Navigation, we
would cover the ships and goods of one or the other of the two Commonwealths
in enmity, and thereby give occasion to the suspicions objected to Us and our
Subjects; by reason of which, many of our ships, not only of such as sailed to
any one of the said respective Enemies, but also of such as were bound for
neutral places, have been interrupted: And in particular, least our ships and
goods, and of our faithful Subjects, have reason to fear the violence and force
either of the Pirates, or of the Frigots aforesaid; We could find no better,
nor more convenient way, to provide unto the sincere integrity and security
of our said ships, then by commanding a Squadron of our men of War to attend
and remain in some of our Ports toward the West, especially at Gothemburg,
which shall have a more accurate inspection, for the preventing of all frauds;
and accordingly shall lawfully defend, in their free course, all our ships and
goods against all unjust attempts. For which end, and that this our design
might be the better signified and promoted, we desire that the underwritten
Articles might be taken for a rule, by such as are concerned therein; and do
graciously command all such as are bound to obey our will, to observe the same,
without any kind of neglect.

1. Our men of War, which upon occasion shall be by us appointed for the
foresaid Convoys, shall abide at Gothemburg, or thereabouts; that, when
required, they might be ready to conduct, through the Western Seas, the
Merchant's ships, which shall com out of the Sound, and shall have need of
their Convoy.

2. When any Merchant-Ship shall com and desire the said Convoy, the same shall
be strictly visited, least any other Ships or goods, but such as properly
belong to our Subjects, or perhaps to such as are neutral, might be received
under the protection of our Convoys. For which end, all the Passes and
Certificates of the Merchant's goods shall be diligently examined, and a
strict inquiry made, by the Admiral, or the chief Commanders of the said
Convoys. And in particular if it happen's that some neutral Towns shall desire
their Ships and Goods to sail under our Convoys, we can see no sufficient
reason, why we should deny it: But yet in that case, they shall be obliged to
give full and sufficient security to our said Convoys, by the Testimonial
Letters of the Magistrates of the Towns, from whence they set forth, concerning
the propriety of the Ships and goods, least, under the said Ships and goods of
the said Towns, any fraud lie hid and covered; because the Officers of our said
Men of War shall have such a care, that if they meet at Sea with any Fleet,
either great, or small, they might have a clear and sincere answer to give them.

3. If any be so bold, against this our severe Command, to abuse any of our
Convoys, thereby intending to cover his frauds, and the same, either presently
after, or afterward in progress of time, shall happen to com to knowledge, the
said goods and wares, or their true value, without any mitigation, shall be
forfeited to us and to our Crown, if the said goods, or the defrauder himself,
or any part of his other goods, then, orhereafter at any time, be found in our
Kingdoms, Dominions, or Ports. And further, the Skipper, if he be convicted
to have been conscious of the fraud, so that he be not able to clear himself
of it, besides the goods so concealed, shall lose the part, he may have in the
Ship; or if he has none, then he shall be arrested, until he redeem's
himself with 500 crowns.

4. If our ships of Convoy do meet perchance with, either many, or few, or one
Ship, of whatsoever Nation they might be, they shall be bound to require
nothing else of them, but good correspondence; to declare all manner of
friendship with any of them; and to take heed, not to give any lawful or just
cause of misunderstanding or quarrel. And we are further content, that if any
Fleet of men of War does, in a just manner, require it of them, they might show
our Powers or Passes, and declare what Ships have been received under the
protection of their Convoy. But, by all decent way, they shall decline, either
to be themselves, or any in their company, particularly searched; but, as they
are gone out with full security, lest any fraud should be concealed; so
likewise we desire they might be credited, that they might go on in their
Voyages, without let or molestation, with all the Vessels in their company.

5. If our Convoys meet with any Caper, and be not troubled by him, they shall
forbear to meddle with him. But, if they observe him to intend any violence, we
will have our Men of War diligently to mark from whence such Caper did set
forth, and then seriously to warn him of the debate and accusation like to
ensue before his own Magistrate. And if for all that he does not desist, and
if necessity forces thereunto, Ours shall, as much as in them lay, by force
repuls violence, both from themselves, and from their company.

6. As we find that no lawful suspicion can be had of our free Ships, when
they are once past the Channel between England and France; so we will not have
our Men of War to conduct them farther then the Ports within the said Channel.
In particular, for some special causes, we will have our Men of War now at the
beginning, to direct specially their Convoys to such Ports, as are neutral in
this War between England and the Netherlands, until we do otherwise declare
our mind thereupon: But yet so, as it might be free to any of our Subjects to
go either into England or into the Netherlands to exercise their free Commerce,
if without our further Convoy they will do it.

7. When our Men of War shall have so safely brought the said Merchant-Ships
through the said Channel, and left them in safety, they shall endeavor
forthwith to return to Gothemburg: Or, if there be any Ship that be willing
to return into the Western Seas, they shall exspect them at Roscow in little
Brittany in France, and having examined the same, after the way before
prescribed, they shall bring them back again safe.

8. That a more exact regard might be had of the time when our Men of War
shall be bound to set forth from Gothemburg for Convoys; We thought fit that
at least the same be don once in a month, when there shall be any Ship ready
to be conducted. But otherwise whenever 10 Merchant-Ships shall be ready at
Gothemburg to be convoyed, they shall do it without regarding the time. And in
particular, they shall observe this, that when the number of Merchant-Ships is
less then 10, they only shall want one Ship of Convoy; but if they be above
10, to the number of 20, two Ships of Convoy shall be granted them. And, if
there be yet more in number, the Admiral shall power to determine how many
Convoys they shall have.

9. Because hereby we only intend to provide to the security of the
navigation of our faithful Subjects; therefore our will is, that all such as do
inhabit our Dominions, Kingdoms, or Provinces, who are willing to enjoy the
free navigation toward and through the Western Seas to neutral places, should
forbear, during the present unsafetie at Sea, rashly to go further then
Gothemburg, but should remain there and look for Convoys; that so much the
better we might undertake their protection. And if any, slighting this our
gracious precaution, does put himself in danger, he is to exspect to be
brought by us to condign punishment for his temeritie.

10. Lastly, that the charges required for the maintaining of our said Men of
War, be not merely and solely born by Us and our Crown, and yet not become
grievous to those who shall make use of the said Convoys, we have thought good
to impose a certain Tax, which we will shortly publish, with our gracious
Command, that whosoever shall be willing to use the said Convoys, might pay
the same in our Chamber of Duties at Gothemburg; which don, they shall not be
further molested.

And therefore hereby we do friendly, and as it becomes, entreat both the
aforesaid Commonwealths now in public War, and all our Friends and Allies,
that, seeing we hereby strive, as much as in us lie's, to hinder and prevent
all kinds of fraud and collusion, which might happen by occasion of our free
navigation, wherein we seek for nothing else, but what may be admitted in all
natural Equity and Reason, they would mutually vouchsafe to issue out more
serious and full Commands to all their Officers and Servants, both by Sea and
by Land, as also to all private Men of War, that go under their Commissions, or
are any way subject unto them, not to undertake any thing against our Men of
War or friendly Convoys and their company, but what may be agreeable to the
confidence of a mutual friendship; the which we exspect, and are willing
freely to acknowledge by the same way. And as to those who are bound to obey
our Commands, and are willing strictly to observe them, we severely command
them, specially the Admirals and Captains of our said Convoys, and any other
belonging to them, as well Merchants, as Skippers and others, who intend to
enjoy this our gracious protection, or any way do apply themselves thereunto, to
be diligently cautious, before all things, not to give the least appearance of
fraud or collusion, nor to give occasion of any just quarrel arising from
thence; but to be punctually obedient to this our gracious Ordinance; as they
do tender the avoiding of our Royal revenge. In witness whereof, we have set
our hand, and caused our Royal Seal to be put to these presents. Dated at our
Castle of Stockholm the 16. of August 1653.

CHRISTINA. Locus Sigilli.


