THE Christian Soldier's PENNY BIBLE. SHOWING From the Holy Scriptures, the
Soldier's Duty and Encouragement. BEING A Brief Collection of pertinent
Scriptures, under XX Heads, fit for the Soldier's, or Seaman's Pocket, when he
is not furnished with, or cannot well carry a larger Volume, in time of War.

Ephesians. VI. 11, 16. Put on the whole Armor of God -- Above all, taking the
Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the Fiery Darts of
the Wicked.

LONDON. Printed by R. Smith, for Sam. Wade, under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, and Sold by him and Rich. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1693.

Imprimatur,

March 17. 1692/3. C. ALSTON.

THE Christian Soldiers PENNY BIBLE, etc.
I. The Christian Soldier's chief aim should be to do his King and Country
Service, in procuring, or preserving the Peace of it.
THere is no Peace, says the Lord, Isa. 48.22.
unto the Wicked.

Should thou help the Ungodly and hate the Lord? 2 Cron. 19.2. Psalm. 139.21,
22. Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4. Number. 22.5.


Do not I hate them that hate thee? Yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred.

An Ammorite, or Moabite, shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord;
even to the tenth Generation, shall they not enter into the Congregation of the
Lord for ever, because they met you not with Bread and with Water, in the way
when ye came forth from Egypt, etc.

Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, Judge. 5.23.
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the Mighty.

It is he that gives Salvation and Victory unto Kings; Psalm. 144, 10.14.
who delivers David his Servant from the hurtful Sword -- That there be no
breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our Streets.

Shall your Brethren go to War, Number. 32.6, 7.
and shall ye sit here? And wherefore discourage ye the Heart of the Children
of Israel from going over into the Land which the Lord has given?

II. The Soldier should observe the Command of the Lord of Hosts, and
acknowledge his Authority in Obeying his Superior.
THe Lord is a Man of War; Exodus 15. Jos. 1.7, 8, 9.
the Lord (or Jehovah) is his Name. General Joshua had encouragement from him.
Only be thou strong and very Courageous; that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law, as Moses my Servant commanded thee: Turn not from it
to the right Hand or to the left, that thou may prosper whether so ever thou
go.

This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall
Meditate therein Day and Night, that thou may observe to do according to all
that is written therein: For thou shall make thy way Prosperous, and thou shall
have good Success.

Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good Courage, be not afraid,
neither be thou disinaid, for the Lord thy God is with thee whether soever thou
go.

David was counted a mighty Valiant Man, Isa. 16.18.
and a Man of War, and prudent in Matters, and a Comely Person, and the Lord was
with him.

Captain Cornelius had a devout Soldier of them that waited on him continually.
Acts 10.7.


Endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Matt. 8.9.
to please him who has chosen thee to be a Soldier. I am a Man under
Authority, having Soldiers under me, and I say to this Man, Go, and he goes:
And to another, Come, and he comes: And to my Servant, Do this, and he does it.

III. A Soldier must not do Wickedly, but Justly, as becomes a Man of Honor.
WHen thou go forth against thine Enemies, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
then keep thee from every wicked thing.

And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, Luke 3.14.
saying. And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do Violence to no Man,
(or put no Man in fear) neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
Wages (or Allowance.)

And if you will not for all this, Lev. 26, 27.37.
hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me, ye shall have no power to stand
before your Enemies.

The Lord shall cause thee to be Smitten before thine Enemies; Deuteronomy. 28.25.
thou shall come out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them.

For thou have trespassed neither, 2 Chr. 26.18.
shall it be for thine Honor from the Lord God.

IV. The Christian Soldier should be Valiant for the Cause of God.
ONly be thou Valiant (or a Son of Valor) for me, and fight the Lord's
Battles. 1 Samuel 18.17. 2 Samuel 2.7.


Therefore now let your hands be Strengthened, and be ye Valiant; (or be ye the
Sons of Valor.)

Be of good Courage, 2 Samuel 10.12.
let us play the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our God: And the
Lord do that which seems him good.

And Israel shall do Valiantly. Number. 24.18. Ps. 6.12 1 Chr. 19.13. 1 Samuel
17.47. Heb 11.34.


Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down our
Enemies.

Be of good Courage, and let us behave our selves valiantly.

For the Battle is the Lords, and he will give you into our Hands.

By Faith they were made strong, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to flight the
Armies of the Aliens.

V. The Christian Soldier should not depend on his own Wisdom or Strength, or
preparation for War.
IN all thy ways acknowledge the Lord, Prove. 3.5.6. 1 Samuel 2.9, 10. Ps. 44.6.
and lean not to thine own Understanding.

For by Strength shall no Man prevail: The Adversaries of the Lord shall be
broken to pieces.

I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword save me.

There is no King saved by the multitude of an Host: Ps. 33.16, 17.
A mighty Man is not delivered by much Strength.

An Horse is a vain thing for Safety: Is. 8.8.
Neither shall he deliver any by his great Strength.

There is no Man that has power over the Spirit, Eccl. 8.8.
to retain the Spirit; neither has he power in the day of Death; and there is
no discharge, (or casting off Weapons) in that War, neither shall wickedness
deliver those that are given to it.

O our God! 2 Chr. 20.12.
will thou not judge them, for we have no might against this great Company that
comes against us: Neither know we what to do, but our desires are upon thee.

VI. The Christian Soldier should place his Trust and Confidence on the Wisdom
and Strength of Almighty God.
BE strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10. Job. 12, 13.
and in the power of his Might; with him is Wisdom and Strength, he has
Counsel and Understanding.

The God of Israel is he that gives Strength and Power unto his People. Ps.
68.35. Ps. 46.1.5.


God is our Refuge and Strength; Ps. 46.1.5.
a very present help in Trouble.

God is in the midst of her, she should not be moved: God shall help her, and
that right early.

God has power to help, 2 Chr. 25.8. Ps. 71.16.
and to cast down.

I will go in the strength of the Lord God.

The Lord will give strength unto his People. Ps. 29.11. Isa. 17.45.


Then said David to the Philistine, thou come to me with a Sword and with a
Spear, and with a Shield; but I come to thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts,
the God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.

VII. The Christian Soldier should lift up his Heart to God in Prayer before he
Engage in Battle.
WE made our Prayer unto our God, Neh. 4.9.
and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.

And Sampson called unto the Lord, and said, Judge. 16.28.
O Lord God, remember me I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, etc.

And David said, O Lord, I pray thee, 2 Samuel 15.31. Jam. 1.5.
turn the Counsel of Achitophel into Foolishness.

If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives all Men liberally,
and upbradeth not, and it shall be given him.

Give me Understanding, Ps. 119.34.
and I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole Heart.

Give strength unto thy Servant, Ps. 86.16.
and save the Son of thine Handmaid.

Plead thou my Cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me, Ps. 35.1, 2.
fight against them that fight against me.

Take hold of Shield and Buckler, and stand up for mine help.

And the Children of Israel said unto the Lord, Judge. 10.15.
We have Sinned, do thou unto us what seems good unto thee: Deliver us only
we pray thee this day.

VIII. The Christian Soldier should give Credit to, and consider well the
gracious Promises of God.
AND they rose early in the Morning, 2 Cor. 20.20.
and went forth into the Wilderness of Tekoah. and as they went forth,
Jehosaphat stood and said, Hear me O Judah, and ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye prosper.

For the Lord your God is he that goes with you, Deuteronomy. 20.4.
to fight for you against your Enemies to save you.

The Lord shall fight for you, Exodus 14.14. Deuteronomy. 20.3. 2 King. 17.36. Isa.
54.17. Dan. 3.17.
let not your hearts faint.

But the Lord your God ye shall fear, and he shall deliver you out of the hands
of all your Enemies.

No Weapon formed against thee shall prosper.

Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine Hand, O King.

Moroever I will subdue all thine Enemies. 1 Chr. 17.10. Isa. 41.10.


Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, even them that contended with
thee: They that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught.

In War he shall redeem thee from the power of the Sword. Job 5.20.


I will deliver thee in that day, Jer. 39.17, 18.
says the Lord, and thou shall not be given into the hand of the Men, of whom
thou art afraid. For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by
the Sword; but thy Life shall be for a Prey unto thee, because thou have put
thy Trust in me, says the Lord.

IX. A Christian Soldier should not be afraid of his Enemy, when they exceed
in Number.
WHen thou go out to battle against thine Enemies, Deuteronomy. 20.1.
and see Horses, and Chariots, and a People more than thou, be not afraid of
them, for the Lord thy God is with thee.

Ye shall not fear them: 2 Chr. 32.7, 8. with Jer. 17.5.
for the Lord your God he shall fight for you.

Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed, for the King of
Assyria, for all the Multitude that is with him, for there be more with us than
with him.

With him is an Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and
to fight our battles.

Fear not, Isa. 7.4.
neither be faint-hearted (or let not thine Heart be tender) for the two Tails
of these smoking Firebrarnds.

And fear not them which kill the Body. Mat. 10.28


X. The Christian Soldier should love his Enemies; yet hate and destroy them as
Enemies to God and his Country.
I Say unto you, love your Enemies, Luke 6.27.
do good to them which hate you.

Is thine Enemy hungry, give him bread to eat, Pro. 25.21. Romans 12.20 Psalm.
139.21, 22.
and if he be thirsty give him water to drink.

Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

I hate them with perfect hatred, Romans 1.30.
I account them mine Enemies, Who are haters of God.

They persecute me wrongfully; help thou me! Psalm. 119.86. 2 Chr. 20.37. v.
19.2.


Because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy
works: and the Ships were broken that they were not able to go to Tarshish.

XI. In the very instant of Battle, a Christian Soldier, should in his heart
cry unto the Lord for help.
BEhold God himself is with us for our Captain; 2 Chr. 13.12, 14.
And when Judah looked back, behold the battle was before and behind: and they
cried unto the Lord.

And Aza cried unto the Lord his God and said, 2 Chr. 14.11.
Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that
have no power; help us O Lord our God for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we
go against this Multitude: O Lord thou art our God, let not mortal Man prevail
against thee.

And it came to pass when the Captains of the Chariots saw Jehosaphat, 2 Chr.
18.31.
that they said it is the King of Israel: therefore they compassed about him to
fight: but Jehosaphat cried out, and the Lord helped him, and God moved them to
depart from him.

XII. A Christian Soldier should consider, that sometimes Gods People, as well
as Gods Enemies, may be worsted in Battle.
THE Sword devoureth one, 2 Samuel 11.25.
as well as another.

All things come alike to all; there is one Event to the righteous, Eccles. 9.2.
and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the
sinner: and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

So there went up thither of the People about three thousand Men, Jos. 7.4.
and they fled before the Men of Ai.

And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. Judge. 6.3. 1 Samuel 4.10.


And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every Man
into his Tent; and there was a very great Slaughter, for there fell of Israel
thirty thousand foot men.

And it came to pass, Exodus 17.11.
when Moses held up his hand that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his
hand Amaleck prevailed.

My Children are desolate, Lam. 1.16.
because the Enemy prevailed.

XIII. The Christian Soldier should consider, that though Gods People sometimes
be worsted, yet it is by the Lords disposal.
WHO gave Jacob to the spoil, Isa. 42.24.
and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?

Shall there be evil in a City, Amos 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it?

And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin King of Canaan. Judge. 4.2.


The Lord has delivered me into their hands, Lam. 1.14.
from whom I am not able to rise up.

The Lord has cast off his Altars, Lam. 2.7.
he has abhorred his Sanctuary: He has given up into the hand of the Enemy
the Walls of her Palaces.

XIV. The Soldier should consider, it is for their Sins, that God suffers his
People, to fall into the hands of their Enemies.
EVen all Nations shall say, Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25.
wherefore has the Lord done this unto this Land? What means the Heat of
this great Anger.

Then Men shall say, because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of
their Fathers, which he made with them when he brought them up out of Egypt.

And the Lord said unto Joshua, get thee up, Jos. 7.10, 11.
Wherefore lie thou thus upon thy Face?

Israel has sinned, and they also transgressed my Covenant, which I commanded
them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing.

And the Captain of the Guard took Jeremiah, Jer. 40.2, 3.
and said unto him, The Lord thy God has pronounced this Evil upon this Place.

Now the Lord has brought it, and done according as he has said: because ye
have sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed his Voice, therefore this
thing is come upon you.

My People has been lost Sheep: Jer. 50.6, 7.
their Shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on
the Mountains, they have gone from Mountain to Hill, they have gotten their
resting place (or place to lie down in.)

All that found them have devoured them, and their Adversaries said, we offend
not because they have sinned against the Lord, the Habitation of of Justice,
even the Lord, the hope of their Fathers.

Wherefore does a living Man complain (or murmur) a Man for the punishment of
his Sins? Lam. 3.39.


XV. Soldiers (and all of us) upon such Occurrences, should search out their
Sins, and particularly whether they have not put too little trust in the Arm of
the Lord, and too much in the Arm of Flesh.
LET us search and try our ways, Lam. 3.4.
and turn again to the Lord.

Up, Jos. 7.13.
sanctify the People, and say, sanctify your selves against to morrow: for
thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee O Israel: Thou can not not stand before thine Enemies, until ye have
taken away the accursed thing from among you.

For my People have committed two Evils, Jer. 2.13.
they they have forsaken me the Fountain of Living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no Water.

Yea, 37.
thou shall go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the Lord
has rejected thy Considence, and thou shall not prosper in them.

Thus says the Lord, Jer. 17.5.
curses be the Man that trusts in Man, and makes flesh his Arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord.

XVI. Soldiers (and all of us) should consider, that because of this Sin, and
to prevent it, God has usually given Victory to a few.
AND the Lord said unto Gideon, Judge. 7.2
the People that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into
thine Hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand
has saved me.

And the Lord said unto Gideon, 7.
By the three hundred Men that lapped, I will save you, and deliver the
Midianites into thine hand:

And the Children of Benjamin were Numbered at that time out of the City, Judge.
20.15.
six and twenty thousand Men that drew the Sword, besides the inhabitants of
Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen Men.

And the Men of Israel besides Benjamin, 17.
were Numbered four hundred thousand Men, that drew Sword; all these were Men of
War.

And the Children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, Judge. 20.21.
and destroyed down to the Ground of the Israelites that day, twenty and two
thousand Men.

And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, 25.
and destroyed down to the Ground of the Children of Israel again, eighteen
Thousand Men; all these drew the Sword.

And the Children of Israel went up against the Children of Benjamin the third
day. 30.


Thus they enclosed the Benjamites round about, 43.
and Chased them and trod them down with ease, overaginst Gibeah toward the
Sun rising.

And there fell of Benjamin eighteen Thousand Men; all these were Men of
Valor. 44.


And they gleaned of them in the Highways five Thousand Men, 45.
and persued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two Thousand Men of them: 46.
So that all which fell that day of Benjamin, were twenty and five Thousand Men
that drew the Sword. All these were Men of Valor.

And Abijah set the Battle in Array, 2 Chr. 13.3.
with an Army of Valiant Men of War, even four hundred thousand chosen Men.
Jeroboam also set the Battle in Array against him with eight hundred thousand
chosen Men, being mighty Men of Valor.

And Abiah stood upon Mount Zemaraim, 4.
which is in Mount Ephraim, and said, hear me thou Jeroboam and all Israel.

And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in the hand of the Sons
of David, 8.
and ye be a great Multitude; and there be with you Golden Calves, which
Jeroboam made you for Gods.

But as for us, the Lord is our God, 10.
and we have not forsaken him: And behold, God himself is with us for our
Captain: O Children of Israel, 12.
fight ye not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper.

But Jeroboam caused an Ambushment to come about behind them: 13.


And when Judah looked back behold, 14.
the Battle was before and behind: And they cried unto the Lord.

Then the Men of Judah gave a Shout; 15.
and as the Men of Judah shouted, it came to pass that God smote Jeroboham and
all Israel before Abijah and Judah.

And Abijah and his People slew them with a great Slaughter: 17.
So there fell down of Israel five hundred thousand chosen Men.

Thus the Children of Israel were brought under at that time, 18.
and the Children of Judah prevailed because they relied upon the Lord God of
their Fathers.

And Asa had an Army of Men that bore Targets and Spears out of Judah, 2 Chr.
14.8.
three hundred Thousand; and out of Benjamin that bear Shields and drew Bows,
two hundred and four score Thousand: All these were Men of Valor.

And there came out against Zerah, 9.
the Ethiopians with an Host of a thousand and three hundred Chariots, and came
unto Mereshah.

Then Asa sent out against him, 10.
and they set the Battle in Array in the Valley of Zephathah, at Mareshah.

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, 11.
and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with
them that have no Power Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy
Name we go against this Multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not Man (or
Mortal Man) prevail against thee.

So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, 12.
and before Judah, and the Ethiopians fled.

XVII. The Christian Soldier should in the very nick of time, when he sees no
help in Man, stay himself on God, crying to him for Aid.
JEhovah Jireh. Genesis 22.14. Exodus 14.13.
In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. (or the Lord will see, or provide)

And Moses said unto the People, fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you this day: For the Egyptians
whom ye have seen this day, ye shall see them no more for ever.

The Lord shall fight for you, v. 14.
and ye shall hold your peace.

O our God, will thou not judge them? 2 Chr. 20.11.
For we have no might against this great Company that comes against us:
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: v. 17.
Set your selves, stand ye still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, with you,
O Judah and Jerusalem, fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against
them, for the Lord will be with you.

To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense; Deuteronomy. 32.35.
their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their Calamity is at hand,
and the things that shall come upon them make haste.

For the Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself for his Servants; v.
36.
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left.

For my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. Zach. 4.6.
not by Might, (or Army) nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts.

For the Oppression of the Poor, Psalm. 12.5.
for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him
in safety from him that puffs at him, (or would enslave him.)

Now will I rise, says the Lord: Isa. 33.10.
now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self.

XVIII. The Christian Soldier should consider, if our Forces be weakened, and
our Enemies strengthened, there is then a Promise of Divine Help to plead, which
we had not, when stronger; whereupon Prayer should be more Earnest.
O Lord be gracious unto us, Isa. 33.2.
we have waited for thee: be thou their help every Morning, our Salvation also
in the time of trouble.

Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, Deuteronomy. 33.7.
and bring him unto his People: let his hands be sufficient for him, and be
thou an help to him from his Enemies.

I looked on my right hand, and beheld, Psalm. 143.4.
but there was no man that would know me: refuge failed me, no man cared for my
Soul.

I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, v. 5.
thou art my refuge, and my Portion in the Land of the living.

Be not far from me, for trouble is near, Psalm. 22.11.
for there is none to help (or not an helper.)

O remember not against us former Iniquities, Psalm. 79.8.
(or the Iniquities of them that were before us,) let thy tender Mercies
speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low.

In War he shall redeem thee from the power of the Sword. Job 5.20.


Take hold of shield, and Buckler, Psalm. 35.2.
and stand up for mine help.

Help us, Psalm. 79.9.
O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge
away our sins for thy mercy sake.

And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went. 2 Samuel 8.6.


XIX. The Christian Soldier (and all of us) should know, that when Victory is
given of God, all the Glory is to be given to him, as his Servants have done.
THY right hand, Exodus 15.6,
O Lord, is become glorious in power; thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in
pieces the Enemy.

And in the greatness of thine Excellency, v. 7.
thou have over-thrown them that rose up against thee.

This is the Lords doing, Psalm. 118.23. Jos. 10.14. Mic. 7.7.
it is mavelous in our eyes.

For the Lord fought for Israel.

Therefore I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my Salvation:
my God will hear me.

Who delivered us from so great a death; 2 Cor. 1.10.
and does deliver.

Now therefore our God we thank thee, 1 Chr. 29.13.
and praise thy glorious name.

And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, Ezra 9.13,
and for our great trespass; seeing that our God has punished us less than our
iniquities deserve; and have given us such a deliverance as this.

Shall we again break the Commandments? v. 14.


I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living. Ps. 116.9. Psalm.
119.106.


I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

XX. The Christian Soldier should so manage all his temporal Warfare (for his
King and Country) that he may succeed well in his Spiritual Warfare, and enjoy
Peace with God Eternally.
LET us cast off the Works of Darkness, Romans 13.12.
and put on the Armor of Light.

Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.13,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all (or
overcome all) to stand.

Stand therefore having your Loins girt about with truth, v. 14.
and having on the breast plate of Righteousness.

And your Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of peace. v. 15.


For the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4.
but mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds.

I have fought a good Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7,
I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith,

Hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, v. 8.
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: And not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearance.

FINIS.

