ARTICLES Collected out of The Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer, and other
Ecclesiastical Laws now in force.

FOR THE Help and assistance of the Churchwardens and Sidemen (with the
assistance of their Ministers) of every Parish within the Archdeaconry of
NORWICH: IN THE VISITATION Of the Reverend JOHN REYNOLDS M. A. Archdeacon of
the Archdeaconry of Norwich.

In the year of our Lord God 1677.

Owen Hughs Dr. of Laws, Official.

LONDON. Printed for W. C. 1677.

The Form of the Oath.
You shall swear, that you will well and truly execute the Office of
Churchwarden, to which you are lawfully Elected within your Parish for this
present year, in all things agreeable to a good Conscience, and as far as by
Law you are bound. So help you God, by the Contents of his holy Gospel.

The Side-mens Oath.
YOu shall swear that you will well and truly execute the Office of Side-man
or Quest-man within your Parish; that is to say, you shall assist the
Churchwardens for this year in Inquiry and Presentment of all Offenders and
Offenses against his Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, in all things agreeable to
a good Conscience, and as far as by Law you are bound.

ARTICLES of Visitation and Enquiry, etc.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repair, both for the
Roof, Windows, Floor, and Seats?

II. Has any part of your Church, Chapel, or Steeple been demolished or
pulled down? What part, and how long since? Or any of the Lead, Timber or Bells
thereunto formerly belonging, any way imbezel'd or sold, and by whom?

III. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover? and does the same stand at
or near the nether end of your Church, in such manner as anciently and usually
Fonts have stood for the Baptizing of Children? Is there a decent
Communion Table in your Chancel, with a decent Carpet, and another covering of
white Linen, to be spread thereon at the time of the Administration of the
Lords Supper? And have you a seemly Chalice or Communion-cup, with a Cover, and
one or more Flagons? Have they been profaned by common use?

IV. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service; a Pulpit
with a decent Cloth or Cushion; a large Bible of the last Translation, and a
Book of Common Prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set
forth by Authority; and a Printed Table of the degrees within which Marriages
are prohibited; and a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; and a
decent Surplice and Hood for your Minister to Officiate in? And are the Ten
Commandments set up at the East End of your Church or Chapel, and are the
Kings Arms set up in some fitting place of your Church or Chancel?

V. Have you a Register-Book in Parchment, of Christenings, Burials, and
Marriages? and is the same kept in all points according to the ancient use?

VI. Have you a Book of Paper, to record the Names and Licenses of such
Strangers as are admitted to Preach in your Church or Chapel, and do such
Strangers subscribe their Names in the same? As also a third Book for the
Churchwardens accounts? As also a Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep
the said Books, and the forementioned furniture?

VII. Has any in your Parish defaced, or caused to be defaced, any Monuments
or Ornaments in your Church, Chapel, or Chancel; or erected any new Pews or
Monuments therein, without License from the Ordinary?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon the same, or made any Door into it, and how long since?

II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses, in good
repair? Have any of them been defaced, or pulled down without License? Have
there been any encroachments made upon the same, or any of the ancient Marks or
Bounds removed or changed, and by whom?

III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; as
also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tythes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister, and by whom, as you know or
have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon Episcopally ordained according to the
Laws of the Church of England, legally Instituted and Inducted into his
Benefice? And did he within two Months after his Induction, publicly in the
Church, upon some Sunday or Holyday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39
Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his assent thereunto?

II. Is he resident among you? How many Weeks has he been absent from you
without urgent necessity?

III. Has your Minister a Curate? Is he in holy Orders, and conformable to the
Laws of the Church? Is he allowed by the Ordinary?

IV. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, if you have any, perform his
Office in all things according to the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer
lately established, and the Act of Uniformity published therewith?

V. Does your Minister at the reading. Divine Service, wear a Surplice and Hood?

VI. Does he observe the Holy Days and Fasting-days, the Ember-weeks, and the
yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as is appointed by the Rubric?

VII. Is your Minister licensed to Preach? If so, Does he constantly (not
having a reasonable impediment) Preach one Sermon in your Church or Chapel
every Sunday? Or if he be not Licenced, or be hindered, does he procure one to
supply his Office by Preaching, or Reading one of the Homilies?

VIII. Does your Minister instruct the Youth in your Parish in the
Church-Catechism, and prepare and present them to be confirmed by the Bishop?

IX. Does he neglect or delay to visit the Sick, or to Baptize any Infant that
is in danger of Death? Does he Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers,
or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own
Children? Does he Baptize publicly only with Water poured into the Font,
without the use of Basin?

X. Has your Minister, or any other in your Parish, Married any persons
without publishing the Bannes on three Sundays or Holy Days, or License first
obtained? Or at any other Hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Forenoon?
Name who are the parties so married, and who were present at such Marriages.
And what Minister or who married them, as far as you know or have heard.

XI. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings, or Exercises not appointed by Authority? Or does he or any other,
either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private
Houses, within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto,
under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation, contrary
to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XII. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of a sober and godly
Life and Conversation? Or is his carriage in any kind disorderly or scandalous,
and unbeseeming a Minister? And wherein does he so misdemean himself?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there any in your Parish that make profession of any other Religion,
than what is established in the Church of England, and that refuse to come unto
the public Assemblies, Prayers, or Service of the Church? If there be any,
what are their Names?

II. Is there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common fame or
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Or is there any of your Parish
that are guilty of anti-nuptial Fornication; that have had carnal knowledge of
Husband or Wife respectively before lawful Marriage? Are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name,
or any that are noted to be Raylers, unclean or filthy Talkers, or Sowers of
Sedition, Faction and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holy Days follow their bodily and
ordinary Labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
Wares sold? Or do any Vintners Inkeepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of
Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those
days, during the time of Divine Service; particularly on the 30 of January, the
29 of May, and the 5 of November?

IV. Does every person in your Parish duly resort to your Church or Chapel
upon Sundays and Holy Days, and there decently and orderly, as well during
Divine Service, as Preaching the Word of God, demean themselves reverently,
uncovering their Heads, Kneeling at Prayers, standing up when the Creed and
Gospel are read?

V. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be
Baptized in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? or do they send them
to be baptized in other Parishes? or are they Baptized after other Form than is
appointed? or are they kept Unbaptized longer than is allowed? or are there any
Infants or more aged Persons as yet Unbaptized?

VI. Is there any person in your Parish of 16 years of age, who does not
receive the Sacrament three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be
one? Does any refuse to receive it kneeling, or resort to other Parishes? or do
any Strangers come to your Parish Church to receive it?

VII. Are there any in your Parish that be Denounced and declared
Excommunicate, for any crime committed? How long have they been so
Excommunicated?

VIII. Are there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully married,
scilicet, Without publication of Banns, or License first obtained, or within
the degrees prohibited?

IX. Are there any married Women within your Parish, who after their Delivery
from the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God
in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled,
and make their Offerings according to Custom?

X. Are there any that refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings, or refuse
to contribute to the Rates made for the repair of your Church or Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging?

XI. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish
that be not proved? Or any Goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying within your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to
your Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XII. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

XIII. Do all Parents and Masters or Mistresses of Families send and cause
their Children and Apprentices, or young Servants, to come to their Minister in
the Church to be catechized and instructed in the Fundamentals of Religion? And
who are they that refuse so to do?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clarks, and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk aged 21 years
at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church?
Are his Wages duly paid unto him, or who withholds the same from him?

II. Does he diligently do his duty in keeping the Church clean and decent? in
tolling and ringing the Bells before Divine Service? And when any person is
departing our of this Life, does he upon notice toll a Bell, that the
Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the Dying-person to the grace and
favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters and Schools.
I. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Ordinary; Does he teach his Scholars the Catechism of
Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause his Scholars upon Sundays and
Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they behave
themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service and Sermon?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. You are further so understand, That according to your Office, you are to
provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, a
sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants.

THE END.

