A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF THE Ten Commandments; Intended for a help to the
Understandings and Memories of CHILDREN.
By JOHN CHISHVLL.
The Preface.
THe Lord that once took Israel by the hand
To bring him out from Aegypts bondage, and
To set him free from the Oppressing crew,
Who vexed their souls with burdens old and new,
Spoke all these words which here explained are:
Mark well, and hear them with a hearing ear.
The First Command.
THe First Command informs us rightly where
Worship must fix, whom we should love and fear;
Be sure you have a God, and have but one,
He that has more is like him that has none.
Love, Fear, Esteem, Honor, Desire, Adore,
Praise, Trust, Believe, choose him, to choose no more.
The Second.
The Second sacred Law directs us now
To Worship God, forbids to make or bow
Before an Idol; this excludes as vain
In Worship all the froth of humane brain,
Injoynes us to observe with reverend Awe,
The Sacred Ordinances of his Law.
The Third.
The Third Command forbids irreverend use
Of Gods most Holy Name, which we abuse
If slightly or profanely we shall dare
To name it, but much more uncalled to swear:
Because this sin is common, is it small?
No; such Transgressors shall not escape at all.
The Fourth.
The Fourth Command requires a Seventh days rest,
Holy to God, comforts both man and beast;
Lay by thine own works, words, and thoughts, to raise
Heavenward thy heart, by Faith, Hope, Love and Praise.
This Law requires thy care for thee and thine,
That needful things with good you only join.
The Fifth.
The Fifth Command requires a reverend Awe
Of those whom Providence or Nature's Law
Has placed above us, whether they be known
To be our Countries Parents or our own:
Kings, Rulers, Parents, Pastors, Masters are
All to be honored with a pious care.
The Sixth Command.
Thou shall not Kill; thus speaks the Sixth Command.
Murther's a crying Sin, pollutes a Land.
To the Neighbor's person, name, or goods, a willing
Wrong done by deed, word, thought, 's a kind of killing.
Miscall, revile him not; the Scriptures tell
That causeless anger leads the way to hell.
The Seventh.
Take heed, fly from Adult'ry, says Command
The Seav'nth in order, given by Moses hand:
Beware of loose behavior, wanton dress,
Words, gestures which entice to wantonness:
'Bove all, observe thine heart least it should steal
Out by thine eye, a secret way to Hell.
The Eighth.
Thou shall not steal: This Law secures thy store
From fraud, and rapine, and the idle Poor;
Injoynes thee strictly to do all you can
To further the Estate of every man.
Just weights and balance keep, the goods restore
Unjustly gotten, though it make thee poor.
The Ninth.
When thou art called 'twixt man and man by Oath
Or Word to witness, speak the Truth for both.
Raise not, nor spread a slander, to defame
Thy Neighbor, and unjustly wound his name:
The flying Tale suppress; see thou defend
His Credit as thine own unto the end.
The Tenth.
The Tenth Commandment bids us be content
With what Gods Providence to us has lent:
This is thy Neighbors hedge, let him alone;
Look not to lust, and say would 'twere mine own.
The goodness of this God and Law admire,
Who would that none should wrong thee in desire.
The Conclusion.
Treasure up all these in thy youthful heart,
And let them not in age from thee depart;
But pray that he that did at first indite 'em,
Would once for thee in fleshly Tables write 'em:
So shall thou find them to thy joys increase,
Ways of great pleasantness, and paths of peace.
LONDON, Printed for the Author* 166^


