ARTICLES, OF Visitation and Enquiry Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Peculiar or
Prebendal Parish Church belonging to the Cathedral Church of the Blessed Virgin
St. Mary of LINCOLN In the Triennial VISITATION of the Right Worshipful MICHAEL
HONYWOOD Doctor in Divinity, Dean of the said Cathedral Church.

LONDON. Printed by Tho. Milbourn in Jewen-Street, 1673

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOu shall Swear, truly to execute the Office of a Churchwarden within the
Parish of and true Presentment make according to the Book of Articles given you
in charge, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God, by the contents of
that Book.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Belonging to the Cathedral Church within
the Peculiar and Prebendal Churches of LINCOLN
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient Repair? Are
the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slate? the Windows well
Glazed, the Floors well Paved, the Seats well Fastened, and, conveniently
placed; and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the House of God?

II. HAS the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof
been pulled Down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto,
been imbezelled, sold or made away? In whose Hands or Custody does the same, or
any part thereof Remain? Declare what you know or have heard herein.

III. IS there a Font or Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel, a decent Communion Table, for the
Administration of the Lords Supper, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine
Woollen Cloth, and another Covering of white and pure Linen to spread
thereupon: And have you a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover of
silver, and one or more Flaggons of Silver or Pewter, thereunto belonging?

IV. HAVE you in you said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat or Pew for your
Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit with a comely Cloth or Cushion for
the same? a Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volum and the Book of
Common Prayer, both well and substantially Bound? Have you likewise the Book of
Hamilies, set forth by Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical? And a Printed Table of the degrees wherein Marriage is
prohibited?

V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his Puplick Ministration in the Church, provided and to be duly washed at the
charge of the Parish?

VI. HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Surames of all such persons as are Married, Christened or Buried, within your
Parish? together with the Names and Surnames of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened expressing the day month and year of all such
Christnings, Marriages and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly,
within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Deans Registry
at Lincoln?

VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Cappel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens
Accounts: together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the
aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe Custody?
And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hears-cloth, for the Burial of the
Dead?

TIT. II Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Gleabs and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has any
person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it out of his own ground
or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there
growing been cut down? how long since? by whom? and to whose use and benefit?

II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar or Curate (with all the outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the
said Houses or Outhouses, been defaced or pulled down without license from the
Ordinary? and by whom? Has any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard or
Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same?

III. HAVE you a true and persect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenaments or Cottages, belonging tr your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pensions. Rate-tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been with held from your Minister? and by whom; as you know or
have heard?

IV. HAVE any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary? have any Enclosures been made in
your Parish, to the detriment of the Church be thy decay of Tillage, and
converting Arable-Land into Pasture? by whom has the same been made? and how
many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby
in the yearly value thereof; as you know believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I, IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders
by any Simonical compact?

III. HAVE he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? and did
he within two months ather his Induction, publicly in she Church, upon some
Sunday or Holy Day in the time of Divine Service read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England established by Authority, and there publicly declare his
assent thereunto?

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend, or Dignity? Is he
constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many weeks in any one
year has he been absent from it, without urgent necessity?

V. HAS your minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in holy
Orders? an able and discreet person, and conformable to the Laws and orders of
the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or
Chapped? and does he serve in any other Church beside? and what yearly stipend
does your Minister allow him?

VI. DOES your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of Sick Burial of the
Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form
and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any addition,
omission, or alteration of the same: And does he use all such Rites and
Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book?

VII. DOES your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Divine Office in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice, together with such other Scholastic
Habit as is suitable to his Degree?

VIII. DOES he observe the Holy Days and Fasting days, as also the
Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week as in the
Comon-Prayer-Book or by the Ecclesiastical Cannons is appointed? giving notice
to the Parishoners of every of the same in the Church in the time of Divine
Service upon the Sunday next before?

IX. HAS your Minister been licenced to Preach by the Bishop, or either of the
two Vniversicies? If so, Does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness.
necessary absence or other reasonable impediment) himself Preach in your
Church or Cappel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed Preacher,
or being so Licensed be hindered by Sickness, or otherwise, as aforesaid? Does
he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a Licensed
Preacher, or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a
Priest or Deacon lawfully Ordained?

X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Parish, in the
Church Catechism? and does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be Confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to
the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounded
duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof?

XI DOES he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that
is in danger of Death? Is there any Child past Infancy or other person of more
years through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish?
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

XII. DOES he in his Sermons preach sound Doctrine tending to the edification
of the people in the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ, and obedience to Gods
holy Commandments? or has he at any time (as you know or have heard) preached
any False, Heretical, Seditious or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the
people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the public peace and
unity either of Church or State?

XIII. HAS he presumed to Marry any persons in private houses? or such as,
being under age have not the consent of their Parents, without the Banes first
published on three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church? or at any other hours
than between Gight and Twelve in the morning; unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XIV. DOES any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture, read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority? or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer a man of a sober, unblamable,
and exemplary life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and
excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a common
Gamester? a profane, or obscene Iester? a Swearer, Railer, Scoffer, or
Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at Variance one with another? or encourage
them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or
vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any person, either within your
Parish, or without? Does he wear his Hair of an immoderate or uncomly length?
Is his Apparel grave and decent, both for fashion and color, as the Canons of
the Church Require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation in any kind whatsoever,
Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishoners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatik? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker or other Sectary that
refuse to come unto the public assemblies, prayers or services of the Church,
or that make profession of any other Religion than what is established in the
Church of England? And if there be any such, what are their Names?

II. IS there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common swearers, or blasphemers of Gods Name,
or any that are noted to be railers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of
sedition, faction and discord amongst their Neighbors?

III. DO any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holy Days, follow their
bodily and ordinary labor? or permit their servants so to do? are any shops
kept open or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Inkeepers or other Victuallers and
sellers of Bear or Ale, suffer any person to tipple or game in their houses
upon those days?

IV. DOES every person inhahiting or sojourning within your Parish, duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holyday appointed for divine
Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order and
decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
service of God there used? and are there any among you that come only to the
Preaching, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church?

V. DOES every person reverently uncover his head, and so continue all the time
of Divine Service and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the
Prayers and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due reverence
when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned?

VI. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to
be baptized publicly in the Church unless in case of urgent danger: in which
case, the child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form
and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after other form than is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time than the Church allows; And are there any Infants
or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized?

VII. DOES every Householder in your Parish cause their children and servants to
learn their Chatechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister as he
shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holdayes, as in
the Book of Common Prayer is appointed: that when they are well Instructed in
the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishops?

VIII. IS there any person in your Parish who being 16 years of age, and well
instructed in Religion does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at
least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Does any
in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling: or from the hands of your
own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad: Or are
there any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and
usually repair to yours for it?

IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of
your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church and
absolved.

X. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully married
contrary to the laws of God? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married
again: Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by
course of law, do not cohabit together?

XI. ARE there any marryed-women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to custom?

XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, and pay
the rate assessed upon them, for the repair of your Church or Chapel, and for
the providing of such Books, furniture and Ornaments, as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine offices there?

XIII. DO any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? Or any goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were shose Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XIV. DO you know, or have you heard, of any Patron or other person in your
Parish having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical benefice who has
made gain thereof by presenting a Elerk or Minister to it upon any bargain
either for money, or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or any
other part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever?

XV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the Body of your Church or Chapel without leave from the Ordinary.

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish Clerk aged 21 years
at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to
perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him.

II. DOES he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does keep your Church or Chapel clean from dust, cobwebs, and
other annoyance? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this life, does he upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the Dying
person so the grace and favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School masters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS there any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free School founded in your Parish?
Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly
Revenue, or Stipend belonging to the Governors or Masters, of the same? Is the
same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the
Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder,
and of such grants and ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor, or the Dean, in their
respective Visitations? Does your Schoolmaster teach his Schoollars the
Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon Sundays
and Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? and see that they
behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

III. DOES any man in your Parish, practice Physic, or Surgery, or any
woman take upon her to exercise the office of Midwife, without approbation and
license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parish oners; or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishoners?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. DO you note them that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun,
or depart before it be ended? Do you suffer none to stand idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch or to walk in the Church, or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

IV. DO you suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, women or
servants, or children in your Church or Chapel? Are you careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hars upon the Communion Table? Do you permit no
Minstrels, no Morice-dancers, no Dogs, Hawks or Hounds to be brought or come
into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation?

V. DO you against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, provide
a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
nunber of Communicants?

VI. DO you cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church or Chapel, to
subscribe their Names the lame day in a Book provided for that purpose,
together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this
Diocese, and do you permit no other to Preach?

VII. HAVE you (the Churchwardens and Sides-men) now sworn to give in a true
answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, taken
sufficient time to draw up your Presentiments, and therein consulted with your
Minister for his faithful assistance?

MICH. HONYWOOD.


