A FORM OR ORDER OF THANKSGIVING* AND PRAYER, TO BE U^ED In London, and Ten
Miles round ^on Sunday the 15th of this Instant January, and throughout England
on Sunday the 29th of the same Month, by all Parsons, Vicars, and Curats in
their Respective Pari^h Churches, and Chapels, in Behalf of the King, and the
Queen, and the Royal Family, upon Occasion of the Queen's being with Child.

By His Majesty's special Command.

Reprinted at Holy-Rood-House, 1688.

A FORM, OR ORDER OF THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER, To be Used in London, and Ten
Miles round it, on Sunday the 15th of this instant January, and throughout
England on Sunday the 29th of the same Month, by all Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates, in their Respective Parish Churches, and Chapels, in behalf of the
King, the Queen, and the Royal Family, upon Occasion of the Queen's being with
Child.
This Service shall be the same with the usual Office for the Days above named,
except where it is hereafter otherwise appointed
At the beginning of Morning Prayer, the Minister shall read these Sentences
following.
I Exhort, that first of all Prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1.2.3.
Supplications, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings be made for all Men; for
Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
Life in all Godliness, and Honesty; for this is Good, and Acceptable in the
sight of GOD our Savior.

S. Math. 7.12.
Whatsoever Ye would that Men should Do unto you, Do ye even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

In the Place of [Venite Exultemus] shall be used this following Hymn.
Psalm. 96.1.
O Sing unto the Lord a new Song, sing unto the Lord all the whole Earth.

verse. 2.
Sing unto the Lord, and Praise his Name by telling his Salvation from day to
day.

For the Lord is Great, and cannot worthily be Praised, He is more to be feared
than all Gods.

Glory and Worship are before him, Power and Honor are in his Sanctuary.

Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye Kindreds of the People, Ascribe unto the Lord,
Worship and Power.

Ascribe unto the Lord, the Honor due unto his Name, Psalm. 22.11
bring Presents, and come into his Courts.

God stands in the Congregation of Princes. He is Judge among the Gods.

Psalm. 33.13.
There is no King saved by the Multitude of an Host, neither is any mighty Man
delivered by much strength.

But the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, ver. 17.
and upon them that put their Trust in His Mercy.

Let all those that seek Thee, Psalm. 40.19.
be joyful and glad in Thee, and let such as love thy Salvation, say always, the
Lord be praised.

O Think upon thy Congregation, Psalm. 74.2.
whom thou have Redeemed and Purchased of Old.

Think upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, Psalm. 74.3.
and Mount Sion, wherein thou have dwelt.

Thou, O God, have sent forth strength for Us, Psalm. 68.28.
Establish, O Lord, what thou have wrought in Us.

So We thy People, and Seep of thy Pasture, shall give Thee Thanks for ever,
and be showing forth thy Praise from Generation to Generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms, 21.127.128.132.

Proper Lessons Genesis 17. to ver. 17. Heb. 11.


To be Added in the Versicles after the Creed.

O Lord, save the King.

And evermore mightily Defend Him.

Prevent Him with the Blessings of Goodness.

And make him glad with the joy of thy Countenance.

O Lord, save Thy Servant the Queen.

And make Her a joyful Mother of Children.

Endue thy Ministers with Righteousness, etc.

The first Collect instead of that for the Day.
O Almighty God, the Fountain of all Life by whose only Gift it comes, that
Mankind is Increased; Blessed be that good Providence, which has Vouchsafed Us
fresh Hopes of Royal Issue by our Gracious Queen Mary; Strengthen Her, we
beseech Thee, and Perfect what thou have begun. Command thy Holy Angels to
Watch over Her Continually, and Defend Her from all Dangers, and evil
Accidents, That what she has Conceived may be happly brought forth, to the Joy
of our Sovereign Lord the King, the farther Estalbishment of His Crown, the
Happiness, and Welfare of the whole Kingdom, and the Glory of thy Great Name.
Which We humbly Beg of thy Gracious Goodness through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

At the end of the Litany, immediately after [ We humbly beseech Thee, etc.]
this following Prayer is to be used.
ALmighty and Everliving God, We most humbly Acknowledge, That in Thee alone We
Live, Move, and have our Being: and that Children, and the Fruit of the Womb
are a Gift and Heritage that comes only of Thee. We therefore devoutly beseech
Thee to Preserve and Protect our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King JAMES, and
so bless Him, that He may see His Children's Children, and Peace upon Israel.
We pray Thee also for his Royal Consort Queen MARY, Make her, O Lord, as a
Fruitful Vine upon the Walls of his House, and his Children like Olive branches
round about his Table. Increase and Multiply the whole Royal Family, That the
King's Seed may endure, for ever, and his Throne be as the Sun before Thee. So
we thy People shall remember, and Praise thy Name from one Generation to
another, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the Common Service next after the Commandments, the first Collect shall be
the same, as in Morning Prayer, O Almighty God, the Fountain of all Life, etc.

Then shall follow one of the two Collects for the King.

The Epistle 1 These. 5. v. 14. to the 26.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 5. v. 3. to the 13.

After the Prayer for the Church Militant, shall follow this Prayer.
O Almighty GOD the Blessed and only Potentate, by whose Appointment and
Blessing Kings Reign, and Kingdoms are Established in Peace: We become Humble
Suitors to thy Divine Majesty in Behalf of our Dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES,
That Thou would Defend his Person in Safety, and Prosper his Reign with
Honorable Successes, and make his Name Glorious in the maintenance of Truth,
Righteousness and Charity; That under the happy influence of his Government, We
may all lead Quiet and Peaceable Lives, in all Godliness, and Honesty. We
Acknowledge, with thankful Hearts, the great Mercy Thou have bestowed upon Him,
and his Royal Consort, and the whole Realm, in the apparent Hopes of farther
Issue. Let the, Prayers of thy People prevail, that our Hopes be not Cut off,
nor our Expectations Disapointed. Let thy Watchful Providence Overshaddow our
Gracious Queen Preserve her Health. Support her Spirit, and Grant her an Easy,
and Happy Deliverance. And do thou so Graciously Bless and Multiply the whole
Royal Family, that the Ages to come may evermore Rejoice under the Government
of our Sovereign, and his Posterity; Which we earnestly Crave of thy great
Mercy, through Jesus Christ our only Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Let this be Printed,

Sunderland P.

FINIS.

