ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry.

Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens,
and Sidemen of every Parish within the DIOCES of DVRHAM. In the PRIMARY
VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God NATHANAEL By Divine Providence
Lord Bishop of DVRHAM.

London, Printed for James Collins, 1676.

The form of a Church-VVardens Oath.
YOu shall swear, truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a
Church-VVarden within your Parish: And according to the best of your skill and
knowledge present such Things and Persons, as to your knowledge are presentable
by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm.

So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry. WITHIN THE DIOCES of DVRHAM.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1. IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Can.
85.
Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate? the Windows well
Glazed, the Floors well Paved, the Seats well fastened, and conveniently
placed; and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the House of God?

II. HAS the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, Lind. prove. Constable.
lib. 3. de imunitat. Ecclesiae
or any part thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly
belonging thereunto been imbezelled, sold or made away? In whose hands or
custody does the same, or a, ny part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or
have heard therein.

III. IS there a Font of Stone, Can. 81.
with a good Cover thereunto standing in convenient place toward the lower
part of your Church, for the administration of Baptism? And is there, Can. 82.
in your Chancel a decent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords
Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine woollen-Cloth, and another
Covering of white and pure Linen to spread thereupon? and have you a fair
Communion-Cup, or Chalice, Can. 20.
with a Cover of silver, and one or more Flagons of silver, or pewter,
thereunto belonging.

IV. HAVE you in your said Church, Can 82. Can 82.
or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew for your Ninister to read Divine Service
in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last
Translation, Can. 80.
in a large Volume, and the Book of Common Prayer, (established by the late Act
of Parliament) both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of
Homilies set forth by Authority? Ks. Conf. Canons.
A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? and a Printed Table of the
Degees wherein Marriage is prohibited? Can. 99. Can. 58.


V. Have you a comely large Suplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his
Public Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the
charge of your Parish?

VI. Have you a Register-Book of Parchment, Can. 70.
wherein to register the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are Married,
Christened, or Buried, within your Parish, together with the Names and Sirnames
of both the Parents of the Children so Christened, expressing the Day, Month,
and Year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? and is the
transcript thereof yearly, within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought
into the Bishops Registry?

VII. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, Can. 52.
wherein to record the Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted
at any time to Preach in your Church or Chapel? As also a third Book, wherein
to write down the Church wardens accounts: together with a strong Chest, Can.
89.
with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all the
aforementioned Furniture, in safe Custody? and lastly, have you a Bier, with a
black Hearse-cloth, for the Burial of the Dead.

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently ^enced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, Can.
85.
and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has
any person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own
ground or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there
growing been cut down? how long since? by whom? 35 Ed. 1.
and to whose use and benefit?

II. IS the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Lind. lib. 1. de Offic.
Archid.
(with all the outhouses thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient
repair; Or have any of the said Houses, or Outhouses, been defaced or pulled
down without License from the Ordinary, and by whom? Has any person encroached
upon any Garden, Yard, or Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage house?
Ibid. de Eccles. Edif.
or cut up any Trees growing thereon? or changed, or removed the ancient Marks
and Bounds of the same?

III HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Can. 87.
Gardens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, or
Vicarage; as also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tythes, and Portions of Tithes,
or other yearly profits (either within or without your Parish,) as belong
thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom,
as you know, or have heard?

IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage, Lind. lib. 3. de rebus Eccles.
been taken away, or exchanged for other without the free consent of the
incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? by whom has the same been made? and
how many years since? and how much is your parsonage or Vicarage
damnified-thereby in the yearly vallue thereof? as you know, believe or have
heard.

TIT. III, Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister defamed, Q Eliz. In junct. 26. Can. 36. Lind. lib. 3.13.
Q. Eliz. Cap. 12.
or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonaical
compact?

II HAS he been legally Inducted into his Benefice?

III DID he within two months after his Induction, publicly in the Church,
upon some Sunday or Holy Day, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39
Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his assent thereunto?

IV HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Can 41.
Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice among you How many weeks in any
one your has he been absent from it?

V. HAS your Minister a Curate to assist him? Can. 47.48.
Who is that Curate? Is he conformable to the Laws and Or^^^^ of the Church of
England? and does he serve in any ^^^er Church beside? and what yearly stipend
does your M^^ster allow him?

VI. DOES your Parson. Can. 14.21.68. Rubric of Bapt.
Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service,
administration of the Holy Sacraments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of
Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick Burial of the Dead, and
pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and words
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, Commun. Visitat. Bur.
without any addition, emission, or Alteration of the same? And does he use all
such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, Comin.
as are appointed in the said Book, so far as you have observed?

VII. DOES your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating the Divine Offices in
your Church or Chapel, Can. 58.
wear the Surplice.

VIII. DOES he observe the Holy days and fasting days, Can. 64. Rub. Com.
Prayer. Q. Eliz. Injunct 1559.
as also the Ember weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as in
the Common Prayer Book is appointed? giving notice to the Parishioners of every
of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next
before?

IX. HAS your Minister been Licensed to preach by the Bishop? Can. 48.
If so, does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary absence,
Can. 49.
or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your Church or Chapel, one
Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed Preacher, Can. 45.46.
or being so Licensed be hindered by Sickness, or other wise, as aforesaid; does
he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a Licensed
Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Anthority to be there read by a
Priest or Deacon?

X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism? Can. 59. Can. 61. Can. 66.
and does he prepare, and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by
the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all popish Recusants and other
Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty in obeying the
Law, and submitting to the government thereof?

VI. DOES he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any
Infant that is in danger of death? Can. 67. Can. 68.
Is there any Child past Infancy, or other person of more years, through
Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Can. 69.
Does he use to baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers? or admit either
of the Parents to be Godfather or GodMother to their own Children? Can ^^.


XII. HAS he at any time (as you, ^^n 5.
know or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious or Schismatical
Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into parties and factions, 13. Q. Eliz.
12.
the disturbance of the public peace and unity either of Church or State?

XIII. HAS he presumed to marry any persons in private houses? Can. 62.
or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents? or without
the banes first published on three Sundays or holy days in the Church? or at
any other hour then between eight and twelve in the morning, unless he had a
License or Dispensation so to do

XIV. DOES any person preach in your parish as a Lecturer? Can. 56.
Has he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Does he, before his Lecture
read Divine Service according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all
respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
prophesying, or exercises, Can. 72.
not appointed by Authority or does he, or any other, either Minister, or lay
person hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private houses within your Parish,
for people of several Families to resort unto, Can. 73.
under the pretenses of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curato, or Lecturer, a man of a sober, Can. 73.
unblameable, and exemplary life; Does he familiarly converse with ungodly
vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Tav^rns or
Alehouses? a common Gamester? a Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller? Does he set
Neighbors at variance one with another? or encourage them to Suits and
Contentious? Can 47.
is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or vehemently suspected of
Incontinency with any person, either within your Parish, or without? Is his
apparel grave and decent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his
Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or Scandalous,
and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? Can. 110.
any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectaries, that refuse to
come unto the public Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church? or that
makes profession of any other Religion then what is established in the Church
of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names?

II. IS there any person in your Parish that lives under a common fame, Can.
109.
or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any
common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods
Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers, or
Sowers of sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

III. DO any of your Parish upon Sundays, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. Cap. 3. Cap. 13.
or Holy Days, follow their bodily or ordinary Labors, or permit their
Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold? or do any Vintners,
Innkeepers, or other Victuallers, and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any
persons to tipple, or game in their houses upon these days?

IV. DOES every person inhabiting and sojourning within your Parish duly
resort unto your Church, 1 Q. Eliz. 2.
or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holy Day appointed for Divine Service? Do
they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order, and decency, during
all the whole time of Common Prayer, Can. 18. Can. 111.
preaching, or other Service of God there used? And are there any among you
that come only to the Preaching, and not to Common Prayers of the Church?

V. DOES every person reverently uncover his head, Can. 18.
and so continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all
reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are
read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned?

VI. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant children to
be Baptized publicly in the Church, Rub. Bap.
unless in case of urgent danger? in which case the child may be baptized at
home by a lawful Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy?
Or do they send them from their own Minister to be bapized in any other
Parishes, or after other form then is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time then the Church allows? And are there any Infants,
or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet unbaptized.

VII. DOES every Householder in your Parish, Cap. 59.
cause their children and servants so come to Church to learn their Catechism,
and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of
them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holy Days, as in the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? that when they are well instructed in the same,
they may be confirmed by the Bishop? Can. 61.


VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, Can. 112. Can. 114.
who being 16 years of age, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Does any
in your Parish refuse to receive the same, kneeling, Can. 21. Can. 27. Rub. Co.
Pr. Can. 28. and 57.
or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and
Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers, not of your Parish, that forsake
their own Churches, and usually repair to others for it.

IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? Can. 65.
how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of your Parish keep
society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved?

X. ARE there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife, Can. 99.
who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced
have Married again? Or any that being lawfully married, Can. 107.
and not sparated, or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together?

XI. ARE there any married-women in your Parish, who, Rub. Common Prayer.
after their delivery from the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their
public thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they
come decently apparelled, and make their offerings according to custom?

XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? 87 Hen. 8.20. Rub. Common Prayet. Can. 85.
Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the Rate assessed upon them for the
repair of your Church or Chapel, and for the providing of such Books,
Furniture, and Ornaments, as be requisite for the performance of all Divine
Offices there?

XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead, Rub. Com. Prayer. Can. 6. Can 92. 21
Hen. 8.5. Lind. lib. 3. de Test.
according to the Rites of the Church of England? and are there any Wills or
Testaments of persons dead in your Parish that be yet unproved? Or any Goods
administered, without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any, dying in your
Parish, or else where, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chapel? what were
those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XIV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been crected in your Chancel or
in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk aged 21 years
at the least? Can 91.
Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or able to perform his
duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and does
he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are his wages duly
paid unto him.

II. DOES he, or your Sexton (if there he any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to your doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? and does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from dust, cob-webs,
and other annoyance? Does he toll or Ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Can. 67.
Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church?
and when any person is passing out of this life, does he, upon notice given him
thereof toll a Bell, as has been accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby
be warned to recommend the dying person to the Grace and Favor of God.

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School masters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS their in your Parish any Hospitals, Almshouse, or Free School, not of
the Kings Foundation or Patronage? 2 Hen. 5.1. Q. Eliz. A. 34.
Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly
Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the
same ordered and Governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the
Revenues thereof rightly employed according to the intention of the Founder,
and of such grants or Ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Can. 77.
Parish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Can. 79.
Does your Schoolmaster teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth
by Authority? Does he cause them upon Sundays and Holy Days orderly to repair
to your Church or Chapel? and see that they behave themselves there quietly
and reverently, during the time of Divine Service and Sermon?

III. DOES any man in your Parish practice Physic, 3 Hen. 8.18.
or Surgery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife,
without Approbation and License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens,
and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and Parishioners; Can. 89.
or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, Can. 89.
and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining in
their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel?

III. DO the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligently care, Can. 90.
and see who of their Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon
in your Church and Chapel upon Sundays and Holy Days? and if they find any of
them to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant
from some of the Justices of Peace, levy of them, by way of distress upon their
goods, the sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence, 1 Q Eliz. 2.
according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do they
distribute the several sums so levied among the poor of your Parish, according
to the Law?

IV. DO they present them that come late to Church after Divine Service is
begun, or depart before it be ented? Can. 18.
Do they suffer none to stand idle or talk together in the Church Porch, Can.
19.
or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, during the time of Prayers, Can. 90.
Preaching or other sacred Offices.

V. DO they suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, Can. 18.
women, Servants, or children in your Church or Chapel? Are they careful that
none of them fit, lean or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they
permit no Minstrels, Can. 88.
no Morrisdancers, no Dogs, Hawks or Hounds, to be brought or come into your
Church to the disturbance of the Congregation.

VI. DO they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Can.
20.
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread and of good Wine, according
to the number of Communicants?

VII. DO they cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chapel to
subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose, Can. 52.
together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this
Diocese? And do they permit no other to preach?

VIII. HAVE they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) now sworn to give in a true
answer, Can. 119.
unto all these Articles of Enquiry in all their several titles, taking
sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with you
their Minister for your faithful assistance.

FOR know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of your Office is the
chief means whereby public Disorders, Sins, and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and
faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by
public fame; That in such cases the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed
against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in cases of willful Omission and
Perjury.

Nathanael Duresme.

THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the names of such of the
younger sort of their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receiye
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed: especially
such as having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the
Holy Communion; and to present them to the Bishop to be confirmed, as there
shall be opportunity.


