ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY CONCERNING MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL Within the DIOCESE of
LANDAFFE IN THE EPISCOPAL VISITATION Of the Right Reverend Father in God,
FRANCIS, Lord Bishop of LANDAFFE.

Anno. Dom. 1671.

LONDON: Printed for James Collins in Westminster Hall. M.DC.LXXI.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Tendered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall Swear diligently to Enquire, and true Presentment make of all
Defaults and Offenses, as are Inquirable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this
Realm. So God you help.

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY within the DIOCESE OF LANDAFFE.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments, Furniture and
Possessions belonging to them.
1. IS the Fabric of your Church (or Chapel) with all things appertaining to
it, kept in good repair within and without, in such order and decency, as
becomes the House dedicated to the Public Worship of God?

2. IS there any Chapel of Ease within your Parish? What Consecration has it
had, or what Instruments of its Allowance to be so: Can you produce?

3. IS there in the Church (or Chapel) a Font of Stone standing in the usual,
ancient place, with a Cover to it, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there
also a convenient Communion Table covered with a fair Carpet of Silk, or other
decent Stuff, in time of Divine Service; and with a fair Linen Cloth at the
time of Administering the Sacrament? What Cup, Chaiice, Paten, or Flagons, have
you belonging to that Service?

4. HAVE you in your Church (or Chapel) a convenient Seat for the Minister to
read Divine Service in? And a Pulpit, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the
same? Have any Pews or Seats been erected by any private person of his own
authority without leave from the Ordinary?

5. HAVE you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of
Common Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clerk? Have
you the Book of Homiles set forth by Authority, the Book of Canons, and the
Table of Degrees allowed and prohibited in Marriage?

6. HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment for all who are Christened, married,
and buried in the Parish, in which are set down the names of the parties, with
the day, month, and year of each Christning, marriage and burial? Is the
Transcri^t thereof every year, within one month after the Twenty fifth of
March, carried into the Bishops Registry?

7. HAVE you a Paper book, in which the names of Strangers, who Preach or
Officiate in the Church (or Chapel) are set down; and another Book for the
Churchwardens accounts?

8. HAVE you a fair Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his
public Ministration, provided at the charge of the Parish?

9. HAVE you a Chest for Alms, with three Locks and Keys, and another Chest to
keep the Books and Ornaments of the Church? Have you a Bier with a black
Herse-cloth for the burial of the Dead?

10. IS the Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Pales, or Rails, and
decently kept from all annoyance or encroachments? Are the Trees therein
preserved?

11. IS the Mansion House of your Minister, with all other houses thereto
belonging, kept in good Repair? Have any of them been pulled down, or defaced?
Have any incroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees
thereon growing?

12. HAVE you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards and
Tenements, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; also a particular List of
such Pensions, Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within, or without the
Parish) as belong thereunto? Are any of them withheld from your Minister, as
you know, or have heard, and by whom?

13. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage, been taken away or alienated by Safe or Exchange, without License
from the Ordinary, and free consent of the Incumbent?

TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS your Minister Episcopally Ordained Deacon or Priest, according to the
Laws of the Realm of England? Is he defamed, or suspected to have obtained his
Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal Compact? has he been Legally Instituted
and Inducted unto his Benefice? and did he within two months after his
Induction, publicly read in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, the
thirty nine Articles of Religion, established in the Church of England? And did
he then and there declare his assent thereunto?

2. HAS your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Archbishop, Bishop of
this Diocese, or either of the two Universities? Does he diligently read Divine
Service, and Preach every Lords day in the Church, unless hindered by sickness,
or reasonable absence? And in such cases, does he procure some lawful Minister
to read Prayers to Preach and perform other Ministerial Duties?

3. HAS your Minister (or any other who Preached in your Church) published in
his Sermons any Doctrine which is new:, strange, and disagreeing from the Word
of God, and the Articles of the Christian Faith, or any thing against the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the Government of it, as it is now
established? Does he use before his Sermon, the Form of Prayer prescribed by
the Fifty fifth Canon?

4. DOES your Minister in the morning and evening Service, in the
Administration of the Sacraments, and in performing other Religious offices
appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms in the Book of
Common Prayer, together with all those Rites and Ceremonies which are enjoined
in this Church? And does he make use of the Surplice and the Hood proper for
him, if a Graduate, when he reads Divine Service; or administers the Sacraments?

5. DOES your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of his Parish every
Sunday and Holyday before Evening Service? Does he prepare and procure them (as
occasion is offered) to come and be confirmed by the Bishop? And does he
endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and all Sectaries in your Parish, to
the true Religion?

6. IS your Minister a man of a sober, unblameable, and exemplary life? Is he
grave, modest, and regular in his outward demeanor and apparel, according to
the Constitutions of the Church? Or is his carriage, conversation, or company
in any kind whatsoever, disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming his Calling
and Charge?

7. IS your Minister ready to visit the Sick, and to baptize Infants in danger
of death, being so desired? Is any Infant or more aged person in the Parish yet
unbaptized by his default? Have those Children which have been baptized
in-private Houses by the Minister of the Parish, afterward been brought into
the Church; and did the Minister there certify the Congregation, That the true
Form of Baptism was by him privately before used? Or if any children in the
Parish have been baptized privately by any other lawful Minister, have those
Children been brought to your Church? and has the Minister of the Parish there
examined, whether such children were lawfully baptized or not? Does your
Minister refuse to give the Sacrament to any in the Parish, and for what cause?
Or does he give it to such as are scandalous, or notorious sinners, or to any
Excommunicated persons? Does he duly administer the blessed Sacrament three
times every year at the least, whereof Easter to be one?

8. DOES your Minister, or any other Minister, Marry any persons within your
Parish, in private Houses, or such as are under age, not having the consent of
their Parents and Guardians? Does he, or any other Minister, marry any within
your Parish without Banes first published three Sundays or Holydays in the
Church? or Banes being not so published, without License? or at prohibited
times or hours, without License so to do?

9. DOES your Minister duly bid and observe Holydays and Fasting days as is
appointed? and does he then use the Form of Prayer prescribed by the Church?
Has he taken upon him to appoint any private Fasts, or Religious Exercises,
without lawful Authority? Does he, or any other (Minister, or Lay person) in
your Parish, hold any Conventicles, or Religious Meetings for people of several
Families to resort unto, contrary to the Laws in that case provided?

10. IS your Minister constantly resident among you, and how many weeks in the
year has he been absent from his Benefice? Has he a Curate to assist him in
his absence or presence? Is that Curate in holy Orders and has he a License
from the Bishop to serve the said Cure? Does he carry himself in all things, as
an able and discreet Minister, and Conformable to the Church of England? Does
he serve any more Cures besides that of your Parish, and at what distance? and
does any Laymen, not being in Holy Orders, presume to read Public Prayers in
the Church?

11. IS there in your Parish any Lecturer? Is he in Orders, and duly Licensed?
Does he read Divine Service before his Lecture? and is he conformable to the
Discipline of the Church of England?

2. DOES your Minister every six Months publicly denounce all such as
persevere in the Sentence of Excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? Have
any excommunicate person been received into the Church, without a Certificate
from the Ordinary of their Absolution? Or any so dying, buried with Christian
Burial?

TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners.
1. ARE there any in your Parish who are reputed Heretics, or Schismatics
refusing Communion with the Church of England? Any Impugners of the Religion
established; of his Majesty's Supremacy, or of any of the Laws, Rites and
Ceremonies Ecclesiastical? Have any spoken or declared any thing in derogation,
or to the depraving of the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and
administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer, as it is now established by Law? are there any Convicted
Papists, known Anabaptists, or Quakers in the Parish?

2. ARE there any in your Parish, who lie under a common Fame, or vehement
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? are there any common Drunkards,
Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods holy Name and Word? are there any
Excommunicate persons, or any who countenance or keep company with them?

3. DO any of your Parish profane the Lords day by neglecting of public holy
duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary Calling, or using unlawful
Recreations, or permitting their Children and Servants so to do? Do they duly
observe other Holy days, Festivals and Fasts appointed by Authority?

4. DO all those who inhabit in your Parish, duly resort to your Church (or
Chapel) and continue there during Divine Service, Sermon, and other holy
Duties, with that Reverence, Order and Decency, as befits devout Christians? Or
have any occasioned Riot, Clamor, or fighting in the Church at any time? Is
there any Recusant, Papists, or Sectaries in your Parish? Do they, or any of
them keep any Schoolmaster in their house, which comes not to Church to hear
Divine Service, and receive the Holy Communion?

5. ARE there any in your Parish, who refuse to have their Infant children
baptized by your Minister? Or do they keep them unbaptized longer than the
Church allows? And what Infants, or more aged persons are there in your Parish
unbaptized?

6. DO all your Householders duly send their Children, Apprentices and Servants
to be Catechized? And do they take care (when occasion is offered) they should
be Confirmed by the Bishop?

7. IS there any person in your Parish so confirmed and instructed, and being
Sixteen years of age, who refused to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, at least three times every year, whereof Easter to be one? And do all
receive this Sacred Mystery with that outward gesture of humility and
reverence, as becomes them, meekly kneeling upon their knees, according to the
order and custom of the Church?

8. ARE there any in your Parish, who are known or suspected to be unlawfully
married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any who being
lawfully married (and never Divorced) do yet live asunder? Or any, who being
lawfully Divorced, do live together again? Or being separated for Adultery,
have afterward Entermarried with any other, during the life of their first
Consort?

9. ARE there any married Women in your Parish, who after their safe Delivery
from Childbirth, refuse to make their humble and public Thanksgivings to God,
according to the appointment of the Church?

10. ARE there any of your Church, who refuse to pay their Easter-Offerings,
and other Duties to your Minister? Or to pay the rates assessed on them, for
the repair and provisions of the Church?

11. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron, or other person in your
Parish, who having the gift of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, has made gain
thereby upon any bargain, either for Money, Pension, Lease, Reserve of Tithes,
or Glebe, or other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever?

12. DO any among you refuse to Bury their Dead, according to the Rites of the
Church of England? Are there any Wills of deceased persons unproved, or Goods
not administered? Do you know of any Legacies given to your Church, or the
Cathedral Church of Landaffe, or to the Poor, or to other charitable Uses, not
yet received by you, or detained from you, or not applied to the charitable
Uses appointed:

TIT. IV. Concerning the Officers belonging to the Church.
1. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish, yearly chosen according to Law? and
are there Sidemen appointed to assist them, for the due ordering of the Church?

2. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to those
that succeed them, together with all moneys, and other things belonging to your
Church or Chapel?

3. HAVE you a Parish Clerk aged Twenty years at least, who is of sober life
and good Report? Is he chosen by your Minister, and approved by the Parish? and
is he able for Reading, Writing, and Singing, as a Clerk? are his wages duly
paid him?

4. DOES he or your Sexton take care of your Church, to keep it locked and
clean: to open the doors, and Ring the Bells in due time, to call the Living to
the Worship of God; also to admonish them by Tolling of a Passing Bell for any
that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own death and to commend the
others weak condition to the mercy of God?

TIT. V. Concerning Almshouses, Schools and Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons and Midwives.
1. IS there any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, founded in your Parish?
are they so governed and ordered in the use and Revenue as the Founders
appointed, according to the Ordinances and Statutes which have been made
concerning the same?

2. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish? Is he or they
licenced and allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Does he-instruct his Scholars in
the Catechism and Religion of the Church of England? Is there any Woman that
takes upon her to instruct and educate any young Maidens? does she resort
duly, and bring with her to Divine Service, upon the Lords day and Holy days,
all such young Maidens as are committed to her care?

3. DO any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery, or Midwifery, without
License?

TIT. VI. Touching Ecclesiastical Officers.
1. ARE there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Diocese, that take and receive any extraordinary Fees
for any Cause? have abuses or offenses been presented by Churchwardens and
Quest-men? And are such offenses being presented, suppressed, or left
unpunished?

2. HAVE any Apparitors taken any Reward for the concealing of any Offense, or
the avoiding of the punishment of the Offenders? And do they summon any without
a Citation first had? IF you know of any other Default, or Crime of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you are to present the same.

THE Minister of every Parish may join in presentiments with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen; and if they will not Present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the persons that have the chief care of the suppressing of sin and
Impiety in their Parishes) may present the Crimes aforesaid, and such things as
shall want due Reformation, Can. 113.

FRANCIS C. LANDAVEN.


