CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, for dissolving the Parliament.
CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the faith:
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as upon diverse good considerations, relating to Our service, and
the good of Our subjects: We did call the Parliament of this Our ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, and did authorize Our right trusty, and right entirely
beloved Cousine and Councellor, the Duke of Landerdale, to be Our Commissioner
during the whole currency thereof, which though the exigency of Our affairs,
has been continued beyond our first intention: We being necessarily engaged in
a war with the States of the United Neitherlands. And by the last Act of the
last Session of that Parliament, bearing date, the third day of March last; Our
said Parliament was by Us declared current, and adjourned to the fourteenth of
October next; The peace betwixt Us and the United Provinces not being then
perfected; and that peace being now brought to its full effect, and seeing the
present condition of Our affairs does not require, that Our good Subject should
be any longer burdened, with attendance in this Parliament, We have resolve to
dissolve the same: Likeas, We, with advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby
dissolve the present current Parliament of this Our Kingdom, and do declare the
same to be dissolved. Our will is herefor, and We charge you straightly, and
commands, that incontinent these Our letters seen ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and
Authority, by oppen Proclamation, make publication of Our dissolving the
present current Parliament of this Our Kingdom, and that the same is dissolved,
that all Our Leiges may have due and timeous notice thereof. The which to do,
We commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by these Our
letters, delivering them by you duly execute, and endorsat again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at White Hall, the ninteenth day of May, one thousand
six hundred seventy and four years, and of Our reign the six and twentieth
year. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.
God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printed to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY. Anno Dom. 1674.


