THE SERVICE That is Performed in the KINGS Free Chapel of S. GEORGE in the
Castle of WINDSOR, UPON Obiit Sunday In the Morning: (That is the Sunday before
every Quarter-day) And at the Offering up of the Achievements of the Deceased
KNIGHTS of the GARTER.
The SERVICE is the same that is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer, until
you come to the Psalms for the Day of the Month: In stead of which you have
these proper Psalms, PSALM XXI. CXLVI. CXLVII.
PSALM 21.
1.THE King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be
of thy salvation.

2. Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request
of his lips.

3. For thou shall prevent Him with the Blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever, and
ever.

5. His honor is great in thy salvation: glory, and great worship shall thou
lay upon him.

6. For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the
joy of thy countenance.

7. And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy
of the most Highest he shall not miscarry.

8. All thine enemies shall feel thy hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

9. Thou shall make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall
destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

10. Their fruit shall thou root out of the Earth: and their seed from among
the Children of men.

11. For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as
they are not able to perform.

12. Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shall
thou make ready against the face of them.

13. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing, and praise
thy power.

PSALM 146.
1.PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: yea, as
long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

2. O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no
help in them.

3. For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth:
and then all his thoughts perish.

4. Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

5. Who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: who keeps his
promise for ever.

6. Who helps them to right that suffer wrong: who feeds the hungry.

7. The Lord loses men out of prison: the Lord gives sight to the blind.

8. The Lord helps them that are fallen: the Lord cares for the righteous.

9. The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless and widow:
as for the way of the ungodly, he turns it upside down.

10. The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for evermore: and throughout all
generations.

PSALM 147.
1.O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea,
a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

2. The Lord does build up Jerusalem: and gather together the Outcasts of
Israel.

3. He heals those that are broken in heart: and gives medicine to heal
their sickness.

4. He tells the number of the stars: and calls them all by their names.

5. Treat is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.

6. The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

7. O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our
God.

8. Who covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth: and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of men.

9. Who gives fodder unto the cattle: and feeds the young ravens that call
upon him.

10. He has no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delights he in
any man's legs.

11. But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his
mercy.

12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.

13. For he has made fast the bars of thy gates: and has blessed thy children
within thee.

14. He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the flour of wheat.

15. He sends forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runs very
swiftly.

16. He gives snow like wool: and scatters the hoar frost like ashes.

17. He casts forth his Ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost?

18. He sends out his word and melts them: he blows with his wind, and
the waters flow.

19. He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

20. He has not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge
of his laws.

After the PSALMS the Junior Cannon upon the place comes out of his Stall with
the Verger before him, and reads the LESSON at the Desk, which is taken out
of The 44th Chap. of Ecclesiasticus.
1.LEt us now praise famous men, and our fathers that begat us.

2. The Lord has wrought great glory by them, through his great power from the
beginning,

3. Such as did bear rule in their Kingdoms, men renowned for their power,
giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring prophecies:

4. Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge of learning
meet for the people, wise and eloquent in their instructions,

5. Such as found out musical tunes, and recited verses in writing:

6. Rich men furnished with ability, living peaceably in their habitations.

7. All these were honored in their generations, and were the glory of their
times.

8. There be of them that have left a name behind them, that their praises
might be reported.

9. And some there be which have no memorial, who are perished as though they
had never been, and are become as though they had never been born, and their
children after them.

10. But these were merciful men, whose righteousness has not been forgotten.

11. With their seed shall continually remain a good inheritance; and their
children are within the covenant.

12. Their seed stands fast, and their children for their sakes.

13. Their seed shall remain for ever, and their glory shall not be blotted out.

14. Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore.

15. The people will tell of their wisdom, and the congregations will show
forth their praise.

16. Enoch pleased the Lord, and was translated, being an example of repentance
to all generations.

17. Noah was found perfect and righteous in the time of wrath, he was taken in
exchange (for the world) therefore was he left as a remnant unto the earth when
the flood came.

18. An everlasting covenant was made with him, that all flesh should perish no
more by the flood.

19. Abraham was a great father of many people, in glory was there none like
unto him:

20. Who kept the Law of the most High, and was in covenant with him, he
established the covenant in his flesh, and when he was proved, he was found
faithful.

21. Therefore he assured him by an oath, that he would bless the Nations in
his seed, and that he would multiply him as the dust of the earth, and exalt
his seed as the stars, and cause them to inherit from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the utmost part of the land.

22. With Isaac did he establish likewise [for Abraham his fathers sake] the
blessing of all men and the covenant.

23. And made it rest upon the head of Jacob, He acknowledged him in his
blessing, and gave him an heritage, and divided his portions, among the twelve
tribes did he part them.

After the LESSON, Te Deum Laudamus is Sung.

After the Te Deum is ended, they all depart out of the Quire into the Body of
the Church to Sermon.

After Sermon is ended, the Canons go up to the Altar, and the Quire go to
their Stalls, and the Communion Service begins.

But if this shall happen to fall upon Easter Day, they begin the Psalms with
the Venite, and continue the Service for OBIIT Sunday as before, till they come
from the Sermon; And then the Canons do not go immediately up to the Altar, but
to their Stalls, and they begin the Service for EASTER DAY with the Anthem.

Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.

And then the proper Psalms for the Day.

After which, they Read the Second LESSON for EASTER DAY, and then Sing the
BENEDICTVS, and so go on with the SERVICE as at usual times; which otherwise is
omitted upon the OBIIT Days.

But at the Second SERVICE they Read the EPISTLE and GOSPEL for OBIIT SUNDAY.

The EPISTLE is taken out of the 33th Chapter of Deuteronomy.
1.ANd this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children
of Israel before his death.

2. And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he
shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints, from
his right hand went a fiery law for them.

3. Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and they sat down
at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

4 Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.

5. And he was King in Iesurum, when the heads of the people and the tribes of
Israel were gathered together.

6 Let Reuben live, and not dye; and let not his men be few.

7. And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Near, O LORD, the voice of
Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him, and
be thou an help to him from his enemies.

8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy holy one,
whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did strive at the waters
of Meribah;

9. Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither
did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have
observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.

10. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put
incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.

11. Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite
through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him,
that they rise not again.

12. And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in safety by
him; and the LORD shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between
his shoulders.

13. And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the precious
things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,

14. And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious
things put forth by the moon,

15. And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious
things of the lasting hills,

16. And for the precious things of the earth, and fullness thereof, and for the
good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of
Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his
brethren.

17. His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the
horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together, to the ends of
the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the
thousands of Manasseh.

18. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and Issachar
in thy tents.

19. They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer
sacrifices of righteousness; for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas,
and of treasures hid in the sand.

20. And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlarges Gad: he dwells as a
lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

21. And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of
the lawgiver was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he
executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments with Israel.

22. And of Dan he said, Dan is a lions whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.

23. And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with
the blessing of the LORD: possess thou the west and the south.

24. And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be
acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

25. Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, and as thy days, so shall thy strength
be.

26. There is none like unto the God of Iesurun, who rides upon the heaven in
thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

27. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms:
and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.

28. Israel then shall dwell in safety alone, the fountain of Jacob shall be
upon a land of corn and wine, also his heavens shall drop down dew.

29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the
Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine
enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high
places.

THe GOSPEL is the 5th Chapter of St. John's Gospel, beginning at the 24th
Verse, and ending at the 30th.
24.VErily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes ou
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation:
but is passed from death unto life.

25. Verily, verily I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear, shall live.

26. For as the Father has life in himself: so has he given to the Son to
have life in himself:

27. And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man.

28. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves, shall hear his voice,

29. And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.

After the CREED they which do not Receive the SACRAMENT depart.

After the SACRAMENT (which is always on Obiit Sunday) is ended, and the
Blessing given at the Altar, the Canons go to their Stalls, and these following
PRAYERS are Read.

Priest. O Lord save our King.


Quire. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.


O Lord our heavenly Father and merciful Savior Jesus Christ, assist our most
worthy King continually with thy holy Spirit, that as he is anciently and truly
descended from the noble Princes of this Realm, and the bountiful Patrons and
Founders of this Noble Order and Church, so he may proceed in all good works;
namely, for sustentation of Learning, and help of Poverty; and that all Noble
Men of this Realm (especially such as be Companions of this most Honorable
Order of the Garter,) may likewise dispose themselves, in Honor and Virtue at
all times, that God thereby may be the better honored, the Commonwealth
served, and their Fame remain to their Posterity, and that we all may continue
in the true Faith, and walk in good works that God has appointed us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

WE praise and thank thee, O Lord, in all the Noble Kings, Patrons and Founders
of this Order, and our Benefactors, thy servants humbly beseeching thy Majesty,
that as they for their time honorably and charitably did bestow their gifts to
our relief, so we may faithfully use them, to the end that thereby others may
be moved with such examples, to provide for good and learned Ministers to teach
thy holy Word, and to be merciful in relieving the poor, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and Savior. Amen.

GOd save our Gracious Sovereign, and all the Companions of the most Honorable
and Noble Order of the Garter. Amen.

At the Offering up of the Achievements of the Deceased KNIGHTS, these
foregoing PRAYERS are Read at the Altar by the PRELATE of the GARTER.

Here ends the OBIIT SERVICE.
These following PRAYERS are Read daily at Morning and Evening Prayer,
immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, we beseech thee to keep thy Servant CHARLES, our most Gracious
King and Governor, and so rule His Heart in thy Faith, Fear, and Love, that
evermore he may have affiance and trust in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GOd save our Gracious Sovereign, and all the Companions of the most Honorable
and Noble Order of the Garter. Amen.

FINIS.

