C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For Publishing the PEACE between His Majesty and the States
General of the United Netherlands.
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally specially constitute, Greeting.
Whereas a Peace has been Treated and Concluded at Westminster, between Us and
the States General of the United Netherlands, and the Ratifications thereof
exchanged, and publication thereof made at the Hague, the twenty fourth day of
February, one thousand six hundred and seventy four: In conformity thereunto,
We have thought fit hereby to Command, that the same be published throughout
all Our Dominions; And We do Declare, that no Acts of Hostility or Force are to
be committed by any of Our Subjects, upon any of the Subjects of the said
States General, within the several limits hereafter mentioned, from and after
the several days and times hereby also specified, viz. After the eighth day of
March, one thousand six hundred and seventy four, next ensuing, from the
Soundings to the Naz in Norway, viz. After the seventh day of April, one
thousand six hundred and seventy four, from the Soundings aforesaid, to the
City of Tanger. After the fifth day of May next following, in the Ocean,
Mediterranean, or elsewhere, betwixt the said City of Tanger, and the
Equinoctial Line. And lastly, after the twenty fourth of October next ensuing,
in any part of the world. And that whatsoever actions of Hostility and Force
shall be committed by any of Our Subjects, against any the Subjects of the
said States General, after the days aforesaid, upon color of whatsoever
former Commission, Letters of Marque, or the like, shall be deemed as illegal,
and the Actors obliged to make reparation and satisfaction, and be punished as
Violators of the Public Peace. And hereof We Will and Command all Our Subjects
to take notice, and govern themselves accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twenty seventh day of February, one
thousand six hundred and seventy four, and the six and twenty year of Our
Reign.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by His MAJESTY'S Printers, 1674.


