ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every PARISH within
the DIOCESE of SARVM.

IN THE Primary Episcopal Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD
GILBERT By Divine Permission, Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOU shall Swear, That you will well and truly execute the Office of
Churchwardens and Sides-men, in your several Parishes, by Presenting such
Things and Persons as you shall find or know to be Presentable by the Laws of
this Realm.

So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of SARVM.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and and sufficient repair;
and all things so decently ordered as becomes the House of God?

II. Is there a Font of Stone for the Administration of Baptism? And is there
in your Chancel a decent Communion Table for the Administration of the Lords
Supper, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or Cloth, and another covering of Linen
to spread thereon? And have you a Communion-Cup or Chalice, with a Cover of
Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging?

III. Have you in your said Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Pew for your
Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion
for the same? A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and the Book
of Common Prayer, (established by the late Act of Parliament) both well and
substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by
Authority, a Book of Canons, and a printed Table of the Degrees wherein
Marriage is prohibited?

IV. Have you a Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his public
Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the charge of
your Parish?

V. Have you a Register-book of Parchment, wherein to register the Names and
Sirnames of all such persons as are married, christened, or buried within your
Parish, together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the
Children so christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof yearly within
one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry?

VI. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens
Account, together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep the
aforesaid Book, and all the forementioned Furniture in safe custody? And
lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hearse-Cloth, for the Burial of the Dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Church yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and
decently kept from all annoyance, or encroachments? Have any Trees there
growing been cut down, how long since, by whom, and to whose use and benefit?

II. Is the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, 25 Ed. 1
with all the Outhouses thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient
repair? Or have any of the said Houses, or Outhouses been defaced or pulled
down without license from the Ordinary, and by whom? Has any person encroached
upon any Garden, Yard, or Close belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house,
or cut up any Treees growing thereon, or changed, or removed the ancient Marks
and Bounds of the same?

III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchyards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage; as
also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or
have heard?

IV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary? by whom has the same been made,
and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified
thereby in the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister defamed, or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice
or Orders by any Simoniacal Compact?

II. Has he been legally inducted into his Benefice?

III. Did he within two months after this Induction, publicly in the Church
upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service read the 39 Articles
of the Church of England established by Authority, and there publicly declare
his assent thereunto?

IV. Has he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he constantly resident upon
his Benefice among you? How many weeks in any one year has he been absent from
it?

V. Has your Minister a Curate to assist him? who is that Curate? is he
conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England, and does he serve
in any other Church beside? and what yearly stipend does your Minister allow
him?

VI. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth; Visitation of the sick, Burial
of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use
the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any
addition, omission, or alteration of the same? And does he use all such Rites
and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said
Book, so far as you have observed?

VII. Does your Minister at the reading or celebrating the Divine Offices in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice?

VIII. Does he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, as also the Ember-weeks,
and the yearly perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the Common Prayer Book is
appointed, giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the
Church, in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before?

IX. Has your Minister or Curate been licensed to Preach by the Bishop? If so,
does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary absence, or
other reasonable Impediment) himself Preach in your Church or Chapel one
Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a licensed Preacher, or being so licensed
be hindered by Sickness or otherwise, as aforesaid, does he procure a Sermon to
be so preached by some other Minister, and licensed Preacher? or one of the
Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon?

X. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechism? and does he prepare, and present them, being so instructed,
to be confirmed by the Bishop? and does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England?

XI. Does he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any
Infant that is in danger of Death? is there any Child past Infancy, or other
Person of more Years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized
in your Parish? Does he use to baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers?

XII. Has he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached any False,
Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the People
into Parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the public Peace and Unity
either of Church or State?

XIII. Has he presumed to marry any Persons in private Houses, or such as
being under Age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banns
first published on three Sundays or Holidays in the Church, or at any other
hours than between eight and twelve in the Morning, imless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XIV. Does any Person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture read Divine Service
according to the Book of Common Prayer, and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a Man of a sober, unblamable,
and exemplary Life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and
excommunicate Persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a common
Gamester, a Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at variance
one with another, or encourage them to Suits and Contentions? Is he noted to be
an intemperate Drinker, or vehemently suspected of Adultery or other sort of
Incontinency with any Person, either within your Parish, or without? Is his
Apparel grave and decent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his
Carriage and Conversation in any kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any Person that is a known or a reputed Atheist, or
Blasphemer and mocker of Religion, or any Papist, or any professing any other
form of Religion different from the Church of England, who has not rendered
himself capable of the benefit of the late Act for Liberty to Men of tender
Consciences in the way prescribed by the said Act?

II. Is there any Person in your Parish that lies under a common fame of
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's Name,
or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or filthy talkers or sowers of
Sedition, Faction, and Discord among their Neighbors?

III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily or
ordinary Labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
Wares sold, or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers
of Beer and Ale, suffer any Persons to tipple or game in their Houses upon
those days?

IV. Do the Inhabitants and Sojourners within your Parish duly resort unto your
Church or Chapel upon Sundays and Holidays appointed for Divine Service? Do
they then and there abide quietly, with Reverence, Order and Decency, during
all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God there
used?

V. Does every Person reverently uncover his Head, and so continue all the time
of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers,
and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read?

VI. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to
be baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent necessity? Are
all surviving Children who were privately baptized brought after Baptism into
the public Congregation, and is the Congregation certified of the true Form of
their Baptism according to the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer?

VII. Does every Householder in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to
come to Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto
your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays
and Holidays, as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed, that when they are
well instructed in the same they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

VIII. Do the Inhabitants of your Parish above sixteen Years of Age receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper at least three times in the Year, of which
Easter is always to be one? Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same
kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other
Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any Strangers not of your Parish
that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it?

IX. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any Crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of
your Parish keep Society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and
absolved?

X. Are there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife who are within the
degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced, have married again? Or
any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of
Law, do not cohabit together?

XI. Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons in your Parish, that be yet
unproved, or any Goods administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary? Did
any dying in your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XII. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, aged 21
Years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient or
able to perform his Duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, or according to the Right or Custom of your Parish? and does he duly
attend him in all Divine Services of the Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto
him, or who withholdeth the same from him?

II. Does he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, or
other Annoyance? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service Morning and Evening, that the People may
be warned to come unto the Church? And when any Person is passing out of this
Life, does he (upon notice given him thereof) toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to meditate upon their
own Death, and to recommend the dying Person to the Grace and Favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, not of
the King's Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue or Stipend, belonging to the Governors
or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it
ought to be? And are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the
intention of the Founder, and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made
concerning the same?

II. Does any Man keep a public School in your Parish, who is not allowed
thereunto by the Ordinary? Does your Schoolmaster teach his Scholars the
Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon Sundays
and Holidays orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? and see that they
behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

III. Does any Man in your Parish practice Physic, or Surgery, or any Woman
take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without approbation and
license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Querie to put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens and
Sidesmen, and Ecclesiastical Officers.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by the Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their Hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. Do they suffer no Misbehaviour or Disorder to be done by Men, Women, or
Servants, or Children in your Church or Chapel? or upon the Communion Table?

IV. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the number of the Communicants?

V. Are there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Diocese, that take and receive any extraordinary Fees
for any Thing or Cause? Have Abuses or Offenses been presented by
Churchwardens and Sidesmen, and are such Offenses, being presented, suppressed,
or left unpunished?

VI. Have any Apparitors taken any Reward for the concealing of any Offense, or
the avoiding of the Punishment of the Offenders? And do they summon any without
a Citation first had?

If you know of any other Default or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you
are to present the same.

THe Ministers of every Parish may join in Presentiments with the Churchwardens
and Sidesmen; and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the Persons that have the chief care of the suppressing of Sin and
Impiety in their Parishes) may present the Crimes aforesaid, and all such
things as shall want a Reformation.

Gilbert Sarum.
THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the
younger sort in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop.



FINIS.

