ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical.

EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish
within the Arch Deaconry OF Hereford In the VISITATION of the Reverend Dr Wm
Johnson Arch Deacon (...)

Anno Domini 1691.

The Churchwardens Oath.
You shall Swear truly and faithfully to Execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge; And also
truly to Present all such Things and Persons, as to your Knowledge are
Presentable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm.

So help you God, etc.
The Side-Mens Oath.
You shall Swear that you will be Assistant to the Churchwardens of your
Parish in the due Execution of their Office, so far as you are bound by Law.

So help you God, etc.
ARTICLES Of Enquiry within the Arch Deaconry of Hereford
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS Your Parish Church or Chapel, with the Chancels, kept in good and
sufficient Repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate,
the Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened,
repaired and conveniently placed, and all things so decently ordered, as
becomes the House of God? How many Bells have you in your Church, Chapel or
Steeple? Are the same whole, and in good order to ring, with the Wheels, Ropes,
and other things thereunto belonging?

II. HAS the Steeple, or Tower, of your Church or Chapel, or any part
thereof, been pulled down, or any of the Lead, or Bells, formerly belonging
thereunto, been imbezelled, sold or made away? In whose Hands or Custody does
the same, or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know or have heard
therein.

III. IS there a Font or Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel, a decent Communion Table for the
Administration of the Lord's Supper, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine
Woollen Cloth; and another Covering of white and pure Linen, to spread
thereupon? And have you a fair Communion-Cup or Chalice, with a cover of
Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter, thereunto belonging?

VI. HAVE you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or
Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volume, and
two Books of Common Prayer, one for the Minister, and another for the Clerk
(according to the last Act of Uniformity (1662.) both well and substantially
Bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority? A Book of
Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? And a printed Table of the Degrees
wherein Marriage is prohibited? Have you also His Majesty's Proclamation
commanded to be Read yearly on the Sunday before the thirtieth day of January?

V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister, to wear at all times of
his public Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed, at the
Charge of the Parish?

VI. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Sur-Names of all such Persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried, within your
Parish, together with the Names and Surnames of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof yearly
within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishop's Register?

VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to Record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a third Book, wherein to Write down the
Churchwardens Accounts, and such Sums of Money as have been collected within
your Parish, upon any Briefs that have come unto it; together with a strong
Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other
the aforementioned Furniture in safe custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, and
a black Herse-cloth for the Burial of the Dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebe, and Tithes belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails or Pales? and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has any
Person encroached upon the same, or made any Door into it out of his own Ground
or Habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? How long since? By whom?
And to whose use and benefit? Have any Crees growing in the Churchyard been
cut down? by whom? and when?

II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the Outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient Repair? Or have any of the
said Houses or Outhouses, been defaced or pulled down, without License from
the Ordinary? And by whom? Has any Person encroached upon any Garden, Yard or
Close belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house? Or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? Or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same?

III. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Tithes, Glebe-Lands,
Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes,
or other yearly Profits or Customs (either within, or without your Parish) as
belong thereunto? Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister, and by
whom, as you know or have heard?

IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-Lands, belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage, been taken away or alienated, by Lease, Sale or Exchange, without
License from the Ordinary, and the free consent of the Incumbent? Have any
Enclosures been made in the Parish, to the detriment of the Church?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders
by any Simoniacal Compact?

III. HAS he been Legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? And did
he within two Months after his Induction, publicly in the Church upon some
Sunday or Holyday, in the time of Diwine Service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by Authority, and there publicly declare his
Assent thereto?

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend or Dignity? Is he
constantly Resident upon his Benefice among you? How many Weeks in any one Year
has he been absent from it, without urgent necessity?

V. HAS your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in Holy
Orders, an able and discreet Person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of
the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or
Chapel? And does he serve in any other Church beside? And what yearly Stipend
does your Minister allow him?

VI. DOES you Parson, Vicar or Curate, in Reading the daily Morning and Evening
Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage,
Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitatation of the Sick, Burial of the
Dead, and pronouncing God's Commination against Impenitent Sinners, use the
Form and Words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any Addition,
Omission or Alteration of the same? And does he use all such Rites and
Ceremonies in all Parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book?

VII. DOES your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Divine Office in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice, together with such other
Scholastical Habit, as is suitable to his Degree?

VIII. DOES he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, as also the Ember-Weeks,
and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-Week, as in the Common Prayer Book, or
by the Ecclesiastical Canons, is appointed; giving notice to the Parishioners
of every of the same in the Church in the time of Divine Service, upon the
Sunday next before?

IX. HAS your Minister been Licensed to Preach by the Bishop, or either of the
two Universities? If so, does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness,
necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your
Church or Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or, if he be not a Licensed
Preacher, or being so Licensed be hindered by Sickness, or otherwise as
aforesaid, does he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister,
being a Licensed Preacher? Or is one of the Homilies, set forth by Authority,
there read by some Priest or Deacon, lawfully Ordained?

X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechism? And does he prepare and present them, being to instructed, to
be Confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants and other persons inhabiting within your Parish, to their bounden
Duty, in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government?

XI. DOES he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that
is in danger of Death? Is there any Child past Infancy; or other person of more
Years, through your Ministers default, or otherwise, yet remaining unbaptized
in your Parish? Does he Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit
either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children? Or
does he Baptize any at home, except in case of imminent danger?

XII. DOES your Minister celebrate the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper so often
every year, that every Parishioner may receive thrice at the least? And does he
expel those that live scandalous Lives, or are guilty of any notorious Crime,
and give an account thereof unto the Bishops?

XIII. DOES he in his Sermons preach sound Doctrine, tending to the Edification
of the People, in the Knowledge and Faith of Jesus Christ, and Obedience to
God's Holy Commandments? Or has he at any time (as you know or have heard)
preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to
seduce the People into Parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the public
Peace and Unity, either of the Church or State?

XIV. HAS he presumed to marry any Persons in private Houses? Or such, as
being under Age, have not the Consent of their Parents, or without the Banes
first published on three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church? Or at any other
hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XV. DOES any Person preach in your Parish as a Lecture? Has he allowance from
the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture, read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? And is he in all Respects comformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XVI. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
Fasts, Prophecyings, or Exercises, not appointed by Authority?

XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a Man of sober, unblameable
and exemplary Life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious and
excommunicated Persons? Is he a Frequenter of Taverns, or Alehouses? A common
Gamester? A profane or obscene Iester? A Swearer, Railer, Scoffer or
Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at Variance one with another; or encourage
them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker; or
vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any Person, either within your Parish
or without? Does he wear his Hair of an immoderate or uncomely length? Is his
Apparel grave and decent, both for Fashion and Color, as the Canons of the
Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation in any kind whatsoever
disorderly and scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there any Person in your Parish a known or reputed Papist, or that lies
under a common Fame, or vehement Suspicion of Adultery, Fornication or Incest?
Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or
Blasphemers of God's Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or
filthy Talkers, Sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord among their Neighbors?

II. DO any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and
ordinary Labors; or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open,
or Wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victualers, and
Sellers of Bear or Ale, suffer any Persons to tipple or game in their Houses
upon those days? And do you, sometimes during Divine Service and Sermon, look
into their Houses, and present those Persons you there find Tippling, and also
the Master or Mistress of the said Houses where they are found?

III. DOES every Person reverently uncover his Head, and so continue all the
time of Divine Service and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel
at the Prayers, and stand tip when the Creed and Gospel are Read, making due
Reverence when the Name of our Lord JESUS is mentioned?

IV. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully Married,
within the Degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully Divorced, have
Married again? Or any that being lawfully Married, and not separated or
divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together?

V. ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their Duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the
Rate Assessed upon them, for the Repair of your Church or Chapel, and for the
providing of such Books, Furniture and Ornaments as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine Offices there?

VI. ARE there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish, that be
yet unproved? Or any Goods administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary?
Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious or charitable
Purposes? What were their Legacies, and how have they been bestowed; And if
there be any Stock of Money left in your Parish for the benefit of the Poor,
whether that be employed accordingly or not? And whether such Legacies or Stock
for the benefit of the Poor be Registered in your Books?

VII. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron, or other Person in your
Parish, having the Presentation or Gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who
has made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any
Bargain, either for Money or Pension, or Lease, Reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or
any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever?

VIII. IS there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry, a Parish-Clerk, aged Twenty
one Years at least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient or
able to perform his Duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his Wages duly paid unto him? or who withholds the same from him?

II. DOES he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, and
other Annoyanre? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Horning and Evening, that the People
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this Life, does he upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the Neighhours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the Grace and Favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
1. IS there any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, founded in your Parish?
Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly
Revenue, or Stipend belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the
same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? And are the
Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the Intention of the Founder,
and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any Man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does your Schoolmaster
teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority?

III. DOES any Man in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery; or any Woman
take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without Approbation and
License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
Consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their Hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. DO they suffer no Misbehaviour or Disorder to be done by Men, Women,
Servants, or Children in your Church or Chapel? Are you careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they permit no
Minstrils, no Morris Dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come
into your Church to the disturbance of the Congregation?

IV. DO you against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the number of Communicants?

V. DO you cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chapel, to
subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose,
together with the Names of the Bishop that Licensed them to Preach in this
Diocese? And do you permit no other to preach?

VI. HAVE you (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) been duly sworn to present
according to your best Skill and Knowledge, and have you taken sufficient time
to draw up your Presentiments, and therein consulted with your Minister for his
faithful Assistance?

FOR know you assuredly, That as the true discharging of your Office, is the
chief means whereby public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such Crimes and
Faults, as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of
by public Fame; That in such Cases, the (...) and his Officers are to proceed
against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and
Perjury.

FINIS.

