ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the DIOCESE of EXETER.

In the Second EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH By
Divine Permission Lord Bishop of EXETER.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the King's Head in S. Paul's Churchyard,
M.DC.LXV.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen,
of every Parish.
YOu shall Swear diligently to enquire, and to make a true Answer unto every
Article in this Book now given you in Charge; and to Present every Person that
now is, or of late was inhabiting within your Parish, that has done any
Offense, or omitted any Duty therein mentioned. And this you shall do uprightly
and truly, without Favor or Malice, Hope of Reward, or Fear of Displeasure, so
far as by the Laws you are bound.

So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of EXETER.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Are the
Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate; the Windows well Glazed,
the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened, and conveniently placed; and all
things so decently ordered, as becomes the House of God? II. HAS the Steeple
or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof, been pulled down, or
any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto been imbezelled, sold, or
made away? In whose hands or custody does the same, or any part thereof,
remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein. III. IS there a Font of
Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a convenient place toward the
lower part of your Church, for the Administration of Baptism? And is there in
your Chancel a decent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords
Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen-Cloath, and another
Covering of white and pure Linen, to spread thereupon? And have you a fair
Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons of
Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? IV. HAVE you in your said Church, or
Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for your Minister to read Divine Service
in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last
Translation, in a large Volume, and the Book of Common Prayer, both well and
substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by
Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? And a Printed
Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? V. HAVE you a comely large
Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his Public Ministration in
the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the Charge of your Parish? VI.
HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Sirnames of all such persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried, within your
Parish; together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened, expressing the day, month, and year of all such
Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly,
within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops
Registry? VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the
Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach
in your Church or Chapel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the
Churchwardens Accounts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys,
wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned
Furniture, in safe Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black
Hearse-cloth, for the Burial of the Dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has any
person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own
ground or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there
growing been cut down? how long since, by whom, and to whose use and benefit?
II. IS the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the
said Houses or Outhouses been defaced or pulled down without license from the
Ordinary? and by whom? Has any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or
Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the
same? III. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or
have heard? IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage
or Vicarage, been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent
of the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary (...) by whom has the same
been made? and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage
damnified thereby in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have
heard?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister defamed, or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice
or Orders by any Simonaical compact? II. HAS he been legally Inducted into his
Benefice? III. DID he within two months after his Induction, publicly in the
Church, upon some Sunday or Holy Day, in the time of Divine Service, read the
39 Articles of the Church of England established by Authority, and there
publicly declare his assent thereunto? IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical
Benefice? Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice among you? How many weeks
in any one year has he been absent from it? V. HAS your Minister a Curate to
assist him? Who is that Curate? Is he conformable to the Laws and Orders of the
Church of England? and does he serve in any other Church beside? and what
yearly stipend does your Minister allow him? VI. DOES your Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the
holy Sacraments, celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth,
Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pronouncing ^ods Commination
against impenitent Sinners, use the form and ^ords prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer, without any addition, omission, or alteration of the same? And
does he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as
are appointed (...) the said Book, so far as you have observed? VII. DOES your
Minister at the Reading or Celebrating the Divine Offices in your Church or
Chapel, wear the Surplice? VIII. DOES he observe the Holy Days and
Fasting-days, as also ^^e Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in
Rogation-week, as (...) the Common Prayer Book is appointed? giving notice to
the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine
service, upon the Sunday next before? IX. HAS your Minister been licensed to
preach by the Bishop? if so, does he then constantly (unless in case of
Sickness, necessary ab^^nce, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in
your Church (...) Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed
^reacher, or being so Licensed be hindered by Sickness, or otherwise, as
foresaid; does he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a
Licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be there
read by a Priest or Deacon? X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the Youth
of your Parish in the Church Catechism? and does he prepare, and present them,
being so instructed, to be Confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to
reclaim all Popish Recusants and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting
within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England,
and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the
Government thereof? XI. DOES he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or delay
the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child past
Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default, yet
remaining unbaptized in your Parish? Does he use to baptize any without
Godfathers and Godmothers? or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or
Godmother to their own Children? XII. HAS he at any time (as you know, or have
heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine,
thereby to seduce the people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of
the public peace and unity either of Church or State? XIII. HAS he presumed
to Marry any persons in private houses? or such as, being under age, have not
the consent of their Parents? or without the Banes first published on three
Sundays or Holy Days in the Church? or at any other hours then between Eight
and Twelve in the Morning, unless he had a License or Dispensation so to do?
XIV. DOES any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture, read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. HAS your Minister taken
upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts, Prophecyings, or Exercises,
not appointed by Authority? or does he, or any other, either Minister or
Lay-person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private houses within your
Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pretense of
Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and
Canons in that case provided? XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer,
a man of a sober, unblameable, and exemplarie life? Does he familiarly converse
with ungodlie, vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of
Taverns, or Alehouses? a common Gamester? a Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller?
Does he set Neighbors at variance one with another? or encourage them to Suits
and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or vehemently
suspected of Incontinencie with any person, either within your Parish, or
without? Is his apparel grave, and decent, as the Canons of the Church require?
Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind whatsoever, Disorderly or
Scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectarie, that
refuse to come unto the public Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church?
or that makes profession of any other Religion then what is established in the
Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their Names? II. IS there
any person in your Parish that lies under a common fame, or vehement suspicion
of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your
Parish? or common Swearers, or blasphemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted
to be railers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, faction, and
discord amongst their neighbors? III. DO any of your Parish upon Sundays or
Holy Days, follow their bodily or ordinary labor? or permit their servants so
to do? Are any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do any Vinteners,
Innkeepers, or other Victualers and sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons
to tipple or game in their houses upon those days? IV. DOES every person
inhabiting, and sofourning within your Parish, duly resort unto your Church or
Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holy Day appointed for Divine Service? Do they
then and there abide quietly, with reverence, order and decency, during all the
whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God there used? and
are there any among you that come only to the Preaching, and not to the
Common Prayers of the Church? V. DOES every person reverently uncover his head,
and so continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all
reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are
read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned? VI.
ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to be
baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which
case the child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form and
rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them from their own Minister to
be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form then is appointed? Or do
they keep them unbaptized any longer time then the Church allows? And are
there any Infants, or more aged persons, in your Parish as yet unbaptized? VII.
DOES every Householder in your Parish cause their children and servants to come
to Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your
Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays and
Holy Days, as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; that when they are
well Instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop? VIII. IS
there any person in your Parish, who, being 16 years of age, does not receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of which
Easter is always to be one? Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same
kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other
Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers, not of your Parish,
that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? IX. HAVE
you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for any crime
committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of your Parish
keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved?
X. ARE there any living in your Parish as man and wife who are within the
degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Or
any that being lawfully married, and not separated, or divorced by course of
Law, do not cohabit together? XI. ARE there any married-women in your Parish,
who, after their delivery from the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their
public thanksgiving to God in the Church? And when they come so to do, do they
come decently apparelled, and make their offerings according to custom? XII.
ARE there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter. Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay
the rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chapel, and for
the providing of such Books, Furniture, and Ornaments as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine Offices there? XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead
according to the Rites of the Church of England? and are there any Wills or
Testaments of persons dead in your Parish that be yet unproved? Or any Goods
administered without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your
Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legary to your Church or Chapel? what were
those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XIV. IS there any strife and
contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church?
Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church
or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, aged 21
years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or
able to perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him? II. DOES
he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently
look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at due time?
And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from dust, cobwebs, and other
annoyance? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before
the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be
warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this
life, does he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the grace and favor of God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free School, not of
the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors
or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it
ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the
intention of the Founder, and of such grants and ordinances as have been made
concerning the same? II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your
Parish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Does your Schoolmaster
teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he
cause them upon Sundays and Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or
Chapel? and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently,
during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? III. DOES any man in your Parish
practice Physic, or Surgery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the
Office of a Midwife, without approbation and license from the Ordinary?
TIT. VII. Quaeries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens
and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by the Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners? II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens
given up their due Accounts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding
Churchwardens the moneys remaining in their hands, together with all other
things belonging to your Church or Chapel? III. DO the Churchwardens and
Sidemen take diligent care, and see who of the Parishioners be absent from the
Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chapel upon Sundays and Holy Days?
And if they find any of them to have absented themselves without a sufficient
cause, do they by warrant from some of the Justices of Peace levy of them, by
way of distress upon their goods, the sum of 12 pence for every such day of
their absence, according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do
they distribute the several sums so levied among the poor of your Parish,
according to the Law? IV. DO they present them that come late to Church after
Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to
stand idle, or talk together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or
Churchyard, during the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? V.
DO they suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or
servants, or children, in your Church or Chapel? Are they careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they permit no
Minstrels, no Morris-dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come
into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. DO they against
every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, provide a sufficient
quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of
Communicants? VII. DO they cause all Strangers that preach in your Church or
Chapel to subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that
purpose, together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in
this Diocese? And do they permit no other to preach? VIII. HAVE they (the
Churchwardens and Sidemen) now sworn to give in a true Answer unto all these
Articles of Enquiry in all their several Titles, taken sufficient time to draw
up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your
faithful assistance?
FOR know you assuredly, That as the true discharging of your Office is the
chief means whereby public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and
faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by
public fame; That, in such cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed
against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and
Perjury.

SETH: EXON.

THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the names of such of the
younger sort in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed: especially
such as having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the
Holy Communion; and to present them to the Bishop to be confirmed, as there
shall be opportunity.


