The Case of our English Wool, and the Manufacture thereof truly Stated:
together with some of the Causes of the low Price of the One, and decaying
Condition of the Other. As also the Presentment of the Grand Jury of the County
of Sommerset thereon.
Humbly offered to the High Court of Parliament.
1st. IT is notorious in Fact, that the Wool of the growth of England is the
Greatest and Chiefest Staple Commodity of our Kingdom; and which for several
years past is fallen above one half in its Price.

2d. It is manifest that the low price of our English Wool has occasioned a
Fall and great Abatement both of the Rents and real Value of Land throughout
the Kingdom, of near a Fifth part.

3d. It is as absolutely necessary to keep up the Rents and Revenues of the
Kingdom, in reference to the Honor, Strength, and Wealth thereof, as to
support the Trade; there being now no way left to raise any considerable Sum
of Money for a sudden and speedy Supply, but by a Land Tax. It appears
therefore to be our Interest, to enquire into the Causes of the low price of
our Wool, and the decaying condition of this Ancient Staple Commodity and
Manufacture of our Kingdom.

And they may be for the present considered under these Two Heads;

1st. The great and vast quantities of Spanish and other Wool brought into this
Kingdom yearly, without paying any Duty or Custom for the same, and here sold
at very low Rates; and the Cloth made thereof being for the most part consumed
by the Subjects of this Kingdom, must of necessity lessen the Manufacture
thereof, and so by consequence beat down the price of our English Wool.

2d. The great Abuses put upon our Clothiers, in the sale of their Cloth at
Blackwell-Hall in London, by a company of Men sprung up there within these few
years, called Factors, and who at this day have the sole management and command
of the Cloth-Trade in their own Hands, and can dispose of it, and of any Man's
particular Cloth and Stock as they please themselves, they having the Clothier,
Draper and Merchant at their own beck, and who are now become the great
Merchants for the Spanish Wool, etc. of whom the poor Clothier is forced to
buy, the Factor having his Stock both of Cloth and Money in his own hands.

These are two of the Chiefest causes of the decay of this Trade, and the Low
price of our English Wool at this time, both which are humbly offered for
consideration, with some means for Redress, when it shall please this
Honorable House to appoint the time.

By Geo. Clark.

Somerset. At the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace held at Brewton, in and
for the County aforesaid, on the Thirteenth day of January, in the Thirty Sixth
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, etc. The Presentment of the
Grand Jury there was as follows; viz.
HEARING the daily, sad and lamentable Complaint of the greatest part of the
Clothiers of this County, concerning the great Decay of their Trade, whereby
many of them within few years last past have been ruined and undone; and
finding by sad experience the great fall that is happened of late on the price
of English Wool, that Commodity now yielding but little more than the one half
the Value of what it was wont to be sold for at the beginning of the late
unhappy Rebellion in this Kingdom; And having seriously considered these
things, do humbly conceive the Causes of these great Evils to be the
Importation of Spanish and other Foreign Wools, without paying any Custom or
Impost for the same; And the great Abuses that have been put upon the Clothiers
at the Principal Mart for Cloth in this Kingdom, by a sort of People called
Factors; Men first set up in the late Times of Distraction, and increasing ever
since in Number and Power, till now at length they have gotten the sole Command
and Sale of most men's Cloth brought thither to be sold; And have thereby
advanced themselves from little or nothing to be Men of great Estates, and as
much impoverished their Masters, who sadly complain of these Abuses, and are
left without prospect of a Remedy: The Consideration of which Mischiefs growing
more and more upon us, and if not timely prevented, being likely in the end to
prove the Ruin of this ancient Staple Commodity and Manufacture of our
Kingdom, has caused us at this time to make this following Presentment.

First, That the Wool of this County in particular, as well as of the whole
Kingdom in general, is the greatest Staple we have; And that which adds more to
the Rents and Improvement of the Real Value of the Lands and Revenues thereof,
than any one Commodity whatsoever; and that it is as much our Interest (if not
more) to improve the Rents and Revenues of the Lands and Estates of this
Kingdom, as to Maintain the Trade, without which Improvement we shall in no
case be able to raise any considerable Sum of Money by a Land Tax, if any
sudden or extraordinary occasion should require it.

We Present therefore, That the Importation of Spanish, and other Foreign
Wools, without paying any Duty or Custom for the same, is a very great
prejudice to the price of English Wool; and so consequently contributes much to
the Abatements of the Rents and Profits issuing from Lands.

We Present, That the making of Woollen Cloth is the greatest Manufacture of
this Kingdom, and that wherein many thousands of poor People are employed and
set to work, and thereby Relieved and Maintained; and that since the time that
the Art of Clothing was first known amongst us, it has continued free, until
the beginning of the late Rebellion, there sprung up a sort of People, who
under the name of Factors of Blackwell-Hall, have gotten into their Power the
Management and Disposal of most of the Cloth that is sold there: And besides,
are grown to be the greatest Merchants of Oil and Dying stuffs, but chiefly of
Spanish Wool; all goods belonging to the Clothing Trade, of whom the Clothier
is forced to buy, the Factor having his Stock both of Cloth and Money in his
own hands; and therefore We present, that these Factors of Blackwell-Hall are a
Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing Trade; and to have been the Ruin
of many poor Clothiers, and the Causes of many other Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that now lie heavy upon us.

Item, We farther present, that this Honorable Bench will be pleased to
implore the Royal Power and Prerogative of his Sacred Majesty for convenient
Remedies to these great Abuses; and that this Presentment may be with all
Submission presented to his Majesty as the Grievance and Complaint of the whole
County.

Thomas Ludwwell, Joseph Gappy, Barnard Russ, William Ridcut, Thomas Pitman,
John Bradny, John Mulford Sen. Thomas Gapper Jun. Thomas Field, William Lewis,
Thomas Biging, Thomas Harvye, John Mabz, Worcester. Brice, Henry Strode, Gabriel
Iveleife, Robert King.


Ver^^op' Ex per Ph. Bennet, Cl. Pac.
This is a true Copy of the Grand Juries Presentment, which we agree to, and
desire it may be presented to his Majesty in Council by Mr Clark.

Weymouth, Fitzharding. Fra. Powlett. E. Phelipps. John Hunt. Ed. Berkely. Tho.
Wyn^^am. Fra. War. Will. Basset. Geo Clarke. Jo. Harington.

This Presentment should have been delivered to his Majesty King Charles the
Second, but by his sudden Death it was prevented; And now comes more proper^^^
to be Considered of and Redressed in Parliament; And at this time will enable
the whole Kingdom in general to pay the present Taxes with greater Ease and
Satisfaction (the Reasons being considered) than by any other way or means that
can be offered.



FINIS.

