A COMMENTATION On the late wonderful Discovery OF THE New Popish PLOT, Being
the Jesuits Diabolick. Device to Inveagle the Son to betray the Father.
IN spite of Fate, the Jesuit like the Devil
To the Worlds end must still be doing Evil:
Plotting his Nature is, and he does think
To mischief Heretics, is meat and drink.
Tho God his Vengeance on their plots has shown
And by his mighty Hand has them over thrown,
They still against all Mercy shut their Eyes,
And will new Mischief, and new plots devise.
What is it that these Devils do not dare
To Act; for God nor Nature do they Care,
True Laborers, unweariable still,
In plotting mischief, and in doing ill.
Whence Comes their plots, Can any mortal tell?
If not from the Divan that is held in Hell,
Wkose black results are by evil spirits sent
To the Jesuits, the Devils Instrument;
Who with much pleasure and industry go
To Act the mischief they had hatched below.
Tho their She Champion had but ill suecess,
And had a devilish squeeze got in the press
Tho she who midwifes Trade well understood.
Miscarried with her bladders Crammed with blood,
Yet they, like Antheus who new strength still found,
Each time that He was flung unto the Ground,
For all these falls, new Life and strength do gather,
And plot to make the son betray his Father
Thus against Nature they dare make their way
And urge a Son his Father to betray,
Thus for the Cause to Such Extremes they run
To hang the Innoent Father by the Son.
Horrid! if this Jesuits Religion be
I still will put it in my Letanie
From Such Religion Lord deliver me.
The first true plot, still sticks within their Maw,
Which they with all their Arts off never will Claw,
Tho since that time they Kept so fowl a stir,
And thought to fling it on the Presbyter,
Tho God their Arts so planely did Consound
When Waller did the Mealtubs bottom sound.
A new plot now from Hell it self they sprung,
To lay the old on Dr. Oats and Tongue;
And the poor son is made an Instrumnt,
To Swear the Father did the plot Invent.
To send the Son they to the devil meant,
God touched his Heart and made him to Repent,
And on a Sudden Cut their we^ of Sin,
And turned them loose Some more strange Plots to spin
Ere it be long we shall more plainly See
Who these damned Machivilian Plotters be,
Not Priest or sesuites all, I am afraid,
Some lay men will be found in Masquerade:
who rather then their Arts shall not prevail,
Will stoop to wipe clean madam Celliers Tail
And at the same time against Baxter rail.
Never since first our happy Reformation
Did Pope or Jesuit So bestride our Nation,
They hop'b by the English Fleeces to grow Rich
Finding the sheep had got a Popish Itch,
But we yet hope, the aproaching Parliament
Will find some way the Infection to prevent,
That this Disease so very lately bred,
May now among the Flock no farther Spread,
But Father Pope and his industrious Tools
who are no dreaming or unthinking Fools;
With Wondrous Industy, and Pollitick Care-
Foresee, and against the Evil would prepare
A new full Mission to their priests they grant,
With to' Each a promise he shall be a saint,
Who swarming here like Ghosts our Cities haunt
Where privately in several shapes they lurk,
Doing their Father Pope and devils work'
More dreadful to us then either Jew or Turk'
But our wise Prince, whom they would fain remove,
Has to the Nation showed his Care, and love
In's royal Edicts, and his strict Command,
To keep such dangerous Vermin from the Land.
Ah happy England happy thou will be,
When we no popish Priest in Thee can See,
And the Reformed all as one agree.
LONDON, Printed for T. Addams. 1680.


