THE City and Country's Loyalty;
OR, The Gallant Resolution of the Kingdom to Defend the same against the
Invasion of the French, Voluntarily Engaging thmeselves in the Defense of King
William Queen and Mary.
To the Tune of, Valiant Jockey, etc.


LEt the Trumpets sound a Charge,
While we our Forces do enlarge,
To Engage the common Enemy;
Boys, we'll either win the day or dye:
All the Counties far and near,
In shining Armor now appear,
With a Resolution will they stand,
To defend and Guard their Native Land:
All will Unite, and freely Fight,
For to put the Romans now to flight;
Better Advance, there take our chance,
Than to bear the heavy Yoke of France.
Though the Frenchmen Landed are,
We for their coming did prepare,
Showing them such welcome to the Shore,
Which they never did expect before:
None shall e're return again,
For with our Valiant Warlike Train;
We will Ring the Rogues a Passing Bell,
Sending them with speed to Pluto's Cell;
We Will never flinch, from the proud French,
Till we cut them off, both Root and Branch;
Why should we fear, huffing Monsieur,
Valiant Courage soon the Coast will clear.
The Stout Valiant Men of Kent,
All with a Resolution bent,
Did engage to meet this Mighty Foe,
Surry, Sussex, did the like also:
When the French did understand,
That they would thus defend the Land;
They were forced straight to hoise up Sail,
Knowing that they should not there prevail:
De Frenchmen said, me are afraid,
If deir Kingdom here we should Invade,
Youthful and Sage, all will Engage,
Not a Frenchman will escape deir Rage.
Then they Steered to the West,
Which Shires as well as all the rest,
Was resolved to let the Frenchmen know,
That they should not unrewarded go:
While they Anchored in Torbay,
The Beacons Fired was straightway,
Which allarum'd all the Counties round,
Loyal Boys with double Courage Crowned:
No frightful Cries, all straight did rise,
That they might the Frenchmen soon surprise;
Both Rich and Poor, flocked to the Shore,
Twenty thousand Fighting-men and more.
London likewise will maintain,
For our Defense a Warlike Train,
Valiant Men of Courage, Foot and Horse,
That they may the wretched Romans cross:
Though the Factious seem to Frown,
We Will pull their haughty Spirits down:
For our Gracious King and Queen we'll Fight,
Putting all their Enemies to flight:
The Royal Fleet, Boys, we'll complete,
Which will make the Frenchmen soon Retreat;
Both Land and Main, we will maintain,
Till our Gracious King returns again.
FINIS.
Printed for C. Bates, next door to the Crown-Tavern, at Duck Lane-end, in
West-Smithfield.


