Christ's Impressions Strong, Sweet, and Sensible on the Hearts of BELIEVERS,

Delivered in a Sermon at Athelstonfoord, June 16, 1700. at the Celebration of
the Sacred Eucharist. With some Addition,

By I: C. M. D.

Isai: 8.11. The LORD spoke unto me with a strong Hand.

^er. 31.33. I will put My Law in their Inward Parts, and write it in their
Hearts.

Flacc: Illyricus in 2. Cor. 3.3. Cor carneum, I: E: Molle, seu spirituale,
sentiens Impressiones Verbi Dei.
Mantuanus.
-- Permulcent alacres Proecordia flammae.
Printed by John Reid, 1700.

POOLES ANNOTATION, on Hebr: 8.10.
THE Powerful Spirit of Our Redeemer, who only can reach the Soul, will make
Impressions and make clear Characters of Divine Truth on it, 2. Cor. 3.3. None
can alter, nor Mould, Frame, and Temper a Spirit. But He -- Epigrapso, is a
Metaphor, setting out a Real, Actual Powerfull-Work of the Spirit of Christ
which leaves the Express Characters, of all GOD's saving Mind, and will upon
the Heart or Soul, as plain as Writing upon Paper, or Engraving upon Stones,
such an Operation on the Spirits of Men, as whereby is Conveyed unto them, a
new Light, Life, Power, so that they are made by i^ Partakers of a Divine
Nature.

A POETIC Epistle to the Reader,
CUm Christus digito pulsat proecordia div^,
Interior jugiter rumpitur omnis obe^t.
Nonobstante, caroquicquid sat anasveperurgent
E contra, ad sese corda proterva trahit,
Etquumflammiferam fors desuper exerit art
in flammamvertitcorglaciaele sacram,
Corda arefacta rigans, perfuso rore supernotem
Fructus quam salubres, perpetuosque ferunt.
Cimmerias long tenebras dispellit, ad imam
Mentem diffundit ter ratilos radios.
Praefractis animis validos etiam imprimit ictus
Queisin mollitiem saxea corda terit.
Men's agitata malis furiis compescitur, omnes
Et stimulos mulcet, cunctipotente manu.
Denique; divinum transformat adiconacunct^s
Affectus animi, Cor renovatque vetus.
Solerti sermonem animo pervolve sequentem
si Christi forsan tu' experiare manum.
Christ's Heavenly Virtue does transcend
what words or writings can commend,
This Sermon does in part Essay,
His sweet Impressions to display.
Bright Orient Beams He makes to shine
Into the Blinded Mistie Mind:
The Stubborn will he bends and bows
To yield Him all His Sacred Dues:
The Frozen Heart he does Inspire,
Into a Flaming Spiritual Fire.
The Withered Soul he does bedue,
Fine Flowers do bud, where Thistles grew
On which when gently he does blow,
What Fragrant Odours from them flow:
What Heart of stone unbroke can stand
Before the Hammer in his Hand?
Sweetly, yet strongly does he draw
Hearts t'imitate his Life and Law,
He makes a Conscience storm arise,
And sends anon calm Halcyon Days,
In fine, Christ's virtue does Imprint,
Like fair Coins, new come from the Mint
GOD's Image deep on the whole Man,
Which neither Sin nor Satan can.
Efface, so that this Creature new
Shows forth a Heavenly Form and Hew,
Reader my Muse Concludes, to Pray
Thou from Experience may say,
Blessed be Christ. I feel, and find,
His sweet Impressions on my mind.
Luke 24.32. And they said one to another, did not our Heart burn within us?
while he talked with us by the Way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures.
OUR LORD JE^US CHRIST having broken the Bonds of Death, and made open the
gates of the Grave, that he might notify or make known his Resurrection to His
Apostles and Disciples, he appeated to them and Conversed with them, at sundry
times, and in diverse manners; particularly he manifested himself to two of the
Disciples that were going to Emmans: So that if we take a back-look to the 13
verse of this Chapter, and from thence to our Text; We will find that their two
Disciples were in a Religious Conference, as is most probable about the
Passion, Crucifixion, and Resurrection of Christ, who, while they are thus
Exercised, joined himself to their Society, and walking along with them,
enquired at them what manne^ of Communications they had; In Answer whereunto,
Cleophas, one of them, told them what strange things had happened Concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, who wa^ Crucified, and according to the Report o^ some,
risen again from the Dead: Bu^ they speaking some what darkly and doubtingly
about these things, he who always went about doing good, explain^ to them more
fully and clearly out of the Scrip^ures, the Prophesies, that concern^^ the
Messiah, and though for a while the did not understand so distinctly the
Myste^ies he was exponing, as applicable and Relative to himself; yet at length
he made the scales fall from their eyes, and darted (...) Beam of Divine Light
into their Mind^ which did both Illuminate and warm their Hearts, so that they
knew him, and ca^^ feelingly to perceive, they had receive Virtue ^^m him, the
mavelous energ^ whereof our Text tells us, did work upon their Spirits, did
not our hearts burn with in us? being thus handed into our Text, Comprehends
these three things.

1. A new Conference of their two Di^ciples going to Emmans, and they said on^
it another.

2. The Subject of their Dialogue, did not our heart burn within us?

3. Th occasion and Cause of this heart burning while he talked with us by the
way, an opened to us the Scriptures; Now the cope of the Text is to inform us,
what mighty Impressions Christ makes on hearts, when he pleases to exerce and
apply his Divine power and Energie, of whom it is said, verse 19. that be was a
Prophet mighty in word and in deed, who always: indeed spoke with an
Extraordinary Authority and Efficacy, so as never man spoke, and without who is
Assistance; none that speak in His name, can speak to purpose.

We shall not insist to Explain the Terms of our Text Critically and
Articulatly, for the only Term that is Metaphorical, and so most needs
Exposition, will be cleared afterward, when we come to speak of the deep
Impressions Christ makes on hearts under the Notion of Fire: So the phrase, did
not our hearts burn within us, being the only part of the verse we mind to
Preach from, may be thus Glossed; O were there not warm, sweet and Sensible
Motions of Christ's Power on out Hearts, that have left deep and abiding
Impressions with us, the like whereof we never felt before: Now we come to make
a Doctrinal Observation, which shall be the su^ject of our Ensuing discourse.
viz.

Where Christ comes he makes deep Impressions and Gracious Dispositions.

In Prosecution of this Doctrine we will Handle these particulars.

1 Offer a a few Perliminary propositions, that may give Light to the matter in
Hand.

2 Give some Grounds of proof of the Doctrine.

3 Inform wherein Christ makes deep and Sensible Impressions.

4 Tell what we must no^ for our parts in order to obtaining and preserving
Christ's Impressions.

5. Make some practical use of the Doctrine.

1. An use of Reproof, 2 of Caution. As to the 1 particular, of preliminary
propositions.

1. Prop: By Christ's Impressions we mean not, any Extraordinary Motions or
Rapide Propensions and Agitations of mind, such as Quakers the German
Anabaptists, and other Enthusiasts pretend to, and boast often, carrying them
either to say or do, what is contrary too; not warranted by or, above that
which is written, in the Holy word of GOD, Und^rstanding nether what they say,
not whereof they Affirm, 1, Tim: 1, 7, many are deluded and Imposed upon by
their own deceitful dreams, and over heated Imaginations, mistaking the
Excentrick and Spurious motiones of their own light Spirits, (not knowing what
manner Spirits they are of) for the Inspirations and Impressions of the Spirit
of GOD, which yet may be no other, but the Fluxes and Refluxes of their own
wild Fancies, or the spunks and sparks of their own kindling: At all times
there have been some such deluded E^thusiasts, such as David Georgi,
Knipperdoling, and of late the Bu^ignians.

2. Prop: But by Christ's Impressions we Understand, a Supernatural wo^k of his
Spirit, whereby he not only brings the heart under a right set, and to a new
Spiritual Temper, which may be called the first great stroke of his Hand at
Conversion, Printing and Stamping the Image of GOD, on the Soul: but whereby
also on all the believers occasions and Exigencies afterward, he sends such
Renewed Inspirations, and Repeated Influences into his Soul, as make and leave
Sensible Workings, on the Respective Faculties, and affections of it, in the
virtue whereof, the Gracious Believer, is strongly Prompted to that which is
truly Good, and Restrained, or made averse from what is ill and Impious, and
is daily Excited in his Progressive Motions Heavnward. See Isa: 6.8.8.11.12
Cor. 3:3.5 Son. 4 16. But least we anticipate what afterward may be Discoursed
more Conveniently, we say no more here, hoping what is to be said, will
Contribute for further clearing of this point.

3. Prop: Some Gracious Souls have more frequent, more Sensible, and deeper
Impressions than others, according to the Measure of the Gift of GOD, yea and
the same persons may at diverse times undergo and Experience very Sensible,
Alterations in their Frame and Inclinations, even such Ebbings and Flowings,
such alternate Ups and Downs, as may make them feel and own that they are
necessarily dependant on the Spirit of Christ, who blows and Breaths, where,
how, and when he lifts, Pss. 30. throughout.

As to the second particular, we will offer some Grounds of Proof of the
Doctrine, To wit, that where Christ comes, he makes deep Impressions. 1 It is
Congruous and Suitable to his Magnificence and Royalty, Christ is King of
Kings, Encircled with most Excellent August Majesty, the Beaming Rays whereof,
cannot but make a Mighty dash on those they teach and beat upon: Says Solomon.
Eccl. 8.4. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, Potently pressing the
Spirits of them that hear it, when Isaias Eyes saw the King the LORD of Hosts,
how deeply was he Affected, and made to cry, w^es me for I am Undone, I am a
Man of Unclean Lips: Isa 6 4. Did not all the Camp of Israel tremble, yea and
the whole Mount quake greatly, when the LORD made his Majestic Appearance on
Mount Sinai, Exodus: 19.16.18.

2. The LORD has promised so to Work upon Souls, as to make great Impressions,
and a Sensible Change upon them, Ezekiel: 36.25.26.27. I will sprinkle clean Water
upon you, and ye shall be clean, I will take away the Stonny Heart, and I will
give you a new Heart, a Heart of Flesh, I will put my Spirit within you, and
Cause you to Walk in My ways: O what mighty Impressiones here, to Bleach and
Press filthy Souls to be clean, to make a hard stone turn soft Flesh, and by a
Physical Efficacious Touch of His Finger, to Cause the Refractorie
Selfish-will, choose and follow his Will, no doubt this is the Result of
Enduement with Power from on High, Luke 24, 43.

3. Many instances may be adduced of the Actual Fulfillment of their his Gracious
Promises, in the Sensible Sweet Experiences of his People; Let every one of you
Retire into the Repositorie of your own Minds, and Memories, Revolve and View
Your Diary, And I dare say, If ever thou have had any Heart Work or Soul
Exercise, thou will put to thy seal, thou can produce thy Witnesses, to attest
this thrice sweet Truth: Says the spouse, Son: 2: 3: 4 5: I sat under his
shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my taste, he brought me
to the Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was Love, which made me sick
of Love. Son. 5.4. My Beloved put in his Hand, by the hole of the door, and my
Bowels were moved; Came not Christ very early to Elizabeth? if we may say so,
even when he was (with Respect to his Humanity) but an Embryo in the Womb of
his Mother, and yet what a Forcible Impression felt she within her. Luke
1.43.44 Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? For
lo! as soon as the Voice of thy salutation sounded in mine Ear, the Babe leaped
in my Womb for Joy: But what need I more Multiply instances, Out Text being
such a plain and Pregnant One, did not our Heart burn within us, when he talked
with us by the way, etc.

4, None Ele can make Eff^ctual Impressions on hearts but Christ, this
Surpasses the Power of men and Angels, who must all cry out, who is sufficient
for these things? It is neither Paul who planteth, nor Apollo who waters, but
GOD who, (by his Influences) gives the increase 1, Cor: 3: 6, 7: Suppose one
endued wi h all the Embellishments and advantages, of Natural parts, acquired
Abilities, and Supernatural virtues in their prime and the Superlative degree,
and that particularly Eloquent in the most charming phrases of finest Language,
yet he cannot speak into thy heart, this is Christ's peculiar prerogative, who is
proper Elogie it is, never man spoke like this man John, 7: 46. As no person
else, so nothing but his mighty power can make Efficacious Impressions: for
Imagine that Heavens gates were cast open, so that thou might have a
prospect into the Supercelestial Glory and happiness, it would not Court or
carry thy Affections to choose and follow Holiness, or Imagine that Hell were
opened wide, so as thou might see the frightfull flames of the Lake, or be
admitted to hear the horrible Sk^icks of the damned wights there, it would not
prove an Argument forcible enough, to persuade or prevail with thee to leave
thy Lusts; no, no, it is only the Victorious Impre^^e virtue of Christ can
perform such Glorious Feats Rom: 9: 16. Phil: 2.13.4.13.

5. The last Ground of proof that where Christ comes he makes great
Impressions, we take from several figurative Terms and Denominations, that
Christ's Operati^ns get in the Scripture, which Import mighty Efficacy.

1: A Creative power is attributed to Christ and specially as it Terminates in
the Formation of the new Creature, the Na^a^ions of this Act of Creating is the
pro^uction of something out of Nothing by such an Almighty Divine Efficiencie,
as is not Communicable to any Creatures: hence it is According to faith, that
all Creatures visible, and Invisible, by the alone word of his power, were at
the beginning of Time brought into a real Existence; without any preexistent
matter or subject to operate, either upon or by Coll: 1, 16: Heb: 11: 3. Even
so it is agreeable both to faith and feeling that they who are Regenerated and
Renewed, are made so by the Creative virtue of Christ's Power? therefore they
who are Renewed in the Spirit of their mind, are said to be Created after GOD
in Righteouseness and true Holiness, Ephesians: 4: 23: 23: 24: and 34 3: 2: 10. They
are GODS workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto Good Works. and 2 Cor: 5: 17:
They are Called new Creatures, and further, Rom: 12: 2: The are said to be
Metamorphosed as the Original word is, or as we Translate it, Transformed: All
which Import they are another thing then they were, they pass under a new form
and Figure; Now to have the Image of GOD Imprinted where it was not, to be made
a new and an other Creature, then before the Application of this Effecacious
Divine virtue, what an undeniably Sensible Impression is there made.

2. The Divine hand is said to draw Sinners unto himself, which is such an Act
and exercement of Divine power, that they who are drawn, cant but be sensible
thereof, for to illustrate this, let us Suppose, when Christ first puts in his
hand at the hole of the doo^ of the heart of an Elect Sinner, and by hi^ Divine
Touch sweetly Impresscis the Son to sway and move toward him, thereupon the
Devil, the World and the Flesh are all alarmed and stirred to put their hand to
hold fast the gripp they before had Now these all drawing and pulling upon the
one side as by a strong three fold Cor^ of Iniquity; And Christ who is
stronge^ then they all, drawing and pulling on the other side, it is not
imaginable, but tha^ the party thus dragged and drawn feels Impressions from
both these adverse part^ drawing Contrar ways, and from the greater Power the
greater Impression, Christ being at length Victorious and Imvincible* Hence Jo.
12:32: And 8. I be lifted up from the Earth ( viz. On the Cross, by the
attractive virtue of my Crucifixion) will draw all, (the Elect) men unto me:
And Jo: 6:44. No man can come unto me, Except the Father which has sent me
draw him, Yet we would not have any body to misunderstand this attractive
ver^ue of Christ, as if by his drawing he did violent the will of the Rational
Creature, or did Committ a kind of perforcible Rape upon his Affections, no,
but he so works agreeably to our Nature, although by a Supernatural Efficacy, as
that he Gently and Sweetly sways our wills, (upon most Rational considerations
proposed and suggested to the Intellect at sundry times, and in diverse
manners) of choice and Compleasantly to Comply with his will, and to yield to
his working, whereby of Naturally unwilling, he makes Supernaturallie willing
in a day of his Power, Psalm: 110:3, Therefore we may Imagine it to be such a
Drawing as is spoken of Jer: 31:3: I have loved thee with an Everlasting love
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. Or as it is Hos: 11:4: I
drew them with Cords of a man, with bonds of love.

3. Christ's opperations are also set off under the Notion of Fire; We need not
insist to demonstrate what Exquisitly sensible Impressions fire makes, let any
man if he would be satisfied by Experience, but hold his finger to the Flame of
a burning Coal or Candle, and he will soon own it makes an Intolerable
Impression: the fire purges, the fire melts and makes malles able, the fire
Transformeth, and fiercely consumes, and that the most solid and hardest
things, as Pontanus says, Excoquit saxum violentus ignis. And the fire still
Augmenteth into a greater and more violent flame, and it is fed and furnished
with agreeable matter combustibly, so that it may be hard to extinguish it;
Hence Solomon comparing Spiritual Love to Fire, says he, Song. 8.6, 7. Love is
as coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame: many waters cannot quench
love, Neither can the floods drown it: The narrow compass of one Sermon will
not allow to be so prolix, as to run the parallel, betwixt the various Effects
of fire, and the many Analogous or correspondent impressions that Christ makes
on hearts, but seeing we may have occasion afterward to touch at some thing of
affinity hereunto, we will not now Enlarge further, but let Suffice that
Christ's Impressions on the two Disciples Hearts, are in our Text Exp^essed by
the Figure of fire: And John the Baptist says of Christ, That he Baptiseth
with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. Luke 3:16.

4: Christ's workings are Represented by wind, and the Blowings of it, the
Impressions whereof whoever have their Senses about them, cannot deny to be
sensible, this pierceing Element affects and reaches all the other Elements;
Enquire at the Gardner or Husbandman, and they will tell you what Impressions
the wind makes on the earth and the Fruits thereof; Ask the Merchant or
Mariner, and they will Inform you of its mighty power on the Waters; Yea but
spear at the Kitchen maid that Blows the Bellows, and she can tell you how it
forces Sparks into Flames: It is a Common saying Aer est Anima ignis, Air is
the Soul of Fire, which quickens and Animates it, hence Paul has a Phraze. 2 Timothy: 1.6. Which alludes to this, Stir up the Gift of GOD which is in thee, the
word in the Original Greek is very Emphatical and Significant Anazoporein, i:
e: As with Bellows to blow the Coals and to revive or stir up Fire that seems
to be extinct and Bur^ed under Ashes: O what would become of the Believer when
his Spirit is dull and flatt, when his Graces are Languishing and ready to
dye, if the Inspirations of the Almighty, if the Sweet Breathings of the life
giving Spirit of Jesus, did not Influence and stir him up unto Activity and
motion in Heavenly things, and Heavenward therefore do we find Languishing
Christians in their Lasie and flatt f^itts forced to cry out, Son: 4:16: Awake
O North wind and come thou South, blow upon my Garden that the Spices thereof
may flow out: And Christ himself Compares the working of his Spirit to Wind.
Jo: 3:8:

5. Christ's Impressions are whiles set off under the Notion of Water, the
Notable effects whereof are so many, we cannot insi^ to enumerate them all.
Hos. 14.5: I will b^ as the Dew unto Israel: When Christ please^ to make the
dew of Heaven come down o^ the Bellievers withered and barren Soul, O how do
the seeds of Grace and Virtue tak^ life? how do they Grow and Fructify? s^
that the Believer looks out more Verdent, Fresh, and Flowrishing than he did,
he Buds and Blossoms like the Lilly and the Ross, he revives as Corn from
under the Clod.

Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come to the Waters, and he that has
no Money, etc. The scorched Thi^stie Believer when he gets a draught of this
Water of Life, how refreshfull is it and sweet to him, Christ's Water is of more
Worth, than other Folks Wine; and yet for as precious as it is, may be had
without Price, which makes us the more Unexcuseable, if we neglect to go seek
and get it, Psalm: 65.11. Thy Paths drop fatness, May we not hereun^o allude,
Considering what Impressions the Droppings of his Pa^nes make on Hearts, Gutta
cavat lapidem. The Drops of Rain from Sklates or Tyles of Houses, make holes
and Cavities in the very Stones, so the Drops of Christ's Influences pierce Our
Rocky Hearts, and make them yield to their frequently Repeated Impulses.

Now from these instances, (and many more might be added) is it not Palpably
proven, that Christ's Operations are very Impressive and Powerful on Hearts.

The 3d. thing we proposed to handle, is to inform wherein Christ makes great
Impressions: And that 1st upon the Heart: 2d upon the Conscience: 3d upon all
the Senses, and 4th upon the several Affections.

As to the 1st of these, we say, Christ makes great Impressions on the Heart,
Viz. These 5 ways, 1. By renewing the Heats, chainging it from its Corrupt
Natural Constitution into a new Gracious Disposition, so that the renewed Heart
has a new Light, and a new Sight of Things, he sees sin with another Eye than
before, even in the Sinfulness and Uglyness of it: He now discerns an Admirable
Amiableness and Beauty in Holiness, which before he hated: He sees in
Religious Duties what engages his Soul with delight and diligence to perform
them, whereas before they were a weariness, he sees in himself so much
Wretchedness, Emptiness, and Vanity, that he Wonders he should ever have been
Proud or Self-conceited in any case: He sees in GOD, that Majesty and
Perfection, which stricks his Soul into deepest Veneration, Highest Love, and
Ingenuine Propension to strickest Obedience, and as the Understanding Shares of
New Light, so the Will and Desires are brought under a new set, he has new
Principles, and new Projects, he is Promp^ed by more Pure Principles in the
Pursuance of all his Pr^jects, he Projects higher than ever he did, his great
and Gracious Soul is not slavishly Chained and Restrained to Earthly, Temporal,
and Transitory Things, but Generously aspires after the things that are above,
and that in the Nature are Spiritual and Eternal, he now cries out, Whom have I
in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon the Earth I desire besides thee,
Psalm 73.25. In a word, he Conceives and beholds Celestial Things, under a more
August and affecting Aspect, than ever he was Capable to apprehend before, from
all which are not these new Qualities and Conditions of the thus Transformed
Soul, the Native Resultances of his Powerful Gracious Impressi^ns, Ezekiel.
36.26. A new Heart also will I give you, etc. Rom: 12.2. Tit. 3:5. But having
spoken somewhat of this before, we superceed further Enlargement now.

2. Christ makes great Impressions on the Heart by opening the Heart, and this
he does sometimes in a more gentle way, as it were softly stealing and slipping
in his Hand by the hole of the Door, Thereby making the Bowels easily move and
Open for his own Reception and Admission. Son: 5.4.5. This way was Lydias,
heart opend Acts 16.14. at other times he opens in a more roughsome manner, as
it were making use of the Kings Keys, by the Hammer of the Word, forcibly
breaking open the Doors, and making the Iron Bares, and Bands of Unbelief and
Obstinacy to flee assunder, but whatever way he takes, (The Holy One of Israel
not being Limited to stinted Methods and Measures) he makes his Royal Entrance
so sensible, that soon or syne the Believer comes to Understand, That the King
has made way and access unto his Soul.

3. Christ makes great Impressions on the Heart, by Purging the Heart, when
Valetudinarie Persons under Disorder, or Indisposition of Body get a Purgative
potion which Works to purpose, readily they are under violent Pressures and
Grippings, so when Christ gives a bitter Potion and Cup of Affliction, it may
through his Blessing prove Operative to Purge and Work out heir Peccant ill
humors, but not without some Throws and painful Resentments within, Isa: 27 8,
9 By this therefore, ( viz. This Chastisement spoken of in the Preceding
Verses) Shall the Iniquity of Jacob be Purged, and his sin taken away, when
Christ Purges the Temple of the Soul by casting and Scourging out the Buyers
and Sellers? Viz. Our Diverse evil Lusts, that make Merchandise of us, and
sell us into the Hands of Satan, the Lashes of his Cords make Prints and Blac
Marks upon us, which to be sure, we have some feelling of: When he Purges our
House of the old Possessores, Viz Legions of Unclean Spirits that have Haunted
our Habitation, readily in their departure they make us Cry, and rent us sore.
Mar. 9 25.26.

4. Christ makes great Impressions on the Heart by fixing and Establishing the
Heart, against all Dangers and Fears, the Fear of Sin, the Fear of Satan, the
Fear either of the Wrath of GOD or Man, the Fear of Death and Hell, may shake
the Courage of the best sometimes, and nothing may be able to stay and settle
them, till Christ's Hand be upon them for good, and thereby they may come to get
a Heart established by Grace, Heb: 13.9 When the Heart is like a Wavering
Leaf, and a reed shaken with the Wind, yet Christ's Presence can settle the
Heart, Ps: 23.4. Psalm: 4.6 8 Yea, and bring it to such a Consistencie of
Established Composure, as to be able to say, My heart is fixed, My heart is
fixed. Ps. 57.7.

5. Christ makes great Impressions on the Heart, in raising the Heart, and that
to these 3 things.

1. Christ Raises the heart too high Elevations of Admiration, does not the
Raised believer, whiles break forth to wonder at the wise and Matchles
Contrivance of Redemption by GOD manifested in the Flesh, which is a mavelous
mystery indeed, does he not wonder at the Thoughts of special Differencing
Love, that has chosen him out of the World, while whole Nations, Country
sides, and Streets full of others are passed by to perish and pine away,
ignorrant of GOD; Insensible of sin, and in hazard every moment of plumping
into the pit? Does he not admite the Transcendent mercy of his GOD, that
pardons his great and many sins, and Intimates an Act of Indemnity to his
Soul, while many far less guilty are Condemned and Confounded? does he not
also admire that Christ should Assume him, who is by Nature an heir of wrath,
and Limb of Satan even as others, to become an united member of his Blessed
mystical Body, and to be an adopted apparent heir of Heaven, so that under
these Astonishing Impressions he is made to Cry out: Who am I O LORD, and what
is my Fathers House that thou have brought me thither too! 2: Sam: 7, 18. And
also, John 1, Ephesians: 3:1. Behold what manner of Love, the Father has bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of GOD!

2, Christ Rises the heart unto Impatient desires after Communion and Soul
intercourses with himself, so that the believer is never in his Right Element
but when in Christ's Company, never at true Rest, but when leaning on his
bosom, Christ's left hand being under his head, and his Right hand Embracing
him. He is never cheerful but when Christ Smiles, and when he frowns then all
in the Dumps, and when he withdraws, O what lookings and longings till he
Return! Or at least show himself throught the Lattes, and there are no words
drop from his Mouth have such an Air and Accent, as when his love sick Soul
cries, O let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Son, 1, 2. And whence
all these so Fervent desires after Christ's company, but from the Impressions
and Resentiments of by gone sweet Enjoyments, one kiss drawing on another, and
one visi^e prompting and pressing, to court and cry for another, or rather to
have a constant tack of his presence: Hence when Christ was Transfigured in the
Mount and the Discipls in his company had a vision and display of the Excellent
Glory, they had ill will to flit thence, and therefore Peter says, Master it is
good for us to be here, here let us dwell; Mat. 9, 35.

3 Christ Raises the Heart to cheerful Enlarged Praises: O when the believer
views his Diary, to Extract an Account of his Received Mercies, Christ Touching
his Heart with feeling Resentments thereof, how high does he Raise his Notes in
hearty and thankful Sonnets of Praise, Singing and saying; Praise, Endle,
Praise be to thee my Gracious and Bountiful LORD, I Praise thee that ever I
heard of thee with the hearing of the Ear, I Praise thee for thy Word and
Sacraments, I Praise thee that ever I had heart to Repent and b^lieve I Praise
thee, for all thy Gifts and Graces, I Praise thee for Health and Strength and
Liberty, I P^aise thee for Food and Raiment, I Praiseing Praise thee for all
thy mercies bodily and Spiritual, and thus Procceds the Enlarged believer in
the Magnifications of the GOD of all Grace, and we may easily suppose that it
is the Finger of Christ, which tunes the harp of his heart, to fit him for this
Angelick Work, it is Christ that fixes all the pines and Strings of his Soul,
so that he can say, my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
Praise, awake up my Glory, awake Psalterie and harp, (...) my self will awake
early. Ps. 57.7.8.

The second thing wherein Christ makes great Impressions is upon the
Conscience, and that these 2 ways.

1. By awaking the Conscience, when GOD Thunders, Conscience Shakes, when GOD
Raises a Storm there, O what Perplexing Impressions and Grievous Concussions
the stoutest sinner will stoup, when GOD opens his Eyes, and sets his sins in
order before his face, and Raises strong Apprehensions in him of Divine Wrath
and Vengeance Impendent over his head! he feels then a wounded Spirit who can
bear, and that the Tortures of a Troubled Conscience are a piece of Hell before
hand, the Intolerable pains whereof have pressed them near to Despair and
Distraction: The Tragic story of Francies Spire, may help to prove what
Tormentfull Impressions GOD can make on Consciences.

2. Christ makes Impressions on Consciences to calm and quiet the Storms
therein: he that by the Word of his Power made the Roaring and Soaring Surges
of the Sea be still, and as it were made horried Tempests to fall into a deep
Sleep of silence, Math: 8:24.26.27: Can also break all the Clouds, setle all
the Storms, and allay all the raging Tumults of a Troubled Conscience, after a
Rough Storm, he can send calm Halevon days to succeed, for as the Poet says.

Nunc pluit, and claro nunc Jupiter aethers fulget. And when this change of
Weather is brought to pass by his Fatherly Care, Kindness and Indulgence, with
what quiet and Serenitie is the Soul p^ss^ssed? Ps: 30, 5, Ps. 126.5. What a
Soul Storm had the Jailout! yet within a while, a profound calm of Joy and
Rejoicing, Acts 16.29, 30, 34. And sometime it falls out that they who have
been sorrest harassed with severest stripes and strictures of Law-work in their
Conscience, have also had the sweetest and highest measures of Peace and
Tranquillity of mind, when the Lord has brought them out of the deeps of their
Soul distresses.

The 3d thing wherein Christ makes great Impressions, is in aff cting all the
Senses, which we would have understood in a Spiritual sense According to the
Apostels meaning, when he speaks Heb. 5:14. Of having the Senses exercised to
discern both Good and Evil. Now we will endeavor to demonstrate how Christ
thus affects all the 5 Senses.

1 Christ affects mightily the Sense of Hearing, making the voice of his Word,
the Voice of his Providence, the Voice of his Spirit, and the Voice of our
Consciences, so to reach the cares of the Soul, as that it is raised to advert
and Listen to what he speaks: Son: 5:2. though the Spouse was slumbring, as
it were betwixt Sleeping and Waking, yet she understood it was the Voice of her
beloved, that Knocked, saying, Open to me my Love, my Dove, etc. Yea so
pierceing is his voice, that he makes even the Dead to Hear it, John 5:25:
Never did the terrible rumbles of Lowdest Thunderings more forcibly beat the
ears of Men than the fearful denunciations of his tremenduous threatenings the
Souls of those he minds to awaken. Acts 2.37. When Peter is charging them home
in his Sermon with the guilt of the Horrid Crimson crime of the Blood of
Christ, they were stricken into such a Consternation, that it is said, when
they heard this they were pricked in their Hearts, and from the painful
Impression of this Divine thrust (as ^he word in the Original will bear) they
cried out as men strangely frighted, Men and Brethren what shall we do? and
says Habbakuk. 3.2.16. O Lord I have heard thy Speech, and was afraid; When I
heard my Belly trembled, my Cups quivered at the Voice. Also never did the
sweetest Consort of Music more passionatly affect them that delight therein,
then ^he Melodious utterance of his Comfortable promises does raise and ravish
the Souls of Believers. In the same Sermon of Peter, Acts 2.39. where after the
Commination of threatenings, he changes his Tune to speak of the promises, (for
the promise, says he, is to you and to your Children) you may see the Effect
thereof, verse 46.47. They did eat their Meat with gladness, and Singlenes of
heart, praising God, their sighings were turned to Singings.

2. Christ mightily Effects the Sense of seeing, when this Sun of Righteousness
pleases to dart down the Beams of his Brightness, what an Insufferable display
of Light illuminats the Minds of Believers, the Sable Clouds of ignorance are
Rent in pieces, and forced last, and far to flee away, we already told the
Enlighted Eye of the Believer, is so furnished with New Light, and a clear
sight that he Discerns Spiritua^ Things under other colors than before the
Scales fell from his Eyes, wherefore w^ proceed no further in this point: But
sur^ a Blind Man that has his Eyes Opened, cannot but perceive that some
strange Affecting Operation has pass^d upon him which will Print the Sense and
Remembran^^ thereof on his Thoughts for ever: Was not Zecharias under great
Impressions, when he said (what partly he Felt) that the day spring, or ( Sun
rising, as in the Margin of our Bibles) from on high has visited us, to give
Light to them that fit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, Luke 1.7.8.7.
Must it not be a very Affecting Light? that is called a Glorious Light, or the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, which GOD Commands to shine into the
Hearts of Believers? 2 Cor: 4.4 6.

3. Christ mightily affects the Sense of Smelling, where ever this perfumed
Prince comes, be sends such a fragrant smell through all the Ambient Air,
that whoever draw it at their Nostrils, cannot but find it: Never did a^ bed of
Roses, nor a bundle or Posie of most fragrant Aromatic flowers, yield a more
ravishing Scent, than this Rose of Sharon? this Lilly of the Valleys Song: 2:1.
and Song: 1.3. Because of the savor of his good Ointments, His Name is as
Ointment poured forth, whereby Believers are raised and pressed in Soul to Love
and admire Him, and from His Odoriferous presence is it, that all about Him
smell strongly of him, the Graces of Believers being stirred and perfumed by
His Grace-giving Virtue. Song: 1.12. While the King sits at his Table, my
Spickenard sends forth the smell thereof. Now O Communicants, have ye not
this day smelled Christ present at His Table? have not your Spices fl^wed out?
are not your Graces more fresh and fragrant than before?

4. Christ mightily aff^cts the sense of Touching; when His Finger touches the
heart, when He puts in his hand by the hole of the door, He makes a strange
moving of the Bowels, Son 5:4. O Christian did thou never touch and feel Him
by the Finger of Faith? I hope thou have, and that thou can experimentaly
say, that thou have Touched him so Effectually and he has Touched thee so
Powerfullie, that virtue has gone out from him to Cure thy flux of Blood, and
to cleanse thy Leprosy Mar. 1.41, 42, 5.28, 30.

5. Christ mightily Affects the sense of Teasting, O Communicante, while thou
was this day Ea^ing His Flesh, which is Meat indeed and Drinking His Blood,
which is Dri^k indeed, had not this Heavenly Manna, a more Delicious Taste,
then any Delicacie ever thou did Taste? Have thou not in the Sa^rament,
senceably Touched, Tasted, and handled sweet Christ: I dare say that the
sw^ete^^ Carnal Gust, that ever the most sen^ual E^icure f^und in his swinish
fills of bodi^y plea^ures, never came ne^r to be so swee^ and ravishing as the
Tastings of Christ's ^piritual fruits and pleasures: Song: 2.3.4 5. I sat under
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, ^e
br^ught me to the Banqueting h^use, and his Banner over me was Love, stay me
with flaggons, comfort me with Aples for I am sick of Love; We dare no^ say she
got a ^urf^it of Christ, but we may ^ay, she got a tastable fill of Christ, for
a surfeit occasions to soath and nauseate, but the fill she got appetized her,
for Christ still more, which may be gathered from the verses Immediately, and
the Chapters after following, where she passionatly longs, she indefatigably
paints and pursues after Christ. And Peter has a passage also to our purpose,
1. Pet: 2.3. If so be ye have tasted that the LORD is Gracious. O Believer have
thou not tasted and felt the Lord to be Gracious, in accepting and Answering
thy Prayers, in healing all thy Diseases, in pardoning all thy sins, in
strengthening thee against all thy Temptations and Tribula^ions, in bestowing
liberally upon the many Love Tockens and Pledges of his fav^ur, as fore^asts of
Glory, and an earnest ^f the future full I^heritance in Heaven, I hope some of
you understand in Experience what I say.

The 4 thing wherein Christ makes great Impressions, is in raising high all the
Affections this Discour^e would swell too big, to sp^ak of all the several
Affections and Passions of the Soul that Christ works upon, therefore we will
touch but at some few, as a sample h^w far Christ's Impressions g^.

1. Christ raises into a flame the Affection ^f Love, did not our H^arts burn
within us? says the Text, and its small wonder our Love should enkindle toward
him, when we consider how much Lovely Christ in pure Love has done and
suffered for us; But how can we moreover but be deeply enamoured with him when
we look upon him as the Orient and Glorious Beauty of Heaven and Earth, being
the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the Express Image of His Person, All
created Beauties, are but faint and fading Resemblances to His matchless,
Comeliness, He is the Beauty of ^aints ^he Admiration of Angels, and the dearly
beloved of GOD; And this further Commands our Love to him, that t^is ^xcelent
Beauty, is content to Cement, and be United to such ugly souls as we a^e; this
Son of the King of Kings, we are called, and have Acc^ss to be Married unto;
and O when the Believer contemplates on this honorable and happy Match, he is
raised into Raptures of Love and Admira^ion, where by his ravished soul is like
to faint and expire in inflamed desires after Him, Song 12. 5. stay me with
flagons, comfort me with Aples for I am sick of Love, was not this a deep
Impression, the flame of Love made o^ Her Hear^?

2. Christ Raises the Affection of Spiritual hatred, self Loathing, and shame
facedness, with what Confusion is the Soul Perfused, when he thought fully
Recounts and Reviews all his Abominations? when he looks on himself as ugglie
and Loathsome in the sight of a Holy GOD, at the same time also is he hateful
and Loathsome in his own eyes, and cannot lift them up toward Heaven, where
Lesed Majesty Resides, eve^ie look into His Innerman Forces sighs from his
heart, tears from his eyes, complaints from his mouth, a Smi^ing upon his
Thighs, and makes some pe^it^ntia^ Impressi^ns on the whole man: When Jobs eyes
were opened, He abhorred himself, and Repented in dust and in ashes Job. 42.5
6. When GOD's hand Reached E^^raim, he Repented, he Smote on his Thigh, yea was
ashamed yea even Confounded. ver. 31.19. When the self Abhorring publican was
under a working sense of his guilt, he stands a far off, will not lift u^ so
much as h^s eye unto Heaven, But smits upon his breast. Luk, 18.13. Look Ezekiel.
36.31.

3 Christ Raises the Affection of Godly sorrow, the Soul having Received a self
Loathing view of all his guiltiness, as said is, his eye. Affects his heart,
yea his Rockie heart by a Touch of Christ's finger gushes out into Waters of
penitential sorrowings, when he considers how much he has dishonored and
Angered GOD, how much he ha^h filed and Endangered his precious Soul, he
mournes like a Dove, he Chatters like a Cron, and whence all their penitential
Boylings in his Bowels but from a look of Christ, and a look to Christ that
draws from him a heart melting virtues. Zeck. 12.10. they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. Luk 22.61 62. It was a
piercing look of Christ to Peter over his shoulder, that made weep him bitterly.

4. Christ Rais^s the Affection of holy fear, a f^at both of sin and Wrath, how
anxio^slie Cau^ious is the Believer, (from this Gracious Principale planted in
hi^ h^ar^) least be Off^nd his Heavenly Father, and how mightily Aff^aid least
because of his Offenses his GOD hide his face and Frown upon him. And when the
fear of man, and any thing that he can own in his Malice, or Wickedness, and
dreed of the great Jehovah, come in competition together, the fear of GOD so
strongly overpowers and swalows up all other feats, that it keeps the ascendent
in the heart; and restrains the Believer both from Impiety against, and
Apostacy from GOD; The which spiritual fear is one of the new Covenant
benefits and Blessings. Jer: 32.40. I will make an everlast^ng Covenant with
them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put (...)
fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

5. Christ raises the affection of Heavenly joy which whiles overflows all
Banks: let me pose thee, exercised Christian, have thou not sometimes found
(specialy aft^r deep Humiliation, delight and diligence in thy Devotions, or
strick ca^e ^o lead a holy Life) have thou not found ^ say, an insufferable and
swalowing J^y, that the narrow necked V^ss^l of thy Soul could contain no more,
do thou not mind some sp^ing Tides of the ineffable Consolation^ of the
Spirit of GOD, which Christ the Giver of it calls a full joy, John 16.24. Luk:
Cap. 24.52. calls a great Joy, Matthew calls an exceeding great joy, Cap. 2:10.
And Peter, A Joy unspeakabl^, and full of Glory. 1. Epist: 1.8. The which joy
for as great as it is in the sense of us Mortals, yet is but a crumb, a drop of
the Heavenly joys, we shall be eternaly satisfied with at our Fathers Table in
Paradise, where we shall enjoy a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.18.

The 4th particular we promised to handle is to tell, what ye must do for your
pa^ts, in order to obtaining and p^eserving Christ's Impressions, as we have
touched before in the first proposition, you must not like Enthusiasts look for
extraordinary impulses and inspirations, but in the ordinary way of the
diligent use of proper means: said the Heathean Poet, Metathenes kai Chaeira.

Kimie, with Minerva, put to thine own hand, even so Christian, with Christ put
to thine own hand. Then

1. Purge out and abandon all ill impressions: sure I am if thou do observe
the ways of thine own ill heart, and art sensible of the disorderly and
distracting motions thereof, many a time, and many may^st thou sigh and say,
that innumerable ill Impressions too frequently molest and pervert thy Spirit:
let bitter Experience speak? Have not the desires of sensual pleasures, the
immoderate ears of this World oppressed and occupied thy thoughts? Have not
many imperuous carnal Lusts haunted thy heart, and inflamed thee unto filthy
inclinations? Have not malicious and revengeful designs sunken deep in thy
mind? Has not envy grated thy intral^? Have not many furious p^ssions fired
thy bosom, are there not innumerable more inordinate ill Impressions, that
daily affect and disorder thy whole Man, that we cannot stay to specify, but
whereof thou may; be conscious to thy self; All which thou must disgorge,
and put far from thy Tabernacle, if thou would have the Spirit of Christ to
dwell and wo^k in thee; This tubbish must be removed, e're thou become a Temple
of the Holy Ghost, at least thou must daily be doing something that may
contribute this way: set thy ^elf then O Believer in the Grace and strength of
Christ, by deep Repentance by serious mortification, by constant Watchfulness,
by active Faith on Christ to weaken and expel all the ill Impressions of thy
Spirit, that thus thou may be the more fitted and capable to take on Christ's
gracious Impressions. Hence 1. Cor: 5.7.8. We are required to keep the Feast
(such a Feast as you have been at the day) not with old Leaven, neither with
the Leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened Bread, of
sincerity and Truth. Now in order to our being a new Lump, he advises first to
purge out the old Leaven: And Peter after the same manner, exhorting, as new
born Babes, to desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby,
exhorts also in or^er to the words having the deeper Impression and being the
more tasteable, that we should lay aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisy, and envies, and all evil speakings, 1. Peter 2.1.2. 3. And Paul
also col: 3.2. Recommending to l^^ our Affections on things above, that this
may be the more readily attained, he ^equires not to set our Affection on the
things on the Earth, which is Equivalent, as if he had said Abstract and
withdraw your Affections from carnal things, that they may be the more pure,
spiritual, and less clogged, in their mountings and soaring^ Heavenwards.

2. Be frequent and ^erve^^ in these Duties and pieces of devotion, wherein
Christ Usualy Communicat^ his Impressions: O^ Christian, i^ure thy self to
Heavenly Meditation, diligently hear and Read the good word of GOD, and
Impartial^ a^ply b^t^ promises and Threatenings as th^^ a^t concerned, and see
thou N^gl^ct no. Christian conferences, for as Iron sharpens Iron, so many one
civ^ly Experienced Christian put an edge upon another, And Remember it was
while cu^ ^wo Disciples in the Text, were talking together of Spiritual things
that Christ cam^ to them and made their hearts to burn, verse, 13.14.15.32.3.
More Especialy, be much in the Duty of Prayer, O the many sweet visi^s and
Communications of Christ, that Believers have gotten on their knees; While they
have been Fervently pouring out their hearts to Christ, Christ has Favorably
powered in his Heart upon them, and filled them with Love, Joy, peace, and much
grace, if at any time O Believer thou find thy frame fl^t and dull, thy graces
Low and weak, what must thou do, but with the spouse cry out. Awake O North
wind and come thou South, ^low upon my Garden that the spices thereof may flow
^ut; I^ is in Pra^er thou art ^o invite Christ to ^ome into his Garden, and eat
his pleasant Fruits Can^: 4.16 Yea see how soon he Answers ^er votes in the
very next words. Chap: 5.1 H^ puts her not off with a promise that he will come
to morrow or the next day, bus says he in the present Tense, I am come into my
Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, etc. and Ezeck. 36. you may see, tha^ GOD will do
so Much for Pra^er, that he will do nothing without it. for having given many
gracious Promises, V. 26, 27.28. he tells them, I will yet for this be Enquired
of by the house of Israel to do it for them.

4 Above all make daily use of Christ, the Inexhaustable fountain of all grace,
for all our springs are in him, and out of it is, we must derive, and get
grace for grace; J^hn 3.15.16. On all thy occasions Act faith on his Bounty and
fulnass and this is the True way both to get and to keep Heavenly Impressions
Zech. 12.10 It Is by locking to Christ, we must come by Spiritual Influences:
Paul also tells us, that the holy Spiritual Life which he Lived, was by the
faith of the Son of GOD Gal, 2.20; see Job, 15:5. Phil. 2.13.

The fifth and last point in prosecu^^ of this Doctrine is to make some (...)
of it.

1. Use of Reproof. Two sorts Rebukable.

1. Who are ind ff^rent of having Christ Impr^ssions on their hearts, Poor
Souls (...) know not where your Mercy Lies, are you (...) d^ff^rent to be Rich?
are you indifferent (...) peace and comfort, are you indifferent to (...)
happi^? are you indifferent of going (...) Heaven? if you be so, how
unspeakabl^ miserable? are you, for Christ's working and Impressions, they make
us Rich toward GOD, they yield us solid and abiding peace and Joy? hey
prepare us for Heaven and happiness, through who ever had any Impressi^ns of
grace, shall never have any Impressions of glory?

They are Reproveable who mock at a Spiritual work of Grace in Believers, how
many men of profain and loose spirits are there, who, under a vogue of wit,
Indulge themselves too Rashly to Nickname, and through dirt upon exercised
Christians, thereby to discredit Religion, and disgrace the grace of GOD, in a
work of Conversi^n and Regeneration, Ignorantly Enough, Accounting the
Impressions and Experiences that Believers have therein, to be but the
Enthusiastic whimsies and Brainesick ^^nceits of Airie Fanatics: Alas! mad^ul
because ye are strangers thereto our selvse, should y^u therefore Judge ^o body
has the R^al sense and and Expe^ience thereof but only in fancy, It seems
^uch know not that Christ's inward Impressions, and saving grace whereby
assurance of salvation ^s given to Believers, in the Scripture style and
dialect, is called a white stone, that has therein written a New Name, which
man knows, ^aving he that Receives it. Revel: 2.17. O be Afraid to be
mockers least your Bands be made strong, and ye be found even to fight against
GOD.

1. Use of Caution of Four Things.

1. Have a special Care Ye resist not the Workings of the Spirit of Christ in
your Souls, quench not Christ's fire, This, like the Sacred Vestal fire among
the Romans, is to be keept always Burning, and therefore. O Believer, make much
of Christ's Impressions, Foment and Improve Carefully all the Motions and
Impulses of his Spirit, that thereby thy Soul may be both put, and keept in
Life, I fear it is our daily Grieving and Quenching the Spirit makes us so
dull, Barren, and Cold^^^, in all our performances and Devoti^ns.

2. What Measure of Christ's Impressions hou gets, be not so Selfi^h, as only to
improve them for thine own particular Use and Service as we use to say, no Man
is born for himself only bu^ also for others, S^ no Man is Born again for
himself, but that he may Employ, the G^fts, Graces, Experiences, and
Consolations he ha^h Received, for the help, Comfort, and Furtherance of
others, in the way to H aven: Says Paul, 1 Th^s^ 5 11. Comfort your selves
together and Edif^^ one another. Heb: 10 24. Consider one another, to provocke
unto Love and good Works: Hence also says David, Come and hear all ye that fear
GOD, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66.16. And did not
our Inflamed Disciples here run the very same Hour, while there Hearts were yet
Hot, and told to others what had passed betwixt Christ and them? V. 33.34.35.

3. Have a care ye mistake not the Wild Spurious and Irregular Motions of your
own Spirits for Christ's Genuine Impressions: If thou art Proud, Self conceited,
a Despiser of others, making too great Ostentation of thy Professi^n and
Religion, suspect thy Spirit not to be in a right Temper; for the true Worki^gs
of ^hrists Spirit, incline to be Holy, Humble, Sincere, Peaceable, Self-denyed,
M^ek, Patien^; Watchful, and Diligent in serving and Walking with GOD.

4. Have a care that ^he impressions from christ you get, do not wear off, nor
decay: ^ow many seem to have great Flashes and ^arm Frames at a Communion
Occasion, ^pecially, which yet prove but like Ephraims ^oodness, That is, like
a Morning cloud, and (...) early dew that goes away, Hos: 6:4. And (...)
Jeremiah says, soon does this Holy flesh pass ^^om them, chap: 11.15 An^ who
among ^s all, (that we may Remember our faults this Day) that ever found what a
Wo^k of Grace or Conversion Meant; but many must say, that at this time we are
under a great Alteration to the worse, whereas our ^^^st Love? whereas our Love
of Espousals, whereas our Tenderness and Filiar Fear, Whereas our Mighty Joy of
the Holy Ghost, Where our Heart Melting and Mournings, ^hen our Hatred and
Destation of sin, where our Heart keeping and Watchfulness, where our Burning
Zeal for GOD's Honor? yea we may almost say, where is Our GOD? and not to
Multiply more, where are all the Spiritual Impressions and Impulses, that we
had in the Younger and Earlier Days of our conversion? Are they not sadly away,
have we not Dangerously fallen there^rom; and is not a Carnal, Worldly, Vain
and Frothie Frame, come in the place thereof: so that alas! we bring forth but
Will Grapes unto the Lord, as if we were the Degenerat Plan^ of a strange Vine,
therefore Remember from whence thou art fallen and Repent and do thy first
Works? And l^ast thou ma^es^ fall still further, O Communicant conside^ with
Fear, that thou art (after their Communion days are over) to be engaged it thy
World^y Bussiness and cares, tho^ may Rencounter many Temptations, tho^ have
a Deceitful Unconstant Heart with hi^ thee, and hence art in great hazard of
ne^^ill Impressions, that may Juffie out and Expel any Spiritual ones thou have
got at thi^ Occasion, and the more thou have gotten thou art in the greater
hazard of satan's at tacks; Who like Pirates set not upon Ligh^ Vessels, but the
most Laden: put thy Impressions and Experiences in Christ's Han^ that gave
them, he is the best Hand to kee^ them, and will restore them as thou neede^
with Increase and Addition: And if tho^ sincerely and carefully do their, and
the other things, we have been Recommend in^ thou may often be Receiving
Spiritua^ Communications and Impressions from Christ, whereby thy Heart will he
made (...) Burn within thee. Amen.

FINIS.

