The Clothiers CASE truly Stated, With an Answer to the REASONS against the
Bill for the Encouragement of the VVoollenManufacture, Humbly offered to the
Parliament.
THE Clothier is brought under a Necessity of employing a Factor or a Packer in
the Sale of his Cloth in the City of London; the Sale of Merchants Cloth being
wholly drawn from the Public Market of Blackwell-Hall into private Houses: And
all the Windows of the said Hall are taken up by Factors, that the Clothier
has no convenient place to show or sell his Cloth to Woollen-Drapers, etc.

This Alteration in Trade has brought on a long Credit with Cloth, six Months,
nine, and twelve Months, has impoverished the Clothiers in twenty or thirty
Years above sixty thousand Pounds in Losses, by broken Factors, has occasioned
three times that Value in bad Debts from Buyers of Cloth; the Price of Cloth
has been brought down from nine Shillings a Yard to six; which has had as
proportionable Effect upon the Price of Wool, and consequently upon Land: This
long Credit has likewise necessitated the Clothiers to pay their Work-People
with Commodities; which has impoverished the Manufacturers so far, that many
Parishes now pay three times as much to the Relief of their Poor as was paid
twenty or thirty years since; which is well known to Gentlemen that live in
Clothing Parts.

As Cloth is now sold by Factors and Packers, who act for the Interest of the
Merchant, they may as easily get a greater Share of the Country-Gentleman's
Estate, and bring down the Price of Wool to twelve Shillings a Tod.

If the Merchant had not an advantage by the Sale of Cloth in private Houses,
he would soon find out the Clothier, and encourage the public Market of
Blackwell-Hall, where all Cloth ought to be brought, and there sold.

The Design of the first Paragraph of the Bill is to prevent Deceit, that
deceitful Cloth made of Pinions and Noyles, etc. should not be sold for Cloth
made of perfect Fleece-Wooll; and since it is not easy to know it, the marking
of such Cloth is as reasonable as that of Plate.

If such Cloth be marked, it does not follow that it will be unvendable, as is
alleged, no more than the worst sort of Colchester Bays, called Cutts, and
Rents, are less vendable than the best, called Crown-Bays, tho at a less Price;
it is reasonable as well as just, that Cloth should be sold according to its
real Goodness.

The Bill gives a Permission to make broad Woollen-Cloth of Pinions, or
Noyles, etc. with a distinction; which by the 21 of Jac. 1. chapter 18. now in
force, is wholly prohibited under the Forfeiture of five Pounds for every such
Cloth, and a larger Power given to Churchwardens and Overseers by the said Act
than by the Bill.

Was the Proof of Pinion Cloth truly examined amongst our Soldiery, who now
wear too much of it, there would be need of no more Argument to mark it.

Lambs-Wooll, and Vell-Wooll, which is likewise prohibited by the said Act, is
usually sold for Flannels and Stockins, and more proper than for Broad-Cloth.

It is not the Design of the Clothiers of Glocestershire to get the Bill pass
by Surprise, it being the Sense of much the greater number of Clothiers of the
other Counties.

The Blackwell-Hall Factors are the Clothiers Servants, they paying them, and
all the Duties of the Hall: If they think it not convenient to employ them,
it is as reasonable for them to turn them off as any other Master their
Servants; and the Rights and Privileges of Englishmen will not be destroyed
thereby: But it will be very hard to necessitate a Master to keep his Servant
that he thinks not proper for him, and is richer than himself, which is the
Clothiers Case.

The Bill provides to send up Factors out of the Country, (where there is
occasion) that may be more under their Management than the present Factors who
are become their Masters: So that there will be (...) inconveniency to
Clothiers that live remote from London, and may think Factors necessary for the
Management of their Trades.

The Glocestershire Clothiers have a place to unload their Cloth, but the
Windows, and most convenient places are taken up by Factors.

The marking of Broad Cloth with the Letters monogram of 'W' (William)
superimposed on 'M' (Mary) crowned, is to show that the same is made of perfect
FleeceWooll, as it was done in the Reigns of Edward the Sixth and others; so no
new thing.

It was usual formerly for Clothiers to have a particular Mark (as the Law
requires) when they made good Cloth; but since this deceitful Cloth has been
made, Marks have been altered to put it off.

The Statute-book is full of the Lengths and Breadths of Cloth, which has many
times been altered. The Lengths proposed in the Bill relates to Long-Cloths,
and not Short-Cloths, and so will not affect those places mentioned in the
Reasons against the Bill.

It Is very evident, That the Rents of Land is very much fallen within these
forty Years; at which time the Sale of Cloth by Factors, as well as Fat Cattle
and Sheep was very rate, or scarce known in the City of London.

It seems reasonable at this time, when Taxes are so great (though necessary
for our Defense) to enquire into the Causes of the decay of the Clothing-Trade.


