THE CITY of LONDONS NEW LETANY.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
FRom Rumps that do Rule against Customs and Laws,
From a fardle of fancies stilled a Good Old Cause,
From Wives that have nails which are sharper then Claws.
Good Jove deliver us all.
From men who seek right where it is not to be had,
From such who seek good where all things are bad,
From wise men far worse then fools or men mad.
Good Jove etc.
From Soldiers that wrack the poor out or doors,
From Rumps that stuffed Coffers to pleasure their Whores,
Which they secretly squeez from Commonwealth scores.
Good Jove etc.
From Ingrossers of wealth to ly by their walls,
Which they force from poor women for keeping of Stalls,
And choose for to rise by other men's fall.
Good Jove etc.
From Knaves that do pocket good Subjects Estates,
From such that give Plasters when they have broken our Pates,
From Rumps that do Vote down our Posts, Chains and Gates.
Good Jove etc.
From Statesmen that Court the thing that they hate,
From woeful Repentauce that comes too late,
From those that delight in making of bate.
Good Jove etc.
From Soldiers who mutiny for want of their pay,
And at last go sneeking without it away,
Crying they hope for a far better day.
Good Jove etc.
From one who brought forces to fill up the Town,
That when Rumps were at highest he might pull them down,
Because he himself does aim at the Crown.
Good Jove deliver us all.
From Commanders who never drew sword but in Schools,
Which were button-pointed to favor such fools,
Who in vapouring words do threaten Joint stools.
Good Jove etc.
Who to loose drop of blood would faint at the heart,
And in dread of a Gun are scared at a Fart,
If one blows but his Nose it makes them to start.
Good Jove ande.
Who think every brush of wind an Alarm,
To which they make ready and cry out Arm, Arm,
Yet secretly pray that there may be no harm.
Good Jove deliver us all.
From a City that lies on its back to be Gelt,
From those that wont stir till famine be felt,
From the Pike, the Gun, the Sword and the Belt,
Good Jove etc.
From a simple Mayor not sit to Rule Hoggs,
From such as obey him like Spannel Dogs,
From Summers heat and from Winters Foggs.
Good Jove etc.
From County Petitions and Declarations,
That will not be drawn one Inch from their stations,
But triumph in words for old Reformations.
Good Jove etc.
From Apprentices valor and threats from the City,
Which would Act great wonders, yet forbear in pity,
From fools that conceit themselves very witty.
Good Jove etc.
From Oaths and Engagements imposed by force,
And broken as fast without any remorse,
Alleging them Ceremonies of course.
Good Jove etc.
From those whose damned actions with Treason are crowned
From such that would Law and Gospel confound,
And Vow that the City they will burn to the ground.
Good Jove etc.
From people that murmur with Swords in their hand,
And keep an entreating when they may command,
Yet had rather loose all then Knaves to withstand.
Good Jove etc.
From Rumps that the Kingdoms Revenue have spent,
From an everlasting Parliament,
And from an Army full of discontent.
Good Jove etc.
From such who do courtisies with a long pause,
From those who condemn before they hear the cause,
And from Trades which are worse then picking of strawes.
Good Jove etc.
From a Foes mercy when one lies in his power,
From a Friends anger in an ill hour,
And from a fool that is Lieutenant of the Tower.
Good Jove etc.
From men who make use of their Friends in the nick,
And when the brunt's over against them do kick,
The thoughts of such Varlets does make my Muse sick.
Good night good people all.
Printed for L: C. in the year 1659.


