MEMENTO MORI, OR A word in season to the Healthful, Sick, and Dying, fit for
this calamitous time.

Wherein sicknesses, rage, and deaths, are frequent.

In which is Discoursed, 1. That the present Life of Man is short. 2. That
Death is most certain. 3. That the time and way of Death is uncertain. 4.
Motives to prepare for Death. 5. Some things to be done in preparation for
Death. 6. Some Antidots against the fears of Death.


Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment.

Chilo per Ausonium,
Vive memor mortis, uti memor sis and salutis.
Persius.
Vive memor Lethi, fugit hora --
August. de Doctr. Christiana. He cannot die ill, who lives well, and it is
rare for one to die well, who has lived ill.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699.

The Argument. The Cross and the Crown, Page 18. Ben O Death is terrible! Cord.
14.
BAr. -- mind thou must dye,
All men to Nature must this Tribute pay;
The Crowned King, and so the Chained Slave
Must equally be turned into the grave.
There Is no discharge in this Man-slaying War,
Memento mori every thing does bear.
It Is but a little while of interval
Twixt those that on a Tra^ick Scaffold fall,
And those the rac^ of natures course who run;
Our life is almost gone when scarce begun;
Like to the Flower, that with the Sun does rise,
And with the Su^ at night fades from our eyes.
And though, the King of terrors, death be called,
Yet by his terrors thou shall not be enthralled.
For Christ has overcome death by his death,
It Is but a softly sleeping out the breath;
Which when its gone breaths in the land of joy,
Where fears of men or death no more annoy.
East-Lothian, November 4. 1699.
MEMENTO MORI, OR Death's Alarm to City and Country, to mind and prepare for
Death.
JOb says, Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble; he
comes fo^th like a flower and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not, Job 14.12. In which Pathetick Passage, he points at the
bre^ity of our present life, the certainty of our future death, and that all
the days of our life till our death, are liable to be attended with many
troubles and sorrows: the serious consideration whereof should make us
concerned to provide Cordials for An^idoting the bitterness of the miseries of
our life, and excite us earnestly to exercise our s^lves to prepare for death,
and with all diligence to secu e our hopes of eternal life.

Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell are the four last things, yet for the most
part the last and least in our thoughts, which speaks out much stupidity,
unbelief, and impiety; for if we did really believe (as we say we do) that
after our natural death, there is life and death of another nature, viz Eternal
life, and the second death, unto one of which we shall be doomed, at the great
day of Judgment, we should surely be more concerned, than generally we are, to
prepare for death, and lay hold on eternal life: These, these are matters of
greatest consequence, all our other secular concerns, and temporal cares and
interests, are but trifles and vanities in comparison hereof: Yet alas! See we
not the greatest part of the infatuated children of men, madly pursuing to
grasp and possess this world, and to take all their present pleasures in time,
as if they were to live a sensual life for ever, or to be annihilated at death,
or that there were neither Heaven nor Hell after it: Eccl. 9.3. -- The heart of
the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart, while they
live, and after that they go to the dead. But my friend, whoever thou art that
reads these Lines, sure I am thou art a Mortal, therefore Memento mori,
rememember thou must die; For what man is he that lives, and shall not see
death? Psalm. 89.48. My design is as succinctly as I can, to set before thee a
few things of death, and preparation for it, which are discoursed in these 6.
Sections following.

SECTION I. The present life of man is short.
WE need not be long or prolix in telling you that our life is short, they have
been but short while in the World, who are not convinced, from their own
observation of daily deaths, that mortal man is of few days; therefore to
prevent multiplication of words in proving a thing, that readily none who have
their senses about them will deny: All we shall offer on this Head, shall be to
cite and narrate some Scripture-passages, wherein the brevity of man's life is
illustrated, by comparing it to several things that are transitory and
corruptible in their nature, or of very short duration and continuance. Job
9.6. My days are swifter than a weavers shuttle, which flies in the twinkling
of an eye, from the one end of the Web-Loom to the other. Job 9.25, 26. My
days are swifter than a post, they pass away as the swift ships, and as the
eagle that hastes to the prey; all which are most swift and violent in their
motions. Psalm. 90.9. We spend our years as a tale that is told, which
consists in a few vanishing idle words. Job 7.7. My life is wind, that
posteth by us on swiftest wings, in a moment of time. Jam. 4.14. -- For what is
your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away. Psalm. 144.4. Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow
that passes away; either as the shadow of a cloud carried with a violent wind,
passes our view in an instant, or as the shadow of the Sun on a Dial, that
quickly declineth, till set from our Horizon. 1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is as
grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass, etc. Man's life is
as the grass, liable to a thousand accidents, to wither either by the scorching
beams of the Sun, or a blasting wind, or to be soon cut down, or trampled under
the foot of man, or beasts: And as in a pleasant Meadow there are many sorts of
grass or flowers, of various forms, figures and colors, white, yellow, red,
blue, etc. Which by the same fate fall together before the sharp Sith; so men
of all qualities, Complexions and statures, are promiscuously alike subject to
deaths destructions. Job 34.18, 19. God accepts not the persons of princes,
nor regards the rich more than the poor, in a moment shall they die. Job
21.13. In a moment they go down to the grave, i. e. in a very short space of
time does their breath evaporate and evanish. Psalm. 39.5. Behold thou have made
my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee; verily
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity: After this similitude of our
vain frail life to nothing and vanity, nothing more needs be said to express
the brevity of it; and even they who by reason of strength, reach the length of
threescore years and ten, or fourscore, yet their strength is labor and
sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and they flee away, Psalm. 90.10.

SECTION II. Death is most certain and inevitable.
DEath is a debt that all mortals owe to Nature, and must be paid; death will
admit of no bribe, no bail, no main-prize, their is no possible fence or guard
against his darts and instruments of destruction, says Job 30.23. I know that
thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. And
Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all once to die, i. e. there is a stated
unalterable decree by the Council of Heaven, that all must die, which by no
means can be repealed or avoided. Pray what can thou plead or pretend as a
ground of hope to escape, but what will be found vain and unable to help thee.
Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Eccles. 8.8. There is no man that
has power in the day of death, and there i^ no discharge in that war. Riches
and wealth will not avail the^ in the day of death, they may rather perhaps
bring thee sooner to thine end; thy vexatious thoughts of the ^ecessty of
leaving them grating and wasting thy vital spi^its, or thereby thou may be
exposed to become a prey to some or other, who by sinister ways may compass thy
death, to share of thy beloved gear and riches: Where is Craesus and Crassus?
Where are all the full and opulent possessors of this worlds goo^s? Has not
death spoiled them all, both of their lives and livings? Job 21.13. They spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. Job 34.19, 20. --
Go^ regards not the rich more than the poor, in a moment shall they die.
Worldly power and greatness are little things before this great King of
terrors, and terror of Kings. Where ar^ the mighty Monarchs, Princes and
Potentats of this World. Where are the Armed Hosts of Nations, with their
Generals Captains and Commanders? Are not all these men of might consumed with
worms and corr^ption? They who brought many deaths upon others, could not war^
it off themselves. Job 24.2^, 24. The mighty are not sure of their life, they
are exalted for a while, but are gone and brought low, they are taken out of
the way as all others, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn. Rev: 19.18.
The flesh of Kings, the flesh of Captains, the flesh of mighty men, the flesh
of all men both free and bound both small and great, shall be made a feast ^o
death and corruption. The Sophists and wise men of the world, who by their
exquisite cunning and providence could contrive and plot the ruin of Nations,
not one of them could ever yet fall on a politic to save themselves from
death: Where the Achitophels where the Matchia^els, and all the other profound
Politicians, who have been admired for their wisdom sense and eloquence; has
not death outwitted them all, and de-witted them utterly Psalm. 49.10. The wise
man dies, etc. Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. Where the mighty man, and the man of war, the
Judge, and the Prophet and the prudent? Where is the honorable man, and the
Co^nsellou^ and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator? Are they no all
taken away? yea, they are dead and gone. Bodily strength health and vigor,
cannot hold out against this Conq^ero^ those he crusheth down as the moth, and
makes to decay a^ all as the grass before the Mower. How many healthful and
young persons have thou known, who appeared as if they would have run to the
outmost step of Natures course, who yet have been run down by death in the
midst and bloom of their verdant years? Let not the young man glory in his
strength, for some says Job 36.14. they die in youth. I thought not amiss on
this particular to insert here a few Lines out of a little Poem, called, An
Abstract of Ecclesiastes, Sect. 17.

Boast not of youthful years, nor boast
Of health of body, nor of might;
A short whiles sickness may thee post
From time, to an eternal night.
Mind thou must die, but when, or where,
Thou cannest not Divine or tell;
The Lambs-skin often at the Fair
You Will find as soon as the Sheeps to sell.
Neither will the charms of beauty, nor the finest amiable complexions, move
death to pity or spare, he is so fond of his own Ghastly Countenance, that he
will have all look like himself: Loveable beauty, I say, the common charm of
Mortals, will not at all take with this Master of Mortals, for he will make their
beauty to consume away like a moth, Psalm. 39.11. Yea, their beauty shall
consume in the grave, Psalm. 49.14. What, what then will be a shield against the
darts of death? If none of these can be Armor of Proof? will not piety and
virtue be a fence and sanctuary? No, no, for all flesh is grass! Even grace and
godliness that may make immortal after time, will not save any mortal from
temporal death. Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and merciful men are taken
away. Heb. 11.13. The Apostle speaking of Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
and other holy men of God, says of them, These all died in faith: Lay thine
account then who ever thou art, that soon or syne thou must die.

SECTION III. The time and way of death is uncertain.
MOrtals are obnoxious to innumerable mischievous misfortunes, fatal accidents,
and untimely deaths, says Eliphaz J^b 5.7. Man is born unto trouble, as the
sparks flee upward. No man knows what scene or share of temptations and
tribulations may betide him ere he go off the stage of time; but all having
sinned, all may dread to partake of the bitter fruits of sin: Every day we may
behold some spectacles of misery; every day brings news of some body or other
that is visited with disasters and d^stress^s. To prevent tedious enlargement
on this Head, take a short Synopsis of some of the common woes and miseries of
the world, in a few Verses of a little Shedull, called, The Cross and the Crown.

This World's a Mass of Woes, a Maze of Tears,
Amazing Mortal Wights with Panick fears;
Our life's a Tragedy, comes in with cries,
Made up of griefs, goes out with Elegies:
Each Mortal acts his part, in every age,
Each Scene new sorrows brings upon the Stage;
Some covered with a Sable Vail we see,
An Emblem of a late Mortality;
Some crying (clapping hands) Ah! cruel Fate,
I Am ravished of my Darling and my Mate.
Some change their health to sickness, ease for pain,
Some in a moment all their glory sta^n;
Some who were Crowned with Fortunes bravest Bay,
Have found their Garland wither soon away:
Some who like Craesus, Treasures had in store,
Like Job, or Irus, poverty deplore:
Some who had all they wished, wish for their Urne,
And that their Funeral Flames may quickly burn.
Yea, Commonwealths, and Monarchies we see,
That sometime flourished, are a nullitie
Our Text is proved, this World's a mass of woes,
Each day a doleful Comment^ry shows.
But that we may come closser to the main purpose of this Section, viz. that
the time and way of death is uncertain, we will narrate an H^storical account
of several persons who have been soon and suddenly snatched out of the world,
and some of them come to very tragical ends, by strange and unexpected ways and
means: It would be an endless work to specify all, even the ordinary diseases,
whereby people are in ieopardy daily of having the thread of their life cut;
neither is it possible to guess at, or foretell all the fatal accidents whereby
our death may be compassed, for our life and breath is at the unavoidable
reverence and disposal of the absolute Lord of life and death, who has many
Arrows in his Quiver, and variety of instruments of death, there be mill
nocendi arts, and mill pericula mortis, which should make us who are certain
we must die, and uncertain where or when, to study to be always ready and
prepared, Matthew. 24.22.24. and Matthew. 25.13. Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man comes, therefore be ye
also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man comes; Prove.
27.1. compared with Jam. 4 14. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth, and ye know not what shall be on the
morrow, for what is your life? it is even a vapor that appears a little
time, and then vanishes away. The inconsiderate r ch man in the Gospel, fondly
promised to himself many years, wherein he expected to possess his great
wealth, and to take his case, eat, drink, and be merry, when behold in a moment
a damping message came unto him, which no doubt did strike him into a Pannick
fear, and Fever of perplexities, but God said to him, Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided? Luke 12.16. to 22. Now we come according to our purpose, to narrate
some Tragic instances of strange and sudden deaths.

Hylas Sailing to Colchos, while he was drawing a Bucket of Seawater, with the
weight thereof was pulled over Board, and drowned.

Fortia Attendulus, while he was endeavoring to save his Servant, in hazard of
drowning in the River Aternus in Italy, did himself perish in the Water.

Maxentius the Emperor, in his flight from Constantine the Great, passing the
Bridge called Ponte Molle, within two Miles of Rome, the said Bridge suddenly
falling into the River, he and all that were with him presently perished.

Remulus Anastasius the Emperor, and Aurelianus Carus the Emperor, and many
with him, were in an instant destroyed and suffocate with Thunder and
Lightnings.

Neocles the Son of Themistocles died with the bite of an Horse.

Seleucus Callenicus, and Theodosius the second Emperors, both died by a fall
off their Horses.

Fulco the Earl of Angiers was brained dead with a stroke of his Horse, lifting
up, and bending back his head.

Hesperia a Maid died of the bite of a Serpent, and Diogenes the Philosopher of
the bite of a Dog.

Hatto the Archbishop of Mentz was devoured of Mice.

Maximinus the Emperor, and Honorificus the King of the Vandals, were both
consumed with swarms of Lice.

Herod arrayed in his Royal Apparel, sitting upon his Throne, by the immediate
hand of God was eaten of Worms.

Alcibiades was burnt alive in his Chamber.

Niolas being keen at hunting, earnestly following the chase, fell accidentally
into a Coal-pit, where he died miserably.

Philostratus and Elpenor falling down a pair of Stairs in their drunkenness,
both died of the fall.

Terentius Corax, while Writing a Missive Letter, suddenly died: So did C.
Julius a Physician, in the time he was putting his Spectacles on his Nose: And
Flavius Vespasianus, while hearing Foreign Ambassadors: And L. Durius a
Physician, while drinking a Glass of Wine.

Ap. Saufetus in glu^ting down an Egg, died immediately.

Cueus Carbo, while easing Nature, died on the place, so it is storied of
Arrius that Arch-heretick in the Primitive times.

Petr. Calceanus died among the Barbers hands while a triming.

Philippides the Comedian, Diagoras the Rhodian, and Juventus Thalua, all died
of an excess of joy.

Philistion the Poet died in a great kink and fit of laughter.

Philip the Son of Demetrius the second King of Macedon, and Charles the gross
Emperor, both died of an excess of grief and sorrow.

Q. Heterius a Roman Knight, and Cornel Gallie a Senator, both died in the very
act of Venery.

Anacreon died by a little stone of a Raisine that stuck in his throat.

Henry the Son of Alphonsus the 8. King of Castile, while playing with his
Comrads, was struck dead by a Slate falling off a ^ouse upon his head.

John the Duke of Britainie, and several others with him, were c^ushed to death
by the fall of a Wall.

Alexander the Emperor, Son of Basilus, and Atti King of Pannonia, both died of
a great bleeding at the nose.

Old Aschylus a Poet in Sicilie, beeking himself at the Sun, under the open
air, was suddenly slain, by the fall of a Tortoise on his bald Pate, which an
Eagle taking, it seems, for a stone, let the Tortoise fall on it, that thereby
breaking the shell, she might get the meat.

Themigenes died of vomiting after his supper.

Antoninus Pius died sleeping.

Otto the third Emperor died by the infecton of a pair of poisoned Gloves.

Frider. 1. Barbarossa Emperor, was drowned swiming.

Henry the 3. Emperor, taking too great a mouthful of bread, died eating.

Drusius Pompeius, Claudius Cesars Son, playing with a piece Pear, and throwing
it up, to intercept or kepp it in his mouth, it fell so far into his throat,
that it choked him immediately.

Tarqu. Priscus, died with a Fish Bone sticking cross in his throat.

Fabius a Roman Senator, was choked with a Hair in Milk that he was drinking.

O what a small matter will do frail man's turn, to turn him out of time into
eternity, when Gods decreed time is come. Now in consideration of these
instances, and the innumerable hazards of death that we are in every moment,
and that by innumerable diverse means and accidents, O let us fear always, and
prepare and provide against all dangers occurrent.

I thought not amiss to insert here, that in the very interim or mean time that
I was Writing their Passages of some sudden deaths, I was called for to see a
young Woman, but about a year Married, that died the same day of a few, hours
illness, having the last night night of her life gone to bed as well i^ health
as ever, as her Husband told me.

SECTION IV. Motives to prepare for Death.
CHRIST says, Mat. 24.42, 44. Watch, for ye know not what hour the Lord does
come, therefore be ye also ready: Though there were no more but this one
command and advertisement from our Lords own mouth, it is enough to make us
think it our great concern to prepare for death, and to alarm us agreeably to
ply this great work. Besides the motives we have already touched at, viz That
death is cer^ain, and the time and manner thereof uncertain, we will offer a few
more considerations, to persuade and excite you to do what ye can to be in a
prepared estate for approaching death.

We get many fair warnings, and speaking memorials, that we must die. Are not
sickness raging, and deaths frequent through the Land? At this day, it is
observed, there are far more Burials than Births; few Families have escaped,
wherein there has not been either sick, or dead. When we go to Church or
Market, do we not miss many of our Friends, Neighbors, and Acquaintances, that
a few days or weeks before, were wont to attend these public occasions, as we
do, and now where are they? They are gone, and their places of converse or
residence knows them no more. What is the language of this, but hodie mini cras
tibi? What Is my fate to day, may be thine to morrow. Again, we must die but
once, we have need to see that we do it well: We say and do many things amiss
in the ordinary course of our life, which we may have leisure and helps to
amend and rectify, but not to die well, can never be helped, now or never is
the time of preparing for death, for as the tree falls so will it ly; if thou
unhappily happen to die in a graceless unconverted estate, without God, and
without Christ, thou dies also without hope, for there is no hope in the grave
whither we go; there is no more Preaching Faith and Repentance after time, no
more mercy to be expected of God, no more mediation by Christ, no more gracious
motions of the Holy Spirit; as life leaves you, death will find you, and as
death finds you, so will eternity treat you; therefore it is the living, ^he
living must lay it to heart, and that while they are in the land of hope; for
if ye die unprepared, your hopes are afterward out off for ever, Eccl. 9.5,
10. The living know that they shall die but the dead know not any thing.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. Isai.
38.18. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go
down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth. Remember also that when the
Harbingers of Death come, though thou should pray him with strong cries and
tears to spare thee yet a little while, that thou may be better prepared ere
thou go hence to be no more: None of thy Reasons or Rhetoric will prevail to
reprieve thee one moment his strict orders he must put to present peremptory
execution; one breathings respite I say thou need not exp^ct: For as it is,
Job 14.5. Thy days are determined, the number of thy months are with God, he
has appointed thy bounds that thou can not pass: it is impossible either to
anticipate or transgress the set and definite time and period of Gods
unalterable decree and appointment. And is there not a great deal of strong
reason ye should prepare for death, even more than a parity, with respect to
other cares and con^erns, this being the care of cares. If ye have Debts or
Accounts to give in to any that owes you, will you not take time to Ex^ract
them, and to fit and set them in order: Now have you not Counts to clear with
God? Are ye not deep in his Debt? What innumerable debts of sins, and debts of
mercies, and of time and other Talents, are you in Arrears of to God? And have
you not just ground to expect that he will call you to an account? Matthew.
25.19. After a long time the Lord of these servants came and reckoned with
them. If you are to take a voyage, or to go a journey, are ye not concerned to
provide for them? And have ye not a far journey and dangerous voyage to go,
that are to land at times end, in the astonishing Abyss of Eternity, and
perhaps knows not whether in Heaven or Hell? If you are to come into the
presence of a King of Clay, will ye not as Joseph, Genesis 41.14. put your selves
in your best prepared dress you can, and are ye to appear before the King of
kings, and will you not change your dirty rags, and put on your be^^
ornaments? If to engage in Battle, will you not arm and prepare for your own
safety? And when to engage in the last Battle of the Soul at death, will ye
adventure naked and Armless? Have not too many careless souls done so? who when
to die have been filled with sorrowful complaints, and horrible outcries, O
time, time! Had I time again, how busy and careful would I be, to improve all
my hours for better purposes than I have done, specially in preparation for my
last hour? As on the contrary, who ever repented their preparing for death?
None sure ever had reason, for these who are prepared, and in case to die well,
if God spare them, are also in case to live well, and prepared the better to
improve every lot of life, it brings not death the sooner that we much mind it,
and prepare for it. Yea, and not only may the wicked be filled with horror,
when to die unprepared, but even many godly, who have died under a cloud, have
lamented bitterly, their not being actually so prepared, as they ought to have
been; for they have found Satan then set most furiously upon them, his time
being short, and they being short of some of their provisions against his
assaults: But though they may not be actually prepared, so much as they should
be, yet being habitually prepared, by their gracious and salvifick translation
from death to life, in their Effectual C^l^ing and Conversion, they need not so
much be in bondage for fear of death, as those who are nothing prepared, being
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. It is indeed a terrible thing
for such, to be surprised unprepared, for they not being meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in light, when they enter the gates of death, the
gates of Heaven will be shut against them for ever, and the gates of hell
opened, thereby to enter into everlasting torments prepared for them. But ere I
pass from this Head, I would have no holy to think, that when I am thus
pressing preparation, it is only upon the sickly, or dying; no, no, I exhort
you who are in most established like health and vigor, so to number your days,
as to apply your hearts to this piece of true wisdom; for it will take our
freshest health, our strongest w^ts, our outmost vigor, as the fittest season
for this so great and important work; then sure ye will have the less to do,
when sicknesses or pains seize upon you, and, many who have resolved, and
delayed to do this work, till sick, or to die, have found that either God in
his justice has taken heart and hand from them, or that their diseases and
maladies have so disordered and distempered both body and mind, that for their
hearts they could not get their hearts serious or steddie, in minding their
souls eternity matters; and who knows if they shall get a warning of sickness
before death, for in the twinkling of an eye they may be snatched out of time
into eternity, (as you have been hearing of many tragical instances) not
getting so much time allowed them, as to cry for Gods mercy. From all which
considerations we earnestly obtest you betimes to prepare for Death, Judgment,
and Eternity.

SECTION V. Some things to be done in preparation for Death.
SAys John, Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, whereby
we may understand the thrice blessful estate of them who die in Union and
Communion with the Lord, in the Faith of the Lord, in peace and reconciliation
with the Lord, in hope of being with the Lord for ever, and who are prepared so
to be: Now for your help herein, I will suggest a few necessary things proper
to be practiced by you.

Frequently meditate on death and your frail state of life, let Memento Mori be
often in your thoughts: For to contemplate of Mortality and Eternity, may
dispose and frame your ^^arts to prepare for death and eternity. Take some
share of thy time seriously to consider thy ways, reflect on all the passages
and periods of thy past course of life, as much as thou can remember, steep thy
thoughts in the deep consideration of thy great and many sins, till thou win
sensibly to know and see what an evil thing it is, and bitter, to have sinned
against God; and when thy heart is affected with a view of all thine
iniquities, confess them fully and particularly before the Lord, and that in
all their aggravating circumstances, accuse thy self as worthy of death, wrath,
and damnation; repent, and prostrate thy self in the most humble manner, then,
renouncing all thy own righteousness as unclean, lay hold on the righteousness,
merits, and mediation of Christ Jesus by faith, believing he is both able and
willing to pardon all thine iniquities, and to save thee from the wrath that is
to come. Covenant thy self away to the Lord, avouching thy self sincerely and
explicitly to be his Subject and Servant, and avouching with alike plainness
and integrity, his being thy alone Lord and Redeemer; and having thus entered
into personal Covenant with him, see thou keep thy Covenant inviolably, also
renew it frequently, and endeavor to carry and walk as becomes a Christian in
Covenant with Christ: Study to lead a holy life, no^ only free of notour vices,
but adorned with examplar Christian virtues, such as good works of Mercy,
Charity and Piety: Have on thy Spiritual Armor always, and stand on the
Watch-Towers that thou may be fenced and shielded against the fiery darts of
Satan, the snares and temptations of the world, and the rebellious inordinat
affections of thy unmortified flesh. Likewise keep up thy daily course of
religious d^ties, devoutly praying to God ilk morning and evening (...) least,
frequently read the Scriptures, and that with reverenc^ attention, and
diligence, praise God thankfully for all the mercies in thy lot; let thy
conversation be in Heaven, by sp^ritual-mindedness, and fervent meditation on
Heavenly an^ spiritual things: Neglect no opportunities when in health, the
public Ordinances of God, with the comfortable Congr^gations of his people;
improve them for daily increase knowledge, growth and exercise of grace,
up-building and stablishment in the most holy Faith: Keep thy mind free from
earthly cares, and distracting thoughts, anent the things this vain vexatious
world: abandon also all inclinations malice, revenge, reproach, or any way
impairing or injur^ thy Neighbors good Name, Person, or Estate: and when there
through the sensible infirmities o^ old age, or threatn^ symptoms of sickness,
or present dangerous diseases, the art under apprehensions of approaching
death, see thou thy house in order, both as to the inward constitution of
spirit, and as to the outward disposal and settlement of secualr Interests and
Affairs: And in the last place, fenc^ and fortify against the fears and
terrors of death, which leads to the last thing I shall offer.

SECTION VI. Antidotes against the fears of Death.
THat will be a sweet and welcome word from the mouth of our Savior, Matthew.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. O
what risques of death do many run, compassing Sea and Land, without fear,
without fainting, that they may gain some small moyetie, or a few crumbs or
this perishing earth? and yet it how little pains are we for the inheritance of
an everlasting Kingdom; yea some are so Epicurish, or Turkish, that they would
even, quite their part and hopes of it, if but freed from death, and secured in
a perpetuated possession of earthly pleasures and riches: It is small wonder
that such fear their loss of this life, who have not the prospect of another
after it: But O Believer, why do thou fear death? whereof if thou had a
right notion, there is nothing in it should be formidable to thee: The valley
and shadow of death is a dark, and irksome passage, to those who go through it
solitary and alone; but Christ has gone this way to sanctify it to thee, he
will be with thee in every step, he will not not leave thee. This way is
strawed with Serpents and Scorpions to the wicked, which will still be stinging
and tormenting them, but Christ has taken the sting of death for thee, 1. Cor.
15.55, 57. Art thou not in union with Christ? yea, such a strict and firm
union, that neither sin nor Satan can break, nor death dissolve, Matthew. 22.32.
In the virtue whereof, all Believers, the mystic members of Christ that
glorious Head, shall at the last day be raised unto glory and happiness. I say
indeed the terrors and torments of death are an earnest to the wicked, of those
^^effible miseries that shall follow thereafter: but death will free thee from
sin and misery, from all temptations to sin, and perils of sorrow and make thee
for ever triumph over sin, Satan, Hell, and Death.

O Believer! Have thou not often been filled with many weary complaints in thy
life? Death will make them all to cease: Has not thy life been sometimes
imbittered with exquisit^ pain or heavy sickness? Death will relieve thee of
those burdens. Have thou not been in frequent tormentful fears, of crosses,
losses, poverty, or disgrace, and other infelicities Common to mankind? It is
death that thou so much fears, will dissolve all these fears for ever. Have
thou not often sighed and sorrowed over thy ill plaguie heart? Have thou not
often cried out, alas, my hard, my vain, my carnal, my unclean and lustful, my
deceitful and perverse untractable heart! Have thou not also often cried out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? O
Believer, rejoice in hope, for e're thy body of clay be laid into dust, death
will be the death of thy body of sin, the old man will be felled dead with
deaths last stroke, thy corruptions and infirmities shall never any more be
matter of thy grievance or complaint. And as death opens the doors of the Lake,
to let in the workers of iniquity, so it will be to thee, O Believer, an inlet
to glory, rest and happiness; thou but dies, that thou may live; thou but
leaves and flits this sinful and cumbersome Tabernacle of Clay, that thou
may go to the glorious Mansion above, not made with hands, but eternal in
the Heavens, and who but should be content with such a flitting? We were
telling before, that Christ will be ready to welcome thee to the fruition of an
everlasting Kingdom, and to say so, thy deaths day will be thy Coronation day;
for by death thou shall be immediately wasted to glory: What should we say more?
for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive, what the believer is to enjoy after death.

FINIS.

