THE Godly Man's Request,



LONDON, Printed for F. Cole, T. Vere, J. Wright and J. Clark, 1676.

THE Godly Man's Request, OR, Choice Flowers gathered out of the Holy
Scriptures, for the Strengthening and support of weak and fainting Souls in
these times of trouble.

Psalm. 9. v. 12. Teach us O Lord to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts to Wisdom. Isa. 14. v. 6. A voice said cry, and he said what shall I
cry, all flesh is grass, v. 8. The grass withers, the flower fades, but the
word of God shall stand for ever. The Fifth Edition with Additions. By I. C.

LONDON, Printed for F. Cole, T. Vere, J. Wright and J. Clark, 1676.

The Godly man's Request.
Psalm. 90. v. 12. Teach us O Lord to number our days that we may apply our
hearts to Wisdom. Isaiah 40. v. 6. A voice said cry, and he said what shall I
cry, all flesh is grass, and v. 8. the grass withers, the flower fades, but
the Word of our God shall stand for ever.
THis Psalm was compiled by Moses as you may see by the Title at what time the
spies returned from the Land of Canaan, and God for the murmuring of the people
pronounced that all which were above twenty years old should die in the
wilderness, except Calib and Joshua that encouraged their brethren to go into
Canaan, now when Moses heard the sentence of death pronounced against himself,
and all the Jews, which came out of Egypt, except only two, Calib and Joshua,
that all should die before they came to the land which they sought, he prays
thus for himself and the rest, Teach us O Lord to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto Wisdom.

That is seeing we must needs dye, teach us to think of our death (that we may
die in thy fear, to live for ever in thy favor, showing us howthe
consideration of our mortality, will make us apply our hearts to godliness,
therefore Moses thinking of his death runs to Wisdom as a remedy against
death, which intimates to us that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom,
therefore we must come to some schoolmaster which teaches us like John Baptist
what we should do, that we may grow in knowledge as we grow in years.

Teach me to number my days (says Moses) that I may apply my heart to Wisdom.
As a man that has a set time for his task listens to the Clock and counts his
hours, so we have a set time to serve God, John 9. v. 4. Work while it is day,
the night comes when no man can work.

That is this life is the day wherein we should work, what work we have to do
the Apostle tells us (work out your salvation) this is a long task, therefore
we have need to number our days not to lose a minute least we be benighted
before our work be done (Teach me O LORD to number my days, etc.

That is, that we may still be numbering and counting our days, and hours, and
minutes, to see how fast we die, that every day and hour we may learn something
of wisdom, unless we think upon death we cannot fashion our selves to a godly
life, though we were as well instructed as Moses, this we find daily in our
selves, that the forgetfulness of death, makes us apply our hearts unto folly
and pleasure and voluptuousness, that contrary to his advice (work your
salvation) we work our damnation, we are so far from numbering our days, that
we do not number our weeks, nor our months, nor our years, muchless number our
days, Oh my beloved friends and Christians, who shall he present at the
reading of this little book? my Prayers shall be to the throne of Grace, That
we may be so taught to number our days that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom.

To pray, and fast, and watch, and hear, and do as becomes him which shall
shortly give account of his Stewardship with cheerfulness to his Lord and
Master, and receive that blessed and joyful benediction of love, Well done thou
good and faithful servant enter into the joy of thy Lord: this shall be the
reward of those that apply their hearts to wisdom.

There is no such enemy to Repentance as to think we have time enough
hereafter, which makes a man say when any good motion comes into his mind. I
may stay yet a little longer and defer my Repentance, for I am Young in my
Youth, if I do take a little pleasure, why God is a merciful God, and he will
pardon my sins if I truly repent, I may stay yet like the sluggard, who turns
upon his Bed like a Door upon the Hinges and says as in Prove. 6. v. 10. Yet a
little more sleep, a little more slumber, I may lie still a while, this is not
to number our days, but to stretch our days, and to make them seem more then
they are, and they that do so never apply their hearts to wisdom, so you see
what a preservative Moses used against sin and pleasure.

He kept a Calendar as it were of his days which called upon him and said, be
diligent for thou have but a short time here. Five things I note in these words.

First, that Death is the Haven of every man and woman whether they sit in the
throne, or live in a Cottage, at last we must knock at Deaths door as all our
fathers have done before us.

Secondly, that man's time is set and his bounds appointed, beyond which he
cannot pass.

Thirdly, that our days are but few as though we were sent into the world but
to see it: showing that it is an easy thing for a man to number his days,
they be so few.

Fourthly, the aptness of man to forget Death, as we have often experienced,
when one man shall say to another, do you remember where you are to go to
morrow, the other shall answer again and say, I protest I thought no more of it
then of my Dying day, and therefore Moses prays to the Lord to teach him to
number his days.

Fifthly and Lastly, that to remember how short a time we have to live, we may
apply our hearts to that which is good, as every one had a day to come into
this world: so surely they shall have a day to go out of this world. When Moses
had spoken of some which lived seven hundred years and another that lived
eight hundred years, and another that lived nine hundred years, at last comes
in Mortuus est, he died.

Therefore the Apostle says, we have here no abiding City, but we look for one
to come, as our Savior says, My Kingdom is not of this world, so we may say,
our dwelling is not of this world, but the soul soareth upward whence she came,
and the body stoopeth downward whence it came, our tabernacles are made to
remove, every man is a tenant at will, and there is nothing sure in this life
but death.

When Adam and Eve were thrust out of Paradise by reason of their sins, God
clothed them with the skins of dead Beasts, which showed them that now they
were clothed with Death, and that as the beasts were dead, whose skins they
wore (so they should dye also) As Job. 17. verse 14. I shall say to corruption
thou art my father, and say to the Worm, thou art my Mother, and Sister. Which
made Solomon to say, that he should go the way of all the Earth. To which
Isaiah bears witness, crying all flesh is grass, chap. 49. verse. 6. that is, it
falls, and is cut down like grass. In this world we live and must dye. In
Heaven we shall live and not dye; before Sin nothing could change us, and now
every thing does change us.

First, we war old, then we war Dry, then we wax weak, then we wax sick, so we
melt away by Drops at last: as we carried others, so others carry us to our
Graves, that is the last bed that every man shall sleep in. We may well be
called Earthen Vessels, for we are soon broken, we are like the Ice that
thaweth a great deal sooner then it froze, so these little worlds, our Earthly
tabernacles are destroyed first, and at last the great world shall be destroyed
too and all in it, which was made for us shall perish with us, what do you
learn when you think of this (but that which Moses says) apply your hearts to
wisdom.

The second note is, that the time of man is set, and his bounds appointed that
be cannot pass, and Jeremiah says, they could not stand because the day of
their destruction is come, as all the promises of God are conditional to take
place if we repent not.

The third point is, that our life is but a short life, as many little sculls,
are in Golgotha as great sculls, that is as many young Children go to their
grave, as Old people the Parents mourn for the death of their Children as often
as Children for the death of their Parents: What a great change is this, that
in Fourscore years, no one of us here that are hearers of this little Book
shall be left alive, but others shall fill our Rooms, and tread upon us as we
tread upon others now: Man dies when he thinks his Sun is a rising: before his
Eye is satisfied with seeing, his Ear with hearing, or his heart with lusting,
Death knocks at his door, and will not give him one minutes respite to meditate
an excuse before he comes to judgment: which shows the Shortness and
Uncertainty of Man's Life.

This was the Arethmatique of Holymen in former times to reckon their days, so
that their time might seem short, to make them apply their Hearts to Wisdom.

David numbered his days by a measure, My life says he is like a span long,
Psalm. 39. v. 5. when he measured his life he took not a Pole or an Ell, nor a
yard to measure it by, but a short measure, his short Span, My life is like a
span long: As some came into the Vineyard in the Borning, some at Noon, and
some at night, so some go out of this Vineyard in the Borning, some at Noon,
and some at night, so that a pleasant life may be compared but to a glorious
day, and a sorrowful life to a cloudy day, and a long life to a Summers day,
and a short life to a winters day; now why has God appointed such a short time
to man in the world, surely least he should defer to do good as his manner is,
for though his life be short, yet he thinks he has time enough to repent, The
Prophet says our years are but threescore and ten, as though they were but a
little time to live, if our life were but a year, yet a Year is more by fifty
one weeks then we use, all the rest be lost, for we defer our repentance till
the last week of the year: it is said of the Devil he is busy, because his
time is short, but the time of man is shorter; and therefore Christ says, in
this thy day, as though no day could be called thy day, but this day, and
therefore all that thou have to do, thou must do this day. Consider this all ye
which travel toward Heaven, had we not need to make have, which must go such a
long journey in so short a time, how can he choose but run which remembers that
every day runs away with his life, how often does the scripture put us in
mind of our death, and yet we no sooner remember it but in a very short time
its forgot again; even so it is with us, as the Fooll says in his heart there
is no God, so we say in our hearts there is no death, or at least death will
not come before we be old, of all numbers we cannot skill to number our days,
we can number our Sheep, and our Oxen, and our Coin, but we think that our
days are infinite, and therefore we never go about to number them, we can
number other men's days and years, and think they will dye ere it be long, if we
see them sick, or sore, or old, but we cannot number our own.

Therefore the Devil does never teach a man to number his days, because he
gains by the forgetfulness of death, but the Lord which would have a man to
apply his heart to Wisdom, it is he which teaches us to number our days, and
therefore Moses pray-unto him that he might apply his heart unto Wisdom, as if
he should say, until men think upon death they never apply their hearts unto
wisdom, but busies themselves with worldly matters as though they were
feathering a nest that should never be pulled down, therefore the way to get
wisdom is (...) apply your hearts unto it, as if it were ^our Calling and
Living, to which you are ^ound Prentices, a man may apply his ears and his
eyes, as many truants do their Books, and yet never prove scholars, but from
that day which a man begins to apply his heart unto wisdom, he learns more in
a month after, then he did in a year before, ^ay than ever he did in his life;
even as you ^ee the wicked, because they apply their hearts ^o wickedness how
fast they proceed, how ^asily and how quickly they become perfect Swearers,
expert Drunkards, cunning Deceivers.

So if we could apply our hearts as thoroughly to knowledge and goodness, we
might become like to the Apostle that teaches us, therefore when Solomon
shows men the way how to come by Wisdom, he speaks often of the Heart, Give
thy heart to wisdom, let wisdom enter into thy heart, get wisdom, keep
wisdom, embrace wisdom, wisdom is like God's Daughter, that he gives to the
man that loves her, and sueth for her, and means to see her at his Heart,
thus we have learned how to apply Knowledge that it may do us good, not to our
ears like them which hear Sermons only, nor to our tougues like them which make
table-talk of Religion, but to our hearts that we may say with the Virgin, My
Heart does magnify the Lord, and the heart will apply it to the Ear, and to the
tongue, as Christ says, out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

The last point is, that the remembrance of death makes us to apply our hearts
to wisdom, Moses commanded not a many books to a wise man Learned, but as
David commends one book instead of many Meditations in the Law of God day and
night, for the reading of many books (says Solomon) is but weariness to the
flesh, therefore as though Moses had marked what did move him most to seek
after God, he prays that that thought may run in his mind still the
remembrance of death, as many benefits come unto us by death, so many benefits
come unto us by the remembrance of death, and this is one, viz.

It makes a man to apply his Heart to wisdom; for when he considers that he
has but a short time to live, he is careful to spend it well, like Moses, of
whom it is said, that when he considered how he had but a season to live, he
chose rather to suffer afflictions with the Servants of God, then to enjoy the
pleasure of sin for a season, this is that which makes the old Men Fast and
watch, and prepare themselves more then young Men, because they think
themselves nearer the Grave, like old Isaac which when he was blind for Age,
said unto Esau, Behold I am now old and know not the day of my death, that is,
because I am old I look to dye shortly, and therefore as Isaiah taught Ezechias
to set all things in order before he died, so he called his eldest Son to whom
he thought his Inheritance belonged that he might bless him before he dyed,
this Wisdom the Fathers called the wisdom of the Cross which we call the best,
because it was the dearest bought, it is hard for a man to think of a short
life; and think evil, or to think of a long life, and think well, therefore
when Jeremy had numbered all the Calamities and ^ins of the Jews, at last he
imputed all to his Lamentations the 1. and the 9. She remembered not her end. So
if I may judge why Natural Men care for nothing but their Pomp, why great men
care for nothing but their Honor and Dignity, why covetous Worldlings care for
nothing but their gain, why voluptious Epicures care for nothing but their
pleasure; I may say with Jeremy, (they remember not their end) we never covet
the same things living and dying, therefore when Solomon had spoken of all the
Vanities of men, at last he tells them all, Eccles. 11. v. 9. Remember that for
all these things thou shall come to judgment, as if he should say, Men would
never speak as they speak, nor do as they do, if they did but think their
speeches and deeds should come to Judgment, as the Bird guides her flight with
her Trian, so the Life of Man is best directed with a continual recourse unto
his end.

Which is in the numbering of our days, let us consider what a Harvest we have
lost which happyly before this time we never prayed with Moses that the Lord
would teach us to number our days, so that we may apply our hearts to wisdom,
but as the old year went, and a new year came, so we thought that a new year
would follow that, and so we think that another will follow this, and so they
thought that are dead long ago.

This is not to number our days, but to provoke God to shorten our days, there
are but few here but have seen twenty years, now if we had but every year
learned one Virtue since we were born, we might by this time have been like
Saints among Men, but the time is yet to come, when we shall apply our hearts
to Wisdom, to Riches and Pleasure we have applied our hearts, and our eyes and
our ears, and our hands too, but to Wisdom we have not applied our hearts.

There be many causes, but there should be no cause if we had numbered our
days, for surely if a man could persuade himself that this is the last day, as
it may be he would not defer his Repentance until to morrow, if he could
think that this is his last Meal that ever he should eat, he would not surfeit
of it, if he could believe that the words which he does speak to day, should
be the last words that ever he should speak, he would not offend with his
tongue, if he could be persuaded that this Sermon should be the last Sermon
that ever he should hear, he would hear it better then ever he heard any yet,
whilst breach is in the body, the heart may apply it self and the eye may apply
it self, and the ear may apply itself, and the hand may apply it self. Work
while it is light, I can but admonish you with words, as John baptized with
Water, as Moses prayed the Lord to number his days, so you must pray the Lord
to teach you to number your Days, it may be that thou hall but twenty years to
serve God, will thou not live twenty years like a Christian, that thou maill
live a thousand years like an Angel, it may be that thou have but ten years to
serve him, wilt not thou serve ten years for Heaven which would serve twenty
years for a Farm, it may be that thou have but five years well to redeem all
thy former misspent years whereby to gain an Eternal being in Heaven, yet God
does know whether many here present or any here present have so long to live,
to repent for all the years we have spent in ^n, if thou were born to day,
thy journey is not an hundred years, if thou be a Man half thy time is spent
already, if thou be an old Man, then thou art drawing to thy Inn, and thy Race
is but a Breach, therefore as Christ said to his Disciples, when he found them
sleeping, (Could ye not Watch one hour) so I say to my self and to you all here
present, can we not pray, can we not suffer a little while, he which is
tired can travel a little way, a little further, one step more for a Kingdom,
for this God would not have Men know when they shall dye (because they
should make Ready at all times having no more certainty of one hour then
another, therefore our Savior says, Watch, because ye know not when the Lord
will come to take you, and judge you.

Happy are they which hear the Word and keep it, thus you see that Death is
the last upon Earth, that the time of Man is set, that his Race is short, that
he thinks not of it, that if he did remember it, it mould make him apply his
mind to Good as he does to Evil. and now I end as I began.

The Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, sold by John Clarke at the Harp and Bible in
VVest-Smith-Field.
A Short view of Gods Judgments executed upon open and notorious offenders.

2. Christ's voice to England, calling for Repentance.

3. God's Justice against Murder, or the bloody Apprentice Executed.

4. Gods Alarm to all drowsy and secure Sinners.

5. The Hartford-shire Wonder.

6. The Godly Man's Request.

7. The Young Man's Monitor, or a word of Advice to Youth.

These seven Books are of singular use to be read and practiced in these sad
and dismal times;


