The Cloath-worker caught in a Trap: Or, A Fool and his Money soon parted.
Being a true Relation of a Cloth worker, dweelling in Thames Street who was
wished by an old woman to a Maid near Paul's Churchyard, persuading him she had
money at use, being a mere Plot of the Maiden and she to cheat him of his Money,
knowing him to be none of the wisest, cheated him of forty pound.

if you will know then give good Ear,
The merriest Jest that ever you did hear.
The Tune is, How now Jocky whither away. Or the Tyrant.




C God people I Will tell you now of a fine jest,
Which now unto you shall here be expressed,
You shall know how I have been cosen'd of late,
By her whom I called my Love and my Mate:
She made me a promise she would be my Bride,
But I have lost her and my Money beside.
There was an old Woman did wish me unto her,
And I, like a woodcok, must needs go and woe her,
I bought me new clothes, boots and silver spurs,
The cause why I mist her the fault it was hers.
She made, etc.
My sweetheart was wondrous gallant and spruce,
She made me believe she had money at use,
My fingers did itch to be at her coin,
As hoping the money and she should be mine.
She made, etc.
I followed her closely by day and by night,
The hope of her Money was all my delight:
But when she perceived m^ greedy intent,
A trick for to cheat me she then did invent,
She made, etc.
She knew I had money, and she had the wit,
To cousen me of it she thought it most fit.
O she was to hard for me in the end,
God keep me hereafter from such a false friend,
She made, etc.
She sent the old Woman upon an ill day,
She came unto me, and thus she did say,
Your Sweetheart is taking the Lease of a house.
The which does belong to old Nicolas Rouse.
She made, etc.
Her Money's at use, and out of her hands,
That she cannot purchase Houses nor Lands.
But if forty pound you will lend her in lieu,
Lo she will make over the house unto you.
I looked for the house and likewise the Bride, etc.
I was overjoyed when I heard her say so,
I gave her the Money without more ado,
Forty good pounds she cozened me of,
And now at my misery make but a scoff,
She made me a Promise she would be my Bride,
But I have lost her and my Money beside.


I Told all my Neighbors I merry would be,
my sweetheart had purchased a house now for me
Though I lent her money her ca(...) to prefer,
Yet I should have all when I married with her.
Thus a promise she made me for to be my Bride,
But I have lost her and my Money beside.
At length I did find that I was over-matcht,
I reckoned my Chickens before they were hatched,
I found to my grief I was wronged God wot,
By a young Harlot and an old old Trot.
This cunning old woman, my Sweetheart and she
Did make but a younger Brother of me,
For when as I went to visit my Dove,
She would not come near me, not grant me her Love
She said her affection was altered quite,
And she bid me be packing now out of her sight,
She made, etc.
Fair Mistress, quoth I, what moves this change?
And what is the reason you should be so strange;
If you be resolved to leave me, sweet Jane,
I play then restore me my Money again.
Now all men that here me pity my case,
For I have lost all by her being base.
She would not be known that my Money she had,
But asked the question, if that I were made
The old Woman had it, quoth I, for your use:
Then you may go look it, go, she, good man Goose.
She made, etc.
If you were so foolish to give her your Coin,
Who ca(...) my nam^, the fault is not mine:
O learn yo^ more w^tt hereafter, I (...)
Seek out your old woman, if you would have you(...) (...)
And since thou want wit thou shall want a (...)
For I Will never have thee while that I have lif(...)
When as she had given me these purging Plu(...)
I stood like sheep-biter biting my Thumbs,
I made me to fret, to fume, and to stare,
Just like the Bull that bewraied the Fair.
That all that beheld me thought I was mad
Beholding my staring and countenance sad
She shoved me out then, and locked the door,
Now was ever man so abused before,
Unless 'twere the Grasier, I never knew the li(...)
Next morning she sent me a Feather bed tike
She made, etc.
She sent me a Feather bed then in disdain,
When as she heard how I did complain,
To rest my restless body, upon,
After the Baggage had me undone,
She made, etc.
She sent me a Bed in height of my pride,
But she was too good to lie by my side,
I paid dearly for it I pla^^ly have found,
My Feather=^ed sirs c^st m^ forty good poun(...)
Now well a day must be all my Song,
She has the Money and I have the wrong.
My covetous humor di^ meet with a cross;
And I was rewarded with (...)rty pound loss,
A Proverb to all me^, lo here I will be,
A Fool and his Money's soon pa^ted we see.
She made me a promise she would be my Br(...)
But I have lost her and my Money beside.

