THE REBELLION Of the Rude Multitude UNDER WAT TYLER And his PRIESTS BAAL and
STRAW, In the Days of King RICHARD the IId, Anno 1381. Paralleled with the
late Rebellion in 1640, AGAINST King CHARLES I. Of ever Blessed Memory.

By a Lover of his King and Country.

London, Printed and Sold by J. R. and in Westminster Hall, and at the New
Exchange, Flee^street, and St. Paul's Churchyard.

John of Lydgate, lib. 4.
ANd semblably to put it at a prefe,
And execute it by clear experience,
One the most contrario^s mischief
Found in this earth by notable evidence,
Is only this by Fortunate violence
When that wretches churlish of nature
The estate of Princes unwarely does recure.
A Crown of Gold is nothing according,
For to be set upon a knaves heed,
A Foltish clerk for to wear a Ring,
Accords not, who that can take heed,
And in this world there is no greater dread
Then power give (if it be well sought)
Unto such one that first rose up of naught.
There is no manner just convenience
A royal Carbuncle, Ruby, or Garnet,
Nor a chaste Emeraud of v^rtues ex^ence,
Nor Inde Saphirs in Copper to be set,
Their Kind'ly power in foul metal is let,
And so the State of politic puysance
Is ever lost where knaves have Governance.
For a time they may well up ascend,
Like windy smokes their fumes sprede,
A crowned ass plainly to comprehend,
Void of discretion, is more for to dread
Then is a Lion: for that one indede
Of his nature is mighty and royal,
Void of discretion that other beastiall.
The gentle nature of a strong Lion,
To prostrate people of kind is merciable,
For unto all that fail before him down,
His trial puisaunce cannot be vengeable:
But churlish Wolves by rigor untreatable,
And follyshe asses eke of beastialty
Fay^ing reason, brayde ever on cruelty.
None is so proud as he that can no good,
The l^er heed the more presumption,
Most cruelte and vengeance in love blood
With malapertnesse and indiscretion:
Of C^urle and Gentle make this division,
Of outh^ of the^ I dare right well report,
Frothens they came, thereto the wy^ re^orte.
To the Reader.
THe beginnings of the Second Richard's reign are turmoiled with a Rebellion,
which shoke his Throne and Empire: A Rebellion, not more against Religion and
Order, than Nature and Humanity too; A Rebellion never to be believed, but in
the Age it was acted in, and our own, in which we find how terrible the
overflowes of the common people (ever delighted in the calamities of others)
untyed, and hurryed on by their own wills, and beastly fury, must prove; though
Masanello is short of Tyler, yet if we compare that Fisherman with our Hind,
the Neapolitan Mechanics and our Clownes, we shall not find them much unlike,
not in their sudden flourish and prosperity, not in the mischiefs they did, and
the barbarous savage rudeness in the doing them: Masanello made a show of
foolish unseasonable Piety to the Prince and Archbishop, which became not his
part, which made him the more imperfect Rebel, the worse Politician; however,
he might seem the bette^ man; but these too might be but counterfeit
reverences; this might be his disguise, and he might have come up to more,
according to the new lights which we may imagine were breaking in. The
continuance and misrule of these Worthies were much of a length; in a few days
the brands themselves had fired, broke upon their own heads, they were plucked
up before their full growth, like airy flitting clouds they were blown over ere
they could pour down the storm they were big with. The colors of these tumults
were fair, and taking, such as their Architects Baal and Straw, the Priests had
laid, such as the Masters of these Schools have delivered in all ages. The
Weal public, the liberty of the freeborn people (pilled, and fl^yed by the
Kings taxes, and the cruel oppression of the Gentry) Justice, Reformation, or
Regulation of Fundamental Laws long subverted (considerable names if we may
believe them) set them on. The King, his Glory, his Honor, his Safety, The
King and the Commons are cried up. But the King was compassed with Traitors
and Malignants, they will have it so, and it is their care to remove them root
and branch; they will fire the house to cleanse it; much other business they
had, much was amiss, much to be reformed, but in the first salley all is not
noysed; what was not handsome, what might give a fuller fright was lapped up in
folds, to be discovered as they had thriven, to be swallowed, but gilded with a
Victory: We know crimes carried in a happy stream of luck, lose their names in
it, are beautiful, and must be thought so: The Ordale of the Sword justified
Caesar, and condemned Pompey, not his cause. Adversae res etiam bonos
detractant (says Salust.) Good men, if they miscarry, do not only lose
themselves but their integrity, their justness, their honesty, they are what
the Conqueror pleases, and the silly multitude, which ever admires the glitter
of prosperity, will hate them. Providence preserved the English Nation from
this blow. The Laurel of success crowned not the Rebels, they crumble to their
first dust again, are ruined by their own weight and confusion. They had risen
like those Sons of the Dragons teeth, in tempests, without policy or advice.
Their leaders were merely fantastical, but goblins and shadows, men willing to
embroyl, and daring, whose courage was better then their cause; and who to
advance the design would not boggle at a piece of Honesty, an Oath, a
Protestation, or Covenant, a Verse of St. Paul, or St. Peter, a Case of
Conscience in the way of brave, bold, manly spirits, yet without heads or wits
to manage the great work, which in so vast a body suddenly composed like the
spawns of Nile, of slime and dirt, of so different parts, so unequal members,
was fatal to the whole. Tyler had no brains, he could not plot, not contrive;
and those about him were as heavy, as very Asses as himself: He is said to be a
crafty fellow, and of an excellent wit, but wanting grace; yet crafty enough he
was not for the great and dangerous enterprise: a Marius (however impious (for
such he must be) pace pessimus, fitter to remove things, to overturn,
overturns, than for peace (but as Plutarch of him) subtle, faithless, one who
could overdo all men in dissembling, in hypocrisy, practiced in all the arts
rf lying (and some of these good sleights Tyler wanted not) one who had sense
and judgment to carry things on, as well as desperate confidence ^o undertake,
had become this part incomparably, had gone through with it, how easily under
such a Captain (if we look upon the weakness of the opposition, and the
villainous baseness of the Gentry) had the frame of the ancient building been
rased, the Model must have held. Richard (whose endeavors of defense or
loyalty alone should have been killing) had not fallen by the sword of
Lancaster, he had found his grave on Tower Hill, or Smithfield, where the
faithful lieges of his Crown were torn in pieces by these Canibals. The
reverence due to the anointed heads of Kings began to fall away, and naked
Majesty could not guard where Innocence could not: But Tyler blinded with his
own fatal pride, throws himself foolishly upon the Kings sword, and by his
overmuch have preserves him whom he had vowed to destroy. The Heathens make it
a mark of the Divinity of of their Gods, that they bestowed benefits upon
mortal men, and took nothing from them. The Clownes of the Idol upon this rule
were not very heavenly, they were the meek ones of those times, the only
inheritours of right, the kingdom was made a prey by them, it was cantoned out
to erect new Principalities for the Mock-kings of the Commons; so their Chiefs
or Captains would be called. Here, though the title of the Rebellion spoke
fair, was shown somewhat of ambition, and no little of injust private interest,
no little of self-seeking, which the good of the people (in pretense only) was
to give way to, and no wonder, for the good of the people properly, was merely
to be intended of themselves: and no where but amongst those was the
Commonwealth. Had these Thistles, these Brambles flourished, the whole Wood of
noble Trees had perished: If the violent casting other men out of their
possessions, firing their houses, cutting off their Heads, violating of all
Rights, be thought Gods blessing, any evidence of his owning the Cause, these
Thieves and Murderers were well blessed, and sufficiently owned. Such was then
the face of things, estates were dangerous, every Rich man was an enemy, men's
lives were taken away without either offense or trial, their reign was but a
continuation of horrible injuries; the Laws were not only silent, but dead:
The Idols fury was a Law, and Faith, and Loyalty, and Obedience to lawful
power, were damnable: Servants had the rule over Princes, England was near a
slavery, the most unworthy of free and ingenious spirits of any.

What I relate here (to speak something of the Story) I collect out of Sir John
Froissart, a Frenchman, living in the times of King EDWARD the third, and his
Grandchild, King RICHARD, who had seen England in both the reigns, was known
and esteemed in the Court, and came last over after these Tumults were
appeased: and out of Thomas of Thomas of Walsingham, a Monk of St. Albanes in
Henry the sixth 's days; who (says Bale in his centuries of him) writes many
the most choice passages of affairs and actions, such as no other has met
with. In the main, and to the substance of things, I have made no additions, no
alterations, I have faithfully followed my Authors, who are not so historically
exact as I could wish, nor could I much better what did not please me in their
order. No man (says Walsingham) Hypod. Neust.
can recite fully the misehiefs, murders, sacrilege, and cruelty of these
Actors; he excuses his digesting them upon the confusion of the combustions
flaming in such variety of places, and in the same time. Tyler, Litster, and
those of Hartfordshire take up most part of the discourse; Westbrome is brought
in by the halves; the lesser Snakes are only named in the Chronicle: What had
been more, had not been to any purpose: Those were but types of Tyler the
Idol, and acted nothing but acrording to the Original, according to his great
example, they were Wolves alike, and he that reads one knows all. Par. Walls.
Wiston. etc. Per Thomae Sanguiuem salva nos* Breviar. fest* S. Tho. Cant.
Rishang* Polyd. D'Avilla* Jaques Clem. the Paricide of Hen. 3. of France was
prayed for as a Saint*
Thomas of Becket, Simon of Montfort; the English Cataline, Thomas of
Lancaster, Rebels and Traitors of the former years are Canonised by the Monks
(generally the enemies of their Kings) miracles make their Tombs illustrious,
and their Memories sacred. The Idol and his Incendiaries are abhorred every
where, every History detests them, while Faith, Civility, Honesty and Piety
shall be left in the world, the enemies of all these must neither be beloved
nor pitied.

THE IDOL OF THE CLOVVNES.
THe Reign of King Richard the second, was but a throw of State for so many
years, a Fever to whose distempers all pieces of the home Dominions
contributed by fits ( Gui^.
the foreign part only continuing faithful) in the fourth year of his reign,
and fifteenth of his Age, the dregs and off scum of the Commons unite into
bodies in several parts of the Kingdom, and form a Rebellion (called the
Rebellion of the Clownes) which lead the rest, and showed the way of
disobedience first. Of which may truly be said (Though amongst other causes* we
may attribute it to the indisposition and unseasonablenesse of the age, that
the fruits of it did not take) it was strongly begun, and had not Providence
heldback the hand, the blow had fallen, the Government had broke into shivers
then. The young King at this time had few besides Thomas of Woodstock his
Uncle, Earl of Buckingham, and after Duke of Gloucester, but the servants of
his house in ordinary about him; the Lord Edmund of Langly Earl of Cambridge,
after Duke of York, with the Lords Beauchamp, Botercaux, Sir Matthew Gourny,
with others of the Nobility, and Gentry, had set sail for Portugal; the Duke
John of Lancaster, another of his Unkles, was in Scotland, treating a peace,
when this commotion brake out. Though no cause can be given for Seditions,
those, who design public troubles, can never want pretenses; Polidore (as
much out in this story as any) gives this reason for this. The Polle money
says he (imposed by Parliament) a groat sterling upon every head was
intolerable. It was justly imposed, and so by some to whom Law and Custom of
England were intolerable, not to be endured; but we shall find in the tyranny
breaking in, not only fifth and twentieth parts and loanes forced out of fear
of plunder and death, but subsidies in Troops and Regiments, by fifties, (more
than Sequestrations and Compositions) not under foot, low sales; for what had
these Rascals to give, but downright Robbery and violent usurpation of Estates.

Thus would Polidore have it in defense of his Priests, who blew the fire, and
thrust the silly rout into the midst of it. He takes it ill that Baal ( valle
he calls him) should be supposed by I know not what flaterers of the Nobles to
have filled these sails, to have let these winds out of their Caverns.

In the fourth year of this King (says the Monk) there was a grievous Tax
exacted in Parliament, after cause of great trouble, every Religious paid half
a Mark, every Secular Priest as much, every Layman or Woman 12d. This might
discontent the people, but who prepared the Mutineers for such dangerous
impressions? who fell in with them after and pushed them forward will be soon
found. Froissart complains of the servitude of the villanes or Bondmen, (now
Names worn out) a miserable sort of drudges frequentlh known here in the
Saxon times: excluded from any right of propriety, sold, and passed away with
the Manor or Lands to which they belonged, bound to til the Lords ground, cut
down, and carry in his Corn, cleanse his Ditches, cover his Halle, etc. These
Froissart make the first stirrers in the Insurrection, these he makes look back
to the beginning of men and things, to talk of the primitve freedom, of the
liberties of the Creature, above Ordinances, that only Treason against the
Lords could forfeit Liberty, which was the case of Lucifer, and could not be
made theirs, who were neither Angels nor spirits, but men of the same shape,
extraction, and Souls, with those who proudly would be thought their Lords,
which (say they) was an height too much, and deserved levelling, must not be
endured hereafter, equality was the way of peace and love. But can clouds fire
in thunder and lightning, can earth quakes tear the entrails of expring
Kingdoms, without a Muncer, or a Wiggington, a Garnet, or an Hall in the mine?

If the Church and Government must be blown up, it is fit a sanctified hand
should (cast the Balls) a man (according to the pure dialect) of immediate
calling, who has had the Seal of it, of wonderful zeal, of resolute
dealings, the Lords Messenge^, extraordinarily gifted and exercised, is only
fit to advance Gods matters, the Holy cause, and action, and a Renegado from
his orders an Apostate Churchman will best become this person, a man with whom
nothing else is sacred but his own ambition, his innovation, and the
propagation of his Schism. One Baal the most sottish and most unworthy, but
most factious of the Clergy, is stirred up by the Devil (who, if rebellion be
as the sin of Witchcraft, is the Father of both) to be the Antichrist of this
Reign, to blaspheme and cry down God and Caesar his anointed, the Rights of God
and Caesar; and who, if he knew any thing, was certainly the very Atheist of
that age; Of these imaginations (so Froissert of those before) was a foolish
Priest in the County of Kent called John Wall (for Baal) and to make it plain
that he was the Father of the uproare, he had been (says this Knight) three
times in the Archbishops prison ( a persecuted Saint) for these Opinions, but
delivered by him; his Conscience was scrupulous of proceeding farther, which
this Historian condemns him for: we shall hereafter see the Archbishop in
John's hands, who shall come short of this mercy. John had preached (if it be
not impious to use the word here) twenty years, and more, ever babbling those
things which he fancied would be gracious to the multitude; He haunted
by-places, the Cloisters of the Cathedral; when the Church was shut against
him, the Streets and Fields were holy ground; There this excommunicated
Apostate laid his Nets. His discourses to the people were partly invectives
against Tithes (which he allowed not where the Parishioner was of better life
and smaller estate than the Parson, whose estate at this rate must be small
enough) against Bishops, and the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry; Then he had his
quarrels to the Government, his Doctrine struck at propriety, and order, the
World was impaired with Diseases, which must be the more for their age, the
crisis would be dangerous, and there could be no health, no soundness hoped
for, till Names, Estates, and things were common. His advise was to let the
King know the resolutions of the new Common-wealthsmen, to tell him where the
Supreme power lies, whose Trustee he was, that another course must be taken,
and if he would not join with them, other remedies thought of: Froiss.
the third time he was imprisoned, he had his Revelations, his Enlightnings,
was full of divine raptures, he foretold his deliverance by 20000. men, which
happened in the following tumults, when his Disciples made so many Jail
deliveries. This, knowing what numbers he had seduced and abused, he might
presume upon probable conjecture. He was no sooner loose, but he incites and
stirs up the unruly Clowns to all the mischiefs possible.

He tells them they were pious and necessary excesses, and that the Law of
Nature, which allows all acts for our own preservation, would justify them:
that a mad Father, who seeks to rob and destroy his offspring, might be
resisted, his thrusts might be put by, the Son might bind his hands, and if
there were no other way to escape his furious violence, kill him in his own
defense. The safety of the people is the Supreme law. If the Prince persisting
(after fair warning) to make himself a shield and defense to wicked
instruments of mischiefs, Malignants and enemies of the Commons, securing them
from the justice of the Commons, endanger himself and his Kingdom, he may
thank himself; We (says he) are willing to hazard our selves (good men) to
preserve both; we will never give any impediment or neglect any proper means of
curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and of closing the dangerous breaches
(made by themselves) according to the trust which lies upon us. At Black heath,
where an assembly of 200000 men made their Randezvouze, after some time spent
in seeking God, he baits in Rhyme, Walsingh.
VVahn Adam dalf and Eve span,
Who was than a Gentleman?
Was his levelling lewd Text: hence it was to be consequent, that as nature,
and the Creation made no distinction, no more ought Laws to make or suffer
any; that servitude is the daughter of unjust oppression, introduced by wicked
men against Gods Will. That if it had pleased him to have created slaves, in
the beginning he would have chosen, and marked out who should have been the
Lord, who the Vassail; he asks where the word allows these sweet things
called Lords, verily Knaves in Purple, Sons of Caine, of Nimrod, of Esau, of
Ishmael, fat by the blood and sweat of the poor innocent Plebeians, honorable
in nothing but the outside, und noble only in riots and adulteries, as cruel,
as ravenous, as killing (and as barbarously) as the Bears, the Lions, the
Tigers of their escutcheons, the Dragons of their bearing; he asks why the
limber Knights, and Franklins, who are only better combed, can kiss the hand
and lowt with more grace, must eat the Capons, which the sturdy brave Commons
must starve themselves to cramme: nothing could be good which was great,
nothing but Independency was divine.

He bids them consider, now was the time appointed them by God to cast off the
yoke, Deposito servitutis jugo, liberate, etc.
that if they would not be wanting to themselves, they should assert their long
looked for liberty, and like good Husbandmen, who love their field, Walls more
boni patris. famil. excolentis agrii suum.
pluck up the weeds which over run it (which signified rooting out the wicked,
and those who carried the mark of the Beast) He points them out the heads
devoted, destined for flaughter. Regni Majores.
The House of Lords, the Peers (as yet they speak no higher) whom he would have
brought to Repentance. Then the Lawyers, Justices, Judges, Jurymen, Quoscunque
nocivos communitatis de terra sua tollerent.
all the enemies of the commonalty were to be swept from the Earth, there could
not else (so he concludes) be any peace or security for the future, Si sublatis
Majoribus aequa libertas, etc.
lopping off the Heads of those which were too tall, which over-topped too
much, equal Nobility, equal Liberty, Dignity and Power (this was his old
Doctrine) were the only antidotes, without which the poisoned Commonwealth
must perish. Whosoever loved not the Cause was a Reprobate, hateful to God,
and damned Body and Soul. John concludes with an exhortation, that in order to
the security and preservation of Religion and Liberty of the Subject, they will
never consent to the laying down of arms, so long as the evil Counselors
and Prelates arming, or in open war, shall by force of arms be protected
against the justice of the Commons. John adds, of long time there has been,
and now is, a traitorous plot for the subversion of us and the liberty of the
Subject.

No wonder, when Peter the Hermits Goose was believed to be the Holy Ghost, In
the Croisade for holy land.
that John amongst as very Ninnyhammers, could strike up for a Prophet.

The base crew prick up their Ears, and wonder at the new truths, which their
Pastor held forth, they applaud him, he is Ut a^lama^ert cum Archiepiscopum.
Archbishop elect, and Chancelour, the true Archbishop must be called a
Traitor Communium and regni proditorem.
, a Traitor of the Commons and the Realm, to make him room, is voted so, to
be apprehended wheresoever he could be found in England, and his Head to be cut
off. Here was a new Treason, and a new way of trial and sentence. But though
Baal had more of the Spirit, there were other adventurers not to be robbed of
their honors, other Worthies, precious men, called to do the Work of the
Lord; Who put to their hands, and brought Trowels and Mortar toward the raising
this Babel. Jack-Straw, another Priest full of life and vigor, the Confessor,
and Bosom-chaplein of Tyler, more inward with him, his special Counselor,
acquainted with all his plots, in the contrivance of which he had a great part,
bestowed his pains upon the Cause, and for action next Tyler the Idol*
carried the name, which may be one cause why Polydore kills him in Tylers
stead, with the Mayors Sword; the most eminent sticklers of the Laity, of the
profane stie, where Wat the Tyler, a Tyler by Trade, not by N^me, his Name was
Helier ( an ungracious Patron, as Froissart) was Walls. Rex ribaldorum, Idolum
rusticorum.
King of the Ribauldes, the Idol of the Kentish Clownes. John Kirkby Alan
Treder, Thomas Scot, and Ralph Rugge, a Magnifico, who gave freely away amongst
his fellow Scoundrels the spoils of his Conquests, were princes of the
separation of the Tribes in Kent and Essex. Robert Westbrome ( Wraw his
Chaplain refusing to set Walls.
Crown upon Crown, and contented to be the Arch priest of the Province) was
King of Suffolk, and the parts adjacent. St. Edmunds-bury, once the Palace of
the East Angle Kings, and Mildenhalle, were the seats of his Sovereignty. John
Litster a Tanner usurps the Name and power of a King at Northwalsham in
Norfolk; I may say the power and more, never was any English King so absolute,
nor can any just and legal Principality be so large, and Arbitrary, Law of the
Land with which the old Englishman was free enough, and contented, was here to
be thrown out of doors. The Heptarchy of the Saxons seemed to revive again,
but prodigiously, the blaze of these Comets must have been fatal to the
Nation; to keep an order in the History of these Ruffians, who abhorred it, I
will give the Van to the Idol of the Clowns, it is due to him, he is the first
who lifts up his Head in the confusion among the Brethren, and deserves the
first chair, He was the Dragon, and no question in the Conclusion, had
swallowed up or clipped the rest, Litster, Westbrome, and the others merited
highly, but they must have been taken down some pins, Tyler must have
elbow-roome, he must have been Lord Paramount, and one such Comet would have
been more than enough for one Horizon. Besides Kent and Essex, were the puddle,
the Lerna which bred this Hydra with the many Heads which poisoned most of the
Counties, and in the conjunction of these two Provinces, Tyler the Idol swayed
all: and here I must observe this, that however Walsingham hatches the cause in
Essex, yet his own relations of Baal and the Letters and Sermons of this
seducing Prophet bring this into question, and by him if Kent be not the
Mother, yet are the Treasons of her and Essex, Sister twins of the same birth,
Essex only started first.

The fire kindled from a small spark, The Clownes of two Villages not named in
the Chronicles contrive the Conspiracy there; They send Warrants to the smaller
Towns about, and rather command than entreat, all men of what age soever,
without any stay or deliberation to repair to a Rendezvouze set down. The
conclusion was terrible; It threatened plundering of Goods, Burning, Pucking
down Houses, and cutting off the heads of those who disobey the present Power.

The summoned Villages are frighted into Obedience, which is to rebel; They
leave their Ploughs, their Fields, their Wives and Farms, and in their first
rising no less than 5000 of the sink of the people meet ill armed, some with
Staves, some with rusty Swords, some with Bows and Featherlesse Arrows, few
knowing any cause of their assembling, gazing upon one another, Walls.
and not finding any enemies of their own peace and good but themselves. Not
one of a thousand was provided like a Soldier, but their number supplied all
things, they were highly conceited of themselves, and believed they were
invincible, not to be resisted. To confirm their steps, Baal (watching to
catch, who had long waited for such an opportunity of imbroiling) drives them
headlong forward, he writes to them his Letters exhortatory (where to
consecrate the enterprise, Gods name is brought in; He is made to own the
Cause, composed of a jargon, a canting gibridge, fit for the design (to abuse
and cheat the innocent peasant, who cannot pry into things, cannot look farther
than the bait) fuller of Ridles than sense, one of them found in the sleeve of
one of these wretched men condemned, and under the Gallows was this.

John Schep, sometimes St. Mary Priest in Yorkn, and now of Colchester greeteth
well John namelesse, and John the Miller, and John Carter, and bids them
that they beware of guile in Borough (which Stow by a notable mistake calls
Gillinborough) and stand together in Gods Name, and bids Pierse Plowman go
to his werk and chastise Hob the robber, and take with you John Trewman, and
all his fellows and no more, John the Miller has yground small, small, small. The
Kings Son of Heaven shall pay for all. Beware or ye be woe, Know your friend
from your foe. Have enough and say hoe. And do well and better, and flee sin
and seek peace, and hold therein; And so bids John Trewm^n and all his
fellows. A List of Sanctity does well in these Cases, but his seeking of Peace,
chastising the Robber^ and ste^ing of Sin, I must leave as mystical. This
shows the industry, carfulness, and vigilance of the Prophet in his
preparations, and his willingness to hurt. He disperseth other Letters of this
kind, in one, he charge all men in the Name of the Trinity, etc. to stand
Manlike together, and help Truth (now we have Truth to our peace) and Truth
shall help them, in his rags of Verses (for a Rimer he would be) he is as
earnest for Truth. They begin, Jack Trewman does you to understond
That falsenes, and guyle has reigned too long,
And Truth has been set under a Lock,
And falsenes reigns in every Flock;
No Man may come truth to
But he must sing si dedero.


Many Remonstrances and Declarations flew abroad from him. The Kentishmen,
seasoned by this Priest or Prophet of the Idol, are easily tempted by the
Essexians to associate in the undertakings, and share in the honor of gaining
Liberty, precious Liberty for the people, and taking away the evil customs of
the Kingdom; which is the glorious Title of the tumult. This was no more (says
the Monk) than the Kentishmen had long wished for. They are quickly ready, and
by the Arts used by those of Essex put all the Country into a combustion. Walls.
That they may not appear with too much horror at the first sight, they would
seem to pretend to an outside Piety, they account (so they tell the Kingdom
and the world) the professing of any thing in the sight of God, the strongest
obligaoion that any Christian, and the most solemn public faith, that any
such state, as a Commonwealth can give. In all humility and reverence they
contrive a sacred vow and Covenant.

They fasten the knot of their holy League with National Covenants and Oaths,
which themselves will first break (than which there can be no stronger tie,
Religion consists in Faith, he who loses his Faith has lost himself) Oaths
contrary to their sworn Allegiance, and former Oaths, which is a most absurd
impiety; here God must be called upon to help, and witness the
perfidiousnesse, oaths use to end -- so help me God -- he who performs not
his oath, directly and plainly, renounces God, and all that is sacred and
Divine; to swear to day against what we were sworn to yesterday, must be
strange amongst Christians, these impieties being once allowed, there can be
neither peace, society, nor government amongst Men safe and unindangered. The
ways leading to Canterbury are beset, the Pilgrims swarming thither
(according to the superstition of those Ages) are seized, and forced to swear
with these extraordinary Workers. To keep faith to King Richard ( whose most
faithful Servants, most humble and loyal Subjects, they profess themselves
to be) and the Commons according to their power and vocation. To accept no King
called John (a vanity thrown in for Duke John of Lancasters sake the Kings
Uncle, and neglected by the Norfolk reformers, who advanced King John Litstere
to the Sovereignty) To be ready upon summons to assist the Commons (the great
wheel of the New State, for whom this Oath was given, and to be principally
respected by it.) To induce their friends and allies to hold with them, and to
allow no Tax but the fifteenth (which say they falsely was the only Tax their
forefathers ever heard of, or submitted to.) How sacred in all the parts this
Oath will be with them (which never was to be intended more than temporary)
will soon be discovered, diversity of words cannot change the nature of
things. Their first march is to Canterbury, Froiss.
where they visit Thomas of Canterbury who lived and dyed a Rebel to his
Prince, and to use the words of Rogerius a Norman, Caesar Dial. l. 8. c. 69.
in Caesarius the Monk deserved death, and damnation for this Contumacy
against, his King the Minister of God, a fit Saint for such votaries; Their
kindness was not much, they spoil his Church, break up the Bishops Chamber,
and make a prey of all they find* p^otest the Bishop shall give them an
account of the profits of his Chancery, and here they begin their audit.

Thus we see our New reformers are entered, but Sacrilege ushers them in, they
break open the Prisons, and free the Saint in Bonds, Baal; when they had done
what they came for, the Citizens, who had entertained them, willingly leave
their houses to keep them company; a Council is called to resolve upon what
ground the next storm should pour down, London ever false to the Prince. The
Wood, which no doubt would lodge the Wolves, is set by their Orders. Tyler the
Idol who knew his Reign would last no longer than while these Men continued
mad, thought this the only place likely to keep them so; London too was the
fairest mark; and besides, the Clownes were assured of a welcome upon a private
invitation from some of the Citizens, whose Ancestors and Predecessors in all
ages, in the tumults of the Confessor S. Edwards reign, in all the Barons
Wars since, have gained the renowned to be lovers of Reformation, otherwise
pure Rebellion, enemies to Courtiers and Malignants, enemies to the enemies of
their dear Liberties, which yet sometimes they pursue with too much heat and
blind zeal, sometimes to their cost and repentance, mistaking every where
both notions and things; the bridles which they without fear or wit, provide
for their Kings being often thrust into their own mouths by the new riders,
which themselves lift into the saddle, while they grown sober Mules, dare
neither kick nor fling. Behold the common people (says the Knight) Froiss.
when they be up against their Prince, and especially in England, among them
there is no remedy, for they are the perillousest people of the World, and most
outrageous if they be up, and specially the Londoners; says the Monk. Walls.
Land. quib. nunque acest furia, etc.
The Londoners never want fury if they be not kept in, if license or insolence
be permitted them. The Princess Dowager of the incomparable Edward the black
Prince, Mother of the young King, then at Canterbury, hardly escapes these
Savages, who rudely assault her Chair, and put her and her Ladies in no small
fear of Villainy to be done to their persons.

This princess was so willing to be out of their reach, that notwithstanding
she was very fat and unwieldie, she got to London in a day. Tyler, who had
insinuated himself into the good grace of these Churles by appearing the most
stirring and active of the Kennell, who began and ruled the cry, and was by I
know not what Ceremony, perhaps like that Irish election by casting an old shoe
over his head, declared Prince of the rabble, leads them to Rochester, which
will not come behind Canterbury in kindness. The people of the Town (says
the Knight) were of the same sect, it seems the Castle (once one of the
strongest in the Kingdom,) was now neither fortified nor manned, the Governor
Sir John Moton yields himself into their hands, he was one of the Kings Family,
of his Household, and must be thought awed, as he was into the engagement.
Here the Commons might be thought ashamed of their own choice, they offer Sir
John the Generals staff; which had he accepted, he must have commanded
according to the motions of the Lieutenant General Tilers Spirit, and when
this turn had been over, at the least stamp of his foot have vanished, sneaked
off the stage.

They tell him Sir John, Froiss.
you must be our Captain, and (which shows the power of his Commission) you
shall do what we will have you. The Knight likes not their company, he tries
his best wit and language to be rid of them, but could not prevail, they reply
downright, Sir John, if you will not do what we will have you, you dye for it;
we will not be denied, but at your peril. Enough was said, the Knight yields,
but his charge of Captain General is forgotten, we shall see hereafter what
use they make of him, and in what manner he must be employed. This example is
followed in the other Countries. The Gentry did not only lose their Estates,
and honor, but their courage and gallantry, their bloods were frozen, fear
had stifled their Spirits. The Clownes (as the Knight) had brought them into
such obeisance, that they caused them to go with them, whether they would or
not, they fawned on them, humbled themselves to them, like Dogs grovelling at
their feet. The Lord Molines, Sir Stephen Hales, Sir Thomas Guyfighen, this Sir
John Moton, and others were Attendants and vassales to the Idol. Walls. qui
censuram juris timebant propter malafacta, etc.
Every day new heaps of men flock to them, like Catilines Troops, all that were
necessitous at home, unthrifts, broken fellows, such as for their misdeeds
feared the Justice of the Laws; who resent the dangerous and distracted state
of the Kingdom alike, and will no doubt hammer out an excellent reformation,
they will mend their own condition which will be enough, we must expect no
more, and now the confidence in their strength made them bold enough to throw
off their mask of Hypocrisy, they began to open the inside. They departed
from Rochester (says Froissart) and passed the River (he says the Thames at
Kingstone) and came to Brentford, (where I think he leads them out of their
way) beating down before them, and round about, the places and Houses of
advocates, and procurers, and striking off the heads of diverse persons.
Walsingham tells us, who those advocates, and procurers were; All men (says
he) were amused, some looked for good from the new Masters others feared this
insurrection would prove the destruction of the Realm. The last were not
deceived. All the Lawyers of the Land (so he goes on) as well the Apprentices,
Counselors, as old Justices, all the Jurymen of the Country, (this was
Priest Balls charge) they could gripe in their clutches had their heads chopped
off.

It was a maxim of the Cabal, That there could be no liberty while any of
these men were suffered to breathe. From little to great they fell upon things
which they never thought of in their first overflow, which Guicciardine
observes (in civil discords, where the Rebellion is fortunate and men's minds
are puffed up with success) to be ordinary. The statue of Cumaean Apollo weeps
for the destruction of Cumae, we shall here read of men without sense or
apprehensions; both the stories will seem as incredible. The stupid Nobility,
and Gentry sleep in their Houses, till they are roused by these bloud-hounds,
that they might seem to deserve the calamity tumbling upon their heads; They
were becoming tenants at will, in Villeinage, to their vassalls, under their
distress, their Task, and Taxes, more by the Sottish baseness of themselves,
than any virtue in these Rascals, Scorned and slighted by every tattered
Clunch; Their Lands continually upon any Vote or Information to be sold, or
given away upon any information of loyalty or faithfulness: the ancient
virtues of the Gentleman, not to be found in that age, and serving only for a
pretense to ruin, no one could form an expectation of more than this, to be
the last man borne, (what was Polyphemus his kindness to Ulysses) to be
devoured lest, all which they were contented to hazard, and endure to preserve
a shred, or jagge of an incertaine ragged Estate (for the health or mistresses
sake) subject ever to the violence of the same lawless spoiling force which
maimed, and rent it before. Next (to return to this riffraffe) their cruelty
reaches to Parchment. Deeds, Charters, Rolls of Courts, Evidences are cast by
them into the fire, as if they meant to abolish all remembrance of things; this
was to defeat their Lords in the Claims of any ancient Rights; and to leave no
man more title, than themselves had to their Sword and power.

The Kentish and Essexian rout, were joined (says the Monk, Walls.
but he tells us not where) and approached near London, at Black heath they
made an halt, where they were near 200000 strong.

Thither came two Knights sent by the King to them, Walls.
to inquire the cause of the Commotion, and why they had amassed such swarms
of the people. They answer, they met to confer with the King concerning
business of weight, they tell the Messengers they ought to go back to the
King and show him, that it behooves him to come to them, they would acquaint him
with their desires (we shall quickly discover why his presence was required,)
upon return of the Knights, it was debated in Council by the Lords about the
King, whether he should go or no, some of the Table more willing to venture
the King than themselves, willing to throw him into the gulf, or perhaps not
senting the design of the Clownes, persuade him to see them, Your Majesty
(thus they) must make a trial of these men, necessity now must be looked on
above reason, if any thing can give the check to the uprores, it must be your
presence, there can be no safety but in this venture, it is now as dangerous to
seem not to trust, as to be deceived; fate is too much feared, if it be
imagined that this tree of your empire, which has flourished so many ages, can
fall in an hour.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, Walls.
Simon Theobald of Sudbury, Lord Chancellor of England, the most Eloquent,
most Wise, and most pious Prelate of the Age, faithful to his Prince, and
therefore odious to those who conspired against his Majesty, and authority,
likes not the advice; Di^caliga^os ribauldos.
The King ought not (says he) to venture his person among such hoselesse
ribaulds, but rather dispose things so as to curb their insolence: Sir, (says
he) your sacred Majesty in this storm ought to show how much of a King you can
play; what you will go for hereafter; by your present carriage, you will
either be feared for the future, or contemned; If you seriously consider the
nature of these rough hewne savages, you will find the gentle ways
pernicious, your tamenesse will undo you, mercy will ever be in your power,
but it is not to be named without the sword drawn; God and your right have
placed you in your throne, but your courage and resolution must keep you there;
your indignation will be justice, good men will think it so, and if they love
you, you have enough, you cannot Capitulate, not treat with your rebels,
without hazarding your honor, and perhaps your royal faith; if you yield to
the force of one sedition, your whole life and reign will be nothing but a
continuation of broils, and tumults, if you assert your sovereign authority
betimes, not only these doults, these sots, but all men else will reverence
you; remember Sir, God by whom lawful Princes reign, whose vicegerent you
are, would not forgive rebellion in Angels, you must not trust the face,
Petitions delivered you upon Swords points are fatal, if you allow this
custom you are ruined, as yet Sir, you may be obeyed as much as you please. Of
this opinion was Sir Robert Hales, Lord Prior o^ Saint John of Jerusalem, newly
Lord Treasurer of England, a magnanimous and stout Knight, but not liked by the
Commons. When this resolution was known to the Clownes, they grow stark mad,
they bluster, they swear to seek out the Kings Traitors, (for such now they
must go for; No man was either good or honest, but he who pleased them) the
Archbishop, and Lord Prior, and to chop off their Heads, here they might be
trusted, they were likely to keep their words.

Hereupon, without more consideration they advance toward London, not
forgetting to burn, and raze the Lawyers and Courtiers houses in the way, to
the Kings honor no doubt, which they will be thought to Arm for, Sir John
Froissart, and others report this part thus, which probably might follow after
this refusal.

The Rebels say they sent their Knight ( Grafton.
so they called him, yet was he the Kings Knight, for Tyler came not up to
dubbing, we find no Sir John, nor Sir Thomas of his making,) Sir John Moton to
the King, who was then in the Tower with his Mother, his half brothers Thomas
Holland Earl of Kent, after Duke of Surry, and the Lord Holland, the Earls of
Salisbury, Warwick, and Oxford, the Archbishop Lord Prior and others. The
Knight casts himself down at the Kings feet, beseeches him, not to look upon
him the worse as in this quality and employment, to consider he is forced to
do what he does; He goes on, Sir the Commons of this Realm (those few in
Arms comparatively to the rest would be taken for the whole) desire you by me
to speak with them. Your Person will be safe, they repute you still their King
(this deserved thanks) but how long the kindness will hold we shall soon
find, they profess that all they had done or would do was for your honor,
For your glory, (your honor and security are their great care) they will make
you a glorious King, fearful to your enemies, and beloved of your Subjects,
they promise you a plentiful and unparalleled revenue, They will maintain
your power and authority in relation to the Laws, with your royal person,
according to the duty of their allegiance, their protestation, their vow, their
solemn League, and Covenant, without diminishing your just power and
greatness, and that they will all the days of their lives continue in this
Covenant against all opposition; They assure you Sir, That they intend
faithfully the good of your Majesty, and of the Kingdom, and that they will
not be diverted from this end by any private or selfe-respects whatsoever. But
the Kingdom has been a long time ill governed by your Uncles, and the Clergy;
especially by the Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom they would have an account.
They have found out necessary Counsels for you, they would warn you of many
things, which hitherto you have wanted good advise in.

The conclusion was sad on the Knights part, His Children were pledges for his
return, and if he fail in that, their lives were to answer it. Which moved
with the the King; He allows the excuse, sends him back with this answer, that
he will speak with the Commons the next Morning; which it should seem the
report of the outrages done by the Clownes upon his refusal, and this Message
made him consent to. At the time he takes his Barge and is rowed down to
Redriffe, the place nearest the Rebels, ten thousand of them descend from the
Hill to see, and treat with him, (with a resolution to yield to nothing, to
overcome by the Treaty; as they must have done, had not the Kings fear
preserved him.) When the Barge drew nigh, the new Council of state (says our
Knight) Froiss.
howled, and shouted, as though all the Devils of Hell had been amongst them;
Sir John Moton was brought toward the River guarded, they being determined to
have cut him in pieces, if the King had broke his promise.

All the desires of these good and faithful Counselors contracted suddenly
into a narrow room, they had now but one demand. The King asks them what is
the matter which made them so earnestly solicit his Presence? They have no
more to say, but to entreat him to land. Which was to betray himself to them,
to give his Life and Sovereignty up to those fickle Beasts, to be held of them
during their good pleasures; which the Lords will not agree to. The Earl of
Salisbury, of the ancient Nobility, and illustrious house of Montacute, tells
them their equipage and order were not comely, and that the King ought not to
adventure amongst their troops. They are now more unsatisfied, and London, how
true soever to the Cause, and faithless to the Prince, shall feel the effects
of their fury, Southwark a friendly borough, is taken up for their first
quarters. Here again they throw down the Malignants Houses, and as a grace of
their entrance, break up the Kings prisons, and let out all those they find
under restraint in them; not forgetting to ransack the Archbishops house at
Lambeth, and spoil all things there -- plucking down the Stews standing upon
the Thames bank, and allowed in the former ages; It cannot be thought but that
the Idol loved Adultery well enough, but perhaps these public bawdy-houses
were too unclean, and might stink in his nostrils; we cannot find him any
where quarelling with the Bears, those were no Malignants.

They knocked not long at the City-gates, Walls.
which (some say) were never shut against them, or (as others) quickly opened:
The Citizens fancyed themselves privy Counselors borne, inspired from their
shoppes for affairs of State, and would not suppose, the Reformation could be
effected without them, they were rich by lies, and all the most sordid ways of
falsehood, and must be sage and knowing, pride the first sin the Devil taught
man tickles them. The Major Sir William Waleworth, whose memory (while truth
and loyalty shall be thought virtues) must be honorable, and nine of the
Aldermen held for King Richard, in vain; a prosperous wicked chief shall never
want wicked instruments, Three Aldermen, and the grearest part of the people
for the King of the Commons, the Idol, and his Priests. Those, the confiders*
and well affected to Tyler, forbid their Major to keep him out, own his
actions, as done for the good of the faithful people of the Land, and the
Commonwealth, and his followers for their Brethren and Companions of the holy
Cause. They vow to live and dye with Tylar. Many of those who had no thoughts
of doing mischief (yet being none of the wisest) were cheated into a good
belief of them, because of their Protestation (which in their first entrance
they made solemnly) that they had no intent, but this only, to search and hunt
out the Traitors of the Kingdom, the subverters of the fundamental Laws,
evil Counselors, and Malignants, and that this done they would give over,
they would disband, and return home the same men they were, to their Farms
and Cottages, without enriching themselves, without any other h^rvest of their
Labors, not doubting but that in the end, it should appear to all the world,
that their endeavors have been most hearty and sincere, for the maintenance of
Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives, the Laws and liberties of the Land; in
which endeavors, by the Grace of God, they would persist, though they should
perish in the work. Which was believed; what confirmed this Faith was, they
made Theft Capital (which yet was confined, all without the Fold of the godly*
were Egyptians, and could not be robbed) and paid justly for what they had,
but they paid not often, nor could their reckonings be great.

The Citizens were their purveiours, and made provision for them, every house
was open to them, and tables continually furnished. Their entry was on the 14
of June, 138^. on Wednesday (a little before Midsummer) the eve of Corpus
Christi day; they spend the morning of the next day, being the festival in
ringes, discoursing of the Piety, Honesty, and fairness of their cause, of
liberty and the courses to gain it, of seifing Traitors, Of bringing
Incendendiaries, Malignants, and evil instruments to condign punishment, of
the Duke John of Lancaster, who was above all men hated by them, but too far
off for the scratches of their claws, being employed in Scotland to treat a
peace there, whence these report him turned a traitor to the King, and become
Scottish: about noone, being warmed more by their cups, than with the Sun, for
the richest Wines were drawn for them, and swallowed with that greediness,
that they were got to the height of drunkenness and raved like mad men, They
are for execution; The Savoy of the Duke of Lancaster a Princely building, the
most stately fabric of the Kingdom was fired by them, his Servants there
murdered, his Plate and Jewels broke in pieces, a Coat of his of great value
(called in that age a Jack) in contempt and scorn to this Prince, was stuck on
the top of a Lance, made a mark for their Arrows, then cut and gashed to
jagges with their hatchets, one of them who had hid a piece of Plate, was
thrown by the rest into the fire with it, crying out, Knighton.
We be zealous of Truth and Justice, and not Thieves and Robbers. The Londoners
were here no slow men, they knew themselves guilty of receiving, and that their
condition could be no worse, they might think too, it would be their shame for
ever to be overdone in mischief, nor were they here exceeded.

The next fiery shower is discharged up^ the Temple an Innes of Court, Walls.
or College for Students of the Laws of the Nobler sort, but belonging to the
Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, to whom the possessions of the Knights
Templars were given by this Kings Grandfather. Many men lost there the
evidences of their estates, many their lives. From hence in malice to the Lord
Prior, they hasten to Clerkenwell, where they leave nothing of that noble
Palace of the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, but rubbidge, and ashes, their
Church too was consumed in the same wicked flames. This house was seven days
burning down. They break open the Exchequer and r^fl^ Westminster the same
day. The Flemmings or Dutch strangers, who since the Jews were banished,
suffer their part in every Sedition, are sought for all the streets through,
all of them massacred, no sanctuary could save them, thirteen Flemmings were
drawn out of the Church of the Friars Hermits of Saint Augustine, and beheaded
in the streets, and seaventeen others pulled out of another parochial Church
dye in the same manner. They had a Shibboleth to discover them, he who
pronounced Brot and Cawse, for Bread and Cheese, had his head lopt off; It was
their sport if they could catch any man, who had not sworn their Oath, was not
of the side, or was hated by any of the Commons, to snatch off his hood or
Capuch (which was a part of the Cloak, or outward garment worn then, and
served to cover the head) with the accustomed cry, or yelling which they used
in beheading and overthrowing Houses, then to rush in to the streets, and hack
with their fellow Jobernolles, at his neck in Crowds, till the Head dropped
down.

Our most famous Chaucer flourishing then, in his description of the terrible
fright, and noise, at the carrying away of Chanticlere the Cock by Reinold the
Fox, reflects upon these cries, but in an Hyperbole of his Poetical feined
ones, and much undervaluing the horror of the Kentish throats, as he will have
it. They yellen as Fiends do in Hell, etc.
So hideous was the noise, Ah benedicite!
Certes Iack-Straw ne his meyney
Ne made shouts half so shrill,
When they would any Flemming kill.


The Lombards escaped better, they were only robbed of what they had, their
skins were left them whole, Wat the Idol had long agon in France served Richard
Lion a Merchant, and Lapidarie, formerly Sheriff of London, one of the
wealthyest of the City, who had given him blows, it was not fit this injury
should be forgotten, nor was it; It was a score now, or never to be paid, he
strikes off his old masters head, which in triumph is carried before him on a
Spear.

This night the King was counseled to fall upon these beasts, for the most
part drunk, and cut their throats, easy to be destroyed, if any man had had
but the courage to overcome. It was the gallant Mayors advise, they lay on
heaps without sense or motion, tired with the mischiefs of the day, drunk and
asleep without Guards or Watch; the Earl of Salisbury and the Nobility,
against whose Lives, Honors and Fortunes these beasts had conspired, desire
the King to try all fair and gentle ways of appeasing them, which counsel he
approves. They were not so kind to themselves; many lost their lives by the
hands and swords of their companions; every pettyd scontent, or grudging, being
enough to provoke them. Thirty two of them being drunk in a Cellar of the Savoy
were immured there, finding in the same place Death and the Grave together.
Some of them threw Barrels of Gunpowder (which was little known then) into the
fire, and are blown up with part of the Palace.

Proclamations were formerly made in Tylers name, not in Strawes, (as Polydore
would have it.) Straw was this while busied elsewhere. The Country about was by
these Proclamations summoned to repair to London with all speed, to spoil
this Babylon; The close menaces ( le^t they provoke Gods Judgments) pluck them
down upon their heads, which themselves explain, if ye fail, if ye and your
Officers give not obedience freely to the Protector, we will send out 20000 men
(20000 of our Locusts) who shall burn the Towns of the children of
disobedience; Those of S. Albanes and Barnet (whose famous deeds challenge a
place in this story by themselves) struck with the thunder of this edict, haste
to London; Walls.
in their journey thither, at Heibury, a retiring house of the Lo: Prior of S.
John near Istington they find 20000. or thereabouts casting down the firmer
parts of the house, which the fire could not consume.

Richard.
Jack Straw Captain of this herd, calls these new comers to him, and forces
them to swear to adhere to King Richard, and the Commons. How long this Oath
will be sworn to we shall see, and how much the safer the King will be for it.

We shall see too what is lost by this new Union of King and Commons, by the
new fellowship, to observe the horrible irreligious hypocrisy of these Clownes
who only would be thought the Protectors of his Crown and Person. They alone
had decreed his ruin, who swear thus often to prevent it, to guard him from
it; A Treason not to be believed by some then till it had taken. The Commons
were then divided into three Bodies, this with Jack Straw, the second at Mile
end under the Essexian Princes, Kirkby, Treder, Scot, and Rugge, the third on
Tower Hill, where the Idol, and Priest Baal were in chief.

This last crew grew horribly rude, and haughty; the Commons there were not
contented to be the Kings Tasters and no more, they snatch the Kings provision
violently from the Purveyours, he is to be starved for his own good, and after,
Harpies or Vultures, choose you whether, strike high, like brave birds of prey
they will kill no more Flies, this was the way to secure their smaller
mischiefs. Polydores conceit that the Archbishop and Lord Prior of S. John,
were sent out by the King to allay their heat, is not probable.

Walsingham relates it thus, That they demanded these two (with full cries no
doubt of Justice, Justice) with some others Traitors by their Law, (a
Fundamental, never to be found or heard of before) to be given up to them by
the King with all the earnestness, and violence imaginable.

They give him his choice, bid him consider of it, they will either have the
blood of these their Traitors or his; Walls. alias scir^ semetipsum vita
priva^dum.
they making all those Delinquents, who attended on him, or executed his
lawful commands* whom say they, The King with an high and forcible hand
protects, will not be appeased, unless they be delivered up; conjuring him to
be wise in time, and dismiss his extraordinary guards, his Cavaliers, and
others of that quality, who seem to have little interest, or affection to the
public good. Whether the Tower doors flew open at this fright, or the
Man-wolfes crowded in, at the Kings going out to appease the party at Mile-end,
as Sir John Froissart tells it, Wat the Idol with Priest Baal are now masters
of the Tower, into which on Friday the 16 of June they entered, not many more
than 400 of their company guarding them, where then were commanded six hundred
of the Kings men of Arms, and six hundred Archers, a Guard not so
extraordinary as was necessary then, all so faint-hearted, so unmanned at the
apparition* at the sight of these Goblins, they stood like the stones of
Medusa, remembered not themselves, their honor, nor what they had been. The
Clownes, the most abject of them, singly with their Clubs, or Cudgels in their
hands, venture into all the rooms, into the Kings Bedchamber, (which perhaps
had been his Scaffold had he been there) sit, lie, and tumble upon his Bed,
they press into his Mothers Chamber, where some of the merry wanton Devils
offer to kiss her, others g^ve her blows, break her head: She swownes, and is
carried privately to the Wardrobe by her servants; Some revile and threaten the
noblest Knights of the Household, some stroke their beards with their unclean
hands (which beyond the Roman patience in the same rudeness from the Gauls is
endured) and this to claw, and sweeten, (they meant it so) they gloss with
smooth words, and bespeak a lasting friendship for the time to come, they must
maintain the injuries done to themselves, must not disturb the usurpers of
their Estates and Rights, must not show any sense of generosity, of faith, of
honor, (it concerned Tyler that they should be the veryest fools and cowards
breathing) if they stir, make any Claims, they shall be reputed seditious,
turbulent, and breakers of the public (otherwise and plainly) Tylers peace. It
was never heard (says the Emperor Charles in Sleidan) that it should be
lawful to despoile any man of his estates and rights, and unlawful to restore
him: Our Tyler and his Anabaptists thought otherwise.

As Walsingham, they went in and out like Lords, who were varlets of the lowest
rank, and those who were not Cowherds to Knights, but to Bores, value
themselves beyond Kights. Here was a hotchpotch of the rabble, a mechanic
sordid state composed as those under Kettes Oak of Reformation, after, Of
Country gnooffes, Hob, Dick, and Hick, with Clubs, and clouted shoon. Nevilli
kettus.
A medley or huddle of Botchers, Cobblers, Tinkers, Draymen, of Apron men and
Plough-joggers, domineering in the Kings Palace, and rooting up the plants and
wholesome flowers of his Kingdom in it; This place was now a vile and nasty
sty, no more a Kings Palace, who will value a stately pile of building, of
honorable title, or Ant que memory, since Constantine, when it is infected
with the plague, haunted by Goblins, or possessed by Thieves. The knights of
the Court, were but knights of the Carpet or Hangings. No man seemed
discontented, all was hushed and still. White hall was then a Bishops Palace,
the Tower was to be prepared for Tylers highness, and his Officers but the
Cement of the Stratocratie of the Government by Sword, and Club Law, could not
be well tempered with vulgar blood; a servant of the Archbishops (who had
trusted himself to these Guards and Walls) is forced to betray his Lord. He
brings them into the Chapel, where the holy Prelat was at his prayers, where
he had celebrated Mass that morning before the King, Walls. Sacram Communionem.
and taken the sacred Communion, where he had spent the whole night in watching
and devotion, as presaging what followed.

He was a valiant man and pious, and expected these Blood hounds with great
security, and calmnesse of mind; when their bellowing first struck his ears, He
tells his servants that Death came now as a more particular blessing; where the
comforts of life were taken away, that life was irksome to him, (perhaps his
pious fears for the Church and Monarchy, both alike endangered, and fatally
tied to the same chain, might make him weary of the World) and that he could
now die with more quiet of conscience than ever; a quiet which these Parricides
will not find when they shall pay the score of this and their other crimes.
However the flattery of success may abuse, our death bed represents things in
their own shape, and as they are: after this the rout of Wolves enter
profanely roaring, where is the Traitor where is the Robber of the Common
people? He answers, not troubled at what he saw, or heard.

Ye are welcome my Sons. I am the Archbishop whom you seek, neither Traitor
nor Robber; Presently these Limbs of the Devil griping him with their wicked
clutches, tear him out of the Chapel, neither reverencing the Altar, nor
Crucifix, figured on the top of his Crosier, nor the Host, (these are the
Monks observations, for which he condemns them in the highest impiety, and
makes them worse than Devils, and as Religion went then, well he might
condemn them so.) They dragge him by the Arms and hood to Tower hill without
the Gates, there they howl hideously, which was the sign of a mischief to
follow.

He asks them what it is they purpose, what is his offense, tells them he is
their Archbishop (this makes him guilty, all his eloquence, his Wisdom are now
of no use) he adds the murder of their Sovereign Pastor will be severely
punished, Qui pastor, etc.
some notorious vengeance will suddenly follow it. These destroyers will not
trouble themselves with the idle formality of a mock-trial or Court of their
own erecting, an abominable Ceremony, which had made their impiety more ugly,
they proceed down right, and plainly, which must be instead of all things, He
is commanded to lay his neck upon the block, as a false traitor to the
Commonalty and Realm: To deal roundly, his life was forfeited, and any
particular charge, or defense would not be necessary, his enemies were his
Accusers, and Judges, (his enemies who had combined and sworn to abolish his
order, the Church, and spoil the sacred patrimony) and what innocence, what
defense could save? Without any reply farther, he forgives the Heads man, and
bows his Body to the Axe.

After the first hit, he touches the wound with his hand, and speaks thus, Ah^
manus Domini.
It is the Hand of the Lord. The next stroke falls upon his hand, ere he could
remove it, and cuts off the tops of his fingers, after which he fell, but died
not till the eight blow, his body lay all that day unburied, and no wonder, all
men were thoroughly scared, under the tyranny of these Monsters, all Humanity,
all Piety, were most unsafe.

The Archbishop dyed a Martyr of loyalty to his King, and has his Walls.
miracles Recorded, an honor often bestowed by Monks (friends of Regicide,
and Regicides,) on Traitors, seldom given to honest men. In his Epitaph (his
riming Epitaph, where is shown the pitiful ignorant rudeness of those
times) he goes for no less, he speaks thus: Sudburiae natus Simon jacet hic
tumulatus,
Martyrizatus nece pro republica stratus.
Sudburies Simon here intombed lies,
Who for the Commonwealth a Martyr dies.


It is fit (says Plato) that he who would appear a just man, become naked,
that his virtue be despoiled of all ornament, that he be taken for a wicked man
by others (wicked indeed) that he be mocked, and hanged. The wisest of men tell
us, Eccles. 7. 15.
There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness. The Seas are often
calm to Pirates, and the scourges of God, the executioners of his fury, the
Goths, Hunnes, and Vandalls heretofore, Tartars and Turks now, how happy are
their Robberies, how do all things succeed with them beyond their wishes! Our
Saviors Passion, the great mystery of his Incarnation lost him to the Jews
his Murderers. Whereupon Grotius notes, Grot. Sape a deo permitti, ut pii ab
imp^s non vexentur^ sed in e^ficiantur.
It is often permitted by God, that pious men be not only vexed by wicked men,
but murdered too -- He gives examples in Abel, Isaiah, and others, the MESSIAH
dyed for the sins of the world, Ethelbert and Saint Edmund the East Angles,
Saint Oswald the Northumbrian, Saint Edward the Monarch, etc. Saxon Kings, are
examples at home.

Thucydides in his narration of the defeat and death of Nician the Athenian in
Syeily, speaks thus: Being the man who of all the Grecians of my time had least
deserved to be brought to so great a degree of misery. It is too frequent to
proclaim Gods Judgments in the misfortunes of others, as if we were of the
Celestial Council, had seen all the Wheels, or Orbs, upon which Providence
turns, and knew all the reasons and ends which direct and govern its motions:
men love by a strange abstraction to separate Facts from their Crimes; where
the fact is beneficial, the advantage must canonize it, it must be of heavenly
offspring, a way to justify Cain, Abimelech, Phocas, our third Richard,
Ravilliac, every lucky parricide whatsoever.

Alexander Severus that most excellent Emperor assassinated by the Militia or
Soldiery, by an ill fate of the Commonwealth (for Maximinus a Thracian or
Goth, Lieutenant General of the Army, a cruel Savage tyrant, by force usurped
the Empire after him) Replied, to one who pretended to foretell his end; That
it troubled him not, the most renowned persons in all ages die violently. This
gallant Prince condemned no death but a dishonest fearful one. Heaven it self
declared on the Archbishops side, and cleared his innocence. Starling of Essex,
who challenged to himself the glory of being Heads man, fell mad suddenly
after, ran through the Villages with his Sword hanging naked upon his breast,
and his Dagger naked behind him, came up to London, confessed freely the fact,
and lost his and there; As most of those did* who had said their hands upon
this Archbishop coming up severally out of their Countries to that City, and
constantly accusing themselves for the Parricide of their spiritual Father.
Nothing was now unlawful, there could be no wickedness after this; They make
more examples of barbarous cruelty under the name of Justice.

Robert Lord Prior of St. John, and Lord Treasurer of England, John Leg, or
Laige one of the Kings sergeants at Arms, a Franciscan, a Physician belonging
to the Duke of Lancaster (whom perhaps they hated because they had wronged his
Master) a Friar Carmelite, the Kings Confessor were murdered there in this
fury. Whose heads with the Archbishops, were borne before them through London
streets, and advanced over the Bridge.

This while the King was softning the Rebels of Essex at Mile-end, with the
Earls of Salisbury, Warwick, and Oxford, and other Lords. Thither by
Proclamation he had summoned them, as presuming the Essexians to be the more
civilized, and by much the fairer enemies, as indeed they were. There he
promises to grant them their desires, Liberty, precious Liberty is the thing
they ask, this is given them by the King, but on condition of good behavior.
They are to cease their burning, and destruction of Houses, to return quietly
to their homes, and offend no man in their way. Two of every Village were to
stay as Agents behind for the Kings Charters, which could not be got ready in
time. Farther the King offers them his Banners.

Some of the^ were simple, honest people, of no ill meaning, Froiss.
who knew not why the Garboils were begun; nor why they came thither. These
were won, and win others; without more stir those of Essex return whence they
came. Tyler and Baal are of another spirit, they would not part so easily,
Tyler the future Monarch, who had designed an Empire for himself, and was now,
sceleribus suis ferox atque praeclarus famous for his villeinies and haughty,
would not put up so, he and his Kentish rabble tarry. The next day being
Saturday the 17 of June, was spent as the other days of their tyranny, in
Burning, Ruining houses, Murders, and Depopulations.

The night of this day the Idol and his Priest upon a new resolution; intended
to have struck at the neck of the Nation, to have Murdered the King ( the
Achan of the Tribes) probably by beheading, the death these parricides had used
hitherto, the Lords, G^ntlemen, the wealthiest and honestest part of the
Citiz^ns, then to have pillaged their Houses, and fi^ed the City in four
parts, they ^ended this have to avoid odi^us partne^sh^p in the exploit, and
that those of Norfolk. Suffolk, and other parts might not share in the
spoil. This Counsel of destruction was against all policy, more profit might
have been made of this City by Excise. Assessment, and Taxes upon the Trade,
Tyler might sooner have enriched himself, and have been as secure. Estate
makes men losty, f^are and poverty, if we may trust Machiavel, bend and supple,
every man had been in danger, and obnoxious to him, one Clown had awed a
street. Near the Abby-Church at Westminster, was a Chapel with an image of
the Virgin Mary, this Chapel was called the Chapel of our Lady, in the
Piew, it stood near the Chapel of S. Steph. since turned from a Chapel to
the Parliament house, here our Lady then (who would not believe it) did great
miracles. Richards preservation at this time was no small one, being in the
hands of the multitude, let loose, and enraged. There he makes his vows of
safety, after which he rides toward these Sons of perdition under the Idol
Tyler.

Tyler, who meant to consume the day in Cavills, protests to those who were
sent by the King to offer those of Kent the same peace, which the Essex Clownes
had accepted, That he would willingly embrace a good and honest Peace, but the
Propositions or Articles of it were only to be dictated by himself. He is not
satisfied with the Kings Charters, Three draughts are presented to him, no
substance, no form would please, he desires an accommodation, but he will have
Peace, and truth together. He exclaims that the liberty there is deceitful,
but an empty name, that while the King talks of liberty, he is actually
levying War, setting up his Standard against his Commons, that the good
Commons are abused to their own ruin, and to the miscarriage of the great
undertaking, that they have with infinite pains and labor acquainted the King
with their humble desires, who refuses to join with them, misled, and carried
away by a few evil and rotten-hearted Lords and Delinquents, contrary to his
Coronation Oath; by which he is obliged to pass all Laws offered him by the
Commons (whose the Legislative power is) which denial of his if it be not a
forfeiture of his trust and office (both which are now useless) it comes near
it, and he is fairly dealt with, if he be not deposed, which too might be done
without any want of modesty or duty, and with the good of the Commonwealth,
The happiness of the Nation not depending on him, or any of the Regal
Branches. I will deliver the Nation from the Norman slavery, and the world
(says he) of an old silly superstition, That Kings are only the Tenants of
Heaven, obnoxious to God alone, cannot be condemned and punished by any power
else, I will make (here he lied not) an wholesome President to the world
formidable to all tyrannes, I declare, That Richard Plantagenet, or Richard of
Bourdeaux, at this time is not in a condition to govern, I will make no
addresses, no applications to him, nor receive any from him; though I am but a
dry bone, too unworthy for this great calling, yet I will finish the work* I
will settle the Government without the King and against him, and against all
that take part with him, which ^ufficiently justifies our Arms, God with Us,
says he, owns them, success manifests the righteousness of our cause, this
is (says he) the voice of the people, by us their Representative, and our
Counsel. After the Vote of no more Addresses, which with all their other Votes
of treasons were to be styled the resolution of the whole Realm; and while he
swells in this ruffle, Sir John Newton a Knight of the Court, is sent to
entreat rather than invite him to come to the King then in Smithfield; where
the Idols Regiments were drawn up, and treat with him, concerning the
additionall Provisions he desired to be inserted into the Charter.

No observance was omitted which might be thought pleasing to his Pride (which
pride was infinitely puffing.) Flattery was sweet to him, and he had enough of
it, that made him bow a little, when nothing else could do it. We may judge a^
the unreasonablenesse of all his demands, and supplies of new Articles out of
his instrument, by one. He required of the King a Commission to empower
himself and a Committee teame of his own choosing, to cut off the heads of
Lawyers and Escheators, and of all those, who by reason of their knowledge, and
place were any way employed in the Law. He fancied if those who were learned in
the Law, were knocked ith'head, all things would be ordered by the common
people, either there would be no law, or that which was should be declared by
him and his, subject to their will, with which his expression the day before
did well agree; Then, attributing all things to God (the God of War) and his
conquering Arms, and striking his Sword (which showed the present power) on
London-stone.

The Cyclops, or Centaur of Kent spoke these words: Walsingh.
From this day (or within four days) all Law (or all the Laws of Engl. as
others) shall fall from Wat Tylers mouth. The Kings indeed had bound
themselves, and were bound by the Laws. They were named in them. Tyler was
more than a King, he was an Emperor, he was above the Laws; nor was it fit
the old overworn Magna Charta should hold him. The supreme Authority and
legislative power (no one knows how derived) were to be, and reside in him,
according to the new establishment, Tyler like Homers Mars, (...), was a
whirlewinde, he was Potius gladiator quam senator.
Egnatius in Paterculus, rather a Fencer, a Swash buckler than a Senator; his
right Arm, his brut^sh force, not Justice, not reason must sway all things;
Tyler will not rule in fetters, his will, his violence shall be c^d Law, and
grievous slavery under that will, falsely peace. Had those, whom no government
never so sweet, and gracious will please, unless the Supreme power be given
the people, seen the confusions and dangers, the c^uelty and tyranny of these
few days, they would quickly have changed this opinion.

The Knight performs his Embassy, he urges the Idol with great earnestness to
see the King and speedily. He answers if thou bent so much for have, get thee
back to the King thy Master* I will come when I list, yet he follows the
Knight on Horse back, but slowly. In the way, he is met by a Cit^zen who had
brought sixty doublets for the Commons, upon the Public Faith. This Citizen
asks him for his money, he promises payment before night, and presses on so
near the King that his horse touched the croupe of the Kings horse.

Froissart reports his discourse to the King, Sir King (says the Idol) see
thou yonder people? The King answers yes, and asks him what he means by the
question. He replies, they are all at my command, have sworn to m^ Faith, and
Truth, to do what I will have them. He and they had broke their Faith and
truth to their Prince, and he thinks these men will be true to him. Here
though it be a digression too much, I cannot omit a passage of the late Civil
Wars of France, D'Avila.
begun and continued by the Jesuited party to ex^irpate the royal Family there.

Villers Governor of Rouen for the holy League, tells the Duke of Mayen
Captain General of the Rebellion, That he would not obey him; they were both
companions and spoilers of the State together: The King being levelled, all men
else ought to be equal.

The Idol, as he that demanded (so the Knight) nothing bu^ Riot, continues his
discourse (thus) Believe^t thou King, that these people will depart without thy
Letters? The King tells him, He means fairly, that he will make good his word,
his Letters are near finished, and they shall have them. But the glory of the
Idol (which was merely the benefit of fortune) beg^n to fade, his principali^y
was to^ cruel, too violent to be lasting. Vengeance here hovered over his
head, and he who had been the destruction of multitudes hastens, nay
precipitates his own fate, and ruins himself by his own fury, he puts himself
into the Kings power, who should in his first towering, had he been wisely
wicked, like a Vulture of the Game, have flown at his throat. In magnis
principium* injuriis non incipitur ut desistatur.
The judicious polit^que will not begin to give over; However, will never
venture himself in the Princes hands whom he has justly offended by treasons
against his government.

Grand fo^e Com.
Charles of Burgundy confesses this to be a great folly; his Grandfather Philip
lost his life at Montereau upon the Yonne by it, and our Idol shall not escape
better.

Sir John Newton the Knight employed to fetch him, delivered his message on
horseback which is now remembered, and taken for an high neglect; besides, it
seems the carriage and words of the Knight were not very pleasing. Every
trifle in omission was treason to the Idols person, and new state. He railes
foulely, draws his Dagger, and bellowing out, Traitor, menaces to strike the
Knight, who returns him in exchange the lie; and not to be behind in blows,
draws his: This the Idol takes for an intolerable affront, but the King
fearful of his servant, cool, and asswages the heat; he commands the Knight
to dismount, and offer up his Dagger to the Idol, which (though unwillingly)
was done.

This would not take off his edge: The Prince who yields once to a Rebel,
shall find heaps of requests, and must deny nothing. The King had given away
his Knights Dagger: now nothing will content Tyler but the Kings Sword, with
which the Militia o^ power of Arms impliedly was sought. This he asks, then
again rushes upon the Knight, vowing never to eat till he have his Head.

When the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, whom neither necessity nor
misery could animate, lie down trampled on by these Villains without Soul,
or motion; In comes the Major of London, Sir William Walworth, the everlasting
honor of the Nation, a man who over did ages of the Roman Scaevolae, or Curtii
in an hours action, and snatches the King and Kingdom out of these flames. He
tells the King it would be a shame to all posterity to suffer more insolences
from this Hangman, this lump of blood. This the rest of the Courtiers now
wakened by their own danger, (For he who destroys one man contrary to Law or
Justice, gives all men else reason to fear themselves and take heed) are
echoes to. This puts daring into the young King; he resolves to hazard all upon
this chance: This way he could not but die kingly, at least, like a Gentleman,
with the Sword, which God (of whose great Majesty he was a beam) gave him in
his hand. The only way left to avoid a shameful death, was to run the danger
of a brave one, and a wise coward (I will not say an honorable one)
considering the incertainty of things under that Iron socage Tenure would think
so.

The King commands the Major to arrest the Butcher: This was charge enough, and
rightly understood, indeed there was then no time for form nor trial, the
suspension of the Courts was Tylers act, his crime, and he oug^t not to look
for any advantage from it: Grot Jur. B^ v^l 1. c. 4.
an Historian says the Duke of Guyse's power was so much, that the ordinary
forms of Justice could not be observed; fair Law is handsome, but it is not
to be given to Wolves and Tigers. Tyler was a traitor, a common enemy; and
against such (says a Father long agone) ev^ry man is a Soldier; whosoev^
struck too, struch as much in his own defense, in his own preservation, as
the Kings: and the safety of the King and People made this course necessary;
besides, Tylers crimes were public and notorious.

The generous Lord Major obeyes the sentence, which was given by the same
power, by which the Judges of Courts sat and acted when Justice flowed down
from the fountain in the ordinary channel, and which the damme head being
thus troubled by this Wolf, could slow no otherwise, which was authority
sufficient; by this power Richards Captains must fight when he has them, and
kill those whom the Courts of Justice cannot deal with: Tyler faints, and
shrinkes to what he had been, he was as cowardly as cruel, and could not seem
a man in any thing but that he was a thief, and a rebel: he asks the brave
Major in what he was offended by him; This was a strange question to an honest
man, he finds it so. The Major (says Froissart) calls him false stinking
knave, and tells him he shall not speak such words in the presence of his
natural Lord the King. The Major answers in full upon the accursed
Sacrilegious Head of the Idol with his Sword. He struck heartily, and like a
faithful zealous subject. Dagon of the Clownes sinkes at his feet. The Kings
followers inviron him round, John Standish an Esquire of the Court, alights,
and runs him into the belly, which thrust sent him into another World, to
accompany him who taught Rebellion, and murder first. Event was then no sign
of a good cause.

All History now brands him for a Traitor, which by some will be attributed to
his miscarriage: without doubt had he prospered in the Work, he had had all
the honors which go along with prosperity. Ut reus fit vincendus est.
The King had been the wrong doer, and his afflictions, if nothing in so much
youth could have been found out, had been crimes; we must overpower those
whom we would make guilty. Henry the great of France under the Popes interdict,
is told by a Gentleman, Sir, if we be overcome, we shall dye condemned
heretics, if your Majesty conquer, the censures shall be revoked, they will
fall of themselves. He who reads the mischiefs of his usurpation will think
he perished too late.

Now I come to an Act of Richards, the most glorious of his History, which the
Annals past can no where parallel, here his infancy excells his after manhood.
Here, and in the gallantry of his death he appears a full Prince, and perhaps
vies with all the bays of his usurpers triumphs.

Alexander the Monarch of the world, (Not more wondered at for his victories,
then for that suppressing the Sedition of his Macedons in Asia, tired, and
unable to march, whither his ambition carried him on wings) leaps from his
Throne of State, into the Battles of his Phalanges enraged, Seises thirteen of
the chief malcontents, and delivers them to the custody of his Guards.
Curtius knows not what he should impute this amazement of the Seditious to,
every man returning upon it to his old duty, and obedience, and ready to yield
himself up into the same hands: it might be (says he) Lib.
The veneration of the Majesty of Kings, which the Nations submitted under,
worship equally with the Gods, or of himself which laid the tempest. That
confidence too of the Duke Alessandro of Parma, in a mutiny of the German
Reiters at Namures is memorable, who made his way with his Sword alone through
the points of all their Lances, into the midst of their Troops, and brought
thence by the collar one of the Mutineers whom he commanded to be hanged to the
terror of the rest. The youth of Richard begat rather contempt, than
reverence, of which too these Clownes breasts were never very full: When the
fall of the Idol was known to the rout, they put themselves into a posture of
defense, thunder out nothing but vengeance to the King and his, whom they now
arraign of Murder and Tyranny: He is guilty of Innocent blood; a Tyrant, a
Traitor, an Homicide, the public Enemy of the Common wealth. Richard
Plantaginet is indicted in the name of the people of England of treason, and
other heinous crimes. He is now become less than Tylers Ghost, a Traitor to
the Freeborne people.

His treason was, he would not destroy himself, he would not open his body to
Tylars full blow. Walsingh. Capitaneus noster.
They roar out, our Captain General is slain treacherously, let us stand to
it, and revenge his p^ecious blood, or die with him: I cannot pass this place
without some little wonder; had these Ruffians (with whom Kings hedged about by
holy Scripture, and Laws humane, are neither divine nor sacred) been asked
whether Tyler the Idol, of their own clay and hands, might have been tried,
touched or struck, according to their resenting this blow here: let his
tyrannies, his exorbitances have been what they would, they would have
answered no doubt in the negative: Though Richard might have been struck
thorough and thorough, Tyler who had usurped his power, must have been sacred,
it must have been treason to touch him: Phocas must not be hurt: in Tylers case
Straw would allow the old texts again: The powers were to be obeyed. Their
bows were drawn, when the King gallops up to them alone, and riding round the
throng, asks them, What madness it was that armed them thus against their own
peace, and his life, whether they would have no end of things or demands.

He tells them if L^berty be their only aim, as hitherto they have pretended,
they may assure themselves of it, and that it is an extreme folly to seek to
make that our own with the breach of Faith, of Laws, with impieties,
violating God and Man, which we may come by fairly. But they trod not the path
to Liberty, That where every man commands, no man can be free; the Liberty too
they fancy cannot be had, the world cannot subsist without Order and
Subjection, men cannot be freed from Laws: If they were, there could be no
society, no civility any where, Men must be shunned as much as Wolves or
Bears, rapine and bloodshed would overrun the world, the spoyler must fear
the next comer, like savage beasts, who hurt others, and know not it is ill to
hurt them; men would devour men, the stronger Thief would swallow up the rest;
no Relations would be sacred, where every man has the power of the Sword, the
aged fire (could there be any such) must defend his silver hairs from the
unnatural violence of his own Sons.

He adds, if there can be any just cause of Sedition, yet is the Sedition
unjust which outlasts it, which continues, when the cause is yielded to, and
taken away; that if his Prerogative has been sometimes grievous, his taxes
heavy, and any of those they call evil Counselors faulty, they ought to
remember, in their first risings, and all along in all their Oaths, and
Covenants, they swore continually not to invade the Monarchy, nor touch the
Rights of his free Crown. You ought to remember your own Remonstrances; you
once declared, that you acknowledged the Maxim of the Law, The King can do no
wrong; If any ill be committed in matters of State, the Counselors; if in
matters of Law, the Judges must answer for it -- My person was not to be
violated. He expect they should deal with him, as the honest Husbandman does
in overflowes of Waters, who cleares and draines his ground, repaires the
banks, but does not usurp upon the stream, does not inhance within the
Channel; And farther that quarrels to his Government and Laws are
unreasonable from those, who out of ambition arm to overthrow both, that
reformation is not the work of Sedition, which ever disorders what is well
settled. He conjures them to forsake these suries, who, says he, abuse their
lightness merely for their own ends, whose companions or masters they were
lately, now are they but their Gaurds, and that if they refuse a su^j^ction
according to all Laws Divine and humane to his Sc^pter, they must become
slaves and tributanes to their Iron, to the Flailes and Pitchforkes of some
Mushrome of their own dirt, and that advancing their Mushrome, thus upon his
power by the ways of force. gives an example to the next tumults against
themselves.

There can be no safety for any new Non est diuturn^ possessio in quam gladio
inducimur. Curt.
power raised upon this force, the obedience to that upon these Rules being
limited, and annexed to the force, and success, and to yield, and give way to
the next power visible which shall overbeare it. A way to thrust a Nation into
a state of War, continual perjury and impiety to the Worlds end. This Realm
(as he goes on) is my inheritance, which I took possession of after the death
of my Grandfather, being a child, and did I claim only by your gift (which I
shall never grant) yet are not you free, to make a new choice, you are bound to
me by Oaths and Compacts, and no right of new compliance (...) ^ubmission can
be left you to transfer. He concludes, That despair was a dangerous sin,
which would drive them headlong to destruction: That whatsoever their offenses
had been, they were not above his mercy.

He bids them not trouble themselves for Tyler, a base fellow who thrust them
into dangers, and blew them into a storm to raise himself upon the billows,
upon the ruins of his Country. He promises to lead them, he will be their
Captain, if they will follow him he will please them in all their desires.
This he spoke, to draw them off farther into Smithfield, fearing they would
again fall to burning of ^ous^s. They now wanted their Devil, who possessed
them, and being in doubt whether they should kill the King, or return home
with his Charters, there being no incendiary to command, follow the King in
suspense; Baal and Straw about this time amazed at the Idols fall, lose courage
and slip away. In the mean time the stout Major spurs to the City with one
servant, where in a few words he acquaints the Citizens with the Kings peril
and his own, and requests their sudden assistance, if not for himself, for
the King, who (says he) is in danger now to be murdered. Walls. Froiss.
Some loyal hearts, some good men of the Kings party arm, and join, to the
number of one thousand, and range themselves in the street, expecting some of
the Cavaliers, of the Kings Knights to conduct them, resolved either to
overcome, or not to fear the Conquerours.

Sir Robert Knowles, a renowned Commander in the French Wars of the Kings
Grandfather (called falsely Canol by Polydor, and others) undertakes this
charge. Sir Perducas D'Albret (called D'Albreth) a noble Gascoigne and a
Commander too in those Wars, Nicholas Brembre the Kings Draper, and other
Aldermen, come in with their Levies, and march to the King in sight of the
Rebels. There the King Knights the brave Will: Walworth, John Standish, one of
his Esquires, Nicholas Brembre, John Philpot, (a most generous Citizen, famous
for his faithful service to his Prince in the times succeeding) and others.
The Nobility about the King desire him to strike off an hundred or two of the
Clowns heads, in revenge of the injuries and infamy they had received from
them. Sir Robert Knowles would have him fa^l on, and cut them all to pieces.
The King dislikes both these counsels; He says many of these unhappy men were
awed to side, without either malice to his Person or Power; and that if the
first advise were taken, the most innocent might be punished, and the guilty
escape; If the second, the very Rebel and the Counterfeit (the forced one) must
be swallowed up together, which was high injustice. Yet were there many of
these R^b^ls called to account, and their acts of blood, rapine and bu^ning
cost them dear; but these acts of theirs done against Law, were punished
legally, upon the finding of Juries, when the Tumults were composed: Which was
fair and handsome, and sh^wes the honorable justice of our King. All that was
done against them that night, was, to forbid the Citizens by Proclamation to
entertain any of these men in the City, or communicate with them; and to
command all men who had not dwelt there for one year before, to depart:

So far was the young King from approving the cruelty of the l^ counsels,
that in the next place, he causes the Charters, which he had promised them to
be delivered; yet some may suppose this but a pardon of show, and the
pardon-piece of the Charters, as well as the other part, rather a piece of
policy than any thing else, the Countries being yet tumultuous, the Clownes
were upon their good behavior, that was a condition of their pardon, which
they would not observe, they commit new outrages, break the Kings Laws, and
pluck down the vengeance of Justice upon their heads afresh, they did not give
over their mischiefs after their return says, Walls. By the King and his
Counsel, the Charters, as extorted out of force, and necessity, were recalled;
and though the Meynie generally were pardoned, the King (again provoked) staid
but for a fit time to take vengeance on the Ringleaders, and punish particular
offenders who could not be forgiven: It being necessary in so desperate a
Revolt* for the terror of others, to make examples of some such malicious
disturbers of the peace, as would never have been reclaimed. The Kings Charters
contained a Manumission of the Villains, and abolition of the memory of what
was past for the rest. The tenor, says Walsingham, of the Charters extorted
from the King by force, was this, (he gives us only that of Hartfordshire the
Province of his Monastery.)

RIchard by the Grace of God King of England and of France, Lord of Ireland,
to all his Bailies, and others his trusty, to whom these Letters shall come,
greeting.
Know ye that we of our special grace have made free all our Lieges, and
every of our subjects of Hartfordshire, and we free those, and every of them
from all Ab omni bondagio.
bondage, and quit them by these presents, and also we pardon the same our
Lieges, and subjects, for all Felonies, Treasons, Trespasses, and extortions by
them, or any of them* in any wise done, or committed, and also every Outlary,
or Outlaries, if any against them, or any of them, are or shall be published,
and our full peace to them or any of them, therefore we grant, in witness
whereof these our Letters we have caused to be made Patents.

Witness our self at London the 15. day of June, the 4th year of our Reign.

This Charter was granted about the time the Clownes of Essex disbanded, and
received theirs, it was brought into Hartfordshire to Saint Albanes by
Wallingford one of the Town; Illucescente die Veneris.
Friday says Walsingham the day of tribulation, etc. (which was the 16 of
June) the Townsmen of Saint Albanes being at the time of Matines acquainted by
those of Barnet with the command of the Ordinance or Act for repairing to
London presently with the Esquires of the Abbot set forth; So that I conceive
the day of this Charter is mistaken in it by the Monk.

The Clownes throw down their Arms at the Kings feet, sue for mercy, and
deliver up their chiefs; the principal of which* Priest Straw was after drawn
from his hiding holes, and laid hold of by the Kings Officers. What became of
them we shall see below, in the visitation made by the King, and his Ministers,
through the Provinces in uproare.

The Commons of Kent now scatter and dissolve, the heads of the Archbishop,
Lord Prior, and the rest, are taken down from the bridge, and the Idols
advanced there; That Baal should now be taken in an old house is an error of
the Knights; Baal Froiss. ^.
must take his turn, but he shall have a longger run for it. That the dagger
should now be given in honor of Sir William Walworth as an addition to the
City arms is Fabulous, this dagger is the Sword of St. Paul, and was borne by
the City when Tyler was living.

The King now rides to Westminster where he gives God thanks for his
deliverance, and presents his offering to the Virgin Mary, in her Chapel of
the Piew, next he visits the Princess mother in the Tower Royal, called the
Queens Wardrobe, and bids her rejoice, for (says he) this day I have
recovered mine heritage, the Realm of England near lost, the Lords return to
their own houses. Froiss.
The other Countries now in combustion, and upon their march to London, make
halt, they were thunder-strucken at the disaster of the Idol, they hated the
fortune not the wickedness of that monster, And tarry to pour out those
plagues at home, if they be not checked, which before they intended to carry
farther off. The example and success of the Idol had moved with many, but his
invitation, and solicitation by the Emissaries of this confederacy and spirit
more. The Sectaries, or ringleaders of the hurden rustic raggamuffins in the
several Provinces of the association (while Tyler was thus busied in the
chief seat of his new Dominions) promote the cause, and pursue the
instructions of the Prince of Devils, they were all to tread his steps, as we
shall find in what follows.

The lewd prankes of the Clowns at Saint Albanes.
I have before spoken of the Summons of the I^ol to fetch the bordering rogues
into the Line of Communication, who were to serve as Auxiliaries only, to
strengthen Tyler, rather than to enrich themselves, and likely to be casheered,
and cast off when he had perfected his Work: amongst these rake hells were the
Townsmen of Saint Albane with the Abbots servants shuffled in the throng of
purpose to oversee and awe the Clownes from the new fangles of our fanatics;
These, as is related, were sworn to the Engagement at Heibury; whence they
come to London, whither they are no sooner got, but the Towns men separate from
the servants of the Monastery, and in St. Mary-bow Church does their profane
Conventicle consult how to make advantage of the tumult*

And what pretenses of revolt from their Lord Abbot would seem most fair, and
taking. Here they make not the causes of their disobedience, they were hatched
secretly amongst themselves, they deliberate how to perfect things, how to come
to effects. The enlarging the bounds of their common. free fishing, hunting in
certain places, when they pleased, and Hand-mills, that the Baily of the
Liberty shall no more meddle within the Precincts of the Town, the revocation
of Charters prejudicial to the Freeborn Burgesses, cancelling the Bonds of
their Forefathers made to Abbot Richard, are the Propositions first voted.

One, who would be wiser than the rest, persuades them not to attempt things
rashly, and giddily, without authority, he tells them that Wat Tyler,
Protector and Captain General of the Clownes was near, that the Protector,
was a righter of wrongs raised, and inspired by providence to redeem the
faithful Commons from the thraldom of the wicked, Walls. Ducem ribaldorum, ut
accepta ab co potestate, etc.
At the suite of the godly party, says he, Tyler has accepted the Government,
he is to govern the two Nations; The Supreme executive Power resides in him,
from him (says he) and from the keepers of the liberties let us seek for
remedy.

Let us make our addresses to him, let us seek to his Highness for power, and
Commission; This he said (as Walsingham writes) supposing a greater than Tyler
should not be seen in the Kingdom, that Tylers greatness for the time to
come would only be eminent; Walls.
That the Laws of the Land (the most ancient English, Saxon Laws) would be of
no force, of no validity, because the most of the Lawyers were already
murdered, and the rest in their account not long lived, the Axes edge was
turned toward them. He concludes, let us return home, and in the puissance of
Wat, and our selves, force the Abbot to reason; If he deny our requests, we
will awe ^m with burning and demolishing the Monastery, with killing the
Monks, we will threaten not to leave one stone upon another; Others conceive
it more safe to petition the King (who might be spoken with by every man, and
durst refuse nothing) for his Letters under the Privy Seal, commanding the
Abbot, to restore to the Townsmen the rights, and Liberties which their
ancestors enjoyed in the time of King Henry the first; as if the English
Church had been lately endowed, the Monasteries founded, their Royalties,
Liberties, Privileges granted by the Norman Princes, than which nothing could
be more false. The most Christian Saxon Kings of blessed memory, twelve of
which died Martyrs of the Faith, ten shine glorious Stars in the Calender of
Saints, were all nursing Fathers of the Church, scareely was there one in the
illustrious roll, who gave not Lands and Possessions with Exemptions, and
Immunities to the Church, who erected not Bishoprics, or Monasteries into
which thirty of our crowned, heads, Kings, or Queens entered, the superstition
of the ^g^ then ought not to blemish their Piety: The Mercian King Offa, his
Son Ecgfryd. King Ethelred, King Edward, are the founders and donours of St.
Albanes, what King Henry the first did for the Town I cannot say, nor how
ample its Liberties were then, this is true, he confirms the grants of the
Saxon Princes, to the Monastery, All these grants end with horrible curses
against Sacrilege.
and adds the Norman seal to strengthen the Saxon Crosses, this is all, but
truth is not necessary in such uproares, the credulity of a light headed
multitude is quickly abused, their duty and obedience easily corrupted without
it.

To keep our way; Both these Counsels are approved. Walsingh.
William Greyndcob an H^de, who had eaten the bread of the Monastery for the
most part of his life, is el^cted with others, and sent on this errand to the
King, before whom he kneeles six times out of zeal to prevail. This Lob too
was made principal Prolocutor (says our Monk) Walsingh.
or Speaker to the Idol: before whose sordid Excellency and his unclean
Council he complains of the grievous tyranny of the Abbot and Prior, (some
few Monks are thrust in to make up the number) of the oppressures of the
Commons, of withholding the wages of poor Laborers, the design was to rowze
the Wolf.

Tyler meant not to leave London, yet he promises, if need be, to send twenty
thousand of the Saints, who shall not fail to shave the beards of the Abbot and
the rest, which signified (in plain English) cutting off their heads.

The gracious Captain General was yet more kind; he vows, if it be
convenient, to assist them in his own person, He gives them directions and
orders to govern themselves by, and makes their obedience here, a condition of
his love. These Orders were generally enjoined by our English Mahomet, through
all the Provinces of his Conquest, and were framed according to the Law of his
bloody Alchoran. He swears them to omit nothing either in his Commands or
Doctrine. A servant of the Abbot, one of the spies upon the Townsmen, rides in
full career to S. Albanes and gives intelligence to the Abbie of the exploits
of the New Masters at London. He tells them in what manner that ^t of a
Captain ( Tyler) sullyed and polluted with the blood of the Noblesse, had
butchered the English Patriarch, and the Lord Treasurer. That London, the den
of these ravenous beasts, falsely called The Chamber of her Kings, was likely
now to become the Charnelhouse of Richard, and his Loyal vassals; That these
Fiends, who would go for Saints, and the only good Patriots* commit the acts
of Thieves, and Murderers, neither reverencing Religion nor Laws: And that
the Conquering French, who makes fair war, nay the barbarous Scot, broke out
of the fastness of his own Desert, mortal enemies of the Nation, could not
spoil nor ruin with more cruelty and villainy. No Mercy, says he, (yield who
will upon mercy) no favor, no goodness can be expected from this rout of
Wolves. He bids those pointed at, and named by Greyndcob to Tyler, shift for
themselves, which they are not long in resolving of. The Prior, four Monks, and
some of their servants, one part horsed, another on foot, fly for their lives,
not assuring themselves till they got to Tynmouth, a Priory of this Monastery
of Saint Albane in Northumberland, William Greyndcob, and William Cadindon a
Baker, on Friday had hastened to S. Albanes, that they might make the honor of
the achievement theirs by first appearing in the action; these brag aloud of
the prosperity of affairs, that they were no more drudges and slaves, but
Lords for the time to come; that they had brought about great and wonderful
feats against the Abbie; Walls. ad diffiduciandum.
they propose, first to defy the Abbot, to renounce all amity and peace with
him, then to break down his folds and gates in Fauconwood, Eywood, and his
other words* and to pull down the Underbowsers house, Subceller^rii.
standing over against the Fish-market, and hindering the prospect of the
Burgesses and Nobility of the Town, this is their own style, a Nobility scarce
to be paralleled in the world discovered, unless we fetch in the Man-eaters of
Brasil, who have neither Letters nor Laws, acknowledge neither God nor Prince.

This night the first Seen of the Tragedy is acted; the next day, being
Saturday, fatal to the Hangman Tyler; the upstart Nobility of Churls assemble
and make, Proclamation, That no man able to serve his Country, presume to
slight the Lieutenants of the Idol, but that every man furnish himself with
such Arms as he can provide, to attend them the Lieutenants in his own defense.
The Crew summoned are commanded to press the Gentry for the service, and to
cut off the heads of those who would not join with them, and swear to be
faithful to them; beheading, burning houses, forfeiture of goods were menaced
to all that would not assist the Forces raised by Tyler, and fight the Lords
Battles, that is, for the Cause. This, says our Monk, was the charge of their
Lord and Master Wat, this was his Rubric of blood.

Next, Cum magna pompa.
with great pomp they march to Fauconwood; to level the slips of their haste
and night-worke, something they feared might be left whole, upon review when
Root and Branch were pared and torn up, they retire.

The other Growtnolls of the Neighborhood, subject to the distress, or
Siegniory of Saint Albane, wait for them; these were cited upon the same
threats to meet, and promised belly: fulls, cart loads of Liberties. Now or
never for the Liberty of the Subject, and the power of godliness. This supply
swells them into huge hopes, it puffs them up. Greyndcob and Cadindon more
haughty now than ever; Lead their Batta^s, blustering with surly pride and
dis^ine, to the Gates of the Monastery, which with the same loftiness they
command the Porter to set open. Some of the company, friends of the house, had
given private intelligence to the Abbots of the contrivances against him, who
had instructed his servants how to carry themselves toward this tag and rag of
Swains, they observe them punctually.

That they may seem pious in their entrance, they free the public
Malefactors out of the Abbots prison; but so that they should owe faith
hereafter, and grace of the benefit to the Commons (a name the most honorable,
and which must swallow up all things else) and inseparably stick to them. One
of the offenders, whom they suppose unworthy of Liberty or life, (grown Judges
and Executioners by the same inspiration and spirit) they behead on the ground
before the Gates, then fix his head upon the Pillory, roaring with that
divelish cry they had learnt at London. This was plain murder by the Law
whatsoever this man's crime was, these Rogues were guilty in a most high nature,
so that besides the baseness of their condition, they were incapable of any
jurisd^ction by the ancient foundamentall Laws of England, as being Traitors,
and out of the Kings faith; Mir. 114.
but to wave all this, by these ancient Laws, every prisoner might demand
Oyer, hearing of the Judges Commission, these villains had neither authority
nor Commission, but from Tylers Sword, which was but a derivative of his
usurpation. No act of which can be just, the foundation of his tyranny this
way, in being just, and illegal at the first.

From the Idols first entrance no act of confirmation or grant was done (could
any such act be done and valid) to establish or make a right, by the power
which had that right to bestow, he asked for a Commission of life, and death,
but was refused, and his arbitrary acts were only a continuance of his
intrusion, and of the violence upon which he began.

to fill up their tattered Regiments, their fellow Leaguers or Covenanters of
Barnet, Luton, Watford, and the Towns round enter St. Albanes, of the same
Sacrilegious affection to the Abbey, in all these Conspiracies the Church was
the maine mark aimed at, about the carcasses of the Cathedralls and Abbeys
(they were now nothing else) did these vultures gather; in the same conjuncture
of time enters Richard Wallingford, head borough or Constable of the place, who
tarried at London for the Kings Letters of Manumission and Pardon, (which
Greyndcob had been so earnest for) bearing the Kings Banner or Pennon of the
Arms of S. George, being the red Cross before him, according to the fashion of
the Clownes of London. The Commons hearing of his coming, pour themselves out
in heaps to meet him. He alights, strikes the Penon into the Earth, and bids
them keep close and incircle it like a Standard. He entreats them to continue
about it, and expect his return, and the Lieutenants who were resolved with all
speed to treat with the Abbot, and would suddenly bring them an answer to their
propositions. Which said, he and they enter the Church, and send for the Abbot
to appear before them, and answer the Commons (only sacred then, and to whom
all knees were to bow.) The Abbot was at first resolute to die for the liberty
of his Church, (a pious gallantry which will be admirable) but overcome with
the prayers of his Monks, who told him, as things stood* his death could
advantage nothing, that these stinking Knaves, these Hell Hounds were
determined to murder the Monks, and burn the Monastery, if they had the
repulse, and that there was no way of safety but to fall down before these
Baals, he yields. After he was come to the Church, and a short salutation past;
Wallingford reaches out to him the Kings Letter or Writ (as Walsingham calls
it) in these words, as I have rendered them out of the barbarous French of that
age.

BEloved in God,
At the Petition of our loved Lieges of the Town of St. Albane we will and
command you, That certain Charters being in your custody made by our
Progenitour King Henry to the Burgesses and good People of the said Town of
commune of pasture and fishing, and of certain other commodities expressed in
the said Charters, in what they say, you do as Law, and Reason requires, So
that they may not have any matter to complain to us for that Cause.

Given under our Signet at London the 15. day of June, the fourth year of our
Reign.

Here certainly again is a mistake of the day, for till Friday the 16. of
June, the Clownes of Saint Albanes (as is observed) stirred not. Thus is the
King forced to be the Author of other men's injustice, to consent to those
insolences (and wrongs) which must undo all those, those who are faithful to
him, to please a base rabble, engaged to turn in the end their destroying hands
upon himself and his royal Family, The Abbot receives the Letter with due
reverence, and reads it: then thinking to work upon the consciences of these
Helhounds, he begins a discourse of Law Reason, Equity, and Justice; Law and
Reason were the princely bounds betwixt which the Kings commands ran. He tells
them whatsoever was demanded by them, had been long ago determined in the
Courts of Justice, by the public Judges, persons knowing, and honorable,
sworn to do equal right.

That the Records were kept amongst the Kings Rolls at Westminster, whence he
inferred, That according to the Laws anciently in use, they had neither right
nor claim left: he adds, the usurpation upon another propriety is tyranny in
the abstract; it is the greatest injustice: the very heathens will have it
unnatural to enrich our selves, to make our advantage from Spoil and robbery,
but force is odious to God and man, that aggravates the sin; violence is a
more heinous crime than theft. This was ridiculous wisdom, considering who
they were the good Abbot spoke to, he had forgot perhaps how Antigonus armed to
invade and seize the Cities, and Countries of other Princes, laughed at the
serious grave folly of one, who presented him with a tractate of Justice.
Wallingford with his hand upon his Sword takes him off pertinently, as
reflecting upon the manners of men, whose treasons prosper, and practice of the
times; In which new men did not advance themselves by Virtue, by Learning, by
Justice, or Valor, but by Murder and Robbery.

My Lord (says he) every story is not true, because it is eloquently told, you
endeavor here to inveigle and deceive us in a long discourse of equity, of
Law, and Justice, we come not hither for words but things, we pretend not to
refute your reasons, (which are but injust defenses of your oppression, but
cunning subtilities, but colors to paint ore the wrongs you do us,) nor can
we; the rudeness of our education must disable us for this part, we have been
borne and bred under your Dominion, slaves, and Villens to you, under a
Dominion so unmanly cruel, you have always kept us deprived, not only of all
means of learning or knowledge, but would willingly have taken away our very
reason and common understanding; that we might groan under our miseries, with
the feeling of beasts, but be Masters neither of sense nor language for a
complaint.

It is time now that we of the Commonalty as you call and range us, should take
our turn of command, however of Liberty. Nor is this to be wondered at if you
consider our strength, and the happiness of the new Model, the eminency of
the Commons is visible to every eye, theirs is the present, theirs is the
Supreme Power, we are armed, and we will not think of the Laws, not regard
them, they only submit to Laws, who want power to help themselves. Besides
these Laws you tell us of, are but the will of our enemies in form and rule,
they were made by them, they favor them; Perque uterum sonipes hic matris
agendus.
And our Captain General Tyler, who has conquered (a sad unhappy word, where
it is used of one part of a Nation against another, and of Benjamin against
Israel, by the worst and least against the better and greater) the makers of
them, the Lawgivers, was so become above the Laws themselves; your reasons,
when these Laws were backed with force, when your King could protect you,
before our success, might have served well enough; Now we expected them not,
nor will we accept them.

He concludes in persuasion, not to exasperate the godly party, the righteous
Commons, who says he will not be appeased, will not give over, not lay down
Arms till they be Masters of their desires.

The Abbot, entering into a new speech, is again stopped, and told, the
thousand before the doors of his Monastery sent for him not to parley, but
consent, which they look he should be sudden in, if not we (says Wallingford)
the Lieutenants, chosen by the Captain representatives of the people will
deliver up and resign the powers to him, which we received of him. We have
voted, if you comply not, to send for the Captain General Tyler, and twenty
thousand of his Militia to the danger of this place, and of the Monks heads.

The Abbot here recites his good deeds, how often in their necessities he had
relieved them, he had been (he says) their spiritual Father thirty two
years, in all which time, no man had been grieved, or oppressed by him, this
giving implyedly the lie to Wallingford, they grant, but will not be denied.
The Obligations and Charters which they require, are delivered them, which they
burn in the Marketplace, near the Cross; This did not content them, they
ask for an ancient Charter concerning the Town Liberties, the capital
Letters of which (say they) were one of Gold, another of Azure; De azorio
The Abbot prays them to be satisfied for the time, he protests, they have all
he has to give them, he knew of no more, yet he would make a search, and if any
such deed could be found, it should faithfully be delivered to them; This too
was the answer of the Covent; it was agreed that the Abbot should after dinner
disclaim under his hand and seal in all things prejudicial to their Liberty.
In memory of an old suit betwixt Abbot Richard the first, and the Townsmen in
the reigns of William the second, and Henry the first, wherein the Townsmen
were overthrown, were laid Milstones before the door of the Locutorii.
Parler. These John the Barber with others took away, as a token of victory
over the Law; these they break into small pieces, and distribute amongst the
worthies, as the sacred Bread is given in the Eucharist.

Who could forbear tears (says Walsingham) Walls.
heavi^y bewailing these changes, to see servants command their Lords, who know
not how to rule, nor how to pity. To see London (once the noble head of our
Cities) become a stie for unclean Swine. Who would not tremble to hear that
the Archbishop and the Lord Treasurer should be offered victimes to wicked
spirits, to the Kentish Idol, the Kentish Saturn or Moloch, and his
Hob-goblings in the midst of the Kingdom. Nay (says he) whose heart would it
not have wounded through to have seen the King of England, who of right for
Majesty and dignity ought to precede all Kings in the World, out of fear of
his head, observe the nods, and becks of these varlets, and the Nobility and
Gentry, mortified beasts, trampled on by these scullions, inslaved at their
own charge, lick up their dust.

After dinner, a sad dinner to the Monks, this merdaille, these stinkards,
throng before the gates, and demand the Charter of Liberties, which the Abbot
had promised them to seal, which was sent, and read to them in the thickest of
the rout: If they please to accept it, (this was the Abbots Complement) he is
ready to seal. They (resolved never to be pleased) with much scorn and pride
answer by an Esquire of the Abbot, That the Abbot must appoint some Clerk of
his to attend them with Ink and Parchment, Themselves would dictate, and after
the Abbot and Covent should confirm what was done; when this humor was
satisfied, The safety and peace of the Monastery and Monks were as desperate
as ever. The old Charter, which they will everlastingly believe concealed, must
be produced, else they will bury the Covent in the ruins of the Cloisters.

This Charter did certainly (as they will have it) contain all their ancient
Liberties and privileges, and if this was true, there was no great reason it
should be in the Abbots keeping.

Here the Abbot imployes the most honorable Esquires of the Country, as
Mediators to loften them, and offers (if they desire it) to say Mass before
them next morning, Super Sacramentum.
and to swear upon the Sacrament he should be about to take, with what Monks
they would name, that he kept from them no such Charter with his knowledge.

Make choice (says he) of what Liberties you can, you shall have my Charters
drawn, they shall be granted you by it; I will seal you a real Charter
instead of a fantastical one, never seen by you, no where to be had. The
Abbot struggles in vain against these waves, this Charter of their fancies
they will have: Nor shall any other price redeem the Monastery, they intended
the subversion of the house, and wrangle thus crossely, that they might seem
to have some pretenses to do it, but because they had much business to go
about, and could not be here and there too, a truce was taken for that day, and
many of these pure brethren betake themselves to other parts; some of them
would not be prevailed with, the Bread and Ale of the Monastery brought forth
to them in huge Fats, would not work upon them to lay their fury, they stayed
only for a leading hand. Here an honest Burgess interposes, Ribaldi.
Ribaulds (says he) what is it you purpose? most of you here are forrainers of
the Villages about, this is the most famous mischief which can be acted in
this Country, this Beacon must set all on fire, and it is fit we, who are
Burgesses and Freemen of this Town should give the onset: by this finenesse
they are gained to quit the gates, and join to the assistance of their
fellowlabourers. The rest of the day is spent by their united forces, in
overthrowing of houses, clashing of vessels, and spoiling of goods according
to the rule of Walter Quod didicerant^ a Waltero.
the false founder of the order. At night the Lieutenants make Proclamation
under the Kings Banner, commanding strong Guards to be set about the Town,
that they may be assured against surprises, and about the river Werlam, and
Saint Germans; making it loss of the head to any Monk, who should be found
issuing from, or entering the Monastery that way, This was done to set a trap
for the Prior; and those who fled with him. They proclaimed also that whosoever
could challenge any debts due to him from the Monastery, might put in his
claim (and little proof should be needed) the next day, and the Burgesses of
the Town, would discharge as far as the goods of the Monastery would reach;
Much more was Magisterially thrown in, to show a cast of the present power:
which was no sooner done, but there appears a Farmour of the Manor of
Kingsbury belonging to this Abbey, armed with his Sword and Buckler, this man
was much in arreares for his Farm, and durst not peep abroad from his
lurking holes before these broils, which hiding of himself he imputes now to
the injustice, and cruelty of the Prior, this chuffe demands one hundred Marks
damages for the losses he had sustained in his absence, and threatens to burn
the grange of Saint Peter, and Mannor-house of Kingsbury near the Abbey, if he
be not repaired; twenty pounds he receives upon this demand, and goes away,
swearing, he would freely give it back again for the Priors head.

Saturday night passed with much perplexity to the Monks, who were at their
wits ends, and life's too (they could not hope better things) about the Charter,
which was no where extant but in the ^dodles of these cluster-fists. But day,
and comfort broke out together upon them; Suddenly this overflow of pride, and
arrogance abated, their loftiness fell, and their bristles were somewhat laid,
very unpleasing rumors concerning the Army were spread, Walls. foedae memoriae.
and the death of the Idol Tyrant Wat, of stinking memory, was certainly
known and divulged, and what was as stabbing, that the Citizens of London
grown wise, and resolute, either out of loyalty (or which is the rather to be
supposed experience of their new master) began now to own their Prince, their
natural Lord unanimously, and to side with him against all seditious opposers
of his Majesty, and the just rights and liberties of his people, which they saw
like to perish together. Walsingh.
Farther a Knight of the Court, seconds the report, and by proclamation in the
Kings Name (now legal again) commands this herd to keep the Kings peace
under forfeiture of life, and members from that hour.

The King now grown a Protector again of his Subjects, sends his Letters
protectory to the Abbot in these words.

RIchard, etc.
To all our Lieges, and Commons of Hartford etc.
We pray, Charge, Command, straightly as we may, etc. by the faith and
ligeances which to us ye owe, that to our Beloved in God, the Abbot of St.
Albane, nor to our House and Monastery of the said place, of our Patronage, nor
to none of the People, Monks, nor others, nor to none of the goods of the said
Monastery, etc, Ye suffer to be done, as much as in you lies any grievance,
damage, etc.

Given under our Great Seal at our City of London, etc.

Though now these Carles were well cooled, yet ere the zeal was quite
slakened, and the Clouds dispelled, which hovered weakly, and were likely to
scatter with the next breath of wind, they conclude to perfect their building,
which to the great nuisance of this Monastery they had raised; Besides, the
Lieutenants, or Major Generals of Tyler, thought it a much unworthiness to
droope too soon, before those whom they had summoned in to piece up their
deformed insurrection with so much bravery, and insolence. They continue and
pursue their requests to the Abbot, but with less noise than formerly, the
Abbot was advised by Letters from Sir Hugh Segrave, Lord Steward of the
Household, and Sir Thomas Percy created after Earl of Worcester, to grant all
things, assuring him these grants being thus forced from him would be void in
Law, and could not hurt his Monastery. The Abbots Chamber, the Chapel, all
places are full of them, they give directions to the Abbots Clerk for their
Charter of Liberties, which now they were contented to accept, but will have a
Bond of one thousand pounds sterling for the delivering up the Charter
unknown, Walls. sterlingorum.
before the annunciation of the blessed Virgin next, if it can be found, if
not, that the Abbot with his twelfth hand (an ancient Saxon manner of purging
or clearing the offender, where the offense was secret) with twelve of his
chief Monks should swear, that he neither has nor detains any such Charter
with his knowledge.

The Abbot agrees, he and the Covent Seal; But oh the miracle (not to be
believed, nor understood without another upon our faith, and understanding) the
Seal, Walls.
in which the glorious Protomartyr was figured, three times together could not
be pulled from the Wax, no slight, no strength could do it; To pass by the
pious frauds, and dreams of Monks; from thence the black-bands depart to the
Market place, there at the Cross they publish their new Acquisitions, the
Charters of the King, and Abbot, with the Kings protection of the Monastery,
which was but a counterfeit of their love. On Monday and Tuesday following the
villeins of the Patrimony of our Protomartyr (as the others did in all places
else imbroiled) exact of the Abbot deeds of manumission, and Liberty, according
to the effect of the Royal Charter before, which Charter the Abbot recites,
and confirms.

From villeins these now conceive themselves Gentlemen of Welsh pedigree,
descended of Princes, nay as our Monk, noble beyond the line and race of Kings,
they are mere freeholders, hold only of God and the Sun, rather of the
Sun, and club, and will neither perform their customs, and services, nor pay
Rent. The common people, Walls.
who are neither swayed by Religion or Honesty, stop and check themselves, not
that they were contented, but because they could not, nay they durst not go on
to more.

The plague of this distemper was not only epidemicall, but kept its days; on
the fatal Saturday, fifty thousand Clownes, out of Suffolk, Essex,
Cambridgeshire, the Isle of Elie (places miserably harrassed according to the
former presidents) were incorporated by the juggling tricks of the Essexian
impostors, sent out by the Fathers of disobedience, in the first conception of
the ruffle to inveigle proselites to the Holy League. This was but an
indigested Mass without shape or form, Wraw not Straw (as sometimes he is
called) a most lewd Presbyter as Walsingham, Sceleratiss. Presbyt.
or Priest, who came from London, the day before with Orders from Tyler (who
according to his own establishment had the executive power) was employed into
those parts to lick and fashion the Monster. He with Robert Westbrome King of
this Congregation, lead the tattered reformers from Mildenhall to St. Edmunds
bury, where then stood a most glorious Monastery, and where their fellow
scoundrells expected them, Wraw finds these choperloches good disciples,
willing to learn, and quick of apprehension so capable they understood his
least signs. The same fr^si^s are again acted by other Lunaticks, the Lawyers
or Apprentices of the Law (as the Monk) and their houses are the first obj^ct^
of their spite, they do not only cut off them, but fire their nests. L^ John
Cavendish chief Justice of the Kings B^nch, who had been one of the most able
Sergeants of this Kings Grandfathers Reign, and was made chief Justice by
him, they intercept, and behead. Orpheus Tra^ie, Nero the Roman, B^lgabred the
Britain, excellent in the sweetness of a voice and skill of Song, with John
of Cambridge Prior of Saint Edmunds lose their lives in the same manner, as
they unluckily fell in to their hands.

The cause of the Priors death is made this; He was discreet, and managed the
affairs of his Monastery faithfully, and diligently, he was taken near
Mildenhall, a Town then belonging to Saint Edmund of the demaine of the Abbey,
the Vassalls, Hindes, Villeins, and bondmen of the house, sentenced him,
murdered him by Vote; His body lay five days naked in the field unburied. In
Saint Edmunds-bury, these cutthroats compass the Priors head round as in a
procession, after they carry it upon a Lance to the pillory, where that and the
chief Justices head, are advanced. Their next work was the levelling a new
house of the Priours. After they enter the Monastery, which they threaten to
fire, unless John Lakinhethe Guardian of the temporalities of the Barony in the
vacancy then were delivered to them, which the Townsmen mingled in the throng,
put them upon: the Guardian stood amidst the crowd unknown. This man out of
piety to preserve the Monastery (it was piety then though it may be thought
impiety now) discovers himself, he tells them he is the man they seek, and
asks what it is the Commons would have with him. They call him traitor (it was
capital to be called so, not to be so) drag him to the Marketplace, and cut
off his head, which is set upon the Pillory to keep company with the Priors,
and chief Justices.

Walter of Todington a Monk was sought for, they wanted his head, but he hid
himself, and escaped. Our hacksters errant, of the round Table, Knights of
industry, would be thought General redeemers, to take care of all menin
distress; For the Burgesses sake, they command the Monks, (threatening them
and their walls if they obey not) to deliver up all the obligations of the
Townsmen for their good behavior, all the ancient Charters from the time of
King Cnut the Founder any way concerning the liberties of the Town, besides
they must grant and confirm by Charter the Liberties of the Town which could
not be done in the vacancy (for so it was) Edmund of Brumfield Abbot in name,
by provision of the Pope was a prisoner at Notingham, nor had any election
been since the death of Abbot John Brivole, and therefore the Jewels of the
house are pawned to the Townsmen as a gage that Edmund of Brumfield (whom they
would suppose Abbot, and whom they intended to set free) should Seal, which
Jewels were a Cross and Calice of Gold, with other things, exceeding in value
one thousand pounds, these were restored again in time of peace, but with much
unwillingnesse. Upon the brute of the Idols mishap, and the suppression of his
Legions at London, these Caterpillars dissolve of themselves, Wraw the Priest,
Westbrome, and the rest of the capital villeins in the general audit, or
doomesday for these hurliburlies, shall be called to a reckoning for their
outrages. Cambridge suffered not a little in these uproars, the Townsmen with
the Country peasants about confederated together, break up the treasury of the
University, tear and burn its Charters, they compel the Chancelour and
Scholars under their common Seals to release to the Major and townsmen all
rights and Liberties, all actions, and to be bound in 3000l, not to molest the
Burgesses by suits of Law concerning these things for the time to come. The
Mayor and Bailiffs were fetched up by writ to the next Parl. where the deeds
were delivered up and Cancelled, the Liberties of the town seiz^d into the
Kings hand, as forfeited; new ones granted by him to the University, all which
they owe yet to the piety of this King, and his Parliament, a Court which the
Idol never names: had he set up one of his own begetting, it must have had
nothing else but the name; it would have been as destroying as the field.

Norfolk^ the Mother of the Kets would not loyter this while, nor sit lazily,
and sluggishly looking on. John Litster a Dyer of Norwich King of the Commons
there, infuses zeal and daring into his Countrymen; he had composed out of his
own Empire, and the borders, an Army of fifty thousand Men. This upstart
Kingling would not wholly move by example, he makes presidents of his own, and
tramples not like a dull beast the road beaten by others. He had heard what was
done by the London Congregations, he had a stock of traditions from the Elders
there, which he was able to improve; and although I know not how he could
exceed the Idol with his council, yet (so the Monk) exceed them he did, he
presumed greater things.

Tyler lost his life before things were ripe, was watched and undermined by the
King and Nobility, he could not spread his full sails, else for his
presumption he far out-goes Litster. Litster the Norfolk Devil begins with
plunder and rapine (the only way to flesh a young Rebellion.) The Malignants
of the Kings party (the rich and peaceable go under that notion) are made a
prey, no place was safe, or privileged. Plots were laid to get the Lord
William of Vfford Earl of Suffolk, at his Manor o^ Vfford near Debenham in
Suffolk, into the company, out of policy; That if the cause succeeded not,
then the Rebels might cover themselves under the shadow of that P^ere. The
Earl warned of their intention, rises from Supper, and disguised as a Groom
Garcion.
of Sir Roger of Bois, with a Port-mantue behind him, riding by-waies, and
about, ever avoiding the routs, comes to St. Albanes, and from thence to the
King.

The Commons failing here, possess themselves of the places, and houses of the
Knights near, and compel the owners to swear what they list, and for greater
wariness to ride the Country over with them, which they durst not deny: among
those inthralled by this compulsion were the Lords Scales, and Morley, Sir John
Brews, Sir Stephane of Hales, and Sir Robert of Salle, which last was no
Gentleman borne, but as full of honor and loyalty as any man, Knighted by the
Kings Grandfather for his valor; he was (lays Froissart) one of the biggest
Knights in England, a man not supple enough, who could not bend before the new
Lords; He had not the solidity of judgment (as some more subtle than honest
call it) to accommodate himself to the times. Like Messala he would be of the
Justest side, let the fortune b^ what it would, he would not forsake Justice
under color of following prudence, he thought it not in vain to prop up the
falling Government, perhaps his judgment may be blamed, he stayed not for a
fit time, had he not failed here, he had not fought against heaven, against
providence, whose counsels and decrees are hid from us, are in the clouds, not
to be pierced, our understanding is as weak, as foolish, as providence is
certain and wise. Our hopes and fears deceive us alike, we cannot resolve our
selves upon any assurance, to forsake our duty for the time to come, Gods
designs are known only to himself, It is despair, not piety (despair too
far from that) to leave our Country in her dangerous diseases, in her public
calamities; the insolency of injust men is a prodigy of their ruin, and the
incerteinty of things humane may teach us, that those we esteem most
established, most assured, are not seldom soonest overthrown, Plato would not
have men refer all things to fate, there is somewhat in our selves (says he)
not a little in fortune, Ours are but cockfights, the least remainder of force
and life may strike a necking blow, and by an unlooked for victory raise what
is fallen, if death cannot be kept off, if our Country cannot be saved by our
attempts, there is a comeliness in dying handsomely, not can any man be unhappy
but he who out-lives it. We have heard of Women who cast themselves into the
fiery pits where their dead husbands are consumed; of Vassals who stab
themselves to follow their Prince into the next world; of Otho's Praetorians,
of the S^gunt^nes burning in their Cities flam^s. What can be so honorable as
to dye for or with our Country, o^ Faith, our Religion, or Honesty, to die
with that which gave us life, and liberty, and sense of these?

Lusters Hog-herds vow to burn Norwich, unless this Knight will come out to
them, which he does well mounted, and forsakes his Horse to please them. They
seem to honor him highly, and offer him a fair Canton of the new
Commonwealth, if he will command their Forces.

The faithful Cavalier abhorred the proposition, and could not dissemble his
dislike; He tells them he will not to his eternal dishonor renounce his
Sovereign, whom all good men obeyed, to ^ngage with the veryest perfidious
Traitors living, in their villainies. He attempts to Horse himself again, but
fails; It was Treaton to speak against the Government.

The Commons grow furious, they cry out Treason, against Treason and Rebellion:
Thousands of hands are lifted up against him, as if they all moved by the same
Nerves and Sinews; They hew him down, but he crushes some of them with his
ruin; Whosoever stood within his reach, lost either Head Legs or Arms; He
kills twelve of them, at length avillein of his own beats out his brains; Then
do the infernal Curs rush in with full mouths, and mangle him to bits, who
(says Walsingham) would have driven a thousand of them before him, had he had
fair play. This amazes the rest of the Gentry, they strive for Vassalage, with
the same emulation others do for Liberty, they observe Litster, they receive
his Commands upon their knees, who in all things imitates the state and pomp of
Kings; Sir Stephen of Hales a Knight of honor carves before him, and tastes
his Meats, and Drinks, the rest of the miserable Courtiers are employed in
their several offices. But when the fame of the Kings good fortune began to
grow strong, and of his preparations to assert his Right and Authority, Litster
sends on Embassy (from NorthWalsham, the thorn of his tyranny) to London, the
Lord Morley, and Sir John Brewes, with three of the confiding Commons, to
obtain Charters of manumission, and pardon, with great sums of moneys,
(squeezed out of the Citizens or Norwich, under pretense of preserving the City
from slaughter, fire and spoil, or as others raised by an ordinary tribute to
Litster.) Which moneys were sent for presents to the King, to win him to grant
them Charters more ample and beneficial, than had been given to any others.

These Mess^gers are met at Ichlingham near New market by Henry le Spenser,
Lord Bishop of Norwich, of a noble Family, stout and well armed; He had been at
his Manor of Burleigh near Okeham, and there heard of the tumults in
Norfolk, and was now hasting thither to see how things were carried, with
eight Lances only in his company, and a few Archers. He charges the Lord
Morley, and Sir John upon their Allegiance to tell him, whether any of the
Commons (the Kings Traitors) were with them. They look upon the Bishop as a
young rash man, and the awe of their Masters was so prevalent, he could hardly
wrest the secret from them. After many words they discover it; and the Bishop
causes the heads of the Clowns to be struck off, and fixed on a public place
at New Market. Then taking with him that Lord and Knight, he posts for
Northwalsham; The Gentry hearing of the Bishops arrival in his Coat of Male,
with his Helmet upon his head, his Sword by his side, and his Lance upon his
thigh, crowd in to him, the Bishop quickly found himself in a galiant
equipage, and as quickly reaches Northwalsham, the sink of the Rebellion.

Litster was entrenched, he had fortified his ditch with Pales, Stakes, and
Doors, and shut himself in behind with his Carts, and Carriages. The heroic
Bishop like another Maccabeus, charges bravely through the ditch, into the
midst of the Rebels (when all the Barons of England hid themselves,) so
suddenly, that the Archers could not let an arrow fly at him, and came to
handy blows. As the French Historian de Serres observes, Raro simul bonam
fortunam cum bona mente. Live.
in affairs of the World oftentimes he that is most strong carries it, a good
fortune, and a good mind seldom go together.

Otho tells his Soldiers oftentimes where the causes of things are good, yet
if judgment be wanting (I may put in) where the Counsels are unsound, the
Agents faithless, where Money, Arms, and Men are wanting, the issue must be
pernicious; The goods and honors of this world which follow the Triumphers
Chariots are common to the good and bad; Grace, Charity and Love, are the marks
of a pious man, not Success, to brag of which becomes rather a Spartacus or
Mahomet, (who carry Faith and Law upon the Swords point) than a Christian: The
God of the Christians is not the God of robbery, and blood, but things here
fell out as could be wished, the innocence of the side prevailed, and the
righteous weak side overcame the strong injust; Litster touched with the
conscience of his mischiefs, strugles to the utmost to avert his danger, at
length gives ground, and attempts to shift for himself by leaping over his
Carriages in the Rere. The Bishop pressed forward so fiercely, this course
proved in vain, most of the unhappy Clownes are laid along upon the place.
Litster and the Captains of the Conspiracy are taken and condemned to be drawn,
hanged and beheaded, which was done. Others of the chief Conspirators
dispersed over the Country, are searched out and executed.

The Monk here tells us, Nisi enim daemoniis pleni fuissent, nequaquam in
destruct. sacr. Eccles. Chr. fidei and regni exterminiu^ conspirass.
It was apparent by the works of these Demoniacks, by their fruits, that they
had conspired (he speaks of the whole) not only the destruction of the Church
and Monarchy, but of the Christian faith too. Schoolemasters were sworn by
them never to teach Grammar more, and whosoever was taken with an Inkhorne
about him, never saved his head.

Our Monk attributes these calamities to the remissness of the Bishops, to the
conceits and fangles of Presbyter Wycliffe, which if they be truly registered by
the Monks, his mortal enemies, were pestilentiall and damnable. Indeed
Presbyter Wycliffe was then living, but is not named in these commotions, as
one busy in them, by the Monk, (though busy he might be, we shall find Sir
John Old-castle, Lord Cobham, and others of Wycliffes disciples, rebels, and
traitors, too too busy in Henry the fifts beginning) Baal, and Straw, and
Wraw were Priests of the Idol, and his Lieutenants, and might serve the turn
to imbroyle without fetching more aid in: He attributes too these mischiefs
to the licentious invectives of the Clownes against their Lords, generally to
the sins of the Nation, inclusively taking in the Orders of Mendicants, or
Begging Friars, (like factious Lecturers) who had nothing of their own, and
were obliged to flatter the people, and make themselves popular) who says he
forgetful of their profession and vows, greedy and covetous of money, foster
the people in their errors, call good evil, and evil good, seducing the great
men with fawning, and the rabble with lies. So that in those days (thus he
proceeds) the Argument held in every man's mouth, This is a Friar* therefore a
Liar as strong as this, This is white, therefore colored.

Here again is Walsingham at a stand, he complains, That it is impossible to
relate the villainies of the Rustic Devils, done in all parts.

We will now return to see what the King does next, who was not asleep this
while. After he had cleared the City (lately Tylers good Town) of the Kentish
fry, he commands the Nobility and Gentry (who durst now peep abroad) all the
Kingdom over to repair to him at London well armed, and well horsed, as they
loved him, and his royal honor. Their own danger, and late fears, add
wings to their haste. Within a few days, forty thousand Horse meet at a
Rendezvous upon Blackheath, whither the young King, who had taken his
Sequestration off, and restored himself to his Blood and Majesty, rides daily
upon a Royal Courser, to view their Order, with his Imperial Banner born
before him. He delighted to be seen and acknowledged for what he was amongst
his own Homagers. Here he is informed, that the Kentishmen (a stirring people,
but with what generous resolution will soon be found) are again in mutiny, (a
mutiny however else contemptible) not to be slighted at that time. The King
commands his Cavalrie (on fire, as much as himself) to march, and root out
this perfidious race of miscreants. Here the Nobility and Gentry of the Country
interpose, and become pledges for the Commons, which appeases the King; who now
disbands his Army, and resolves to take no other course of Justice, but such as
was ordinary and usual, by Judgments upon the known Laws of the Land, and by
Juries of twelve men, the ancient Birthright of the Englishmen. Laws which
could not have fitted Tylers Courts, nor Trials, but which have been ever the
rule in all just and legal Trials, in all calm, and pious Ages. The Law
Martial being proper to an Army marching, to be exercised in it. If otherwise,
all Sentences by color of it, Earl of Straf. case;
are against the Magna Charta, etc. and to the manifest subversion of the
privileges of Subjects.

Upon this fair, and K^gly conclusion of Richard, Commissions were given, and
Justices of Oyer and Terminer to hear and determine the Treasons and Felonies
committed in the late Insurrections, and principally to inquire, who were the
chief authors, fomenters, and incendiaries of the broils, are sent into Kent,
Essex, and the rest of the Provinces in Rebellion.

The most honorable Mayor of London with others in Commission with him, sat
upon those of Kent, Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk, etc. who were apprehended in
London. Straw taken in an old rotten house about London, Kirkby, Treder,
Sterling are condemned, and beheaded, Strawes head being set upon London bridge
with Tylers; but Jack Straw, who was privy to all the contrivances, and plots
of the confederacy could give light into the midnight darkness of Tylers
steps, through all the close windings of his labyrinths of Treasons, is urged
(the Major promising with some honest Citizens to be at the charge of Masses
for his soul, the good of which they desire him to consider) to declare his
full knowledge of the Counsels, and votes passed, and to what end they had
conjured up the wicked spirits of those Garboyles, John was obstinate at the
first, and would confess nothing, but gained by these promises, and a little
penitent (which was much to be believed of one possessed with Legions) he tells
them, because I have hopes of help from your suffrages after my death, and
because this discovery may be advantageous to the Commonwealth, I will
confess truly to you what we intended; when we met at Black Heath, and sent
for the King by our Captain Generals Order, we purposed to have massacred all
the Nobility and Gentry with him, then to have lead the King with us respected,
and treated Kingly from place to place, to bait the vulgar by the authority of
his presence into our League, whom they might so have taken for the head of our
Commotion, he being by these means likely to have been supposed by his own
party too to have trusted us, when by the confluence of all the Counties our
companies had been full, and the supreme Executive power wholly ours, we meant
to have purged the Nation, to have destroyed the Gentry, and first the Knights
of Saint John's of Jerusalem, with all the rags of royalty, which by this time
had been but a ragge it self. Afterward to have killed the King, whose Name
could then have been of no use to us.

Their Oath to preserve him could not last longer then their convenience and
opinions, which had then changed. We meant so once, but we mean otherwise now,
had been a satisfactory excuse. They had often sworn and Covenanted that they
neither meant nor had power to hurt the Kings Prerogative, that they intended
to maintain the Kings authority in his royal dignity, the free course of
Justice, and the Laws of the Land, with infinite expressions and protestations
of this kind. They might answer, The time was when all this was real, when
they would not have subverted the government, not have destroyed the ancient
family; to which says a Statute (which we hope it can be no treason to Tylers
Ghost to recite) the dominions, and rights of the realm of England, etc. See
Mag. Chart etc. See 25 H. 8. 1 Eliz. 1 Jac.
Ought by inhaerent birthright and lawful and undoubted succession descend
and come. This we being bounden (thus speak the members heretofore) thereunto
by the Laws of God and man do recognize, etc. The answer we say might have
been easy, they would not have done it some time agon, they swore and
Covenanted, and Covenanted again they would not, now they will; Tyler is still
Tyler, but his Liberty (false cheating liberty) is every where free, both to
will and dislike, as the safety of the Commonwealth shall require and carry
him on. This was the faith and honesty of that age, by which we may guess at
the cause and men who acted for it, who were the undertakers; what trust is to
be given to such perfidious knaves, whose protestations, and Covenants of one
day are wiped out by an inspiration of the next; We may say by an inspiration,
It was wondrous fit for these changes, Our Proteus should bring inspiration in.
All those of Estates, and Possessions, Bishops, Canons, Parsons of Churches,
Monks, we would have rooted out of the earth: only the begging Friars should
have been preserved, who would have served (such sheep such Shepherds) well
enough for Church-duties, which we may wonder after all these pranks that they
should think of; here would have been a very plain church; Questionless
after all these actions the devotion of these Reformers could not have been
much; By that time our public Thieves had cast lots for the Kings, Churches,
Nobilities, and Gentries Revenues, what Boores of others Countries ^ould have
compared with the riches of (...) Peasants and their Captain Tyler* Quib.
subjecti regulati, etc.
When there should have been (so Straw goes on,) none left more great, more
strong or more wise then our selves, then we had set up a Law of our own
forging, at our pleasure, by which our Subjects should have been regulated.
Necessary it was the old Law should be voted down; It condemned them in every
line. Then had we created us Kings, Tyler for Kent (a part too small for the
Arch-tyrant) and others for other Shires; Here was to be Monarchy still, not
evil in it self, but where it ought to be of right, only the Family was to
be changed, the ancient Saxon Norman stem, for an upstart dunghill brood of
Vipers, Tyler to be advanced upon the ruins of Richard, the Cedar to be torn
up, to make the Bramble room enough, while any of the royal off spring had
been in being to claim the right, to have involved the miserable, perjured,
foolish people, in an everlasting civil^ War; never to have ceased while
there had been a vein of blood to run. The mainteinance of Tylers wrong, his
usurpation (not to look farther than the present World) would have been more
fatal then ten plagues. John adds, no man thwarted these ends of ours more
than the Archbishop, therefore we hated him to death, and made all the have
possible to bring him to it.

In the evening of that Saturday in which Wat perished, because the poorer sort
of the Londoners favored us, we intended to have fired the City in four
places, and to have divided the spoils* (So the faithful Citizens, as forward
as they were, had at last paid for their love) he calls God to witness these
truths. The confessions of many others of the engagement agreed with this of
Straw.

The Lawyers, and those (as one) who fled from the tyranny of the time, durst
now show their faces. Stow.
Here is tyranny of the rout, tyranny of a savage Clown their boutefeu; whose
few days of cruel usurpation, were more bloody, more destroying then the
years of any Caligula, any Nero, any Domitian whatsoever. A Civil War
(says a noble Frenchman) Sieur de la Nove.
makes more breaches, as to a Country, as to Manners, Laws, and Men in six
Months, then can be repaired in six years.

What then can be thought or said of those Monsters, who, against all ties of
nature and piety, shall raise a desperate civil War merely with the intent
to overthrow Religion, the Church, the Government, Laws, and Humanity, out of
a cursed divelish ambition to advance themselves ( Tylers and Sons of the Earth
before) to an height which God (as some love to speak) never called them to.
For though power is of God, it is only so when the coming to it is by lawful
means. He that ordaines the power, allows, not the usurpation of it, Tyler
had the power to do mischief, the power of rebellion, the power which must
have ruined the church and common wealth, but whether this be the power which
Christians are to submit to, let the next Casuists judge.

The Septuagint translation of the Bible says of Abimelech, who slew his
seaventy Brethren, (murder ushers usurpation in) He made himself King, by
Tyranny. The Monk, who writes the lives of the Offa's, speaking of Beormred the
Mercian Usurper, has these words: In the same region of the Mercians, a
certain Tyranne rather destroying and d^ssipating the Nobility of the Realm,
than ruling, etc. persecuting, banishing, etc. Lest any one, especially of the
Royal Blood, should be advanced in his place, he vehemently feared. The thirty
Usurpers in the time of Gallienus are every where called Tyrannes, Paulus
Diaconus writing of Vale^tine in the time of Valentinian, says, He was crushed
in Britannie, before he could invade the Tyranny; and of Maximus, that he was
stout and valiant, and worthy of the Empire, had he not against the faith of
his ^ath, raised himself per tyrannidem, by tyranny. In other places,
Eugenius, Gratian, Constance, Sebastian, created Tyrannes* The words Tyranne,
and Tyranny, and tyrannous party, being used often by him, are ever opposed
to ju^ and Regal power, never used in any other sense. Widdrington, to the
example of Athalia urged by Bellarmine against Kings, Apolog, 234.
says she was no lawful Queen, she had seized the Kingdom as an Usurpresse
by Tyranny, the Kingdom belonged to Joash, in whose right, and by whose power
she was justly slain -- Our most learned Prelate Bishop Abbot of Salisbury
tells the Cubs of Loyola, Antilog. c 3.
Athalia had snatched had grasped, and held the kingdom with no right, no
title, but by butchery, robbery, rapine, and forcible entry -- and that she was
thrown down and killed by the common bounden duty and faith of Subjects to
their Prince. Baronius a Cardinal, that the Maccabees of Levi or house of the
Assamoneans, may not be made Usurpers, matches them with the royal line of
David, else says he, Apparat.
absque labe tyrannidis, without the stain of Tyranny, they could not meddle
with the Kingdom. Rodolph Duke of Suevia or Suabenland set up for a false
Emperor by that devilish Pope Hildebrand against the Emperor Hen. the IIII.
is called by the Germans a Tyranne upon this score. A full Tyranny (says one
of our Chief Justices, speaking of the Papal power in Church causes here) has
two parts, without right to usurp, and inordinately to rule, and the Statute 28
of King Henry the 8. against the Papal Authority, calls it an usurped Tyranny,
and the exercise of it a Robbery, and spoiling of the King, and his people.

The Statute 31 Henry 6. adjudging John Cade another Impe of Hell, and
successor of Wat* to be a traitor, which are the words of the title, and all
his Indictments, and Acts to be void, speaks thus; The most abominable
Tyranny, horrible, odious, and arrant false Traitor, John Cade, naming
himself sometime Mortimer (he and Tyler had two Names) taking upon him Royal
power, etc. by false, subtle, and imagined language, etc. Robbing, Stealing,
and spoiling, etc. And that all his Tyranny, Acts, Feats, and false opinions,
shall be voyded, and that all things depending thereof etc. under the power of
Tyranny, shall be likewise void, etc. and that all Indictments in times
coming in like case under power of Tyranny, Rebellion, etc. shall be void in
Law; and that all Petitions delivered to the King in his last Parliament, etc.
against his mind, by him not agreed, shall be put in oblivion etc. as against
God, and conscience, etc.

To proceed, The King, because all th^se risings were by the Ring leaders
protested to be made for him and his Rights, and that the forces then raised,
were raised by his Authority, and all their actions owned by him, issues out a
Proclamation from London, to this effect.

RIchard etc.
To all and singular Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, etc. of our County of N. etc.
Because we are given to understand; That diverse of our Subjects, who against
our Peace, etc. have raised and in diverse Conventicles and Assemblies, etc. Do
affirm, That they the said Assemblies, and Levies have made, and do make by
Our will and Authority, etc. We make known to all men, That such Levies,
Assemblies, and Mischiefs, from Our Will and Authority have not proceeded (He
adds) they were begun, and continued much to His displeasure and disgrace, to
the prejudice of His Crown, and damage of the Realm. Wherefore he injoynes
and commands, etc. To take the best care for the keeping of his Peace, and
opposing of all such Levies with a strong hand: Farther, He commands every man
to leave such Assemblies, and return home to his own house under penalty of
forfeiture of Life, and Member, and all things forfeitable to the King, etc.


These Clowns charge not the King to be transported Furiously, and Hostilely,
to the destruction of the whole people, which can never happen, where the King
is in his wits; But what is fully as mad, they will suppose him to Arm against
his own life and power, against his own peace, and the peace of all that love
him. This Proclamation put life into the Royalists, into all honest hearts, and
dismayes as much the Rebels, yet after this the Essex Traitors, gather again at
Byllericay near Hatfield Peverell, and send to the King, now at Waltham, to
know whether he intends to make good his Grants of Liberties, and require to be
made equal with their Lords, without being bound to any Suits of Court, view of
Frank pledge, only excepted twice the year.

The King and his Counsel are startled at this impudence: The King answers the
Agents, Walls.
That if he did not look upon them as Messengers, he would hang them up: Return
(says he) to your fellow Rebels, and tell them, Clowns they were, and are, and
shall continue in their Bondage, not as hitherto, but far more basely trampled
on. While we live, and rule this Kingdom, by Gods Will we will employ all our
Means and Power to keep you under: So that your misery shall frighten all
villeins hereafter: And your posterity shall curse your memory. At the heels of
the Messengers, the King sends his Uncle Thomas of Woodstock Earl of
Buckingham, and Sir Thomas Piercy with a body of Horse to quell them. The
Rebels we^ entrenched according to the manner of Litsters Camp, in the midst of
Woods; T^n Lances of the Avaunt Currours rout them; the Lords, when they were
come up, enclose the Woods round, five hundred are killed, eight hundred Horses
for carriage taken, the broken remainders of the defeat escape to Colchester,
Walls:
a Town ever honest, and faithful to the Prince, where the loyal Townsmen
would not be gotten to stir; they solicit the Townsmen (says the Monk) with
much entreaty, great threats, and many arguments; neither entreaties, nor
threats, nor arguments would move them: From thence they get to Sudbury, making
every where such Proclamations as of old they had used; where the Lord
Fitzwalser (whose seat was at Woodham Walters in Essex) and Sir John Harlestone
rush suddenly upon them, kill and take them: The King meaning to visit Essex
in his own person, comes to Havering at the boure, a Manor of his own demain,
of the sacred Patrimony, and from thence to Chelmsford, where he appoints Sir
Robert Tresilian chief Justice of his Bench of Pleas of the Crown, to sit and
inquire of the Malefactors, and Troublers of the Country, and to punish the
offenders according to the customs of the Realm, known, and visible.

Five hundred of these wretched peasants, Walls.
who had no mercy for others heretofore, cast themselves down before the King
bare footed, and with heads uncovered, implore his pardon, which he grants
them, on condition, They discover the great Conspiratours, the Captain Rogues.
The Jurors are charged by the chief Justices to carry themselves indifferently,
and justly in their Verdicts, neither swayed by love, or hatred, to favor, or
prosecute any man: Many upon the Evidence given in, and the finding of the
Jury, were condemned to be drawn and hanged; nineteen of them were trussed upon
one Gallows. Heading had formerly been the execution of others in Essex, Kent,
and London, because of the numbers of the guilty, which was now thought a death
short of the demerits of the most foul and heinous offenders; Wherefore
according to the custom of the Realm, It was decreed (says the Monk) that the
Captains should be hanged.

The like was done in other Countries by the Justices in Commission, where the
King was in person. Here the King with the advice of his Counsel, revokes his
Letters Patents, the Charters granted to the Clowns: Although (so he speaks) we
have have in the late detestable troubles, etc. manumised all the Commons, our
Liege Subjects of our Shires, and them, etc. have freed from all bondage and
service, etc. And also have pardoned the same, our Liege men and Subjects all
Insurrections by Riding, Going, etc. And also all manner of Treasons, Felonies,
Trespasses, and Extortions, etc. Notwithstanding for that the said Charters,
were without mature deliberation, and unduly procured, etc. To the prejudice of
us, and our Crown, of the Prelates, and great men of our Realm; as also to the
disherison of holy English Church, and to the hurt and damage of the Common
wealth, the said Letters we revoke, make void, and annull, etc. Yet our
intention is such Grace upon every of our said Subjects to confer, though
enormiously their Allegiance they have forfeited, etc. As shall be useful to
us, and our Realm.

The close commands to bring in to the King and his Council all Charters of
manumission, and pardon to be cancelled upon their faith and allegiance, and
under forfeiture of all things forfeitable, etc. Witness our self at
Chelmsford the 2. of July, and 5. year of our reign. False for the 4.

In the case of a Subject (and no reason Kings shall be more bound) every Act
extorted by violence, and awe upon the Agent is void. In the time of Edward the
third, two Thieves (which was the case here) force a Traveller to swear that
he will at a day appoi^d bring them a thousand pound; and threaten to kill him
if he refuse their oath; He swears, and performs what he had sworn; 44 E. 3. 14.
by advice of all the Justices these two were Indicted of Robbery, and the
Court maintains that the party was not bound by this Oath. Yet if this be
denied as unsafe, Violence, or Force, which strikes a just fear into any man,
makes any Contract void, say the Casuists.

Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apolog.
that most learned Prelate, answers to the pretended resignation of King John,
urged by Bellarmine, that what this King did, (if any such act was done) was
done by force, and out of fear.

Widdrington, Admonit. disp. de jur. fid. l. 1.
the most loyal of all Roman Catholic Priests, who writ much against the
Gunpowder Jesuits, in defense of the right of Kings, against those Jesuits who
would have cut off the King, the Royal Family, the Bishops of the English
Catholic Church, the Nobility and Gentry, as their Letter speaks, with one
blow, says of this Resignation, or Donation, if we may (so he) call it so,
That it was not freely given. The Jesuits challenge the perpetual dictature,
or regency of the University of Pontamousson by Bull of Sixtus the fifth,
contrary to the Statutes of the foundation by Gregory the thirteenth. Were the
Bull true (says Barclaie) yet it ougt not to be of force, because it was
obtained presently after his Creation, when things are presumed to be rather
extorted than obtained. Bodin denies that a King deceived or forced can be
bound by his grants. The justice of Contracts is that alone which binds. The
distinction of Royal and Private acts is of more sound then strength, and
answers not the injustice of the impulsive violence, which must be naturally
vicious every where, and corrupt, and weaken the effects, and cannot be good
and bad by changes, or as to this, or that. Grotius, who loves this
distinction, in another place is positive, There must be Equality in all
Contracts. He condemns all fear, or awe upon the person purposely moved for the
contracts sake, and tells us out of Xenophon of those of Lacaedemon who annulled
a sale of lands which the Elians had forced the owners to pass out of fear.

A Charter of King Henry the third imprisoned and forced, is said by Aldenham
to be void upon thls reason, and I judge the justice of this revocation by the
Law of England, by which, as our old Parliaments, such force is Treason. Exil.
Hugle de Spencer pat. and fill.
The fruits of which were here more justly plucked up than they were planted. He
who gives up his money to Thieves, according to his oath, may lawfully take it
away from them: however they are bound to make restitution. Nor can any
prescription of time establish a right of possession in him, Rei furtiva ^terna
authoritas esto.
who makes his seizure upon no other title but Plunder and Robbery. The 5th of
this King, the Parliament declares these Grants to be forced and void. Enough
to clear the honor of King Richard, as to this part.

At Chelmsford the King is informed of the whole History of mischiefs done at
St. Albanes, and resolved in person with all his Guards and Cavalry to ride
thither, and sentence the Malefactors with his own mouth; but Sir Walter Leye
of Hartfordshire, fearing the much impoverishing the Country, if the King
should make any long stay there with such numbers as then attended him
beseeches him to make a trial wehther things might not be composed without him,
and offers to reconcile the Abbot and Townsmen, if the King would, which was
c^nsented to: The King grants him a Commission, and joins with him Edward
Benstude, Geofrey Stukelye, and others of the Gentry of that County.

The coming of these Commissioners was noysed at St. Albanes: The fiercest of
the Clowns knowing what they had done was condemned by the Law, and not to be
defended, but by force, which now they had not, began to shake and take fright,
are plotting to get out of the way. Grindecob, Lieutenant of the late Idol,
comforts them, he persuades to go to Horse; Let us meet the Knight (says he)
and see whether his looks promise Peace or not; if not, the Towns about us have
engaged, they have associated, and are of our League, we are rich, and cannot
want good fellows, who will assist us while our moneys last: On St. Peter's day
this ill advised crew meets the Knight upon the Rode, who was ignorant of their
resolutions, and conduct him honorably, according to their fashion to the
Town: Sir Walter had with him fifty Lances, and some Companies of Archers,
listed at random, many of them being of the Churles, and confederates with
them: The Knight cites the Townsmen and their Neighbors to appear before him
in Derfold, to hear the pleasure and commands of the King; They fail not, There
he tells them what Forces the King had assembled, how rigorously those of Essex
were sentenced: That the King was highly incensed at the troubles and seditions
of this place of which he was the Patron and Defender: That with great
difficulty he had procured of the King a Commission, by which himself, and
others, not Strangers, or Enemies, but their Friends and Neighbors were
authorized to do Justice in the Kings stead; he concludes, if they will appease
the King, they must find out, and deliver up the beginners of these broyls, and
make satisfaction to the Lord Abbot, an holy and a just man, for the wrong they
had done him.

This many of the hearers approve, and promise to obey. The Knight charges a
Jury to be made ready the next morning, and make what discovery they can, and
gives the people leave to depart. Toward night he sends for the Jury to his
Chamber, intending to have apprehended the Lieutenants, by the assistance of
the Jury, with out any noise. These good men and true know nothing, it was the
case of their fellows in mischief, and might be their own. They answer in a
plain Ignoramus, they can indict no man, accuse no man. Amongst all the sounder
of these swine, there was not one who had been faithless and disloyal to his
natural Liege Lord, not one breaker of his peace, not one who could appear so
to them.

The Knight seems not to understand the falsnesse and cunning of these
Hob-naile perjured Juglers: He takes another way, and next requires them within
a peremptory time to bring him the Charters which they had forced from the
Monastery, they return after a short consultation, and in the Abbots chamber,
where the Knight then was, tell him, They dare not obey out of fear of the
Commons, what was more, they knew not in whose custody the Charters were. The
Knight grows angry, (...) swears, they shall not go out of the Chamber till he
have them, which they call imprisoning their persons. Here the Abbot
intercedes, and though he knew them as very knaves and liars as any Tyler had
set on work, yet he will not (he says) distrust their honesty, he will leave
things to their consciences, upon which they are freed.

Another Assembly is appointed at Barnet Wood, whither the V^llagers about
throng in multitudes. Three hundred Bowmen of Barnet, and Berkhamsted, make
here so terrible a show nothing is done.

The Commissioners privately charge the Gentry, Constables, and Baylifs to
seize in the night Greyncob, Cadindon, John the Barber, with some others, and
to bring them to Hartford, whither themselves went in all haste, which was
performed: The Esquires and servants of the Abbey were sent with them to
strengthen the company. This inrages the Townsmen afresh, they gather into
Conventicles in the Woods, and Fields, so much frightful to the Monastery, that
the Abbot recalls his Esquires, lets the prosecution fall, and fearfully
summons in his friends to guard him, Greyndcobs friends take advantage of this
change, and bayl him for three days, within which time they were either tied
to agree with the Abbey, or render up Greyndcob to the Justices again. The
Townsmen fierce enough still, yet earnest to preserve their Worthy, are content
to part with the Charters; But this Greyndcob (more foolhardy than wise) would
not consent to, Nor does he, as knowing the stiffness of his Clowns, whine in a
Religious tone, never used by him.

He prays them to consider how beautiful Liberty is, how sweet, how
honorable; Dangerou^ Liberty (say^s he) is more valuable than sat and quiet
slavery, let us live, or die with Liberty in so generous, so honest a
contention, it will be glorious to be overcom^; whatsoever our fears are,
worse we cannot be, than now we are about to make our selves; Success too does
not so often fail men as their own industry and boldness; Fear not for me,
nor trouble your selves at my dangers. I shall think my self more happy than
our Lords, if they prosper, or their King, to die a Martyr of the Cause, Per
tale Martyrium v^a^ finire.
with the reputation of such a gallantry. Let such courage as would have
hurryed you forward to all brave and signal mischiefs, had I lost my head at
Hartford, Si Hertford^ae, Hesterno decollatus, etc.
inflame your hes vy sprights; Methinks I see the Hero Tylers Ghost chiding
our sluggish cowardice, and by the blazes of his firebrarnds kindled in Hell,
and waved by Fiends about his head, lead on to noble villainies.

Let dreaming Monks and Priests tremble at the aerie founds of God, and Saints;
he who fears Thunderbolts is a religious heartlesse Coxcombe, and shall never
climb a Molehill. Thus our buskined Martyr swaggers, after the raptures put
upon him by Walsingham; Greyndcobs stubbornness hardens on the Clownes, they
now accuse themselves of baseness, that they did not cut off the Knights Head,
and nail it on the Pillory, to the terror (say they) of all judges, and false
Justices. Greyndcob had raised spirits which he could not lay when he would.

Three days being expired, he is again sent to Hartford Gaol, where he
hearts news from his Brother, who mediated for him in the Court, not very
pleasing, which he communicates to his Townsmen. His intelligence was to this
effect; That Rich: of Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and Sir Thomas Percie with a
thousand armed men were appointed to visit S. Albanes.

At this report the Rebels star^e, they fall to new Treaties, offer the
Charters and Book, in which the old Pleas betwixt the Abbey and the Town were
recorded, with 200 l. for amends. The Book is received, the rest put off till
the next day. The Earl of Warwick sends only excuses, he heard his own house
was on fire, that the C^owns of his own Lordship^ were up, and he leaves all
things else to quel them. This raises the fallen courages of those of St.
Albanes, they now laugh at their ^ate fears, If the Commons, say they must quit
their right of Conquest, and surrender their Charters, yet will not we (the
renowned Mechanics) of St. Albanes be their president. And as in all tumults
(which can never be observed too often) lying is necessary, and must not be
useless, whatsoever else is; They lay the blame of their obstinacy upon the
Inhabitants of Barnet and Watford, who threaten (so they would have it
believed) to burn their Town if they deliver up their Liberties.

Which Inhabitants of Barnet, and Watford had humbly surrendered theirs before,
and submitted to the Kings mercy: Thus we find these Rebels of St. Albanes
again swaggering in their old Rhodomontadoes. An Esquire of the Abbots
acquaints the King with these turnings, who vows to sit personally in judgment
upon these everlasting malcontents.

The Abbot full of pity and charity, who had saved some of these enemies of
his House from the Axe by intercession at London: continues his goodness still,
he sollicites Sir Hugh Segrave, Steward of the Household, and others of his
friends to mitigate the Kings displeasure, and hinder his journey thither,
which was not in their power. Now again are the Townsmen dejected, and seek by
all means to keep off the tempest which threatened them: They fee Sir William
Croyser a Lawyer to make their defense, and mediate with the Abbot, where there
was no danger: an agreement is concluded the day of the King's entry, by which
they would bind the Abbot not to disclose them, or inform against them.

He promises (if they fail not in performance on their part) not to make any
complaints to the King of them, that he would be a suitor for their peace if
his prayers may be heard, but that here he cannot assure them, Parcons were
Acts flowing merely from the Kings Grace. See 27 H. 3. c. 24.
No man had any power or authority to pardon or remit treasons, etc but the
King; and whether he could prevail for them he knew not. This doubtfulness
troubles them, it seems to call their innocence too much into question: They
tell him, his good will was ^uffi^t ^d that as to what belonged to the Royal
D^gnity they should satisfy the King.

After Vespers the King made his entry into the Town, being met by the Abbot
and Covert, the B^s rang aloud, and the Monks sang merrily his welcome: He was
followed by some thousands of Bowmen, and Cavaliers. In this train was Sir
Robert Tresilian Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, who the next day being
Saturday the 13. of July, and first of the Dog-dayes sat in judgment at the
Moo^-hall (says Walsingham) at the Townhouse.

Greyndcob, Cadindon, and John the Barber are fetched from Hartford, and laid
fast till Monday, against which time new Jurymen are chosen, and charged to be
ready with their Verdicts: Prophet Baal, the Sergius of the new Alcaran, the
Priest of the Idol, and his Calves, the Martin of the yoke, o^ pure discipline
of the Eldership, was taken by the Townsmen of Coventry, brought to St. Albanes
the day before, and this Saturday condemned by the Chief Justice to be Drawn
Hanged, Beheaded, Imbowelled, and Quartered, which was done on the Monday
following.

He confessed to the Bishop of London (to whose Christian Piety he ought the
two last days of his life, which were begged for his repentance) that certain
hot, and powerful Pastors of the Separation, Brethren of simple hearts,
called by the Spirit (he named six or seven) had covenanted, and engaged to
compass England and Wales round, as Itinerant Apostles to propagate the Gospel
beat down all abomination of the outward Man, Antichristian Hierarthy, and
Tyranny of the Nimrods of the Earth, to cry up the great and holy Cause, and to
spread the Law, Principles, and Heresies of Baal, which Disciples (says this
Rabbi) unless they be prevented, and taken off will destroy the Realm in two
years: He might have said, two months, and been believed, as to the Civility,
Humanity, Order, and Honor (never intermitted but in the confusion of a
barbarous, impious age) which made England glorious, they had been destroyed,
and torn up in a less time. A few licentious ill Acts easily beget a custom,
and an hundred ill customs quicklier grow and prevail than one single good
one, there is a proneness in unruly man to run into deboshments, and no wonder
that the arrogant, misled, silly multitude capable of any ill impressions
should deprave and disorder things, where all ties of restraint are loosened,
nay, where disorders are not only defended by the corrupt wits of hirelings,
but bidden, strengthened by a Law, and Villainies made legal Acts.

Had the Idol King Tyler, with his Council not gone on too far in the way of
extermination, but endeavored to repair the breaches of his entrance; it would
have been no small labor to have restored things to any mean and tolerable
condition. If Presbyter VVicklief, and his Classes by their pernicious
Doctrines (as they are charged to this day) did first pervert and corrupt the
people and broach that vessel with which Father Baal and Straw poisoned them,
they must have ruined themselves by the change, sure enough they had been no
more comprehended in any of Tylers Toleration than the Prelatical or Papistical
party.

In the turmoiles and outrages of this Tyranny, had it taken, Innocence,
Virtue, Ingenuity Honesty, Faith, Learning, and Goodness had been odious, and
dangerous. The profit, and advantage of the new Usurpers had been the measure
of Justice and right: The noble and ignoble had dyed Streets and Scaffolds with
their blood, not by Laws and Judgment, but out of malice to their height and
worth, out of fury and covetousness to enrich public Thieves and Murderers.
The jealousies too and fears of Tyler had made all men unsafe. Yet the repute,
the renown of the Founders could not have been much: The glory of success
cannot be greater then the honesty of the enterprise; there must be Justice in
the quarrel, else there can be no true honor in the prosperity. Cato will
love the conquered Commonwealth: Jugurtha's fame, who is said to be
Illustrious for his Parricides and Rapines, will not make all men fall down and
worship.

On Monday the fi^teenth of July (not of October, as Walsingham is
mis-printed) The Chief Justice Tresilian calls before him the Jury for
Inquiry, who faulter, and shamelesly protest they cannot make any such
discovery as is desired. The Chief Justice puts them in mind of the Kings
Words to them upon the way, promising pardon if they will find out the
offenders, else threatening them with the punishment they should have suffered,
who through such silence cannot be apprehended.

Out they go again, and the Chief Justice follows them; He shows them a
Roll of the princlpall Offenders names, tells them they must not think to
delude and blind the Court with this impudence, and advises them out of a care
to preserve wicked men's lives not to hazard their own.

Hereupon they Indict many of the Town and Country, which Indictments are
allowed by a second Inquest appointed to bring in the Verdict, and again
affirmed by a third Jury of twelve, charged only for the fairness of the
Trial: So no man was pronounced guilty, but upon the finding, of thirty six
Jurors. Then were the Lieutenants Greyndcob, Cadingdon, and Barber, and twelve
more Condemned, Drawn, and Hanged. Wallingford, John Garleck, William
Berewill, Thomas Putor, and many more; with eighty of the Country, were
Indicted by their Neighbors, and Impriprisoned, but forgiven by the Kings
Mercy, and discharged. They were forgiven most by the Kings Mercy; for he
had forbidden by Proclamation, all men to sue or beg for them, a command
which the good Abbot sometimes disobeyed, and he shall be well thanked for it.

No benefits can oblige some men: A true rugged churl can never be made fast,
never be tied by any merit whatsoever: Nothing can soften him: See an unheard
of shamelesness till then; These lazy, tenderhearted Clowns, who could hardly
be got to discover the guilty, now run with full speed to betray the
innocent: They indict the Abbot as the principal Raiser, and contriver of
these Tumults, which struck at his own life, and the being and safety of his
Monastery. The Abbot, as it is said, sent to Tyler, upon his ordinances some of
the Town and Monastery, but to temporiz, and secure himself. This is now
supposed by the very Traitors indeed, Treason by Common Law and Statute against
the King his natural liege Lord. This having not the fear of God in his
heart, etc. but being seduced by the instigation of the Devil, is compassing
the death, etc. the deprivation and deposing of his Sovereign Lord from his
Royal State, etc. (as such Indictments use to run) this must go for levying
War against our Lord the King, adhering to, comforting, and aiding his enemies
by open fact; 25 Edw. 3.
which are the words of the Statute of Treason, declarative of the Common Law.

The Chief Justice, abominating and cursing the treacherous malice, and
perfidiousness of th^se Bruits, makes them tear the Indictment, which
themselves, though urged, are not wicked enough to swear to; nay, which
publicly they confess to be false in the face of the Court.

Villeinage was not now abolished, though so methink otherwise, but by degrees
extinguished since this reign. Besides, the Letters of Revocation before,
restoring all things to their old course, A Commission, which the Abbot
procured from the King out of the Chancery, then kept in the Chapter House of
this Monastery, makes this manifest, which speaks to this effect:

RIchard by the grace of God King of England, and of France, and Lord of
Ireland, etc.
To his beloved John Lodowick, Jo: Westwycomb, etc.
We command you, and every of you, upon sight of these presents, etc. That on
our part, forthwith ye cause to be proclaimed, That all and singular the
Tenants of our beloved in Christ, the Abbot of S. Albane, as well free as bond;
the Works, Customs and Services, which they, to the foresaid Abbot ought to
do, and of ancient time have been accustomed to perform, without any
contrad^ct^on, mumur, etc. Do as before they have been accustomed.


The disobedient are commanded to be taken, and imprisoned as Rebels.

In the time of King Henry the seventh there were villains. 11 H 7. 13
This I observe to make it appear how (...) it is which the miserable common
people, without whom no famous mischief can be attained, are gainers by any of
their riots, or seditions; whatsoever the charges are, their condition is still
the same or worse; if some few of them advance themselves by the spoils of the
public sh^pwrack, the rest are no happier for it; the insolent sight offends
their eyes, they see the dirt of their own ditches Lord it over them, and the
body of them (perhaps) more despised than ever. Tyler (who could not but have
known that nothing can be so destructive to Government, as the licentiousness
of the base Commons) would doubtless (when his own work had been done)
quickly have chained up the Monster; he would have perched in the Kings sacred
Oak; all the Forest should have been his, Bishoprics, Earledomes, nay the
Kingdoms had been swallowed by him; instead of a just legal power by which
the Kings acted, an arbitrary, boundless, unlimited power must have been set
up; instead of a fatherly royal Monarchy, a Tyranny after the Turkish mode, a
Monarchy seignioral; and had he brought in upon the fall of the Christian Faith
and Worship, which must have followed his establishment, Circumcision, and the
Creed of Mahomet: as the spirits of men were then debased, he must have been
obeyed. All the Kings right (and more) must have been his; Sultan Tyler's
Prerogative would have been found more grievous, more heavy, more killing than
all the yokes and scorpions of our Kings; no man, when he went to sleep, could
assure himself that one Law would be left next morning; the Ordinances of Tyler
and his Council flew about in swarms, killing and rooting up the Laws: one
Proclamation of this Tyrants was of force to blow up the ancient Foundation;
enough to have made men mad, if ever they could wake, and understand: when the
French had conquered Naples, the people looked for a Golden World, they thought
their new Master would (as the King of Mexico's Oath used to say) do Justice to
all men, make the Sun to shine, the Clouds to rain, the Earth to be fruitful:
They promise themselves Liberty, and that the accustomed Imposts of their
former Kings of the House of Arragon should not only be taken off, but the
very word Gabelle driven out of the Kingdom, there should be no such thing in
nature left; but foolish dolts as they were, they found an alteration quickly,
instead of a Court Cavalrie before (the new Masters ill established and
assured, not daring to trust any thing) standing Armies were continually to be
kept on foot, instead of one Tax, intolerable of late, they are oppressed with
ten, their backs and shoulders crack under the load.

Upon this fancy of these abused Italians, says the Historian, This is the
custom, for the most part of all people weary ever of the present condition,
and inconsiderately gaping after a change, but they receive such wages of their
fond and disorderly lightness.

The War undertaken against Lewis the 11 of France by the House of Burgundy,
Dukes of Berry, Brittaine^, and Burbon, called the Weal public, was not made
against the King (say the Al^ies) but against evil order, injustice in the
Government, and for the public good of the Realm. In the Treaty for Peace
these fine things are forgotten, the wretched Peasants torn, and ground with
Taxes, left to shift for themselves.

The Prince of the Burgaundies demands the Towns upon the Some for himself:
Normandy for the Duke of Berry, and other places, Offices, and Pensions for the
rest, some overtures were made for the Weal public (says the History) ^ommen.
that is all, the Weal public was the least of the question, the Weal public
was turned to Weal particular, self-seeking was the sum of the business. This
has been the fashion of all Rebels hitherto, and will be to the worlds end.
After these proceedings the Hartfordshire men betwixt the ages of 15 and 60
present themselves according to command, and take the Oath of Allegiance; they
are sworn too to unkennel and apprehend the late Incendiaries.

The King having now quieted the commotions removes to Berkhamsted eight miles
from St. Albanes, a royal Castle then, and at Easthamsted where he hunts, is
informed, That the bodies of the Traitors executed were taken down from the
Gallows, hereupon he directs his Writ or Letter to the Bailies of St. Albanes,
commanding them under penalty of forfeiting all things forfeitable to hang up
again the said bodies now rotten, and stinking in Iron chains, which the
Townsmen are forced to do with their own hands.

A Parliament sitting in May the fifth year of this Kings Reign, John Wraw
Priest of the Reformation at Mildenhall, and St. Edmundsbury was taken, and
upon the Petition of the house of Commons to the King, judged to be drawn, and
hanged. In the same Parliament too it was enacted, That wheresoever any Clowns
by six or seven in a company kept suspicious Conventicles the Kings good and
faithful Subjects should lay hold of them and commit them to the next Gaol
without staying for the Kings Writ. Walls. Hypod.
In the same Parliament of the King it was made Treason to begin a Riot, Rout,
or Rumor; by this Parliament, and that of the 6. Provisions are made for those
whose Deeds were burnt or destroyed in the late insurrection, and in the 6. of
Richard, the King pardons the multitudes for their misdemeanors in the
tumults. The Clowns now every where returned to their old Obedience, and the
winds wcre laid in all t^i quarter. Richard, a Prince born for troubles, shall
be turmoiled with the Rebellions of his Peers and Parliaments, deposed and
murdered by them, yet his memory shall be sacred, his Peers and Clowns shall
dig for him in his grave* Posterity too shall owe all things to his person.
After the death of Maximinus a wicked bloody thief, a cruel tyrant, Jul.
Capitol. nefarii improbi latronis.
who invad^d the Roman Empire, Capitolinus recites a gratulatory Letter wr^tten
by Claudius Julianus a Consul to the Emp^rours Maximus and Balbinus, whom he
calls Preservers and Redeemers of the Common wealth, there the Consul tells them
they had restored to the Senate (the house of Lords) their ancient dignity to
the Romans their Laws, Equity, and Clemency abolished, their lives, their
manners, their liberty, the hopes of succession to their heirs. He adds, they
had freed the Provinces from the insatiable coverousness of tyrannes, no voice,
language, nor wit can express (says he) the public happiness.

King Richard restored to the Church and Universities their rights and
possessions, to the Nobility their honor, to the Gentry their respect, to the
Cities their free Trade, the plenty of his harvest to the industrious
Countryman, Security, Peace, and Liberty to all Orders, what Prince could
bestow greater benefits upon a people? he was the Stator, the Savior of the
Nation, a Nation not worthy of him, whose ingratefulness to his sacred head,
whose perfidiousness and impiety in advancing an usurper upon his ruins; were
punished with a fatal Civil War, which lasted ages, with an issue of blood
which could not be stopped till the true and lawful heir of this Prince was
seated in the Imperial Throne, according to the Faith and Oaths of this people
(which whatsoever may be pretended no power on earth can dispense with) and
according to the Fundamental Laws of England.

FINIS.

