THE ZEA-ATLAS Or the WATER-WORLD, Showing all the SEA-COATS OF Y KNOWN PARTS of
y EARTH, WITH A General Description of the same.

Very Useful for all MASTERS and MATES of Ships, and likewise for MERCHANTS
Newly set forth.



At AMSTERDAM, Printed by Casparus Loots-Man, Bookseller upon the Water, in the
Loots-man. Anno 1688.

A SHORT DECLARATION Of the Division, Situation and Qualities of the EARTH.
IN the Beginning did the Everlasting and Almighty God, throug his wisdom,
create the world out of nothing; and join the Earth with the Sea together (as
being the heaviest) in one round form, in the manner of a ball, and place them
in the center or midst point, as in the nethermost place; the heaven, as a
tent, is with an unmeasurable breadth extendeed, over and about it, and adorned
with many and glorious lights, as the Sun, Moon, Planets and other Stars
innumerable. And that the earth might be a fit habitation or dwelling for man
and other terrestrial creatures, and through its plentiful fruit nourish and
sustain them, has God exalted it above the waters, and ordained unto the Zea
its place in the depths on such a manner, that she on every side comprehending
the earth with its krookednes, does distinguisch and divide the same in three
several parts or great continents, that is firm lands, over which the
describers of the earth (as the Astronomers over heaven) place fif circkels, as
the Aequinoctial, so called, because night and day are over the whole earth off
one length whenever the Son does come in this circkel, which happens about
the 21th. of March, and the 23th. of September. This circkel is also called
Equator, to which when the Sun comes, it makes the days and the nights
equal; the Mariners of the low countries do call it the middel-line, because
it does divide the face of the earth in two equal parts, whereof one tends
toward the North, and the other toward the South, and so it is the very
middle betwixt the Northern and Southern lines or Poles. The other is called
Tropicus Cancri, or the Sun turning of the Crab, because the Sun when it
comes to this cirkel about the 21th. of June, begins to turn toward the
Equator, and then it is the longest day to those who live in the north, and
the shortest to those who live in the South from the Equator: this circkels
situated 23 degrees 31 minutes Northward from the middelline. The third is
termed Tropicus Capricorni, or a Sunne-turning of the sign in the heaven,
called Capricorn, because the Sun, when it comme to this circkel, which is
about the 22th. of December, begins to turn and to klimbe toward the
Equator; and then it is contrary as before, the shortest day to those who live
in the North, and the longest to those who live in the South of the mid-line:
and this sign is situated 23 degrees, 31 minuits in the South of the
Aequinoctial. The 4th. is called Circulus Arcticus, the Northern cirkel, and
the 5th. Circulis Antarcticus, the Soutrhern cirkel: these are situated 23
degrees 31 minutes, the one from the Northern, and the other from the Southern
pole or diameter of the world, and are through the circumrotation of the
heaven, described from the Pole of the Zodiak, or the course of the Sun. The
ancient and most skilful Astronomers understand by the Circulus Arcticus not
only this which is described; but such a circkel whose half Diameter or line
which goes through the middle point, is even as much as the heyght of the pole
from every place, comprehending always those stars which before the heyght
of every land never go under, in which regard this circkel in all countries
which differ in breath, does differ, as also from Antarcticus: but in the
aforesaid description we follow the common manner off the describers off
countries. The earth is also through the aforenamed 4 last circkels, divided in
5 great regions, by the Grieck called Zonas, or girdels, because that they in
the form of girdels do compass the globe of the earth. The first thereof is
environed or enclosed within the Northern circkel, and bears the name of the
Northern cold region. The second is called the Southern cold region, running
round about the Southern Pole within the Southern circkel. The third, being the
middelmost amongst them all, is called the barren and hot region, and is
situated between two Circkels of the Cancer or Crab, and the sign of
Capricornus. The 4th. is situated betwixt the Northern Circkel and the Circkel
of the Crab, and is called the tempered Norther Region. The last called the
Southern temperate region, is situated betwixt the Circkel of Capricornus and
the Southern Circkel. The old Philosophers and Describers of countries did
suppose that off these few the two temperate alone where inhabited, and that of
the other three, the two cold ones cold not be inhabited, in regard of the
great intolerable cold, and the barren hot region, in regard of the burning
heat of the Sun. But time in conclusion has produced, the truth thereof:
seeing we have experienced about 150 jears hence that they all are inhabited,
but the cold least of all, as Greenland, Ysland, Lapland, the utmost parts of
Norway, and such like countries. Experience likewise has taught us that in the
barnen, hot region the heat is not untolerable, neither does it burn in such a
manner as the Ancient conceived: fith there are found many excellent fruitful
and populous Kingdoms, as Gennee, Aethiope, Arabien, East Indies, the famous
Islands Sumatra, Java and Molucquen, as also Bresilien, Peru, Nieuw-Spaine, and
other such like countries.

For to have the right understanding of the situation of countries, we must
know that the describers of the earth calculate the same according to the
degrees of length and breath. The breath of places (which is always a like at
the height of the Pole) is accounted from the middle line to be twofold,
Northward or Southward to the number of ninety. The length is accounted from
the Meridian-line, which runs over the Pico de Tayda in the Island Teneriffa,
along de midle-line toward the East, to the number of 360, as for example,
Amsterdam is situated 52 from the midle-line toward the North, which is the
breadth or the Poles height of the same city, and in the length 23 degrees,
because the same does agree with such a degree of the Aequinoctial, calculating
from the aforesaid Meridian. De Cabo de Bona Esperanca is situated on the
breadth Southward from 34 degrees, and in the length from 42 degrees. The
countries or cities situated under the same length, have always at one time
and moment alike midday, and alike hour of the day: as when it is noonetide at
Amsterdam, then it is also noonetide at Bergen in Norway, at Lions in France,
at Algiers in Barbary, and such like places situated in one length. But those
which are situated under several degrees of length, differ likewise in the
calculation of hours; so that when it is midday in the forenamed places, then
it is a Bantam in the Island Java 7 hours and 12 minutes in the afternoon,
because the same city is situated 108 degrees in the length toward the East,
for it differs every 15 degrees one hour; but in the city Lima, lying in Peru,
it is 6 hours in the fore-noone, because the same city is situated in the
length about 90 degrees toward the West, as Amsterdam. Those also which are
situated under the like breadth or height of the Pole, have always alike
length of days and nights: this is also to be understood, that those who live
on the southside of the midle-line, have the shortest day, when we have the
longest: as they have the Winter when we have the Summer, and we the Winter,
when they have the Summer. But they which are situated under an unequal breadth
or height of the Pole, have also unequal length of days and nights: for the
farter a place is situated from the midle-line, how the longest day is greater
there, and the shortest les. As for example they wol live under the
Aequinoctial line, have day and nigt thorough the whole jeare alike long,
without change. They who live on the breath of 30 degrees, have the longest day
almost of 14 hours: on the breath of 50 degrees, the longest day has stiffly
16 hours. Under the Northern Circkel, which we call Circules Arcticus, does
not the Sun on the longest day, set or go under the Horizon. On the breadth
of 70 degrees does not the Sun set in 64 days: and so following the longed
days encreasse till under the Pole, wherein the whole jear not more is then
one day and one night, each continuing one half jeare.

Further more the Earth is divided ad this day in two great firm lands and
parts, in Antiquam or old and Novam or new America, called the new World. The
first called the old World, because it was only known to the Ancient, have
the ancient Describers of the Earth divided again in tree parts to wit, in
Europa, Asia and Africa.

EUROPA as some will have it, has its name from the Dochter of Again, or King of
Syrien, ravished by Jupiter, which others esteem to be fabulous, supposing
that the Original of this name is unkowne. The territories of Europe in the
West are the great Zea, in the south the Mediterranean Zea, in the East the
Archipelage, Pontus Euxinus, or Maeotis Palus, and the right line ascending
thither wards the Nord to the River Dwyna, from whence the Ys-Sea does wash
against Europe. Albeit this part of the World be very small in respect, of the
other parts of the Earth, yet not with standing it is commended above all other
Countries for its singular vertuet, and specially for the wholesome and
temperate air, the fruytfulnes of the Earth, and abundance of all other
necessaries for the maintenance of Mans-life; being watered with many fair
Rivers, and furnished with many hot and cold water-veynes or bathings,
effectual and fit for the expelling of several diseases. Here grow no drugs
not precious stones, but abundance of Korne, Wine and als sort of fair
tree-fruyt. Here are few cruel and pernicious beasts, but tame Creatures in a
greater multitude and fayret then one where. Thoug that which this Country
does most boast of, is the great multitude of its fair, welbuilt and populous
cities, which are here far more in number, then in other parts of the earth.
Europe hat formerly through the Monarchy of the Grecians and Romans, ruled as a
Queen over the Countries of Asia and Africa: al she yet does at this day
through the Moscoviters and Turckes, as also throug the Castilianen, Portugals
and Hollanders, who have dominion over many places, countries, Islands, and
potent Cities therein contained, and who do subdue under their obedience
almost whole America.

SPAIN is the Western, and therefore also the first Kingdom of Europe, of
their inhabitans called Espanna, within name as also the People have their
denomination and derivation of certain Province in Asia, in former time called
Pania, of pan who was Lord of the same. Spain is on all the 4 parts or side
environed with the Zea, except on the North-east-korner which is compassed
about with the Pyrenian hills, for a separation from Frans. 't Is a wonderful
blessed country, not only in respect of fruytful ground, but also of an
healthy air; thence it is that there is so fair a growth of Oil, Sugar,
Figs, Raisons, Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranats, Kappers, and other
medicinal hearps; and above all such strong and delicate sort of Wine as any
where are to be had. The worldly government of Spain consists in a King,
nevertheles he does not conclude of any nomentany affairs without the advice of
the 12, who one with an other make up the high Counsel. The Ecclesiastical
government consists in Archbishops and Bishop; the first are ten in number,
the other more then vifty. Spain in our time is gotten under one King, which
was never sien before in 800 years, notwithstanding conteyningh 16 several
Kingdoms as may be seen in the Spanish Titels: but Castilien or Castilie,
Arragon and Portugal are the chiefest, under which all the other resort.

ARRAGON has its denomination from the Province Tarroconensis, in which it is
situated, or from the city Tarragona. Its head or Mother-city is Saragossa, in
former time called Caesar Augusta, placed on the river Ebro. In the midst of
this Kingdom is Monson founded, wether the King once in three year does resort
in his own Person, for the receyving of his revenues.

The third krowne of Spain conteyneth the Kingdoms of Portugal and Algarven;
Portugal is last of all joined unto the other Spanish Kingdoms. 't Is supposed
that the revenues of the Kingdom import jearly two Millions of Ducats, which
wealth does most arise from the great trade which the Portugals drive upon
Ginee, Brasil, and Portugals Indien; but the country is also fruytfull in it
self, affording many sorts of Wine, Oly, and other commodities. The main City
of Portugal is Lisbon, situated on the River of Tajo, an excellent and great
city of Merchandise.

FRANCE, the noblest fruytfulst and most potent Kingdom of Europe, has its
name from the Frankes, a people of Germany, which 1200 years hence begin to
conquer it. For the environing of this Kingdom is drawn in the North a line
from Calis to the freedom of Straetsburgh; which line they of Artois, Henegou
and Lutzenburg do let lie on the left hand. In the West Frans does beath on
the Sea of Aquitanien, nou Gujenne, and partly on the Pyrrhenian hills, which
fasten and join it to Spayn, in the South is bordereth on the Mediterranean
Sea; in the East the high hills (called the Alps) divide it from Italy, the hill
Jura from Helvetia or Switserland, and the River Rheine from Germany. This
country has abundance of wheat and all other sorts of Korne, of Wine we find
here many sorts, and in such abundance, that it does not only supply it self
therewith, but also Engeland, Schotland, the Low Contreys, and many other
places besides, in the Southern parts of France is plenty of Oil, Figs,
Safferon there is ordinarely much kattel; we find there much Salt, Flax and
Hemp. In this Kingdom are 14 Arch-Bisshops, and above hundret Bisshops. It is
divided in 8 Parlaments or high Courts, to which the 21 head-Provinces there in
contained, appeal. The same Parlamens have their residence in the cities of
Paris, Rouaan, Rennes, Bordeaux, Toulouse, Grenoble, Aix, and Digion. In our
time has King Henry the Great of an immortal memory joined his souveran
Prinsdom of Bearn to the Krown, and there erected a ninth Parliament in the city
of Pau.

ITALY, which many account for the fairest country in the World, should have
obtained its name from the King Italus of Sicily, who first taught the
Inhabitans husbandry. The Territories of Italy in the West are, and partly also
in the North, the Alps with the flood Varo, which divide this Country from
Frans, Germany and Switserland: forth thence forth the Sea washes round about
it. The hill Apenius is as the backbone of Italy, dividing the same in length
almost over thwart from the hills of Alps to the Sea of Sicily. Italy has for
the most part a healthy and good temperate air, the ground is wonderful fat and
fruitful, affording plenty off Korne, fruit, and all sorts off herbs, several
excellent good Wines, Oil and Flax, the fields are full off tame, and the woods
full off wild creatures, the hills adorned througly with several Metals and
stones. Here are found many waters replenished with fish, many glorious and
neatly-built and strong cities, in one nord, this country is the right Paradijs
off World. In Italy are 28 Arsh-Bisshops and more then 200 Bisshops; with many
beautiful cities, off which these are the chiefest: Rome, Napels, Florence,
Venice, Genua, Milanen, Bolonien, Ravenna, Cremona, Pavia, Paedoa, Verona,
Vicenza, Mantoua, Siena, Luca, Ancona and Livorne are the two chiefest havens.
Messina and Palermo lie in Sicily. The Islands of Sicily are specially three;
Sicily, Corsica and Sardinien; besides other little ones.

GERMANY, the greatest Country off one name and Language in whole Europe, the
Latinists call it Germania, the inhabitans themselves call it Teutschlandt /
the reason hereof is uncertain. The linits off Garmany do at this day stretch
much further then in the days off Prolomy, for in the West is passes through
the Rhine, and beats at the French Lands of Loreyn and Bourgondien; in the
South, it stretchest over the River Donau to the hills the Alps, which divide
it from Italy; in the East it bordereth on Prussia, Poland, and Hungary, in the
North on the North-zea, Denmarck, and the East-zea. 't Is a warlik Nation and a
populous Country, no less pleasant then fruitful; it has a sweet Pleasant
air, and plenty of Wines, which produce delicate good Wines. The Woods and
Fields are replenished with wild and tame Beasts, the Rivers and other Waters
rich off Visch: Here are found very fair Fountains, and healthy baths; many
of Iron, Steel, Kopper, Tin, Gold and Silver. Germany is divided in the high
and low Countries. The high Countries are called those places which lie next
to the Alps, and conteyne those following Provinces: Elsaz, Swaben, the County
of the Pals on the Rhine, the Kingdom off Bohemen, which, though the
inhabitans thereof use another language, noth wichstanding is comprehended
within Germany and has under it three Provinces; to wit, Marhern, Silesien and
Lausnits. The County Tirol, Stiermarck, Carnten, and Carniola or Crayn. The
Low Countries comprehend the Bisshopricks off Ments, Trier and Coln, the County
off Hessen, the Dukedoms off Saxen, Pomeren, Mekelenburgh, Meyssen, Thuringen,
Cleeff and Bergh, with the Countries which do depend on them. Under the
Marquess off Brandenburg resort Westphalen and the Dukedom of East-Frieslant.

THe LOW COUNTRIES, which in time off the Romans most were contained in
Gallia-Belgica, are at this day divided in 17 Provinces, bordering in the West
and South on Frances, in the East on the Rhine or the Maas, in the North on the
Ocean. The air off these Countries is thick and moist, but healthy and
convenient; the ground for the most part even and smooth. The Low-Countres are
very fruitful off Korne, and several sorts off tre-fruyt; they afforde also
much Flax, Hemp; there is also much catle to be found: but the chief of the
country consists in fishing and navigation, wherein the inhabitants surpass
all other Nations. These 17 Provinces are partly subject under the House off
Bourgundien, partly free, and are governed in the manner of a comononweath. The
House of Bourgundien possesses the Dukedoms off Brabant, Limburg, and
Lutzenburg, and one Quartier off Gelderland, the Marquizdom off the Holy Empire
on the River Schelde, the Earldoms off Flandres, Artois, Henegou, Namen, and
the Dominion off Mechelen. The free united Low Country Provinces are these:
three quarters of the Dukedom Gelderland, and the Earldom Sutphen, the Earldoms
off Holland and Zeland, and the great Dominions off Utrick, Friesland,
Overyssel, and Groeningen.

HELVETIA or SWITSERLAND borders in the South, on Italy; in the East on the
Earldom on Tirol; in the West, on Savoyen and Bourgondien; in the North, on
Eisaz and Loreynen. It is a country which lies in the midst off the Alps,
and therefore accounted the highest Country off Europe, indifferent good and
fruytful; free and respected off all its neighbors, divided in several
Cantons, which the call Or^en. The chief cities are Zurich, Bern, Lucern,
Basel, Friburg, Baden.

The Earldom off Walls, where of Sitten is the prime city, and the Province
off the Grisons or Graubunders, having Chur for a capital City, have bin long
since in consederacy with the Switsers, and defend one another against their
common enemies.

POLAND borders toward the East on Silesien; has for her Neygbours the
Prussiaus, Littauwers, and Hungarians; it is a very fruytful Country off all
sorts off Korne. The chief city is Cracou, situated on the Weixel. Not far
from thence are mines off Salt. The chief commodities which are transported out
off Poland in other countries, are, Wheat, Rye, Flax, Wax, Wood and Lead.

DENMARK is an indifferent great and large Kingdom, on a wonderful manner
parted and divided throug the sea. Its extremest Province is Jutland, in former
time called Cimbrica Chersonnesus. This country bordereth in the South an
Germany, being forthwith environed with the sea, for the most part it is
fruytful and rich off Korne, except in the North, where it is sandy and barren.
Out of Denmark are conveyed to other parts multitude of Oxen and Horses, much
Butter, Hides, Visch, etc. The chief city is Coppenhaven, where the King deepes
his court, and where there is an University.

NORWAY has on the East Sweveland, on the West the Ocean, on the South
Denmark, and on the North Lapland. The West and South Quarters of the Country
are of an indifferent temperate Climate, but on the North the soil is
unfruytful, and not able to feed and supports its habitans. Out of Norway
comes plenty of Stok-visch, great quantity of pelt, hides, trane, tar,
masts, spars, plankes, and other sort of wood.

SWEDEN or SWETHELAND boundeth in the West on Norway, in the South on Denmark;
in the East on the white Sea and Moscovia; in the North on the Ys-Sea. This
Kingdom is one of the fruitfulst Quarters of the North, and affords much
Korne, Honey, Wax, Pelts, Hides, Roer, Silver, Steel, Lead, Iron and Kopper.
The head or chief city of the Kingdom is Stokholm, where the King keeps his
Court.

MOSCOVIA has toward the North the Sea Petzorke, toward the East the
Tartarians; toward the South the Turks; and toward the West, the Littauwers,
Lijflanders, and the Swethers. The chief city is Moscou, there the great Duke
(whone the Subjects call the Emperor of Russia) keeps his Court. The
principal commodites which are from hence transported unito other Countries,
are Flax, Hemp, Wax, Eland and Oxen-hides, several precious pelts, traan and
salt visch.

LIFELAND bordereth in the East on white Russenland of Moscovia; in the South
on Samogitien, which is a part of Litta^; in the West and North on the
East-Sea. The chiefest city is Rigs, not far from the mouth of the River
Dwyna. Ith affords much honey, Wax, Ashes, Pick, Taar, and Pelts.

HUNGARY has for her Neygbours on the East Moldavia; and Walachia; on the
South Bosnia and Croatia, toward the West Austria or Ostenreich, and toward
the North, Poland. The ground is exceeding fruytful of Korn, Wine, and all sort
of Victual, of kattel here is such great plenty as that the sheep and Oxen are
sent in abundance to Germany and Italy. Here also are found many Mines of Gold,
Silver, Kopper, Iron and Steel.

SLAVONIEN is environed betwixt Hungary, Italy, the Gulf of Venice and Greece:
containing Liburnia, Croatia, Bosnia and Dalmatia. The Turk has a great part
thereof in possession, another part the Emperor of Germany, the rest being
situated on the Zea, is under the dominion of the Venetians.

GREECE, in former time a Mother and Nurse of all sort of learning, but now a
bondslaaf of the unbeleeving Mahumetists, and an habitation of the Turkish
Emperous, is environed on the North with Bulgaria and Servia; and forth with on
the West, South and East compassed about with the Sea. The commodities which
are brought out of Greece and conveyghed to foreign places, are, gold, silver,
kopper, kopperas, sevral dying stuff, wines, oil, flus, Damasts, and Turksch
Groggreins. Greece or Grieckland has almost innumerable Islands, among which
the greast and most famous, is, Candia, in former time called Creta, affording
very precious and delicate Wines, Moscadel and Malvesii, Curtens, Scarletdie,
Sugar, Cristal, goat skins, Oil, Honey, Wax, and healing herbs.

The chiefest Islands of Europe, situated in the great Sea, are, Britain,
Yreland and Ysland, Britain (which certain years hence is happily reduced
under one Kingdom) was here to fore divided in Engeland and Scotland.

ENGLAND which with Scotland makes the greatest Island of Europe, bearing
abundance of good wheat and other sort of Korn, and beautified with many rivers
wherein is plenty of fish, has many commodious havens: also mines of Gold,
Silver, Lead, Iron, and especially much precious Tin: There are several
sorts of creatures, (serving for the supportance of Man) and chiefly a great
multitude of fine Wol-bearing sheep, which indeed is the right golden fleece
of this Royal Island. The chief city of whole Engeland is the glorious city
London, situated on the River Teems, with a bridge over it, which is accounted
one of the fairest of Europe. From hence come several sorts of Woollen clothes,
Saffron, Tin, Lead, Wheat, Baarly, Beat, Dried herrings, and Sea-koles.

SCOTLAND compassed round about with the Sea, except on the South where it
boundeth on Engeland, is not so fruytful, has notwitstanding all necessaries
for the supportance of life. The chief city is Edenbourrough. Scotland
affords many sorts of course Woollen clothes: Wool, Malt, Hides, Fish and
Stone-Koles.

YERLAND is full of lakes and standing Pooles, has good fat pastorage, also
abundance of tame and wild Beasts. This Island has an healthy air, bears no
venomousthing. The inhabitants are rude wild People but through the
conversation and government of the English begin to be more and more tamed. On
the fields grow much gras, where in go many kie and sheep, but are somewhat
less then in other countries.

YZLAND is in length about hondert dutsch miles, for the most part unbuylt and
hilly, in the valleys is much katle and gras, there grows no Korne or other
trees then bark and Junipertrees. The inhabitans make bread of beaten fish,
wont to drink water, but mix it now with Korne, which is brought to them from
forreyne places. They live most, in caves or holes under the earth, and account
the Mountains for their cities, make their houses of fish-bones. They in the
East-countrey deal much for Ysland, and exchange there commodities for
brimstone, dry Fish, Roet, Butter, Skins of wild and tame Beasts, white
Faulkes, Horses, and other commodities. In this Country are two Bisshopricks,
Holen and Schalholt, which have some Nunneries under them. Here as also in
other Northern parts are found many white Bears, which are exceeding fierce
and cruel.

ASIA the second part of the old World, is in the West divided from Europe
throug the Rivers the Don and the Dwina; from Africa throug the narrownes,
between the Mediterranean and the red Seas; on the East it stretches to the
Chineesch or Eoisch, on the North to the Scytish, and on the South to the
Indiaen Sea. It does far surpass Europe and Africa, as also other parts of
the World, in largenes, riches, plenty of spices, precious stones, kostly
Pearls, and other rarities. This part of the world has bin in all former
times the most famous; for from hence arose first all dominions, where by the
world has bin governed. Man has bin there first created of God, placed in
Paradijs, seduced throug Satan, and redeemed throug Christ our Savior. Here
also happened most all that happened in the old, and especialy that in the new
Testament.

All the Countries of Asia are divided in six parts: where of the great Duke of
Muscovien does possess a part; the second is under the Tyranny of the great
Turk; the third under the Power of Tartarians; 4th. under the Dominion of the
mighty King of China; the 5th. are the rich Countries of Indien, and the 6th.
and last part is under the command of the Sophi, or King Persien. To Asia
likewise appertain an innumerable multitude of Islands, among which these are
the chiefest, Cyprus in the Mediterranean Sea, furthermore in the Indian Sea,
Zeil^n, Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Celebes, Moluccen, Banda, Gilolo, Luconia and
Japan.

Of Muscovia we have treated here to fore in the Description of Europe, since
the most part thereof is situated in Europe.

That which the great Turk does possess in Asia, are all the Provinces of
Natolia (formerly called Asia the less) small Armenia, and a part of a great
Armenia; Diarbech (in former time Mesopotamia) Syria and a great deal of
Arabia. The chiefest Mart-townes in these Countries are, Trapesonda, Aleppo,
with the Sea-havens Tripoli, Amon, Damasco, Baruti and Mecha. These Country
affoard much silk, Tasti, Damasts, Turks Groggrein, Kotton and Scarletdie. The
other part of Arabia resorteth under several Kings, there in is situated the
famous city Aden: from thence come very fair Pearls; the unfeygned
Balzem-Oyl, Franckincense, Myrrh, and suchlike commodities.

TARTARIE are in one name termed all the Countries, situated, with a large and
confused comprehension, Eastward from the Eastern Ocean, betwixt the Northern
Yz-Sea and the Southern Countries, as China, that part of Indien without
Ganges, the River Oxus, the Caspian and Meotian Sea to Moscovien westward. The
inhabitans are called Tartarians, who are ordinarily strange; stout and bold
People, and who easily suffer hunger, heat, and cold. They have no cities,
villager nor houses, but dwell by companyes (which they call Hordas) with wives,
childern and cattle (in tabernakels and tents in the fields) now here, to
morrow elsewhere, wheresoever they find good pastorage for their cattle, to
wit, Oxen, Sheep, Horses and Kamels, with whose flesh, blood and milk they
sustain themselves. Their Prince one or the greatest Potentates of the Earth
they call Cham (that is Duke) to whom they show singular obedience.

CHINA which is accounted the greatest, powerfulst, and richest Kingdom of the
whole World, is compassed on the East and South with the Oriental Ocean, which
the Ancient named Mare Eoum; on the west with India and Bramas; and on the
North it is joined with Tartary, where the Kings have divided it with an
admirable wall of 400 miles in length, buylt betwixt the hills. It is divided in
15 Kingsdoms or great Provinces, they have each a Prince or King of their own,
who again submit themselves all unto one supreme King; who is able (according
to the relation of the Portugals) in time of war to bring in the field moor
as 300000 Footmen and 200000 Horsemen. It is very fruytful of Korne, kattel,
tame and wild: it has also mines of precious stones, gold, kopper, iron,
steel and pearls and specialy there is great abundance of silk: it conteyneth
great migry citities, which also are very populous. Of the great and glorious
city Paquin (where the King has his residence) are almost incredible things
written. The inhabitans are very witty and sutle, inespecially in Manifactuurs,
they make wagons with which they sail over Land, as with ships in the Zea. The
art of printing and making of pieces of ordonances has bin by them far
sooner in use as by us. They have good civil laws, according to which they
live; but the true knowlegde of God they want, since they are heathens, and
adore Sun, Moon, and other idols, jea the Devil hunself, least he do them any
evil. The principal commodities which come out of China, are, gold, precious
stones, musk, rhubarb, the root China, fine earthen platters, abundance of
silk, sugar, rijs, cotton, linen and korne.

INDIEN situated betwixt Persien, the hill Tauri, China, and the Indian Sea, is
(as all writers Witness) the best and nobelest Country on Earth, or which
produces the beautifulst and best fruit, as well those which serve for Man's
sustenance a pleasure. It replenisheth the whole World withis precious stones
and pearls, kostly spices, medicinal drugs and perfumes, in such a manner that
(if Paradys where no where to be had) this whole Country might betearmed a
terrestrial Paradys. Many Kingdoms and rich countries are therein contained, as
the Kingdom of the great Mogol, which is properly Indien, Cambaja, Orixa,
Bengala, Aracan, Pegu, Malacca, Siam, Tipura, Gouro, etc. Calicut, situated in
Malabar, wont not long since to be the chief city of whole Indien, which at
this time is called Coa: here have the Deputy of Portugal, the Arch-Bisshop,
the Kings Counsel and the Chauncellors their residence, to command over all
the Quarters of the Eastparts appertayning to the King of Spain. Among many
strange thing and trees which grow in Indien, are the tree de Raise and the tree
Triste very wonderful. The tree de Raise or root-tree grows first from below
as other trees do, but spreading its branches, they grow full of sprigs and
roots, which bowing and growing downward to the earth, at last grow fast there
and take root, and in progres of time grow so thick as the first root, so that
they are hardly to be discerned one from anoter: out of which again others
round about grow to an innumerable number; so that such trees in time spread
themselves in a round circle an Italian mile far; and not only that the
lowes branches thrust their twigs and roots downwards (which afare of is as a
deal of hanging hemp) but also the uppermost highest, in such a manner that one
only tree makes a close wood.

De Arbore triste or the sadtree, so called, because he does not slourish by
day but always by night; a strange thing to behold. As long as the Sun is not
set, this tree appears as withered, and when the Sun is set, there is no
blossom to be seen on it; but presently an half hour after, it is as full of
blossoms as may be, very fair to behold, and of an exceeding pleasant smell, and
continues so the whole night: but as soon as the day and Sun returns, do
all the blossoms fall of, that there remains not one on the tree, and cover
the Earth, and the leaves shut themselfs half, so that he seems to be
withered and dead; this continues til evening, then it begins to get
blossoms as before; and continues so the whole year.

PERSIA very famous in respect of the 2de Monarchy, comprehends many
Countries and Provinces, is a very potent rich country, and is governed by the
Sophi, who (though he be a Mahumetist) warreth continually against the Turck
for the religion of Mahumet, and that in respect of the several expositions of
the Alcoran. Out of Persia are brought precious stones, Oriental Pearls, the
cordial stone Bezoar, much silk-work, and very fair Horses.

The nobelest and fairest Pearls which are found in the whole East, and which
are called the right Oriental Pearls, are found in the Gulf of Persia, betwixt
Ormus and Bassora, in the Places of Bare in Caryffa, Julfar and other places
thereabout. These are fished by Diverse, which are therein experienced, going
ten, twelff, twenty and more fathoms under water, and grow in Oisters, which
the Dippers (being naked) grable swiffly on the bottom, and with a small
baskef, which they have bound about their body bring them with them above
water; being laid in the Sun, they go open of their own accord, and therein
are found the Pearls.

ZEYLAN is one of the best and fruytfulst Islands which are known at this day,
the Earth is there always green, and the trees loadened with blossems and
fruit, producing the fairest Oreng appels, Lemmons, Citrons, and such like
fruit. The best Cinnamon grows here with hole bonshes. This pleasant fruit is
the ondermost or second rind of tree, is cut of in four square pieces, is of
an asch-colour, being laid in the Sun and rould up together, it becomes
red, and in three years after the trees have their rind or bark again. Besides
many other creatures there are multitude of Elephants, which are supposed to
surpass all Elephants of other Countroys in wit and nobilite.

Westward from Zeylan are situated the Islands Maldivia, more (as is reported)
then eleven thousand in number, which are most inhabited, and some for their
lownes not inhabited: here are not much other commodities then Coques, that is,
Indian nuts, and these in such abundance, that the Inhabitants do wholly
maintain themselves with them, and the leve almost whole Indien. The rind, or,
that which sits about the fhel of this nut is the hemp of Indien, where of
they make kabels and all sorts of ropes. They make their Ships of the wood of
this tree, and sewe them together with koardes made of this aforenamed rind,
without the use of an iron needle. The leaves of the tree they use for their
sails. In one word, the ship withal its appurtances, they victual and also
merchandise where with it is loadened is all of this only date tree, which
maintayneth all the Inhabitants of these Islands.

SUMATRA which in former times (according to the Opinion of many) was wont to
be called Taprobana, is divided under several Kings: of all these is he of
Achem the most potent. Here grows (besides several other spices) plenty of
very good Peper. Also there are mines of several metals, whereof the
Inhabitants make good pieces of Ordonnance. Here are found very big Elephants,
which being tamed, are very fit for war, they have their residence in the
woods, by whole troops: here is also to be seen the creature Rhinoceros, the
arch-anemy of the Elephant, and thoug it be far less, yet notwithstanding it
dare enter battle with it: it does whet its horns against the rocks, and
thereby endeavors to tear up the belly of the Elephant. Many judge it to be
the right Unicorn. What soever part of body this creature has, but especially
the horn, is accounted very precious for the expelling of all venom.

JAVA is very fruitful of several spices and Indian fruyts, especially here
grows great plenty of Pepper. Is divided among many Kings, of which the great
Mataran, he of Bantam, and he of Tuban are the mightiest. They who dwell on
Seashore are Mahumetists, in the Country they are heathens. On Java the
Hollanders have buyle the city and strong fort Batavia where formerley Jacatra
has bin; it is the chiefest Colonie and residence of the Governeur.

BANDA is a small Island, but very famous; for here alone and on some Islands
thereabout grow all the nutmucks and Mace, which are dispersed in great plenty
over all the World. The trees on which the nutmeks grow are something alike the
pear tree of persick-tree, only that they are smaller. The nutmeks are covered
with a threefold shel or rind: the outmost is as the green rindes of acornes:
when these are ripe, they divide or separate themselves asunder, and then there
is to be seen a rind or bast, like a small net, where with the fruit is
compassed about, fair red of color, like unto scarlet, pleasant of sigt,
which we call Mace or the blom of the nutmek. When the fruit is ripe and
grows dry, the Mace breaks forth, and becomes then an Orange color. The
third rind or shel is some what harder and woodenish then the former; as the
acorne-nuts, safe that it is blackish, and that being opened, therein we find
the Nutmek. Three times in the jear these trees afforde ripe fruit, to wit in
August, in December, and the best and most in April. In Banda is to be seen a
wonderful bird, which they call Eme, being almost once as big as a Swan,
having black feathers, but no wings nor tongue, above its head it has a
sharpnes or shield, as a shell-crab, he does protect and defend him self with
his strong hooks, striking behind him as a horse. He devoureth all that is
cast before him, thoug it were apples as big as a fist, and that which is most
to be admired, burning koles and great pieces of ice. In the year 1596 have the
Hollands Ships brought such a bird a live at Amsterdam, for an admirable rarity.

The Islands of Moluccen, situated under the Aequinoctial line, and a little
toward the North (thoug they be small) are notwith-standing famous over the
whole world, in regard of cloves which grow only in these places; and are
vijf number, to wit, Ternate, Tidore, Motir, Machian and Bachian. The trees on
which the cloves grow, are like the laurel-tree or baytree in bigness and
fashion, only that the leaves are smaller; like unto the almond or
willow-leaves, they have many twigs and plenty of flowers, which first are
white, afterward green, and at the last red and somewhat hard, and do change
in these fruit, which we call cloves. When these flowers are green they have
the most pleasant smell above all flowers in the World. The flowers grow very
close together in great quantity on the utmost of the sprigs, as the berryes of
the Myrtle-tree. These Islands afford very little to the sustenance of man life;
here grows no rice nor korn; there are also no catle, but few bukgoat and
hens. Their bread they make of some trees and roots. Only in these Islands are
to be found the Paradijs-birde, which in strange and beautiful feathers
surpasses all other birds in the World.

AFRICA, the third part of the old World, is divided from Europe through the
Mediterranean, and from Asia through the red Sea. The chief Countries of Africa
are BarBary, Egypt, Biledulgerid, Sarra, the Country of the Ethiopians, the
Abissines, of Priest John's Countries, and Menomotapa. The Islands appertaining
to Africa, are those of Canaria, Cabo de Verde, S. Thomas Madagascar, and
Sacotora. Out of Africa are brougt in Europe, Gold, Yvorie, Eben-wood, Aloe,
the Egyptian Balzem-olye, Mumia, Myrrh, Feathers, Sugar, Ginger, Daats and
some Wines from Madera, and the Islands of Canari^n.

BARBARY, the best part of Africa, has on the South the mountains of Atlas;
on the West, the Atlantish; and on the North the Mediterranean Zea. It is
divided into four Kingdoms, as Marocco, Fez, Telesin and Tunes it is watered
with many Rivers, which flowing out of the hills Atlas, Powers out her waters
in the Mediterranean Zea. The Kingdom of Fez, which is far forth the
mightiest of Barbary, has its name derived from the Mother-city Fez, a fair
and populous city partly environed with Walls and fortwith mountains and
rocks. It is reported that in the same are 700 churches, where of the
Mother Church comprehends a large round place, having 30 high and very
spacious doors. Here grow ordinarily many daats, Oranges, Olives, Figs, and
such like fruit, but not much wine. The Inhabitants are white or jollow Mores,
commonly an upright and good, but dom and incapable people.

EGYPT has bin many years hence a famous Country, so admirable fruytful, when
the River Nile does but keep its ordinary course, and flow 13 cubits over
the Land, that the Poet Lucan does highly extol it. The aforesaid flood
begins commonly to increase in the beginning of June, and continues 40
days: then it does by little and little decrease, and as soon as any part of
the Country runs dry, they begin to cast their zeed in the earth, not
standing in need of rain or any other humidty. The Egyptians have bin in
former times very futtel and witty, great Astronomers and Physicians, but
exceeding superstitious.

The Pyramides, which are reckoned among the seven miracles of the world, where
formerly erected in this place by their Kings, either for vayn glory and
ostentation of their great power and wealth, or to keep the people in action
that they might not betake them selves to ydelnes.

ETHIOPIA or ABISSINEN has northward Lybien and Egypt; toward the West the
River Nigar, and the Kingdom of Congo; toward the South the Maensbergen; and
toward the east the Kingdoms of Melinde, Magadoxa and the red Sea, and though
here grow but little korne, notwithstanding it bears much fruit, unkowne to
us, first for maintenance of Man's life. The Inhabitans are Christians have one
King who by us is called Priest John, but by them Acegue and Negus, that is
Emperor and King: He writes that he is of the house of David: is able to raise
ten hondert thousend Men of war, and 500 Elephants, besides a great number of
horses and Camels, they have one Patriarch, whom they call Abuma, who is the
head of the Clergii: have Cloisters for Men and Women, but the Monks as also
the Priest being married, must maintain themselves with their own labor and
husbandry. They mix the gospel and the old Testament among one another:
circumcise both male and female kind, and baptize them with water and fire, to
wit, in burning some tokens on their face; and the baptism of water is yearly
revewed by them. They keep also lent; which continues with them 50 days, with
water and bread, and some of them with green herbs. They have besides these
many other ceremonies and superstitions to tedious to relate.

BILEDULGERID bears that name from the palm or Daat-tree, which grows here
in quantity. The Inhabitants are dull and borsh, without any good laws or
manners. All their trade consists in dates and Marmelstone, which they exchange
with the Outlanders for Korne, which no where is sowed here.

Hitherto we have shortly run over the chief Countries of the Old World: now
follow the New World of America, which in the division of the whole earth, we
place for the second part, which ordinarily is placed for the 4th. part of the
World. This Country has bin unknown to the Ancient, and found in the year of
our Lord 1497 by Americus Vespusius a Florentine, after whom it is called
America; though this honor be not without reason attributed to Christopher
Columber of Geneve, who in the year 1492 first has discoured it. It may be
almost divided in two Islands: since it is only with a small neck annexed unto
Panama and Nombre de Dios. The Northern part comprehends New Spain, Florida,
Virginia, the New Low Countries, New Frans, New England, Canada, and Terra
Nova, on the North it is yet unknown; the South part conteyneth Guajana,
Castilia del Oro, Peru, Chili, Brasilien, Paraguay, and other Provinces more.

NEW-SPAYN conteyneth many Provinces and Nations of several languages. The
chief city of this Country is Mexico, a Queen of all the cities of the new
world. Before the Spanjards came hither, the number of the houses were 70000,
and was situated in the midst of a great or large lake or standingh poole,
almost as Venice: but Ferdinandus Cortez, who in the jears 1519 and 1520. has
brought these Countries under the command of the King of Spayn, has
transported the city on the shore of the lake, and is at he present a welbuilt
city. The other principal cities next to Mexico, are, Compostella, (where the
Bishop has his stool, and the Kings Council her residence,) Colima or
Purficatio, Guadalajara, Mechoacan, Sacatula, and Civitas Angelorum, or the
city of Angels. The commodities which are transported hence unto other parts of
the World, are Gold, Silver, Pearls, Balzem-Oyl, Concenille or Scarlet-die,
Salsaparilla, the reat Mechoacanna, Brimstone and Hides.

FLORIDA is pleasant and indifferent fruitful country. Here grow mulberries,
cherries, chestnuts, grapes, medlers and prunes. Here are also ha^ts, goats,
bears, leopards, and many other creatures; also peakocks, partridges, parrets,
and manifold birds, which are yet unknown to us. In the Rivers are many and
several Serpents, and many Crocodils, which the inhabitants most continually
seek to oppose. As for the manners of the inhabitants, they are for the most
part rude and not chaste. They do not let their Children learn na art nor
trade, neither reprove them for their faults. From robbing and to keep that
which they have tobbed as their own, they make no conscience. Every one
nothwithstanding has his own wife, and are very jealous, account no thing so
precious as the curious colors of the feathers of birds. They do believe the
immortality of souls, but are otherwise Idolaters.

PERU, the most famaus place of all Countries in the world, has on the North
Castilia del Oro; on the east the hills; on the South Chili; and on the West the
great Southern Zea. The prime city is Lima, otherwise called Ciudad de los
Reyes: there the Deputy has his residence, also the Arsch-Bisshop, having
under him for Bisshops-cities, Quito, Cusco, Guamanga, Guanuco, Popoian,
Gajaquil, Chacapoias, Porto Vejo, Arequipa, Plata, Trugillo, Charchi, S. Miguel
and S. Francisco. This Country is temperate of air, very populous, and
fruitful of precious stones, bezoar-stone, Salsaparilla, and especially of
gold and silver: for it is accounted for one of the richest in the world in
regard of this acceptable and desirable Metal; which is also easily to be
conceived from the great treasures which have bin many jears hence, and yet
are, conveyged thence. That which the Historians write of Peru is almost
incredible. Atabaliba, King of Peru, when the Spanjaerts came first thither,
and took him prisoner, offered for his redemption, to fill up the place, where
he lay imprisoned, with gold, so high as he standing on his toes, where able to
reach with his fingers; the place was 22 feet in length, and 17 in breadth; or
if they rather would have Silver, he would fill the place twice up to the top of
the house. It appears also out of histories, that the Spanjards in their
first coming thither did cover the hoofs of their horse with Gold and Silver,
from Peru are transported in to Europe Gold, Silver, Precious stones,
Besoar-stone, Salsaparilla, and more other things of an healingh nature.

CHILI is also larg Country, rich of Gold, but as yet little known, much less
conquered by the Spanjards, against which nation the inhabitans (for the
defense of their liberty) continually war, wherein also they carre themselves
manly.

BRASIL is toward the east and north compassed about with the Sea: toward the
west and north it has the large River of the Amasones, and to the South de Rio
de la Plate. This is a very pleasant and fruitful Country, and of an healthy
air. This Province is divided by the Portugals into 9 gouvernments, which they
call Capitanias, other do reck on 14, to wit, S. Vincent, R. de Jenero, Porto
Seguro, Spirito Santo, Itheos, Bahia, Seregipe, Phernambuco, Tamaraca, Parayba,
Rio Grande, Ciara, Maranhahon, and Para; though some of these surpass the
bounds of Brasil. The inhabitants are called Margajaten, Trabajaten,
Ovetacaten, Tovoupinambaultien, Morpions, and many more: most all of them cruel
and wild people, and eaters of mankind. They go stark naked, Men and Women:
Adorn themselves with feathers, they bore in their lips and cheeks great
holes, in which they place certain little stones or bones, which is of a
terrible sight. They are strangers to all civil government and religion, they
known neither honor heavenly nor earthly Gods: believe notwithstanding the
immortality of the Souls, and that those who have taken prisoners, killed
eaten many Enemies, live with their Forefathers in delight and dancing: and on
the contrary that the slow are carried away and tormented of the Aignan, that
is, the devil, who does plange them. They war always one against another,
the one Nation against the other: their weapons are wooden spears or Javelins,
bows, and arrows. Their enemies whom on both sides they take prisoners, they
make fat as swine, and afterward kill them with many ceremonies, and being
roasted on their wooden grid-irons, eath them up. The Margajaten are friends
to the Portugals, through whose conversation they by degrees are tamed, and
made subject to laws and civil gouvernement besides Brasily-wood, cotton and
other things more, does Brasil afford, more as other Countries, great quantity
of sugar, which grows in long reeds or canes, these they break, and grind
them with mils, afterward sees or boil them in ketles, and so they draw the
pleasant sweetness out of it.

The principal Islands of the new world are Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaico and S.
Juan de Porto Rico. Hispaniola is also called S. Domingo, after S. Dominicus,
to whose honor they have built there a city, which is the head-city of all the
rest; there the Deputy of the King and the Bishop have their residence. It is
al hilly, but above all other a pleasant and fruitful Country. Here growet
great plenty of sugar, Cassia Fistula, Mastix, and great store of the best
ginger. Here are also good mines of Gold and Silver, and from thence are
brought abundance of Hides.

CUBA is a long small Island, and also Mountainous, has many gold-bearing
rivers. The Spanjards have built there two cities, S. Jago, where the Bishop
dwells, and Havana, the Matt-touwn and haven of the Island, very strong, where
the fleet zayling from the Westindis to Spain does ordinarily meet, and wait
for wind and weather for to zayle over.

Some wont to call for a fifth part of the world Terra Australis or Magellanica,
the Countries in the South of the Streat Magellanes; but since the shipping by
the Hollanders to those parts, but some few jears hence it known, that Tierra
del Fuego, by Magellanes called, is nothing than a heap of Islands; and no firm
land there about, which may bear the name of the 5th. part of the world, I
think it sufficient that I have touched it with these few words, except, two
will call Terra Australis, those Countries in the South of Nova Guinea, whether
the Hollanders most zayled in the jear 1644. and in these our Maps are called
Hollandia Nova, and Nova Zelandia. Nothwithstanding since the Coasts are but
partly discovered, and that we have no knowledge of the inwards Countries, we
shall as yet let them rest under Asia, til further discovery; and commend such
a division to our Posterity, if we by our life gain no more knowledge.

FINIS.
Pas Caert van de NOORT ZEE. Verthoonende in zich. All de Custen en Havens.
daer rontom gelegen.

to Amsterdam. By Casparus Loots-man, Boeckverkoper en Graadbooghmaker, opt
Water inde Loots-man.



Pascaart Van't VLYE, tot Hitland, Berghen in Noorwege^ tot de mont van de
Oost-Zee Alles van veel souten en nade miswysing yerbetert.

't Amsterdam, By Iacobus en Casparus Lootsman op 't water in de Lootsman.



Pascaarte vande OOST ZEE Van t Eylandt R^gen os vande hoeck van ^alster bon
tot ^en Wyborg

't Amsterdam By Theunis Iacobsz op t water inde Lootsman



PASCAART Van de Zee-custen van Ruslandt. Laplandt Finmarcken Spitsbergen en
Nova-zembla

't Amsterdam By Theums Iacobsz op 'twater inde Lootsman. Op men's oversien en
ver: betert



Pascaerte van GROEN-LANDT, Yslandt. Straet David's en Ian Mayen eylandt: hoemen
de selvigevan Hitlandt en de Noort custen van Schotlandt en Yrlandt bescylen
match.


PASKAERT Van de Zeeusche en Vlaemsche Kusten, tonende all drooghte, diepten,
en ondiepten, tusschen 't eylandt Schouwen en de Hoofden, curieuselyck
beschreven door Dirck Davidsz.


PASKAERT Van de Zeeusche en Vlaemsche Kusten, tonende all drooghte, diepten,
en ondiepten, tusschen 't eylandt Schouwen en de Hoofden, curieuselyck
beschreven door Dirck Davidsz.


Pas caerte van TEXEL tot dende HOOFDEN, begrypende in sich de Zee custen van
Vries-land, Holland, Zeeland, ^laenderen en de Oos^-cust van Engeland. Als mede
hoemen ^t all havens en ga^en al^ 't Vlie. Texel de Maes. Goeresche gat. t
Veergat en all Zeeusche gaten en de Rivier van Londen de Hoofden s^l besoylen
oock hoemen de selynge gaten be^namelyc^ ^ytter zee sal aen done.

't Amsterdam, By Jacob Theuniss Loots-man Boeckverkoper en Graadbooghmaker op
't Water inde Loots-man.



Pas-Caert van ENGELANDT Schotlandt Yrlandt En even Gedeelte van Vranckryck op
Nieuws Overgesien en verbetert

't Amsterdam By Iacobus en Casparus Lootsman Boeck-verkoopers op 't Water in
de Lootsman



Pas Caart van 'T CANAAL Tusschen ENGELAND en VRANKRYCK. by Jacob en Casparus
Loots-man Boeck verkoopers op 't water inde Loots-man.


Pascaerte om achter YRLANDT om te zeylen van Hitlant tot aen H^rsant. Nieuw
lycx vy^gegeven 't Amsterdam By Theunis Iacobsz op (...) t water inde Lootsman.


Pas-kaerte vant in komen VANDE CANAES HOEMEN die sal aen done, als men uyt de
West comt. 't Amsterdam. Gedruckt by Jacob en Casparus Loots-man.
Boeck-verkoopers op 't Water, in de Loots-man.


Pascaerte vande BOCHT van Vranckryck. Biscayen. en Galissen. tusschen Heysant
en C. de Finesterre door L^^ Brien.

t Amsterdam. By Jacob en Casparus Lootsman, Boeckverkoopers opt Water inde
Lootsman.



Parfecte Pascaerte van de Rivier van BOURDEAUX Vertoonende 'tinkomen der
selvige, met haer diepten, droogten en Ancker-gronden. Nievelyx beschreven.

't Amsterdam. By CASPARUS LOOTS-MAN Boeck-verkooper op 't Water inde Loots-man.



Pas Caart van HISPANGIEN Vertoonende de Custen van Granada, Andaluzie,
Algarre, Portugael, Galissien en Biscaie^, met even gedeelte van Vrancrijck:
strecken^ van Heysant tot de straet Gibralter. N^. de Rocht van Vranckryk
ingekort en verbetert door A. en I. de Bree: 'T AMSTERDAM. By Jacobus en
Casparus Lootsman op 't water in de Lootsman.


Pas Caart van de MIDDLANDSCHE ZEE. Vertoonende in b^ee deelen 't Amsterdam, By
Jacob en Casparus Lootsman op 't Water.


De Cust van BARBARIA, Gualata, Arguyn, en Genehoa van Capo S. Vincent tot Capo
Verde

't Amsterdam by Jacobus en Casparus Lootsman Boeck-verkoopers op 't water inde
Lootsman



Pascaerte van GVINEA, en Angola, van R. de Gambia tot Cabo de Bona Esperanca.

't Amsterdam. By Theunis Iacobsz op twater inde Lootsman.



Pascaert vande CARYBES. Nieu Nedder landt. Brazil. de Flaemsche e^ Soute
Eylanden. en de landen daer ontrent gelegen

't Amsterdam By Theu^^s Iacobsz op 't Water inde Lootsman



Pascaerte van NIEV NEDERLANT. Virginies, Nieu Engelant en Nova Francia, van C.
of Fair tot C Forchu

Amsterdam By Theunis Iacobsz op 't water inde Lootsman.



Generaele Kaert Van WEST INDIEN Vande Linie Aequinoctiael tot Benoorde Terra
Neuf.


Pascaerte vande CARIBES S. Iuan de Port Rico, de costhoeck van I. Spangnola
als mede de vaste cust van Nueva Andalusia me^ de eylanden daer omtrent
gelegen, Nieu-lyckx wtgegeven 't Amsterdam, Gedruckt by Jacob Theunis^
Loots-man. Boeck verkooper. en Grandt (...) Maker. op 't Water inde Loots-man.


Pascaerte Van't Westelyckste deel van OOST INDIEN En de Eylanden daer onder
begrepen, van C. de Bona Esperanca tot C. Comorin. 't Amsterdam By Jacob en
Casparus Lootsman Boeckverkoopers opt t water inde Lootsman


Pascaerte Van 't Oostelyckste deel van OOST-INDIEN met all de Eylanden daer
onder gelegen, van Cabo Comorin tot aen Iapan. t Amsterdam By Jacob en Casparus
Lootsman Boeckverkoopers opt Water inde Lootsman.



