THE COMMISSION FOR TAKING SUBSCRIPTIONS TO THE National Land-Bank.
Commissioners Names.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved
Thomas Lord Jermyn, Our Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Councellor Thomas
Lord Coningsby, Our Trusty and Well-beloved the Lord James Russel; Goodwin
Wharton Esquire Henry Paget Esquire Robert Cecill Esquire Sidney Wortley alias Mountagu Esquire
Charles Mountagu of Esquire Sir William Langham Bar. Sir Walter Young Bar. Sir
Henry Ashurst Bar. Sir Richard Atkins Bar. Sir Richard Blackham Bar. Sir Tho.
Pope Blount Bar. Sir Josiah Child Bar. Sir Robert Cotton Bar. Sir Heal Hook
Bar. Sir Henry Hobart Bar. Sir John Mordant Bar. Sir Walter St. John's Bar. Sir
Basil Dixwell Bar. Sir Peter Paravacine Knight. Sir Humphery Edwin Knight. Sir Rowland
Aynsworth Knight. Sir Owen Buckingham Knight. Sir John Banks Knight. Sir Benjamin Bathurst
Knight. Sir Edward Clarke Knight. Sir Thomas Cook Knight. Sir Samuel Dashwood Knight. Sir
Thomas Davall, Knight. Sir John Eyles Knight. Sir William Forester Knight. Sir John Fleet
Knight. Sir Edward Farmer Knight. Sir Joseph Herne Knight. Sir Christopher Hales Knight. Sir
Robert Jefferies Knight. Sir Thomas Lane Knight. Sir John Moore Knight. Sir Tho. Mompesson
Knight. Sir William Pritchard Knight. Sir Gabriel Roberts Knight. Sir Leonard Robinson Knight.
Sir Tho. Stamp Knight. Sir Jeremy Sambrooke Knight. Sir Joseph Tyley Knight. Sir Peter
Vandeputt Knight. Sir Thomas Meares Knight. Sir Edward Wills Knight. Sir Thomas Rawlinson
Knight. Sir Edmond Wiseman Knight. Sir Francis Child Knight. Sir Charles Hedges Knight. Sir
Peter Daniel Knight. Sir Benjamin Newland Knight. Sir Henry Johnson Knight. Sir Godfery
Copley Knight. Robert Austin Senior, Esquire Robert Austin Junior, Esquire John Archer
Merchant, John Arnold Esquire Mordecai Abbot Esquire William Aspin Esquire John Asgil Esquire
Tho. Andrews Esquire Gabriel Armiger Esquire Capt. Jonathan Andrews, John Aviolle
Merch. Isaac Aviolle Merch. John Billers Merch. James Ball Merch. Col. Robert
Byerly, David d'Burry Merch. James Boddington Merch. John Brown Merch. Arthur
Bailey Merch. Theophilus Boughey Merch. John Scroop Esquire John Borrett Esquire George
Bohun Esquire Robert Breedon Esquire Dr. Nicholas Barbon, James des Boverie Merch. John
Bellamy Merch. John Briscoc Merch. John Browning Gent. Peter Burrel Merch. Tho
Boon Merch. Robert Brown Merch. Francis Boynton Merch. William Baber Esquire Ralph
Bucknal Esquire George Boddington Merch. John Blackler Merch. Francis Buzelin
Merch. David de la Bretonniere Merch. Nicholas Carey Esquire Arthur Chamney Esquire
William Coward Merch. Richard Carey Merchant, Awnsham Churchill Merchant,
Stephen Cook Merchant, Francis Chapman Gent. Tho. Coleby Senior Merchant, John
Dutton Colt Esquire Capt. William Child, Tho. Colson Esquire John Delow Merchant,
Francis Dashwood Merchant, Charles Dubois Merchant, Peter Delaune Merchant,
Paul d'Aranda Merchant, Richard Dove Merchant, Abraham Dolins Merchant, Paul
Darby Merchant, George Doddington Esquire Alvarez Mendez d'Costa Esquire William
Cockram Merchant, John Cook Merchant, John Deagle Esquire Paul Docminique Esquire
Richard Dalton Esquire Anthony Mendez d'Costa Merchant, John Mendez d'Costa
Merchant, Jacob de Lilliers Merchant, Adam de Cardonnel Esquire Dennis Dutry
Merchant, John Duboys Merchant, Capt. Robert Dorrel, Paul Dufoure Esquire Peter
Deline Merchant, Francis Eyles Merchant, Barrington Eyton Merchant, John Evans
Merchant, William East Esquire Henry Air Esquire William Ettrick Esquire Martin Folks Esquire
William Faulkner Merchant, Andrew Franklyn Merchant, Samuel Foot Junior
Merchant, Christopher Fouler Merchant, Thomas Foley Senior Esquire Philip Foley Esquire
Tho. Foley Junior Esquire William Fenwick Esquire George Furnace Merch. Peter Fanshaw
Merch. Samuel Fuller Esquire Edward Fenwick Merch. Israel Feilding Esquire Mark
Huggetan Merch. Sergeant Tho. Goodin, Tho. Glover Esquire Tho. Guy Esquire Thomas
Gunstone Merchant, James Green Merch Gabriel Glover Merchant, Bartholo
Gracedieu Merchant, Francis Gosfright Merchant, Almin Garraway Merchant, Thomas
Gratwick Merchant, Dr. William Gibbons, Benjamin Giles Merchant, George Gresham
Merchant, Tho. Hodges Esquire Tho. Hall Esquire Peter Henriques Senior Merchant, Edmond
Harrison Merchant, Nathaniel Herne Merchant, Robert Heysham Merchant, Joseph
Hoskinstiles Merchant, Beddingfield Higham Merchant, John Hanger Merchant,
Edward Haistwell Merchant, Thomas Hancock Merchant, Dr. Edward Hulse, Lyonel
Herne Merchant, Frederick Herne Merchant, Thomas Harley Esquire William Hewer Esquire
Charles Hooper Merchant, Urban Hall Esquire Nathaniel Horneby Esquire George Hawes
Merchant, Richard Harnage Merchant, Edward Harley Esquire James Hooper Esquire Charles
Herle Merchant, Hercules Horsey Esquire Ralph Hough Esquire Luke Hodges Merchant,
Ebenezer Hall Merchant, John Hall Merchant, Daniel Haies Merchant, Robert Henly
Esquire John Harvey Esquire James Hallet Goldsmith, Michael Hubart Esquire Jeffery
Jefferies Esquire John Jefferies Merchant, George Juce Merchant, Henry Ireton Esquire
John Jackson Esquire Peter Henriques Junior Merchant, Charles Hargrave Merchant,
Henry Kiffin Merchant, Maurice Kendal Esquire Samuel Keckwich Merchant, William
Lowndes Esquire Robert Leydal Merchant, John Love Merchant, James Lever Merchant,
John Lethullier Merchant, Robert Lancashire Merchant, Edward Lloyd Esquire Joseph
Lane Esquire Dr. Fisher Littleton, Thomas Lucas Merchant, Nehemiah Lyde Merchant,
Peter Henriques Leferrer Merchant, Solomon d'Medina Esquire John Morris Esquire
Nichilas Mors Junior Merchant, Samuel Moyer Merchant, Samuel Mitchel Merchant,
Ralph Marshal Esquire John Martyn Merchant, William Mead Merchant, Tho. Mulso Esquire
Arthur Moore Esquire William Milman Esquire Richard Mead Merchant, James Misson
Merchant, Charles Middleton Merchant, Anthony Meek Esquire Nicholas Martin Esquire
Charles Mason Esquire William Nichols Merchant, Thomas Nisbet Merchant, Francis
Negus Esquire Hugh North Merchant, Michael Noble Esquire Richard Noys Esquire Thomas Owen
Esquire Walter Overbury Esquire Samuel Only Senior Esquire Samuel Powel Esquire Joseph Paice
Merchant, John Paschall Esquire John Pearson Merchant, Colonel John Perry, Richard
Petty Esquire John Powell Merchant, George Paske Esquire John Packer Esquire Col.
Pilkinton, Thomas Papillon Esquire Bartholowew Phillibert Merch. Tho. Radbord Esquire
Gabriel Roberts Merch. Henry Renew Merch. Peter Renew Merch. Edward Richier
Merch. Edward Ruge Merchant, Capt. Richard Rider, Samuel Read Merchant,
Nicholas Richards Esquire Tho Rawlins Esquire John Roydhouse Merchant, Dr. Radcliffe,
Tho Robinson Merchant, Sir Isaac Rebow Knight. Jacob Reynardon Merchant, Stephen
Signiorett Merchant, Arthur Shellett Merchant, Thomas Skinner Esquire Dr. William
Stokeham, John Sherbrooke Merchant, Capt. John Smith, John Sikes Merchant, John
Skinner Esquire Arnold Squibb Esquire Edward Salloway Merchant, Ebenezer Sadler Esquire
Thomas Slater Esquire Thomas Sutton Merchant, John Smith Gent. Thomas Swinbourne
Esquire Sam. Sheppard Merchant, William Sheppard Merchant, William Sedgwick
Merchant, Robert Sanderson Merchant, John Schoppins Merchant, Samuel Sale
Merchant, Robert Stephens Esquire Paris Slaughter Merchant, Francis Tussen Junior
Esquire Richard Tilden Merchant, John Trenchard Esquire Richard Trevor Esquire Major
General Trelawny, Colonel Henry Trelawny, Joseph Tompson Merchant, Frederick
Tilney Esquire Thomas Trench Merchant, Robert Tracy Esquire John Tulley Esquire Francis
Terrence Merchant, Thomas Tailor Esquire Dalby Thomas Esquire Nicholas Tourton
Merchant, Mr. Prothonotary Tempest, Robert Thompson Esquire John Du Tilleux
Merchant, Constantine Vernatti Esquire Henry Vincent Esquire Leonard Wessell Merchant,
Joseph Woolfe Merchant, William Withers Merchant, Samuel Wickens Merchant,
Solloway Winnington Esquire John Weston Esquire Thomas Winford Esquire Basil Wood Gent.
Edward Woodhouse Esquire Jaques Wiseman Merchant, Thomas Williams Merchant, Isaac
Watlington Esquire Thomas Williamson Esquire Walter Whitfeild Esquire Edmund Waller Esquire
William Young Esquire and Warwick Yard Merchant, Greeting, Recital of the Act.
Whereas in and by an Act made in the late Sessions of Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for Continuing to His Majesty certain Duties upon Salt, Glass Wares,
Stone and Earthen Wares, and for Granting several Duties upon Tobacco Pipes,
and other Earthen-Wares, for the Carrying on the War against France, and for
Establishing a National-Land-Bank, and for taking off the Duties upon Tunnage
of Ships and upon Coals; It is Enacted (amongst other things) That all and
every the Rates and Duties in the said Act mentioned should be Continued,
Raised, Levied, Collected, Answered and Paid unto Us, our Heirs and Successors,
in manner and form as in the said Act is mentioned, into the Receipt of
Exchequer, under certain Penalties therein mentioned: And that all the said
Sums, by virtue of the said Act, to be paid into the Receipt of Exchequer,
should be the Fund for the several and respective intents and Purposes in the
said Act expressed. And that yearly, and every year, reckoning the First Year
to begin from the Seventeenth Day of May One thousand six hundred ninety six,
the full Sum of One hundred seventy nine thousand four hundred and eighty
Pounds, out of the Moneys to arise by the several Rates and Duties by the said
Act Granted and Continued, and to be brought into the Receipt of Exchequer as
aforesaid, should be the whole and entire yearly Fund. And in case the said
Payments should not amount to One hundred seventy nine thousand four hundred
and eighty Pounds per Annum, then the said Payments, so far as they will
extend, should be part of the yearly Fund for and toward the answering and
paying of the several yearly Sums in the said Act mentioned.

And it is thereby further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
Us by Commission under Our Great Seal of England, to Authorize and Appoint any
Number of Persons to take and receive such voluntary Subscriptions as shall be
made on or before the First Day of August, One thousand six hundred ninety six,
by any Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners, Bodies Politic or Corporate
(other than the Governor and Company of the Bank of England) for and toward
the Raising and Paying into the Receipt of Exchequer the Sum of Five and twenty
hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds: And that the yearly Sum of One hundred
seventy nine thousand four hundred and eighty Pounds arising by and out of the
said Duties and Impositions before mentioned, shall be applied, issued and
directed, and is thereby appropriated to the Use and Advantage of such Person
or Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, as shall make such voluntary
Subscriptions and Payments their Executors, Administrators, Successors and
Assigns for ever, proportionable to the Subscription of each Person or Body
Politic so subscribing the same.

And it is thereby further Enacted, That the Commissioners of Our Treasury, and
the Under-Treasurer of Our Exchequer now being, and the Lord High Treasurer and
Under Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, are
thereby strictly enjoined and required by virtue of the said Act, and without
any further or other Warrant to be sued for, had or obtained from Us, Our Heirs
or Successors, to direct their Warrants yearly for the payment of the said
yearly Sum of One hundred seventy nine thousand four hundred and eighty Pounds
to the Contributors of the said Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four
thousand Pounds, in manner and proportion in and by the said Act directed and
appointed. And the Auditor of the Receipt of Exchequer, and all other Officers
of the Exchequer for the time being, are thereby directed and enjoined to issue
the said Moneys so set apart for the Uses thereby directed from time to time
without any Fee or Reward, under such Penalties as are by the said Act to be
inflicted. And it was thereby declared, That it should be lawful for Us to
Incorporate all and every the Subscribers and Contributors, their Executors,
Successors and Assigns to be one Body Corporate and Politic, by the Name of
the Governor and Company of the National Land-Bank, to have perpetual
Succession, and to have such Capacities, Privileges and Powers, and to be
under such Rules as are therein mentioned. And in case the whole Sum of Five
and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds shall not be advanced and
paid into the said Receipt of Exchequer before the first Day of January, which
shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred ninety six, that then
the Subscribers and Contributors for and toward raising the said Five and
twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds, their Executors, Successors and
Assigns, shall only have and receive so much and such part and proportion of
the said yearly Fund as shall be after the Rate of Seven Pounds per Cent. per
annum, for such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be so respectively paid and
advanced: And that from and after the Granting the said Letters Patents of
Incorporation, the said yearly Sum of One hundred seventy nine thousand four
hundred and eighty Pounds, or so much thereof as shall be proportionable to the
several Sums of Money before that time advanced, or to be then afterward
advanced, before the said First Day of January One thousand six hundred ninety
six as aforesaid, shall be paid and payable unto the said Governor and Company
and their Successors for ever in Trust, in the First Place, for paying and
satisfying all Bills and other Charges which they shall from time to time
charge thereupon under their Common Seal; and from and after Payment of such
Bills and Charges then in Trust for the several and respective Members of the
said Incorporation, according to the proportion of their several Stocks
therein. And that the Interests and Stock of the particular Members of the said
Incorporation shall go to Executors and Administrators, and not to Heirs. and
shall be Transferrable and Devisable in such manner as We shall direct in and
by the said Letters Patents, and not otherwise.

And in the said Act is contained a Proviso, That in case the Sum of Five and
twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds, or a Moiety thereof should not
be Subscribed on or before the First Day or August, One thousand for hundred
ninety six, that then the Powers and Authorities in the said Act for Erecting a
Corporation as aforesaid, shall cease and determine: And in such case so much
of the said yearly Sum of One hundred seventy nine thousand four hundred and
eighty Pounds as shall belong to the said Subscribers, according to the meaning
of the said Act, shall be transferrable by the respective Subscribers their
respective Executors, Successors or Assigns, to any Person or Persons
whatsoever, by any Writing or Writings under the Hand and Seal of the Person or
Persons transferring the same, attested by two or more credible Witnesses, and
entered within Twenty Days after the Sealing thereof, in a Book or Books to be
for that purpose kept in the said Exchequer by the Remembrancer for the time
being; (for the Entry whereof nothing shall be paid;) which Entry the said
Remembrancer is hereby required upon Request to make.

Words of Commission.
And that every such Subscriber shall at the time of such Subscription, pay or
cause to be paid unto the said Commissioners one Fourth Part of his or her
Subscription, and in Default thereof such Subscriptions shall be void, and that
the Residue of the said Subscription Moneys shall be paid into the Receipt of
our Exchequer, as we shall direct, before the First Day of January, One
thousand six hundred ninety six; and in Default of such Payments, that then the
Fourth Part first paid as aforesaid, shall be forfeited to, and for the Benefit
of Us, Our Heirs and Successors.

Now know ye, That we being resolved and determined, in case the said Sum of
Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds, or one Moiety thereof,
shall be Subscribed on or before the First Day of August, One thousand six
hundred ninety six, to Grant and pass our Royal Charter or Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, for Erecting and Establishing a Corporation or
Body Politic, to be called by the Name aforesaid, and to have a perpetual
Succession with such Powers and Privileges as are prescribed by the said Act,
and such others as shall be Lawful and Reasonable for Us to give and grant, as
well for the public Good as for Our own Service, subject nevertheless to the
Proviso's, Restrictions and Rules in the said Act of Parliament contained, and
reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Abilities, Faithfulness and
Prudent Circumspections in and for the performance of so much of this Affair as
shall be committed to your Care and Charge, have Nominated, Constituted
Authorized, and Appointed, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors do Nominate, Constitute, Authorize, and do Appoint you the said
Thomas Lord Jermyn, Thomas Lord Coningsby, Lord James Russell, Goodwin Wharton,
Henry Pagett, Robert Cecill, Sydney Wortley alias Mountagu, Charles Mountagu,
Sir William Langham, Sir Walter Young, Sir Henry Ashurst, Sir Richard Atkins,
Sir Richard Blackham, Sir Thomas Pope Blount, Sir Josiah Child, Sir Robert
Cotton, Sir Heal Hook, Sir Henry Hobart, Sir John Mordant, Sir Walter St.
John's, Sir Basil Dixwell, Sir Peter Paravacine, Sir Humphery Edwin, Sir Rowland
Aynsworth, Sir Owen Buckingham, Sir John Banks, Sir Benjamin Bathurst, Sir
Edward Clarke, Sir Thomas Cook, Sir Samuel Dashwood, Sir Thomas Davall, Sir
John Eyles, Sir William Forester, Sir John Fleet, Sir Edward Farmer, Sir Joseph
Herne, Sir Christopher Hales, Sir Robert Jefferies, Sir Thomas Lane, Sir John
Moore, Sir Tho. Mompesson, Sir William Pritchard, Sir Gabriel Roberts, Sir
Leonard Robinson, Sir Thomas Stamp, Sir Jeremy Sambrooke, Sir Joseph Tyley, Sir
Peter Vandeputt, Sir Thomas Meares, Sir Edward Wills, Sir Thomas Rawlinson, Sir
Edmond Wiseman, Sir Francis Child, Sir Charles Hedges, Sir Peter Daniel, Sir
Benjamin Newland, Sir Henry Johnson, Sir Godfrey Copley, Robert Austin Senior,
Robert Austin Junior, John Archer, John Arnold, Mordecai Abbot, William Aspin,
John Asgil, Thomas Andrews, Gabriel Armiger, Jonathan Andrews; John Aviolle,
Isaac Aviolle, John Billers, James Ball, Robert Byerly, David d' Burry; James
Boddington, John Brown, Arthur Bailey, Theophilus Boughey, John Scroop; John
Borrett, George Bohum, Robert Brown, Robert Breedon, Nicholas Barbon, James des
Boverie, John Bellamy, John Briscot, John Browning, Peter Burrel, Tho. Boon,
Francis Boynton, William Baber, Ralph Backnal, George Boddington* John
Blacklar, Francis Bazelin, David de la Bretonniere, Nicholas Carey, Arthur
Chamney; William Coward, Richard Carey, Awnsham Churchill, Stephen Cook,
Francis Chapman, Thomas Colby Senior, Thomas Compere, Anthony Gracherode, John
Churchill, John Dutton Colt, William Child, Thomas Colson, John Conyers,
Thomas Coleby Junior, Sir Pary Cust, James Dewy, John Delow, Francis Dashwood,
Charles Dubois, Peter Delaune Paul d'Aranda, Richard Dove, Abraham Dolins, Paul
Darby, George Doddington; Alvarez Mendez d'Costa, William Cockram, John Cook,
John Deagle. Paul Docminique, Richard Dalton, Anthony Mendez d'Costa, John
Mendez d'Costa, Jacob de Lilliers, Adam de Cardonnel, Dennis Dutry, John
Duboys, Robert Dorrel, Paul Dufoure, Peter Deline, Francis Eyles, Barrington
Eyton, John Evans, William East, Henry Air, William Ettrick, Martin Folks,
William Faulkner, Andrew Franklyn, Samuel Foot Junior, Christopher Fouler,
Thomas Fobey Senior, Philip Foley, Thomas Foley Junior, William Fenwick, George
Furnace, Peter Fanshaw, Samuel Fuller, Edward Fenwick, Israel Feilding, Mark
Huggetan, Sergeant Tho. Goodin, Tho. Glover, Thomas Guy, Thomas Gunstone, James
Green, Gabriel Glover, Bartholo Gracedieu, Francis Gosfright, Alwin Garraway,
Thomas Gratwick, Dr. William Gibbons, Benjamin Giles, George Gresham, Thomas
Hodges, Thomas Hall, Peter Henriques Senior, Edmond Harrison, Nathaniel Herne,
Robert Heysham, Joseph Hoskinstiles, Beddingfield Higham, John Hanger, Edward
Haistwell, Thomas Hancock, Dr. Edward Hulse, Lyonel Herne, Frederick Herne,
Thomas Harley, William Hewer, Charles Hooper, Urban Hall, Nathaniel Horneby,
George Hawes, Richard Harnage, Edward Harley, James Hooper, Charles Herle,
Hercules Horsey, Ralph Hough, Luke Hodges, Ebenezer Hall, John Hall, Daniel
Haies, Robert Henly, John Harvey, James Hallet, Michael Hubart, Jeffery
Jefferies, John Jefferies, George Juce, Henry Ireton, John Jackson, Peter
Henriques Junior, Charles Hargrave, Henry Kiffin, Maurice Kendal, Samuel
Keckwich, William Lowndes, Robert Leydal, John Love, James Lever, John
Lethullier, Robert Lancashire, Edward Lloyd, Joseph Lane, Dr. Fisher Littleton,
Thomas Lucas, Nehemiah Lyde, Peter Henriques Leferrer, Solomon d'Medina, John
Morris, Nicholas Mors Junior, Samuel Moyer, Samuel Mitchel, Ralph Marshal, John
Martyn, William Mead, Thomas Mulso, Arthur Moore, William Milman, Richard Mead,
James Misson, Charles Middleton, Anthony Meek, Nicholas Martin, Charles Mason,
William Nicholas, Thomas Nisbet, Francis Negus, Hugh North, Michael Noble,
Richard Noys, Thomas Owen, Walter Overbury, Samuel Only Senior, Samuel Powel,
Joseph Paice, John Paschall, John Pearson, Colonel John Perry, Richard Petty,
John Powell, George Paske, John Packer, Col. Pilkinton, Thomas Papillon,
Bartholowew Phillibert, Tho. Radbord, Gabriel Roberts, Henry Renew, Peter
Renew, Edward Richier, Edward Ruge, Richard Rider, Samuel Read, Nicholas
Richards, Thomas Rawlins, John Roydhouse, Dr. Radcliffe, Thomas Robinson, Sir
Isaac Rebow, Jacob Reynardon, Stephen Signiorett, Arthur Shellett, Thomas
Skinner, Dr. William Stokeham, John Sherbrooke, John Smith, John Sikes, John
Skinner, Arnold Squibb, Edward Solloway, Ebenezer Sadler, Thomas Slater, Thomas
Sutton, John Smith, Thomas Swinbourne, Samuel Sheppard, William Sheppard,
William Sedgwick, Robert Sanderson, John Schoppins, Samuel Sale, Robert
Stephens, Perry Slaughter, Francis Tussen Junior, Richard Tilden, John
Trenchard, Richard Trevor, Major General Trelawny, Colonel Henry Trelawny,
Joseph Thompson, Frederick Tilney, Thomas Trench, Robert Tracy, John Tulley,
Francis Terrence, Thomas Tailor, Dalby Thomas, Nicholas Tourton, Mr.
Prothonotary Tempest, Robert Thompson, John Du Tilleux, Constantine Vernatti,
Henry Vincent, Leonard Wessell, Joseph Woolfe, William Withers, Samuel Wickens,
Solloway Winnington, John Weston, Thomas Winford, Basil Wood, Edward
Woodhouse, Jaques Wiseman, Thomas Williams, Isaac Watlington, Thomas
Williamson, Walter Whitfeild, Edmund Waller, William Young, and Warwick Yard,
to be our Commissioners, to take and receive all such voluntary Subscriptions
as shall be made on or before the said First Day of August, in the year of our
Lord One thousand six hundred ninety six, by or for any Person or Persons,
Natives or Foreignors, or by or for any Body Politic or Corporate (except as
aforesaid) for or toward the Raising or Paying the said Sum of Five and twenty
hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds in the said Act mentioned: And to you,
or any Five or more of you, We do by these Presents give and grant full Power
and Authority to take and receive; and you, or so many of you as aforesaid, are
hereby directed and required to take and receive all such voluntary
Subscriptions of and for any Sum or Sums of Money (not exceeding in the whole
the said Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds) as any
Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners, or Bodies Politic or Corporate
(other than the Governor and Company of the Bank of England) shall be willing
to make as aforesaid, or shall cause to be made within the time before.

To Provide the Office in Ten Days.
And for the better pursuing of the End and Intent of the said Act of
Parliament, and of our Royal Purpose and Intention in these Presents, we do for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, order, direct and appoint that you or so many of
you as aforesaid, shall within Ten Days after the Date or making of these
Presents, provide, appoint, and keep one or more Convenient House or Houses
within the Cities of London and Westminster, or one of them, or within the
Suburbs of the same, to be the Public Office or Offices to which all or any
Person or Persons shall or may resort for the making of the said Subscriptions,
and to pay the Fourth Part of the Moneys which they respectively are to pay
thereupon; and shall give such public Notice thereof as you shall think most
conduceable to this Service.

Books in Ten Days.
And that you, or any Five or more of you, shall within Ten Days after the Date
or making hereof, provide or cause to be provided one or more Book or Books of
Vellum or Parchment for the said Subscriptions to be made therein.

Which Book or Books shall lie open every Day ( Sundays excepted) at the said
Public Office or Offices, Books to lie Open.
from the Hours of Eight to the Hours of Twelve in the Forenoons, and from the
Hours of Three to the Hours of Eight in the Afternoons, until and upon the said
First Day of August One thousand six hundred ninety six, unless the
Subscriptions for the said whole Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four
thousand Pounds shall be sooner Completed.

And that in the Title or Front of every or any such Book or Books, there shall
be fairly written proper Words, Title of the Book.
importing that the same does or do contain the Subscriptions authorized to be
made in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament, and of these Presents, of the
respective Sums which the several Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, whose Names shall be written therein, do or shall
set or cause to be set against their Names respectively.

One full Fourth Part of which said Sum or Sums of Money, and every of them so
to be Subscribed is to be paid at the time of making each Subscription by the
respective Subscribers, Fourth Part paid down.
to the Hands of you our Commissioners, and the residue thereof in such manner
as is herein after directed.

Sums in Words at length and Figures.
And you are severally to take care, that the Sums so Subscribed be written as
will in Words at length as in Figures, with a Colume for expressing the Day on
which every such Subscription shall be made; and that the Subscriptions so to
be made from time to time, be attested under the Hands and Seals of two or more
of you, Subscription: Attested under the Hands and Seals of two or more
Commissioners.
our Commissioners who were present at the making of those Subscriptions.

And that no such Subscriptions shall be made or taken after the said First Day
of August now next ensuing.

Duplicates Attested by Five Commissioners. to be delivered to the Auditor of
the Exchequer.
And that you, or any Five or more of you, do without delay after the said First
Day of August next ensuing, or after the said Subscriptions for the whole Sum
of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds shall be Completed
(which shall first happen) make or cause to be made true Duplicates, or Copies
fairly written in Parchment, of the said whole Book or Books of Subscriptions,
and deliver the said Duplicate or Duplicates of the said Book or Books,
attested by Five or more of you as aforesaid, into the said Office of Auditor
of the Receipt of Our Exchequer, that so it may appear whether the whole Sum of
Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds be Subscribed within the
said limited Time, or not, or how much thereof, and by whom the same or any
part thereof shall be so Subscribed, and that thereby the Commissioners of Our
Treasury, or Our Treasurer, and Under Treasurer, and other Officers of the
Exchequer for the time being may know how the yearly Fund appropriated by the
said Act, or any proportion or part thereof, is to be Issued or Applied,
according to the true Intent and Meaning of the same Act of Parliament: And we
do hereby Authorize, Require and Command the said Auditor of the Receipt of Our
Exchequer to Enroll, and the Clerk of the Pells in the Receipt of Exchequer to
Record the said Duplicate or Duplicates in the Registers or Records of their
respective Offices, for the Ends and Purposes aforesaid.

And also, we do by these presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, Direct,
Authorize and Appoint, that you our said Commissioners, Any five to receive the
first fourth part.
or any five or more of you, shall and may receive and take from every such
Subscriber or Subscribers as aforesaid, respectively, at the time of his, her,
or their Subscription, the full fourth part of every Sum so Subscribed, which
by the Tenor and true meaning of the said Act, is then to be paid in Ready
Money.

And that you Our said Commissioners, or any five or more of you, shall and may
Appoint such Person or Persons as you shall think fit to Entrust, To Appoint a
Cashier.
and shall be also Approved by the Commissioners of Our Treasury or any three
of them now being, or by the Treasurer of Our Exchequer, or any three or more
of the Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, to be the Cashier or
Cashiers for the Custody or Keeping of all or any the Sum or Sums of Money
arising by or for the first fourth part of the Moneys to be Subscribed as
aforesaid, taking from such Person or Persons respectively, such Security or
Securities as to you shall seem good and sufficient, and shall also be Approved
by the Commissioners of Our Treasury, or the Treasurer of Our Exchequer as
aforesaid, by Bond or Bonds in the Name of us, Our Heirs or Successors, for the
due Answering, Paying and Accounting for the Money which they shall
respectively receive, according to such Rules or Directions as are hereafter in
these Presents contained, for or concerning the Payment or Application of the
same.

To keep the Money till payable into the Exchequer.
AND We do by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, Direct,
Authorize and Command, that you Our said Commissioners, or your Cashier or
Cashiers who shall Receive or have in their Custody all or any the Moneys
arising by the said Subscriptions for the first fourth part as aforesaid, or
any Person or Persons, Chargeable therewith; shall safely keep the same and
every part thereof (as it shall be received) to Our use until the said Moneys
shall be payable into the Receipt of Our Exchequer, according to Our Directions
herein after contained (that is to say,)

How the first fourth part shall be paid into the Exchequer
OUR Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Direct, Authorize and Command, that
you Our said Commissioners, or the said Cashier or Cashiers or others that
shall have the Custody of the money of the said first fourth part, or any part
thereof, or be chargeable therewith, shall and do, in case the whole Sum of Two
Millions Five Hundred Sixty four Thousand Pounds, or the Moiety, or any greater
part thereof, shall be Subscribed on or before the first Day of August now next
ensuing as aforesaid, as soon as our Charter of Incorporation shall be made and
passed under Our Great Seal of England, pay or cause to be paid all the Moneys
which shall then have been received of or for the said first fourth part into
the Receipt of Our Exchequer, in the Name of the Governor and Company of the
National Land Band, and upon such Payment or Payments to be made in the Name of
such Governor and Company of the National Land-Bank of the Moneys of the said
first fourth part, the Commissioners of Our Treasury, Treasurer and under
Treasurer of Our Exchequer, and all other Officers to whom it does or shall
appertain in the Receipt of the Exchequer for the time being, are hereby
Required and Authorized to Levy or Strike Talleys for the same, Importing so
much Money Received from such Governor and Company by the hands of you Our
said Commissioners, for or toward the Sum not exceeding Five and twenty
hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds, to be raised upon the said Act, and to
Draw and Sign Exchequer Orders fairly written in Parchment for paying to the
said Governor and Company of the National Land-Bank and their Successors for
ever, (Subject nevertheless to the Condition of Redemption in the said Act
contained, a proportionable part of the said yearly Sum of One hundred seventy
nine thousand four hundred and eighty Pounds per Annum, for every or any Sum of
the said first fourth part which shall be so paid into the Receipt of Our
Exchequer, according to the Tenor and true meaning of the said Act of
Parliament.

AND Our Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby Direct, Authorize and Command,
that you Our said Commissioners, or the said Cashier or Cashiers, or others,
who shall have the Custody of the said Moneys so to be received for the first
fourth part of the said Subscriptions, or any part thereof, shall and do (in
case so much as a Moiety of the said Five and twenty hundred and sixty four
thousand Pounds shall not be Subscribed on or before the said first day of
August next) pay or cause to be paid, all the Moneys which you shall have
received for the said first fourth part upon the said Subscriptions into the
Receipt of Our Exchequer, in the Names of the respective Subscribers or
Contributors thereof, his, her, or their respective Executors, Administrators,
Successors, or Assigns; and upon every or any such Payment or Payments to be
made; (as is last mentioned) the said Commissioners of Our Treasury, Treasurer,
and under Treasurer of Our Exchequer, and all other Officers to whom it does or
shall appertain in the Receipt of Our Exchequer for the time being, are hereby
Authorized and Required to Levy and Strike Talleys for the same, Importing so
much Money Received from the respective Subscribers and Contributors, their
Executors, Administrators, Successors, or Assigns, by the hands of you Our
said Commissioners upon the said Act, and to Draw and Sign Exchequer Orders
fairly written in Parchment, for paying to the said respective Subscribers and
Contributors, their Executors, Administrators, Successors and Assigns for
ever, (subject nevertheless to the condition of Redemption in the said Act
contained) proportionable parts of the said yearly Fund of One hundred seventy
nine thousand four hundred and eighty Pounds, according to the true meaning of
the said Act, for every or any Sum which shall be so paid into the Receipt of
Our Exchequer, and these presents of the Entry or Enrollment thereof, shall be
to the said Commissioners of the Treasury, Treasurer, under Treasurer, and all
other Officers and Persons who are, or may be concerned, a sufficient Warrant
and Discharge in that behalf.

And as to the remaining three fourth parts of all and every the Sum and Sums
of Money which shall be Subscribed and Contained in the said Books of
Subscription as aforesaid; How the residue shall be paid.
Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare, Limit and Appoint, that
every entire Sum Subscribed, or to be Subscribed as aforesaid, being divided
into four equal parts (whereof the first fourth part is to be paid and brought
into the Receipt of our Exchequer, by and according to Our Directions
aforesaid.)

A Second fourth part thereof shall be paid and brought into the Receipt of
Exchequer, Second Payment.
on or before the first day of October now next ensuing.

Residue of the Payment.
And the remaining two fourth parts (which will complete the whole
Subscriptions) shall be paid or brought into the Receipt of Exchequer, before
the first day of January) now next ensuing.

How the Residue shall be paid in case of Incorporation.
And in case the whole Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand
Pounds or the Moiety, or any greater part thereof, shall be Subscribed on or
before the first day of August next as aforesaid, then all the Moneys which
shall be Subscribed as aforesaid, (the first fourth part only excepted) shall
and may be brought and paid into the Receipt of Our Exchequer, at such times
and by such Ways, Methods or Means, as the Governor, (or in his absence) the
Deputy Governor, together with Sixteen or more of the Trustees, to be
constituted by the said Charter of Incorporation, shall from time to time
Direct, Limit or Appoint.

So as a full Second Fourth part of all and every the Sum and Sums of Money to
be Subscribed as aforesaid, be entirely paid and brought into the said Receipt
of Exchequer, on on or before the said first day of October now next ensuing.

And so as that the remaining two fourth parts to complete the whole Account of
the said Subscriptions be paid, or brought into the said Receipt of Exchequer,
before the said first day of January now next ensuing as aforesaid.

How the Residue shall be paid in case there be no Incorporation.
And in case so much as a Moiety of the said Five and twenty hundred and sixty
four thousand Pounds, or any greater Sum, shall not be Subscribed on or before
the first day of August now next ensuing, then all the Moneys which shall be
Subscribed as aforesaid (the said first fourth part only excepted) shall be
paid and brought into the said Receipt of Exchequer by the respective
Subscribers of the same, his, her, or their Executors, Administrators,
Successors or Assigns, at or before the respective days or times, and in such
proportions as are herein before limited and appointed for the payment of the
last three fourth parts, in case five and twenty hundred and sixty four
thousand Pounds, or a Moiety, or any greater part thereof, shall be Subscribed
as aforesaid, and according to the Tenor and true meaning of the said Act.

Talleys struck for the Payments.
And upon every or any such Payment or Payments so to be made, of all or any the
Moneys arising by or upon the said Subscriptions, (the First Fourth Part only
excepted, touching which Our Pleasure is herein before declared,) Our Will and
Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Direct,
Authorize and Command, That the said Commissioners of Our Treasury, Treasurer,
and Under-Treasurer, and all other Officers in Our Exchequer for the Time
being, to whom it does or shall appertain, shall from Time to Time Levy and
Strike Talleys for the Moneys which shall be so Paid by the Governor and
Company of the National Land-Bank, importing the Receipt thereof from them; and
Tallies for the Moneys which shall or may (in the Case beforementioned) be so
Paid by the respective Subscribers or Contribubuters, his, her, or their
Executors, Administrators, Successors, or Assigns, importing the Receipt
thereof of and from them respectively; And shall from Time to Time, upon the
said Tallies, Draw and Sign such Exchequer-Orders as are abovementioned, for
the Proportionable Parts of the said Yearly Fund, which (in the respective
Cases aforesaid) are to be Paid and Issued, either to the Governor and Company
of the National Land-Bank, and their Successors, for ever; or to the respective
Subscribers and Contributers, their Executors, Administrators, Successors and
Assigns, for ever, according to the Tenor and true Meaning of the said Act of
Parliament, and subject to the Conditions of Redemption therein contained.

Any Five Commissioners to give Receipts
And We do also Direct and Appoint, that you Our said Commissioners, or any
Five, or more of you, who shall Receive any of the abovementioned Payments of
the said First Fourth Part, in pursuance of these Presents, shall immediately
give to the Person or Persons paying the same, a Receipt in Writing for the
several Sum and Sums of Money so received.

Entries of Payment.
And shall cause an Entry thereof to be made in a Book or Books for that purpose
to be kept in your said Office or Offices, wherein shall be Entered and
Registered the Day on which every such Payment shall be made; the Names of you
Our said Commissioners, to whom each Sum shall have been paid; the Name, and
Place of Abode, of the said Person or Persons making the Payment, with his, her
or their proper Additions; and the Sum that shall be actually paid.

Transmit an Acccount of the Payments to the Auditor
And that you Our said Commissioners, or any Five, or more of you, do without
Delay, after the said First Day of August next ensuing, make, or cause to be
made, a true Account, fairly written in Parchment, of all the said Receipts of
the Money of the said First Fourth Part; expressing therein such Particulars as
are herein before directed to be Inserted in the said Receipts; and deliver the
said Account, Attested by any Five, or more of you, as aforesaid, into the
Office of the Auditor of the Receipt of Exchequer.

Account to be Enrolled and Recorded.
And We do hereby Authorize, Require and Command the said Auditor of the Receipt
to Inrol, and the said Clerk of the Pells to Record the said Account, in the
Registers or Records of their respective Offices; as well for the Charging of
you, Our Commissioners, who shall Receive the said Moneys, or your Cashiers,
with the Money so Received, as for the better Guidance of the said
Commissioners of the Treasury, Treasurer, Under-Treasurer, and other the
Officers of the Exchequer, for the Time being, in the Issuing and Payment of
the said appropriated Fund, or any Part or Proportion of the same, pursuant to
the said Act of Parliament.

To give Attendance.
And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Require and Command, That you
Our said Commissioners, and every of you respectively, do from Time to Time
Assemble and Meet together, and give your Attendance at the Public Office or
Offices beforementioned.

And if the First, Subdivide.
or any other General Meeting of you Our Commissioners, which shall be had, or
appointed to be had, for the putting of this Commission in Execution, you, or
the Major Part of you then present, shall judge it most convenient to have or
keep several public Offices for the Purpose aforesaid; In that Case you are
hereby Directed and Authorized to Sub-divide your selves for the said several
Offices; taking Care that a sufficient Number of you Our Commissioners shall
be, and do Attend in each Office; And that you selves, and the Cashier or
Cashiers to be Employed under you, do from Time to Time carefully and
diligently Attend the Execution and Performance of this Our Service, in all
Things, as becomes.

Commissioners of the Treasury to be Aiding.
And the said Commissioners of Our Treasury now being, and the Treasurer and
Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, or Commissioners of Our Treasury for the Time
being, are hereby required to be Aiding and Assisting to you in the Performance
of this Our Service.

Commmissioners of the Treasury to issue Moneys for the Charges.
And are hereby also Empowered and Commanded, out of any Our Treasury, from Time
to Time, being and remaining in the Receipt of Our Exchequer, (not appropriated
to particular Uses by Act of Parliament,) to Issue and Pay to such Person or
Persons as you shall nominate, such Sum or Sums of Money as shall be necessary
to be Expended or Laid out as Incident Charges in the Execution of this Our
Commission.

Notice of the first Election.
And to the End the said Corporation, or Body Politic (in Case the said Sum of
Two Millions Five Hundred Sixty Four Thousand Pounds, or the Moiety, or any
greater Part thereof shall be Subscribed on or before the said First Day of
August next ensuing) may be Erected and Settled to the best Content and
Satisfaction of the Subscribers or Contributers aforesaid, We do by these
Presents give full Power and Authority to you Our said Commissioners: And We do
hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Require, Cmmand, Consent, and Agree,
That you Our said Commissioners, or any Five or more of you, shall and may
immediately after the said First Day of August next, or so soon as the said Sum
of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds shall be Subscribed
as aforesaid (which of them shall first happen) cause Public Notice to be
given by Writing under your Hands, to be openly set up and affixed upon the
Royal Exchange in London, and at your own Public Office or Offices, to and for
all and every the Person and Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, who before
the making of the Elections herein after mentioned, shall severally or
respectively have Subscribed in the said Book or Books as aforesaid, any Sum or
Sums of Money not less than Five hundred Pounds, and shall have severally paid
one Fourth Part of the Sum or Sums so by them Subscribed, and shall have taken
the Oaths, Qualification of Electors.
or made the Declaration herein after mentioned, their Executors,
Administrators, Successors or Assigns, to Assemble and Meet together at some
convenient Place within the Cities of London or Westminster, and at a Day to be
Prescribed or Appointed in the said Writing; (Which Day is not to be sooner
than Four Days, or later than Eight Days after the said Notice shall be Set up
or Affixed upon the Royal Exchange, and your said Office or Offices as
aforesaid: Provided that no one to Elect.
) Then and there to Elect and Choose Persons (qualified as is herein after
mentioned) to be the First Governor, First Deputy Governor, and First Trustees
of the Corporation, or Body-Politick, to be Erected and Established in
pursuance of the said Act.

Chose by Ballat.
And that it shall and may be lawful, to and for all and every such Subscribers
qualified as aforesaid; their Executors Administrators, Successors and
Assigns, then and there to assemble and meet together; and too and for them,
or the Major part of them so assembled, to Nominate, Elect and Choose (by way
of Ballat) out of the whole number of Subscribers, None above one Vote.
(whereof none to have more then one Vote) one Person who shall have Subscribed
in his own Right, the Sum of Four Thousand Pounds at least, and shall have paid
one fourth at the least of the Sum so by him Subscribed, Stock of Governor.
to be made the first Governor of the said Corporation, to be erected as
aforesaid; and one other Person who shall have Subscribed in his own Right the
Sum of Three Thousand Pounds at least, and shall have paid one fourth part at
least, of the Sum so by him Subscribed, Stock of Deputy Governor, Thirty
Trustees.
to be made the first Deputy Governor of the said Corporation; and thirty other
Persons, each of which shall severally have Subscribed in their own Rights, the
Sum of Two Thousand Pounds at the least, Stock of Trustees.
and who shall severally and respectively have paid one fourth part, or more,
of every such Sum so by them respectively Subscribed, to be the first Trustees
of the said Corporation, or Body Politic; which Election shall severally be
determined by the Majority of Votes of the Subscribers then present, by way of
Ballat as aforesaid.

In case of Equality.
And in case they shall be Equal, then by you Our Commissioners, or the Major
part of you then present.

Persons Elected to be inserted in the Charter.
And the Persons so to be Elected or Chosen, shall be incerted in Our Royal
Charter of Incorporation, to be granted as aforesaid, and shall thereby be made
and constituted the first Governor, Deputy Governor, and Trustees of the
Company, thereby to be Erected and Established, and to be and continue in those
several Offices of Governor, Deputy Governor, and Trustees, from the date or
making of Our said Charter, until the Tenth Day of April, which shall be in the
Year of Our Lord, One thousand six hundred ninety eight, First Trustees to
continue till tenth of April, School.
and till others shall be duly chosen in their Rooms and sworn, Subject
nevertheless to the Rules, Restrictions, Provisoes and Directions contained in
the said Act of Parliament; and to such other Rules and Appointments as shall
be inserted touching them in the said Charter: The Draught whereof is contained
in a Schedule hereunto annexed.

Provided always, and Our Royal Will and Pleasure is, And we do hereby Appoint,
that no Subscriber shall be capable to Vote, as aforesaid, in the Election of
the said Persons, to be made the first Governor, Deputy Governor, or Trustees,
Oath of Electors.
or any of them, until he shall have taken an Oath, in the form and to the
effect following, (to wit) I A. B. Do swear that the Sum of Five hundred Pounds
by me Subscribed, or the Sum of Five hundred Pounds at least, of the Moneys by
me Subscribed, is my own proper Money, for my own Use, and in my own Right, and
not in Trust for any Person whatsoever.

Provided nevertheless, that any Person or Persons commonly called or known to
be Quakers, who shall have Subscribed Five hundred Pounds, or more, as
aforesaid, Proviso for Quakers.
and shall have made and Signed the Declaration following (that is to say,) I
A. B. Do Sincerely and Solemnly Declare, in the Presence of God, that the Sum
of Five hundred Pounds by me Subscribed, or the Sum of Five hundred Pounds at
least, of the Moneys by me Subscribed, is my own Proper Money, for my own Use,
and in my own Right, and not in Trust for any Person whatsoever,) shall be
capable of Voting, and the Elections or choice of the said Persons, to be made
the First Governor, Deputy Governor, and Trustees, as aforesaid.

Governor, Deputy Governor, and Trustees, to be Natural Born or Naturallized;
and to take Oaths.
Provided also, and Our Royal Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby Appoint,
that no Subscriber or Subscribers shall be capable to be Chosen as aforesaid,
to be made the First Governor, Deputy Governor, or Trustees, as aforesaid,
unless he or they be Natural born Subjects of England, or Naturalized and shall
severally and respectively have taken an Oath, that the Sums, which in their
respective cases are requisite to have been Subscribed by them as aforesaid,
(that is to say) Four Thousand Pounds by the Person to be made Governor, Three
Thousand Pounds by the Person to be made Deputy Governor, and Two Thousand
Pounds by every one of them that shall be the Trustees (are their own proper
Moneys respectively, and Subscribed for their own Use, and in their own Right,
and not in Trust for any other Person or Persons as aforesaid,) nor shall be
capable of Executing his or their Office or Offices, until he or they shall
respectively have taken the Oaths in the said Recited Act prescribed for that
purpose, and the Oath herein before-directed.

Two Commissioners to administer Oaths to First Governor, Deputy Governor and
Trustees
And We do hereby Direct, Require, Authorize and Empower you our said
Commissioners, or any Two or more of you, to Administer the said several Oaths
and Declaration to the said Persons who are to choose or be the First Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Trustees respectively, as aforesaid; any thing in these
Presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the End all and every Person and Persons who shall Subscribe and
Contribute their Moneys, in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament (which
manifestly Designs and Intends the Public Good and Convenience of the People
of this Kingdom, and the Profit and Advantage of the Persons who shall be
Concerned in the said Company, as well as the Accommodation of Our Affairs, in
respect of the Moneys which are intended by this Means to be Supplied, for the
Carrying on the War against France; and the Just Satisfaction of Persons who
had Securities upon the Duties of Tunnage, Coals, and other Things by the said
Recited Act, Taken away, or Altered) may be fully Assured and Satisfied, That
the Powers Vested in us by the said Act of Parliament for Erecting and
Establishing the said Corporation, or Body Politic, shall be justly and truly
Executed, according to the true Intent and Meaning of the said Act.

King's Covenant to Incorporate.
We are Graciously pleased to Promise and Declare, and we do by these Presents
solemnly Promise, Publish, Declare and make Known, and We do also for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, Covenant, Grant and Agree to and with you Our said
Commissioners, and every of you, for and on the Behalf of your selves, and
every or any one of you, and of every or any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, that shall Subscribe and Pay any Sum or Sums of Money as aforesaid,
that in case the whole Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand
Pounds, or a Moiety, or any greater part thereof, shall be Subscribed upon the
Security of the said Act, or in pursuance of these Presents, on or before the
said First Day of August now next ensuing, that then immediately after the said
First Day of August, or so soon as the said Sum of Five and twenty hundred and
sixty four thousand Pounds shall be Subscribed as aforesaid, which of them
shall first happen, We, Our Heirs or Successors, shall and will Grant and make
forth Our Royal Charter or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, Who
shall be Incorporated, according to the Schedule annexed.
and thereby Incorporate all and every such Subscribers and Contributers who
shall then be living, and who shall not have Assigned their Interest in their
said Subscriptions: And in Case any of them shall be dead, the Executors or
Administrators of such Subscribers: And in Case any of the Subscribers shall
have Assigned their Interest in their said Subscriptions, in all such Cases the
Assignees of such Subscribers to be one Body Corporate and Politic, by the
Name of the Governor and Company of the National Land-Bank, with such Powers,
Capacities, Privileges, Benefits, Liberties, and Advantages, and under and
subject to such Rules, Restrictions, Power of Redemption, Provisoes,
Limitatations and Clauses as are contained in the said Act of Parliament, or
are Intended by the Schedule hereunto annexed, and with such further Power or
Privileges (being such as We can Lawfully Grant) as shall be reasonably
Advised and Desired by Council Learned in the Law, for or on the Behalf of the
said Subscribers and Contributers, and shall be Approved by Our Attorney or
Solliciter-General on Our Behalf.

Subscription-Money shall be called, The Capital Stock.
And We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Declare, Limit,
Direct and Appoint, That the whole Sum or Amount of all and every the Sum and
Sums of Money that shall be Subscribed and Paid as aforesaid, shall after the
said Grant of Incorporation, be and be called, accepted, esteemed, reputed and
taken, The Capital Stock of the said Incorporation; and all and every Person
and Persons, or Bodies Politic, his, her, and their Executors, Administrators,
Successors or Assigns, according and in proportion to the Sum or Sums or Money
by him, her or them respectively Subscribed and Paid thereunto, shall have and
be deemed to have an Interest or Share in the said Capital Stock (not in the
whole to exceed Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand Pounds as
aforesaid. Which Interest or Share, or any part thereof, shall be Assignable
and Transferrable, and shall and may be Assigned and Transferred by any Person
or Persons Entitled thereunto, to any other Person or Persons, Bodies Politic
or Corporate, except the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, (...)
Stock shall be Assignable.
who shall be willing to accept thereof, his or their Executors,
Administrators, Successors or Assigns, and so over toties quoties as fully and
effectually as any other Interest whatsoever is by Law Assignable: Which
Assignment shall Vest the Interest in the Assignee and Assignees, his, her and
their Executors, Administrators and Successors, according to the Purport and
Effect thereof. And after such Assignments made, it shall not be in the Power
of the Assigner or Assigners, their Executors or Administrators to Revoke or
make Void any such Assignments, so such Assignments or Transferrances be made
in Writing, and Entered or Regestred in such manner as is herein after mentioned
(that is to say.) All Assignments or Transferrances which shall be made on or
before the said First Day of August next ensuing, or the full and complete
Subscribing of the whole Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousand
Pounds, which shall first happen, and before the Granting of Our Royal Charter
of Incorporation before mentioned shall be Entered or Registered in the said
Office of Auditor of the Receipt of Our Exchequer, within Six Days after the
making of the said respective Assignments. And all Assignments or
Transferrances which shall be made after the Granting of Our said Royal Charter
of Incorporation, shall be Made Entered and Registered in such Manner and Form as
shall be thereby prescribed* And if for Default of Subscribing one Moiety of
the said Sum of Five and twenty hundred and sixty four thousound Pounds, on or
before the said First Day of August next, the Powers and Authorities in the
said Act contained for Erecting a Corporation as aforesaid, shall Cease and
Determine; then all the Assignments and Transferrances to be thenceforth made,
shall be Entered in the Office of the Remembrancer in the Exchequer, in such
Method as the said Act in that Case directs.

Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do by these Presents for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, signify, express, declare and grant, That you
Our said Commissioners, or any of you, Commissioners to be answerable for their
own Acts only.
who are joined in this Our Commission, shall be nevertheless Liable and
Answerable unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors severally, (to wit) Every one of
you for his own particular Receipts, Actings and Doings, and not for the
Receipts, Actings, or Doings of one another, or of your Casheir or Casheirs, or
in any Case where there is not particular Fraud or Deceit.

Commissioners to be Sworn.
Provided also, and Our Will and Pleasure is, That you Our said Commissioners,
and every of you, before you respectively do intermeddle in the Execution of
this Our Commission, be Sworn to the Faithful and Honest Discharge and
Execution thereof.

And we do hereby Authorize and Empower the Keeper of Our Great Seal of
England, or Our High Chancellor of England for the Time being, or the Chief
Baron of Our Court of Exchequer for the Time being, or such two or more of you
our Commissioners, as shall first be Sworn before Our said Keeper, Chancellor
or Chief Baron, to Administer unto you severally such Oath in the Words, or to
the Effect following, (that is to say)

Form of Commissioners Oath.
I A. B do Swear, That I will Faithfully and Honestly Discharge and Execute the
Duty and Trust Reposed in me, as one of the Commissioners Appointed by His
Majesty under the Great Seal of England, for taking Subscriptions, and doing
other Matters and Things pursuant to the Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for Continuing to His Majesty certain Rates and Duties upon Salt, Glass Wares,
Stone and Earthen Wares, and for Granting several Duties upon Tobacco Pipes and
Earthen Wares, for the Carrying on the War against France, and for Establishing
a Notional Land-Bank, and for taking off the Duties upon Tunnage of Ships and
upon Coals, to the best of my Skill, Unsterstanding and Power, and without
Fraud or Deceit: (So help me, God.)

In Case of death of Commissioners.
Provided also, and Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare, Ordain
and Appoint, That in Case any of you, Our said Commissioners, shall happen to
die before all the Matters and Things hereby Authorized and Intended to be done
and Executed shall be fully Performed and Accomplished, That then this Our
Commission, or any the Powers hereby Granted, shall not Determine or become
Ineffectual, but shall and may be Executed and Performed by the rest of you Our
Commissioners, so long as there shall be a sufficient number left to Execute
the same.

And in Default thereof We do hereby Promise and Declare, That a New Commission
and full Powers and Authorities shall be Granted under Our Great Seal of
England, for the Accomplishment and Performance of all Matters and Things
hereby Directed or Intended to be Done for the Benefit or Security of the said
Subscribers and Contributers, their Executors, Successors or Assigns.

Any Commissioners may Subscribe.
Provided also, and We do hereby Signify and Declare, That it is Our Royal
Intention and Purpose in these Presents, that any of you Our Commissioners may
be Subscribers; and the rest of you Our Commissioners, or so many of you as
aforesaid, may take such Subscriptions from any of you, and Receive the Money,
and do all other Things thereupon, as are hereby directed to be done in the
Case of any other Subscribers, any thing beforementioned to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided Nevertheless, that where any of you Our said Commissioners shall be
Subscribers, such Subscriptions shall be made before, and be Attested in the
Books by some other of you Our said Commissioners, who are to give Receipts for
the same.

When Enrolled.
And Lastly, Our Pleasure is, That these Presents shall be Enrolled in the
Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, and Recorded in the Office of the Clerk
of the Pells in Our Exchequer, and these Presents, or the Entry,
Exemplification or Inrollment thereof, shall be to you, and every of you, and
all others herein Concerned, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge for all, and
whatsoever Matters and Things shall be Done, Executed or Performed in pursuance
of the same, or of Our Pleasure therein declared. In Witness

FINIS.

