A Form of the Indulgences, with which our Holy Father Pope Clement the IX.
blesses the Beads, Rosaries, Crosses, Pictures, or Medals, on the occasion of
Canonizing of St. Peter of Alcantura, and St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzis.
WHoever shall use once in a week at least to say the Beads of our Savior, or
of the B. Virgin Mary, or the Rosary, or the third part of it, or the Divine
Office, or the Office of our B. Lady, or of the Dead, or the Seven Penitential
Psalms, or Gradual Psalms, or shall use to visit the Prisoners, or relieve the
Poor, being confessed to a Priest, approved of by the Ordinary, and receiving the
B. Sacrament on any of the days hereafter named, and praying Devoutly for the
Extripation of Heresies, and Propagation of the Catholic Faith, and for the
other necessities of the Church, may gain a plenary Indulgence; that is to
say, on the Nativity, Circumcision, Epiphany, Resurrection, and Ascension of
our B. Savior Jesus Christ; on Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday, on Corpus Christi
day; or on the Conception, Nativity, Presentation, Visitation, Annunciation,
Purification, and Assumption of the B. Virgin Mary; or likewise on the Nativity
of St. John Baptist, on the Feast of St. Peter, and St. Paul, or of either of
the two Saints now Cannonized, on All Saints Day, on the Dedication, Chief
Patron, or Title of their proper Church.

Whoever shall fast on the Vigil of either of the two Saints, and being
(...)est, shall receive the B. Sacrament on their Fast, and shall pray as above
each time, may gain a plenary Indulgence.

Whoever shall say Mass, or being Confessed, and Communicated, shall hear Mass at
the Altar when the Picture, or the Body, or Relics of either of the two
Saints are, and shall pray as above, may once in a Month, at his own Election,
gain a plenary Indulgence.

Whoever, being truly Penitent of his Sins, with a firm purpose of Amendment,
shall on the same day visit seven Churches; or if there be not seven, shall
visit all that there are; or if there be but one, shall visit all the Altars of
it, and praying for the Extirpation of Heresies, etc. may once a Year gain all
the Indulgences that are gained by visiting the seven Churches of Rome.

Whoever shall devoutly think on any Mystery of the Passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and in honor thereof, shall humbly kiss the Ground seven times,
may on that day gain all the Indulgences that are gained by making the Holy
Stares of Rome, once in a year only.

Whoever shall make an Act of true Detestation of his Sins, with a firm purpose
of Amendment, or shall exercise some Act of Virtue in Imitation of the said two
Saints, as to fast one day with Devotion, to imitate at least in some small
measure, their great Austerity, may every time gain an Indulgence of seven
years, and as many Quarantains.

Whoever shall read one Chapter of the Life of the said Saints; or, shall visit
their Altar, or shall reverence their Pictures, and shall pray for the happy
state of our Holy Mother the Church, and for the conversion of Sinners, may as
often gain 100 days of Indulgence.

He may likewise gain the same Indulgence, by giving something to the Poor, or
instructing of them, or by getting others to instruct them in matters of Faith,
or good Manners.

Those that live in Rome, or within 20 miles of it, being lawfully hindered from
being present at the solemn Benediction, which the Sovereign Pope are wont to
give on Easter, and Ascension day, being Confessed, and Communicated, and praying
for the Extirpation of Heresies, etc. may gain the same Indulgences which those
gain that are present: And those that are more remote from Rome, may gain the
same Indulgence, although they have no Impediment, by doing the foresaid things.

Whoever at the point of death, shall devoutly recommend himself wholly to God,
and shall invocate the said Saints or either of them, with his Mouth, if he
can, or at least with his Heart, being Confessed, and Communicated, if he can, or
at least contrite, may gain a plenary Indulgence of all his Sins.

All these Indulgences may be applied to the Souls in Purgatory, Per modum
suffragij, by way of suffrage.

His Holiness commands, that in the Distribution, and use of the Beads,
Crosses, etc. the Decree of Alexander the VII. of happy memory be observed,
given the 7th. of February, 1657. Which is, that those Beads, Crosses,
Rosaries, Medals, and Images, blessed with the foresaid Indulgences, shall not
pass the Person to whom his Holiness shall grant them, or them to whom they
shall grant them the first time; neither may they be lent, or sold; for if they
be, they lose their Indulgences: Moreover, if one be lost, another may not be
subrogated in its place, notwithstanding any grant, or privilege to the
contrary.

A Copy of the Original printed at Rome, in the Printing House of the Reverend
Apostolic, Chamber, 1669.

Signed Michael Angelus Riccius, Secertary by permission of Superiors.


