AN ADDITIONAL WORD TO THE Body of Divinity, OR CONFESSION of FAITH; Being the
substance of CHRISTIANITY.

ADDED On special occasion, tending further to confirm some Truths therein.

With a further discourse about the doctrine of Election, Universal, and
special Grace, etc.

All which were touched in the said Confession of Faith, but in this more
plainly and fully (though briefly) discoursed and designed for the good of all.

Whereunto is annexed a seasonable Word of Advice, being an Essay for Peace and
Union among all the Sons and Daughters of Peace.

Written by Thomas Collier.

2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness: That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.

Jam. 1. 25. But who so looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and continues
therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the Work, this man
shall be blessed in his Deed.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1676.

The PREFACE or EPISTLE to the READER.
Reader,
THese Lines are to give thee a brief account of the occasion of this ensuing
discourse. There being some things in my Book, titled The Body of Divinity, or
a Confession of Faith, relative to the Person of the Son of God, with some
other things, at which some take Offense, and lest others might do the same, I
thought it necessary to say something in way of further clearing and confirming
the matters stumbled at, though (in my understanding) it was fully clear
before, it being a matter of that weight (if I mistake not) that greatly
concerns Christians to be instructed and established in; though in it self an
unsearchable mystery; yet that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Son of
man in one Person; that the same, who is ths Son of God, is the Son of man; and
the same Jesus, who is the Son of Man, is the Son of God, and was so (as to the
Father) from Eternity; the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; the Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last; for which, there is so great a cloud of
Witnesses (as you may find in the ensuing discourse) not one or two, but* it
has the Volum of the book of God for its Testimony: So that I fear some
persons read more to find occasions of Offense, to make Contentions, than for
Edification; or else they would not stumble where is no stumbling stone. I
would willingly hope that there are but few who profess to own Christ to be the
Son of God, but do believe him to be so, as he was born of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4.
the same which the Scripture declares him to be: and as for my self, I must
profess I know nor believe in any other: but here I shall say no more of this
matter, leaving the Reader to the ensuing discourse, desiring him to Read, and
impartially ponder what is further said.

And as for the other things that are briefly, yet plainly discoursed, most of
them were hinted at in my Book, but not so plain as in this; partly because I
thought not to speak my apprehensions in these matters so plain, being
unwilling to offend any; but having the occasion of writing, as but now
expressed, and meeting with Convictions for not Answering my Light and Conscience
in these matters, it being (in my understanding) of weighty concernment to the
Name of God, the Gospel of his Grace, and the good of all men; hence I thought
it better to discharge my Conscience toward God, than remain under the guilt
of hiding Truth within me; I can say that in these matters I thought to have
been dumb and silent, but it burned within me, and at last it burst out, and I
hope not in vain; but if seriously and soberly pondered, instead of being an
occasion of stumbling, or offense to any, it will prove a blessed means of
removing some stumblings and offenses out of the way, and Unite Christians in
the truth of the Gospel; though I am not forgetful that I must expect (by some)
to be judged and censured as affecting singularity; but that I value not, let
Truth take place; though I pass under Reproach for Truths sake, it matters not
to me, though I trust my design is not fleshly singularity, or esteem with men:
no, this is not the way for that: But to be singular for God and Truth, is not
only my duty, but the duty and concernment of all Christians, Mat. 5. 46, 47.
Phil. 1. 9, 10. And O that we were all more singular in this matter.

Its true, I must say that I have not followed Authors, nor pinned my Faith on
the judgment of any; nor have I followed cunning devised fables, but singly
searched the Scriptures (following the Lords teachings therein) which are able
to make us wise to Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2. 15. and
to build us up, and give us an Inheritance among the Sanctified ones, Act 20.
32.

But to conclude, I am not willing to have any offended at any thing in the
following discourse, and to that end, do desire the Reader to read and ponder
well, and to search the Scriptures, and see whether those things be so; laying
aside all prejudice against the things, or the Author, exercising the
understanding with an unballanced and unprejudiced mind, looking to the Lord
for direction. And if after all, any thing seem dark or unsound, lay it aside,
and be sure it will not harm thee, unless it be in the loss of Truth, if so it
be, I desire the Lord to direct in all things, and to follow all sincere and
right endeavors for his Name and Honor, the Gospel and good of souls with his
blessing, and do pray him to follow this with his blessing for good. Amen.

T. C.

An Additional Word to the body of Divinity, or Confession of Faith, added on
special occasion, tending further to confirm some Truths therein; with a
further discourse about the Doctrine of Election, Universal and special Grace,
the power of man to believe and obey the Gospel, and about the Eternal Judgment.
CHAP. I.
Concerning God.

In which I demonstrated that God is, and that he subsisteth in Three, the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Against which I find are several exceptions relating to the Person of the Son
of God; the Exceptions against what I said in this matter, are as follows,

1. That he is not the Son of God in the Divine Nature only, page 30. 36. 2.
That he is the Son of God only, as considered in both Natures, pa. 30. 3. That
he was the Word, as he was God-Man and Man-God. p. 30. 33. 4. That as God and
Man he was a Creature, page 31. 5. That this Creature, God and Man, Created all
things, page 31. 6. That this word God-Man was made flesh, page 33. 7. That he
is the Son of Man in both Natures, page 37. 8 That there are not three persons
in the Trinity, but various titles and discoveries, etc.
THese things (I think) are all stated and cleared in the first Chapter,
without all just occasion of offense; I shall not say much of the ungrounded
Arguments against them, being as yet private, but what is necessary for the
more full confirmation of the things as stated in that Chapter.

1. That He is not the Son of God in the divine Nature only.

My reason for this is, because the Scripture, no where (that I know) affirms
him so to be; and for me or any other to affirm that which the Scripture does
not, must needs be unsound and unsafe. The Scripture, always, when it speaks of
the Son of God, it is as he was in both Natures, God and Man; and hence its
safe to say, that he was not the Son of God in the Divine Nature only.

That which I shall endeavor to demonstrate from Scripture, is, that he is the
Son of God only, as considered in both Natures, which is the second Exception;
and if this be proved, then the first is true, (viz.) If he be the Son of God
in both Natures only, then he is not the Son of God in the Divine Nature only;
and to prove that he is the Son of God in both Natures only, the Scripture so
presents him to us, and no otherwise; and as the Scriptures presents him to us,
so ought we to believe him to be, and no otherwise; but that the Scriptures do
thus present Christ unto us, and no otherwise, appears.

1. The Scriptures that speak of Christ, as in the Bosom of the Father before
time, speak of him as he came forth in time, 1 John 1, 2. the same word it was,
that was in the beginning with God, that in time was made flesh and dwelt among
us, v. 14. and his glory was seen and beheld, which was not the Divine Nature
only, that only was never seen nor beheld of any, Rom 8. 29. speaking of Christ
as with the Father, in his fore-knowing and electing grace to men, says, That
they were predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son. Here the Son
is considered as at the bottom of Electing grace, and this surely must be
before the world was; then let us seriously consider, whether it was as God
only, or as Man only. 1. Not as God only, for this the Opposers will not grant;
that as the Son in the Divine Nature only, he was the Firstborn among many
Brethren, for so he could have no Brother, then it must be as God and Man, as
in time he was made manifest, and as anciently so considered by and with the
Father, as the fore-knowing and predestinating Grace of God to men, though not
so frequently made known by the name or title of the Son of God, till made
siesh, but the word of God, 1 John 1, 2. Psalm. 33. 6. and Ephesians. 1. 4. God chose
in Christ before the world was, and as Christ the Anointed, he was the Son of
God, and the Son of Man: and is it possible for us to have right thoughts of
Christ in this choice, and yet to suppose him not to be in any true
Scripture-sence with the Father, as Christ the Son of God and Man in this
choice? For he was not Christ in the divine Nature only, nor in human nature
only; so to understand him, tends to Un christ, and so to Un-son him as truly
as any notion whatsoever, Psalm. 2. 6, 7. The same He, That was in the Form of
God, it was, that took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of Man. Where the Apostle speaks of him, as he was before, he was made
flesh, and as when made flesh, and I think it was he that was, and is the Son
of God, in both Natures, or else I know not of whom he speaks; not in the
Humane Nature only; for so he could not be in the Form of God, and equal with
him; nor in the Divine Nature only, for so he could not be in the Form of a
Servant, and humble himself to Death; therefore it must be as the Son in both
Natures, both before and after his Humiliation, it being the same He in both, 2 Timothy 1. 9, The Gospel grace, is that which was given us in Christ Jesus before
the world began. Then surely Christ Jesus must be so considered as with the
Father before the world began, or else the grace could not be given us in him
before, 1 Pet. 1. 20. Who verily was foreordained before the Foundation of the
World, but was manifest in these last times, etc.

Let these Scriptures (among many) suffice to prove that Christ considered from
Eternity was the same, as when manifest in time, relative to the Father, the
same Son of God in both Natures.

2. The Scriptures that foretell of him before he was come in flesh, so speak
of him, as to come (viz.) as God and Man, Genesis 3. 15. The Woman's Seed that was
to bruise the Scrpents head, was not the Divine Nature only; for that only
could not be the Woman's Seed; nor the Humane Nature only; for that could not
bruise the Serpents head, nor accomplish the work designed; therefore it must
be Christ, God, and Man, as he came forth in time, Gal. 4. 4. Genesis 12. 3. with
22. 18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. and Gal. 3.
8, 16. The Apostle applies this Promise to Christ (personally, and not
mistically, as some would have it) that is, all the Elect, or the Church of
whom Christ is the head; then the Nations must come to the Church for the
Promises, and the Church to it self, which is ridiculous, and contrary to the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 1. 20.) Now if the Nations shall be blessed in Abraham's seed,
which is Christ, then I must say (as I said before) this seed is not the Divine
Nature only; this the Opposite will not grant, that the Divine Nature only
should be Abraham's seed, nor could the Humane Nature only accomplish the
promised Blessing to the world; therefore it must intend Christ the Son of God
in both Natures, according to Gal. 4. 4. so Isa. 9. 6. and Mica. 5. 2, 4. is
the same.

3. The Scriptures that speak of his Birth, declare him to be the Son of God in
both Natures, Luke 1. 32, 33, 35. the same that was conceived in the Womb, and
born of the Virgin, was the Son of the highest, the Son of God; and was it the
Divine Nature only that was born of the Virgin, and was the Son of God? I think
none will affirm it; then it must be Christ the Son of God in both Natures,
Chap. 2. 11. Unto you is born this Day, in the City of David, a Savior which
is Christ the Lord. Was he born a Savior only as God in the Divine Nature;
This I suppose none will affirm, nor only in the Humane Nature, for so only he
would not be a Savior, then it must be in both Natures; see the same Mat. 1.
21.

4. As the Christ, the Son of God in both Natures, so was he in his life among
men, John 1. 14. He was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and they saw his Glory,
as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, etc. Which was in the Unity of
Natures, and not the Divine only; which distinct from the Humane could not be
seen, with verse. 33. 34. 1 John 1. 1, 2. Mat. 16. 16. Joh. 6. 69. all which
Scriptures, with multitudes that might be mentioned, prove him to be the Son of
God in both Natures; Christ, God, and Man in his life among men, and not in one
Nature only.

5. It was the Son of God that dyed for our sins, Romans 5. 10. and 8. 32. 1 John
4. 10. Hence his Blood is called the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. and that God
laid down his life for us, 1 John 3. 16. Not that the Divine Nature could be
properly said to dye, but as united in the Humane Nature; and so the Divine and
Humane Natures making one Person, one Son; so this glorious Son of God, in a
true Gospel sense, is said to suffer Death for our sins, or we must all have
dyed Eternally; nor does that Unscriptural Notion reach the case, viz. that the
Humane Nature suffered, and the Divine Nature satisfied, it is the same who
suffered that satisfied, Ephesians. 10. 2. Heb 9. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and Chap. 1. 18.
19. And it was our High Priest that was the Son of God, not in one Nature only,
Heb. 3. 1, 6. and 4. 14. and 7. 28. and as he was the Prince of life, Act. 3.
15. the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. was he killed, and crucified; and certainly
that was not in the Humane Nature only; for so he could not be the Prince of
life, the Lord of glory.

Object.
It is said, 1 Pet. 3. 18. and 4. 1. That he was put to death in the flesh; and
that he suffered in the flesh: and that he was crucified through weakness, etc.
1 Cor. 13. 4. Which Scriptures argue, that he suffered, and dyed only in his
Humane Nature, as the Son of David.

Answ
1. If the Son of God had not been in flesh, he could not have suffered; but
being made fle^^, was (in a true sense) weak, and did suffer, for it was the
Son of God, the Prince of life, the Lord of glory in flesh that did suffer.

2. Yet (as I said before) the Divine Nature could not suffer in any sense, but
as united to the Humane; so making one Person: and this one Person is said in a
true Gospel-sence, to suffer and dye; the Divine Nature vailing it self in the
Humane for so glorious an end. Mat. 27. 54. the Centurion, and they that were
with him, watching at his death, said, Truly this was the Son of God. Let not
us have less Faith in him that dyed for our sins, than them that were his
Enemies.

6. He was raised from death, as the Son of God, Act. 13. 33, 34. Romans 1. 3, 4.

7. And He is the same still at the right hand of God: What he was, he is, Joh.
20. 31. Act. 8. 37. and 9. 20. Romans 8. 34. and shall be so to Eternity, 1 Cor.
15. 28. Heb. 13. 8. Rev 1. 17, 18. Now if Christ be the Son of God, in both
Natures only, as is most apparent; then it is as apparent, that he is not the
Son of God in the Divine Nature only. But, lest the Opposers of this great
truth should be quicker-sighted than I, to find Scriptures that speak of a Son
in the Divine Nature only; I shall take a View of the Scriptures by themselves
mentioned to prove him a Son in the Divine Nature only, which are these that
follow, Joh. 10. 30. I and the Father are one, that is (say they) one in the
same substance, etc. and thus also the Jews understood him, therefore charged
him with Blasphemy, verse. 33. And that the Jews did not mistake him in what
sense he affirmed himself to be the Son of God; the Context does plainly and
expressly show, wherein Christ goes on to make it good, but not a word that they
misapprehended him.

Answ.
This Scripture no way makes against, but confirms the Truth as it is by me
asserted. That neither Christ did intend, nor the Jews understand, that he
intended himself to be the Son of God in the Divine Nature only, is most
apparent both from the Text and Context.

1. That Christ did not so intend, is apparent. 1. Because he spoke of himself,
as he was the Son of God, (not as he was not) viz. as he was God and Man
(visible), and not of the Divine Nature only, which was invisible, and must
have been an unseen Son, which could not be understood.

2. Christ explains what Son it was he spoke of, verse. 36. Say ye of him whom
the Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, thou blasphemest, because
I said, I am the Son of God.

Now let the Understanding judge, whether it was the Divine Nature only, that
the Father sanctified, and sent into the World. 1. Whether on that account he
had need to be sanctified, and sent into the world? 2. Whether That was
sanctified and sent into the world, as the Son of God, distinct from the Humane
Nature? 3. Whether we are not to understand, by the Fathers sanctifying and
sending, etc. the Father's setting apart, and sending his Son into the world to
be the Savior thereof, according to 1 John 4. 14? If so, it must be, as he was
sanctified and sent to be a Savior, (and not as he was not) which was as God
and Man, not in the Divine Nature only, that is contrary to the Scripture, and
Faith of all Christians.

So then fourthly, Whether to understand Christ to be the Son of God in the
Divine Nature only, leaving out the Humane, be not the ready way to un-Son and
un-Christ the true Christ and Son of God, as held forth in the true light and
sense of Scripture, 1 John 2. 22, 23. and 4. 2, 3, 9?

2. That the Jews did not thus understand him is likewise clear, verse. 33. Thou
being a Man make thy self God; they understood that he spoke of himself as
Man, and not of his Divinity only. And this he made good, and not a word that
they mis-apprehended him.

And John 5. 17, 18. is to be understood as this, as the Text and Context does
explain, as any judicious Person may easily understand, Read from verse. 17. to
27. the same who is the Son of God, verse. 17. is the Son of Man, verse. 27. and
(I think) that is not the Divine Nature only. See John 1. 14. The word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. This I have before cleared, it
was the word made flesh, which was the only begotten of the Father. Whose glory
they saw with their eyes, 1 John 1. 1, 2. Which was not the Divine Nature only,
that was never seen of any, otherwise than as personated in the Son of God, and
in the Son of God, was conversive with men. So 1 John 4. 9. is as plain as the
Sun when it shines, that it intends Christ the Son of God in both Natures; for
it is the same Son, that God sent into the world to be a propitiation for our
sins. And I think the Divine Nature only, was not the Propitiatory, or
Peacemaking Sacrifice for our sins, And for Romans 3. 25. it is a Question (and
I think) too hard for any man (undoubtedly to resolve; whether that Scripture
intends the Son of God, though it is generally so understood. 1. Because there
is no mention of the Son, under that Name and Title. 2. Because the Wisdom here
spoken of, is in the Feminine Gender, Her, and She, verse. 1. 2. and Chapter 9. 1,
2. which is not proper to the Son of God, nor is he so described in the
Scripture; but in the Masculine Gender, He and Him; therefore it may intend the
infinite Wisdom of God, exercised in and about the works of Creation, rejoicing
in the foresight thereof: or if it intend the person of the Son of God, it must
be as God and man, as he came forth in time, for so is he called The Wisdom and
Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. And indeed the mystery and wisdom of God, is in the
Person of his Son; and his works that have been, and are to be effected, have
been, and shall be all done in and by him; in and by him is the manifold wisdom
and power of God made manifest.

2. The Text may be so understood, for the word Translated, brought-forth, is
in the Hebrew formed, Was I formed. Else he could not be set up from
everlasting; and wisdom seems to speak as personated in the Son of God, viz,
Rejoicing in the habitable parts of his Earth; not of my Earth, which had been
proper, if it had been the Divine Nature only; but the Son always exalts the
Father, Joh. 5. 19. And no marvel that he rejoices in the habitable parts of
his Earth, and his delights was with the Sons of Men, it being all made by him,
and for him, Col. 1. 16. And Romans 8. 32. Here they say he is called God's own
proper Son, so the Greek word signifies; and on this we are well agreed, for
it is this proper Son of God that was delivered up for us all. I suppose they
will not say the Divine Nature only was delivered up for us all, but it was the
proper Son of God, He that was born of the Virgin, lived in the world, went
about doing good, suffered death for Sinners, was raised again, and is ascended
into Heaven, and shall come again from thence, to judge both the quick and dead,
etc. This was the proper Son of God, who was delivered up for us all; or else I
know him not, nor (I think) in truth any others, but talk of an unknown
Scriptureless Son of God. And whereas they affirm him to be the Son of God in
the Divine Nature, in opposition to the Human Nature, and that this distinction
is usual in Scripture; If this were proved, their work (in this) were done. The
Scriptures urged to prove it, are Romans 1, 2, 3. and 9, 5. 2 Cor. 13. 4. 1 Pet.
3. 18. All which Scriptures plainly prove the contrary; its Christ the Son of
God, as in both Natures, that is spoken of in them all, as any judicious eye
may discern; and Mat. 22. 42, 43, 44. and Luke 20. 41, 44. He is David's Son,
and David's Lord; the same that was to be David's Son, was his Lord; that was not
the Divine Nature only, none will affirm that; and he it was that was his Son,
that was his Lord, both the root and offspring of David, Rev. 22. 16.

Quest.
Whether to affirm that Christ is the Son of God only in the Divine Nature, in
opposition to the Human Nature, and David's Son only in the Human Nature, do not
unavoidably make two Sons in that one Person; one, only the Son of God; the
other, only the Son of David? and whether this do not tend truly to deny the
true Christ the Son of God? the Scripture letting us to know that there is but
one Lord Jesus Christ, one Son of God and man, one Savior of the world in one
Person.

Further, the Scripture lets us to know that Christ was considered as the Son
of man, before he came in flesh; and then certainly, he that was so considered,
as with the Father, must be the Son of God, and that he was so considered as
the Son of man, as with the Father, before he came in flesh; to prove this, we
have a cloud of Witnesses, Joh. 3. 13. and 6. 33, 35, 38, 41, 42, 51, 62. and
16. 27. 30. and 17. 8. 1 Cor. 15 47. Ephesians. 4. 9. 10. Now if any dare to say,
that in all these Scriptures that is attributed to the Human Nature, which is
only proper to the Divine; let them say it, but I am not bound to believe it,
lest I should believe a lie. I believe there is a mystery in the Son of God,
such as we may never come to know; but what is meet for us to know, is revealed
in the Scriptures, and we may not suppose that the Scripture-revelation of him
is (designedly) to darken him to us, to call him the Son of man, and in the
same words, intend him only the Son of God in the Divine Nature; it must needs
be great boldness for any to affirm this.

3. That he was the Word as he was God-Man, and Man-God. That which I said, and
do still say, is, That the same Word and Son of God, God-Man, was made Flesh;
that is, made in and of a Woman, born God and Man, him by whom the world was
made, and nothing was made without him, page 33. and this I still say, because
the Scripture says it, The same Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and
they saw his glory, etc. which I explained before, with 1 John 1. 1, 2. it was
the same Word by which the world was made, that was made Flesh, and they saw
his glory. It was by him (considered as Christ Jesus, the Son of God) that all
things were made, Col. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. and he is the Word of God still, Rev.
19. 13.

The reason rendered against this, is, Because the Word was from the beginning;
the human Nature, not so. I say, that in a true God-like and Scripture-sence it
was so, because it was the Word that was made Flesh; and in some true
Gospel-sence, Christ, as the Son of man, came down from Heaven, and out from
God, as the many Scriptures but now mentioned do abundantly prove.

And probably this mysterious Truth is so abundantly stated in the word of
truth, because the Lord knew with what difficulty men would come to understand
and believe, that Christ the Son of God is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. Though it be a mystery too hard for us to understand how it is, yet not
too hard for God; that his Son should be the same from Eternity, and yet in
time to be made of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh, declared to be
the Son of God by his Resurrection from the Dead. This is a mystery, that men
and Angels may wonder at, and believe it, though we cannot understand the
manner how it is; and it concerns us, Not to contradict it, because we
understand it not; nor too curiously to pry into it, but believe it, because
God has said it; remembering that Christ has a hidden Name that no man knows
but Himself and Father, nor probably ever shall, Rev. 19. 12. Mat. 11. 27. And
herein lies the wonderful mystery of the love of God to men, to have one to be
his own proper Son, in his own Nature, and in our Nature, united, that we by
Faith might be the Sons of God in him.

4. That as God-Man he was a Creature, page 31. That which I there said, is,
That he was considered as in his both Natures from Eternity, as the Son of God,
Col. 1. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
Creature; that, in this verse, and the verses before, he is spoken of as
God-Man, for so he was a Creature, a Son, a wonderful one.

Against this it is Objected, 1. That it is not said that he is the first
Created, but the first born. 2. That it is not said, he is the first born of
every Creature, as being one of them, etc.

1. I do not say he was the first Created, but the first Born in God of every
Creature, as he is said, Romans 8 29. to be the first born among many Brethren.

2. That he is spoken of as the firstborn of every Creature, as being one of
them, is most clear and manifest, though he was last in manifestation, yet was
first in order of nature and design; He that is Lord of all, must be before
all; and this is it, is intended in this place, as the scope and sense of the
words does demonstrate, that he was the first born of every Creature, as being
one of them, though infinitely more glorious than all of them. That this is it
is intended, appears not only in that it speaks of him, the same, in whom we
have Redemption by his Blood, v. 14. As having made peace by the blood of his
Cross, v. 20. which was as Man, and so a Creature. But 2. From the same word
being compared with v. 18. where he is said to be the first born of the Dead;
its the same word as v. 15. The first born of every Creature, (...), the first
born, (or begotten) of the dead, as one of them that was dead, the first fruits
of them that slept; so in the same sense, in the Creation-work, was he the
first born of every Creature, as being one of them, The beginning of the
Creation of God, Rev. 3. 14. 3dly. It appears from the reason of his being the
first born of every Creature; that is, For by him were all things created, etc.
v. 16. Therefore he must be the first born, he must be before them; and how he
was before all things, even as he came forth in time, has been already
sufficiently cleared. 4. It will further appear, compared with Romans 8. 29.
where he is said to be the firstborn among many Brethren, which certainly must
be as one of them, or else there is nothing in the words: So in this, must we
understand him to be the first born of every Creature, as being one of them, or
there is nothing in the words; but it is plain, that as Romans 8. 29. presents
Christ in Person, as at the bottom of Election, Redemption, and Salvation, so
this presents him as at the bottom of the Creation.

And that he was a Creature and the Creator too, is most evident, God and Man
in one Person; for if he was a man, then he was a Creature, else he could not
have dyed; if he was not a Creature, then he was no man, so that you may see
whither such Un-scriptural Notions will lead; but to be the Creator and a
Creature in one Person, is no more but the same, as, God and Man in one Person.
The sum of all, is this, That he was the first that was begotten, or born in
the Eternal Will and Bosom of the Father, and that as he came forth in time,
God and man, the Creator and a Creature, in one Person, him by whom all was
made.

5. That this Creature God-Man made all things; and who durst to deny this, the
Scripture being so abundantly full in this matter, that I need say nothing
further to confirm it, the denial here of giving the Scripture the Lie, Col. 1.
15, 16. and Blasphemy against the Son of God.

But the doubt is, that I allow Christ no more than to be a medium, or
instrument in this matter: To this I say, that he was both a medium or
instrument, and efficient cause and worker therein; as he is the medium in the
work of Redemption, a Mediator between God and man, yet he that has wrought
forth our Redemption; So, its the same in all his works, John 5. 17. Hitherto
the Father works, and I work.

6. That this word God-Man was made Flesh. This I have (in substance) already
often answered, and from Scripture proved, that he that was the Word was made
Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. But here (it seems) lies the block in the way, Then he that
was a Man was made a Man. The resolve is clear from Scripture, he that was God
and man in Gods Eye, was made so in our eye, when made, or manifested in Flesh,
Phil. 2. 6, 7. Joh. 1. 14.

7. That he is the Son of man in both Natures. I do not say that he had the
nature of God from Man, or from the Woman, nor that the nature of man was the
Nature of God, or that there was a confusion of Natures, but the contrary; but
that the Son of God was born of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. and so was truly the Son of
Mary, and so the Son of Abraham, and of David, Luke 1. 35. He that shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God; and this Son of God was the Son
of Mary, the Son of Man, the Son of David, v. 32, 33. John 5. 22. -- 27. The
same that is the Son of God, is the Son of Man; and the same that is the Son of
Man, is the Son of God; so not two, but one Son; therefore let not man presume
to make two, or to dis-unite what God has united. This great truth further
appears from the promise of breaking the Serpent's head, to the Seed of the
Woman, and the blessing to the Nations in Abraham's Seed; which Seed must be
whole Christ, God and Man, else (as Man only) he could neither break the
Serpents head, nor make the Nations blessed; but whole Christ, the Son of God,
is in Gods account, and so in Scripture, called the Seed of Abraham, etc.

8. That there are not three Persons in the Trinity, but various titles and
discoveries; to this, I think I said enough to take off all occasions of
offense, That I own Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, though not three Persons,
because the Scripture gives not the title of Persons to the three, but a
plurality of titles, and variety of discoveries, properties, and operations;
distinct titles, properties, and operations, implies some real distinction;
there is the Father, and that is his title; the Son, and that is his title; the
Holy Spirit, and that is his title: the Father is not the Son, the Son is not
the Spirit, the Spirit is neither the Father nor the Son; so are there several
properties and operations proper to each other, really distinct in the Trinity;
this (I suppose) I fully cleared, page 22 43, 44. where I gave my understanding
about this matter, to which I refer the Reader.

As for other offenses; as 1. About the matter of Justification, I know not
what to add further than I have there said in clearing that matter; its open
and plain, and I doubt not, but will plead for it self against all gainsayers;
if any persons dare to maintain that any are justified before God, without
Faith and Holiness, as the terms thereof, though not the deserving cause, I
must leave them to their own understanding, without all Scripture ground; for
my own part, I fully (on good grounds) believe the contrary.

2. As to the Omnipresence of God the Father, I say what the Scripture says,
which directs us to the Father as in Heaven, and that by his Spirit he is
present in all places.

3. And as for the Increated Heavens: 1. Though in the term of Increated, it be
not expressed, yet there is enough in Scripture to prove the truth thereof, as I
there expressed: For the Eternal God, must have some Eternal Habitation, and its
called, Isa. 57. 15. the high and holy place, He dwells in the high and holy
place; and if God has prepared a Building, a House (for his people) not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Methinks it should be no
crime to say that he has an Eternal Habitation for himself suitable to his
Name and Nature; and if Eternal, then Increated.

4. As for the Creation of Nature and Angels; I gave my apprehension on
probable grounds from Scripture; and why might I not without offense, when
others will be positive about the same matter, without any Scripture ground?
and if I miss in what I do state; but on probable grounds in this matter,
wherein lies the danger thereof?

5. The Corruption of the Heavens by the Sin of Man. Another dangerous Error!
That the Heavens are corrupt, the Scripture witnesses, Job. 15. 15. The
Heavens are not clean in his sight; they were clean in their primitive created
estate; for God made all good, and all clean, and they could not be corrupt,
but by, and for sin: I query then for whose sin it is, they are become corrupt
and unclean, their own sin, or the sin of man? I think we may safely say, it is
by and for the sin of man, and man it is that suffers thereby, and is like to
suffer until the restitution: But to conclude this matter, I cannot yet be
convinced of any thing written in that Book, of which I yet see cause to
Repent; and I think if persons did read designedly to profit, and not to find
occasion, it would be more to their advantage both here and here-after.

CHAP. II.
Of the Extent of the design of God in the Death of his Son, as it is stated in
the Scripture.

THere having been various and differing apprehensions among men about this
great Truth of the Gospel, by reason of darkness that has in part befaln us
all; under the sense of which, we have cause to be humbled: I shall, according
to what I have attained from Scripture Light, briefly give forth; as follows,

1. That Christ died for the World, that is, the Universe, the Heavens and
Earth, and all things therein, the whole six days Creation, that sell with man
for the sin of man, as a Curse to man for his sin, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. and the
Whole shall be restored again out of that Estate, Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 20. 21. 2
Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 5. And this Renovation and New-life to the world, must be
effected by Jesus Christ, Crucified and raised again from the dead; its founded
here, He died and revived that the world might live, Joh. 6. 33. The Bread of
God is He, which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the World; and
v. 51. The Bread that I will give, is my Flesh which I will give for the life
of the World, Joh. 14. 4. This is for the Salvation and Life of the World out
of the fallen state; by the Death, Resurrection and Life of Christ, it shall all
be accomplished in his time; that, as the first death and loss of the world,
came in by the disobedience of the First man, so the Restoration must be
effected by the Second Man, who is the Lord from Heaven, Romans 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor.
15. 21, 22, 47. Act. 3. 20, 21.

2. And more especially, in order to the accomplishment of this great and
universal design of God, he died for all Mankind (which is included in the
first); and in this sense he died for the sins of the whole world, and that
because, Sin it was, that brought in Death, and a Curse on all mankind, Romans
5. 12. and in a true sense upon the whole world, for man's sake that sinned,
Genesis 3. 17, 18. Job. 15. 15. And that he died for all mankind, appears in
these and the like Scriptures, Joh. 1. 29. 1 Timothy 2. 6 Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2. 2.
2 Cor. 5. 19.

Obj
The two last Scriptures mentioned, speak of Christ as a Propitiation and
Reconciliation, not imputing Sin; this being proper only to Believers, and
therefore cannot intend the World in the largest sense, because none are
reconciled to God by the blood of Jesus, through the not imputing of Sin, but
Believers.

Answ.
This (I suppose) has been almost a universal mistake, Because Believers are
reconciled, therefore none else, whereas the Scripture clearly states a general
Reconciliation, and a special, and both are true: 1. A general Reconciliation
by the death of Christ, Col. 1. 20. And having made Peace by the Blood of his
Cross, to reconcile all things to himself, whether things in Earth, or things
in Heaven, etc. Its true, this intends the whole in the first sense, then it
must be true in the second, relative to mankind, who is especially intended in
the (all things): and to be a Propitiation is the same, an Atonement, a
Peacemaking Sacrifice, not imputing Sin; and this is for all things, for all
men, this we have likewise, Romans 5, 8. 10. But God Commends his Love toward
us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us, v. 10. For if when
we were Enemies, we were Reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being Reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. Where this first
Reconciliation is stated in the Death of the Son of God, while Sinners,
Enemies; which relates not to the Reconciliation by Faith, but as a preparative
thereunto?

2. There is a special Reconciliation, proper only to Believers, arising out of
the general; for, if the general Reconciliation had not been, there could have
been no room for the special. The special Reconciliation proper only to
Believers, we have plentifully declared in Scripture; but especially, I shall
mention the two last, which proves it to arise out of the general: Col. 1. 20.
is the Universal Reconciliation, and v. 21. is the special Reconciliation of
Believers, which is not the same as the general, but arises out thereof, the
first being Universal, and that which was past in the Blood of his Cross; the
second, i. e. particular and special, is obtained at, and after Believing, you,
etc. now has he Reconciled: So likewise that Romans 5. v. 8. 10. is the general
Reconciliation, at, and by the Death of his Son, and that while we were yet
Sinners and Enemies. The second and special is of our believing and cleaving to
Christ in the Gospel, v. 11. And not only so, but we also joy in God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the Atonement; the
Reconciliation: So it is in the Greek, ((...)) There was a Reconciliation
before, and now it is received, i. e. believed, and thereby one comes to have
an interest in the special benefit thereof.

Quest.
In what sense may the World be said to be Reconciled to God, and to have sin
not imputed?

Answ.
1. They are so far Reconciled, and sin not imputed, as to have the Gospel of
Reconciliation truly tendered to them; sin shall not hinder the going forth of
the Gospel, and tenders of Grace, and Reconciliation to the World, that
whosoever do accept it, on the same terms thereof, might be reconciled and
saved, Mark 16. 15, 16. 2. The world is so far Reconciled, and sin not imputed,
as that it shall not hinder their Resurrection, and Restitution out of the fallen
state, 1 Cor. 15. 22. Act. 3. 21. And the second death shall be for sin against
the New Covenant and Gospel-law of Grace, for not accepting the Reconciliation
and Salvation on the terms thereof, Joh. 3. 19.

3. There is in this mavelous Transaction, a more special design of Grace in
the most special end thereof, viz. Christ died for the Salvation of the Elect,
of his Church; and this is likewise as fully stated in the word of Truth, as
the other, that They shall have the special benefit thereof: And this we have
in such Scriptures as these, Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my Life for the Sheep,
Ephesians. 5. 25. He also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; and on this
account it is that Christ says, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my Blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many, for the Remission of sins; for so it was
shed on the account of special Grace, i. e. for Remission of sins to all, who
believe and obey the Gospel; but of this I shall speak more in the next
Chapter, about the matter of Election.

Now the design of God in his Gospel Grace, by the death of his Son, being thus
Universal to the whole world, in this threefold sense as has been mentioned;
Hence it is that the Gospel must be Preached to the whole Creation, because it
shall all share in the Salvation thereof, according to the capacities and
degrees determined: that the Gospel of this Salvation by Jesus Christ, is to be
Preached to the whole Creation, see Mark 16. 15. The word Translated, to every
Creature, is in the Greek, to all the Creation, (...), to all the Creation,
Col. 1. 23. is the same Word which was Preached to all the Creation under
Heaven, which may be understood to be under God; which sometimes is called
Heaven, Dan. 4. 25, 26. compared with Math. 21. 25. Luke 20. 4. and 15. 21. It
is true, it is especially to be published to men, who were concerned in the sin
and fall; and they are capable to understand, believe, and obey it, and so to
obtain the special benefit thereof.

Quest.
In what sense may the Gospel be said to be Preached to the whole Creation,
seeing the greatest part of Men never heard it? and the rest of the Creation
cannot understand it?

Answ.
1. In the first and general sense mentioned, it is, and may be truly Preached
to the whole Creation: though they hear it not, nor understand it, the Doctrine
of the Gospel Preaches it to all the Creation, and so should Ministers too, and
thus we must understand, Col. 1. 23. For the Gospel then was not Preached in
the hearing of all men, nor in the hearing of the whole Creation, yet it was
Preached to all the Creation, according to the Commission of Christ our Lord;
so that to Preach the Redemption and Salvation of the Gospel designed of God to
the whole Creation, is in a true sense, the Preaching of the Gospel to the
whole Creation; and Ministers do not understand their Commission, nor do their
Gospel-office and work, till they so do.

2. The works of God, do (in some true sense, though more darkly) Preach forth
God and the Gospel too, to the whole Creation, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. and this
the Apostle applies to the case in hand, to be in a true sense a Preaching of
the Gospel, Romans 10. 18. The design of God in Commissionating the Gospel to be
published to the whole Creation, being more apparently to make known his
public and glorious design of Salvation; that so it might be more openly
known, and be believed in the world than possibly the Works could declare, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and that so he might have a People made ready and prepared for
himself, and for that glory, Luke 1. 17. Romans 6. 22. and 8. 23 And hence it
follows, that who-ever among the Sons and Daughters of men, do sincerely
believe and obey the Gospel, shall have the special relation to God and Christ
therein, and the special benefit and salvation thereof, Mark. 16. 15, 16. Heb.
5. 9. Rev. 22. 14.

Quest.
If Christ died for the sins of the World, and if God had a real design of good
will and grace to all men in his general Love; Why then is not the Gospel
Preached to all men? Whence is it that the greatest part of the World has
been, and still are, without the Gospel?

Answ.
The first and universal design of God in the death of his Son, being the
restitution of all things, and the Redemption and recovery of all men out of
the fallen state, as it is universal, and carries in it universal grace; so it
is absolute and inconditional, and shall be accomplished without any terms on
man's part to be performed; and on this account only, needs not to be
Doctrinally Preached in the hearing of all men, though it is granted that its
more of grace where it is Preached, and most of all where its effectually
believed and obeyed, Heb. 5. 9. and 9. 15.

2. The Gospel has been, (and still is) Preached to the whole world by the
works of God, and his common goodness to men, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Romans 10. 18.
Psalm. 145. 8, 9. Romans 2. 4. And it has been, and is Preached to the whole
Creation, not only by the works of God, but by the doctrine of the Gospel, as
before I showed

3. Though there is no other name given under Heaven among men, whereby they
may be saved, Act. 4. 12. yet we must own that many have been, and may be saved
by that name, that never heard of him, and so could not have Faith in him; for
we may not suppose that any shall dye the second death, for not believing in
the Son of God, as Crucified, that never heard of him, Romans 10. 14. And we must
likewise understand that there has been a sufficiency of Teaching under all
the Ministries of God to the world, to bring them to the knowledge of God, and
so to Salvation, by that name (though unknown to them) and to leave all others
without excuse; which could not be, were there not a sufficiency of teaching
therein, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. and 2, 1. Though all the saved ones shall know at
that day, that their Salvation was, and is accomplished by the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, Phil. 2. 10, 11. Rev. 5. 13. If every Knee shall bow,
and acknowledge the Lamb slain, to be the Lord, to the glory and praise of God,
then doubtless all the saved ones shall so do.

4. If the great design of Gospel-preaching to the World, is to make known the
universal Love of God to men in the Restaurationwork, and to gather in the
Elect (as the special gift to Jesus Christ) into the Espoused Relation; this
work must be accomplished, and the Gospel must come for the gathering in and
Espousing of such to his Son, wherever they are, Act. 18. 10. and 16. 6. --
10. yet no ways derogating from his general grace. If such as have not heard
the doctrine of the Gospel, may, and shall obtain, as certainly, the salvation
of the Gospel (as those that live under it). If they believe, and live to God,
suitable to the Teachings they are under, though not the same for degrees in
the Espoused relation; then they are not deprived of Gospel-salvation, though
some may be deprived of the doctrine of the Gospel, for sin: God being free in
this matter, and will show mercy on whom he will; for it must be granted that
it is a degree of special grace, where the doctrine of the Gospel of Salvation
is sent.

For God in these things acts according to his will, and will accomplish his
designs in the world, both of mercy and justice; its a degree of special grace
where the Gospel comes, its more where its effectual to life; yet to balance
this Grace, where the Gospel comes not, some may obtain more than some, that
may be saved under the Gospel; so that God will justify himself in all his
dispensations to men, so as sufficiently to leave the disobedient (under all
his ministrations) without excuse, that none shall have cause to complain in
the great day of account; and to save all upright-hearted ones under his
several ministrations, though the special saved ones are such as are espoused
to Christ by the Word, Spirit, and Faith of the Gospel.

CHAP. III.
Of Election, and its place and use in this wonderful design of God, in the
Restoration and Redemption-work.

OF this I have spoken something too in my Confession of Faith, or Body of
Divinity; but in this I shall speak a little more full and plain.

Election, or to elect or choose, from (...), or (...), in Scripture,
ordinarily imports, to choose, or to be chosen; and as to the case ^n hand,
viz. Gods Electing or choosing, it is to be understood either, 1. Of a more
general Election; or 2. Of a more special.

1. Of the more general Election, viz. Of Gods choosing a people for himself,
to be his Church to worship him, and to bear up his Name in the world, distinct
from other people, under the profession of peculiar Covenant Relation to him;
and this holds true in the Churches, both of the Old and New Testament.

1. The Church of the old Covenant, the natural Seed of Abraham, and the
Proselyted Gentiles, were the Elected and chosen of God to be his Church; and
he made it their duty and privilege to enter into, and keep that Covenant, and
to worship him in that Covenantrelation; and this was his more general Election
and choice, Genesis 17. 6. to 16. Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 7. 6. and 10. 15. Isa. 45. 4.
Romans 9. 10, 11, 13. and 3, 1, 2.

2. And among those there was a special Election and choice of those who walked
uprightly with God in that Covenant, Exodus 19. 5, 6. Psalm. 4. 3. and 34. 11. --
15. and 37. 18, 19. Romans 9. 27. and 11. 4.

There is likewise a general Election in the Gospel, and that is, all that do
believe and obey the Gospel, they are the Elect Church of the Gospel, and are
reputed the New-Covenant-People and Church of Christ; and its their great
concernment to be sincere to God therein, and so to persevere in the Faith and
Obedience of the Gospel, as to obtain the end, and of whom we are bound to hope
that it will be so, Phil. 1. 6, 7. Yet out of this Elect Church of Christ, its
possible that many may fail of the grace of God, and so come short of the glory
of the Covenant, Heb. 12. 15. The Church thus considered, as the Elect Church
of God, visible in the Gospel, we may (and must) understand in these and the
like Scriptures, Matthew. 28 19, 20. which is the Commission of Christ for
stating and constituting the Gospel Church and worship of God therein, with the
promise of Christ's presence with them in their walking according thereunto; and
to whom is the Promise of Salvation in their constancy in the Faith and
Obedience of the Gospel, Mark 16. 15, 16. and it will be their great damage who
come into the Church, and afterward fail of the grace of God, 2 Pet. 2. 20,
21. And the Church and Churches are thus considered as is apparent in the
method of all the Epistles, which includes all the Believers and Members as the
called Ones of God, and yet supposes a possibility of departing from the Lord,
and the Church is thus considered, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Heb 3. 6.
And that all that believe and obey the Gospel, are the New Covenant Church of
Christ, is so common and plain in the Scripture, as that (I suppose) it is
scarcely doubted of any, 1 Cor. 1. 2, 3. 1 These. 1. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet 2. 5.
to 10.

2. There is a second and special Election in the New Covenant, and this we are
likewise to understand to be two fold.

The 1. are such, or some who were Elected and chosen of God in his Son before
the World was, to the obtaining of the special grace and glory of the
New Covenant in the Restoration; and this Election was from the freeness of
grace in God, without any respect to foreseen Faith and Obedience, as the
meritorious or deserving cause thereof, though this Election was to believe and
obey the Gospel, and persevere therein unto the end, as the way to obtain the
glory; and this Election we are to understand is intended in these and the like
Scriptures, Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 8. 29, 30. and we may rationally
conceive (and that groundedly from the Scripture) something of the reason of
this Choice or Election, viz. That the undertaking of Christ in the
Restoration, might be assured, not to be in vain on the most special account;
some were given to him by the Father, as a sure and certain reward of his
gracious and glorious undertaking, Joh. 6. 39. and 10. 15, 16. And thus the
Prophet, personating Christ seems to reason, Isa. 49. 4, 5, 6. and God answers
that his Labor should not be in vain, and declares the work that was before
him, and should be accomplished by him, in which, this of special grace and
Election is included, the special Salvation both of Jews and Gentiles being
assured there.

2. The second sort of special Election in the Gospel is, All that do believe
and obey the Gospel in Truth, persevering therein to the end, are Elected to be
saved; and this Election is the same in substance as the first Election to the
Church State: only in this it differs; the first includes all that believe and
obey the Gospel; this includes all that are sincere, and persevere to the end:
and this likewise includes all the special Elect, even all that believe and
obey the Gospel to the end; and the reason is, because all must obtain the
Salvation of the Gospel in the same way, viz. of Faith, Obedience, and
Perseverance, Matthew. 10. 22. Of the Election under this consideration, viz. of
all that do believe and obey the Gospel to the end, its declared in these and
the like Scriptures, Joh. 6. 40. and 3. 16. and 8. 31. Romans 2. 7. Heb. 5. 9.
Col. 1. 21. 23. Rev. 22. 14.

And this second Election it is the Apostle seems most to adhere unto, both for
himself and others, because the first is a hidden mystery, no man knows it: (In
the first) it is God only that knows who are his. We know our Election by
believing and obeying the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1. 10. The first we ought to believe,
but its the second that we must stand or fall by; therefore I said, the Apostle
seems rather to adhere to this both for himself and others, as that wherein our
assurance consists: 1. For himself, he builds not his assurance on special
Election, but on constancy in the Faith, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 2.
Directs all others the same way, viz. To look to their constancy in the Faith
to the end, Romans 2. 7. 10. Col. 1. 21. -- 23. Heb. 3. 6. To prove that more may
be saved than the first and special Elect and gift to Christ, I shall
demonstrate from these following grounds.

1. We may not so understand particular and special Election, as to derogate
from the universal grace and love of God to all men; nor from the truth of the
law of grace, which calls upon all, and encourages all, and promises life
to all that do believe and obey the Gospel; which if we should so understand
Election in the strictest sense, as to shut out all besides, it would tend to
contradict the Gospel in the general tenders of grace to all, and so contradict
a great part of the glorious and blessed Gospel of grace to men, and be a great
stumbling block in the hopeful way of Salvation, and a great discouragement to
poor Sinners in their believing and obeying the Gospel; therefore (I say) we
may not so understand the Decrees of God which are secret, as to make-null the
plain declared will of God in the Gospel, 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. but we are to Preach
the Gospel, and to assure Sinners, that if they believe* and obey the Lord
therein they shall be saved, persevering therein to the end; this is the Gospel
law of grace, and Will of the Lord, Mark 16. 15, 16. Mat. 10. 22.

2. Because the Lord himself makes this distinction, with suitable promises
alike to both, i. e. He allows a latitude beyond the first and special
Election or gift to his Son, with promise of life on the universal account of
grace, Joh. 6. 37. There is first a description of the first and special gift;
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me. 2. An encouragement to all
comers; And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out: Him, that is,
every one that comes; for it cannot rightly be supposed, that him that comes,
etc. is a promise to the first gift, for they shall come, i. e. believe and
obey the Gospel, and there is no doubt of their being cast out that are given,
and shall come: But to prevent a doubt that might arise from the knowledge of
the first gift, the second promise follows to assure us, that the special
gift no whit derogates from the freedom of universal grace; and v. 39. 40. more
fully confirms the same truth, v. 39. Christ states the first gift, [and they
shall come]; This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
day; and v. 40. declares the universal grace and encouragement to all, to
believe and obey the Gospel; And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life,
etc. And this agrees fully with the general Promises of the Gospeli so
frequently stated in the Scriptures, Joh. 3. 16. Matthew. 11. 28. Isa. 55. 1, 2,
3, 6, 7. Rev. 22. 17.

3. Suitable to this, are we to understand the Book of Life, mentioned in the
Scriptures: 1. Of Gods foreknowledge and Election to the special and espoused
relation to his Son, Heb. 12. 23. Rev. 13. 8. and 17. 8. and 21. 27.

2. It intends the Gospel Book of Life, in which is the Law of Life, and the
Promises of Life to all Believers; it works Life, and propounds and
promises Life on the terms thereof: this is the visible Book of Life, the
revealed will of God about the matters of Life, and properly belongs to us as
the revealed will of God; and we are not to suppose any thing in the hidden
Book of Life, contrary to that which is revealed; and this Book of Life we must
understand to be intended in these Scriptures, Rev. 3. 5. and 20, 12, 15. and
22. 19. All which must be understood to be the Gospelbook of Life, in which all
Believers are written, and not the first Book of Life, for out of that none
shall be blotted, Romans 8. 29, 36. But out of the second Book of Life, many may
be blotted, and lose their part therein, through their own default, Rev. 22.
19. And that it must be this Book that promises Life on the terms thereof,
further appears; because among the rest of the Books, the Book of Life was
opened, and they were judged according to the things written in the Books, i.
e. how they had lived suitable to the Laws thereof; the Book of Election in the
first sense will be no rule of judging by at that day; but the Book of the
Gospel, and the Laws thereof, shall be the rule of judging by, to those that
have been under it, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Joh. 12. 48. Romans 2. 16. Jam. 2. 12.

4. It appears that special Election is no ground to discourage any from
believing and obeying the Gospel, that they may be saved, because we find not
in Scripture, that any were discouraged on this ground among the many thousands
that believed, both of Jews and Gentiles; yea, even of those that Crucified the
Lord of Life; yet they stumbled not at this stumbling stone, but gladly
received the word of Salvation, which discovers that they understood not
Election to lie as any block in the hopeful way thereof.

5. Lest any should say they understood not this of Election, and therefore
could not stumble thereat: I answer; The Apostles understood it, and yet laid
it not as any stumbling block in the way of any, but did so Preach, and so
Write, as to encourage all Sinners to come in and obey the Gospel, that they
might be saved, and Believers to abide faithful, as if Election was no
hinderance to the Faith and Salvation of any, Act. 2. 40. 1 Cor. 9. 19. to 23.
and 10. 32, 33. Col. 1. 28, 29.

6. and finally; The Scripture seems to import that many, yea, very many
(compared with the first Elect and espoused relation) shall obtain some great
privilege, though below that of Election and Espoused relation unto Jesus
Christ; else what means that Psalm. 45. 14. The Virgins her Companions, that
follow her shall be brought unto thee; that is to Christ, where the only one
Spouse is distinct from the Virgins her Companions; and that Song 9. 6. where
are multitudes besides the Espoused Relations of Queens, Concubins, and
Virgins, blessing and praising the holy and happy estate of the undefiled
Spouse, called chap. 5. 8. the Daughters of Jerusalem; so that there may be
many Friends and followers that may come short of the Espoused Relation, and
yet have a share at that day; and that Matthew. 25. 1. to 12. seems to suit with
those Scriptures, though the Lord and Bridegroom will say to the foolish
Virgins, I know you not; that may be: In the Espoused Relation to go into the
Wedding, he knew them; but as Virgins that had been his Spouse's Companions: or
else what means our Savior, Matthew. 10. 41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in
the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward, etc. And he that gives to
drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold Water only, in the name of a
Disciple (or because he belongs to Christ) Verily I say unto you, he shall in
no wise lose his reward: See Mark 9. 40, 41. and Matthew. 20. 16. Many that are
first shall be last, and the last, first; for many are called, but few chosen,
i. e. chosen to the Espoused Relation, yet shall obtain some privilege, as the
parable plainly imports: See chap. 19. 30. Mark 10. 31. and else, what means
that of the first fruits to God and ^o the Lamb, Rev 14. 14. if it do not
intend the special saved Ones in the Election, and the multitudes that may
obtain besides, according to the metaphor, as the Harvest to the first fruits;
so that the first fruits imports multitudes besides: and further, it would be
beneath the spirit and charity of the Gospel to allow no Salvation (during the
old Covenant) to any in the world besides the Elect Church of the Jews, and
contrary to the Scripture, Act. 10. 34, 35. or to allow no Salvation, now under
the Gospel, to any among the Gentiles that have not heard of Christ; and
contrary to the Scripture, Rom* 2. 14, 15, 16. Yet not that either can obtain
the same Espoused Relation and Salvation as the special Elect Church and Spouse
of Christ, which probably may be intended in the Church of the firstborn, Heb.
12 23. and may be the same, Rev. 14. 4. who are the first fruits to God and to
the Lamb; of which the Church in its militant state, and as Elect, is a
resemblance, and a kind of first fruits, Jam. 1. 18. Yet many of these may come
short of this Glory.

CHAP. IV.
Touching the Power and Will of Man.

Whether we may suppose it to be of capacity to believe and obey the the
Gospel, so as to live thereby.

THat there is a capacity in men (by the help of the means and ministeries of
God, under which they live) to understand, believe, and obey the Lord therein,
suitable to the means and ministry, will appear to be unquestionable; though
without, and at a distance from all means and ministry from without, there is
no capacity either of will or power in any man; but suitable to the means and
ministry, there must be, and is a capacity both of power and will in all men;
not but that the capacity both of power and will is of God, but that of him
there is such a capacity in all men, that are men, (and not debilitated of the
ordinary capacities of men) appears from these five following grounds.

1. In that God has stated it to be the bounden duty of all men (suitable to
the means and ministry they are, or have, been under) to believe and obey him.
That this is true, fully appears from Scripture.

1. For the Gentiles, who had no other means or ministry but the works of God,
which was the general ministry of God to the world, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans
1. 19, 20. God so far teaching thereby, as to leave the world without excuse,
which clearly imports that God expected (as duty) a return from them suitable
to the ministry they were under, which we may not imagine, if they had no
capacity to perform it.

2. The Jews, under the ministration of the Law, which was a higher and
additional ministry, and suitably, it was their duty to believe and obey the
Lord therein, Exodus 19. 9. Deuteronomy. 6. throughout, with multitude of Scriptures of
like import.

3 Under the ministration of the glorious Gospel, he has made it the duty of
all men that come under the hearing thereof, to believe and obey him therein,
Mark 16. 15, 16. Luke 24. 47. Act. 17. 30. 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. All which, proves a
capacity in men to answer his will, or we must reflect on God; supposing that
he requires of men that which by his helps they can in no case perform, and so
justify the saying of the evil Servant, Mat. 25. 24.

2. It appears, in that he blames those under all his ministrations, that did
not, nor do not, suitably believe and obey him therein.

As 1. The Gentiles under the ministry of the Creation, Romans 1. 21. to 25.

2. The Jews, under the ministry of the Law, Exodus 32 7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. to
19. Psalm. 81. 11. and pittys them for their Rebellion against him therein,
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Psalm. 81. 13. Isa. 48. 18, 19. Jer. 13. 27. Luke 13. 34. and 19.
41, 42.

3. He blames Unbelievers under the Gospel, Joh. 5. 40. and 1. 11. Act. 13. 45,
46.

3. It appears in that God has threatened and executed, and does threaten, and
will execute Judgment upon all that have, do, or shall disobey him in his
several ministrations.

1. The Gentiles that lived (or do live) only under the ministry of the
Creation, Romans 1. 24. 26, 27. And will execute future Judgment upon them that
live not to him therein, Romans 2. 12.

2. The Jews for sinning against him under the ministry of the Law, Lev. 26.
14. to 43. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to the end; all which was executed for their
disobedience against God: See Lamentations of Jeremy, with multitudes of other
Scriptures that do confirm the same.

3. Under the Gospel great wrath is threatened, and must be executed upon all
under the Ministry thereof that do not believe and obey it; as also great
promises are made to all that do believe and obey the same, Mark 15. 15, 16. 2
These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9, 10.

All which seriously considered, must needs tend to prove a capacity in man
(with the helps of those Ministeries) to believe and obey the Lord therein, or
else we cannot have right, honorable, and God-like thoughts of him, to
require, blame, pity, promise, threaten, and execute terrible Judgment on a
people that in no case was able to help it; I know what it would render any man
so to do in all rational men's understandings. Let us dread the having so
dishonorable thoughts of God.

4. It must be so, because the contrary leaves the Condemnation of sinners at
God's door, which far be it from any sober spirit to imagine: for God to bring
forth a glorious Ministration of Grace and Life to the World, and tender it to
Sinners on such terms, as is impossible for them to perform, with the helps he
affords, and to damn them for nonperformance thereof, necessarily leaves a
necessity of perishing without hope or help: So that if this were true, that
men could not believe and obey the Gospel, where it comes simply from their
debility and impotency, and the debility of the means afforded them for help
therein, It could not be their sin; for its no man's sin not to do what he
cannot do, but what he can and might do, had he a will to do it. The contrary
supposes that God has laid a necessity upon the World, to die the second
death, whereas by sin men destroy themselves.

This I am bold to affirm, as suitable to the holy Name of God, that he will
damn no man for that which in no case he could not help, but whatever has
befaln man, or does befall him, that he could not, nor in any case cannot help,
it is his Affliction, but not his Sin, and such things shall never occasion the
second death. Its true, the first death is come on all men by Adams
Transgression, they having the same original nature of sin and death, its come
into all men as a Judgment for the first transgression, but not as a sin to the
second death.

To instance in some particular cases, that what man cannot help, is not his
sin, but his affliction. Its generally granted that its not the sin, but
affliction of those born naturally Idiots, or through natural distempers lose
their senses, because they cannot help it: So likewise Sickness in it self is
an affliction, not a sin. A man that has a bad memory, he bewailes it, and
endeavors its help; it is not his sin, but his affliction. Damnation is the
judgment of Gospel-unbelief and disobedience; yet those that never heard the
Gospel, cannot be under this Judgment, because its impossible (without a
miracle) that they should believe the Gospel; its (in some sense) their
affliction and judgment that they have it not, but not their sin, that they
believe it not, because they cannot, Romans 10. 14.

All men are born into the world with sinful Natures, commonly called original
sin, because it is derived originally from our first Parents. Now this
defilement of our Natures, though sinful, no man can help; therefore it is not
their sin, but their affliction, and cause we have to bewail it, as our
affliction, but not as our sin; so the Apostle does, Romans 7. 24. It is
consenting to it which is the sin, Romans 7. 15, 16. Jam. 1. 14, 15. When persons
consent to covetous and wordly Lusts, to proud, envious, and disobedient Lusts,
this is the sin that will usher in the second death; original guilt, and stain
only brings under the first death, but not the second, as distinct from
consent, (from which, God has ordained a blessed remedy, if men were willing
to improve the same.) This truth acquits not only Idiots, but all Infants (so
dying) from the second death; whose debility is such, as they cannot help,
relative to the defilement of their Natures, and incapacity to believe the
Gospel; and therefore God has given no Law unto them, and where is no Law, is
no transgression; all which serves to confirm the matter in hand, viz. The
ability that is in men to believe, suitable to the means and Ministry, without
which they should not die the second death, which must be for wilfulness, and
not for weakness; and likewise that the contrary leaves the Condemnation of the
World at God's door.

5. It appears, in that the true and righteous God expostulates the matter with
sinful men, to convince both them and us, that his ways are equal and just, and
sinful man's ways* are unjust and unequal, Ezekiel. 18. 25, 29, 30. and 23. 17. to
20. which could not be, if man had no power at all to eschew the evil which he
forbids, or do the good which he requires; neither the one, nor other could
be sin in man, had he no power thereunto; nor could it be just and equal in God
to punish man for not doing that which he could not. In this, lies the
difference between Men and Beasts: they have no capacity to understand and
obey; therefore God has given no Law unto them; and hence it is that they do
not, cannot sin; and they who deny any power in man to will, and to do the will
of God, according to his Ministries; they render men to be but as Beasts; and
God, as giving Laws to Brutes, which would not only be dishonorable, but
unequal; therefore let us be more prudent than to have so dishonorable
thoughts of God, who will let all men know in the end that in his Ministries he
had to do with men capable to understand him, and suitably will he judge them
in Righteousness, Act. 17. 31.

Obj*
God made man upright, and he had once a power and will to obey him, and lost
it by sin; therefore he may justly require of him, what once he gave him,
though he cannot perform it.

Answ.
1. God does not require under any of his Ministrations, the exercise of the
power that is lost, but the power that is yet remaining; here lies the great
mistake in this matter: It Is true, We are to suppose that Adam had a power in
his perfect and sinless Estate to have yielded perfect obedience to his Maker,
and that he lost, and that is not now required. But since the Fall, that which
God requires, is sincere obedience under all his Ministries; he knew there
could be no perfect obedience by reason of debility, through corruption of
nature, but he knew that man might yield sincere obedience in Faith and Love,
and in that has promised both assistance and acceptance in his Son; (see this
further cleared in the next Chapter, viz. He requires sincere obedience) so
that this objection falls and comes to nothing; for he accepts us according
to what we have, and not according to what we have not; and he will judge men
at the last day, not for, *or by) their lost power in Adam, but for their own
wilful wickedness, and not improving the power they have.

2. The design of God in the Gospel, being the restoration of the World out of
its fallen state; which design is founded in Grace, by Jesus Christ Crucified and
raised again: And to suppose that God should make known a new design of Grace
to men, to the World, to recover it out of its lost Estate; and for that end,
to lay a new foundation, and to send forth his Gospel to call men to partake of
the grace and glory thereof, on such terms, as no man on Earth had power to
perform with the common helps afforded, is not only inconsistent with reason,
but must necessarily render his undertaking in this matter successeless, and
cloud the whole design to most of men.

3. Its that which not only tends to frustrate the design of Gospelgrace to the
world, but it tends to render the design of God in the Gospel to the greatest
part of the world, to be rather a designed trap and snare, than a design of
grace, to command men to Repent, believe, and obey the Gospel on peril of
damnation (the second death) on their neglect or disobedience; and knew that in
no case they could not, nor ever intended any such grace unto them, in any
sense, is to have such thoughts of a Holy and Righteous God, as are uncomely
for sober spirited Christians.

CHAP. V.
Some further Questions and Objections Answered, that are (or may be) made,
about this matter.

1. Object.
THe Scripture says that men by Nature are dead in Trespasses and Sins; What
capacity then can be in dead men to obey the Gospel?

Answ.
1. Negatively, What we are not to understand in this matter. 1. We are not to
understand that men by Nature are dead as a stock or a stone; this is a great
mistake in those who thus think and speak, as if men were as dead and incapable
to believe and obey the Gospel as a stock or a stone, or as men that are
naturally dead; this is a ridiculous and untrue imagination If you should see a
man go to a stone and command him, and threaten him, and break him to pieces;
because he does not obey him, Would you not think such a man to be besides
himself? Therefore let us not retain that which tends to reflect so much on the
Holy and Infinite, Wise and Righteous, God.

2. Nor are we to understand men to be as dead (that is, as incapable to
believe and obey the Gospel) as the merely sensitive, irrational and brutish
Creatures. For, so to understand it, tends to unman Man, and to equal him
with the unreasonable Creatures, and little less than to un-god the infinitely
wise and glorious Being.

Secondly, Affirmatively, What we are to understand thereby:

1. That all men by sin, are in a state of death; and that, natural, spiritual,
and, without help, eternal.

2. And, as in that estate, are under the sentence of death, and must die, Heb.
9. 27. Romans 5. 12.

3. Were, and are, altogether incapable to help themselves without a Mediator,
and at a distance from the helps by God afforded, as I showed in the last
Chapter. As suppose a man were born blind and deaf, such a one being incapable
of any Ministry from without, that might tend to reach his understanding, will,
and affections, would be (without a miracle) incapable to understand, believe,
and obey the Gospel; but otherwise, men considered as men, are not so dead, but
that in the use of the means and Ministries of God, they may (possibly)
understand, believe and live, Act. 17. 24-27.

Obj.
There are many Scriptures that seem to speak the contrary, viz. That there is
no such power or capacity in man by Nature, of willing and doing the will of
God, so as to obtain life thereby.

The first Scripture is, Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him.

Answ.
It Is true, that no man can come to Christ without Gospeldrawings, which is the
way in, and by which the Father draws, as before I showed; and v. 45. Every
one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes to me; and by the
teachings of the Gospel, it is we learn and come to Christ. There are several
Cannots in this matter, and all reach not to the positive debility of man to
believe and obey the Gospel in the true sense I speak of. As 1. No man Can
believe and obey the Gospel that never heard it, Romans 10. 14. This being the
way of God's drawing and working souls to himself, Mark 16. 15, 16. Jam. 1. 18.
This is his way of drawing, Hos. 11. 4. and without this drawing, no man can
come, Joh. 30. 31. And its no more than what I say, that there is a capacity in
man, with the helps that God affords, to believe and obey the Gospel, and
without it there is no capacity.

2. No man can come to Christ that will not come; and where the Gospel is
published, there is no Cannot, without a Will-not, Tha's the Cannot that keeps
people at a distance from Christ and Life; it arises from the averseness of
their Wills; they will not, and therefore they cannot find in their hearts to
accept Christ and Life on the Gospel-terms, Joh. 5. 40. Jer. 6. 16. This wilful
Cannot arises, 1. From the habit and custom in sin: persons being habitually
accustomed to sin, will not, cannot part with it; will not Repent and turn to
the Lord, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may ye do good that are accustomed to do evil. Custom in sin, makes
resolute and wilful therein, to the perdition and destruction of multitudes;
this is the Cannot which keeps souls at a distance from God under all his
Ministeries.

3. as an effect hereof, Persons cannot leave their sins and turn to the Lord,
because they love them, and will keep them. And whiles its thus, they cannot
embrace Christ on the Gospel-terms; they cannot find in their hearts to leave
all for Christ; its with such in this matter, as it was with those, Jer. 2. 25.
After all the Lord's calls and invitations to return, they said, There is no
hope, no, for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go. While the Will
follows the affections and lusts, there Can be no returning to the Lord; while
its thus, they are like those, Job 21. 14. They say unto God, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; and while its thus, its no marvel
they cannot come to Christ, because their wills are averse; they will not come,
Joh. 3. 19, 20.

4. The Devil takes his advantage to hinder the work of Conversion, and a Soul
turning to the Lord; In blinding the mind, and hardening the heart, thereby
aggravating the difficulties, that corrupt Nature it self is ready to suggest,
viz. forsaking Sin, the beloved Lusts, loving and cleaving to Holiness,
strictness of Life, reproach for Christ, etc. All which, maintains a Will-not,
and so a Cannot, 2 Cor. 4. 4. But there is no cannot arising alone from man's
debility, i. e. want of reason and understanding to refuse the Evil, and to
choose the Good, and power to will and affect the Good, but as it is captivated
by the brutish sensual part: the understanding and reason, yielding thereunto,
rather than to the Gospel Light, wilfully refuses the proffers of Grace and
Life on the Gospel-terms thereof, Joh. 5. 40.

Quest.
May we suppose that persons may believe, or that any do believe unto Life,
only by the Objective evidence, or external Ministry, without the Spirits work,
in and with the Gospel?

Answ.
If we may suppose the Ministry to go without the Spirit working therein, then
we may suppose a possibility in respect of power; else men could not be
condemned for not believing, if they had no power to believe, in as much as the
second death comes in for not believing; and if men have no power to believe
and obey unto Life, it leaves the disobedient excusable, as objects of Pity
rather than of Wrath.

Therefore 2. There being a debility in Man by the Fall, and the prevalency of
corrupt Nature, and averseness of the will; God adds a further help to his
Ministries; that is, his Spirit working in and with his Ministries. We have
ground from Scripture to believe, that as all mercy has been (in some true
sense) Gospel-mercy since the Fall, so God has wrought by his Spirit in all
his Ministries since the Fall. 1. In the Ministry of the Creation, Genesis 6. 3.
Prove. 1. 20. 23. 2. Under the Law, Nehem. 9. 20 Act. 7. 50. although the Gospel
is the highest and most spiritual Ministry, being the most open and full in
order to glory. It Is called the Ministration of the Spirit, because its
administered immediately by and from Jesus Christ the Lord thereof, and is
therefore more attended with the power of the Spirit; for the honor and glory
of the Lord thereof, and for the Espousing of souls to Himself, so that the
Gospel administers a sufficiency of supply to help, over all difficulties.

3. God requires not perfection in the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel (as
before I said) but Sincerity: He, knowing the weakness of man, and the many
impediments in the way, did, in all, require the sincerity of faith and
obedience in which they should be accepted: yea, even under the Law, (though
the Law required perfect Obedience, He that failed in one point, was guilty of
all: yet) there was so much annexed to it, as clearly implied, that its
perfection consisted in Universality and Sincerity, rather than in Perfection
without any Imperfection or Failing, else, What means the showing mercy to
thousands, of them that love him and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20. 6. that
is, in sincerity, not in perfection, for then they had needed no mercy, for
mercy was extended to them in the pardon of sin, Exodus 34. 6, 7. which was a
confirmation of the promise beforementioned. And, that his people did so
understand, that it was sincerity of obedience which God required, is evident,
Psalm. 25. 21. and 26. 1. and 51. 6. Isa. 38. 3. or else there could have been
no acceptance on Repentance, which was promised, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. And so it is
likewise in the Gospel, as appears, 1 John 2. 1. with Phil. 1. 10. Ephesians. 6. 24.

Quest.
How far, and in what manner, may we understand that God works by his Spirit,
to the Conversion of Sinners and building up of Saints?

Answ.
1. If God did not work at all by his Spirit, but only give the Gospel, which
has in it self a natural tendency to draw Sinners to Christ; if, according to
their capacities, they believe and obey it, they should undoubtedly be saved;
and if not, it will leave them without excuse, because they believed not in the
name of the Son of God, Joh. 3. 18. Yet so it is, that, by reason of the
Corruption of Nature, custom in sin, and the averseness of the will, it comes
to pass, that rarely, if at all, any do savingly believe and obey the Gospel,
without the effectual working of the holy Spirit therein, Matthew. 13. 19. When
any one hears the Word, and understands (or considers) it not, then
comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in the heart, etc.

2. The Spirit works in the Gospel, To convince of sin, and the need and
worth of a Savior, Joh. 16. 8. to 11. And this may be effected in many, that
may come short of an effectual closing in, with Jesus Christ in the Gospel; who
by reason of the love of Sin, Self, and the World, fear of Tribulation for the
sake of Christ, loose their Convictions, and turn away from the Truth to their
own destruction, Matthew. 13. 20, 21, 22. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.

3. The Spirit by the word of the Gospel, works a willing mind to leave all for
Christ, to turn to, and to accept him as Lord and Savior, and to cleave to him
in the Faith, Love, and Obedience of the Gospel; and this he effects in all
Gospel*believers alike, which are the Elect in the threefold sense before
minded; and might all obtain, were they sincere and constant to the end, 1 Cor.
12. 13. Psalm. 10. 3. Yet of these, its possible that some may miscarry and come
short of the glory of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Heb. 3. 12, 13, 14.

4. He will preserve all (who look to him, and live upon him) unto the Heavenly
glory, Isa. 40. 30, 31. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

5. And he will in the same way certainly preserve all the special Elect and
chosen-ones, to the glory to come, Joh. 6. 39. Romans 8. 39, 40.

6. And after believing and obeying the Gospel, God usually gives a greater
measure of his Spirit to his people in the gifts and graces thereof, as a
sealing evidence of their relation to him, Ephesians. 1. 13. Gal. 4. 6. and 5. 22,
23. and to empower them more abundantly to do and suffer what he calls them to,
Ephesians. 3. 16. and 6. 10. and this our Lord would have his people to pray for,
Luke 11. 13. it being the promise of the New Covenant, Act. 2. 38, 39. From
whence we may conclude, that after believing, Christians are (or might be) in a
better capacity to live to God, than before; and therefore the Condemnation of
such as do not improve this their mercy will be the greater, Matthew. 25. 29, 30.
2 Pet. 2. 21.

2. And as for the manner of the Spirit's working in the work of
Gospel-conversion; 1. It Is secret, and invisible, and therefore unaccountable,
as to us, and is better understood by its effects, than in the manner of
working; so that we understand it when he has by the Gospel enlightened,
convinced, and converted us to the Lord, 1 John 3. 14. 23, 24 and 4. 6.

2. In this great Work he always works in the Word of the Gospel by that
means and ministry, and not without it: the Word and Spirit may not be
separated, Joh. 3. 5. and 17. 20. Jam. 1. 18.

3. The manner of the Spirit's working is not contrary, but suitable to our
reason and capacities as men; it destroys not our reason and natural
capacities, but helps our infirmities, against, and over those difficulties
that tend to hinder us in believing and obeying the Gospel. As the Apostle
speaks in the matter of Prayer, Romans 8. 26. He helps our Infirmities, etc. so
its true in all cases, the work of the Spirit, is to help our Infirmities, for
its we that do believe and obey the Gospel, and not the Spirit; but he helps
us herein, and makes us willing, Psalm. 110. 3.

Object.
The Gospel-work of Conversion is called in Scripture, A Birth from above, Joh.
3. 3. a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. a being Created after God, Ephesians. 4. 24.
Created in Christ Jesus, born of God, Ephesians. 2. 10. 1 John 3. 9. By all which,
the work seems to be more than helping our Infirmities.

Answ.
All these expressions (rightly weighed) amount but to the same thing; it is in
all an inward disposition to Believe, Repent, and obey the Gospel; and this is
the Gospel-work and duty of every one to be performed, and that on peril of
Damnation, and that to which Salvation is promised, Mark 16. 15, 16. and Act.
16. 13. It is, To be born of the Word and Spirit, Jam. 1. 18. by which we
become new Creatures in Christ Jesus. The new man, which after God is Created
in Holiness and Righteousness; this He, in and by the Word effects, it helps
us herein; for its our duty, and so its stated in the Scripture, as the matter
likewise wherein it consists, that is, To put off the old man with his Lusts,
and put on the new, etc. That is, to put off sin, and the sinful disposition,
and to put on holiness; to be more unlike the World, and to be more like the
Lord: This is the great Gospel-duty, and this the Spirit helps us to perform.

Quest.
Does the Spirit in the Gospel (where it comes) work in all alike? or May we
suppose that He effects a more special work in some, than in others?

Answ.
This is a mystery known only to God, How far he works in men in this matter;
yet something we may obtain from Scripturelight and experience too, herein, as
I have before showed.

1. That he works so far in all his Ministries, as by which they might obtain;
and as to leave the Neglectors or Rejectors without excuse, Romans 1. 20. Joh. 3.
19. Heb. 2 3.

2. That he works Conviction in some that may not be Converted, Act. 24 25. and
26. 28.

3. Others are wrought so far by the same Word and Spirit, as to believe and
obey the Gospel so, as if they continue therein they shall be saved, Col. 1.
21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Matthew. 10. 22.

4. Though the work be sufficient, by which all might obtain the end, yet he
works differingly and gives differing measures for differing ends, which are
best known to himself, Matthew. 25. 14, 15. and expects a suitable improvement of
what he gives, or works, and will punish the neglect thereof, Matthew. 25. 19. to
30.

5. As I said before, His work in the special Elect is certain, and shall not
leave them till it bring them to glory, Joh. 6. 39. Romans 8. 29, 30. But these
are only known in the Counsel of God, 2 Timothy 2. 19. We know our Election only
by sincerity of Faith, Obedience, and constancy therein to the end.

From the general Election some have fallen, and others may fall, and never
obtain the end: and its the great concernment of all, to look well to their
standing, lest they fall, seeing we all stand by Faith, a-like in the general
Election, by the Law of the Gospel, viz. by our constancy and perseverance in
the Faith to the End, without which we cannot obtain, Romans 11. 20. Heb. 3. 6.
and 4. 1. 11.

Yet it behooves all true Christians to believe the truth of the Gospel,
relative to the special gift and grace of Election, and the certainty of such
to obtain; and likewise to believe the truth of the law of Grace to all that
come under it, and the unchangeableness of the Love of God therein, to all that
keep faithful with Him; and that nothing shall be able to make a breach or
separation, unless we do it our selves by sin, Romans 8. 35. -- 38. Heb. 3. 12. 1
Cor. 9. 26, 27. And hence it is, it so greatly concerns us all to keep up our
Watch and War, that we be not ensnared thereby, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Matthew. 26. 41.
Luke 21. 36.

Quest.
May we not suppose that God fore-knew all that would believe and be saved by
his means and ministries, as perfectly as those he gave as a special gift to
his Son; and likewise those who would not believe? If so, it seems to leave the
matter under certainty of fore-knowledg, which is as certain as decrees (else
not perfect); and so leaves all under certainty of Salvation or Damnation from
Eternity, and so the case as hopeless to all that were fore-known not to
believe (the foreknowledge being certain) as special Election, as generally
held in the strictest sense, does render it.

Answ.
Though we are not to question the foreknowledge of God in this, or in any
other matter, yet we are not to think of the foreknowledge of God, as either,
1. To derogate from his Gospel-Law of grace, that promises Life to all that
believe: Or 2. So, as from thence, to suppose a necessity for any to perish;
this is a foolish thing in men, to sore aloft into Gods secrets, so as to
contradict his revealed Will, which is dishonorable unto God, and pernicious
unto Men. As some affirm that God decreed Adams Fall before he made him; or at
least, so far fore-knew it, as that it must be. That he fore-knew it, is
without doubt; but that he decreed it, or so fore-knew it, as to necessitate
it, is so far from having true, holy, and honorable thoughts of God, as that
it lays all the Wickedness and Plagues of the World at God's door; therefore
we may not have such thoughts of the foreknowledge of God, as to lay a
necessity on Man, to Sin and die. What God may do, in giving up to hardness of
heart, as a Judgment for former sins, is another case, as in the case of
Pharaoh, Exodus 1. 8. to 22. and 9. 16. For this cause have I made thee to
stand, (i. e. against God in his sin, because of his former sins and wrong,
done to his people) and in the case of his own people, Joh. 12 39, 40.

Quest.
May we suppose that persons, who are Regenerate and born from above, may
(possibly) fall from this state of grace?

Answ.
1. The Scriptures do not say, they may not, nor that they shall certainly
obtain; but that, without Regeneration, (or the Birth from above) none can see
the Kingdom of Heaven.

2 We are to suppose all Gospel-Believers to be Regenerate, and then we may,
and must suppose a possibility for the Regenerate to fall, or none can fall
away.

3. I know nothing stated in the Gospel Law of grace, as a duty in order to
obtain the end, but that persons may obtain, and be supposed (possibly) to fall
finally from, Joh. 15. 4, 5, 6. The truth hereof, will further appear if we
consider;

1. That the Gospel makes no difference, but warns all to take heed of falling,
Romans 1. 8. with 8. 13. Heb. 3. 12. and 4 11. Rev. 3. 11, 12, 13. which
necessarily supposes a possibility of falling in respect of us, without taking
that heed; unless we will suppose all the Churches to be Unregenerate, which is
contrary, both to the Word and Charity of the Gospel.

2. They have all the same Faith and Love for kind; there is but one Faith
which has the same object, and is influenced by the same Spirit, which
produces the same effect, i. e. a good Conscience, even in such as fall from
it.

3. The Scripture supposes that Persons may have the same Gospel Spirit in all
its operations, and yet may (possibiy) finally fall from God, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

So that according to the Law of Grace, all that do believe and obey the
Gospel, stand related to God therein, and nothing makes the difference: But,
sincerity and perseverance shall be crowned, and Hypocrites and Back sliders
must fall short, and meet with Condemnation, Joh. 3. 6. 13. Prove. 14. 14. Luk 9
62. And whatever special grace, and Divine assistance some do obtain in their
perseverance, and preservation to the glory promised, it no whit lessens the
duty or danger of the Disobedient, of Hypocrites and Back-sliders, God affording
a sufficiency of assistance, that all might obtain if they would, Luke 13. 34.

Quest.
Does not the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ (as in this it is
represented) as generally tendered, viz. on terms of Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience, and Constancy therein to the end (without which it cannot be had)
tend to make null the New Covenant in its absolute and inconditional promises,
and so cast a cloud upon the absoluteness of the New Covenant?

Answ.
No, in no case; for first, we must distinguish between the absoluteness of the
Covenant, and its Ministry now in the imperfect state of the Church, in which
its preparing a people for it is perfect glory, and its ministration in the
perfect state, and so suitably, of its promises. Its Ministry now in preparing
a people for the glory, is on terms, without which they can never obtain the
glory promised; this is so clearly stated in the Gospel, that I need say no
more to confirm it. And as for the absolute and inconditional promises of the
Covenant, if we apply them to the present state, we may not so understand and
apply them, as to thwart or contradict the conditional, or to make them null;
if we do, we are never like to obtain the glory: for no man on Earth can
rightly claim a part in Gospel grace or glory, that has not the terms thereof
effected in him, Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 22. 14. We may not understand any absolute
promises contrary to the law of Gospel Grace, and glory; the absolute promises
are sure to none but such as are under the conditional, and so they ought to be
understood, Rev. 3. 10, 11, 12. and 21. 7.

2. We may look for, and believe-down, assisting grace from these promises, to
preserve us to glory, and the Covenant in the perfection thereof, when come to
glory; will be absolute in all its promises; its absolutely true to all
Over-comers, and administers power through Faith, to preserve us to the
promised glory, 1 Pet. 4, 5. and then the Covenant will set all Over-comers
above all fears of going out any more from God, Rev. 3 12. And this distinction
between the imperfect and perfect state, the Scripture is full and clear in,
Heb. 4. 3. For we which have believed, do enter into rest (we enter now, by
Faith) v. 9. There remains therefore a rest unto the people of God: This is
the Rest which is yet to come, and remains to be entered into; which Rest, as
to come, admits of some doubt of entrance into it, because we are yet on the
terms of entering, v. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest
any man fall after the same example of Unbelief; which supposes a possibility,
yea, and a danger to, of coming short, and that of those who now do enter by
Faith, v. 1. and on these terms God keeps all his people, even the special
Elect; and that too, for their safety and preservation to Glory, and that
without any wrong at all to his Covenant of grace, or absolute promises
thereof: but, as the sure way for the obtaining thereof, he lets us to know our
Duty, and has assured us that he will be faithful in his Word.

Object.
This asserts a possibility of falling from Grace, and so destroys the
assurance and comfort of Believers.

Answ.
1. It does no other than the Scripture does; its that of which the Scripture
is full; I need not mention any more, it frequently presents us with a
possibility of falling: Else those many and frequent Exhortations to the
contrary are useless, if there were no danger, as also the examples of those
that have fallen, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 1. 15. Heb. 4. 11. Else what means the
Lord's appointing a Ministry in the Church to preserve it from falling, Ephesians. 4.
11. to 14. and, all to exhort one another, 1 These. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 13. were
there no danger of miscarrying?

2. We are to understand, that the Elect are only known to God, and that in
this way of perseverance they shall be preserved to Glory; we know our selves
to be His no other way, but by our Faith and Constancy in the Gospel; this is
his Gospel-Law of Grace, in which we have the witness of the Spirit that we are
His

And 3dly. It Is so far from diminishing the Consolation of Believers (rightly
understood) that it is the only sure way for Gospel-Consolation. For persons to
pretend high Assurance, and strong Consolation in any other way, or from any
other ground, than being under the Gospel-Law of Grace and Promises thereof,
it is to deceive themselves, Jam. 1. 22. ad finem, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 11. So that its
so far from destroying the assurance and comfort of Christians, that its the
only way of assurance and preservation to the Inheritance.

Object.
But this is supposed, to be the way to live in fear; and John says, that
perfect love casts our fear.

Answ.
It does concern us to live in fear; not only to fear God, to fear any sin
against Him, but to fear our own deceitful Hearts, and naughty Natures, the
Devils Temptations, and the Worlds Allurements; and this fear is that, without
which we cannot be safe, nor expect to be preserved to the Glory to come, Romans
10. 20. Heb. 3. 13. and 4 1.

The 2d Scripture is Joh. 15. 5. Without Me, ye can do nothing.

Answ.
This Doctrine supposes nothing contrary unto it; for 1. All the common Light,
Understanding, and Reason, etc. that men have, is from him, He is the Light
that lights every man, etc. Joh. 1. 9. And were there no more said in this
matter, it is true, without Him we can do nothing. But 2. The Gospel leads
souls to Him, where their help is; its that which I say, There is no capacity
or power without the Gospel, which unites souls to Christ, in whom their life
is, Col. 3. 3. and where the drawing is, souls may come to Christ, and enjoy
His power in their work and walk with God.

The 3d. Scripture is Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that Wills, nor of him
that Runs, but of God that shows Mercy, etc.

Answ.
1. Negatively: This Scripture does not suppose that there is no power to Will
or Run, but rather that willing and running will not do it. Nor 2. May we
understand that it designs to take-off from all willing and running, in order
to the obtaining of Gospel-Life: for, that is contrary to the whole scope of
the Gospel, which commands all to Believe, Repent, and Obey the Lord therein;
and the promises of Life are only to such, Mark. 16. 15, 16. Heb. 5. 9. Nor 3.
May we understand, that the specially-Elect only, shall obtain, and that all
others are debarred; that, though they Will and Run, all will be in vain: These
are corrupt understandings of the Scripture, being contrary to the whole
Gospel-Law, which commends and encourages all to Repent, Believe, and Obey,
with promises of Life to such, and threats of Damnation to the Disobedient, 2
These. 1. 7. 8, 9, 10.

These I take as true and unerring Rules in the understanding of Scripture: 1.
Not to understand any dark Scripture, contrary to the plain revealed Will of
God in his Gospel-Law of Grace; this must needs be corrupt and dangerous. 2.
Not to understand any Scripture so, as to contradict others, especially so as
to contradict the Volum of the Book of God, and Law of Grace, as either of
these senses, does; yea, and contradict the Apostle, and set him against
himself, who in this very same Epistle encourages to the willing and doing of
the will of God, and that in order to the obtaining of Life, with the danger of
the contrary, Romans 2. 4. to 10. and 8. 13. and 12. 1, 2.

2. Therefore, 2dly. Affirmatively, we must necessarily understand that it
tends to keep us, in our Willing and Running, to the right rule and right end
in running; and therefore we may understand either, 1. That it is not our
Willing or Running that can bring us within the compass of special
Electing-grace; that being past, in God's Will before the World was: or 2. That
it condemns all Willing and Running without having respect to the Mercy of God
in the Gospel, leaving out Christ and Grace; all such willing and running will
be in vain. And most probably this is it that is intended; for this suits with
the scope of the Gospel, Act. 4. 12. Ephesians. 2. 7, 8. Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.

Or 3dly. That it is by the Grace and Mercy of God in the Gospel that any do
rightly will and run; Man by Nature, being so averse thereunto. So that it no
whit derogates from the power to will and run, but regulates it to the right
way of assistance and acceptance, that is, to God that shows Mercy.

And v. 8. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardens.

Answ.
1. He has let us know in his Word (as to his general Law of Grace) on whom he
will have Mercy, viz. On all that do believe the Gospel, and cleave to him
therein, They are and shall be the Vessels of Mercy, Act. 2. 38. and 3. 19.

And 2ly. This discovers the freedom of his will, relative to Sinners. After
they have hardened themselves and sined away their mercy, he is at liberty in
this case, to soften in Mercy, or to harden in Judgment whom he pleases. And
this the Scripture, from whence the Apostle takes this Sentence, does
demonstrate, Exodus 33. 19. The people had all sinned away their mercy in making
a Calf: God threatened to destroy them all, Moses intercedes for them: God is
entreated, but takes the advantage of their sin, and exalts Mercy and Judgment;
whom he would, he would pardon, and keep alive to go into the good Land, and
whom he would, should not come there, Exodus 32. 34, 35. It Is Gods Prerogative,
when he please, for former sins and abuse of mercy (as a Judgment) to give men
up to a hardened Estate in sin; but still this stands as the firm and
unchangable Law of the Gospel, that he will have Mercy on all that do believe,
and obey the Lord therein.

And verse. 19, 20, 21. or what is elsewhere said in this Chapter, we must
understand to the same purpose; it shows the power of God over Man, in his
sinning state, (where all have sinned away their Mercy) to exercise Justice and
Mercy on whom he please; not from his Eternal Will, without relation to sin and
obstinacy, but as a punishment of former Rebellion, which in justice he might
exercise on many, whom (probably) He will make Vessels of Mercy.

To understand it otherwise, (viz.) That God will Damn whom he please, from his
own Will and Power; and save whom he will, from his own Will and Power; let Men
believe and obey, do what they will or can, it is all nothing; but he will
(after all) have mercy on whom he will have mercy: and from his Power in his
Eternal Will has prepared some to Honor, and some to Dishonor, without any
relation to sin or obedience, this tends not only to contradict his general
Grace to Men, and the whole Law of Gospel grace, which promises Life to all
that do believe and obey the Gospel, but indeed must put all to a loss; for, no
man on earth can conclude (from this principle) but that after all his Willing,
Running, Believing, Repenting, Obeying, Watching and Warring, he must leave all
to the Eternal Will and Power, who, as probably as not, had designed him a
Vessel of Wrath from Eternity. If it be Objected, I may be one of the specially
Elected Ones; I Answer; And, it may be, not, and then you are gone for ever, if
your assurance arise not from your being under the Law-promise of Grace, by
believing and obeying the Gospel, but from the Eternal Will and Power of God,
without relation to Gospel-Willing and Running, you destroy all
Gospel-assurance, and Gospel-comfort of Christians.

If you say, You are under the Law of Gospel Grace, the promise of Life by
believing. I Answer: There you should be, and there is your safety, and the
Controversy is over: Who-ever believes and obeys to the end, is a Vessel of
mercy. Though God may (as before I said, as a punishment for former sins) make
some Vessels of Wrath; and, to show the freedom of his Will in a way of Grace,
make others in the same state, Vessels of mercy: yet this no whit derogates
from the freeness of Gospel Grace, nor should discourage any in believing and
obeying the Gospel, that they may be saved.

Finally, and to conclude this: It Is evident that the scope and drif^ of the
Apostle in this Chapter, is, to discover the method of God both in the Old and
New Covenants, relative to his Election (especially) to a Church State. His
Election in the Old Covenant, was to the Children of Promise, from v. 4. to 12.
the Natural Seed of Abraham, yet said, not to be the Children of the Flesh, i.
e. of Ishmael, Gal. 4. 29. but of Isaac, who was a Son of Promise, and so of
Jacob, and not of Esau. So in the New Testament, the Elected Church is
Believers both of Jews and Gentiles; they are the Children of the Promise, and
Elected Church of Christ, and, continuing faithful in this relation, shall
obtain the glory: and seems to be stated as a word of encouragement to the
Gentile Churches of Believers; that though God had made the Jews his Elect
Church, formerly, yet they should not doubt of the truth of his Grace to the
Gentiles; nor the Jews present rejecting of the Gospel, be any stumbling block
in the way of the Gentiles: and, to take off this Stumble, he gives two
Arguments, 1. That they did not all reject the Gospel, but many Believed, v. 6.
and chap. 10. 1, 2. And 2. that God might in Justice harden them for their
disobedience to the Gospel; that though they did Will and Run, yet it was out
of the way of Gospel Grace, v. 31, 32. and chap. 10. 2, 3. So that the sum of
all, seems to be, To take off discouragements from the Believing Gentiles that
might arise, 1. From doubts of the reality of Gospel Grace to them, seeing the
Jews were of old, the only visible Elect Church of God; and 2. That the Jews
rejecting the Gospel, should occasion no temptation on the Gentiles to doubt the
truth thereof; as also afterward, to warn them not to insult over the
unbelieving Jews: for, these were the temptations that the Gentile-Believers
were liable to, Chap. 11. 18.

The fourth Scripture is 1 Cor. 8. 14. The Natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, nor can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

Answ.
The Natural, Animal, or Sensual Man, does not, cannot understand, viz. either
1. The Idolatrous Gentiles, that would not come to the Gospel Light, which is
the Ministration of the Spirit: such did not, nor could not, receive the things
of the Spirit: or 2. Such as were under the doctrine of the Gospel, and yet
willingly hardened their hearts against it, Joh. 3. 19, 20. Satan, the Prince
of the World, helping-on the blindness, 2 Cor. 4. 4. 3. The Spiritual things of
the Gospel, are revealed in and by the Gospel, and all where it comes, should
understand and believe it; but it is those only, that, by the Word and Spirit of
the Gospel, do believe and obey it, that have this spiritual understanding. 4.
There are degrees of glories in the Gospel-mystery, and there may (and must) be
a growth in the understanding thereof after believing; and this is proper only
for the Obedient, to be led by the Word and Spirit into the understanding of
those Gospel-mysteries of grace and glory, which are above the understanding of
all Unconverted persons, Ephesians. 1. 15. to 20. 2 Pet. 3. 18. So that it supposes
not any impossibility for the darkest and worst of Men to obtain light and life
by the Gospel. That, is contrary to all Gospel-law.

The 5th. Scripture is 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ? and what have
thou that thou have not received?

Answ. It Is true: We have all from God, Natural parts and abilities; Christ,
the Gospel, and Grace thereby to make us willing to perform its terms of life:
it is He by his Gospel Grace that makes us to differ, or distinguishes his
Church from others; so that, it no whit derogates from the truth in hand.

The 6th. Scripture is 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient as of our
selves, to think any thing as of (or from) our selves.

Answ.
It Is true: As of our selves only, we are not; distinct from Christ and Gospel
grace, we are not, but by the helps afforded, there is power both to will and
do the Will of God in the Gospel; there is power in the Disobedient to do what
they have no will to do; and in Christians in many cases is a power to do more
than they have a will to do, which is their sin, and will be their loss in the
end, 2 Cor. 9. 6. And in others, a will to do (in some cases) more than they
can do, 1 Cor. 7. 18. and this will be accepted with God, as if what is willed
were done, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

The 7th. Scripture is Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in you, to will and
to do, of his good pleasure.

Answ.
1. It Is the good Will and Pleasure of God, by the Gospel, to work men to will
and do His Will therein; and this is that which seems to be intended in this
place; for the Apostle exhorts them earnestly to do the Will of God, as the
Text and Context does demonstrate; therefore he intends not such a working, as
of which they had no power or will to perform, but that as God (of his good
pleasure) had by the Gospel wrought in them to will and do his will therein,
they should improve the Grace received, and in which they stood. To understand
it to intend Gods working an impulsive Will, and that they could not, or
should not work without it, destroys the Exhortation, and makes null the Duty.

2. As God had begun the good work in them, he lets them to know, that in the
faithful performance of their duty, God would continue to work in them; and in
this way it is, that Christians may assuredly expect the continuance of the
Spirit's assisting presence; it is as much as to say, Up and be doing, and the
Lord will be will you. But, to understand that God works to Gospel-duty by an
impulsive power, and that without it we can do nothing, and so must wait for
this, before we move toward him in Gospel-duty; is corrupt and dangerous,
tending to end all Gospel-obedience.

The 8th. and last Scripture I shall mention, is, 1 John 2. 19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us; if they had been of us, they would, no doubt,
have continued with us; but they went out from us that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us.

Answ.
1. John was an Apostle, and might be able to judge infallibly in this matter,
touching the persons of whom he spoke, as sometimes Peter did in the case of
Ananias and Saphira his Wife, Act. 5. 1. to 10. So John might know, that those
gone out from them were Hypocrites; and if so, were not truly of them, but
Plants that were not of Gods planting. So that this proves not, that all that
may go out from the Church, were not of them: but some may go out, who, if they
had continued, might have obtained; for such as make Shipwreck of Faith, and a
good Conscience, had they continued, they must have obtained.

Or, 2. Had they been of the Elect in the special sense, they would, no doubt,
have continued, or returned again by Repentance.

CHAP. VI.
That the Salvation and Damnation of Men, shall be suitable to the several
Ministrations under which they have Lived.

WE may now result, clearly and safely, that the Salvation of all that shall be
saved, shall be suitable to the means and Ministries, under which they have
lived. That there has been, and is, a sufficiency of means of Salvation under
all, is apparent, as has been before proved; and that there was Salvation to
some under all, has been likewise proved, Act. 10. 34, 35. This Salvation
shall be suitable to the means and ministry, and the seize of those under
it, viz. such as have been United to Christ by Faith, in, and under the Gospel,
are Espoused to him in the nearest Relation; a privilege and glory, which the
Gentiles that have not heard of Christ, nor the common saved ones of the Jews,
may be supposed to arrive unto, Gal. 4. 30, 31.

Yet this we must understand, that all Salvation must be by the Lamb slain, i.
e. Jesus Christ Crucified and Raised again. There has been no ministration
(simply in its self) capable to save, but relative to the Lamb slain, though
they have been ignorant thereof, Act. 4. 12. and this all the Saved ones shall
know, and Condemned ones too, Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13. Phil. 2. 10, 11.

2. That the Condemnation of men in the Judgment day, shall be for sinning
against God under the means and ministries, under which they have lived, i. e.
They before the Law, and without the Law and Gospel too, shall be Judged and
Condemned for not improving the Ministry of the Creation, Psalm. 28. 4, 5. Romans
2. 1, 2, 3, 12. And they under the Law, for sinning against the Law, Romans 2.
12. And they under the Gospel, for sinning (more immediately) against the
Gospel, Joh. 3. 19. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. They that never heard the Gospel, are
not capable to believe the Gospel, Romans 10. 14. therefore are not under the
Condemnation thereof for not believing; although the Gospel is Preached, more
remotely, both by the works of God, and by the Law; and all Sin, since the
Fall, has been (in a true sense) against the Gospel; yet their judgment must
be by the ministrations, under which they have been, and they shall then know
that they sinned against their Lord and Judge, Act. 17. 31. Phil. 2. 11. Hence
it is said, Rev. 20. 12. The Books were opened; that is, the Book of the
Creation, and works of God, under which all had been, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. and
the Book of the Law, ver. 7. to 12. and another Book was opened, which was the
Book of Life; this is the Book of the Gospel, and Men were judged according to
the things written in the Books. And a fourth Book may be well understood, i.
e. The book of every man's Conscience, that will accuse, or excuse at that day;
and will be a Witness too, for, or against, at the day of Judgment, Romans 2. 15,
16.

Which should be a warning to all, to take heed how they neglect the great
Salvation of the Gospel, and so judge themselves unworthy of Life. Such must
then know that the word of Salvation (which was able to save them, had they
believed and obeyed it) must be their Judge at that day, Joh. 12. 48 And this
must needs be very grievous, when the word of the Gospel, that has sought to
save Sinners; and Jesus Christ, who has been thereby wooing and entreating
acceptance, shall then Judge and Condemn them; and they themselves shall then
acknowledge the Judgment is just and right: where, will be no Plea of
Non-ability in the matter, when it shall be found that it was their own wilful
Will that was the cause thereof.

CHAP. VII.
Some further Considerations about the Eternal Judgment relative to the Wicked:
Whether there may be any probability from Scripture Light, of any deliverance
from, or mitigation of, the Punishment of any after the Sentence is past, and
the Judgment Executed.

TOuching this, I do apprehend that there are probable grounds, both from
Scripture and Reason, that there may be a deliverance of some from the penal
part, or pains inflicted, though not from the sense of Loss; the Judgment in
that respect will be Eternal. The probable Scripture-grounds for this probable
supposition, are as follows.

1. The Scripture lets us to know, that some shall be saved; that through their
own miscarriages shall lose the reward of their work, 1 Cor. 3. 14, 15. They
shall be saved, yet so, as by fire; and what that fire is, and how far it shall
extend, at, and after the Judgment, I must leave to Him that knows all things
to determine. I know that some understand this of another day and fire before
the Judgment-Day: but with what Authority from Scripture, I leave the Prudent
to judge, Mal. 3. 2. and 4. 1.

2. The Lord of all, lets us to know, that none shall be Eternally Damned, but
those who sin against the Holy Spirit, Matthew. 12. 31. Three of the Evangelists
state this for confirmation, Mark. 3. 28. Luke 12. 10. And if all sin shall be
forgiven, then there must be a deliverance from the Judgment; the unpardonable
sin is, Knowingly and maliciously to oppose Christ, and the Convictions and
workings of the Spirit in themselves or others, under any of the Ministrations,
but especially under the Gospel, Matthew. 12. 24. 31. Heb. 10. 26. 29. 2 Pet. 2.
20, 21, 22. Paul mist this sin, though he did the same in fact, that is,
Violently oppose the Gospel and Spirit of Christ therein; yet he did it
ignorantly in Unbelief, and therefore he obtained mercy: Had he done the same
work knowingly and maliciously, he had been past the reach of mercy.

Obj.
This Scripture only supposes, that on Repentance all such sins may be
forgiven; not, that they shall be forgiven without Repentance.

Answ.
It Is true, we may not suppose the forgiveness of sin, first or last, to be
without Repentance, but that they shall be forgiven on Repentance, either here,
or hereafter. 1. Here, on Repentance and Faith, and such shall not come into
Condemnation, Joh. 5. 24. 2. Hereafter, for Christ strongly implies the
forgiveness of sins in the World to come; He that sins against the Holy
Spirit, shall not be forgiven in this World, nor in the World to come: Which
imports that others shall be forgiven in this World, or in the World to come.
1. It imports that there shall be forgiveness of sins in the World to come.
2. We may not suppose that the forgiveness of sins in the World to come, will
be without Repentance. And 3. It is said that all other sins shall be forgiven,
either in this world, or in that which is to come, but still on the terms of
Repentance, then as well as now. And that there may be forgiveness and
acceptance after death, seems further to appear: else, What means 1 Pet. 3. 19,
20. with chap. 4. 6. In chap. 3. 19, 20. it is said, by which (viz. Spirit) also
he went and Preached to the Spirits in Prison, which sometime were disobedient,
etc. I know its commonly understood, the Preaching of Christ by Noah to the old
World, to the Spirits that are now in Prison; but it is greatly doubtful whether
that be it which is here intended. 1. Because its said that He went, i. e.
Christ, not the Spirit only by Noah, but by which He went and Preached. 2. He
does not say, He went by Noah to the people of the Old World, but he went and
Preached to the Spirits (not persons) in Prison: Noah's Preaching was to
Persons living, this to the Spirits in Prison.

3dly, And especially; compare this with chap. 4. 6. which seems to be the same
with this; for, for this cause was the Gospel Preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the Flesh, but live
according to God in the Spirit. Where the Apostle states these things: 1. That
the Gospel was Preached to them that are dead. 2. The time When it was Preached
to them; that was, after they were dead; that is apparent from these
expressions: 1. It Is plainly expressed, It was Preached to them that are dead. 2.
That they might be judged according to, (or as) men in the Flesh, viz. that
they were judged (in this matter) as if they had been alive in the Flesh, which
imports they were not. 3. The end of the Gospel's being Preached unto them,
was, that they might live to God in the Spirit; and if so, it clearly imports
that there may be some hopes of some relief, some time or other after death,
especially of such as never heard the Gospel. Nor does this justify Christ's
Dis^ension into Hell, as some hold; that, while his Body was in the Sepulcher,
his Soul descended into Hell. For 1. This Scripture tells us not when it was,
whether before, or after his Suffering. 2. It says not, that his Soul went and
Preached, etc. but He, i. e. Christ in Person by the Spirit, as he did all his
works here among men, even by the same Spirit he went and Preached, etc. 3.
Because the Scripture gives us to understand that the restitution shall be so
accomplished by degrees, and at various times; therefore it is called the times
of Restitution* Act. 3. 21. and that in the dispensation of the fullness of
times, he will gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in
Heaven and in the Earth, even in Him. There is (doubtless) a true Gospel-sence,
in which all things shall be gathered (or summed) up in Christ, into such an
estate as shall tend to exalt and glorify God in his Name to Eternity,
especially in his Mercy, Truth, and Justice.

4. The Scripture presents us with the deliverance of Sodom and Gomorrah in
some time, from the greatness of their Judgment: Ezekiel. 16. speaking of the
greatness of their Judgment, and of Samaria, v. 46. 49. he promises a
Restoration to them both, out of their forlorn estate, v. 55. 61. This is
spoken of literal Sodom, and cannot be mystically applied: Compare this with
Matthew. 18. 15. where Christ, the Lord and Judge, allows a tolerableness for
Sodom at that day, more than for Sinners against the Gospel; which being
compared with the former Scripture, seems to give some light unto it, (viz.)
how far Sodom may be tolerated at that day, Matthew. 11. 23, 24. And the rather
may we thus understand it, because Jude says) Jude v. 7) that they are
suffering the Vengeance of Eternal fire, and the Scripture promises a time of
deliverance.

5. Why may we not suppose, that God may in time, be pacified toward Sinners,
after they have born their Sin and Judgment, as formerly he has declared
himself to be, or will be in time to come? Ezekiel. 16. 58. Thou have born thy
leudness, and thine abominations, that is, the punishment of thy lewdness, v.
63. that thou may remember and be confounded when I am pacified toward thee:
and chap. 39. 6. Seeing God has been (or will be) pacified in Judgment, why
should we suppose him to be unreconcileable, and never to be pacified in his
last and great Judgment?

6. The Scripture says expressly, That God is the Savior of all men, but
especially of those that believe; and it is not present outward Salvation the
Apostle is there speaking of, but very probably the Salvation of all, out of
the fallen state in the Resurrection, and of all in His times, from the greatness
of the Judgment, that are not excepted in his Word.

7. That (probably) all sins of Ignorance (if not wilful) are herein
comprehended, as in times to be forgiven, which seems to be grounded upon
Reason: For, if Sodom had enjoyed the means of Light, as some others did, they
had Repented, and the Judgment been diverted, and Sodom had remained, Matthew.
11. 23. Act. 17. 13. So that such as might, or would have Repented, had they
had the means of Light as some others, may have a time for mercy; and the
Scripture seems to present us with this, that all (except such as sin wilfully
and knowingly against God) may have a time for remitting the penal part of
their Judgment, after they have born the punishment of their sin, Heb. 10. 26.

8. It Is not intended, that this Deliverance will extend to any degree of
glory, but only a deliverance from pain and misery, for they are under no
promise of reward of good works (because they had none) and therefore must
justly suffer the reward of their bad works, but no reward of any good, and, on
this account, must be under the Eternal Judgment and sense of Loss.

9. And that, what of favor and mercy may be extended on this account, shall
be on the account, and for the sake of Christ: He shall have the honor of all
acts of grace to Eternity, Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 10. and this, as it seems to be
Scriptural, so it seems to be rational and most God-like, Who is the Fountain
of Reason and Righteousness; and as he has let us to know that he will suit
his Judgments (as a Righteous Judge) suitable to men's various facts for measure,
which is a rational and righteous way of Justice, Heb. 2. 2. Luke 12. 47, 48.
Jam. 2. 13. Rev. 18. 7. Rev. 22. 12. So likewise from the same reason and rule
of Righteousness, has he given us hints of limitation in respect of time, as
if he would not be for ever punishing, Luke 12. 58, 59. And this word, till, or
until, in Scripture, rarely imports Eternity, but limits to time, Matthew. 18.
34, 35. and 5. 25, 26.

I shall now come to answer such Objections as may seem to lay in the way of
this matter.

1. Obj
The Scripture tells, us, that but few shall be saved, Matthew. 7. 14. Luk* 13.
24.

Answ.
1. This rightly understood, no whit contradicts what has been said: for
first, Few, yea, very few comparatively, obtain the first degree of Salvation,
as the Elect Spouse of Christ; few enter in at this gate, and many may
sluggishly seek, and not be able. There are but few of the Undefiled ones, such
as Rev. 14. 4, 5. such as Psalm. 119. 1, 2. Luk 1. 6. Phil. 2. 15. But,
multitudes walk in the broad way which leads to destruction.

2. Few comparatively obtain so far, as not only to meet with loss, blame, and
shame, 2 Pet. 3. 14. 1 John 2. 28. but punishment in the day of Reckoning; and
though sluggish Christians and formalists, enter not in at the straight gate,
yet this proves not that they shall find no mercy at all; if so, Woe will be
the case of most of Professors at that Day.

2. Obj.
The Scripture sentenceth the Wicked with Eternal Damnation, assuring us, that
it shall be Everlasting, Matthew. 25. 41, 46

Answ.
1. Rightly understood, it may fall in with the same as has been mentioned;
for its evident, that Matthew. 25. intends professing-Christian-Nations; for,
others cannot be accused and sentenced for not showing kindness to Christ in
his Members, that never knew (or heard of) either him or them; and so may be
such as under the sound of the Gospel sinned against the holy Spirit, or such
as may obtain a time of mitigation.

2. Eternal, Everlasting, and for-Ever, being understood according to the
common use and import of the Word in Scripture seems rather to confirm this
Understanding than otherwise; for we must understand it according to the time,
or times intended, and not always for ever, without end, but very often the
contrary, and that both in the Old and New Testament.

1. In the Old Testament, Genesis 13. 15. and 17. 8. and 48. 4. Exodus 39. 8. and
40. 15. Lev. 16. 34. Number. 25. 13. in all which places, for-Ever, and
Everlasting, must be limited to the times intended therein; and Jer. 7. 7. and
25. 5. for Ever and Ever must be thus understood.

2. In the New Testament, (...) and (...) which are the common words for
Everlasting, and for Ever, yet must frequently be thus understood, with
limitation to the times intended, as sometimes to the end of the world, Matthew.
28. 20. to this World, or Life, Luke 16. 8. The God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The World to come, Luke 18. 30. Course of life, Ages to come, Ephesians. 2. 2. 7.
(...) sometimes intends the time before the World was, 1 Timothy 2. Sometime the
time of a man's life, Philem. v. 15. That thou should receive him for ever,
which could be no longer than they lived together; and this is a common sense
of the word for-Ever, both in Scripture, and among men; for-Ever, i. e. so long
as men live together, Exodus 21. 6.

By all which, it appears, that the use of the word in the New Testament, futes
with the use thereof in the Old Testament (if rightly understood) relative to
the times intended, and so is no stop at all to what is here presented, but
rather a help therein.

3. In a true sense, the Judgment will be Eternal in the largest sense of the
Word; for all that obtain not in the Judgment, must be under the Eternal
Judgment and sense of Loss, which will be very great, and will render their
Judgment to be Eternal.

Quest.
Will not this occasion a Carnal liberty and boldness in sin? Persons, from a
supposition that there may be an end of the pain, may thence take liberty to
sin the more without fear.

Answ.
There is no occasion from hence for any to take liberty to sin; for if every
one shall receive according to the things done in their bodies, whether it be
good or evil, it should rather tend to provoke to a sincere and holy walking,
as a preparation for that day: If there shall be loss in the neglect of doing
Good, and punishment for doing Evil, suitable to the facts, both for measure and
time; there is no ground for a Carnal-liberty in sin from hence, especially the
Scripture giving us some light in this matter, both as to the terribleness of
the Judgment, and time of its Executions, (viz.) If Sodom be suffering the
Vengeance of Eternal fire so many thousand years, and yet shall return in the
end, the serious thoughts of this Judgment, would be very terrible: If a fit of
Sickness, and terrible pain, be so hard to be born here for a season, in which
men wish for death, and cannot obtain it, what will be the dreadful state of
Sinners that must lie in the fiery Lake, some perhaps a 100. some a 1000 and
some perhaps 10000. years, and at last must be glad with a freedom from their
Torment, without any entrance into Glory, being Eternally under the sense of
Loss? Surely this is no encouragement to sin, nor to slackness or negligence in
duty, but rather engaging to strictness in holiness, and as dreadful to
Evildoers, as the supposition of endless misery* in the strictest sense.

3. Obj.
This seems to be like the Popish Purgatory; To pass under the fiery Judgment
for a time, and afterward to have some deliverance, seems to justify their
principle in this matter.

Answ.
The false Church has (almost) in all things, something like the Truth; and
we may not reject the Truth, because they own IT, or something like IT.

2dly, Their's is a clear Abuse, and setting it out of its place and time, for
base ends, to enrich themselves, in cheating the People; and themselves it is,
that are like to have the deepest share in this Purgatory: from whence, Money
will not deliver. This is a Purgatory after Judgment, from which none can free,
but the Judge Himself: Their*s is an invented Purgatory, before Judgment, to
enrich themselves; As great a Cheat, as ever came into the World!

Object.
The Scripture affirms Sodom and Gomorrah to be suffering the Vengeance of
Eternal Fire, before the Judgment Day; which imports a Judgment and Purgatory
before that Day.

Answ.
That was Sodom's Judgment-Day, and this Example (being extraordinary) is no
general Proof; The general Rule of Scripture is, That the Wicked are reserved
for the Day of Judgment, to be Punished, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Heb. 9. 27. Sodom
received their Judgment then, and are still suffering thereof; and the Day of
the general Judgment is like to be their Day of Ease; but not so to any else,
liable to Condemnation, especially under the Gospel.

4. Object.
If Damnation be limited unto Times, and that we may suppose a time of
Deliverance, and that [Everlasting] in Scripture-Sence, may admit of Time, Why
may not the Salvation of the Godly like-wise admit of Time? And so may, from
the same Ground, be supposed to have an end.

Answ.
1. Nothing that has been said, tends to the nulling of the Eternal Judgment;
and therefore ministers no occasion of Doubt in this Matter, relating to the
Eternal Salvation of the Godly, according to the Promises thereof.

2dly. There is not the like Reason, for the lessening of the Glory of the
Saved Ones, as of the Misery of the Condemned Ones; because God has always
declared himself to be very merciful, and pitiful toward poor Sinners, ready
to be Pacified, that their Judgment might be altered and ended, not pouring out
all His Wrath: But we never find Him repenting of his Mercy, promised and
exercised toward His own People, unless Sin made a Change, Romans 11. 29. Number.
14. 30, -- 34. And (then) shall be no Sin; and so, no occasion of a Breach,
Zeph. 3. 13. Phil. 3. 21.

3dly, The Design of Gospel Grace, and Life, shall be suitable to the Son, and
Lord thereof, as the First World was stated upon the Standing, or Fall of the
First Man, for whom it was made; and (in some true Sense) was the Lord thereof,
Genesis 1. 27, to 31. Who, by his Sin, lost it.

But, the Restoration, and New World, is founded immediately, and wholly on the
Second Man, who is the Lord from Heaven: Who can never forfeit and lose the
new-Restored State; and, the Eternity of the Glory of His Saved Ones, depends
on the Eternity, and Glory of their Espoused Head, and Lord, and Everlasting
Covenant of Gospel Grace and Life in Him, Joh. 14. 19. 1 Cor. 15. 49. So that,
to all made nigh to Him in Gospel-Relation, as is the Glory of the Bridegroom,
so shall the Glory of the Bride be, Joh. 14. 1, 2. 1 These. 4. 17.

5. Object.
Though Sin be in it self finite, yet in as much as it is against an Infinite
Majesty, it deserves infinite Punishment, both as to Measure and Time.

Answ.
Though the Assertion in it self is true; yet we shall find, that it is from
the Infinitness God, and his Grace, that we are not all consumed: Here lies
the Foundation of our Acceptance in His Son, now, in the Day of Grace;
therefore the Infinitness of the Majesty offended, is no Block in the way of
Mercy; but, on the contrary, it is the greatest help, and ground of Hope, in
our Acceptance, through the infinite Sacrifice, of the Lamb slain: and, Why we
should make that an Argument against all Grace after the Judgment, (the infinite
Sacrifice remaining the same to have its Influence here in), which has been
our alone Hope and Help, before the Judgment; and that which God Himself made
an Argument to encourage Sinners to come unto Him (Hos. 11. 9.): I do not yet
understand.

6. Object.
If Men did Live ever, they would Sin ever, and therefore it is just in God to
Punish them ever.

Answ.
1. So it would have been just in God, to have given us up all to Sin and
Judgment for ever; But He is merciful, and abundant in goodness; and that is it
why we are not all consumed.

2dly, God will Punish no Man for what they might or would have done, but for
what they have done: It will be enough in that, Eccles. 11. 9. Rev. 22. 12.

3dly. They shall be under the Punishment of loss for ever, as before I have
said; which, how great it will be, cannot now by us be known: The loss of a
Kingdom, of Glory, of loving Favor to Eternity; How great will this Judgment
of Loss be?

CHAP. VIII.
Shows the Reasons for understanding the Scriptures, as has been declared in
the Whole Matter.

Reas. 1. It Is that which renders a real Design of good will in God, toward
all Men, in the gift of His Son, and in the Restauration-Work; and a Real Love
in Christ Jesus toward all Men, in His painful and shameful Death for Sinners;
and so confirms the Truth of the Scriptures, Joh. 3. 16. Luke 2. 10. 1 Timothy 2.
4, -- 6. Tit. 2. 11.

2dly. It renders a real Capacity in the Second Man the Lord from Heaven; not
only to repair what was lost in the First; but of an Additional good to all
men, if themselves stand not in the way thereof, Romans 5. 18. Joh. 5. 40. Act.
13. 46. And that, notwithstanding men's Neglects, they may have some benefit of
the Grace, after they have justly born their sin and shame.

3dly. As it renders God not only truly, but Universally good, gracious, and
Merciful, Psalm. 145. 8, 9. So, like-wise, it tends to moderate our Notions,
about the Extremity and Unlimitedness of His Justice, relative both to the
measure and time of its Execution: And, that Grace and Mercy in God, through
the Gospel, has exalted it self above Justice, (it being his Name and Nature);
yet no way to the wrong of Justice.

4thly. As it renders the way of God in the Gospel, to be both exceeding
merciful and just; so it gives us a Rational Accountableness of His Proceedings
in the Whole; which will tend to satisfy gracious Souls, and silence all
Gainsayers, if not here, yet certainly hereafter; from His general Design of
Good to Men; and the Rationalness and Equity of his proeeeding therein.

5thly. It Is that which renders the Scriptures reconcilable, and discovers the
sweet Harmony thereof; that tells us of God's Design of good to all men, and
lays the blame on Man, in failing of Receiving the Good, designed. And the
special Grace of God therein to some, and that without any Derogation at all
from His general Grace, and leads out of those confused Labyrinths; which the
contrary, and unaccountable Notions, has brought men into, viz. Of God's
sending His Son to dye for the Elect only, (in the strictest Sense) determining
to damn all the World besides; That, no man has a Power (in any Sense) to
believe, and obey the Gospel, and yet must be damned eternally for not
believing; which imports no less (were it true) than that God sent His Son, not
to save (but to destroy) the World: And like-wise delivers from the unquoth
Notions, of denying Election, and special Grace; and the certainty of such to
obtain; The Liberty of the Will of God in this matter, without any wrong at all
to His general Grace; The laying too much Stress in the Creature's Will,
derogating from the Spirit's Work in the Gospel: These, with sundry like
Notions, this Understanding delivers from; and renders the ways of God toward
Men, in the Gospel-way and work, to be righteous, even rational men themselves,
being Judges; which will make all miscarrying Persons, silent, and speechless,
in the great Day of Account.

God's design in Scripture, being to render himself, and ways to be understood
of men, rationally to convince them of His Mercy, Truth, and Justice, suitable
to his Name and Nature; that what may be known of Him who is Invisible, may be
understood by men; and it concerns us, not to cloud Him under Darkness, and so
to render both Him and His ways Unaccountable, Irrational, and Ungodlike; who
is the fountain of all Light, Reason, Truth, Holiness, Justice, and Equity; and
is (and must be) so in all His ways; and has designed by his Word, and Works,
so to make known himself to men, Psalm. 145. 17. Romans 3. 3, 4.

5thly, It renders those divided Notions, about Election, and Reprobation,
general and special Grace, (that have unjustly made Divisions among Christians)
to be reconcilable, and tends rightly to end the strife in this matter; there
being a Truth in both, if rightly understood and held: But, as held in
opposition, are both contrary to the Truth, and dishonorable unto God. Let
those that are for special Grace, believe and own the general Grace of God to
All; and those that are for general Grace, believe and own the special Grace of
Election, in the true sense, as has been declared; and the Controversy will be
over, God will be honored, and His People comforted, and edified.

6thly. It Is that which tends, not only to render God and Christ, truly lovely
in the Eyes of all men, and effectually to draw the Hearts of Sinners to Him,
when they understand that his Love is General and Universal, Hos. 11. 4. Matt.
11. 28. Joh. 3. 16. and 6. 37. But effectually works the Hearts of Saints to
Duty and Diligence in all His ways, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. working in them Love to
God and Christ above all, as their chiefest good, and as the Word does require,
Matt. 22. 37. Which can never be, but from the Apprehension of the truth of
Love to them, 1 John 4. 19. v. 10.

7thly. It tends to render God to be infinitely Glorious in the Restoration.
As in the Creation-Work, in which he deljghteth himself in variety, and that
(as to us) infinitely; in which his Infinitness is wonderfully declared: So, in
the Restoration and Redemption-Work, there will be Infinitness in variety to
Eternity, though all shall stand in Unity as to the Head, Ephesians. 1. 10. who is
not only Head of the Church, but Head over all things to the Church. v. 22. Yet
a variety beyond all Human Capacity, both as to Glory, and Punishment, distinct
and suitable to the various states of All, respecting both Persons, Actions,
and times of Restitution; and some as wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of Darkness for ever, Jude v. 13. I say, That things thus considered,
will render God infinitely glorious in His whole Name, and that to Eternity; the
New-World being set, in the whole State thereof, to glorify Him in all His
Names.

CHAP. IX.
The Result and Conclusion of the Whole, in a few Brief Words of Application.

Use 1. Of Information.
1. IT Informs us, How greatly it concerns us to be searching after, and
enquiring into, that so we may obtain a greater measure of the knowledge of the
Will of God in the Gospel; it Informs us, of the Weight and Worth of that
Exhortation, 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ: To grow in the Knowledge of the Dignity and Unity of
his Person, Name, and Offices, and not to separate what God has united; To
grow in the Knowledge of the Greatness and Universality of his Love to Sinners,
and the Work he undertook, when He came to offer himself a Sacrifice for Sin;
Surely there is a Mystery in the Knowledge of Christ, His design of Love and
Grace to Sinners, that is unsearchable: O be daily enquiring more into it, and
live more therein, and you need not doubt of your falling from Him, or the loss
of your Consolation in Him, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18. 1 John 3. 18, 19, 20. and 4. 16,
17, 18. Christians go the wrong way to work for Assurance and Consolation, when
they go to Election, in the strictest and hidden Sense, to plead Assurance from
thence: Alas, that is a Mystery, hid in the Father and the Son, and must lose
all that will lay the Foundation there; therefore, learn to live much in the
Apprehension of, and Faith in, the Love of Christ: Grow in the Knowledge
thereof; and so, that it work you to a holy Conformity to his Will: Love him,
and live to him under his Law of Grace, and you need not doubt your good Estate
to Godward, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

2dly. It Informs us, of the great miscarrying of those, who in their Notions
do not distinguish, but divide and separate the ^eneral and special Love of
Christ in the Gospel: By reason of which, they have fallen into, not only
Oppositions and Contentions, but Separations each from other, to the great
trouble of the Church, and scandal of Religion, whereas both are Truth. One
takes one Part, and the other takes the other Part; and here the Gospel of
Salvation is rent to pieces, and the Church rent thereby; and all, as the
Effects of Men's mistakes and Passions: Let us learn better to distinguish, and
not to Divide what God has United.

3dly. It Informs us, How greatly it concerns All, to take heed, and beware of
Extremes, in our Notions and Principles, in the matters of our God, in the
Gospel: Many miscarriages among Christians, come in by Extremes: When an Error
is apprehendded on one hand, we ordinarily run into another on the other, to
deliver our selves, and often it proves as dangerous as the other; and this
tends to harden and divide, rather than to cure: For instance, The Protestants,
to be rid of Popish meritorious Works, run themselves too much, in both
Principle and Practice, beyond (almost) all Works of Charity: And because some
lie low in Christianity, more it may be in the Form, than in the Power thereof;
Others, to cure this, (from supposition of obtaining the Power) throw away
Christ and Christianity it self: Others, to beware of Formality in Prayer, will
not pray at all, without some special Impulse there-unto: So, supposing to gain
the Power, lose the Duty of Prayer; and, ordinarily, the Power with it: And
others, into those various Extremes in their Notions, about the things I have
discoursed on, about the great things of the Gospel of Salvation: But,
certainly, Extremes will prove bad Cures in the end. Our great Concern is, To
study Truth and Unity, not Extremes, and Divisions; Unity in the Knowledge and
Faith of the Son of God, in the Knowledge of his Word and Will, in the matters
of Faith and Worship; and to dread Extremes, especially such as do tend to
Division.

Object.
Your self have been liable to the same Miscarriage; and have sometimes been
of another Mind than now, about those things you have now Discoursed on.

Answ.
I easily grant it, and cannot deny it; nor dare I say, that yet I am free from
all Extremes in my Understanding; and should heartily rejoice to see the man
that has been, or is, free from all Extremes in this matter. Let us be humbled
in the Sense hereof and design a Freedom here from, and learn to pity each
other; and above all, look that we make not our Extremes in Principles and
Opinions, Grounds of Breaches and Separation in Love and Affection.

4thly. If God be good to all (as indeed He is,) and would have all Men come to
the Knowledge of the Truth, and be Saved; it Informs us then, How greatly it
concerns us All, to seek the good, and Salvation of All, to exhort and pray for
the good of All, 1 Timothy 2. 1, to 6. and not to lay stumbling Blocks in the way
of any, seeing God has laid none; but rather to be removing them out of the
way, Isa. 57. 14, and 62. 10. There can be no greater stumbling Block in the
way of Sinners, than to suppose, That God, in the Gospel, willed the Salvation
of, but very few; it may be, not one in a thousand; nay, not (probably,
according to their Principle) one in Ten thousand: A great Block is this in the
hopeful way of Salvation of poor Sinners. And if it be supposed, that so few
are like to be saved; yet if this Block be removed, the Fault will rest in
themselves, and not on God: Therefore (I say) let there be no Principle owned,
nor Doctrine published, nor any thing Practiced in the Conversation, that may
prove justly stumbling, either to Saints or Sinners; that Sinners be not
thereby kept at a distance from the Truth, nor the Lame turned out of the Way,
Heb, 12. 13. It likewise greatly concerns us, to remove those Blocks that lie
in the way of Reconciliation, and Peace, one with another; and to prefer the
great and good design of Salvation. If by our Meat we may not destroy him, for
whom Christ dyed, Romans 14. 15, 20. how much more should we be heedful, we do it
not by contrary Doctrines, and bad VValkings? VVhat-ever tends to destroy Men
is not of God; but from beneath: God is the God of Peace, and Jesus Christ is
the Prince of Peace, and the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, Life, and
Salvation, and seeks the good of all; and the Ministers thereof, are (or should
be) the Ministers of Peace: And that Spirit that stirs up Contentions,
Divisions, Enmities, Persecutions, Wars, etc. (all which tends to hinder the
common Salvation) is not of God, but from our own Lusts and Passions, and from
the Devil, under what specious pretense for Religion so-ever it appears, Romans
6. 16, 17, 18. Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17,

5thly. It Informs us, of the great miscarriage of those, who either 1. own no
Holy Spirit at all, which is contrary to the Doctrine, and Faith of the Gospel,
and the Name into which we are Baptized. Or, 2. such who own the Holy Spirit;
but will allow Him no special Work in the Gospel, in the Conversion of Sinners
and Building up of Saints: But leave all to the averse Will of the Creature.
3. Such as pretend to own the Holy Spirit, but in word only; and deny Him
indeed, both in Word and in Work. 1. Such who pretend to own the Holy Spirit,
yet do all without Him; follow their own Spirits, Lusts, and Wills; and
blaspheme, and persecute Him in others. 2. Those who pretend much for the
Spirit, but will none of the Word of the Spirit, the Gospel, in and by which He
works: It Is the Gospel that is the Ministration of the Spirit; and who-ever
opposes That, cannot have the Spirit thereof: And if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.

6thly, It Informs us, of the Mistake, and Miscarriage of such, as in their
Notions carry all things above the reach of Reason; as if the
Gospel-ministration were carried all out of sight of men, so as designedly to
lose them therein: It is true, it is a glorious Mystery of Grace, which was hid
from Ages, and Generations; but is now made manifest, Ephesians. 3. 3, 5. So that
now, if it be hid, it is to them that perish; in whom, the God of this World
has blinded their Minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Other-wise, men may come to the open
Sight, and Understanding thereof: It is not through the Vailedness of the
Gospel, that men Perish: That, is an open Light, gloriously shining forth, in
view of All; the contrary Notions, tend to cast a Cloud on the Revelation
thereof, and does open-wrong there-to, and to the Souls of men: Though it is
true, that by reason of Sensitive Lusts, and the corrupt Will and Affections,
it so comes to pass, that rarely, if at all, any fall so in love therewith, as
to believe unto Life, without a measure of Divine Grace, and Assistance, yet
the Gospel is suited to men's Understandings; else, the Conscience cannot
accuse in the Day of Judgment, for what it did not (nor could) understand.

Use 2d. Of Exhortation.
2d. ANd to Conclude, O that it might be a word of Exhortation to us All! 1. To
study more, the things that make for the Salvation of All, that we may not
narrow this large Dispensation of Grace, according to our own narrow minds; but
own it, and promote it, for the good of All; yea, of the whole Creation,
according to the Design thereof: Without it, we cannot heartily Preach the
Gospel to all; but must have Restriction in our Minds to a few, yea, a very
few. Nor, 2. can we, according to Scripture -Exhortation, pray for All, which
is a Commanded-Duty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. on weighty Grounds. 1. Because it is good,
and acceptable, in the sight of God, v 3. 2. Because He would have all to be
saved, v. 4. Because Jesus Christ gave Himself a Ransom for All, v. 6. These
are weighty Grounds, to encourage us to pray for All: and it is impossible, that
men should thus pray, who limit the Design of Salvation to so few.

2dly. Let us own the Spirit's Work in the Gospel, and pray for it; It Is the
Glory thereof: The Gospel is the Ministration of the Spirit, and ministers the
Spirit; which is the great help to Gospel-Faith, and Obedience: Therefore,
leave not out the Spirit of the Gospel; if you do, you leave out the Life and
Glory thereof. You cannot pray, that God will bless your Ministry; nor praise
God for what is wrought in (and by) you, if you believe not the Spirit's Work
in the Gospel: Be humble therefore, and give all Glory to God.

3dly. Study Things which make for Peace: Away with the proud Spirit of
Contention, and Division; and put on the Gospel Spirit of Peace, and Charity.
Love all as Christians, in whom the Life of Christ is manifest, though they
differ from you in some things, that are of weighty Concern; For, such I take
to be good Christians, who believe, love, and obey the Gospel, to the best of
their Understanding; though, among such, may be Differing Apprehensions, in
many things: But this I shall forbear to prosecute any further; because I have
annexed here-unto, An Essay for more of Gospel-Love, and Peace, among all true
Christians.

4th Exhortation is, 1. To Sinners, to accept of Gospel Grace and Life by
Jesus: It Is freely tendered; and you may have it on the holy, honourable-Terms
of the Gospel, if you will. He did not only dye for you, but cries to you, Ho!
every one that Thirsts, Come, take of the Waters of Life freely. All ye that
are Weary come to Me; If any Man Thirst, let him come to Me and Drink: Whoever
will, let him Come. Let him Believe and Obey the Doctrine of the Gospel, and he
shall live: O let not your Lusts, and Sins, and Love of the World, retain you
any longer, from Believing and Obeying the Gospel, that you may be Saved; and
know it shall be no Plea for you; Want of Power? No, No! It Is want of Will: The
Aversness of your own Wills, That will prove your Ruin, Joh 5 40. The Power
shall not be wanting: If there be a willing Mind, there is (nor shall be)
nothing wanting on God's Part, for your good. O be not like the Fool, that has
a Price in his Hand to get Wisdom, but has not a Heart to it. And know, That
if you reject or neglect this great Salvation, it will be to your own
Condemnation.

2d. Exhortation is to the Saints, to persevere in the way of Welldoing.
Remember, it is Sincerity, and Perseverance, that shall wear the Crown; Take
heed therefore, of an Unbelieving Heart, to depart from the Living God. Take
heed and beware of Sin. Let not your Lusts, and the World, captivate you, Rom
6. 16. Take heed and beware of Covetousness; Of Pride, of Oppression, of
Malice, Envy, and Evil-speakings; Abstain from all Appearance of Evil. And
know, That you may be in the Holy-Profession of the Gospel, with unholy Hearts,
and unholy Lives; and so, be far enough from the Grace of Life: For, if you
Live after the Flesh, you must Dye; notwithstanding your Holy-Profession, Rom
8. 13. And look to the Lord for his Assisting preserving Grace; who will keep
you through Faith unto Salvation: But do not deceive your selves: For, God will
not be Mocked. You may Deceive your selves, Jam. 1. 22. but you cannot Deceive
God. Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be yestedfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; knowing that your Labor shall not be in
Vain in the Lord, 1 Cor 15. 58.

FINIS.
A Healing Word: OR, AN Humble, Hearty, and Earnest Endeavor, FOR PEACE and
UNITY AMONG The Children of Peace, and all Men* HUMBLY Presented for common Use
and Benefit of all the true Lovers of Truth and Peace.

Written by Thomas Collier.

Zach. 8. 19. Love the Truth and Peace.

Prove. 12. 20. Deceit is in the heart of them that Imagine Evil, but to the
Counselors of Peace is Joy.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1676.

THE PREFACE, or EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
HAving observed (to my grief) the Differences, among Christians, about matters
of Faith and Worship; notwithstanding, we have all Grounds to fear, that we are
All (in some things) in the Dark; being but coming out of the Mystical Babylon,
and Apostasy. And, What Person or Church can say, They are in all things
delivered from the Desilement of that Estate? but rather are traveling from
Babylon to Zion: And, O that we could go together in more Unity; going, and
weeping, to seek the Lord our God; and asking the Way to Zion, with our Faces
thither-ward, Jer. 50. 4, 5. Not judging, and censuring one another; because,
all have not attained alike Apprehension, in and about the Way: Some think they
have gotten a step beyond their Fellows; And hence they despise, or too much
undervalue those they think to come short of them: And those, who may
(probably) come short of others in some Principles of Truth, judge those, who
(it may be) are gotten beyond them: And thus it is to be feared, that Christians
have sinned much in their Contestings, Reproachings, Judgings, Dividings, and
Separating one from another: even to the utmost Extent, the Scripture warrants
a Separation from the World and Babylon.

I have here endeavonred to put my poor Helping-hand, for Healing (if it may be)
the Wounds, and binding up the Breaches, and Controversies of Zion, of the
Church. And, O that it may be of Healing Use, and as a Medicine fitly applied!
It Is not a Scriptureless Peace I plead for; but a just and lawful Peace, a
Christian Peace: Not to throw Churches into Confusion; but that they may not
Confound each other; that they may not bite, and devour each other.

I have endeavored an Answer to the most special things in use at this Day; on
which, Separations among Churches, and Christians, are built: My reason here-in
is, not (in the least) to provoke, but to moderate; that so, my designed End
herein might be accomplished, viz. That those who break on those Grounds, might
(at least) unde^stand, that there are Matters of weight, that sway with
Judgment, and Conscience, with those who cannot act in some-things, as they do:
Which may tend to moderate their Spirits in the matter; and may come to see
more cause to learn to bear with, and forbear, their Brethren in Love; that if
their Faith continue in such things, they may have it to themselves, and not
impose it on their Brethren, on terms of Separation. I hope, the sober-spirited
will come to see the little Grounds they have to make Breaches, with their
Brethren about these matters: I heartily desire, it may prove a Healing-Word to
All, through the Blessing of Him that has dwelt in the burning Bush, so as
that it is not yet consumed. I shall here give no further account of the
Matter, or Method of the following Discourse: It Is very brief; and has waited
an opportunity, of coming into Public, for some Years; but, for some Reasons,
has layn in silence till this time; hoping that the preceding Discourse, may
tend to add something to this Essay for Peace. I commit it All to the God of
Peace; praying His Blessing of Peace may attend it, to all the Sons and
Daughters of Peace. Amen.

T. C.

A Healing Word: Or, A Humble, Hearty, and Earnest Endeavor for Peace and
Unity, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Grounds, and Bounds, of Church Communion.

MY Method in that which follows, shall be, 1. To state the Grounds, and so the
Bounds of Church Communion, according to the Gospel; which is the alone Rule
both of Faith and Practice.

The Grounds of Church-Fellow-ship, or those Principles on which the Church, or
Churches of Christ, should Ground and Bound their Communion, are most clearly
stated in Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. The reason why I (especially) fix on this Scripture
is, because it seems to be stated (not only) as an Argument to engage to the
Unity exhorted to, verse. 3. but is (likewise) a Description wherein this Unity
does consist.

1. Of the Unity of the Church it self, There is one Body, i. e. one Church,
which is the Body of Christ; and of whom He is the true and lawful Head, Lord,
and Lawgiver, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Which Church contains all true Believers, in all
Nations: This is the Visible Church of Christ, in the Visible Profession of the
Faith of Christ, according to the best of their Understanding, and Knowledge of
the Will of Christ, their Head and Lord, in His Word: Though, in this Church,
as thus considered, some may miscarry; and, by their own Default, come short of
the Glory promised.

This Universal Church is thus described, in the Text last mentioned, and in
verse. 27, and in Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Col. 1. 18.

Though this Church is gathered into many Churches, and is in many Nations;
and, (it may be), through Ignorance, Pride, Frowardness, and misguided-Zeal,
separated into more Churches than need (or ought) to be: and, it may be, some
part thereof in Babylon still, Rev. 18. 4. and others build Tabernacles before
they are half way out; yet the Church is but one Body, in Christ the Head.
There is but one true Universal Gospel Church in the World, which is the Body
of Christ; and of this Church it is, I do profess my self a Member: And this
Church is (or should be) gathered into particular Churches, or Congregations;
walking according to the Rules and Laws of Christ, their Head and Lord: Holding
Communion with Christ, their Head; one with another; and with all Churches in
the same Faith, and Obedience of the Gospel. And as for the great matters of
Faith, wherein the Church's Unity consists, it here follows:

1. In one Spirit, There is one Holy Spirit; that is, one holy Spirit of the
Father, and of the Son; by which, this one Body, the Church, is Regenerated by
the Word of the Gospel, and united unto Christ the Head thereof, Joh. 3. 3, 1
Cor. 12. 13. and 6. 17.

2dly. All are called in one hope of their Calling; That is, All hope for one
thing, to wit, an Interest in the Grace and Glory of the New Covenant, Romans 5.
2. Tit. 1. 2. Chapter 3. 7. And in 2 These. 2. 16. it is called, Good Hope, through
Grace: In which Hope, it behooves them to be constant, and steadfast to the End,
1 Pet 1. 13.

3dly. One Lord; that is, One Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord and Savior of this
Body, the Church, 1 Cor. 8. 6. and 12. 13. who purchased it with His own Blood,
Act. 20. 28. and to whom the Church is to be subject in all things, as to Her
lawful Head, and Lord. Ephesians. 5. 24.

4thly. One Faith; that is, That one Faith of (and in) the Gospel; of which,
it is necessary for all the Members of the Body to be principled in; and
includes all things necessary to be believed, in order to Eternal Life: with a
suitable VValking thereunto.

5thly. One Baptism; that is, either, 1. One of a kind: One of Water, one of
the Spirit, and one of Afflictions: Or, 2. one of Water, unto Regeneration,
Act. 22. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 21. 1 John 5. 6. which I take to be the one Baptism
(most probably) here intended.

1. Because-that, Baptism in Water was commanded to be done after Believing;
and was always so done, according to that Rule, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 38.
and 8. 12. 37. and so it is stated in this place, one Faith, one Baptism.

2dly. Because the other Baptism, i. e. of the Spirit, and of Afflictions, are
so called Metaphorically, and not properly. Properly Water Baptism is so; the
others are so called by way of allusion, or likeness.

3dly. Because the Baptism of Afflictions may (or may not) be: it is no Duty, or
Ordinance, for any man to throw himself into it; but a Duty, when lawfully
called to it, and (esteemed as) a Mercy to be delivered from it: But as there
is but one Baptism of Water; so a Union herein is necessary to a right
Church Communion; without which, there cannot be, in the Body of the Church,
one sort of Members; and so the Body cannot be one in the Head.

6thly. One God, and Father of All; who is above All, and through All, and in
you All. Now, where there is a Unity in these principal Things (viz. One
Spirit, uniting this one Body, one Hope, one Lord Jesus, one Baptism, one God,
and Father of All, etc.) there is a Ground for Church Communion, in all the
things of Jesus Christ, if other matters of Scandal, in Conversation, do not
justly prevent, Ephesians. 5. 5, to 12.

Our Lord sums up the Fundamentals, necessary to Salvation, in a narrow
Compass. Joh. 17. 3. And this is Life Eternal, that they know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; which (doubtless) includes the
Whole, of Faith and Practice, necessary unto Life Eternal: And Mar. 16. 16. He
that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be Saved; that is, He that Believes,
and Obeys the Lord in the Gospel, shall be Saved; of which Obedience, Baptism
is the first, and an Usher to all other Parts of Obedience; and that which, by
the Gospel-Law, puts Persons under the Promise of Salvation, and gives them a
right to orderly Church Communion.

So that I infer from the Premises, That, according to the Rule of Scripture,
and Law of Christ, nothing should prevent those that are united in the Faith
and Baptism of Christ (walking according thereunto) from Fellowship, in all the
Ordinances, and Privileges of the Church. And truly I do fear, that it has
been the great sin, and miscarriage of Christians, to make other things (as
their own private Opinions) too much the Ground of their Church Communion;
(which has been one cause of many Breaches, among Christians, and Churches).
And hence it comes to pass, that (almost) so many Opinions, so many Churches,
which gives occasion of stumbling to some; and to others, to triumph, and say,
A-hah; so would we have it; (A wonderful sin and shame it is): And, as these
are the Grounds, so they are the Bounds, of Gospel-Church-Communion. I see not
how we may, by the Gospel-Law, go without these Bounds in
Gospel-Church-Fellowship, and Communion, in the Church-Ordinances, and
Privileges of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.
Of Laying on of Hands on all Baptized Believers.

I Shall now come to speak something to those several Persons and Churches,
separated and distinguished, according to their several Opinions, that may tend
to moderate in this matter: As for Baptism, it being (almost) generally
granted, to be an indispensible Ordinance of Christ, in order to
Visible-Church-Communion; or a Visible- giving up our selves to God, after
Believing: I shall therefore take it for granted, that all, who own Jesus
Christ to be their Savior and Lord, do own Baptism in Water to be his holy
Ordinance; and none will deny it to follow Faith, according to the Law of
Christ; though too many practice the contrary, as to the Subjects: viz. Take
Infants instead of Believers.

The first I shall speak unto, are those who practice Imposition of Hands on
all Baptized Believers, as the Law of Christ; and on this Ground separate from
all, who, in Conscience, cannot so act with them. And for such, I have seen
several of their Writings; and had some Converse with some of them; some more
moderate, and some more rigid; some making it a ground of Separation, and some
not.

The Grounds, I find, on which that Practice is stated are, that of Heb. 6. 1,
2. and the Practice of the Apostles, Act. 8. 17, and 19. 6. I shall endeavor
to discourse this Matter, with all the Clearness and Moderation I can; to the
intent, that all gracious Souls may (at least) see the little ground there is
to make Breaches and Separations about it; though I do exceedingly own
tenderness of Conscience to Godward, in all His Will.

1. As for Heb. 6. 1, 2. (from whence, I suppose, are several Mistakes urged in
this Matter: As, first, supposing it to be the only Design of the Apostle
here-in, to state the Grounds, and Bounds, of Church Communion); though it is
so, that most of the things here-mentitioned are the great matters of Faith and
Practice; yet, it is evident, that it is rather letting the Church to know, That
if they drew back, and fell away, there was no renewing of them to those things
again: And therefore, (though they were very much degenerated, as is apparent,
Chap. 5. 12.) the Apostle would leave these Things, and not teach them anew;
but, go on to Perfection; that is, Go on to teach them further Gospel Truths,
as verse 3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 5, 10, 11. 8, 7. to the end of the Epistle, does
Demonstrate.

The second Mistake is, in so frequently calling those things Foundations, and
Foundation-Principles, to be all alike practiced in all Ages of the Church;
whereas Jesus Christ is the alone Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And this is clear
in the Text: It says not, Repentance, Faith, and Baptism, etc. which is the
Foundation; But, not Laying again the Foundation of these Things; that is,
Christ Jesus: He is the Foundation of Repentance etc. For, without Him, there
is no ground for any of these, nor for our Acceptance therein: It Is all
Founded in Him: Therefore, the Scripture says not, Laying of these things as
the Foundation; But, not Laying again the Foundation of these Things; which is
Christ Jesus: And, by reason of this Mistake, Men persuade themselves and
others, that, not to come up fully and practically, in all these
beginning-Words, is to take away the Foundations of the Building; by reason of
which, it must needs Fall.

A third mistake is, That the beginning-things the Apostles did, are
indispensibly to be practiced in the Church through-out all Ages; and from
hence, because the Apostles practiced this of Imposition of hands, it must
continue as an Ordinance in the Church, of the same Authority and continuance
as Baptism: and hence separate from those who (in their notions) come not to
the same Faith and Practice.

Now that this is a mere mistake, and that there are Beginning-things practiced
by the Apostles (of which, this is one, as will in its place appear) which are
not practicable by us, is most evident; for if it were not so, it would set all
a-seeking, and not find; to instance, The Apostles did many miracles, and some
of them were by Imposition of hands, Act. 9. 17, 18. and 28. 8. If we hence
reason (as some do) that there are now no true Ministers, but such as can do
such miracles, there would be no Ministry at all, and so no Church; and we
might all go a-seeking, and not find: In the beginning of the
Gospelministration, there was such varieties of Gifts in the Church, as now is
not, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. And if it be necessary that these gifts be in the
Church at all times, then now there can be no Church, and they that so affirm,
are justified: But we are to understand that the Gospel Church, intends one and
the same Church State from first to last, as the state of the Jewish Church
was, and was sometimes more, and sometimes less glorious, from varieties and
occasions; so that the Apostles, and Gifts, and Miracles were for us as well as
them, and are as truly ours as theirs, being the same Church State; so that
there is no more need for those first Miracles and Gifts to continue, and to be
repeated over in every Age (relative to the Church) than was of Moses in
Person; and those amazing miracles from Mount -Sinai, to be repeated over in
every Generation after: by all which, it appears, that all the beginning-Words
and Works of Christ, and his Apostles are not essential to the Church State in
every Generation, but some of them only to be believed, but not practiced,
because it cannot be: of which, this will appear to be one.

A fourth mistake is, in so positively affirming that the Imposition of hands
in this Scripture, is, and must be intended, 1. Of that on all Believers as
such, being Baptized. 2. To be done as an Ordinance of Christ, of constant and
universal practice as is Baptism; to these, several conscionable doubts may be
made,

As 1. Whether Imposition of hands on Believers, as such, be at all intended in
this Scripture; and that 1. Because we do not find laying on of hands on
Believers as such, at all practiced in that Church; and for us to conclude that
to be intended, which we do not find practiced among them, must needs be an
uncertain conclusion.

2. That it was not practiced, seems evident, not only from its not being
mentioned, but likewise from the Promise, Act. 2. 38. Repent and be Baptized,
every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. He does not
say, be Baptized, and have hands laid on you, but be Baptized, etc. By which it
appears that Baptism is that to which the Promise is made, and not laying on of
hands; and its not to be doubted, but that they had the gift (according to the
Promise) on Repentance and Baptism, without Laying on of hands, or else the
words of Peter were not true of them; and the rather, because it is not at all
mentioned as exercised among them: And further, Its evident there was no other
Ordinance used among them after Repentance (in order to Church Communion) but
Baptism; for its said, That they which gladly received the Word, were Baptized,
and added to the Church, without any Laying on of hands, Act. 2. 41, 42.

3dly. We have grounds to conclude that, Imposition of Hands on Baptized
Believers, as such, was an additional act done by the Apostles only where the
gifts were not before, and so no instituted Ordinance of common use in the
Church: And that for these Reasons;

1. Because we find it not practiced on any Converted by the Apostles Ministry,
because that such had the gifts, following Faith and Baptism according to the
Promise, without Laying on of Hands; and (it seems) that additional act of the
Apostles was, to confirm the Conversion wrought by Ministers that were
inferior to the Apostles in Gifts and Authority.

2ly. We find it practiced only on those of Samaria, Act. 8. Converted by
Philip, who was not an Apostle, and Baptized by him, on whom the Gifts did not
follow after Baptism, as when the Apostles Ministry Converted: and Peter and
John laid Hands on them, in order to the gift of the Spirit, which they had not
before; if the Gift had followed Baptism, as in the Apostles Ministry, there
had been no occasion of Imposition of Hands for such an end; and this is
rendered as the reason thereof, v. 16. As yet the Holy Spirit was fallen on none
of them, and for this reason they prayed, and laid on Hands, which clearly
imports, that if the Spirit had fallen on them before, they had not laid on
Hands for that end; and likewise, that the gifts of the Spirit came at first on
the Church of the Jews, without Laying on of Hands, as is evident, Act. 11. 15.
and 10. 44. And those Paul laid hands on, Act. 19. were Believers before, who
had not heard whether there was any Holy Spirit, and he laid hands on them, and
they received the gifts of the Spirit. By all which, it appears, that laying on
of the Apostles Hands, was sometimes done as a supply to Baptism, when the
gifts did not follow Baptism; so that its evident, As sometimes the gifts did
not follow Baptism, without laying on of the Apostles Hands, as in the cases
mentioned: So sometimes the Gift was given before Baptism, as Act. 10. 44, 45,
46. And then was no mention of laying on of Hands, but they were commanded to
be Baptized, v. 48. which confirms Baptism to be a standing Ordinance of
constant and universal concernment to Believers, though they have the Gifts of
the Spirit before; but Laying on of Hands to be only of present use, in order
to the particular end, expressed; and further, if it had been an Ordinance of
Christ, as Baptism, to be practiced on All, in order to Church Communion, then
Philip let the Eunuch pass away without it; and so, in an incapacity of
Church Communion in any of the other Ordinances of Christ: and this we find
generally stated in Scriptures (not only in those beforementioned, Act. 2. 41,
42.) that Baptism was it, that united them to Visible-Church-Communion, Romans 6.
3. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 27. and nothing else after was required but a willing
mind to walk with God in all His ways.

4thly. We find that Imposition of Hands, was exercised only on those called to
minister in that Church among them. And, in Reason, if we understand Scripture,
by Scripture, (which is the safest way) then, what Laying on of Hands we find
practiced among them, we must (most rationally) conclude, That is it the
Apostle intends, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

I shall endeavor to answer some Objections against this.

1. It may be said, That of Laying on of Hands on Elders, is not a Principle,
and Beginning-Word; and that of Act. 6. 6. relates only to Ministers; but this
seems to relate to the whole Church, and is Milk for Babes; and therefore, is
not that Imposition of Hands on Elders.

Answ.
1. A Ministry in the Church, (which, ordinarily, was orderly set apart in the
Church, by Prayers, and Laying on of Hands,) is such a Beginning-Word, or
Principle; as, without which, there can be no orderly Church: This is that (I
suppose) I need not prove. It was that, which was not only frequently
practiced, but taught in all the Churches: But this, on all Believers, was
never taught, other-wise, than to the Persons immediately concerned therein;
therefore cannot so properly come under this Doctrine.

2dly. This on Elders did (and does) relate to all the Church; and so is Milk
for Babes, 1 Pet. 2. 2. For, a Ministry is for the Churches Service, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. And surely it will be bad for those Churches that have none; Experience
proves this: So, that which I understood is intended in the Text, is, That if
(according to verse. 4, 5, 6.) they fell away from the Truth, there could be no
restoring them to Faith, Repentance, Baptism, Ministry, and Churchstate again;
because the Foundation of these could not be laid again, unless there was
another Jesus, another Sacrifice for Sin, Heb. 10. 26.

3dly. Laying on of Hands, on the Ministry, did follow Faith and Baptisms; for
so is the word, Baptisms; that on All (when done) did follow Baptism, not
Baptisms; which must be the Baptism of Water, and of the Spirit: and therefore,
must be that on Ministers, (who were not only baptized with Water, but with the
Spirit) in order to fitting them for Affliction, Act. 6. 3. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12.
And, if it can be proved, that Believers, as such, had Hands laid on them after
Baptisms, the weight of this Argument will be taken off; else not.

2d. Object.
They (Act. 6. 6.) were ordained Deacons, not Elders; therefore, this Example,
in this Church, reaches not the Case: It Is Imposition of Hands, on Elders,
that must Answer the Case pleaded for.

Answ.
1. Suppose it to be on Deacons, it was the only ordained Ministry in that
Church; and therefore does Answer the Case in hand.

2dly. It will appear that those (Act. 6.) were ordained Elders, and that they
had no Deacons in that Church. We are to understand, that all Offices were
first in the Apostles: They did the Whole; were Apostles, Elders, 1 Pet. 5 1.
Deacons, as appears by their Work, Act. 4. 34, to 37. and Offices, and
Officers, came from them, as the State of the Church, and Need, required: And,
in this Church, only Elders; though their Work was to take care for the Poor,
Act. 6 2, 3. yet they were ordained Elders; that, by virtue of their Office,
they might do both Works, viz. of Elders and Deacons, as is evident, they were
eminently employed in: And, that they were ordained Elders, does plainly
appear; and that, not only, 1. from the Qualifications, required verse. 3. Men
full of the Holy Spirit and Wisdom; which is not the Qualifications (expressed)
of Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9.

But 2dly, and especially they are frequently called Elders, but never called
Deacons; That was a Title unknown in that Church, Act. 11. 30. The Contribution
sent from the Believers of the Gentiles, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, was
sent to the Elders: And surely, it was to such as had the care of the Poor, to
distribute the Churches Treasure, as was need; and they are called Elders, Act.
Chap. 15. 2, 4, 6, 22. By all which it appears, that for Officers, there were
none but Apostles and Elders, v. 22. Apostles, and Elders, and Church; So that,
the case is clear, that those Act. 6. 6. were ordained Elders, as Heb. 13. 7,
17. and no other Office is mentioned in that Church. And further, if Laying on
of Hands, in the Sense pleaded for, be at all included in Heb. 6. 1, 2. most
probably it is in that of Baptisms; because, when it was done, it was in order
to the Baptism of Gifts; and must be one of the Baptisms there intended. And we
cannot rationally understand, the Apostle should intend Laying on of Hands for
the Baptism of Gifts, where they were before: But the Ordination of Elders,
which had these Baptisms, answers the Method of the Apostle in this Place. And
thus much as to the First probable Mistake in this Matter: Let the Judicious
well ponder, and consider it.

The Second probable Mistake is, That it is to be done as an Ordinance of
Christ, of constant and Universal Practice, as Baptism: For, so it is pleaded
for; To be an Ordinance of Common Use, in order to Church Communion (as Baptism
is). In Answer to this, it would be worth the enquiring into, (that so we might
understand) when (and where) it was ordained; for all Ordinances must be
ordained: And we must be able to prove it, lest we make Ordinances, where
Christ has made none; That of which there is no Command; and to which there is
no Promise; we have no ground to set up as an Ordinance; especially, as
Essential to Church Communion, lest the Lord say unto us, Who has required
these things at your hands? This I presume, that if all were granted, that is
supposed from Heb. 6. 1, 2. and from these two Examples, Act. 8. and 19.
Chapters, it would not amount to so much as to make it an Ordinance; Ordinances
being such, as must carry in them the Authority of the Ordainer.

3d. Object.
Either the Apostles practiced it as the Will of Christ, and then it must be an
Ordinance; or they did it of their own Wills, and then it must be Will Worship;
which, we suppose, you will not affirm: And if they did it as an Ordinance, and
the Will of Christ, it must so continue to us; For, they were to teach Baptized
Believers, To observe and do whatsoever was commanded them.

Answ.
We are to distinguish between Personal Commands, and Instituted Ordinances. No
question, but the Apostles had Authority sufficient, with Power, for doing what
they did in this Matter; and yet no Ordinance, for us to practice: They did
other Things as well as This, by the same Authority and Power they did This;
which no others now can (or dare attempt to) do, as Act. 3. 3. to 8. and 9. 33,
34, 40, 41. and 19. 11, 12. and 28. 8, 9. None (I suppose) will take upon them
to Do these Works as Instituted Ordinances: And, what reason there is to take
the other for an Instituted Ordinance more than these, I know not; and that for
these further Reasons.

1. Because Apostles, and none but Apostles, did it; no, not Philip, though an
ordained Elder, (as before was proved) and an Evangelist, Act. 21. 8. by whom
God did many Miracles, Act. 8. 6, 7. yet he did not presume to lay on Hands, in
order to the Gifts of the Spirit: And it is probable, that all the Apostles had
not this Power, for we read of none, but Peter, John, and Paul, that did This,
by whom was done many other mighty Miracles: So that, not only none but
Apostles did it; but also, none but such of the Apostles, who had the Power of
Extraordinary Miracles.

2dly. These Apostles did It by extraordinary Power of Faith, to extraordinary
Ends; to wit, The Baptism of the Gifts of the Spirit; and that, but at some
times, when the Gifts were not before, as the aforementioned Instances prove;
where the Gifts were, nothing of Laying on of Hands is mentioned, Act. 10. 47,
48.

3dly. The Scripture plainly determins this Matter, Heb. 2. 3, 4. where it is
reckoned by the Author, among the extraordinary Works done by the Apostles, and
as a Witness of God to the Gospel; peculiar to the Apostles only, in the first
Plantation of the Gospel: The words are, How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation? Which at first, began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed to us, by them that heard Him; God also bearing them Witness, both
with Signs, and Wonders; and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts (or
Distributions) of the Holy Spirit: Distributions being the proper signification
of the Greek word (...), from (...), Distributions; which must intend those
Miraculous Distributions, by the Hands of the Apostles, as a VVitness of God to
their Doctrine as the other Miracles were, and as alone Apostolical: So that,
hence I conclude, That there is no more Ground, (for any now) to Lay on Hands
on Baptized Believers, because the Apostles did it; than there is ground (for
any now) to attempt to Do the other Miracles, because the Apostles did them;
muchless, to make either to be of formal use, without the Power: To improve the
Examples of Acts of mighty Power, to common and formal Use without the Power,
is without all Warrant of Scripture, and a wrong to Jesus Christ. So that, if
any do yet suppose, that Laying on of Hands on Believers, as such, is ^ntended
in Heb. 6. 1, 2. yet, in no case, does it speak forth enough, to make it an
Ordinance of common Use, seeing there were beginning-Things done by the
Apostles, which are not (nor cannot be) now practicable; and of which, it is so
apparent this was one: but are matters of Faith for us to believe that it was
done, rather than of Practice. And in that Scripture, one of the
beginning-VVords (or Principles) are Baptisms, which must intend the Baptism of
Gifts as one; which, I dare be bold to say, no men on Earth have: So that, if
there be a Baptism among these beginning-Things, which no man on Earth has
attained, and the end of the Apostles Laying on of Hands, was in order to this
Baptism, and no man can attain it without the Gift of God; and yet there is a
Church in present being without it: So, may there be as truly a Church, without
Laying on of Hands, which was in order to it; for, the Form adds nothing
without the Power; especially, in this case, where the Formal Act was used only
in way of Power: And for Persons to lay on Hands to such an end, who have not
the Gifts themselves, seems altogether Scriptureless, and Reasonless.

And what is said in this Matter, of the Judgment of Authors, both Ancient and
Modern, proves nothing; it being known, that the Apostasy was entered timely
into the Church; and has made so great an alteration, and change, from the
Primitive Rule and Power; that, although there is something like the Truth, yet
the true Form and Power of Truth is lost. The Lord help His People, that in
their coming out, they bring away none of Babylon's Devices with them; which, I
greatly fear, they are too much inclined unto.

But to conclude this Matter; From all these Considerations, I must say, That I
dare not meddle with this, having no Authority from the Lord for it: I cannot
do it in His Name, without His Authority, lest my Act should be of the same
kind as those, Act. 19. 13, to 16. These Things have I minded in general; not
meddling with particular Answers to any Man's Arguments for it: Not doubting,
but if what I have said be seriously considered, it may set a stop on the
Spirits of those who have prosecuted this Practice to Separation, from their
Brethren: and caution others, that they be not over rash, in rushing into this
Extreme: So that, it is Issue may tend to, and effect, Peace, which is all my
Design in this Matter.

CHAP. III.
Treats on the Seaventh-Day, Sabbath.

OThers make a Breach, and Separation, about the Seaventh-day -Sabbath;
supposing that to be the Day, (and the only Day) commanded of God, for Gospel
Rest and Worship: and hence, make a Breach, and Separation, from all that are
not of their Opinion in this Matter.

And in what I shall offer to Consideration in this Case, I shall not meddle to
Answer any Man's particular Grounds for it; because it is not Controversy I
design, but Healing. I shall (to this end) present some weighty Considerations
about this Matter; which, if well weighed, may (if not Answer all) moderate the
spirits of those, who are so high in prosecution thereof; and caution others of
being too forward in rushing thereinto; which is my only Design in writeing
This.

First, then, I offer This, that the Seventh-Day Sabbath, was (nor is) no Moral
Precept, but an instituted Ordinance of God; and so subject to be changed at
the Will of the Institutor, or have an end, as all other (merely) instituted
Ordinances are. I know, there are varieties of Opinions about the meaning of
the word Moral; but that which I intend is in two Things, which is enough for
the Case in hand.

1. If Moral, it must be so, as the Law of Nature, viz. That which Man by
Nature, with the teaching of the Works of God (without any other Revelation, or
Institution) might attain unto. Man by Nature, with those Helps, might, and
did, come to know that there was a God, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. And so, by the same
Light and Law, might know, that this God must be worshipped, and that there
must be time for that Worship: but that this time must be the Seventh-Day, was
not written in Nature's Book; and therefore, (in this sense) not Moral. And
that it did not teach the Seventh-Day Sabbath, not only Reason tells us it
could not, but it is evident, it did not teach any the Knowledge of the Sabbath,
either good or bad in the World, till it was instituted by God, and commanded,
as I shall in its place demonstrate.

Or, 2. It must be Moral, as perpetual; and that it cannot be: For, there will
be no Keeping of Seventh-Day Sabbaths in Glory; but it shall be all one
perpetual Sabbath to the Lord, Heb. 4. 9. 11. of which, the Seventh-Day Sabbath
was a Type, verse. 4, 5, 6. Col. 2. 16, 17. but all the rest of the Precepts are
perpetual; and our being perfected therein, will be our Perfection in Glory,
relative to Purity.

Quest.
If it be not Moral, Whence is it, that it is set among the Moral Precepts?

Answ.
Because, though the Day and Time in it self was not Moral, in either of these
Senses, but Instituted; yet there was something in and about it, which was
Moral, and is Perpetual; that is, the Worship of God, that is Moral; though, as
to the manner thereof, differing according to the Will of God; but the Day and
Time was an Institution: As like-wise, the Rest for Worship, and the Rest in
Glory, prefigured by the Rest of the Sabbath, was and is Moral, and shall be
Perpetual.

2. It is very probable, that the Seventh*Day Sabbath, was neither Instituted,
nor Observed, nor known in the World, before it was Given by Moses, Exodus 16.
23. and 20. 8. The Reasons hereof are:

1. Because we find it not mentioned till this time, which would be, 1.
Improbable, that such a thing as this (if it had been known or practiced)
should never be mentioned till this time, in the space of two thousand, and
five hundred Years; the Saints, and their VVorshipping-God, being so much
spoken of, during this time: It is enough for us to deny, where is neither
Scripture, nor Reason, to the contrary.

2dly. It is uncertain, whether it was the Seventh-Day, from the Creation, that
God commanded: For, it is plain in the Institution, Exodus 16. 5. 22, 23. that it
was the Seventh-Day, numbered from the First Day that the Manna came down from
Heaven. Whether that was the Seventh-Day from the Creation, is yet to prove:
And most evident it is, that it was not known to the Jews before this time,
which was the first Institution thereof, Exodus 16. v. 26. 29.

3dly. The Sabbath was Given (on no Moral, but) particular peculiar Grounds,
though to Moral ends, viz. The Worship of God; and may be performed on any
Day: That the Grounds or Reasons of the Institution, were particular, and
peculiar to that People, viz. for Remembrance of what God had done for them;
and so, peculiar to that People only, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. in which is the Reason of
this Institution; which like-wise proves, that it was not Instituted before. It
was for Remembrance, that they were Servants in the Land of Egypt; and that
God brought them forth, and gave them Rest from their Bondage in that Land;
Therefore, the Lord thy God, commanded thee to Keep the Sabbath Day. And, Ezekiel.
20. 12. More-over, I gave them my Sabbath, to be a Sign between Me and Them,
that They might know, that I am the Lord that Sanctifies Them: That, by the
Sanctity of a Day, they might remember that God had Sanctified them for
Himself, that they might be holy; and that could not be given to them for a
special Remembrance of so great a Salvation, and a sign of peculiar
Sanctification, that had been a known practicial Duty before. Nor can it be so
a Remembrance, and Sign, to any others now.

Object.
The Fourth Command is stated on God 's Resting the Seventh-Day, from the Works
of Creation; and His Resting the Seventh-Day, and Hallowing It, Exodus 20. 11.

Answ.
The Lord gives this as a Reason, to engage them to keep It, not him to give
It: For, the Command was fully given before: And then, verse. 11. gives this as
a Reason for them to observe it; that, as He Rested the Seventh-Day from His
Work of Creation, having finished It; so would He, by His Example, oblige them
to Rest the Seventh-Day (Commanded) from their Works.

2dly. It Is said, That God Rested the Seventh-Day, (after he had finished His
Works of Creation) and blessed, and hallowed It: But, it is not said, That he
Blessed, and Hallowed, that Seventh-Day, then Commanded. Nor do I suppose, that
we may any further understand it, than the Purpose of God to Sanctify that
Day, when the time was come, that He purposed to Command It.

Object.
We have still the same cause to Keep It as they, for Deliverance out of
Spiritual Egypt, and Bondage of Sin, by Jesus Christ; and as a sign of our
Sanctification.

Answ.
1. It stands not with the Gospel; Nor is it God's Order, to Institute the same
Old-Covenant-Signes of Old-Covenant-Grace, and Sanctification, to be Signs of
New-Covenant-Grace, and Sanctification: This is quite besides God's Method and
Order, and savours not of the Gospel.

And so, 2dly. The Will of God should be our Rule in all Things. And if God in
the Gospel, has at all given us the Sabbath, as a sign of our
Gospel*Redemption, and Sanctification, then are we so to receive It, else not:
But if God has given Jesus Christ, as the sign and example of our
Sanctification; and the Copy after which we must write and walk, 1 Cor. 15. 48,
49. 2 Cor. 4. 11. 1 John 2. 6. and 3. 3. and 4. 7. and the Holy-Spirit, in the
word of the Gospel, to accomplish the work of Sanctification in us, 1 These. 5.
23. 2 Cor. 3. 16. it is good for us to cleave close to This.

3dly. Their Deliverance out of Egypt, was out-ward, and temporary, and might
be forgotten in the Generations to come, that had not seen It, and therefore
needed some out-ward sign of Remembrance: and all came short of accomplishing
the end, designed thereby, Judge. 2. 7. -- 10, 11. They were the Natural Seed,
sanctified, and set apart for a time, under an out-ward Covenant, and a
Worldly Sanctuary; and out-ward signs of Sanctification, and Salvation from
out-ward Servitude, to remember them that they were God's Saved holy People:
but the Church of God, in the New Covenant, are the Spiritual Seed, and are (or
should be) Spiritual; Sanctified in Christ Jesus; called to be Saints. Their
Redemption is Spiritual, and shall be Eternal: And they need not look back, or
take up the signs of the Jew's Redemption, and Sanctification, but cleave to
the Word, and Spirit of the Gospel.

4thly. The whole Law, (by the New Covenant) is abolished, as a Ministration
from Mount Sinai, to that Church: and Believers are to Receive their Law from
the Hand of Christ, and no otherwise: He being their Lord and Lawgiver, Act.
3. 22. 2 Cor. 3. 7. 11. Romans 7. 4.

5thly. Neither Christ, nor His Apostles, has commanded the Observation of
that Day in the New Testament; and therefore, we judge, that we are not bound
by any Law of Christ our Lord, to the Observation thereof: And therefore, to
suppose that Day to be observed, we do herein render Christ to be less Faithful
in His House, than Moses was in his. Contrary to Hebrews, Heb* 3. 2. 5, 6. That
a matter of so great Importance as this, should be wholly left in silence, (if
the Lord's Will had been, it should be observed) seems very unlikly, and
incredible.

And the Apostle Paul, who was the Apostle of the Gentiles, in Faith, and
Verity, Romans 11. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 7. tells us, that he had not ceased to make
known all the Counsel of God, Act. 27 with verse. 20. We may safely conclude,
that if this of the Sabbath had been any part of the Counsel of God, to us
Believing*Gentiles, under the Gospel, we should have heard of it from our
Apostle.

And as for that other Objection, from Matt. 24. 20. where Christ says, Pray
that your Flight be not on the Sabbath Day, it is easily Answered, 1. That it is
no Command for the Sabbath, take it in the strictest sense that may be
supposed. 2. It Is evident, that Christ intends it relative to the Jews, who he
knew would be zealous of the Sabbath; and so their trouble would be the
greater: It no whit adds Authority to the Sabbath; but relates the Difficulty
of their Case, by reason of the zealous Jews, who would be (probably) as ready
to kill such as would flee on that Day, as the Enemy. And, as for the Apostles
Preaching on that Day to the Jews, it is no marvel, nor ground to conclude it
Instituted, for the Gospelday of Divine-Worship; whose Work it was, to take all
Opportunities, both among the Jews and Gentiles, to be winning Souls to Christ,
any Day, or Time, of their Assembling, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21. But show any one
Example of a Gospel Church, assembling on that Day, to worship God in Praying,
Preaching, and breaking Bread, or Fellowship in the Lord's Supper; it would be
something nearer the Matter, though not enough to make it an Ordinance.

6thly. We have not only the Silence of Christ, and His Apostles, both as to
the Precept, and Precedent; but we have many words dropped by the Apostle Paul,
in his Epistles, seemingly to the contrary, as Romans 14. 5. One Man esteems
one Day above another, another esteems every Day alike; that is, Esteems no
Holiness in one Day above another, and so leaves it as a matter indifferent.
Let every one be fully persuaded in his own Mind, and not judge, or despise one
another: Some, I know, will say to this, That it intends other Legal-Daies,
formerly observable; But who can Determine this? Seeing the Apostle speaks in
the largest sense, Esteems every Day alike? There is no room for the Sabbath
to be excepted: And, it is not probable, that the Gentile-Believers should so
soon fall in love with the lesser Holy Days of the Jews, and not with the
greater; So that, the Seventh*Day, is the most likely to be the one Day (by
some) esteemed above the rest.

So, Col. 2. 16. ^et no Man, therefore, judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath -Days, (or
Sabbaths) which are a shadow of things to-come, but the Body is of Christ; that
is, He is the Substance of these Things, and we are to have it in Him. Here,
like-wise, it will be said, That the Apostle intends the other Jewish-Sabbaths,
and not that of the Seventh-Day; to which I say, 1. That it seems strange for
the Apostle to speak thus at large, and yet design to keep up the Sabbath Day.
2. It clearly appears, That all the other Sabbaths, are included in that of an
Holy Day, and the New Mood: For, in these the Apostle gathers in all the
Jewish-Observations, both of Meat, and Drink, and Days; and by Sabbath-Dayes,
(or Sabbaths) intends alone the Seventh-Day Sabbath; and this appears, 1.
New Mons were a distinct Service, to be performed constantly, Number. 28. 11. and
10. 10. Holy Days were other Feasts, commonly called, Holy-Convocations, Lev.
23. 4. through-out: and some of them were sometimes called Sabbaths like-wise.

But for the Seventh-Day Sabbaths, they were commonly, called Sabbaths, and
Sabbath-Dayes, in the Old Testament, as they are in the Text, Col. 2. 16. So
Exodus 31. 13, 14. Lev. 19. 3 30. and 23. 38. 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. with multitudes
more to the same Effect; But, in the last, it distinguishes, as the Apostle in
the Text, Sabbaths, New Mons, set*Feasts; The Apostle says, Holy Days,
New Mons, Sabbaths; By all which it appears, that, by Sabbath-Dayes, is
intended the Seventh-Dayes Sabbaths, and Heb. 4. 3. For we which have Believed
do enter into Rest; that is, into Sabbath.

7thly. And after all this, Having given so many Hints of Liberty about it, and
of its Cessation, and so to leave it; and not any further to open his Mind
about it, to let us know, that, notwithstanding he thus spoke; yet he intended,
that the Seventh-Day should be kept as a Sabbath still: I say, Can we imagine,
that both Christ, and the Apostle, should leave us thus in the Dark, in this so
weighty a Matter, if still to be continued? That which was so plainly Stated,
and so often Repeated, and Inculcated, in the Old Testament, when in force, and
nothing at all in the New; but so much to the contrary, if it had been to be
observed? Surely, I cannot, I dare not, think it.

8thly, and lastly, From the Whole I conclude, That we have no ground in the
New Testament, to observe the Seventh*Day Sabbath; and therefore, Men have no
ground to separate from their Brethren, that cannot follow them in this Matter:
And, I hope, this will be of use unto them, (at least) to moderate them, and to
Repent of the Breaches made on this account; that, if their Faith continue
herein, they will have it to themselves. And, as for the Gospel*Day of
Publick-Worship for the Church, I must own the first Day of the Week, though
not as a Sabbath, by Virtue of the Fourth-Command, which only requires the
Seventh-Day; but as the Gospel-Day of Worship, it being the Day of our Lord's
Resurrection; and so, the first Visible-ground of Hope, for the new
Restored-VVorld, and from the Grounds, ordinarily stated in this Matter; and by
my self in a small Tract, about the Sabbath; on which account, I shall forbear
to speak any further about this.

CHAP. IV.
Treats of Marriages, and whether Church Members may Marry with such as are
not.

AS touching this matter, viz. The Marrying of Church Members, with those that
are not so; (this being made by some a ground of Separation,) I do acknowledge*
that it is a desirable thing, to keep within the Bounds of the Churches in this
matter: Or, for every Opinion, and Profession, to Marry with such as are of the
same Societies, it is most likely to tend to Peace.

But to make the contrary a matter of Fact, so as to separate Persons from
their Societies, who fail in this matter, or to separate from Churches, who see
not the Way clear to do the like, I see no Scripture-ground: For,
Church Censures being of high concernment, and may not be executed but for
great and wilful Transgressions, being the Breach of some known Law of Christ,
and wilfully persisting therein: And all that is (or, I suppose, can be) said
in this matter, seems not to amount to so much: And it is of weighty
concernment, to do a thing in the Lord's Name, without His Authority: Tender
Consciences dare not do it.

1. The Old-Testament-Scriptures, stated in this matter, seem to come short of
a New-Testament-Law; and that for these Reasons, 1. Because the Church of the
Old-Covenant was the Natural Seed; Marriage being a matter of Natural, and
Worldly Concernment (though God's Ordinance), it was to preserve them from
mixing with the Nations, in the way of Generation, they being accounted the
Holy-Seed, Ezra 9 2. 2dly. and probably, Because Christ was to come of the Seed
of the Woman, which Line was to be in the Church from the first Promise, Luke
3. 23. to 38. Though that Line did admit of mixture sometimes, through infinite
Wisdom; for gracious ends, as in the case of Ruth, and probably some others;
yet, without Rule, though not without the Divine design therein, the Lord did
not only herein preserve them from mixing with the Nations; but from mixing
with the same Tribes in Marriage, for politic ends, Number. 36. 6, 7, 8. which
(probably) might be one end of forbidding them Marriage with the Nations. But,
3dly. The special Reason rendered was, The Danger of Inconvenience that might
follow, viz. They might be drawn a way to serve other Gods, Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. and
so, The Anger of the Lord be kindled against them: Not simply for so Marrying;
but for being drawn away thereby, to serve other Gods. The Lord did bear with
it, where, and when He pleased, without Reproof, when they were not drawn away
thereby, Number. 12. 1. 7, 8. Act. 16. 1. True it is, there is the same danger
still, of being turned away from the Truth; and therefore, Christians ought to
be very careful herein.

2dly. Come we to the New Testament, and we have no positive Law stated in this
matter: The Scriptures urged, reach not the case in hand, as Luke 17. 26, 27. I
verily think, it is a great mistake in those who think that Christ there speaks
of unlawful Marriages, or of the sins of the last Days; but, rather discovers
the state of the World, as not expecting His Coming; that, as a snare, it will
come upon them, when they are not aware: And 2. Cor. 6. 14. clearly relates to
Fellowship on a Church-account, and the Churches Concernment; not to mix with
Idolaters, or false Worshippers in Religious-Worship, and nothing at all of
Marriages. Neither does 1 Cor. 10. 8. Act. 15. 29. Rev. 2 14. at all reach the
case in hand; only that 1 Cor. 7. 39. seems to have something of this Matter in
it. The unmarryed Woman, being a Widow, is at liberty to be Married, to whom
she will, Only in the Lord: Yet, whether to understand the words, Only in the
Lord, to intend only with a Churchmember, is the great Question, which some
cannot so easily pass over; but rather understand it to intend, in the Fear of
the Lord, as His Ordinance: And that, 1. Because (though the word [in the
Lord,] and [in Christ], do mostly intend in the Faith, and Profession, of the
Lord,) the word In the Lord, is never spoken of a Second Person, viz. When it
speaks of any Person, doing any Act, as In the Lord, it intends the same
Person, and not another: So, when it speaks of the Woman's Marrying In the
Lord, it intends her own Act, and not the Person with whom she Marryeth, That
he must be in the Lord, i. e. in the Church 2. Because there are other-like
sayings in Scripture, that must be thus understood, viz. The Fear of the Lord,
according to Hi^ Appointment and Ordinance, as 1 Cor. 11. 11. Nevertheless,
neither is the Man without the Woman, neither the Woman without the Man, in the
Lord: In the Lord, in this Place, cannot intend in the Faith, and Profession,
of the Lord; For so, Paul was without a Wife, and persuaded others, both Men,
and Women, so to be; because, it brings not only Worldly Troubles, but
Distraction in Religious Things; which clearly imports, That they might be
without each other, as in the Church; and that, to the best advantage, on the
Religious account. But, as v. 11, 12. do fully explain, They cannot be without
each other, on the Worldly-account, for Procreation, and maintaining the World,
which is God's Ordinance: And to do it in the Way of Marriage, is to do it in
the Lord: For, the Woman is of the Man, and the Man is by the Woman; but both,
of God: Taking, and living together, In the Lord, i. e. in Lawful Matrimony,
and not in Adultery, is to Marry in the Lord, Heb. 13. 4. So, Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children Obey your Parents, in the Lord: It cannot import their Parents in the
Church only; then it would be a Law of Liberty, and Disobedience, to Parents
out of the Church: But, In the Lord, relates to the Children themselves, to do
it in the Fear of the Lord, as His Ordinance, in all lawful, and rightful
Things, whether their Parents be in, or out of the Church. So, Col. 3. 18.
Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord,
must be thus understood, viz. of Wive's Submission, in Lawful Things to their
Husbands, in the fear of the Lord; and that to those out of the Profession of
the Lord, as well as to those in the Church, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

3dly. There are many Sayings in Scripture, which seem to take off the force of
what seems to be said to the contrary; as 1 Cor. 7. 2. Let every Man have his
own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband. He does not limit, to the Church;
compared with v. 13, 14 where the unbelieving-Husband, and the
unbelieving-Wife, are Sanctified to each other's use in that Relation. And,
what is said in this matter, is but a Supposition, and no insallible
Conclusion, viz. That it intends such as were Married before Believing; and
urged from v. 20. Let every one abide in the same Calling, wherein they were
called. This is but a Supposition, and no undoubted Conclusion: But v. 17.
seems more proper to this case, But as God has Distributed to every Man, (or
Divided); which seems to relate most properly to the matter of Marriage; it
being God's Distribution, (whether the Husband, or Wife, be good or bad), one
in Mercy, the other in Judgment: And, to this like wise, agrees 1 Pet. 3. 1,
2. which fully clears, That believing-VVomen, had unbelieving-Husbands; but,
whether married before Believing, is unintelligible, as to us, unless by
Divine-Revelation; which now, none can pretend unto.

4thly. Marriage it self, is of Natural, and VVorldly concernment, (and not
Religious, any other-wise, than Eating, and Drinking, which is God's Ordinance)
and, by Christians to be done in the Lord, viz. in His Fear, with Prayer, and
Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Religion, in both Parties, adds to
the Comfort of the Relation; but not to the Being thereof.

That it is of VVorldly Concernment in it self, is clear, not only from Reason,
but from the Scripture, Luk 20. 34 The Children of this World Marry, and are
given in Marriage. Though, in some respect, the Kingdom of Christ is distinct
from the World, and is not of the World; and the Children of Light, distinct
from the Children of this World: Yet in this, and in many other Cases, as
Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and in VVorldly Employments, they are as the
Children of this World, and act as in the Faln-state; though Grace directs them
to a higher end in all, 1 Cor. 10. 31. than they, who are only the Children of
this World, do attain unto. Yet Marriage both of good and bad is a
Worldly*work, and performed by the Children of this World, one with another, to
Worldly-ends; as you may see, Genesis 1. 28. and 2. 18. 1 Cor. 7. 2. Which ends of
Marriage, Men and Women (only as so) are capable to perform. Neither can I be
of the mind of those who judge such Marriages to be positively unlawful, and
sinful; and yet, that it is unlawful for such to be separated one from the
other, (the grounds stated, not reaching the Case); For, if it were so, I do
not yet understand, How any Repentance, (for a Fact done contrary to the Law of
God) can be accounted true, without Reformation; How the Way can be made plain
over this Block, I know not.

5thly. The Case with us much differs, from what it was in the Primitive Times;
all then (of the Gentiles) that were not of the Church, were of the Idolatrous
Heathens; yet some Believing-Husbands had Unbelieving-Wives and some
Believing-Wives had such Unbelieving-Husbands: But now, all profess
Christianity; and, in a sense, may be said to be Believers. And, in all the
differing Opinions about the VVays; and Worship of God as Christians* there
may be some fearing God among All; For, God has His People in Babylon, Rev.
18. 4. And so,

6thly. Hence it comes to pass, That some Husbands, and Wives, prove better,
and more comfortable Yoke-Fellows in that Relation, that are not
Church Members, than some that are; though a shame, and reproof it is to
Church Members that it is so: And indeed, some Church Members become vile and
wicked, and worse Relations than is ordinary among the worst of Men; which
renders the uncertainty of Comfort to Christians, in their Relations, in this
matter; though (both religiously, rationally, and ordinarily) it may be
expected better: Yet, I have seen as great disappointments on this account, as
of any by Marrying out of the Church.

Yet, 7thly. and finally; I would not be mis understood by any: For, I judge it
to be most suitable, most religious, most honorable, and most likely for Peace
and Comfort, for all sorts of Opinions (in matters of Religion), to unite in
this near Relation, where Unity may be both religiously, and rationally,
expected; though I earnestly desire more Love among all Christians of differing
Apprehensions; and that Persons united in Marriage, of differing Persuasions,
may perform the several Duties of each other of that Relation. Yet, it savours
most of Christianity, that our nearest Relations be such, as with whom we may
walk, and worship God, as Heirs together of the Grace of Life, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

And as for the matter of Oaths, in the Cases of late, commonly controverted,
and on which, has been many Breaches; I believe if Persons knew what it is to
walk by Rule, and not by Will, this matter will be soon over; though Repentance
is needed for the uncharitable Breaches on this account.

And as for Blood, and Things strangled; though I am much of the same mind,
that Blood is forbidden; and that on the same grounds as mentioned; viz. That
which was forbidden before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, must
needs be unlawful; viz. That which was ever unlawful, must be so still, without
some new Law to make it lawful: And I may add, That Blood was at first
forbidden on a Moral (and not a Ceremonial) ground, viz. The Blood is the Life
thereof, Genesis 9. 4. So it was, and so it is, the Life still. The Law of
forbidding Blood is as ancient, as the Law of allowance to eat the Flesh; and
is the general Law to mankind, not Ceremonial, but Moral, and Perpetual: Yet,
notwithstanding, I see no ground of Separation; from Persons, or Churches, that
are of another mind; not only, because such things are not stated as the ground
of Fellowship; but like-wise, we are forbidden to make Breaches on such
accounts, Romans 14. 17. And because, there are various Expressions in the
Scripture, which, many, yea most of the Godly understand gives an allowance in
this matter; and think it weakness in those who make Conscience thereof, as
Romans 14. 14. I know, and am persuaded, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there is
nothing unclean of it self; viz. by any Law of God: For, it is
Legal-Uncleanness that is here intended: And that the first Part of that
Injunction of the Apostles, Elders, and Church (Act. 15. 28, 29.) forbidding
the eating of Things offered to Idols, etc. is in some case allowed elsewhere;
and forbidden only in case of Offense, 1 Cor. 8. 4. 8, 9. and 10. 27, 28, 29.
32. Though, as for my self, I can satisfiedly understand these Scriptures, and
the Law against eating of Blood stand unaltered; yet, I durst not force my
understanding on others; nor withdraw from those who differ from me herein.
And I heartily desire, that all the true Lovers of Truth, and Peace, would not
make disputable and doubtful Things, the causes of Division; but to receive
each other, not to doubtful Disputations, Romans 14. 1. knowing that The Kingdom
of Heaven consists not in Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Spirit, Romans 14. 17.

And as for these grand causes of Division, viz. The differing Notions about
Election, special and general Grace, I hope what I have said about this matter,
in the preceding Discourse, may tend (in time) to help over those Extremes;
when others shall see cause, to set to their helping-hand in this Matter.

CHAP. V.
A few brief Words to some other Christians, that may tend to Peace.

ANd as for others, who make the way of Church Communion so wide, as either to
endeavor to make up a Union, and Communion, with all sorts of profane
Persons; or Sprinkle Infants, which answers not that one Baptism, commanded in
the Gospel; or would force a Union, and Communion, on a Church-account, by a
human Coercive-Power, which is contrary to the Law of Christ; who will have all
the Subjects of His Kingdom, His Church, to be a willing People, Psalm 110. 3.
made so by His Word, and Spirit, Act. 2. 41. 2 Cor. 8. 5. and not by
Human-Power and Force; I know not what to say to them, to work them into the
Regular-Union, and Fellowship of the Gospel, on a Church-account; being
persuaded, that there are many, yea very many, who fear God among them;
yet-while, walking (not only) contrary to the Gospel, but contrary to their own
avowed Principles; who confess, that Faith, and Repentance, is required of
Persons that are to be Baptized: This is the Acknowledgment of all professed
Christians, and Churches; That this answers the Law of Christ, and yet do
contrary to it, which seems to stand up as a Bar of Separation, and Breach of
Fellowship, on a Church-account.

But this I am willing to hope, That such as are Godly among all that thus
practice, when they coometsee, how inconsistent, Infant Baptism is, with that
of Believers; and that they holding the first, on solid Scripturegrounds, which
are innumerable; and the Second (at best), but on supposed grounds; and that,
in so much Inconsistency, and Contradiction, both to the Thing it self, and
true state of the Gospel Church, who are, or should be, all (at least)
Profest-Believers, called to be Saints; I say, I am willing to hope, That when
they come to see into these (so great) Contradictions, that they will be as
willing, and ready to lay down, and fall in, with the Gospel-Practice, as ever
they were to withstand it.

And, 2dly. I am willing to hope, That they will (for time to come) be more
heedful of opposing, reproaching, and persecuting a People, for owning, and
practicing, their profest-Principles; if they suppose weakness in those that
cannot, in Conscience, fall-in with their Practice of Infant Baptism; whiles,
they are sure, it is Truth they fall-in with, in Believer's-Baptism, I hope
they may come to see it, not so great a Crime, as they persuade themselves, and
others, it is; especially, in as much, as they cannot, nor pretend not to
Infallibility in the Matter. I would therefore, humbly pray all such serious
and godly Persons, seriously to ponder this Matter, and to search after the
Mind of the Lord herein, in order to the true Gospel-Peace of the Church, that
there may be no more biting and devouring one of another; and to try, how they
can reconcile their own Principles in this Matter; and to weigh all in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; and what ever is found too light there, to let it go
as it is; and to be of a Caleb, and Joshua-like spirit, to follow God fully:
And above all, to take heed of an opposing persecuting-Spirit. I am persuaded,
that a Gospel Spirit, and Persecution, can, or do, rarely dwell together in one
Man: To Persecute, or use a Coercive-Power in matters of Religion, is
inconsistent with the Christian-Church, relative to Christ the Head, and Lord
thereof; who uses not Worldly-Weapons (or Power) in His Kingdom, or Church:
Neither has He Authorized His Ministers so to do. Worldly-Government, is to be
managed with Worldly-Power: Christ's-Government in His Church, by His Word and
Spirit, administering His Censures in His Name: So that, to use Coercive-Power,
in Christ's immediate Concerns in His Church, derogates from His Authority;
and, it like-wise derogates from the true Nature of His Church, which are His
Sheep. For Sheep, under any pretense, to persecute Wolves (or pretended
Wolves); yet it shows forth a Wolvish-nature: And how Persecuters can acquit
themselves from Wolves, though in Sheep's-Cloathings, I know not: Therefore,
take heed and beware of a persecuting-spirit; and fall-in with Truth; Love the
Truth and Peace. This I must say, That, were there nothing else to make a
Difference, I could never hold Communion with a Persecuting-Church; it being so
contrary to the Spirit and Word of the Gospel, and State of the true
Gospel Church, who did never persecute; but was always persecuted for Christ,
and the Truth's sake.

And whereas it is said, That those which pretend to be against Persecution, do
the same in words, and evil-speakings, which is as truly Persecution of the
Tongue, as any other way of Persecution. This I must say, 1. I am much of the
same mind, that there has been too much of this amongst us All; and, as our
Lord said in another Case, He that has not offended in this matter let him
throw the first-stone: And cause we have all to be humbled, and to repent of
this Evil. Yet, 2dly, we must contend earnestly (yet humbly in the
Gospel Spirit), for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3. And I
earnestly desire All, who fear God, to manifest Truth of Love to all People;
especially, such as have the Visible-appearance of Godlyness, according to the
Gospel, in their differing-ways; though, on a Church-account, constituted,
according to the Gospel-Rule. I do not yet understand, how there can be a
walking-together in Church-Worship, without a Unity in that Worship, and in the
one sort of Members that are to be exercised therein; whithout which, I see no
way for the Church, to be either constituted or preserved, according to the
Gospel-Law, and Order: Yet, there should be a great heedfulness of
unchristianing each other, (unless Persons unchristian themselves by
profaneness.) nor to account each other as Enemies; but converse together, and
love as Brethren: For, I truly desire, That, among all the
differing-Apprehensions, all that hold to the Head Christ Jesus (and that call
on His Name), may study the Things that make for Peace, (forsaking the
quarelling opposing-spirit) which best becomes the Gospel, and Spirit of
Christianity.

These Things have I written, to discover the weakness of the grounds, on which
Christians commonly make Divisions; that they may see the weakness, and that
there is not so much in the Matter as they supposed: And, am willing to
conclude, That if Christians are not too much wedded to their own
Understandings, it may prove of some help in the Matter; and that all sorts of
differing-Apprehensions, may learn to bear with, and forbear, each other in
love; and, till they can come to be of one mind, (from sense of weakness, and
fallibility,) to pity one another; and to seek the Peace, and Welfare of one
another. This is the Lovely-spirit of the Gospel; and the People, who thus
walk, are a lovely People; and the People, who thus walk, God will bless: But,
if Christians will still go on to bite and devour each other, What can they
expect, but to be devoured one of another? and that as a righteous Judgment
from God, who is the God of Peace; and would have His People, to be the People
of Peace: Therefore, if you love God, and Peace, think on these Things.

CHAP. VI.
In which are Three-Things presented, that may tend to further the
Churches-Peace.

I Shall present three Things in this Matter, that may tend to help on, and to
further Union and Peace, among all the Godly.

1st. To discover what Unity, and Peace, it is I plead for, 1. That all who
agree in the one Faith, and one Baptism of the Gospel, may own each other, and
walk together, in one Constituted-Church-Relation, (though they may differ in
several disputable Things, in matters both of Faith, and Practice;) and not by
making Laws for each other, where Christ the Lord, and Lawgiver, has made
none; that in all such cases, that Rule of the Apostle may be observed, Have
thou Faith? have it to thy self: For, I am clear, there may be some
differing-Apprehensions, in both matters of Faith, and Practice, that should
make no Breach in Church Fellowship: Such things as these, did not throw the
Church into Divisions, in purer times, than we are yet arrived to. We find that
the Disciples of Christ were ignorant of, and unbelieving in, the main
Fundamental-Truth of the Gospel, viz. The Death, and Resurrection of Christ;
though He instructed them herein (at least) three times, yet He separated them
not from Him; but owned them in what they did Believe, Matt. 16. 16, 17. The
Apostle Paul deals moderatly about the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. where it is
evident, that some (in that Church) denied it, v. 12. though a Fundamental; yet
the Apostle endeavors to convince of that Error, and not to reject: Which
clearly argues, That Persons, for Error in matters of Faith, are not
suddenly, and rashly, to be separated from, as for matter of Practice; as in
the case of the Incestuous Person, 1 Cor. 5. The Jews, that Believed, likewise
held many things in Practice about the Law; which, for Peacesake, the Apostles
did bear withal, and conform to, Act. 21. 20, 21, 22. And lik-wise, the
Gentile Churches had diversities of Opinions, about Meats, Drinks, and Days,
etc. Romans 14. which the Apostle endeavors to reconcile; not by making all of
one Opinion in these matters, but by bearing with, and forbearing each other in
love: By all which, it appears, That the greatness of Evil lies not in variety
of Opinions, about many Religious things, but in making Divisions, and
Breaches, by reason of those Opinions; and it appears to be a Fruit of the
Apostatized Spirit, and of the Flesh, so to do.

And as for those Christians, who so far differ, either in Faith, or Practice;
as that there cannot be Communion on a Church-account, and yet hold the Head,
and prize, and press after Holiness: let there be Truth of Love, allowing each
other a Latitude in their way, according to their Faith, and Conscience; else
we do not as we would be done unto; not envying one another, nor unchristian
one another (though there cannot be Communion in the Ordinances of Christ, as
by Him stated), being not of one Mind therein; yet to encourage Godliness in
All: and to own, and approve, what of Faith, and Truth, there is in each other;
so far, as there is a Unity therein. For, I doubt not, but that there is so
much of the Root of the Matter, in all gracious Persons, as will minister
occasion of rejoicing in each other, if Pride, and Prejudice, be laid aside;
that so, there might be a free Converse with each other, about matters of Faith
and Practice.

And as for such, who are Enemies, and hateful, Christians should seek Peace
with such, in all lawful ways; As much as in them lies, they should live
Peaceable with All, Romans 12. 18. They should love Enemies (with the Love of
Pity), and pray for Enemies: This is the Will of Christ concerning His Church,
Matt. 5. 44, 45. Romans 12. 14, 20, 21. A Lesson which, I fear, Christians have
learned but little of.

2dly. The way how to obtain this Peace; 1. Let all true Christians get their
Hearts principled with this: That it is their bounden-Duty, to study, seek, and
endeavor after the Churches-Peace. Out with the spirit of Division; and know,
That it is your Duty, yea, your bounden-Duty to follow after Peace, with all
the Children of Peace. For, while you entertain that Spirit (as to account all
Enemies that differ from you), you will account it your Virtue to envy them,
when it is but your Vice. Read and ponder, Jam. 4. 5. and 3. 14. to 18.

2. Get your Hearts, not only principled with the Duty and Work; but with the
Love of Christ, and that will effectually carry you on to the duty, and work,
required; if you would have your hearts filled with Love each to other, dwell
deep in the Love of Christ to your selves; that is, of a humbling, melting, and
transforming-Nature, and will accomplish the Work in you, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Ephesians. 3.
17, 18, 19. Let the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, keep your
Hearts, and the Work will be done, Phil. 4. 7.

3. Let there be Opportunities of Converse (in Moderation) about the matter; by
which means, the Spirits, and Tempers of Christians, may be the better known to
each other; so (probably) the stumblingblocks may be removed, and the end
thereby obtained. The Strangness of Christians one to another, is that which
has brought forth strange, and unchristian-Effects: In some it may be, the
Difference is not so wide as has been supposed; and, it may be, there has
been Extremes on both hands, which Moderate-debates, might tend to rectify.

4. And so, probably, might unite in such Principles, as are necessary to
Communion, on a Church-account: and like-wise, consult what ways of Love, and
Peace, may be exercised among all Christians, toward each other; seeing it is
the Duty of All, to love and seek Peace, with All that love the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, I shall present some serious, and weighty Considerations, tending to
provoke all true-hearted Christians, to this great, and Gospelconcernment, of
seeking, and endeavoring, the Churches-Unity; and Peace.

1. Remember, that the Church is yet, but coming out of Babylon; and, I fear,
that none of us all are so far removed, as to boast, or be overconceited with
our own seize: But much of Darkness yet remains: and, a full Deliverance,
is not so easily and suddenly obtained, as is imagined; and, it may be, some
have out-went their Brethren. Let us learn to pity, and pray one for another;
and not judge, and censure one another, Jam. 4. 11. Let us endeavor (every one
for himself) to get a due sense of our own Coming-short; that so, we may judge
our selves, and we shall not be so high in judging one another: And withal, let
us remember, That we must All appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. And I
heartily wish, That there were not so much of the Symptoms of Babylon's-Church
among us, as (I fear) there is; which (I fear) is too little thought on, or
laid to heart; viz. Babylon's Pride, and Covetousness, and Oppression; rendering
Evil for Evil, in way of revenge, backbiting, and evil-speakings, etc. O that
the Church would purge it self of these, and the like Abominations; without
which, there can be no Peace with God.

2dly. Remember, (as the effect of the Babylonish-Darkness, and Confusion, that
is yet upon us) that if you will not have Fellowship with your Brethren, but on
Terms of Unity in all things; it is that which must necessarily tend, to break
all Church Communion in the World: For, so great are the
differing-Understandings of Christians about Divine-things, and that too, in
some things of weighty concernment; that, I verily think, there are not two in
the World, of one mind in all things: By all which, we may understand, How far
we are from Babylon, and should tend to humble us. And surely, there must needs
be Ignorance, and Pride, where is not a sense in this Matter.

3dly. The Unity and Peace of the Godly, is that which tends much to the Honor
of God, and the Gospel The Divisions of Christians, gives occasion to the
Enemies of God to Reproach, and Religion loses in the World thereby;
Therefore, let all that love the Name of God, and Truth, study to find out a
way for more Union, and Peace.

4thly. Love, and Peace, among the People of God, is a very lovely and
desirable thing; Psalm. 133. 1. Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for
Brethren to awell together in Unity: It is good before God, and pleasant to all
good men: A desirable thing it is!

5thly. It Is the great Gospel-Duty of Christians; for which, Christ prayed, and
suffered; and Christians are greatly exhorted to; the contrary of which, is a
Character of graceless Persons, and a state of Death, Joh 17. 20, 21. Ephesians. 2.
13, 14. and 4. 1, 2, 3. 1 John 2. 9, 10, 11.

6thly. The Divisions of the Godly, (very probably) tend to hinder the
Conversion of poor Sinners: Is it not the common Language of many? There are so
many Religions, and Churches, that I know not which is true, or where there be
any true at all? And thus are poor sinners wronged, by the Divisions of professed
Saints: See the Prayer of Christ in this Matter, Joh. 17. 20, 21.

7thly. Remember that, Divisions, and Contentions, (ordinarily) comes from
Pride, and borders on the Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness; who is that
Envious one, who sowed Tares among the Wheat; and will never cease sowing
Discord among the People of God (as well as in the World) till he is shut up in
the Bottomless-Pit.

8thly. Consider, That God is the God of Peace, who commands peace, and gives
peace; and Jesus Christ is the Prince of Peace; and the Fruit of the Spirit is
sown in Peace of them that love Peace; and His Church is (or should be) His
Kingdom of Peace; and if you are not the Children of Peace, you are none of
His: So that, if you have the Spirit of Christ in you, it will operate in those
Divine Virtues, of Love, and Peace.

9thly. The present Rebukes of God, upon His People, plainly discover, that He
is displeased with them; and we have ground to judge, that among the many
provocations of his People, this is not the least. The Divisions of His
Heritage: His Dispensations (as well as His Word) call aloud to us in this
matter: O let us not be like the Deaf-Adder, to stop our Ears at so many, and
so great Calls to Peace, and Unity; Let us pray for it, and endeavor after it:
O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; They shall prosper who love the Peace
thereof. Let there be great searching of Heart in this matter. Let us pray, and
argue out, this foul Spirit of Division. Let us say as the Prophet, Psalm. 137.
5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my Right Hand forget her Cunning; If I
do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief Joy. Let us prefer the Peace, and welfare of the
Church, above our chief Joy, and then we shall seek its Peace: And this we must
know, That this desirable thing (the Churche's-Peace) must be obtained with
some Difficulty, and Loss; or else we are not like to obtain it. We must be
content to loose our own Wills, and (it may be) our Profits, and our Honors.
In some cases, an Allowance must be yielded to each other in differing
Apprehensions, that our selves cannot receive. It is a just Liberty that every
one will claim; and should allow it to others, else we do not as we would be
done by. We must allow each other that Liberty, as every one has received; so,
to walk by the same Rule: And let no Man resolve to stand by any ^rinciple or
practice, from Custom; or to keep up Honor, and Repute with Men; but be ready
to fall before every plain Gospel Truth. And in doubtful, and disputable
Things, let us learn to bear with, and forbear each other in love; especially,
let Ministers set their Hearts and Hands to this Work; And let all the upright
in Heart be after them: Who knows, but that God may yet have a Blessing in
store for His Church; even the Blessing of Truth, and Peace, and the Prosperity
of the Gospel, in the Conversion of Sinners.

10thly. and finally; Who knows, but that wise and moderate Endeavors (in this
matter), might tend to bring in a more near Union in general (by removing
Offenses, and composing Differences), than I have named; For, that is it we
should be reaching after, a^ the perfecting of Holiness (so the perfecting of
Peace) in the Fear of G(...). And it is a wonderful mistake in those who pretend
to perfect Holiness, out of the way of Peace.

I shall now say no more in this matter, but conclude with 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11.
For he that will love Life, and see good Days, let him refrain his Tongue from
Evil, and his Lips that they speak no Guile; Let him eschew Evil, and do Good;
Let him seek Peace, and ensue it.

And, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally, my Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good
Comfort; live in Peace, and the God of Love, and Peace, shall be with you: Even
so, Amen.

FINIS.

