THE SPOUSES Hidden Glory, AND Faithful Leaning upon her Welbeloved. Wherein
is laid down the Souls Glory in Christ, and the way by which the Soul comes
to Christ. Delivered in two Lecture SERMONS in St Andrews Church in Norwich.
By JOHN COLLINGS Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods word in Saviors parish
in Norwich.

1 John 3.1. The world knows us not. Isaiah 43.1. Fear not, I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine.

2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

LONDON, Printed for William Franckling, and are to be sold at his Shop near
the sign of the George in Norwich. 1646.

TO The Right worshipful and truly honored Patriot of his Country, Sir JOHN
HOBART Knight and Baronet, one of the Members of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Honored Sir,
Goodness is the Honor of Greatness, and Grace is the Beauty of Goodness:
Greatness without Goodness, is like a grossy body with a sluggards spirit,
too heavy to bear its own burden: and Goodness without some Authoritative
Greatness, is like a soul in separation, happy in it self, but it wants an
organ to move in terrestrials. But he to whom God has given gracious
Greatness, is one that has ten Talents, one upon whom opportunities wait to
do his God Honor. And it is the greatest happiness can betide a creature, to
have an opportunity to throw his two mites, his little all into the Treasury of
the Lords Glory. Our actuated habit of Love to Gods Church and Spouse, is the
greatest way of honoring our God. The Bridegroom honors those that he makes
his Brides Vshers: And it is the most endearing service we can do our Master,
to have a care of his Lambs. Simon Peter love thou me? feed my Lambs: his
Lambs in the Fold, which are his Church. Sir, God has called you to this
Honor; though not to feed, yet to provide their Shepherds a Crook. Alas! what
shall we do? our Saviors Lambs stray and wander in dangerous pastures, and
we have no Crook to reduce them: we can only feed them when they please to
eat: we have no hedge of Government to keep them in their pastures, nor Crook
to reduce the wanderers: here is our misery! God has made us watchmen; we may
give good counsel to the unlawful straglers, but we want our watch-bill to
stay them if they will go. Blessed be the God of heaven, that has not only
made you Honorable in the sight of men, but more in his own sight, because
zealous for his Bride. Christ's Spouse in this Kingdom is in the wilderness;
and woe unto us that we can imagine the heart of any so hard as to contribute a
vote to keep her there, much more to hedge up her way with thorns, that she
cannot get out. At whose hands will the blood of those the wolves destroy be
required? Blessed be the God of heaven, that has given you an heart to wash
not only your hands but tongue also of the blood of those that perish in this
Kingdom for want of Government. I have here presented your Worship with a
member of Christ's Church; endeavoring to limn out the Spouse in her Hidden
Glory: if she wants expected beauty, it is the Limners fault: she is truly
Glorious in her self, and her Bridegrooms eyes; but her glory is hidden to the
world. Is it not pity so glorious a creature as this Spouse is in the
perfection of her members, should want Order in her House? and be prostituted
to every one that has wickedness enough to defloure her? May the number of
those increase thar are the friends of Sion, and the generation of those
perish, that make it their design to lay yet more waste the City of God,
already near to bury her self in her own ruins. It is alas! too true, Sir,
and unhappy too, that God has put weakness into your hands, though your heart
longs to be at Temple-work. Your self are in a wilderness of Affliction,
whiles you should and would gladly be lending your hand and votes to help the
Spouse in England out: Gods will must be done, though we be patients. The
Lord prosper the Nehemiahs that are at the work, and lessen the number of the
Sanballats that hinder it; and in Elijahs absence double his spirit upon his
Elishaes: and the Lord grant that in your wilderness of Affliction, you may
lean upon you Beloved, and the Bridegroom grant such an happiness to his
Spouse, as to spare her friends life, that you may come out of your wilderness
of Afflictions, leaning upon your Beloved, and do your God more service by
living to his glory, and contributing your dying Votes to the happiness of his
Bride: which is Sir, the daily prayer of

Your Worships devoted servant, JOHN COLLINGS.

TO The Right Honorable, and truly Noble, the Lady Francis Hobart, increase of
all happiness. etc.
Madam,
I Must ingenuously confess, it was my own ease was the first inducement to
me, to offer these unpolished meditations to the censure of the world, (whom I
hear already saying, is Saul also among the Prophets?) having promised more
coppies then I was willing to transcribe; But when that had raked the embers,
something else blew the coals: I well knew that the Press was so tainted, it
would be a suspicion of faction to be seen under it, and (if ever) now was the
time to be a Fool in print: But when I considered the vanity of my former,
and the incertaintie of my latter, days I thought it was time to redeem the
time, not only because my days were evil, but because my span might be almost
measured out; And I thought if these meditations might not have the happiness
to show some soul the way out of the wilderness, Leaning upon its Beloved,
yet they could not be denied so small a blessing, as to keep some Bookish eyes
from dirtying themselves with po^ring in the excrements of Factious brains and
pens, (which present themselves in our unhappy days, upon every shop-board, to
Athenian gazers) by busying them in these papers a little. After these thoughts
had wrested my notes out of my hands, which at the first composure I had
thought (like a dying infant) should only have looked upon the world, misliked
it, and gone out again. My near relation to your Honors house, told me it
would be no good manners to speak of a wedding and not invite your Ladyship
(especially being one of the Children of the Bride-chamber) to it. The truths
here may appeal to your Honor, for a confirmation; and I doubt not but you
will and can sign them from precious experience: having already Set to your
Seal, that God is true. Nay, I dare be further bold to say that the marriage
of the Lamb could not be consummate without you: And I was loath to present a
Bride lame, to so glorious a Bridegroom. These sermons are but a Record of
your Honors practice; and yet they are a prophecy of your Honors life too.
The Bride of Christ is not past all her dirty way, when she is espoused to her
Bridegroom; She walks with him through dirty paths also: It is the way of
heaven, not the way to heaven, that is strewed with flowers and roses: He knew
that told us, By much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

Mortality is but the Christians wilderness, For why should the disciple be
above his Master, or the servant above his Lord? the Crown of thorns was not
made for Christ's head only: and if there be written over our heads, in letters
of glory, These are the heirs of heaven, what need we care to hang here nailed
to a cross? The nails of the cross are sanctified ever since they pierced
his sacred Limbs: A meditation of Christ's agony, may be a cordial draught for
a soul sick with afflictions.

If Christ walked upon the Sea to us, let us gird our coats and walk also:
Though Christ seems to sleep, yet our groanings will awaken him, for he
takes care that we perrish not. Though Christ shakes himself, as if he
intended to shake off our hand sometimes; yet let us consider, it is because
our hands are dirty, and not be so foolish to let go our hold; Christ may duck,
but he will not drown us; He knows the way out of the wilderness, and will
lead us right, if we will but lean: Though we sit in darkness and see no
light, yet let us trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay our selves upon our
God: we may be persecuted, we shall never be forsaken: we shall come out of
the wilderness, leaning upon our Beloved.

I presume Madam, to present these sermons naked to your Honors hands,
trusting your Ladyship will cover the imperfections with charity; they were
buried, but if the Ghosts must walk, I thought it no ways proper to put them
on gayer clothes, let them walk in their windingsheet: If they will but tell a
story of heaven to any they meet, and show them the way, and learn them Christ,
I will promise them to give them an acquittance for any other debt they owe
me: If they will but procure me the Brides prayers, my reward is greater then
my desert: If God will honor them to win a soul, his free grace shall have
the honor of it; for here is nothing but I have received from his Grace, and
to it I owe all that I am.

Madam, were not my discourse of heaven and Christ, my Epistle might be
tedious; but I am confident your Honor could be content to hear of your
Bridegroom all the day long. The Lord grant your Honor yet more sweetness in
his enjoyments, and fill you yet more full of his grace, till you shall come
out of the wilderness of mortality, leaning upon your beloved, into the
pleasant Paradise of Glory, which is and shall be (Madam) the prayer of

Your Honors obliged Chaplain, John Collins.

THE SPOUSES HIDDEN GLORY.
SOLOMON'S SONG, Chap. 8. verse. 5. Who is this that comes out of the
Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?


THis Book is called the Song of Songs; Canticum Canticorum, that is Canticum
Excellentissimum; the most excellent Song; so Vatablus: and Estius Qu^a
sermocinationem continet Christi sponsi, and Ecclesiae sponsae, Estius.
gives the reason; because it contains a discourse betwixt Christ the
Bridegroom, and his Church the Bride. The Song of Songs, as a note of Eminency
(thinks he) Mr Brightman will have it as well Nota distinctionis quam
Eminentiae, a note of distinction, as of eminency; Canticum excellentius
omnibus quae Solomon composuit.
A Song more excellent then all those which Solomon made; The Song that sounded
sweetest to Solomon's penitent heart: But truly well may that be called the Song
of Songs, where every strain is breathed by the Spirit of the most High, whose
pen man was Son and Heir to the sweet Singer of Israel, and had the most wise
understanding heart, that ever blessed a creature: whose every note is a note of
Free grace, and every close a close with Christ, an union with him who is the
head of his Church: Finally, where every line breaths the perfume of the Rose
of Sharon, and is beautified with the color of the Lilly of the Valleys. It is
a Song of Love, sung in parts, by the Son of his fathers Love, The Lord
Christ, and the wife of his bosom, The Church in general, and every believing
soul in particular: It begin^ with Love, Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth, for his love is better then wine; Osculum est Symbolum amoris: And
it ends with love, Make have my beloved, and come away. The fountain from
whence it arises is a spring of love, and the sea into which it falls is an
Ocean of love, where the soul that enters is swallowed up of love, and drowned
in sweetness. The whole stream of the book, is a stream of love, running
betwixt two precious banks, Jesus Christ, and the believing soul; Sometimes it
runs an higher, sometimes a lower water; it is always some, though the
Floodgates be not always open. The two lovers spend their song in feasting
themselves with each others beauties; One while the Bridegroom is courting his
Bride with ravishing strains of grace; another while she is emptying her soul
into her beloveds bosom. The whole song is but a sweet enterchange of
delightful expressions, while both seem to be ravished with each others
mutual embraces.

I shall not study the coherence of the Text, it being a strain of the Song
that stands in small dependency to the other. The spouse had now her
bridegroom by the hand, it was her turn to pour her love into her beloveds
bosom: from the 10. verse of the former chapter. My text seems to be a
parenthesis, standing in small relation to the antecedent, or subsequent words;
but seems to be the voice of some third person, viewing this blessed pair
sweetly embracing one another, and the beloved following her love through most
rugged places and wilderness ways; in those ways leaning upon Christ, either
in admiration of Christ's condiscention, that he would please through
wildernesses to lead his beloved, or in admiration of the spouse so worthless
a creature, that she should lean; or of her beauty by the refl^xion of her
beloveds countenance, or of her constancy, that the bria^s and thorns of the
wilderness could not separate her beloved and her, Quos Deus conjunxit, etc.
cries out, Quae est illa quae ascendit ex deserto? What manner of creature is
this, that she should lean? or what so glorious creature is this that leans?
What manner of love is this, that makes her follow her Beloved through such
uncoth, rugged, dangerous ways as these?

Learned ^remellius would have these words to be no Parenthesis at all, but
the continued speech of the Church, and says it is an Expression of the great
love that the Church bare to the Lord Christ, by comparison. Expositio summi
amoris quo Ecclesi prosequitur S^orsum, ansuit ull^ unquam Ecclesia quae tot ac
tantos l bores perse^ret, tantaque pericu^a susciperet, ad consequendum
dilectum s^um? hec igitur sunt pignora Voluntat^^ me^ qued fide diffi^ultates
omnes superavi. Tremell^^s ad locum.


What Church ever (says she) would undertake so many and so great labors
encounter so many dangers to get her beloved? These are pledges of my good
will, that by faith I have overcome all difficulties, leaning upon him, even in
the wilderness.

But with all due respect to Tremellius, I rather agree with our whole stream
of Expositors, that it is a Parenthesis, and the voice of a third person
speaking, Quae est illa? The only question is, who this third person should be:

Beda and Mr Brightman understand it to be the voice of the Jewish Church,
that with the eye of prophecy fore seeing the conversion of the Church of the
Gentiles, cry out, Who is this? This wilderness creature? that she should have
any thing to do with the Messiah? and therefore they read it, Dilectum meum, my
beloved; Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon my
beloved? whom I thought only to have loved me, Quem mesolum dil^gese, ceteris
aut^m Nationibus rebar esse ignotum. Bed^ ad locum.
and to have been unknown to other nations (says Beda) C^^us nominis sit haec
Gens quae ascendit ex deserto? Insti^ni videtur haec quaestio de grandioribus
natu sororibus, quae stupescent hoc novo and inaudito spectaculo, says Mr
Brightman ad locum.

But I see no reason why it should only be restrained to be the voice of the
Jewish Church, nor why [illa] [this] should be meant only of the Church in
general, whiles that which is predicated of this subject is common to each
believing Soul as well as the believing Church: Luther ad loc. Non solum
V^cinae gen^es, sed etiam ipsi quisunt in po^ulo hanc mirantur sic ascendentem?
deserto.
And therefore I rather agree with Luther upon the text; Not only (says he)
the neighbor nations, but those in the same nation shall admire her coming
out of the wilderness.

And I see no reason why we may not make the ordinary eye of the world, the
eye of the text, that seeing the believing souls confidence in Christ, and
affiance to him, that no wilderness will make her let go her hold but through
every wilderness she finds a way by the help of her Savior, who is her way,
and up out of every wilderness (how rugged soever) she will come, and not lose
her Savior her beloved neither, but comes up leaning, cries out, Quae est illa
quae ascendit e deserto? Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness?
[leaning] Associans, associatura, Marrying or about to marry her self to her
beloved; so Tremellius Delicijs affluens, feasting her self with delight,
abounding with delights in her beloved: so Vatablu, Hierome and Lyra, Innixa
leaning upon her beloved; so Mr Brightman, and reverend Beda: The matter is not
much.

1. Leaning is a posture of familiarity and she that is so bold to lean upon
her beloveds arm, is surely lodged in her beloveds heart, and is associans,
marrying, or associatura, about to marry her self to her beloved; and 2.
Leaning is a posture of love too: She that leans, loves; surely she takes
pleasure in her posture, she delights her self in her beloveds shoulder.

The Text contains an imperfect description of a Virgin, the daughter of Zion,
the Spouse of our Savior; In which consider, 1. The place whence she came, The
Wilderness:
2. Her motion, She comes up:
3. Her posture, Innixa, Leaning:
4. The person upon whom she leans, Dilectum, A beloved:
5. The proper interest she has in him, Dilectum suum, Her beloved:



The imperfection of the description appears in the first words, being
interrogatory, Quae est illa? Who is this? we know not what rare, princely,
glorious creature it is?

Who is this? It is formula interrogandi. An interrogatory form of speech; and
does (arguere ignorantiam) argue an ignorance; We know not who she is; what is
she? Secondly, it is a form of admiring, and does argue amaze. Whatso glorious
creature is this, that has such relation to the Kings Son, that she leanes
upon him? Hence we learn

1. That the Spouse of Christ is a glorious creature that the world knows not;
from the latter part of the Text.

2. That it is the property of the believing soul the spouse of the Lord
Christ, to come out of the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved.

Of the first, First, That the Spouse of Christ is a glorious creature that the
world knows not:

Here first, we will enquire, Who is the Spouse.

Secondly, How she is so glorious.

Thirdly, How she is unknown, and what of her is unknown: The confirmation will
be interwoven with the explication: By the Spouse of Christ every one knows is
meant either the Church in general, Hosea 2.19.20. I will betroth thee unto me
for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me, in righteousness, and in judgment,
and in loving kindness, and mercyes. And I will betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness; Or the believing soul in particular; the believing soul
stands in the nearest relations to Jesus Christ, 12. Matthew. 50. She is his
mother and sister, and Christ's sister is his spouse. My sister, my spouse, he
calls her Cantic. 5. ver. 1. But wherein is this Spouse of her Savior so
glorious that any need say concerning her, Quae est illa? Who is this that
comes up?

There are six things which may breed an admiration in the eye of the
beholders, in relation to any Bride, all which are eminenter in this spouse.

1. Her breeding, that is admirable; she is borne of God, 1 Ioh. 5.18. God is
her father: she calls him Our Father and Abba Father every day. Jesus Christ
himself Baptized her. He shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire,
Math. 3. she is a Kings daughter. 45. Psalm. 13. and she lives in the Spirit of
God Gal. 5.25. she and God are all one in a mystery; the Saint is a mystical
piece of Jesus Christ; it lives with him and in him, and he lives in and with
it. It is written the heavens shall contain him; contain him, but not
circumscribe him; he lives under the Cottage-roof of the meanest Christian;
Christ dwells with the believer, and lives too. I live, but yet not I, but
Christ lives in me (says the Apostle.) The soul must needs be well bred under
such a Tutor, a glorious breeding! Its brother is Jesus Christ, Husband and
brother too. The spouse is Jesus Christ's sister and spouse, as Abraham said
concerning Sarah: She is near a kin to the Trinity; to all the Apostles and
Saints; of the blood Royal: admirable for her breeding, that in that regard
they might say, Quae est illa? Who is this?

2. Her carriage, that is admirable, this depends much upon breeding you know;
she shames not her breeding: her deportment is according to her birth, her
companions noble Kings daughters 45. Psalm. 9. Her carrriage chaste, a Virgin
through a spouse Christus non renascitur, nisi in cordibus eorum qui
spirituales sunt virgins, and Deo uno spiritu adherent. Christ is not borne
again, nor married to those that are not spiritual Virgins, and adhere to him
alone. She loves righteousness, and hates wickedness, 45. Psalm. 7. and
keeps her garment unspotted from the flesh; she carries not her self like the
wanton women: those that see the Saints carriage for humility, for gravity, for
her whole deportment, may in admiration say, Quae est illa? Who is this? What
rare, what glorious creature?

3. Her Beauty is admirable, 45. ps. 2. She is fairer then the Children of men,
for grace is poured into her lips. Some daughters are beautiful, but she is
far more beautiful. Some in part, but she is all fair; thou art all fair my
spouse. She is black (that is in her morning) but her black morning proves a
fair day; black by nature, fair by grace, comely as the Tents of Kedar and
Curtains of Solomon. A lilly (though amongst thorns.)

1. Her beauty is a perfect beauty. The Church was once called the perfection of
Beauty, 2. Lament. 25. No beauteous face and deformed body, much less deformed
soul; All fair. See her full description from the best limner in the 7. chap.
to the 7. verse. She is without spot, or wrinkle.

2. It is a desirable beauty, Kings shall desire thy beauty: amongst Creatures
sometimes the flesh may be beautiful, but the countenance casts a veil over,
and makes the beauty not lovely, or desirable; but this is a lovely Beauty even
in the eyes of Kings.

3. It is a constant beauty, no sickness can make her unlovely; nothing can
wrinkle the believing soul, or curle the gracious brow, the lilly of these
valleys loses no beauty in the scorches of afflictions or hail of sorrow,
or storms of temptation; but in every condition those that look upon her may
say, Quae est illa? What so beauteous creature is this?

4. She is admirable for her Clothing. Her clothing is of wrought gold. 45.
Psalm. 13. She shall be brought unto the King in a garment of needlework; in her
espousall days she is clothed with grace, hereafter she shall be clothed with
glory: she has put off her widows garments, and put on a garment like the
garment Mordecay was arrayed with. Ester 8.15. Royal apparel taken out of the
wardrobe of glory. Blew, and white, precious Raiment; even of the same cloth
with the King of glories attire. Dan. 7.9. Revel. 3.5. And with a crown of
glory upon her head, and a garment of fine linen, and purple; Indeed she was
clothed like Iehoshua with filthy garments. But God has said take away the
filthy garments from her, and I will clothe her with change of Raiment. Zech.
chap. 3. ver. 4.5.

1. She is admirable. First for the Variety of her clothing.

Secondly, For the perfume of her garments.

We will open her wardrobe and show you a few of the changes of Raiment this
Bride has:

First, She has her Inner garment of Christ's righteousness, her robe of
righteousness; this the Saints are clothed with, and this is their long white
garment: Their inner garment that goes next their soul. They are clothed in
white, Revel. 7.13.14. Those that come out of Tribulation and have washed their
robes in the blood of the Lamb are arrayed in white robes.

2. She has another white garment of chastity, which the Apostle bids Timothy
put on, and the young women must have gowns made of it; they were to be chaste
and discreet, not committing adultery with the pleasures and profits and vain
delights as well as men of the world, but keep her whole love and whole soul
to God, and God alone.

3. She has a long garment of Charity, her cloak of charity, this is both
long and full; with the others she clothed her self, with this she clotheth
others; with this she clotheth the naked, and this is a true garment, and it
covers a multitude of sins: 1 Pet. 5.8. A garment that neatly becomes a
Christian, and which she should be sure to have what ever she wants to the back
of her soul: Above all have fervent charity (says the Apostle) It is a
garment that the Bridegroom will look that his Bride should be clothed with,
at the great marriage day, Matthew. 25.34. etc. Come ye blessed of my Father, and
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of the world, for
I was an hungry and ye gave me meat etc.

A fourth change of Raiment, she has, is the hair cloth of humility; an
homely, but precious garment, 1 Pet. 5.5. Be ye clothed with humility; The
Bridegroom himself woed his spouse with this robe, He humbled himself and
became obedient unto God, even to death, the death upon the cross; For these
two last changes of raiment my heart aches to think how many Christians have
left them off: Charity is grown cold, to a Proverb; and humility, the
precious garment of humility, changed for the conceited coat of singularity;
the party colored coat of factions has brought this garment out of fashion;
It has lost no beauty, though it be pitifully out of fashion.

A fifth change of raiment; is her garment of Moderation, a summer garment to
be worn when the Sun of prosperity shines hott: then let your moderation be
known unto all men, Philip. 4.5.

Sixthly, She has likewise a winter garment of Patience, and this the Spouse
puts on in a storm; Tribulation works Patience: This the good Church of
Ephesus was clad with, and her God loved her in this habit, Rev. 2.3. And have
borne and had patience, and for my name have labored, and have not fainted.

Seventhly, Many are the changes of this Spouses Raiment, I will only mention
one more, and that is Vestimentum fidei, her Buff-coat of faith, this is
Pistol, yea Canon proof, this she puts on in a time of war: The shield of
faith, called Ephesians. 6.16. This is her militia vestment: These are the Spouses
several changes of Vesture, and many more; she has garments of needlework,
and diverse colors, and she shall have at last a garment of Glory; She is
glorious for the change of her raiment, that the eye of the beholder may be put
to amaze, and he in admiration say, Quae est illa? Who is this that comes up?

2. She is admirable, as for the change, so for the perfume of her garments,
Psalm. 45.8. All her garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia. Cant. 4.11. The
smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon; no perfume like the
believers sweetness, sweetness that cannot be worn out, she gives a smell as
she goes, like the smell of a garden, like the smell of a field which the Lord
has blessed; like the perfume of Paradise.

3. As she is admirable for her clothing, so for her virtues also, Virtues
shall I say? Virtue is too cheap a garment for this glorious Bride; Graces are
inward ornaments, and indeed this is but her clothing of wrought gold; I have
spoke something to this before, the best nature is but the thread of her
garment, the Gold of grace is wrought upon it, the warp of nature and the woof
of Grace; she is clothed with grace as a garment: Virtue is the cheapest cloth
she wears, though that be more precious then a cloth of silver or gold: The
virtues of her Bridegroom are in her; Nature refined beyond nature; The
Quintessence of ingenuous nature seven times refined, clarified, spiritualized:
Virtues (say they) are chained together: This spouse is not adorned with
collars of pearl, the most precious pearl is too cheap for her Ornaments, but
her cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, and her neck with chains of gold,
Cant. 1.16. What chains, but the chains of her virtues and graces? and this
chain of grace ravisheth the heart of Jesus, Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my
heart my sister my spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thy eyes,
with one of the chains of thy neck, this precious Chain the Apostle persuades
the Saints to put on, 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity; Oh precious chain of intermixed pearl! Surely this will
make the spouse admirable, that whosoever hears of her, or sees her, will, must
say, Quae est illa? who is this comes up?

4. Lastly, She is admirable for her Attendants, this makes all that see her,
or know her, or hear of her, stand and admire her, and say, who is this? etc.
Psalm. 45.9. Kings daughters were among thine Honorable women, upon thy right
hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophyr; None more glorious Attendants then
Kings and Queens, Isay. 49.23. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and
Queens thy nursing mothers, they shall bow down to thee, with their faces
toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; What more honorable
Attendants then the glorious Angels? Those household servants of the King of
glory, even these are this Brides waiting servants, Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? Heb.
1.14. Shall I go yet higher? The King of glory himself is the Attendant of the
Kings daughter; he took upon him the form of a servant, he came in person to
attend her, he comes still and bears her company; yea Jesus Christ is the
believers servant in heaven, for he stands at the right hand of her father, to
make intercession for her, to make her prayers, and her welcome into the
chambers of his Fathers glory, (the Mansion house of the King of heaven) She
is admirable for her Attendants; first for the multitude of them, The Creation
is all her servant, the Creatures below are as the grooms of her kitchen, the
Angels are the Gentlemen of her Bedchamber, Queens are her maids of Honor,
Jesus Christ her Bridegroom is her servant, though her Lord; all his
employment is to do her service. Secondly, for the gloriousness of her
Attendants, the Queen that stands at her right hand, is clad with gold of
Ophyr: the Angels that are her ministering spirits are clothed with eternity;
None so glorious a retinue as this Spouses, they that look upon her Train as
she comes, must needs say, Quae est illa? Who is this that comes up? and
thus I have showed how this beloved soul is admirable; but the words are as
well formula inquirendi as admirandi, a form of inquiring as a form of
admiring; It argues they did not know her; therefore they say Who is this that
comes up? The believer is a bride that is unknown to the world, an unknown
creature. To whom and what are they unknown, and how far known? what of her
must be known, and what in her is hidden?

First, She is unknown to the ways and carriage of the world.

Secondly, She is unknown to the men of the world.

First, She is unknown to the ways of the world, she hates the garment spotted
with the flesh, Jude v. 23. she is none of those that dare revell in mixed
dances, she is not seen at every fair, she proclaims not her beauty at every
cross, she dresseth not her self like a puppet of pride that forgets she is
dust and ashes, she is indeed all glorious, but it is within; there her
clothing is of wrought gold; she paints not her borrowed face, she knows not
how to look God in the face another day with a face that is not of his
adorning; she has beauty enough, she needs not borrow any, she knows that
paint will consume in hell fire: The painted puppets of earthly pride that fare
deliciously every day, wonder at her native beauty, though maintained with
pulse, and when they see her face outshine theirs, and her making conscience
of what they make no scruple, they shall wonder, and say, Who is this?

Secondly, She is unknown to the men of the world, an hidden creature, 1 Ioh.
3.1. The world knows us not. They are called Gods hidden ones, 83. Psalm. 3.
Sometimes compared to Jewels, In that day when I make up my Iew^ls, I will
spare them. Jewels are not seen to every one; the Spouses excellency is not
known to all, The men of the world do not know them. What, are they spirits?
do not they live in the lower region? How so hidden then?

Answ. First, They do not know them Scientia perfecta, with a perfect and full
knowledge, they look upon a gracious man as one only of a refined nature, a
pure moralist, that does no one wrong, for they have only the carnal eye of
sense, and the spirituality of a Christian is spiritually discerned: These
diamonds are no better to them then pebles; a Jewel to them is but worth a
barley corn.

Secondly, They do not know them Scientia Scientifica with a distinguishing
knowledge; the Bristow stone is as precious to them as the Diamond, nor can
they distinguish them; and indeed no one has infallible marks of them but he
that searches the hearts, and tries the reins: An hypocrite may paint her
self with such seeming graces, that the world may say of her, Surely this is
the Lords anointed, or as in the text, who is this that comes up? But can the
Saint be hidden? It is hard (says that pious man) to hide a great fire, or to
cast a covering upon sweet odours that they smell not; Christ's name by which
she is called is as a sweet ointment poured out, as a mountain of spices, and
he is the strong favor of heaven, and of the highest Paradise; you may cast a
covering over the man, that he shall not see the Sun: But not over the body of
the sun to hide daylight; To whom is she hidden therefore? and to whom not
hidden? What of her is uncovered, and what is covered?

First, She is not hidden to God; Elijah thought all the saints had beer both
dead and buried, when he complained that he was left alone, but God saw seven
thousand in Israel, that had not bowed their knee to Baal: Ezechiel saw no
mourners but God sent him to mark out such a precious tribe from the tribes of
Israel: he saw their private drops; God need not say concerning the most
retired saint, Who is this that comes up?

Secondly, To her self she is not hidden, She has her conscience bearing her
witness, the manifestation of Gods love in her own soul, the prints of his
footsteps: Gods Spirit bearing witness with their own Spirits; Christ is
written in great letters in their hearts, she has her (...) her marks to know
her self by: By this we know 1 John 2.3. and by this again we know verse. 5. 3.
She is unknown and hidden to the world, to the saints of the world, (her
brethren know her not) and to the men of the world; to the one less, to the
other more; the saints know her not infallibly. It was a true saying of him,
"When any of us come in heaven, we shall see some faces there that we never
thought had been there, and miss some others that we had verily thought to
have found there.

But yet many ways may the Saints discern by the fruits, betwixt light and
darkness; yet not any that I know so certain to our duskish eyes, that by it
I can positively and infallibly say of any, This or that is a Saint of God,
though in charity I ought to judge so of many; yet Samuel may be deceived in
Eliab, Gods eyes see not as man sees: Therefore I have sometimes wondered with
what face any man (that professes himself a servant of Jesus Christ) dare for
a fee at a funeral, lift a moralist to heaven, that possibly burns in hell
that hour; I should fear to speak it positively of him that (in my deceivable
eyes) seems a pious Christian; They are Hidden ones: How many that shine in
heaven at this day a glorious constellation that went out of the world clouded?
and with what face shall a minister of Jesus Christ say more of me then I dare
say of my self? How comes his assurance if I want mine? I know charity in this
case is pleaded; But I conceive charity is enough shown to say I hope, or we
hope, if the tree may be judged by the fruits; declare the probabilities, and
leave the soul to God: But I am not amongst an indocible kind of creatures,
that will tell me, they are too old to be taught, and I too young to teach
them. To return therefore whence I digrest, and to tell you what of the
Christian cannot be hidden, and what of them is hidden.

1. The acts of his graces cannot be hidden, A Christian must show his love to
God, though God clouds himself to him; If they have any habit of love in them,
it will act; For Love is strong as the grave, and jealousy burns like fire,
Cant. 8.6, 7. Many waters cannot quench love; Their zeal cannot be hid, no
not from the world, he cannot hear a wretch swear, see him drunk, profaning
Gods sabbaths, nay, abusing his Christ's blood, but he must speak, The zeal of
Gods house has eaten up the Christian, as well as his master: The hypocrite
learns that politic paradox to see, and not to see, to see and wink: Eliah
must be zealous for the Lord God of hosts; The hypocrite will tell you of
discretion, "O that idol of discretion (said he) (and very well) that drives
the power of Godliness out of the Kingdom! Discretion indeed is commendable,
The prudent man orders his affairs with discretion, but not with discretion
as now impleaded; The Magistrate must be zealous in his place; these tell him
he must be moderate, Summum jus est summa injuria, he must not anger his rich
neighbor, to levy the penalty for swearing or blaspheming, nor make the poor
men his enemies by executing the Statutes for tippling and drunkenness, he must
keep his oath with discretion and punish sin with discret^on, and damn his
own soul with discretion too; The ministers they must act by the
hypocritical Newters lukewarm principles of discretion too, they must not
reprove faction till they see how it will be favored above; see what
government will be settled and then speak against those that oppose it; See the
truth of Christ rent in pieces, his precious robe of truth torn from top to
bottom, his church rent limb from limb, cut in more pieces then the Levites
concubine, yet must they say nothing; It were indiscretion, want of moderation,
bitter Presbyterianisme, what not? to speak against these butchers; wait and
see what will be done above, and so indeed it may be salvation may be brought
to the church another way, but we must know then assuredly that we, and our
houses, and our fathers houses shall perish: The word of God was in Ieremiahs
heart as a burning fire shut up in his bones, Ier. 20.9. Grace commands a
Christian Magistrate, and a Christian Minister sometimes beyond what the world
judges discretion, witness that though an extraordinary case of Phineas for
Zimri and Cosbi. But alas where is this zeal? we have more Discreeter (as the
world calls them) then Gracious zealous preachers by one half, mere Gallioes
that can see a Church rent in pieces, souls perverted, truth torn, and they
care for none of these things: And we have more moderate Magistrates then
Godly, more that the world calls honest then God will thank for their honesty
another day. It was never before our days the Commendation of a Magistrate to
be last in action, to do nothing against blasphemers, Heretics, etc. Where ^s
these pretended Christians graces? O away with these Ciphers on Benches; act
for God or the Devil: When God calls as in these days, Who is on my side,
who? why do ye hide your heads in holes? were there a dram of grace in your
hearts, it could not be but we should see a little flame.

The acts of Christians graces cannot be hidden. No, one must say of them in
that sense. Who is this?

Secondly, Their gracious and holy life cannot be hidden, They must walk as it
becomes children of the light; they cannot be saints here, and Devils there;
their company be it good or bad, shall be the better for them: It was a shrewd
failing of Peter, to be a Jew amongst the Jews* and a Gentile amongst the
Gentiles, Paul reproved him to his face for it. Thus they are not hidden; if
they be Gods coin they will have his image and superscription upon them: How
then are they hidden from the world, that they may say, who is this? admiring
her, that her beloved so great, so glorious, should suffer her to lean on him?
Many things in her are hidden, especially these five:

First, Her b^eeding, that is hidden; Not a believer but is a Kings daughter,
borne of God, brother of Christ; do the scornful gallants of the world think
thus, that a Pesantly Christian is better bred then they that so boast of their
Genus and proavos? do they think that the King of glory is father to that
leatherne Christian? The Christians face indeed discovers his father, he is
Christened with the name of the ^rince of peace; Gods eldest son gives them
their name Christian, but this their breeding is hidden: the worlds says, Who
is this? Is not this the Carpenters Son?

Secondly, Her Value that is hidden; Who knows the Value of a child of God?
those are precious creatures that are the passive creatures of the earth; those
Precisians, Puri ans, call them what you please, those that have trialls here
of cruel mockings, scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonments, that
are stoned, sawne in sunder, tempted, slain with the sword, that wander about
in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, Of these
the world is not worthy, Heb. 12.37.38. The world, the fine world that glifters
in cloth of Gold, knows not the value of a Christians leatherne dublet, Sub
sordido pallio jacet pietas, the world wonders to see a poor creature a piece
of momentany dust, leaning upon the Prince of Glory, confiding in Christ,
living upon Christ, so welcome to his house, so precious in his eyes, so
familiar with his heart, resting upon the Prince of glories bosom; they wonder
what they are, what invisible beauty this Prince should set his eyes on, they
see no such worth in the Christian, therefore they say, Quae e^t illa? Who is
this that comes up? What hidden beauty is inner? Her Value is hidden.

Thirdly, Her joy and peace that is hidden. The Spouse of Jesus Christ is a
careless creature, yet not secure, she is a calm in all tempest; let the
winds blow and the waves beat this house is founded upon a rock, the gates of
hell cannot prevail against it; Let heaven and earth rush together yet the
Christian is safe. There are in especial five stormy and tempestuous days,
which trouble the worldling, and they are all sun-shiny to this Spouse, she
has joy, and peace joyful peace, and peace^ull joy in all.

The first is the day of sickness t^ his body; The worldling cries out my
burden is too heavy for me to bear, the Saint says, O my God! I will kiss
thy rod; Thy rod as well as thy s^^ffe shall comfort me; The rod of God to the
Christian is made of several boughs of joy and twigs of consolation: Though he
kills me (says Job yet I will trust in him; Who is this that has such peace?
says the worldling; Her peace is hidden.

A second tempestuous day is the day of trouble to the Spirit; let the
worldling be a little troubled in spirit, his foul conscience a little shaked
up, the stink choaks him: Give me an halter, says Judas: Oh what shall he do?
Now he is damnd, that never would believe any such matter as damnation before,
he that would believe no hell till he felt it; and scarce any one wicked man
but has at some time or other, a storm in his conscience, for all the
flattered peace of their soul: The merryest youth, if Democritus had the
Anatomizing of him, would be sound to have some melancholy in him: Esaias says
they are like a foaming sea continually casting forth mire and dirt; Now here
has the Christian peace, the winds and the waves obey her Master; If the winds
blow, she casts but out her anchor of hope, and the ship of her soul is still;
though she does strike her sails a little, yet she is sure her cable cannot
break in her saddest sorrows: she rejoices in the salvation of God, she
finds a bottom in the deepest seas, and as confidently looks, that though she
goes out weeping, yet carrying precious seed, she shall return rejoicing, and
bring her sheaves with her; as after a storm, the weather-beaten mariner
expects a calm; the worldling wonders at her hope that makes her not ashamed,
at her joy and peace, that cannot be drowned in sorrow, and says, Who is this
that comes up?

3. A third tempestuous day, is a day o^ trouble in the public State or
Church; Here the worldling is distracted, and cries out, What shall we do to be
saved? In this day she has peace, she trusts in God, and her God is able to
deliver her; she uses lawful means to calm these tempests, and throws her
God-displeasing Jonas into the sea; if all will not do, in a sweet
acquiescency of spirit, she rests, saying, Deus est, It is God, let him do
what seems him good: No stroke can be unlovely that comes from the hand of a
father: The Saints of God see God, though he ride^ upon the wings of th wind,
and makes the whirlewind his chariot, and she does not much care whether she
goes to heaven in a calm or in a storm, whether she be gently taken thither,
or wrapped up in a fiery chariot, whether she goes fairly by land, or swims
through a sea of blood: The world wonders at this careless, secure calm and
says, Who is this?

4. A fourth tempestuous day, is the day of death; Oh! here is the worldling
troubled, now he sighs out (with the dying Emperor) Animula! quo vadis? I have
drunk away my soul, sworn away mine heaven, blasphemed the God that should
now save me; Now poor soul! whither go thou? The spouse of Christ goes
down to the grave as willingly as the sleepy body goes to bed; Indeed this
virgin has cause to go willingly to it, she goes but to see where her Lord
lay; It was her Bridegroomes bed, She loves the winding sheet ever since it
enwrapt her Savior; The grave is a bed of roses to her, ever since, and she
cries out, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all; She is of the Spirit of that dying Saint, that professed, If all the crowns
and empires, riches, honors and glory of the earth were on one hand, and death
on the other, he would scorn them and embrace this: The world wonders at the
serene death of the Saint, that the King of terrors should be a messenger of
joy, the most fearful thing of things to be feared, the most joyful thing to
be emb aced: Balaam himself could ^ay, O that I might dye the death o^ the
Righteous let my latter end be like his; A as the Godly man his peace and joy
is hidden, and when they see him li^ting up his undaunted ^ead in this terrible
day, they say concerning him, Who is this?

5. The last tempestuous day indeed it is the last d y, he day of Judgment:
this day but in a fancy the thoughts of this day, Oh how they troub^e a
worldling when they but think they hear the trumpet sounding Alarm to this
dreadful day! Oh how ready are they to have their hearts like Nabals dye
within them, and become as cold as a stone! how ready before their time to cry,
O Rocks, Rocks, fall upon us, cover us from the face of the lamb. When they
hear but those words r^peated, Behold I come like a theife, that ^ (says this
wretch) is that Jesus whose blood I have trampled upon, whose free grace I have
despised; that I (says the Spouses) is the first letter of my Jesus, my sweet
and precious savior; Oh how glad shall I be to see my husband with his
glorious retinue come to fetch me away to his bed of glory! O come my precious
Jesus! my dear husband come quickly, Oh that the days of my widdowhood were
accomplished, Oh that I could see but my husbands face in the clouds, that I
might say, Lo this is my Christ, I have waited for him, Lo this is my Christ, I
have waited for him, I will rejoice and be glad in his salvation. The world
wonders what manner of spirit the Christian has that is scared with nothing,
what manner of peace it is that passes all understanding, he cries out Quae
est illa? Who is this? I must confess the fountain though it be of a great
depth, may not contain it self within its own banks; but if full, it must
run over; The Saint must speak his joy, if his heart be full, It must breath
out its comforts, I charge you tell my beloved, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
that I am sick of love; Joy will speak it self, It is not, it cannot be dumb;
If the Bridegroom be with the Children of the Bride-chamber, they cannot
mourn.

1. But first, The ground of their joy is not known, that is hidden, they know
not whence the spring comes that makes the fountain of their joy so brimfull
as it is; they see them smile, but they know not wherefore.

2. The measure of their joy is hidden; I may know by the brook, that there is
water in the fountain, but I cannot know by the shallow brook what depth the
water is that is in the fountain: they may say for this, Who is this joyful
creature? What is the Basis? How great is the depth of her hidden joy? what is
she? Who is this that comes?

4. But Fourthly, The Saints sincerity is hidden, From the world? yea from one
another infallibly: The Barbarians think Paul a murderer one day, a God
another day, they know not what any day: The disciples are readier to accuse
themselves then Judas: An unmixed company of Saints is peculiar to the Church
triumphant. I would demand of any who plead for unmixed Congregations, by what
infallible mark I shall know a sincere Christian from a deceitful hypocrite;
and to my thoughts, that title of Visible Saints seems to have contradictionem
in terminis; for if they be saints they are not visible; at least the truth of
their Saintship is not visible; And why it is necessarily required to the
constitution of Gods Church, that they be such as my deceivable eye judges
Saints, which may be the eldest children of perdition and the worst of devils,
is such a riddle, as I must profess I cannot open, nor can (I suppose any
considerable reason be given for it.

It was a true saying of him, To have none good, is the property of a Church
malignant; to have all good, and none bad, is the property of the Church
Triumphant; to have some good and some bad, is the property of the Church
Militant: Only God and their own consciences know their sincerity; O Lo d
remember how I have walked before thee (says Hezekiah) God knew, and his own
conscience knew: The Saints sincerity is hidd^n to the world; they are ready to
say, Who is this? what wine-bibber? as concerning John, What friend of
Publicanes and sinners? as concerning Christ. What Babbler? as concerning Paul.
What Puritan? What Roundhead? as now adays, Who is this?

5. Lastly, The Saints Glory is hidden, their future estate; and this is one
reason why the world despises them; the world uses to make much of great men,
Kings and Queens; but their greatness must be visible; the world would be
kinder to them, if they knew they should be their Judges, and sure enough they
shall; it is written, The Saints shall judge the world, they shall have a
Kingdom, when these shall go to hell; and an hidden Kingdom it is, 1 Cor.
2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard* nor can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive what things God has prepared for them that love him. So much may
serve for the Doctrinall part; now let us bring what you have heard to practice.

1. Let this be a cautionary reproof to the men of the world: no such despised
handful of dust and ashes as the little flock, the handful of Christians; the
mouth of every dog is open against them: O let what thou have heard of their
glory, be a bridle in thy lips, and an hook in thy nostrills: The least and
meanest of them, though c ad in rags, is a better man, of better breeding, of
more value then thou art, that abasest them, though in cloth of Gold and cloak
of Scarlet; Saints are precious creatures. First, Consider ^he is the Spouse of
the King of glory; Mighty jesus is her husband; Art thou a gallan, t and have
thou a wife of thy bosom? tell me, what would thou do to him that in thy
absence should turn her out of doors* or kick her about the streets? Is not
the Lord Christ (think thou) as tender of his, as thou can be of thy
Spouse? She is the wife of an Omnipotent Christ, whose power makes him able,
and whose love makes him willing to avenge his Spouse: Verily he will tear
thee in pe^ces, and there shall be none to deliver thee: Her husband is one
that non^ can stand before, when he is angry: If he be angry but a little,
Blessed are all they that trust in him: O take heed if he draws his sword, woe
unto thee! and he loves his spouse* for concerning her, he has said, He that
touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Beware, O Beware of the Apple of
Gods eye: I had rather lie under the feet* then but tread upon the toe of Gods
child. I might draw some arguments from Love, as this from fear considering
she is so lovely, so glorious a creature. But I will use but one more, from the
latter part of my doctrine.

2. Remember she is an hidden unknown creature; we have a Proverb, De
absentibus and mortuis nihil malum, speak no evil of those that are absent or
dead: we may put in a third, de ignotis; Ingenuity commands us, as well not to
wrong those we know not, as those that are dead, or ab ent: O that rhese few
words might bridle the tongues of wretches, from abusing that poor little
flock which God is so tender of, that his eye will not endure to see any of it
wronged in the least sort, before they repent them of the wrong they offer to
them, before this Spouse cries out to her husband and his wrath be kindled in
his b east but a little; his wrath is far sooner kindled then quenched.

In the second place, it may be applied by way of discovery:

First, To discover the reason why the children of God meet with such course
handling from the men of the world; they are accounted as the off se^uring of
the world, and refuse of the Nations; It is because they are hidden ones, the
world knows them not; a King may walk in a place where he is not known, and
the meanest Pea^ant not stir^e his hatte to him; an Emperor may walk in a
foreign Nation, and the most sordid clown not give him the way; The Saint is
here in a st ange country; he is in, but not of the world: I am a sojourner
and a pilgr^m here (said the holy man) as all my fathers were; Their dwelling
(their fixed dwelling, I mean) is not in the world, they have tents, but they
will build no Tabernacles; They will scarce say It is good for us to be here;
their voice is Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ;
Their inheritance is above the stars, their mansion house in the land of
glory; if once they come in heaven, the Saints shall Court th m, the blessed
Angels shall wait upon them, the King of glory their Father shall bid them
welcome, and their Bridegroom give them joy; there they are known, here they
are not, The world says of them, Who are these?

2. This may, Secondly, discover a difference betwixt the meanest Saint, and
the greatest Worldling. Are they so glorious in ^ods eyes, how mean soever in
the eyes of men? learn then that a leathern doublet may be more precious then
a scarlet coat: These are born of God: the Devil is their father, how great
soever their parentage be: You are of your father the devil, Ioh. 8.44.
There Is their Breeding in Gods Heraldry. And the lus^s of their father they
will do: There Is their Carriage. No^withstanding their gay clothes, they are
clothed with the rags of unrighteousness, and their garments are spotted
with the flesh, Their best clothes w ll not cover this Nakedness; The Saints
are glorious, these inglorious creatures, in the sight of their God.

3. Thirdly, Are the Saints hidden creatures? This may then inform us, that
all is not Gold that glisters; the sincerity and habit of the Saints graces is
hidden: every one in Israel is not of Israel: Saints are hidden creatures;
hidden to others, and something modestly retired to themselves: they are such
as we must say of them, Who are these? I like not those that are too much their
own trumpets; when I hear one boasting of his graces, (which, by the way, is
the best beauty he has to glory in, if he might glory in any thing, when he
has nothing but what he has received) inviting others into his chariot to
see his zeal for the Lord God of Hosts (as Jehu once did Jonadab;) though I
had rather call a man's title to his lands, then his title to the Kingdom of
heaven in question, which is his best inheritance; yet I am ready to suspect
such a creature, that there is more without then within; more in his forehead
then in his heart: I am ready to fear the Cities running out of the gates; the
empty vessel sound^ng most. It is a pretty Simile of a quaint Divine of our
own, Those Merchants and other Wholesale men in a City, whose shops are of
greatest value, and have most solid Merchandise in them, set no great show out
at their shop windows, perhaps they are shut up, whiles the poor Pedlar lays
out every piece of Ribband, and bit of Lace he has: The solid and serious
Saint is an hidden creature; of whom we must say, Who is this? He does not
care to set out so much at his windows as he has in his shop; and yet not so
hidden, but communicative upon occasion too.

To demonstrate that the smell of Christ's spikenard is upon his clothing, that
his garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia; whiles the pedling hypocrite
hangs out every seeming grace to the eye of the world; I am afraid at this time
there is many a painted Theban Lady in the Church of God, that will not endure
to wash her face: many a painted hypocrite, that dare not come at the fire. We
say, Good Wine needs no Bush: The good Christian needs no Trumpet. The
beauteous face looks most beautiful through a veil; and odours will smell
through a covering: It is the painted lewd strumpet that walks the streets
brazing every one she meets, that calls to every one to look on her beauty,
and invites the wild-eyed passenger to her lodgings. The modest Gentlewoman
wears a veil, and is only seen under that. It is the strum^et in Christianity
that proclaims her beauty to all, and sounds a trumpet before her, and invites
all to kiss her because she is Christ's Spouse. O friend take heed* let there
be more in thy heart, and less in thy tongue; Christ's Spouse is all-glorious,
but not vainglorious: Glorious, but it is within: She has a glorious
inscription, but her superscription is not in so big characters. You will say
of the Saint of God whiles you have a glympse of her beau^y through her veil,
Who is this? As for the other, you shall not need ask who they are, they are
the only Church of Christ, The godly party, THE well-affected. These say*
Stand by your selves; come not near to us; we will have no communion with you;
for we are holier then you. The holy God make them more holy; but the Lord
grant that none of these boasters be a smoke in Gods nose, we find them a fire
that burns all the day, Isai. 65.5.

The next Life is of Exhortation: to teach all of us several lessons.

1. To those that are not yet married to this King of glory: O that this day
might be a day of espousalls! And me thinks I have spoke enough to persuade
with poor creatures, that are vile dust and ashes, to consider how glorious
they are made after this wedding day. What is there desirable in an husband
that is not to be found in this mighty Jesus? I know but four things that can
make a Bridegroom desirable; all which are to be found to the highest in the
Lord Jesus Christ: 1. Breeding. 2. Beauty. 3. Riches. 4. A loving ingenuous
nature. I am come this day to plead for my Master with you (friends) who are
but dust and ashes: Does any one here think that the marriage of Christ will
disparage their house? and his cross dishonor their coat? Know (friend) my
Master (whose love I tender thee) is the Son of the Lord of lords; the Heir of
heaven and earth; One that has always been brought up in the Court of glory:
One that in the day of thine espousalls to him shall put a degree of honor
more upon thee, though thou were the Empress of the world before. No honor
like the honor to be called the sons and daughters of the most High. If thou
have an ambitious eye, here is an object of highest honor for thee; thou shall
be daughter to that King that can bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in links of
iron; and Bride to him that has Emperors for his meanest servants, and is
Heir of eternity.

2. Have thou a wanton eye? will beauty move thy affection? My Master is the
fairest of ten thousand, white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. His head is of most fine
gold, his locks bushy and black as a Raven, etc. See the full description of
him in that Chapter. The creatures beauty is mouldring paint, but His native
beauty is permanent glory.

3. Have thou a covetous eye? and do thou look for a great jointure? My
Master has it for thee: He is rich in inheritance, heaven is his, and earth
is his, and the sea is the work of his hands. He is rich in movables: Every
beast of the forest is his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills: The fowls
of the mountain, and the wild beasts of the field. Ay, and all is thine; for
he can withold no good thing from those that live uprightly. The Father of
glory gives all with his Son in marriage. He has given us his Son; shall he
not with him give us all things?

4. Have thou a sober ingenuous eye? that thou think love is the best
riches, and a certainty in that the best jointure? Know that my Master is of a
loving nature too. Read this delicious Song; tell me what Gallant ever courted
his Mistress (though far above himself) with such Rethoricall expressions of
love as this precious Jesus woes poor dust and ashes? O tell me (poor
creature) how would thou desire to try my Masters love toward thee? O man,
did ever Bridegroom do so much for his Bride? why man? he has come and left
his palace of Glory, for thee, and lived a scornful tedious life upon the
earth; he has pleaded night and day with his angry father in heaven for thee:
that thy soul might not be damned; but thou might be married to him; he has
made thee a path for thy prayers to his father, and thou have not had a
gracious answer to one prayer, but has come under Christ's hand, and been
sealed with my masters blood. Will thou try him by what he has or will suffer
for thee? Why poor creature, for thee has he been buffeted, beaten, whipped,
pricked with a crown of thorns; for thee did he suffer his precious side to be
ripped with a spear; for thee did that precious bloody balsamy sweat trickle
down his sacred cheeks, for thee was he nailed to cross, for thee he did
suffer such torments as made his dying soul cry out, Eli, Eli, lama
sabachthani? is this no suffering? does not he deserve thee, that has suffered
so much for thee that art but a piece of momentary clay? The Gallant perhaps
will venture his life for his Mistress, but my Master has more then ventured
his life for thee; he embraced death for thee; He knew he should dye; yet to
show that he valued not his heart blood for thee, he shund not the cross: I
doubt whether a gallant would fight a duel for his Love, if he were certain he
should be slain in that duel: But this my Master has done for thee. Some have
a trick to try the constancy of their lovers, by making them long suitors: If
they be content to woe seven years, then perhaps they will love: This is but an
unmannerly trick; but yet thus have thou tried my Lord, and Master (most
unworthy creature) He has proved himself constant in his patient woings and
waitings upon thy scorn; this has been his woing place; every minister came
with a love-letter from my Master to thee; He has come himself many a time
and knocked at the door of thine heart, whilst thou have been in bed with sin;
yea he has stood and knocked while his locks have been wet with the dew of the
night; O hard heart! Why do thou tire out my Masters patience (most
worthless creature?) What, has he not staid for thee long enough? is not yet
the constancy of his love approved to thee? What, was it for a portion he
should have with thee what portion but sin? he must give his blood to cleanse
thee before he can embrace thee; yet rather then loose thee he will do it: O
precious melting love! here love was stronger then the grave indeed; was ever
love like his? Let me be familiar with thee this day; (I would gladly make joy
in heaven this day, for the marriage of some poor soul to my Master) What
makes thee so coy and scornful? Art thou a creature of such deserts do thou
think? What do thou deserve? if any thing, it is hell: yet he, even he who is
in heaven it self, and glory it self, he woes thee. What will move thee? Thou
art vile and filthy, polluted in thy blood, more loathsome then a toad, worse
then the stinking leper that goes up and down the stree^s: O come, come this
day and be married to the Lord Christ; Take him, and him alone, not for the
heaven thou shall have with him, but for the heaven thou shall have in him; he
shall make thee admired, thou shall be a Queen, thou that art the child of the
Devil shall become the child of God; thou that were so filthy shall learn the
carriage of a Kings daughter; thou that were all dirty, and besmeared with sin,
shall become all fair; Thou art all fair my s ouse; Thou that had nothing
but rags of iniquity, shall now be clothed with the glorious robes of
righteousness; Isai. 61. verse. 10. Thou shall be clothed with the garments of
salvation, and covered with the robes of righteousness: Thou shall be decked
like a Bridegroom, and as a Bride decks her self with jewels. He shall make
thee so glister with graces, and shine with holiness in thy life and
conversation, that the worlds eye shall be dazzled upon thee, and they shall say
of thee, Who is this?

O you that are children of pleasure, Come; O make haste and be married to this
glorious Bridegroom; the King of glory waits upon you to honor you this day:
O come to the wedding, become his friends, and Eat of his fatness, and drink
of his sweetness, and be merry and rejoice in the God of your salvation, and
let us all cry out, Effice (O Christ) nos dignos ut ad Nuptias Agni aliquando
introducamur, Lord make us all worthy of such a Bridegroom.

Secondly, Are the Saints of God hidden creatures, that the world must say of
them, Who are th^se? Then judge not, that ye be not judged; Say not, This man
is a Saint, and the other a Reprobate, lest you condemn the generation of the
just, and justify the generation of the wicked, both which things are an
abomination to the Lord.

A Third branch of this use, may reach to the children of God, those who are
already married to this blessed Bridegroom, and made honorable and glorious
by such a marriage; O carry your selves as the Brides of so glorious a
Bridegreome, as it becomes those that should not shame their breeding, that
the world may say concerning you, Who is this? you are made glorious, you were
inglorious creatures: First, Remember what you were, and carry your selves
humbly: Philip King of Macedon, would always be awaked with a momento of his
mortality; and Wigiliscus would delight to hear Memento quid fueris, O remember
what thou were; Such were some of you, humbled the believing Corinthians,
though now they were washed and sanctified; Quanto Nobilior es tanto te geras
submissius, Humility is the g^eatest Ornament of Honor: Thou art admired, but
it is Christ and free grace that has set the luster upon thee, and made thee
admirable; Admire him for his goodness, and let others admire thee for thy
humble carriage: The Leper was to bring two birds at his cleansing, the one was
to be killed, the other let go, but first dipped in the blood of the dead bird;
The Christians heavenly life must be dipped in the blood of the bird which it
has killed: Though our sins be pardoned, they may be remembered so far as to
make us humble: Let the world for thy humble lowly carriage, say, Who is this?

Secondly, Walk thankfully; Thou were not honorably clothed, he has given
thee the Robes of righteousness^; Thou were without Ornaments, he has given
thee bracelets, and earrings; O be singing perpetual Hosanna's, till thou
shall be translated, and sing perpetual Hallelujah; Be always saying Quid
Retribuam, O Quid Retribuam? What shall I? what can I render unto the Lord for
his mercy? O that I could praise the name of my God! whose mercy endures for
ever, for his mercy endures for ever.

Thirdly, Walk lovingly toward this Bridegroom that has honored thee; thou
were naked, He has clothed thee with the garments of Righteousness and
Salvation, O keep it on for his sake; Thou were damned, remember who saved
thee, for to marry thee; Thou were rolled in thy blood; Remember who gave his
blood to wash thee; Thou were filthy, and defiled, Remember who anointed thee
with oil, and made thy face to shine, Thou were clothed with rags, O remember
who pulled off his own robes to clothe thee; Thou were poor, Remember who left
heaven and glory to make thee rich; Thou were starved, Remember who gave thee
his flesh for meat, and his blood for drink; Thou did play the Adulteress
with him; O remember who notwithstanding that, received thee again into favor,
and let us all say with that Holy man, Tota vita nostra conformis illi reddatur
qui ex amore nostri totum se nobis conformavit, Let us in all our life conform
our selves to him, who out of a mere principle of love in all things made
himself conformable unto us; Art thou made a glorious creature? Walk lovingly,
that for that they may say, Who is this?

Fourthly, Keep the garb of of a Kings daughter, walk according to thy place;
a Kings daughter is no conpanion for every idle woman; you that are the Saints
of God, keep company like your selves: How precious is the communion of Saints?
How unpleasant is the company of sinners? Dishonor not your selves.

Fifthly, Walk Dependently: The Spouse leans upon her Bridegroom, she draws
her very breath from Christ's lungs, She breaths through Christ's lips. She is
described here to come up leaning; O lean upon his arm, if you be his Bride,
lean upon him for pardoning grace, upon him for strengthening grace, upon him
for perfecting grace, Beg not your bread out of your husbands doors, it were
a sign he kept too poor an house to maintain you.

6. Lastly, Walk chastely, that the world may see that every thought of your
heart is but as an arrow drawn from the Quiver of your souls, and shot
heavenward, that your language is the dialect of Canaan, and your actions all
aiming at the glory of God; that all the perishing profits, and vanishing
pleasures of the world cannot flatter down your heavenly soul to an hours
lodging; But you love the Lord your Christ, with all your heart, and all your
soul, and will serve him with all your mind, and all your strength: Thus walk
beleevingly, above means, beyond means, with and without means; Lean when
Christ may seem to draw away his shoulder; Though he kills you, yet trust in
him, and make the world admire and say, Who is this?

Walk humbly, Remember what you were, whence you are, what has saved you,
despising no Saint, humbling your self to all, that the world may admire, and
say, Who is this?

Walk holily and righteously, defrauding none, graciously and strictly before
God, close with him, loose to the world, and make the earthly world to say, Who
is this?

Walk lovingly to your husband, charitably to your brethren, judging none,
condemning none, honoring all, becoming all things to all men, to gain some;
courteously, ingenuously, graciously, that the world may admire, and say, Who
is this?

Walk finally as becomes the Brides of so glorious a Bridegroom, in all
places, in all conditions, Remembering what you are, and whence you are, letting
your graces shine out, even to your enemies, till your gracious soul^s be
swallowed up in glory.

Lastly, Let it be a word of consolation to all the Saints of God, that can say
with Hezekiah, Remember Lord how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart; or with Peter, Thou know Lord that I love thee; against all
the scoffs, slanders and malice of the world: Alas! they know thee not; not thy
sincerity, nor thy joy, nor thy value* nor thy glory; carry thy self so
gloriously before them, that they may see the virtue that is in thee, and
glorify thy Father which is in heaven; then and not before, will the world
have a better estimate of thee. And so I have done with the imperfection of the
description, from the interrogatory Who is this? I now come to the description
it self, Comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved.

We have already taken notice of two travelers in this text: Christ is a
traveller; for had he not come up with his garments died, from Bozra, we had
been in the wilderness still. And his Spouse is a traveller, the text says,
she comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved.

We have took notice of her glorious garb, and her veil: she is still upon
her march, let us now take a more full survey of her, and enquire whence she
comes? and who is her companion? and what her posture?

Whence comes she? E Deserto from the Wilderness, that is Terminus a quo, the
place from which she comes.

What Is her motion? Ascendit, She comes up.

Her posture is Leaning, Innixa,

The person upon whom she lea^s, is Dilectum, a Beloved; and she has a
propriety in him, it is Dilectum suum her Beloved: Who is this that comes up
from the wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved?

Doct. It is the property or the duty of the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ,
to come out of the Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved. We must take it in
pieces, and handle the parts severally: These four things lie couched in it.

1. That the Spouse of Christ has had, and may sometimes have her dwelling in
the Wilderness. That is implied.

2. Though she has had, and may sometimes have her dwelling in the
Wilderness, yet she rests not there, She comes up from it. Who is this that
comes up?

3. She cannot come up alone; She must come up leaning.

4. She will lean upon her Beloved, and he will, and only can bear her.

First, She has had, and sometimes may have her dwelling in the wilderness:
Here first I must open the term Wilderness. Secondly, I shall show you what
Wilderness the Spouse has had, or may have her dwelling in.

I shall open the first in five or six particulars.

1. The Wilderness is an untilled place, where wild nature is yet seen, that
Art has not yet tamed, no pruning hook has lopt the overgrown trees, no plow
broke up the soil to make it fruitful: The husbandman has not tilled the
ground there; nor can the reaper fill his hand: It is a place just in its
natural state, not yet manured.

2. The Wilderness is a losing place; no beaten road for the Traveller there
to follow, no landmarks, nothing to guide him in his way, he is lost if once
in it; he looks on this side, and on the other, forward, backward, every way,
still he sees himself lost, knows not whither to go: He is in a
Wilderness, and knows not the way out.

3. The Wilderness is a dangerous place: A man in the Wilderness is a prey to
the mouth of every Lion; the Lion is the King of those waste places; and the
Bears, Wolves, Cockatrices, and Adders his lesser subjects: There dwells the
young Lion, the Cockatrice, and the Adder together, each one searching for his
prey: It is a dangerous place.

4. The Wilderness is a solitary place; where he that walks, as he has no
path, so he has no company: The paths in the Wilderness are not trodden, no
beaten highwayes are there; no company but the Owls and the Ostriches, the
beasts of the field, and creeping things of the earth: Nothing fit to be a
companion for man: No, it is a Wilderness.

5. The Wilderness is a disconsolate place: no curiosities of nature to
refresh his spirits with: Terror is round about him; no pleasure to delight him.

6. Lastly, the Wilderness is a place void of all provisions: There is neither
bread for the hungry, nor water for the thirsty soul; no necessities, much
less superfluities.

The expression is very apt: Such a Wilderness, yea many a such Wilderness
the Spouse of Christ has had, and may have her dwelling in:

1. A Wilderness of Sin. 2. A Wilderness of Sorrow. 3. A Wilderness of
Affliction. 4. A Wilderness of Temptation. 5. A Wilderness of Desertion. Nay,
lastly, This whole life is but a Wilderness to her: She has been in some of
these, and may be in all of them; but out of all She comes up leaning. Every
one of these is the souls Wilderness: and as they come up to Christ, they
come up from some of them; and in their walking with the Lord Christ, they go
through some of them; and some go through all of them.

The first is Eremus peccati, The Wilderness of sin; and every soul is born
in this Wilderness: Man at first created dwelt in Paradise; but alas! he
threw himself out into the Wilderness, and God locked the Garden gate against
him. Sinful man preferred the Wilderness before Paradise, and God allots him
his dwelling there: There was man thrown, and all mankind born in it. We are
all Wilderness brats by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. You were children of wrath by
nature, even as others. And sin may well be call d a Wilderness; it is
status naturalis, our natural condition: We are in a Wilderness habit, when
we are clothed with the rags of iniquity. Ay and it is a state as dangerous as
the Wilderness: The Lion claims him in the Wilderness as his prey; and if
he scapes his teeth, it will be hard to escape the Cockatrice, and young Lion,
and Adder, the lesser fry of destroyers: If in this sinful natural condition
we do escape the mouth of the roaring Lion the Devil, it is greatly to be
seared that the Bear, and the Wolf, and the Cockatrice, the lesser judgments
of God, will swallow us up: we are children of wrath, as well passively as
actively, in a dangerous condition. Lastly, as the Wilderness is a place void
of all necessary provisions for the body, so is sin a state void of all
necessary provisions for the soul: We are hungry, and naked, and bloody, and
filthy in our sins, it is a Wilderness dress Ezekiel. ^6. As for thy nativity,
in the day that thou were born, ^hy navell was not cut: neither were thou
washed in water to su ple thee, thou were cut out in the open field. Verse. 8.
Every spouse of the Lord Christ has been in this Wilderness. Who is this that
comes up?

The second Wilderness is Eremus c^ntritionis, The Wilderness of contrition,
or sorrow for sin: Every soul is naturally in the Wilderness; but every one
that is in it sees not that it is there: Every soul is born blind, though
most think they see. When God opens the souls eyes, and shows it the hell
that it treads over every hour, and makes the soul apprehensive of its
danger, it conceives it self in a worse Wilderness then before; the physic
works: the Patient thinks it is nearer death then before it took it. Here it
cries out, Oh, I am a lost undone creature! Oh, whither should I go? on one
side behold terror! on the other side despair! If it looks up to heaven, there
is an angry God; if downward, there is a gaping hell: Oh, whither should it
go? Now it cries out (with the Iaylor) O what shall I do to be saved? I am
lost in my sins! I am lost in mine own righteousness! I know not what to
do: If I stay in my sins I perish; if I go out of the world I perish. Here
stands the soul turning it self every way, and seeing comfort no way, till
the Lord Christ bows the heavens, and thrusts out his arm of salvation, his
shoulder of merits, and takes the soul by the hand, saying, Come (my Beloved)
I will tell thee what thou shall do; I am the way out of this wilderness,
come out leaning; lean thy arm of faith upon the shoulder of my merits; Free
grace is able to bear thee: I am thy Welbeloved, and thy Welbeloved is thine.
And ordinarily the soul when it comes to the Lord Christ, comes through this
wilderness, this losing place of conviction and contrition, and weeps her
self a path; where she would drown in the waters of Marah, if Christ did not
hold her up. Indeed God could have brought the Israelites a shorter Journey,
then through the wilderness to Canaan; and sometimes God miraculously draws a
soul to himself, only by the cords of mercy: God is not tied always to bring
a soul the same road to heaven; Elijah was carried to heaven in a fiery
chariot; but the more ordinary way is by Jacobs ladder. The common way to
heaven is by the gates of hell; the way to life is through the chambers of
death, through a wilderness: Who is this that comes up out of the wilderness?

The third wilderness in which the Spouse of the Lord Christ may sometimes
have her dwelling in, is the Wilderness of afflictions; bodily afflictions I
mean. A wilderness is a place full of briars and thorns; and through such a
wilderness (the holy Ghost tells us) lies the Saints way to heaven: By much
tribulation [much pricking of thorns, thorns in the flesh sometimes] must we
enter into the kingdom of God. The Spouse has a dirty way to go to marrying
in; and when she is married, she has a dirty way home too: A wilderness on
either side. The Apostle speaks plain, Heb. 11.7, 38. They wandered about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth;
And who were these that wandered thus in the wilderness? They were such of whom
the world was not wo^thy; the Spouses of the Lord Christ. And truly afflictions
may be called a wilderness, for the disconsolacy of them too; they are times
of sorrow, no delights please; the Spouse in affliction is in a wilderness.

4. A fourth wilderness that the Spouse sometimes dwells in, is the
wilderness of temptations; The Bridegroom himself was in this wilderness;
He was led into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; The Spirit took
him thither, Matthew. 4. verse. 1. and Paul was in this wilderness, troubled on
every side, this is Satan's wilderness, that he leads many a poor soul
into, and it had been a sad wilderness, had not our WAY been there first:
If the Devil could have lost our Savior in it, we should never have found
the way out of it: A dangerous, a disconsolate place, well termed a
wilderness, as the Saint will tell you that has been in it.

5. A fifth Wilderness that the Spouse is sometimes in, is the Wilderness of
desertion; Here Is a sad wilderness, a desert indeed, Quum Deus deseruit, When
God has forsaken or withdrawn himself from the Soul; this Desert Christ
himself was in, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? was the voice of the Lord Jesus hollowing in the wilderness: such
a wilderness was the Spouse in, when she sought him, but found him not, Cant.
3. verse 2. In this desert the soul is solitary, her God is gone, and she
knows not what is become of him; the soul never calls any company her
company, if her God be not there: David was in this wilderness too, he is
often crying out of the wilderness he was in, when God hid his face from
him: The soul that belongs to the Lord Jesus goes through many a wilderness
in this world, but scarce any which Christ has not walked in before it, and
hewn it a way through it; through every wilderness we may follow the Lamb in
his own path.

6. Nay lastly, The Saints whole life below, is but a wilderness: Earth is a
Christians desert; while she lives here, she lives in widowhood, it is a
sinful place and a dangerous place, a thorny place, and a place where she
finds an abatement of the joys she shall be swallowed up in glory. Mortality
is but Meshech, and her best habitations are but tents of Kedar, nothing to the
temple of Glory she shall worship her God in hereafter; and the former deserts
are but as several corners of this wilderness; but she comes up out of every
wilderness: That is the next branch of the Doctrine I hasten to.

Doctr. 2. That though the Saint of God has had, and may have her dwelling in
the wilderness, she rests not there, but comes up out of it.

She comes up: It seems to argue a propriety in the motion, as if she were not
driven nor drawn up, and a voluntarinesse in the motion, as if she were not
compelled nor made to come, but of her self came, and of her own strength, and
yet not of her own strength neither; her own legs would not bear her, for the
text tells us she comes up leaning, she had fallen had she not leaned.

Here is the Question stated; what the soul does toward its conversion, what
power of doing any thing tending toward its conversion before it is
sanctified, or after it is sanctified, whether it be merely passive, what she
may do, what she cannot do, how far she may come, where she must lean?

Whether has the soul any power to come up out of the wilderness of sin to
the Lord Christ, to move one step heavenward of it self? And here I have a
narrow path to tread betwixt the Pelagians and Arminians on the one side, that
would make the soul have more power then it has: and the Antinomians and
Sectaries on the other side, that are so far from holding that the soul has
no power to come to Christ, that they would make us believe she has no power
to come to Church neither.

I shall not know how to determine this Question better then in the words of
pious and learned Bishop Davenant, Determ. Q. 9. p. 46. Non potest quodvis opus
ex divina promissione, ad impetrandam peccatorum remissionem, aut ad eundam
possessionem regni coelorum ordinatum, The soul cannot do any thing that is
ordained by God, or has the promise of God, to obtain pardon of sins, or
possession of the Kingdom of heaven; she cannot savingly believe, repent,
love, etc. for these are the acts of grace, and God is the fountain and donour
of all grace.

1. But first, She may, by Gods general restraining grace, without special
and saving grace, abstain from gross sins; the heathens did so; the light
of nature which God keeps from none, will show her that this is darkness.

2. Secondly, She may by Gods exciting grace, without any saving grace
perform many previous actions that are required of men to faith and
repentance; she may by virtue of Gods general grace, his exciting grace, go
to Church, hear the word of God, meditate of God, peccata propria considerare
and sensu eorum expavescere, says Dr. Davenant; Ay, and she may beg
deliverance from that woeful condition, which she apprehends her self in; but
she stirrs not one of these stepps after a spiritual, but after a natural
manner, till the quickening grace of God come: A man may in a wilderness
conceive himself lost, look about for the way out, call for help, be willing
to be out, yet not be one step in the way that will lead him out; and this the
soul must do so far as it can: Negamus etenim hanc gratiam regenerantem,
infundi homnibus, mertibus sed animis per verbum Dei erectis, and subactis, and
per praedictas actiones quodammodo dispositis, viz. We deny that regenerating
grace is infused into sloathfull men, but into souls subdued by Gods word and
law, and after a manner disposed by the foregoing actions; yet we say, that
even these forgoing actions have their first motions from God; and the question
is whither God does not first work a sight and sense of sin, and an
humiliation for it by his exciting grace, before he comes with his
regenerating, quickening and saving grace into the soul; we say he does in his
ordinary course of his dispensations. (Only I must here be safely understood
that I speak according to man's apprehension; for in respect of God, nothing is
first or last, he works all in an instant, all graces together in the soul;
but the question lies not whether God works the habit of Repentance before the
habit of Faith, or no; for without question he works together all his works;
but whether God makes humiliation act before faith, which we say he does.
Esau and Jacob may be in their mothers womb together, but Esau may come out
and be seen in the world before Jacob: yet not tying up the Almighty to this
method, who can and will work any way, even which way it pleases him: Nor do
we say that any such previous action can be performed by the Creature, ut de
merito congrui teneatur Gratiam dare, That God is bound for the desert of any
such previous action to give his inward and regenerating quickening grace: But
yet this we say, Davenant, ibid.
that in the church of God, where men are daily stirred up by the word and
spirit to repent and believe savingly, God will give (though not for any of
these previous or dispository actions, yet) freely, regenerating grace to all
such as are capable of it, unless they have resisted the Spirit of God in the
preceding operations, and rejected his quickening grace; but yet we deny, that
any man can perform these actions so but he will offend and resist the Spirit
of God in them: Now why when as all resist, God should reject some, as they
have rejected him, and leave them to the hardness of their own hearts, and
work irresistibly on others who have resisted their God as much, and break open
their hearts, though locked and barred against him, and fill them with
quickening grace, and pull a Lot out of Sodom by force, and draw a soul out of
the wilderness by head and shoulders, I say, why he should do it, when two
are grinding at the same mill, take one and leave the other; when two are in
the same field, why the one should be taken the other left; when two souls
are equal in duties, fasting, mourning, in the way that God has appointed,
why he should baulk this and take the other, when perhaps that which is taken
has been the least penitent too, I will conclude with Dr. Davenant, is Sacrum
Misterium divinae voluntati reliquendum, A sacred and secret mystery to be left
to the divine pleasure, and the reason lies in the agents own breast; It is
because he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he wills he
hardens; God is his own reason, and his free grace its own cause.

So then we conclude, that the soul cannot move one foot to a spiritual
action spiritually, not by any common grace, it must be only by Gods
regenerating and saving grace. So that to answer yet more distinctly to the
Question.



Draw me (says the Spouse) and I will run after thee. First, I must be
drawn; but then I will run: In the same moment God makes us to will, and we
will; and yet all the efficacy of the Action comes from Gods most holy Spirit.

It is certain (says Augustine) That we are willing when we are willing;
but he makes us willing, certum est no velle quum volumus, sed ille facit ut
velimus qui operatur in nobis velle.
that works in us to will and to perform, Phil. 2.13. And so he, (...); God
draws, but he draws the soul that is willing: Ay, but first, (...), he makes
it willing. So, I have showed what propriety the soul has in the Action, how
she comes, and how willing she is to the motion. She is drawn, but she is
willing to be drawn to Jesus Christ. But first, she is made willing before she
is willing, ay, and in her life, after she is come to Christ, in her walking
with Christ; Non suis confidit viribus, she trusts not her own strength, she
even then comes leaning, which is the next Branch of the Doctrine I have to
handle.

Though she comes up from the wilderness, yet she comes up, not of her own
strength, but leaning.

First, Let us enquire what the expression holds out to us.

Secondly, What is the souls hand.

Thirdly, Who it is she leanes upon.

Fourthly, What in him she has to trust to, and how in every wilderness she
leanes, and out of every wilderness comes up leaning.

I conceive, here are four things hinted in this expression leaning, which I
may term the four fingers of the Spouses hand, which she lays upon her
Saviors shoulders.

It does argue that the soul is weary, otherwise she would not lean.

It is a willing posture; I am not forced to lean, I do it willingly: The
soul that comes up with Christ is willing.

It is a posture of love; Otherwise she would not lean.

It does argue a confidence that the soul has in the Lord, that he is able to
boar her; Otherwise she would not trust the weight of her soul upon him.

weariness; If she were not weary she would not lean. Humiliation is a
preface to faith, and the way to be found is to be lost. It is not a leaning of
wantonness, but a leaning of weariness: O Lord, I am sinking into Hell, let
me save my self from sinking by thy shoulders; I am falling, Lord let me
lean: whiles the soul has any strength to go, it is too proud to be
beholden to lean; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you, Mat. 11.29. First, weary; then come: First, heavy laden; then I will
ease you: What shall I do to be saved (says the Jailer?) O I am lost! undone!
I am at a Nonplus! O what shall I do? I am weary! for I am far readier to
believe, That that Voice, What shall I do? is rather the Voice of the soul
(at it is nil^^^tra) Sadly sensible of it is lost and miserable condition,
sufficiently humbled in the sense of it, then the voice of a soul, thinking it
might do any thing that might be but in the least contributary to the desert
of salvation. I cannot be persuaded, to think, that when the Jailer spoke
those words, prostrated by humiliation at the Apostles feet, that he had the
least thought that he could throw in so much as two mites into the Treasury of
free grace. But as it is the ordinary speech of one drowned in the depth of
sorrow, amazing sorrow; O what shall I do? What shall I do? though at that
instant they know they can do nothing to help themselves. So the Jailer, in a
true sense of his own lost condition, cries out, O what shall I do? he was
weary, it was time for the Apostle to bid him lean, then believe (says the
Apostle) and thou shall be saved. It is but a wresting of the place, or mocking
it rather, to bring it to persuade that duties preparatory were here excluded.
Surely, had not the Apostles seen him humbled in some degrees, they would as
well have prefixed Repent here, as Peter did to them, Act. 2. Repent, and be
baptized. The Fig-leafe is too thin to cover these Opinionists nakedness;
Christ came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance. He is a
Savior, but it is for them that are lost in their own feeling too. And the
truth of it is, the soul scorns to lean upon Christ so long as it is able to
go alone, when it has never a crutch of merits or duties to rest upon, then
it looks out for some rest for it is foot, for some shoulder to bear up, for
some staff to stay it self upon: Leaning does argue weariness, that is the
first.

willingness in the soul to come to Jesus Christ: Leaning is not a forced
action. Indeed (as I said before) Christ first works this willingness; he it
is that gives us power to will, and it is by his power that we are willing as
it is written; They shall be willing in the day of my power. But he does not
let us lean before we are willing; Psalm. 110.3.
leaning is an action proceeds from the will, Who is this comes up leaning?

love, who leanes upon his enemies, I will not lean upon one whom I cannot
trust, I must have some good thoughts of his love. The soul that leanes upon
the Lord Jesus Christ loves Christ; that Faith, that pretended dependancy of
any upon Christ, that proceeds not out of a principle of love, grows out of
a false root; the loving soul is only the truly believing soul, Leaning is
a loving posture: That Is the third.

fiduciam, a resting, a trusting the soul upon Christ; he that leanes upon
another reposeth his whole weight, trusts his whole strength upon him: He
does as much as say, well; I know I cannot go alone, I cannot stand; but I will
trust my self, upon thy strength will I lean, if I fall, I fall: So the soul
that comes up out of the wilderness of sin to the Lord Jesus Christ, does
repose it is whole weight upon the Lord Christ, it says, O Lord, I am a great
and grievous sinner, I am not able to stand upon mine own legs, but I trust
my soul upon thy arms; thou have mercies, and great mercies, and free
mercies, if I fall, I fall, if I be damned, I am damned; here I will lean. And
here you have the second thing plain, viz,

The souls hand with which she leanes upon Jesus Christ for salvation and
these 4. things which I have hinted from this expression, leaning, are as the
four fingers of the hand of Faith. And we may thus give a description of it.

Faith is the hand of a soul which God has humbled, whereby the soul, being
not able to stand alone, nor daring to trust to any thing else, and being made
willing by God, out of a principle of love, lays hold upon Jesus Christ, and
trusts and rests it self upon him for her salvation. And that leads me to the
third thing I propounded, the Person upon whom she leanes, the Text renders it,
Her beloved; or as I conceive, the old Translation better, Her welbeloved: The
Latin dilectum suum, him that is her, conjugally beloved.

This is the last Branch of the Doctrine, That though the believing soul comes
up from the wilderness leaning, yet she will only lean upon her beloved,
and he only can and will bear her.

We know, that whosoever leanes, must have a Person to lean upon. Secondly,
There must be a capacity in this arm to bear her, some strength, yea, there
had need be a great deal to hold up the weight of a soul: First, let us
enquire who the Person is, rendered in the Text dilectum, Her welbeloved; in
plain terms, her Husband, one that has more then an ordinary portion of her
love.

Here are five things hinted in this Expression.

It is one whom she loves: The word signifies a special sort of love; and
every greater includes a less.

One that she is married to, he is welbeloved, her dearest love; not charum,
but dilectum; one that has a title to her.

Her Beloved, not another Beloved.

Her Beloved: He that is her Beloved, not who was her Beloved.

Her Beloved, not her Beloveds.

It is one whom she loves. This I hinted at before; it is a principle of love,
that draws the Soul to lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ. The hatred of her
self, has bred the love of her Savior in it. And no Soul loves Christ more
then that which loathes it self most: When the Soul shall consider what a
Brand for Hell it was in its original, how worthless a worm it is, how
basely it has dealt by God, trampling upon his rich offers of Grace, scorning
his Invitations. And again, consider that God has no need at all of it: But
if it were burning in hell, could be as glorious as in its Salvation, and yet
would be pleased to power out his precious blood for it, yet so unworthy: To
woe the Soul that has need of him, and yet never prays to him nor ever was a
suitor for mercy. This breeds love in the Soul: And the more the Soul fadomes
her own misery, the more yet she loves and admires the Lords mercy, and loving
thus, she leanes upon him.

It is one that she pleades some title to, and interest in, she calls him hers.
Christ is the Bridegroom of the Soul, and the Soul is Christ's Bride:
Beloved, in all this Song is taken for the highest degree of love, and nearest
relation, conjugall love, therefore Christ elsewhere calls her his Sister, his
Spouse; she has a title to, and interest in him, possession of him; and in
another place, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine. She is his, and
he is hers: they have a propriety each in other. But suppose we should put the
Spouse to prove her title to him, What is thy Beloved more then another
Beloved? Or, why is he thy Beloved (O believing soul) more than the Beloved of
another? show thy title to him: And again, why is she Christ's more than
another? Why should the Believer monopolize Christ? and how came Christ to be
hers? she is his, and he is hers by right of gift, her heavenly Father has
given her unto him; hence is that Phrase of her Saviors Prayer, John 17.9. All
that the Father has given me, and I pray for all them that thou have given me.
She has given her self to him. Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth, for his love is better then wine. She has said, Draw me, and I will
run after thee; ay and he has given himself to her; he has given his grace
unto her, Gal. 1.6. And his glory unto her. The glory which thou have given me
I have given them. Her Beloved by right of gift.

by right of bargain and sale. The Ancients had three ways to get themselves
wives; by gift, purchase, or desert. The Fathers sold their Daughters, and the
Bridegroom bought his Bride, he gave a Dowry for her. Hence when Sechem had a
mind to Dinah the daughter of Jacob, he says, Ask me what Dowry thou will,
and I will give it thee. Christ has bought his Beloved; hence (says the
Apostle) He has paid a price for us. A bloody price: more than all the world
was worth. But he would have her because he delighted in her, and so she is
his, and he is hers by right of purchase.

By right of desert, she deserved not him, but he deserved her. This was a
third way by which the Ancients got them wives, by some gallant exploit, or
great service. Their wives were sometimes given them for wages; Jacob served
fourteen years for Rachell, Genesis 29.17. David for his Sovereigns daughter,
encountered great Goliath; and afterward robbed the Philistines of their
foreskins: he paid more for her, then she proved to be worth: By this right,
the believing soul is the beloved of Christ, he has served a long service for
her; not fourteen, but above thirty years, he has vanquished the Goliahs of
our souls, and has conquered our Spiritual Enemies.

by right of possession, he dwells in her, and she dwells in him. The second
person in the Trinity, is an inmate with the believing soul: He dwells under
the roof of her heart: He has a chamber in the soul, and has pitched his
tent within her, and she is in him too; united each unto other, this is very
plainly expressed, Ga. 2.20. I live, but yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I am
the Carcass, Christ the Soul; the Soul moves the body, so Christ moves my
soul: I move not from any principle in my self, but from a principle of
Grace. The life I live in the flesh, I live by the life of the Son of God who
dwells in me, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Thus you see she may
well call Christ her Beloved, and Christ may well call her his Beloved, He has
a propriety in her, and she has a propriety in him also; he has married her,
and dwells with her, yea, and in her, dilectum suum her welbeloved indeed.

her beloved, not another beloved. Every soul has a Beloved; the Drunkard
has his beloved cups; the wanton has his beloved Queanes; the Covetous person
his beloved Gold; The soul that leanes upon Christ, goes not a whoring after
other Gods. The Spouse of Christ, leanes not upon the Papists beloved merits,
nor upon the Turks beloved Mahomet, nor upon the Pharisees beloved duties, nor
upon the Idolaters beloved Saints; she says, Abrah^m knows her not, Isa.
63.16.
and Israel is ignorant of her, but the Lord is her father, Christ is her
Redeemer, and her maker, her Redeemer is her husband, Creator tuus est sponsus
tuus. Her Beloved, not another Beloved.

He that is her Beloved, not that which was her Beloved. She once loved her
sins, and her lust were the beloveds of her soul. The name of Baali was in her
mouth; her lusts were her Lords, and they ruled over her. But now the name of
Baalim is taken out of her mouth: she calls the Lord Ishi, God alone is her
beloved, sin was the dearly beloved of her soul, but now she calls sin no more
Naomi, she calls it Marah; that which was once the sweetness, is now the
bitterness of her soul, she takes no pleasure in it; no, nor does she account
her duties her beloved; she uses them, but she dares not trust her soul upon
them; she dares not plead any desert in them, though once perhaps she had a
Pharisaicall conceit, that her duties would be her healing, yet when she comes
to the Lord Christ to lean upon his Arm, though she uses duties, and is as
full of full of Prayer and humiliation as ever: she knocks her hand upon her
breast, and cries she is a sinner, Oh! but what remedy? the knocking her hand
upon her breast she knows cannot save her; no, for that, God be merciful to
her, she leanes upon Christ, that is her now Beloved, not upon any duties, or
any other merits that was before her Beloved.

Her beloved, not her beloveds. The soul that comes to the Lord Jesus Christ
loves him intensly, and as she loves him best, so she loves him only. As
nothing shall have her whole heart, so neither will she divide her heart
betwixt him and another: he shall have her heart, and he only shall have her
heart, and he shall have her whole heart too; she dare trust her strength upon
Christ, and upon him alone: she desires only to be found in the Lord Jesus,
who is her Bridegroom; she is a Virgin, not a Whore; she leanes not upon
Christ with one hand, and her own merits with another: no, nor dares she lean
upon the merits of another; she durst not trust the weight of her soul upon
the wings of an Angel, nor to the Prayers of a Saint; she relies upon God, and
upon God only. The Papists lean upon Christ, but not upon him alone: she
knows it will be a dishonor both to her and her husband, to take any thing in
partem amoris, to share with her husband in his love; she will keep her honor
in being the wife of one husband.

And so I have showed you how she leanes, what is her hand, who it is she
leanes upon, what title she has to him, what rules she observes in her
leaning. I have but one thing more, and that is, to show you what strength
there is in the Lord Christ's shoulders to bear her; how she leanes even in
every wilderness, and what fullness of strength there is in her husbands arm
to keep her up from falling.

The first wilderness you may remember, was the wilderness of sin: Here the
Spouse cannot be said properly to lean upon her beloved, for she wants the
hand of faith to lay hold upon Christ, and indeed she is not weary: yet I do
not know why in some sense, even in this estate, the elect soul is not
beholding to free grace; he is her Christ here, though he has not yet
manifested himself to be her Jesus, her savior. The elect soul in sin is
elect, and decreed to be saved, though she be not declared to be elect; she is
beloved in decree, though God has not actullay manifested his love unto her:
he is not her beloved, but the soul is his beloved, not actually but
decretally, he has thoughts of good to her, but his thoughts are kept within
himself, till he is pleased to reveal them to her at his best time: she is
his Beloved though there be no correlation, she is in his thoughts, his Spouse,
aye, and positively, not conditionally. The Arminians falsely dream of Gods
conditional decrees, because they comprehend not the ways of God: Believing
is necessarily required, yet it was not a condition in Gods decree: The soul
is his beloved, though yet there be no correlation, though she be not his wife
yet, yet she is intended for his wife. To speak according to the ways of men,
I may intend to make a woman my wife, before I actually declare my intentions
to her; she is my wife in my determinations and thoughts before I woo her,
though not actually my wife before I have wooed her, and she has yielded too,
there lies only this difference, my determination must be but conditionally,
if she will accept of my proffered love: There lies a power in her to refuse.
We may therefore make the simile a little higher; A great Emperor buyeth a
woman that is a slave, which he intends to marry, and will, whither she will or
no; yet he will woo her, and if it be possible marry her will, as well as her
person; yet whither she will or no, he will and may marry her, for she is his
purchase, she is his wife in his determination before he has married her. But
yet even this simile is lame. (Every simile, comparing the ways of God, with
the ways of man, must at least halt of one foot) for though this Emperor has
power to force the woman's body to the action, yet he has no power to force her
will, to be willing to the action: The will is always independent. sui juris;
but God has power, not only to marry the soul, which he has bought from
being a slave to the Devil, but to make her willing to marry him; yet she is
in Christ's decree his Spouse, before he has actually revealed his decree unto
her: So though strictly and properly the soul cannot be said to lean upon
Christ in the wilderness of sin, yet she may be said to be beholden unto the
Lord Christ, and that thus.

She is beholding unto God for his preventing and restraining grace, though
here she is merely passive.

for his exciting grace: The foul hears, and fasts and prays, meditates of
her own sad condition, though for the substance of the action it is her own,
yet it is Gods exciting grace makes her willing to hear, fast, pray, though not
his special saving-grace, yet his common grace: But this is not a leaning
meant in the Text, she leanes here upon Christ, but not upon Jesus [a Saviour]
upon God, but not as her Beloved. And here the soul is brought into a second
wilderness.

The wilderness of Sorrow, Contrition, Repentance, call it what you please;
though I know the latter term Repentance, be controverted by some new
Opinionists.

Yet I know not why we may not say, That a man may repent without
saving-grace. And for that Repentance which they say must be the effect of
faith; if I were a Schoole-man, I should rather call it Godly Sorrow, but I
desire not to play upon terms: And for their defining Repentance, To be a
sorrow for sin out of the sense of the love of God revealed in Jesus Christ,
it is a definition they have devised for their own purpose; And give them
their premises according as they please, they would be poor Logicians if they
made the conclusion to displease them: For from hence they argue, If the love
of God be the ground and cause of Repentance [ viz. the love of God manifested
and sensible to us, we having apprehended it by faith] the special love of
God then faith must go before repentance, viz. an apprehension of Gods saving
love, and reliance upon it. But I answer, the definition which they give us of
Repentance is deceitful; it is a definition of a Species in steed of a Genus
(as we say in Logic) As some unwary Divines define Faith, to be an assurane
of Gods love in Jesus Christ: This is true, but this is a faith of the highest
stamp, and many a precious soul is without this faith to his dying day.

Faith of adherence is another thing; as if I should go to define a man to be
a reasonable creature, skilled in all sorts of Learning. Any man would
understand me, that I did not go about to describe a man in general, but this
or that particular man. And I say once again, If I were a Schoole-man, I
should rather call this A godly sorrow, and define Repentance in general to be
A sorrow for sin, there is the genus and differentia: Or if there be required
a fuller definition with the ground, though I conceive such a definition would
be more proper to give of Repentance in it is several kinds, then of Repentance
in general; yet we may give it thus, It is a sorrow for sin, arising out of
the fear of Gods wrath, or apprehensions of Gods love. And I know not, why we
may not say, That a man may repent without saving grace. Bishop Davenant says,
A man by exciting the grace of God, may Peccata propria considerare, ad sensum
corundem expavescere and liberationem ab hoc metu exoptare, tremble for his
sins, Mark. 1.15. Luke 17.3, 4. Ezekiel 14 6.
and mourn for them, and desire deliverance out of them, and if this be not
Repentance, I know not what is, (not taking Repentance for the whole work of
conversion, as sometimes it is taken in Scripture) but taking Repentance for a
weariness of sin and sorrow for it.

But those of our Brethren here (that are so afraid of Babylon, that they will
run quite beyond Jerusalem, so afraid of being Arminians, or Papists, to
ascribe any desert to duties, or tie that God has to concur with our duties,
that they are resolved they will not be sober Protestants: So afraid of being
Heterodox, that to avoid it, they will not be Orthodox. Tell us, that this is a
legal, not a saving Repentance, it soundsill to distinguish between a legal
and saving Repentance. I will digress a little to rend this Fig-leafe, being
all they have to cover the nakedness of their Opinion: I would feign
understand that term saving Repentance, in what sense they take it; the
Scripture warrants no such distinction.

saving Repentance, such a repentance as merits Salvation; or such a Repentance
as God is tied necessarily to concur with, with his saving grace I say, no
Repentance can be saving Repentance. No Repentance (says Learned Davenant) can
so dispose the heart; Ut ex merito congrui teneatur Deus gratiam cuiquam
infundere.

saving Repentance, such a repentance, as of it self without any more ado,
shall be sufficient to Salvation: I say again, no Repentance can be called a
saving Repentance. For, Without Faith, it is impossible to please God.

saving Repentance, a repentance that conduces to Salvation; I say, this kind
of Repentance (let them call it legal or what they please) is a saving
Repentance.

saving Repentance, such a repentance as is wrought ordinarily in such as shall
be saved; I say, in that sense this Repentance is a saving Repentance.

Now, Whether it ought not to be preached, as well from law as Gospel-motives,
is a question lies not in my way to determine; only I hear my Savior (though
he were Gospel it sell, preaching it from a Law-motive, Luke 13.2. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Let the unprejudiced Reader judge, if
damnation be not there preached as a terrible motive to Repentance: Surely I
then may learn to preach from the Best of Preachers, and preach, Repent, or
you will go to Hell; Repent, or you will be damned, as well as Repent, because
God has loved you: Yea, and John too preached Repentance as well, because The
axe was laid to the root of the tree, and whatsoever tree brought not forth
good fruit, should be hewn down and cast into the fire, as because The
Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. I dare not learn contrary to Christ, and
Baptists Copy; I will preach Mercy and Judgment: The Law and the Gospel go
well together, I will not be accursed for seperating what God has joined. But

We cannot call any Repentance saving Repentance, till the work of conversion
be fully wrought in our souls. Nay, I make a question, whither any man
(without the grace of Assurance) can properly call his Repentance saving
Repentance, till he comes in Heaven. And for my own part, I am full in the
Negative. But I have digressed too far, to convince some (who I fear are not
so willing to suffer the word of conviction, as I to speak it.)

We left the Spouse in the second wilderness, The wilderness of sorrow; it is
time we now return to her, and comfort her, and show you how she comes out of
that, leaning upon her Beloved.

Here now the beloved Soul is mourning like a Turtle, and crying, O what shall
I do to be saved? I am lost! oh, how shall I find the way out of this
wilderness? O my sins pull me back! I cannot set a step forward! Sin trips up
my heels. The Devil tells me I am his; and my sins bear witness to his
words? Now she that is not the Spouse of Christ, sinkes in these mighty waters,
she sinkes to hell in despair, is quite lost, if once she comes into them: But
he that said not one of those whom his father had given him should perish,
seeing the poor soul like Peter, (Math. 14.30.) that thought to have trod
upon those waters, sinking in them, and crying, Lord save me or else I perish!
when he sees such a poor souls ship in which he is, though he seems to
sleep, tossed in these bitter waves, when the tempest arises, and hearing the
soul in this Agony, crying out, Master save me or else I perish, now he begins
to arise, and stretch out his shoulder for the soul to lean upon, speaks,
and rebukes the winds, and calmes the busy tempests; when the Whale of sorrow
has swallowed up these Jonahs, and they are in the bottom of the Sea in the
Whales belly, they cry, their God hears: and causes the Whale to vomit them
out on the dry land. Me thinks that voice of Jonah, is the voice of every
penitent soul, Jonah 2. The soul cries by reason of her affliction unto the
Lord, and the Lord hears her; out of the belly of hell she cries, and he
hears her voice for he has cast her into this deep, into the midst of the
Seas, and the floods compass her about, and all the billows, and the waves
past over her. Then the soul says, I am cast out of the Lords sight! yet I
will look again toward his holy Temple: The waters compass her about, even
to the soul, the depths closed round about her, the weeds were wrapped about her
head; she went down to the bottom of the mountains, the earth with her bars
was about her, yet her Lord, her God brings up her life from corruption: when
her soul faints within her, she remembers the Lord, and her prayers come unto
him, even into his holy place. And when the soul is in this wilderness, in
the deepes of sorrow, then her Beloved does throw her his shoulder of
supporting grace to lean upon: that she says as David, Psalm. 94.17, 18.
Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence, when
I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy O Lord held me up. When the soul cries, O I
am drowned! Then the Lords mercy holds her up: No (says God) thou art not
drowned, here is a cord of mercy for thee to lay hold upon, and I will draw
thee out by it. Here is my hand, be still O ye waves, this soul is mine. When
the soul is burdened with sins, laden with the sense of them; and in the sad
apprehension of them, cries out, my burden is too great for me to bear: O I
sink! I sink under it! then Christ looks out of the heavens, and says, Cast
thy burden upon the Lord (man) and he shall sustain thee: Psalm. 55.22.
or Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you:
Mat. 11.29. The supporting grace of God, is the Anchor of the soul, which
stays the Ship of the soul when a tempest of sorrow arises, and the waves
beat upon it.

Now this Anchor has two flukes.





1. The fullness of them. 2. The freeness of them.
Thy mercy held me up. My sins have cried up to heaven, (says the soul) O but
my mercies are above the heavens, (says Christ) Psalm. 108.5. My sins are more
in number then the hairs of my head, (says the soul) O, but my mercies)
says Christ) are more in number then the sand which lies on the Sea shore.
Psalm. 139.17, 18. My sins have abounded, (says the soul) O, but my grace has
much more abounded, (says Christ) (...) Romans 5.20. O, but my heart is as hard
as Iron, and the face of my sins like Brasle, (says the soul) O, but that God
that made the Leviathan, is as strong as the Leviathan. He esteems Iron as
straw, and Brass as rotten wood. My sins are many, (says the soul) But were
their name Legion, (says Christ) I could cast them out. O, but I am an old
sinner, I have a mountain of sins. But my mercies are from everlasting, (says
Christ) so are not thy sins, and I came to level Mountains, Luke 3.4. The
more old thou art, the more glory shall my free grace have, all the world shall
see, I do not pardon thee for any service thou can, or wilt do me, thou must
ere long lie down in the grave. Thus the soul in this wilderness of sorrow,
leanes upon the fullness of Gods mercies.

Hosea. 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, Ezekiel.
16.7, 8, 9. Now the soul being fully persuaded of this, that Christ is full of
mercy, and able to pardon her, and free in his mercy, therefore willing to
forgive her, and desiring nothing for her pardon, but to live like a Spouse in
his sight, begins to lean, believing he will pardon her: But yet says the
soul, I could desire to see it under Christ's hand; I think I could take his
word now.

Christ's promises, which are as the other Fluke of this Anchor: Now says the
soul, Oh, that I had it but under Christ's hand, that my sins (which I am
scarce able to think can be pardoned) may be pardoned, though I staid my Jesus
his leisure for the sealing of it. Here she enquires for first, Promises: and
secondly, Presidents: Did ever Christ promise (says the Soul) to pardon such
a scarlet, crimson sinner as I am? Yes, I have (says Christ) look Isai. 1.18.
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as snow, though they be red like
Crimson, they shall be as wool: and so Isai. 55.6, 7. I will have mercy upon
you, I will abundantly pardon you. Matthew. 11.29. O, but where has Christ
promised freely to dispense these mercies (says the soul?) Christ turns her
again to Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. He every one that thirsts, come buy of me without
money, or money worth: O, but secondly, where did he ever pardon such a sinner
as I am (says the soul?) Christ puts her in mind of Mary Magdalen, Manasses.
O, but where one that was so near hell as I am (says the Soul) an old
sinner? the thief upon the Cross (says Christ.)

Now it must not be understood, that Christ Jesus should reveal these Promises
Audibly to the Soul, but

1. Either sets his Ministers a work to declare his Charters of Grace, and
read the Souls pardon.

2. Or else he suggests into the soul such promises in such a seasonable time,
which must be taken as the voice of God to that soul. Thus the soul furnished
with presidents, trusting upon promises, wipes her eyes, comes out of the
wilderness leaning upon her blessed Savior, and saying, O my sweet Savior!
thou that have drawn me from the pit of hell, and have reached out thy arm
for a worthless lost worm, to lean upon thee. I dare believe thee. I now
roll my soul upon thee, I am shipwract, but thou are my harbor; and now, o
what shall I do for thee? O my God! I am sick of love! Thou have ravished my
heart! I am thine, I am thine. Thus have I shown how the Soul comes out of
the wilderness of sin, and sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved. And here the ship
is in harbor, but yet ever and anon she is tossed still, persecuted, though
not forsaken: This is the most dangerous wilderness; afterward she is often
in the Corner of a Desert. I must show you how even then she leanes, and how
out of them she comes leaning upon her Beloved. She is always a dependent
creature; she leanes when ever she is wearied.

the wilderness of afflictictions; in this she leanes; out of this she comes
leaning upon her Welbeloved, id est, In afflictions she leanes. Christ is her
Comfort in her saddest troubles. She leanes upon him, viz. Upon his supporting
grace: Thy rod and thy staff comforted me, Psalm. 23. The staff held him up,
while the rod was upon his back. The rod was a comfort because of the staff;
the more he had of the rod, the more he had of the staff also. In afflictions,
the believing soul leans upon ^od, and says, 2 Lam. 20. Behold O Lord, for I
am in distress: Out of the belly of Hell she cries, as Jonas, chap. 2.

First, She believes, that she shall suffer no more then she is able to bear,
2 Cor. 12.9. My grace shall be sufficient for thee For Gods strength is made
perfect in the Christians weak nesse.

Secondly, She believes, that she shall bear no more then shall be for her
good, Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for the good of those that
love God. She has a Promise or two here to lean upon also, Job 5. v. 19. He
shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee: And Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee,
and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk
through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee. She comes out also leaning, trusting upon God as before, that he would
help her out, if he saw best, or support her in: So when she is come out, she
believes that God loves her never the worse; neither does she love him any
whit the worse, she cries, It is good for me that I was afflicted. When she is
in, she believes she shall come out; and she comes out with as much love to
her God, and confidence in him as ever she had before, not being weary of
Gods service, because he has smitten her: She sees a smile in a smiting,
favor in a frown, love in a lower, and she is resolved, though he kills her,
yet to trust in him: she comes out of this Wilderness leaning.

A fourth wilderness that the Spouse is in sometimes, is the Wilderness of
Temptations. Even in this she leanes upon the Lord Jesus Christ. They were not
the Spouses of Christ, The good ground, Luke 8.13. Which when they heard,
received the Word with joy, but having no root, for a time believed, and in
time of temptation tell away. The true Disciples are those that continue with
Christ in tentations, Luke 22.18. First, they believe, that God who is
faithful, will not suffer them to be tempted above that which they are able:
But will with the temptation also make way to escape, that they may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. They believe, in that himself suffered, being tempted,
he is able to succor those that are tempted, 2 Heb. 18. The Saints that
suffered many things were in many wildernesses, Heb. 11.37. Amongst the rest
were in this also; and they all leaned, v. 39. They received a good report
through faith. Yea, temptation is so far from making a child of God let go
his hold, that it makes him lay the faster hold, 1 Pet. 1.6. Though now for a
season you are in heaviness, through manifold temptations; yet it is that the
trial of your faith (being much more precious then of gold which perishes)
though it be tried with the fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and
glory In temptations they lean upon God; and they come out of these
temptations leaning, believing upon God too, having found, that he is able, and
knows how to deliver the godly out of all temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9.

the wilderness of desertion. And this is one of the saddest Wildernesses that
the Spouse of Christ comes in, and she has an hard work to lean here, when
Christ seems to pull away his shoulder: yet even here she leanes: Christ
himself did so: My God! my God why have thou forsa^en me? Mark the phrase,
Forsaken, yet not forsaken: the Bridegroom cries out he was forsaken, yet my
God! Gods forsaking us is no ground for us to forsake him: If he seems not to
own us, it is no warrant, nor policy in us not to own him: It is the duty of
a pious soul, when God clouds himself, yet to cry, My God. The Bowels of the
father must yerne upon the child again, if the child cries, and will not
shake him off, It is a remarkable expression of Job, chap. 13. v. 15. Though he
kills me, yet will I trust in him. How now? if thou be killed (blessed Job)
how can thou trust? O immortal faith I that put Spirits of confidence in
the dust and ashes of Job. Let God hide himself from the soul, and so kill
it. (For Gods separration of himself from the Christians soul, is a worse
death then the separation of his soul from his body.) Yet the soul must trust
in him, it must, it will lean upon him. The Spouse loses not, but quickens
her faith in a fit of desertion. That place of the Prophet is remarkable, Isa.
50. v. 10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord? that obeys the voice of
his servant? that walks in darkness and has no light; let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. They that fear the Lord, though they
may walk in a dark Wilderness, and see no such light as they were wont to
see, have no such comfortable enjoyments of their God as they were wont to
have, yet they will trust and rest themselves upon the Lord, and come out of
this wilderness leaning.

in the Covert of his wings, Psalm. 62.8.
for all blessings: The Spouse of Christ is a most dependent creature. The Babe
of grace is never old enough to go alone, it hangs like a child upon the
mothers hands, and leanes like a Bride upon the Bride-grooms bosom.

Thus have I done with the Doctrinall part, having showed you, how she has
had, and sometimes has her dwelling in the wilderness; and how out of every
wilderness she comes up but leaning, and what strength there is in her
Savior to bear her up leaning upon him; even in every wilderness. Who is
this comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved? Now let us see
what use we may make of it.

And first here may a word of reproof, and a brand of folly be fastened upon
diverse erroneous opinions and practices.

Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinner to repentance. These men
dream of heaven, and yet never think of Repentance. Christ came to seek and to
save that which was lost (friend) how lost? what, insensibly lost, as all of us
were by Nature? This is an idle construction that giddy headed Sectaries have
of late devised to help themselves to heaven with. The Devils are so lost: yet
Christ never came to save them: No no friend! it is those that are lost in
their own apprehensions, those that know not what to do to be saved, those
that feel themselves even in the jaws of hell: he makes apprehensions of his
wrath precede the apprehensions of his love: But woe, and alas! how many think
they have a part in Christ, That the Devil has as great a part in Christ
actually as they have? heaven is grown the common journeyes end, and let men
ride which way they list. Not the most debauched wretch in a Congregation, but
ask him what he thinks shall become of him, if he dies in that condition: why
he hopes he shall go to heaven; nay I wish he does not say, he is sure of it
too. All men are sinners: He is lost, but Christ came to seek and save that
which was lost. Tell him of mourning for his sins, if he means to be
comforted, of humbling himself, if he means to be exalted, of feeling hell, if
ever he means to feel heaven: O then, you are a legal Preacher. Hear what
the other side says, what those you call^ Antinomian Preachers; O these are
the only Gospel-preachers to them. This makes them pass for such honest men:
O they show a fine Cushion-way to Heaven! that you shall not need wet a a foot
or eye in: But let them preach what they will (friend) believe him, who
(although he knows but little) yet knows you must go out of the wilderness
if ever you come there. The way is, neither the Drunkards Ale-way, nor the
Adulterers unclean way, nor the Covetous man his dirtie way, nor the Ambitious
man's highway, nor the Hypocrites hidden way, nor the Carnall-Gospellers
formal way, nor the Antinomians easy way. It is a way through a wilderness,
not a way in a wilderness: The Spouse is not described by her staying in the
wilderness, but by coming out of the wilderness; Who is this comes out of
the wilderness?

come out of a wilderness of sorrow, leaning upon her Beloved? First, she is
in, then she comes out; then this reproves the folly of those that preach men
found before they were lost, and of those that dream of leaning before they
are in the wilderness: The Spouse leans, but it is when she is coming out of
the wilderness: Is there none that preaches down a needlesnesse of duties,
that mocks at mourners? that learn people a way to be found before they are
lost? Examine the Scriptures before you trust them; under a pretense of
exalting Faith, do they not cry down sorrow for sin? and all preparatory
duties? Nay, they do cry down the preaching of the Law, to bring men to see
they are in the wilderness, that they might lean: Do they make you believe,
that preaching the Law is a piece of Anti-christianisme, and no one ought to
preach it? And for their parts, they will take heed of it, for fear of
preaching away their hearers. O beware of this leaven! For my part, I had
rather hear them, then believe them; (and yet I would not much care for that
neither) were it nothing but to consider.

First, That this way of preaching, has been that which God has most blessed
by his Servants labors: Witness our Rogers, our Hooker, our Pious Shepard;
those three, to which many threes may be added, thougn they will scarce come up
to the first three. Those three Constellations of Heaven, that gave more light
to dark Travelers, that wandered in the night of sin while they shined in
our Firmament, then all these Ignes fatui; Oh! I would I could not construe it
false-fires, mis-leading poor Travelers. Was ever any of these Leaders so
honored (though they have beat up their Drums almost in every street of the
Kingdom for followers) as to gather such Troops of Saints to the Christian
warfare, as these before mentioned? Did ever God honor their labors so much
as these? who (poor souls!) shone in their days like lights under Bushels
too, had only the corner of a Pulpit, or a Pulpit in some blind corner
tolerated them. Nay, look upon these that have lately fallen into this Vein,
and were Preachers of Gods whole truth before; was not their first fruits
better, and more accepted of God then their harvest is now? Has not God
distinguished which way of preaching he will most honor, by making the first
ripe grapes sweeter then the whole Vintage? were it only for this, And

Paul stricken down to the earth before he went in the Triumph of Glory? Did
not the Jailer come in trembling, and fall at the Apostles feet, and cry, what
shall I do to be saved? before they bid him believe, and thou shall be saved.
Neither can they evade it with saying, That trembling was not an humiliation
for sin, but occasioned for fear his prisoners were gone. Least people
should wrest it in that manner, The Holy Ghost has cleared it to their hand;
for before we read of his trembling, Paul had cried with a loud voice, verse
28. Do thy self no harm for we are all here. Neither do we read, that he
trembled for that at all; but like one struck senseless, and his spirits dead
as it were, in a fit of desperate madness, was about with his Sword to let out
his own blood. Now I say, were it no more then to hear such doctrine,
contrary to the Doctrine which God has chiefly honored in his Servants lips,
by making it efficacious for the salvation of their souls, and contrary to the
experience of the generality of Gods Servants, if not contrary to the
Preachers own former and better thoughts and practice, it would be sufficient
to make me suspend my faith, from being too hasty to believe this new way to
Heaven: But it is enough to confirm me, to hear my Christ calling, Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Before you are
sensible of an heavy load you will need no ease, and to hear my Text speaking
of leaning, but in a wilderness; Nay, it may be noted too, The Text says, Who
is this that comes? Not who is this that jumpeth up from the wilderness; I
cannot fancy this going to Heaven at a running jump, nor can I like this
pressing faith without preaching repentance also: Faith is an act of an humble
soul. Nor can the soul apprehend the beauty of Christ, and love Christ,
before it apprehends it is own miserable condition. The only harm this
Doctrine does, is to make poor souls presume, instead of believing, for alas!
Tell an impenitent soul of believing, it apprehends it easy, because it does
not understand it, and runs on upon a supposition, that it has faith, when,
alas, it believes no more then the Devil believes: sorrow for sin is
better understood by a carnal heart then faith is; for the truth of it is, the
humbled soul only can tell what faith is: The other sees, neither the want
they have of faith, nor yet the nature of that precious grace. Shall I tell you
what pious Master Rutherford says concerning this.

Faith (says he) is bottomed upon the sense and pain of a lost condition;
Poverty is the nearest capacity of believing. This is Faiths method, be
condemned, and be saved; be hanged, and be pardoned; be sick, and be healed.
Faith is a flower of Christ's only planting, yet it grows out of no soil, but
out of the margin and banck of the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone
-- Antinomians (says he again) make faith an act of a lofty Pharisee,
applying, (immediato contactu) presently, his hot boiling and smoking lusts to
Christ's wounds, blood, and merit, without any conscience of a precedent
command, that the person thus believing should be humbled, wearied, laden,
grieved for his sins: I confess (says he) This is hasty, hot work, but it
is a wanton, fleshly, presumptuous opinion, that it is an immediate work to
lay hold on the promises and be saved. In his Book of the Trial and Triumph of
Faith, you hear the opinion of Gods Servants, and the Text mentions a coming
too; pedetentim, gradatim, little by little, step by step: Those that come,
cannot go so fast as these illegal Sectaries, because they are weary and
heavy laden. Those that learn people to jumppe, must take away Math. 11.29.
the heavy load of sins which the Spouse has upon her shoulders, keeps her
from that hasty motion that Antinomians make. I do not speak to limit the
Almighties power, but to show you his ordinary dispensations; not what he can
do, but what he will do, what he has used to do, and God ordinarily walks
in his own paths, not in the paths our fancies make for him: we may look for
God in his ordinary ways of Providence and dispensations to the soul, if he
comes in a new way, it must be beyond our expectations, though not beyond our
faith that he can do it, yet beyond our faith that he will do it. When we
have no word to assure us, what shall faith be builded upon? God can turn
midnight into midday, ipso facto: But we know in Gods ordinary course of
Providence, first comes the dawning of the day, then the morning, then the
noonday: God can take a soul and marry it, and never humble it, but where
has he promised it? where has he done it? or if he has done it, we say, one
Swallow makes not a Summer, one example make^ not a Rule, one president makes
not a Law. It is no rule for thee or me to trust in that, no more then the
saving of the thief upon the Cross, might be a safe president for us to
defer repentance tell our dying day. Let thee and I learn to be humbled, to
get broken hearts, to loath our selves, see our own misery. Sorrow is the
ordinary door to joy, Humiliation the ordinary step to exaltation, Mourning
for sin the only preface to Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, in Gods ordinary
way of dealing out grace. The Latin is full, Quae est illa quae ascendit, that
ascends from the wilderness: Our Translation comes up, implying an ascensive
motion, it is hard running up an hill. They that run up a mountain, if they
run too fast, they may quickly run themselves out of breath: It is bad
jumping over a broad ditch (especially if it be drowning depth) for fear if
we jumpe short we jump our last. It is a great jump from the bottom of Hell
to Heaven, to take it at one leap. I wish, those that dare take it, do not
fall short and drown themselves eternally. I had rather go up Gods steps, then
make such a hasty motion, God give me grace to ascend up the Saints stairs to
the chambers of glory. Elijah was such a favorite to heaven, that God sent a
coach for him; but those that will expect till that fiery Chariot be sent down
for them too: I suppose may wait something a longer time then they desire. O
beg of God to humble you, to power out his spirit of mourning, and
supplications upon you, this will learn you to believe (friends) It is the
humbled soul only that can construe that word Faith: it is Hebrew to others,
it poseth the impenitent heart, Faith is a riddle to them: Christ finds his
Spouse in the wilderness, and there he gives her his shoulder to lean upon:
But,

Thirdly, She comes up leaning out of the wilderness.

Is it the duty of a soul that is in a wilderness of sorrow or affliction, or
temptation, or desertion, to lean upon the Lord Christ? Then this may reprove
those that are in these wildernesses, and yet cannot be persuaded to lean upon
the Lord Christ: hence they cry out, O, faith is impossible! is it possible to
believe that Christ Jesus will save me? me, that have scorned his salvation,
and slighted his mercies? And because thou have slighted mercy, will thou
therefore still slight mercy? still refuse his offer of grace? Thou sinnest as
much now in not believing there is mercy for thee, that have despised mercy, as
thou did sin in despising that mercy. O why is it harder to raise up, then to
cast down a soul? Why will thou not believe, O thou of little faith? Is the
molehill of thy sins, like the mountain of his mercies? does the voice of thy
sins roar like the voice of his loving kindness? Is there any humbled soul
before the Lord? O do not provoke God by thy infidelity now he has made thee
capable of faith: You that are Christians, for shame, in your several
wildernesses of afflictions, temptations, and desertions, do not, O do not
cast down your heads, and say, who shall show us any good? or if you do, say
again with the Saint in the ensuing words, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us: Believe in your depths of sorrow, believe in your most
trying afflictions, most sadding temptations, most killing desertions, believe
me, it is the greatest honor you can put upon the Lord Christ: And it is the
greatest dishonor you can put upon your God, to have any diffidence in the
Lords arms, any distrust in the Lords free grace. It is the property, nay, it
is the duty of the Spouse to come out of wildernesses leaning.

Fourthly, Does she lean upon God before she can come? must he work the first
motion to make her willing, before she can believe in him?

Then how are those to be here reproved that would make man's will to be the
Author of its first motions unto God. Pelagius was a great defender of it.
First he would hold, That the grace of God was not necessary, but by the law of
nature we might be saved. 2. That the grace of God (which the Apostle speaks
of) was only in giving the law of nature. 3. Driven from this, he would
maintain, that the faculties of the soul, and their natural Actions was the
grace of God, understood by the Apostle. Yet here is no leaning upon our
Beloved. Afterward he would maintain. Si quaeratur an ex suis Naturalibus
viribus anima aliquid afferat ad suam conversionem, vel renovationem, vel
aliquam facultatem, vel actionem, quae vel partialis causa, vel quocunque alio
modo appelletur, vere respondetur quod habet se mere passive. Chemnit. in loc.
de l. b. A bit.
4. That the grace of God was necessary for sins past, but it was in the power
of man's free will, to avoid or commit sins for the time to come, and to resist
rebellious corruptions. 5. After this, he would maintain, That some men indeed
were weak, and must do all by the grace of God, others that were stronger
might act good by their own will. But still only some Spouses lean. Lastly,
he would maintain, (and the Arminiams still from him: Quae de gratia dei
praveni nte, and praeparante, and operante traduntur, hunc habent sensum, quod
non nostrae parts priores sunt in conversione, sed quod deus per afflatum
divinum praeveniat, post hunc autem motum, voluntatis divinae factum, voluntas
humona, non habet se mere passive sed mota and adjuta, espiritu sancto non
repugnat sed assentitur. Ib.
) That grace did indeed help a good work, but it had its first motion from
our wills, or at least might have: and the will had a negative voice, and might
resist and cross grace which did not work irresistably in the soul, to force
the soul to him.

Cassianus Monachus Pelagis Doctrinam amplexus est. Faustus Hormisda and Ben.
I would not rake up these graves, did not these ghosts walk in these our
days, when every grave of Heresy is unbowelled, and no one takes care to
throw the dirt upon them again. Nay, and the Papists having been tainted with
this Leven, the Sententiaries now tell us, Hominis est preparare cor. Aquin. in
Sum. Theol. Aquiescere and assentiri est nostrum.
That a man without grace, merely by the strength of his free will, may avoid
any mortal sin, and prepare himself for Gods free grace, and fulfill the
Commandments of God; Quoad substantiam actus, for the substance of the Act.
Quibus de co^gruo mereatur gratiam gratum facientem. Scotus.
And another more impudently maintains, That a man without any grace of God (by
the mere strength of nature) may do works morally good, yea, even such as
God shall be bound to concur with, and give his special grace for. Even thus
going back from their own great Rabbis, one of which was pleased to confess,
Homo sinegratia Dei non potest non peccare and mortaliter and venialiter. Lomb.
That a man without the grace of God, could not but sin both mortally and
venially. What is become here of the Beloveds Leaning? But no more of these;
only if you hear such Doctrines (as you may hear any thing in these days)
believe them not.

Does God move the will attending him in duties, first? secondly, when the will
is thus moved, does it then come? 5. Spiritus Sanctus pravenit. movet and
impellit voluntatem in conversione, non ^tiosam, sed attendentem verbo Chemnit.
Vel per speculationem somniorum, vel per simulationem orationis illabi
efficaciam. Spiritus Sa^cti. Vide D. Featly, Dippers Dip^.
when it is drawn, does it run? Then this reproves the Enthusiasts of old,
the Anabaptists, Antin^mians, Seekers of our days, that hold, first, there is
no need of duties. The Enthusiasts of old affirmed, That for the receiving of
the Spirit of Promise and saving grace, the Spirit of God was either infused to
them in a dream, Vel per simulationem orationis: Ay, and the motions of the
Spirit, were as sensible in their flesh as the beating of the pulse, so
blasphemous were they grown; and thence they would lie, and gape for
Revelations, and so indeed they may have a suggestion from the Devil but
scarce a Revelation from God. Oh! How in these days are mentainted with these
lazy Opinions! slighting duties, vilifying Sabbaths, neglecting ordinances;
that if poor people would truly now give account of their growth in grace,
and of their learning godliness: many of them might truly. As the child that
ye have heard a story, in the learning of its primer, boasted to the father
that it had learned past Grace. Is not this the miserable learning of our
days? that men are grown past grace, past Prayer, past Ordinances, past all
duties?

6. Again what you have heard, that after the soul is drawn, then it comes,
may show us the falsenesse of another Doctrine of Enthusiasme, too brief even
in these days also: that the soul is merely passive, even after the work of
conversion also; and is even then a mere stone. Draw me (says the Spouse) and
then, See the Book set out from the Ministers of New England of the heretics,
etc. Post conversionem concurrit voluntas, non tamen quasi suis viri^us adjuvet
spirituales actiones. Semper addendum est non esse plenam libertatem, in sancto
renato, sed virtutem in infirmitate perfici, Chemnit. Intelligant si filij Dei
sint spiritu Dei se agi, ut quod agendum est agant, and cum egerint, illi, a
quo aguntur gratias agan^. Aguntur enim, ut agant, non ut ipsi nihil agant. Aug.
I will run after thee. Indeed, after our conversion, the will is but in part
sanctified, and the Image of God in us will want of his first integrity, after
it is renewed: but Christ's strength is perfected in our weakness; we must
understand if we be the children of God, that God has therefore wrought in us
that we might also work something, and when we have wrought it, give thanks
to God, who has made us to work; for God has wrought in us, that we might
work, not that we should be idle. Thus I have labored to you to divide the
Truth from Error; Now you have heard of the leaven of these Pharisees; take
heed of it.

In the next place, what you have heard, that the soul that comes to the Lord
Jesus Christ, leanes upon a new Beloved, not upon her old beloveds: may serve
to reprove those that would feign plead a title to Christ, and have a portion
in Christ, but they will not take Christ alone: two sorts there are of these.
The one cannot leave their old beloveds, and the other cannot trust this
Beloved O the wicked man would have his portion in Christ, if he might but have
his lusts too, his pleasures, his profi^; but to take Christ, and Christ alone,
o this is such a hard saying that they cannot bear by any means; If Christ
and his lusts would lie both in one bed, Christ at the feet, and his lusts at
the head; then Christ should be as welcome as any thing to him, but he is loath
to sue a divorce for this Beloved, he is loath to part with his old love for a
new; till he sees how he can love him. But at a venture he will take him in
p^rtem amoris. O wretch! flatter not thy self, if Christ be thy Beloved, he
will endure no Polygamy; you must leave your sins or be without your Christ.
The true Spouse leanes upon her Beloved, not upon her Beloveds, upon her now
Beloved, she forsakes her old.

Lastly this may serve to reproove.

1. Those that would lean upon Christ, but they dare not trust their souls
upon Christ alone. Forsooth he will be the Spouse of Christ, but he must lean
upon Christ with one hand, and his good works with the other. The whore of
Babylon commits adultery with her self.

2. Under this lash comes a better rank of people, that when God has showed
them their own sinful, sad condition, they do not only perform duties, pray,
and mourn, and repent, and be humbled, all which they ought to do; but they
are ready to rest in them, and make them their Beloved: It is natural to the
soul, that God has made to loath its sins, to love its duties, it finds
duties almost as consentaneous to its nature, as sins were before; and it is
too ready to think that its saving, or damning, depends upon such a quantity
of tears, and humiliation: Hence, you hear souls in this condition, often
complaining; oh! I could believe, if I were humbled enough, if I could but
mourn enough. This soul does well to be sensible of the hardness of its own
heart; and it is too true, it can never mourn, it can never be humbled enough.
But it does ill to think that free grace stints its operation, and blessed
influence, to such a quantity of tears, if it be humbled enough, to see its
want of Christ. The water runs through the river, that is the way to the Sea,
but it does not rest in the river, but with a swift and continued motion, runs
betwixt the banks, till it comes, and is swallowed up in the Sea: Even so the
soul ought to run through duties, but not to rest betwixt the banks of
duties, but to run through, till it come to the Sea of free grace, where it
will be swallowed up of infinite mercy; and our imperfections will be drowned
in his infinite perfection; we ought to take duties in our way to Christ, but
not to make duties our Jesus. God has ordained that they should fit us for
him; but it is written, My glory will I not give to another. The glory of the
Lords free grace, is his greatest glory; he will not give that to any other:
None shall share with him in his Spouses love, he is a jealous Savior. The
Spouse leanes upon her Beloved, not Beloveds: Thus I have done with my use of
reproof.

The next use is for examination, here may every one try himself whether he be
the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ, or no: Even by what has been already
said; I will reduce it all (...) three heads.

First Examine thy self, whether thou be out of the wilderness of sin,
yea, or no.

Secondly, Whether thou were, or art in any other wilderness, yea, or no.

Thirdly, What was, or is thy demeanor in these wildernesses thou have been,
or art in, and how have thou come, or do thou come out.

Examine whether thou be not in the wilderness of sin, yea, or no: It was
given as the Character of the Spouse, to come out of this wilderness: O, but
how shall I know that? (will the soul say.) I will name two or three notes, by
which thou may suspect thy self as from probabilities.

1. The wilderness it is an incult place; a place where the soil was never
tilled, it is as hard almost as a millstone; the over-growne Trees were never
pruned, the unruly boughs never lopt, the bushes never cut or stubbed: do
thou find thy heart in such a condition, that it is as hard as ever; neither
judgment breaks it, nor mercy melts it, the fallow-ground of it is not
plowed, nor the seed of righteousness sown in it? Thy unruly lusts are not
tamed, thy life is as much overgrowne with sin as ever it was: thy sins were
never yet cut off from the body of thy life. O friend! suspect thy self; Thou
may justly fear, yea, and know too, that thou art not the Spouse of Christ,
thou art in the wilderness, in thy natural estate.

Secondly, The wilderness is a barren place, it brings forth no corn for the
sickle, no wholesome fruit, no figgs, no grapes for man's pallat, for can a man
gather grapes of thistles, or figgs of thorns? No pastures wholesome for the
beasts. The fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness. Joel 1.19. And
God complained that Nineveh was dry like a wilderness. Zeph. 2.13. Art thou a
barren, and unfruitful creature, that do nothing for God? thy heart is a
barren heart, no seeds of good are sown there, thy tongue is a barren tongue,
no good words come out thence; thy whole soul a barren soul; not a good
action upon the record of thy life. Indeed, no soul can be barren, the soul
is of a working nature; but sinful works are unfruitful works (in the
Apostles language.) The unfruitful works of darkness, and what fruits had ye
of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Gal, 5.22. The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc. A barren soul is always a
wilderness soul. Those that are borne of God, bring forth fruits unto God.

Thirdly, Thou may know whether thou be in the wilderness or no, by the
company thou delightest in: It is a known rule, Noscitur ex socio qui non
dignoscitur ex se.

He that is a wilderness creature, loves wilderness company, the wolves, and
bears, and foxes: but he that is out, keeps the company of men; do thou love
the wilderness company? the swinish drunkard, the politic Fox, the malicious
Lion, the venomous liar and slanderer, the lascivious wanton, more then the
Children of God? oh suspect thy self! By this we know (says John) that we are
translated from death to life, if we love the Brethren: Lazarus when he was
raised from the grave, we do not read he went to keep the dead men company
again: those that God has raised from the death of their sins, live amongst
living men, and delight in living men's company; Thus examine whether thou be
come out of the wilderness of sin, or no.

Secondly, As coming out of the wilderness is a sign of the child of God: so
being in the wilderness, is likewise a note whereby thou may know thy
self. Gods Spouse comes out of one wilderness into another, out of the
wilderness of sin into the wilderness of sorrow, and out of that to their
Savior. Would thou know whether thou art found, or no? Examine whether thou
were ever lost or no: would thou know whether ever thou were a believer,
examine whether ever thou were a penitent, or not. This is Gods ordinary way;
thence he complains of his people, that they would not repent, that they might
believe in him. Do thou find God in another manner of working in thy soul?
bless God for it; and if thy title be good to heaven, which will be known by
thy walking with God; believe me, God has used thee kindly, heaven has cost
thee cheaper then it costs many a poor soul, and walk humbly before God,
because he has not humbled thee under his mighty hand, as he has done many
another poor creature: and though I would not condemn those that plead their
title to heaven this way, for fear I should condemn the generation of the
righteous, yet believe me, I should suspect it in my own cause. They that go
out weeping, and carry precious seed, shall return rejoicing, and bring their
sheaves with them.

2. Examine thy self, What other wildernesses thou meetest with? Afflictions,
temptations, etc. I would not give this as an infallible mark, and yet God
says, whom he loves he chasteneth, and scourges every child whom he
receives; and thence the Father drew out his Conclusion, Unicum Deus habuit
filium sine peccato, nullum sine flagello. God had one Sor without sin, but
none without a rod. But I know, even the wicked sometimes begin their hell upon
the earth: and though would suspect my self, if I met with no afflictions, ye
I would not be glad to have a life full of crosses, and afflictions my best
evidence for heaven: I rather named this for a prefac^ to the next note,

3. Examine how thou carriest thy self in the wilderness* there is a
different carriage betwixt the child of God, and the child of the Devil in
afflictions: the one sinkes into his grav^ with despair, the other lifts up
his head to Sion with hope the one is pressed to death under crosses, the other
lives above al crosses. Caine cries, my punishment is too heavy for me to bear
Job cries, though he should kill me, yet I will trust in him: The Reprobate
cries, Who is the Lord that I should wait for him? The Saint says, I will
patiently wait for the Lords Salvation: the wicked man dies, the Saint leanes;
the eyes of the sinners fail that day; but the Saints look up to Sion, from
whence comes their help that day.

How thou have come out of thy wilderness? of thine own strength? or leaning?
Can thou say, That God knew thee in the wilderness, in the land of great
drought. Hos. 13.5. If thou think thou came out alone, thou art there
still, What gave thee comfort in the depths of sorrow? what? thy merry company?
did thy duties do it? If any thing did it but thy Christ, I fear thou art
still in the wilderness: when thou did mourn, as one that mourns for his
only begotten son, did thou look upon him whom thou had pierced? there
is nothing but the blood of Christ can give a cordial to a fainting soul;
nothing but the hand-kerchiefe of free grace that can wipe thine eyes; nothing
but the blotting out of the handwriting, which was written in Gods Book, and
thine own conscience against thee, that can make thy heart leave trembling,
and thy knees leave beating together for terror. Thou can not come out alone,
if ever thou came out, it was leaning.

How thou have carried thy self since thou came out? How have thou been
since thou were humbled, and lost in the wilderness of sorrow? What effects
has the wilderness of sorrow wrought upon thee? Has thy sorrow been like
the sorrow of Achan, that thou have been only sorry because thou have been
under an Attachment of wrath? Or like Ahab, rending his clothes, putting on his
sackcloth, and going softly? 2 Chronicles. 22. Or like Pharaoh, saying, I have
sinned? Exodus Or like Balaam, saying, I have sinned, I will return back
again? when he might have had more thanks for his labor and never have come
there, he had checks enough. Art thou worse when thou come out of the
wilderness of Affliction, that we may brand thee with Ahaz his Brand, This
was that King Ahaz? Or do thou come out of thy Afflictions leaning, with thy
weak faith strengthened, and thy strong faith confirmed? Have thou lost no
grains, but got in the fire? Is thy gold as good weight now as before? it is a
good sign it is good then. But I hasten to the next Use, which may be to
inform us:

The sad condition that all unbeleevers are in.

The joyful condition that all the Children of God are in.

The great love of God, that he would send Christ to seek us up in the
wilderness, and give his hand to poor creatures to lead them out.

It may inform us, what need we have at all times to walk close with the
Lord Christ. First, here see the sad condition that all men and women by nature
are in, that have not the Lord Jesus Christ. It consists in two things:

They are in a wilderness: Sin is a wilderness. Now which of you (friends)
but would think himself as good as a dead man if he were in the midst of an
Arabian desert, that he could not see any possibility of getting out, nor any
comfort he could enjoy there: terror on every side, comfort on no side; the
Lions and beasts of prey of every hand ready to devour him, and it is well if
he can keep his flesh for food for himself, for he can get no provision for
his body, nothing, except he would eat the bark of trees; o^ the parched
grass. What man would not tremble, to think of on that should be condemned to
such an exile? Do not your hearts pity as often as you think of those poor
men that were left but half a year in Green-land? And yet O Lord! How few
pity themselves! O poor creature! Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur, the
Story is thy own, apply it therefore: You that are in your sins are all in a
sad wilderness; the judgments of God, like the beasts of prey, are ready to
swallow you up on every hand; it is a miracle of mercy you are not in hell;
there is but a thread betwixt you and death; the Sword of Gods wrath hangs over
your head, while you are at your Drunken Banquets of sin: Oh! what comfort?
what joy can you have in the wilderness (friends?) that when you lie down at
night, you know not but you may wake in the morning past Repentance, even with
Hell flames about you; as the Lord lives, there is but a hairs breadth betwixt
you and Hell.

That you have no one to help you out of any wilderness; if Christ be not
yours, nothing is yours: what will you do in a stormy day of Afflictions, when
you shall cry unto God, and he shall say unto you, as he once said to the
roaring Israelites, Judge. 10.14. Go, and cry unto the gods which you have
chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Cry unto your
Gold now, unto your Lusts now, trust your Riches now, make you a golden Calfe!
See if it will now save you. O think! You that live in sin, and love and
delight in sin, what shall I do in a sad day of sickness, when the fear of
the grave shall surround me, and the terrors of Hell shall make me afraid? What
shall I lean upon when these comforts shall be no comforts? when I shall say
to all creature enjoyments, miserable comforters are you all. Where shall I
warm me when these flashes will be out? when these sparks of pleasure and
profit shall be choakt, and killed with the dust and ashes of my grave? Hear
ye this all ye, That kindle a fire that compass your selves about with
sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled; This shall ye have at the Lords hand, Isa. 50. v. 11.
you shall lie down in sorrow: Your pleasurable sins are but as sparks
(Sirs) What will you do when your sparks are out? They are (as we say of a
short flame) but a Widows joy for a moment: Take heed, that when your sparks
are out you blow not your nails in hell: Take heed, that your sparks do not
kindle everlasting burnings for you. What will you do in a wilderness of
Affliction? how will you come out? What will ye lean upon?

e contrario, in a just opposion to the others misery: O lift up your heads ye
righteous, and be glad ye upright in heart: Your happiness consists in these
two things:

First, You are out of the wilderness, out of the danger of Hell, and those
that can spell in their thoughts but that word Hell, will know it to be a mercy
to be out of the fear of it. You are out of the wilderness, O bless that God
that has helped you out: it is a great happiness to be delivered of fears;
believe me! Did the wicked men seriously think what a weight of wrath they lie
under, what a cloud of blood hangs over their heads, they would pray till all
their knees were melted (though they were all steel) to be delivered from it.
Hold up your hands that you have escaped a drowning; that you fear not the
wild beasts that belong to the wilderness; Gods dreadful judgments you dare
meet, the Lion and the Bear, and they dare not set the print of their teeth
upon you. A godly man is like a man under protection, he owes much, but the
Bayliffe dares not meddle with him; Christ has undertaken the debt for him, he
is under the protection of the Son of God; he can look a Judgment in the
face, and never run for it. The wicked man, on the contrary, is like one.
that hangs upon every bush (as we say) owes more then he is worth; he dares
scarce look out of the doors whiles the Bayliffes are about; when the
judgments of God are about, the wicked wretch dares not look out, he sinks
into his grave in the thoughts of it. This Plague, this Fever, this Ague, may
be a Bayliffe to Arrest me, that God has sent to carry me bound hand and foot
and thrown into Hell, where is weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth. And
then thinks with himself (O that they did so!) Where is my surety (if it
should be so?) who would be bound for the payment of the Debt due for my
sins, and to be paid at Gods judgment seat? The godly man, he likewise
says; This Plague, this Fever, this Sickness, may Arrest me: But suppose
they should, the Son of God is bound for my Debt; My Judge surely will not
demand better Surety then his own Son. I bless God I am out of the
wilderness: O happy man! Here Is a portion of thy happiness; but here is not
all.

2. Consider, That if thou should fall into the corner of another
wilderness: Thou have one to lean upon, even in every wilderness: If thou
should have a rod upon thy back, thou have a staff to comfort thee. Thou
have one to lead thee out, when soever thou art in: an arm that thou may
trust to. Happy is he that has a friend in the Court, such is thy friend. A
friend in adversity, is better then a Brother, (says Solomon) thou have a
friend in adversity, and he is thy brother. Thy brother Christ is thy friend,
that will lead thee through, and out of every wilderness; Is the child happy
that in want has a father to run unto? the wife happy that has a husband in
time of sickness to comfort her? The servant happy that has a Master in
adversity to pity him? then I dare pronounce thee in all times happy. Thy
husband loves thee, thy father sends his Son to lead thee: thy husband is
always by, to comfort thee, and lead thee by his hand. God has said, Esaias
58.11. That he will guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones. Thou have always a friend at need, a brother in
adversity.

Thirdly, Is it so that the Spouse comes out of the wilderness* leaning upon
her Beloved? This may then show us the infinite love of God to the Creature;
that he would be pleased to look us up in the wilderness, and let us lean
upon him: Christ was lead into the wilderness because thou were there, he had
a bad journey to fetch thee home: Oh! what should? what could (besides his
infinite free grace) make his bowels of mercy so yerne toward the Creature, as
to look it up in the wilderness, to cloth it naked, to wash it polluted, to
save it damned? Christ the shepherd had lost his stray sheep, and goes after
that which was lost in the wilderness until he finds it, then he lays it
on his shoulders, and brings it home. O, blessed be the name of the Lord for
his free grace and mercy! The shepherd followed the sheep, whiles the sheep
regarded not the shepherd; we were in a wilderness, he came to find us out.
O! was not this infinite love, astonishing mercy?

Lastly, Is it so? that we must come out of every wilderness leaning upon our
Beloved? O then let this inform us what need we have to walk close with the
Lord Jesus Christ; what need we have to be fearful of offending, and careful
to please him: It is he that must help us in every need; he that must lead us
in every wilderness: If he forsakes us we are undone. Have we but one friend?
let us keep him then: if we anger him, we loose our best friend: has the
shiftlesse child need to keep the love of the father? the Babe need to keep
in the arms of the Nurse? the wife need to keep the love of the husband? the
blind man need to keep the love of his guide? O Christian, thou have much more
need to keep the love of thy Christ. It is he that must succor thee at every
need; he that must make the rugged ways plain for thee; It is he that must
carry the Babe of grace in his arms, least it should dash its feet against the
stones of affliction. It is he that must lead the child of God upon his hand,
least in this world of afflictions it fall, and hurt it self. O keep close in
his arms, keep thy self warm in his bosom; fear that which may make thy
God go from thee. Gods departing from the Creature is a piece of hell: thou
know not how soon thou may need him; yea, thou always need him,
therefore take heed of sinning against him; thou will anger the best friend, I
will assure thee.

I hasten to the last use, which shall be a word of Exhortation: Does the
Spouse of Christ come out of the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved.

First, O then, you that are yet in the wilderness of sins, come out, come
out, get this Spouses Beloved, and then lean upon him.

2. You that are in the wilderness of sorrow for sin, afflictions, temptations
desertions, lean upon your beloved, live leaning and dye leaning: you that say
you are sinking, and you cannot believe. Oh lean! and come out of this
wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

A word to the first: Is there any before the Lord this day that is yet in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, with what arguments shall I
plead with such a soul? Those are not wanting, but with what arguments shall I
prevail with such a soul, to come unto the Lord Christ? were any here
drowning in the water? a little Rhetoric would persuade them to let me help
them out? were any cast in a wood, I should not need much entreat them to give
me their hand, and I would show them a way out of that loosing place, why
should I not as much prevail for heaven this day?

1 Consider what estate it is that thou take such pleasure to continue in?
first, It it a dangerous place, more dangerous then the sands to the ship: thou
art ready to be swallowed up of hell every hour in it. A troop of judgments
waits upon thee to destroy it; how can thou abide consuming fire? or dwell
in everlasting burnings?

Secondly, Consider, it is a joylesse condition: There is no true joy to the
sinner, though he sings sometimes amongst his drunken cups, yet he cannot feed
heartily upon a feast of joy, because the Sword hangs over his head; it is but
a feigned joy that the sinner has, a sudden short lived flame, without any
coals underneath to preserve it. There is no peace to the wicked (says God)
and if no peace, there can be no joy; when the sinner is serious he cannot
rejoice, his rejoicing is like the skipping of mad men that know not what they
do.

Thirdly, Consider, it is a starving c^ndition. The sinners soul starves
whiles he feasts bis body like a glutton, his soul dies for thirst, when his
body is overflowen with drunkenesse. It is impossible the puffe-past of
iniquity should nourish a soul: Does an Angel feed upon the earth? does a
Saint feed upon hell? The soul is of an Angelicke substance, it cannot feed
upon sin: sin starves it. Do thou love to be in the midst of thorns? do
thou delight to lie down in sorrow? can thou endure to see thy better part
starved, whilst thou pamperest thy filthy Carcass? O let this deter thee
from the wilderness of sin, and persuade thee to come out of it unto Paradise.
There,

First, Thou shall be in a safe condition: Out of the fear of judgments, out
of hells gunshot. There life or death will be either peace temporal, or else
eternal, either grace, or glory unto thee; here thy soul shall be in a
harbor, if thousands fall at thy left hand, and ten thousands at thy right:
none shall make thee afraid, thou shall laugh at trouble when it comes. Thou
shall be sure to go to heaven either by land, or water: If thou go through
the fire, thou shall be sure to have Christ with thee. Heaven is a security in
all estates, a protection from all Arrests, if the King of Glory has a mind to
sue thee, thou shall not be arrested (like other men) with a writ of wrath, but
invited to sup with him in glory, only by a letter of love, and he will send
his Ushers of glory to wait upon thy soul to the chambers of glory, Luke
16.22. The soul of good Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom:
you shall not live like other men, haunted with the bloud-hounds of wrath, nor
dye like other wretches, that go out of the world, haled by the Sergeants of
hell to everlasting prison: but quietly sleep, and awake again one day in
glory. O who would not desire such a protection for himself? such a security
for his soul? who would not throw off his rags of sin, to put on Christ's
livery of grace, when Christ's badge upon his shoulder shall free him from all
Arrests? That he shall walk up and down, and nothing shall make him afraid?

Secondly, Consider that Heaven is a place as full of joy, as ever the
wilderness was full of sorrow and trouble; of this I spoke before. O think of
the joy of the Saints, you children of vain pleasure, you madmen of the
earth, that can dance over the hole of the Aspe, and put your hands on the
Cocatrices den. Your false and flattering joy is nothing to the real joys of
heaven, There is joy like the joy in the harvest, like the joy when men divide
the spoil. The yoke of their burden is broken, and the rod of the oppressor:
O you that love your drinking meetings, and dancing days, that you would but
love heaven, where you might drink new wine with your Lord Christ: where you
might dance in glory, and make all your days, days of joy, and every hour,
an hour of pleasure.

Thirdly, consider, that there, and there only, is provision for your soul.
Christ's robes is the only clothing that will cover the nakedness of it; his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, there my friends, Eat,
and drink, and be merry, there you may have wine and milk without money, or
without price. O, spend not your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which profits not?

Here you may eat that which is good, Esa. 35.1, 2, 3.
and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Here is a Feast of fat
things; The fatlings are killed: O come unto the wedding! Why should your
rooms be empty in the day of the Lords Espousalls? You shall be welcome to
my Masters Table: Now, O now, Behold he stands at the door and knocks: (Lord,
break where thou knockest) If any man will hear his voice, and open the
door, he will come into him, and sup with him, Revel. 20.
and he shall sup with him. O let me entreat you, to pity the yerning of
your Saviors bowels toward you; pity the groanings of his tender heart for
you; pity your selves, if not your Christ; and, O come, come out of the
wilderness of sin into this wilderness of sorrow; that of a drunken profane
creature, thou may be a mourning pious soul; of a proud careless sinner,
become a poor humbled poenitent; that the world may admire, Saul amongst the
Prophets, and Paul amongst the Apostles, and thee amongst the Saints of Christ;
and say of thee, who art now a profane Swearer and Blasphemer, Behold he
Prays! Of thee that were a filthy Wanton, Behold he Mournes! Of thee that
were a filthy Drunkard and Glutton, Behold he Fasts! And may in time say of
thee, Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved? But,

Secondly, Is there any before the Lord this day, that is in any other
wilderness of Sorrow, Affliction, Temptation, Desertion, etc. O lean! Come
out of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

First, Is there any one here, to whom the Lord has shown their own sad
condition too, and yet has not revealed the fullness of his free grace to
them? O lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and leaning come out of thy
wilderness; Believe, and thou shall be saved? But here is the hard task, to
persuade such a soul to believe.

Consider but these few things.

1. That now thou art in a capacity of believing. Poverty of spirit is the
nearest capacity of faith; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness. Now thou art weary. Christ has promised to ease thee; now thou
art heavy laden, he has promised to help thee.

Secondly, Consider that thou have ground enough to build thy faith upon;
Christ's power and love are two Pillars, able to hold up the weakest faith.

First, Believe; lean upon Christ, for he is able to pardon thy sins; thou
should blaspheme in thy thoughts if thou should not think this. Can
infinite mercy be fadomed think thou? Can any one plead his undeservings
against free grace? Were thy burden far heavier then it is, cast it upon
Christ, for he is able to bear it; Art thou thick darkness? he is infinite
light: Art thou all sin? he is all pardon: Art thou altogether lovely? why
Christ is altogether lovely.

Secondly, Believe; because Christ is as much love as he is power: he is not
only able, but he is willing to pardon thee; free grace thirsts after thee.
Nay, believe me, thou can give Christ no greater satisfaction then to receive
his mercies. Christ is withchild of free grace (to speak it with reverence)
and he desires nothing more then to be delivered in thine heart. He is a Sea of
mercy, and he would rejoice to empty himself by drops into his peoples
hearts. But why did I say empty? Can the Sun loose any light by
communicating his light to others? When the creature speaks of God, he must
speak (...), he would fill thee, and yet continue full himself. He is
satisfied when thou art full. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied. Thou art not so willing to receive, as he is to bestow free
grace. O then lean upon him.

Thirdly, Consider, thou can not dishonor thy God; more then when thou art
humbled by him for thy sins, and cast down in thine own thoughts, and called
to believe in his mercies, and secured upon his word, if thou will but trust
him. If thou will not, then believe in him, Surely then thou art of a little
faith, if not an Infidel. Thou could not believe when thou were an
impaenitent hard-hearted creature. Why? because thou knew no need thou had
of faith: Neither could thou hear Christ's invitation, because thou were not
weary and heavy laden; but now that the Lord has humbled thee, now the
promises belong unto thee, what? dare thou not take Christ's word? Suppose a
Traitor were condemned to dye, and the King should send a Pardon by the hand
of his own Son to this forlorn wretch, and he should refuse it, saying;
The King cannot pardon me; what has he to do to send me a Pardon? I know he
does but mock me, he means nothing less, etc. Were not this a piece of
unworthiness, by which he should dishonor his Prince as much as with his
Treason before? O take heed of provoking the Lord still; it is enough that thou
have provoked him once, yet he will pardon thee. And on the contrary, thou
can not honor Christ more then in believing; for thou acknowledgest the
unfadomable depth of his free love and mercy; Thou proclaimest God, to be a
God, gracious, long-suffering, a God that may be trusted by the creature which
has deserved nothing at his hand; that he is so pure an Essence of love, that
he will create himself a cause of love where is none. And though he could find
nothing in thee to pardon thee, for thy sake, yet he would pardon thee for his
own Name sake.

So likewise, you that are in any wilderness, or shall be, of Affliction,
Desertion, Temptation, etc. O lean! lean! It Is that which God requires at
your hand; it is that which will ease you when you are weary; help you when you
are heavy laden; Believing will ease you when complaining will not; it is that
which honors God, and honors Christ; It gives him the glory of his Power, and
Providence, and Dominion, and free Grace, and mercy. Christ, believe me, will
take it kindly at your hands, that you will try him in need, and trust him even
in despair; though he kills you, yet you will trust in him. Those that venture
upon Death with such a faith cannot dye. Those that have such a Spirit must
live eternally. The way to live, is to dye believing, and the way to stand, is
to lean falling. O come all ye that love the Lord ^ and trust in his mercies:
I have done, only I conclude with my Text.

O you that are falling, as you think into the pit of despair that are lost
in the wilderness of sorrow: Believe, believe, and you shall be saved. Come
out trusting upon God; resting upon the fullness of his mercy, and the
freeness of his grace, come out, come out leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in a wilderness of afflictions, lean upon Gods staff, let
his rod comfort you; believe that he smileth while he smites thee, believe in
affliction you shall have no more then you are able to bear; he will let his
grace be sufficient for you, all shall work for your good* And come you out
of your wilderness leaning upon your Beloved.

O you that are in the wilderness of temptations, in the snare of the Devil,
believe, and lean, your Christ was tempted, and he knows how to succor those
that are tempted: lean upon him to bear you up in, and to give you an happy
issue out of your temptations in which you are in, for the trial of your
faith, and come you out likewise leaning upon your Beloved.

You that are in the sad wilderness of Desertion, cry, My God! though you be
forsaken, keep your faith, retain your Interest; O lean, loose not your hold
you have upon the Almighty, lean in: and come out of this your wilderness
leaning upon your Beloved.

Finally. All you that are in the wilderness of sin; the worst wilderness of
all: Let me conclude with you, And once more as the Emba^^adour of Jesus
Christ, in my Masters name, as if he himself were here. I beseech you, by the
many, and tender mercies of him, whose bowels yerne toward you, by his
precious blood, which was powered out upon the Cross for sinners, (and who
knows, whether not for you, as well as others) as you tender the life and
happiness of your own souls, the joy of your faithful pastors: nay, (which
is most of all) as you tender the honor of God, come out, o come out of your
sad wilderness! be humbled, and mourn, sit down in dust and ashes, that you
may rise up, adorned with grace, and be crowned with glory, that you may lean
upon your Beloved, and (O that my first or last words might prevail with some
great sinner this day for whom we might all rejoice, concerning whom we might
all say, who is this that comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her
welbeloved.

FINIS.

