THE CITIZENS REPLY To the Whores Petition, AND Prentices Answer.
NOw that you two have made your grievance known,
In the third place, pray let our cause be shown,
The Proverb says give leosers leave to speak
And by that rule we may a freedom take;
For why we suffer in our Reputation,
Such things should acted be in this our nation,
A City fame'd through Europes Continent
To be the Prime for civil Government;
And that a Rout under Prentices names
Should act such things as those unto our shames
We cannot but bewail, and henceforth shall
Strive to redress, and to prevent them all.
First you who think your selves ith wronged condition
And therefore take upon you to Petition,
We do believe your Iosses to be great,
And don't approve of them that did the feat;
Yet let us tell you too, your vices were
Far greater then the loss fell to your share;
Your actions to such height of ill did bend
You well might think that ill would be the end.
You are the Cities Pesthouse, Suburbs sinks,
And what proceeds from sinks but nasty stinks?
What can expected be from such as do
Sin with delight, but misery and woe?
Complain not then, your selves may rather blame,
It was your impudence that caused the same,
Strive to get goods by what is lawful means,
And think not to grow rich by being Queans;
"That never thrives which is artain'd by ill,
"A little evil got much consume will.
Forbear henceforth then to commit such facts
You see the consequence of such bad acts,
"Shame and confusion always is the end,
"Of that which unto vice and sin does tend.
Then next to you who set the boys on work,
(Who little thought such mischief in it did lurk)
You who act mis heif in Prentices names
Thinking upon them for to put the blames;
Who by pretense of punishing of Whores
Do rob and steal from them their wealth and stores,
Who knows what mischief might by this arose
When faction did with insurrection close;
Sad might it proved if you had been cemented
'Dangers foreseen are easiest prevented
It Is good to crush the Serpents in the Eggs,
Before such mischief stands too firm on legs;
Some little dreaming harm may be drawn in
And fo be punished for another sin,
They suffer may for all their harmless Looks;
"What has the Daws to do among the Rooks;
Keep far from such then as do move sedition,
"By giving Countenance you give Commission,
"It is encouragement to those uncivil
"For to look on and not correct their evil.
You rail on Whores, it is true, they bad do live;
And yet your selves as bad example give.
Will you in such contempt and rudeness stand
To seek to wrest the sword from Justice hand?
What can be thought of such a bold intrusion
But that it will bring all unto confusion.
Sad may we think will prove that fatal day
When a rude rout takes on them to bear sway.
Such actions must needs shipwreck on the shelves,
VVho'd punish Theft and be strong Thieves themselves,
Do you your selves in compass fair demean
Justice will punish them which is obscene,
Should Justice chance to wink, it is tumults curse
To punish Vice by that which is fat worse;
Tumults in time may to Rebellion come
Mischeifs do after mischeifs swiftly run.
So to conclude, lets wish you to beware,
And in your actions have a better care,
Though some by fair delusions in would creep,
There Is difference will be found t'wixt Swine and Sheeps
And those who seek by Boys to make foul ends
May find the hangman prove their fastest friends,
Let insurrections have the Tiburn swing,
We for our parts do cry, God save the KING.
London Printed 1668.


