CONSIDERATIONS DIVINE, RATIONAL and POLITICAL, calculated for the present
state of Affairs in ENGLAND, and offered to the Consideration of every
true-hearted ENGLISHMAN.
COnsider, That the ancient Government of this Nation by KING, Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, is in it self the most equal and well tempered
Government of any in Christendom.

2. Consider, The Renown and Felicity of this Nation, which continued many
hundred years under that Government.

3. The many Violences acted upon the Parliament, especially the Force which
was upon the House of Commons when the pretended law was made for the
alteration of that Government, being contrary to the express Oaths,
Declarations and Resolutions thereof whilst free.

4. That the Design of the Chief Actor of those Villainies, and Contriver of
that Law was for advancing himself to the regal Dignity, which it has pleased
God to confound to the perpetual reproach of him, his Relations and Posterity.

5. Consider, The general contempt and poverty which God has brought upon the
Nation, since the change by subjecting us to the Insolences of the Basest of
the people, who have Exalted themselves by the Ruin of their Superiors,
whereby we are become a shame to our selves and a scorn and derision to all our
Neighbors.

6. That it is destructive to the Liberties of the people that the Legislative
Power should reside in a Multitude of Commoners without any Checque upon them,
Probatum est, there having been more horrid oppressions by High Courts of
Justice and other Exorbitant arbitrary Laws Acted in the Inter-regnum, then
ever was done by color of Authority in the Reigns of all the KINGS of England.

7. That Atheism. Ignorance, Sacrilege, Factions, and Heresies the Fruits and
Nurslings of this alteration, have crowded out Piety, Learning, Charity,
Uniformity and sound Doctrine, wherein the Glory of this Nation did formerly
excel most in Christendom.

8. That it is the undoubted Birthright of Charles Stuart to be KING of England.

9. That the People of the three Nations besides the Obligation of their
Natural duty are bound by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Protestation
and Covenant to endeavor his Restitution.

10. That it is the earnest desire of all the Nobility, Gentry and sober
Comonalty, except only such whose peculiar Advantages or dreadful consciences
cause them to oppose it.

11. That during his Exile the three Nations have been under perpetual
Enmities, tremblings and Changes without any Foundations of Peace or Government.

12. That it is impossible without his concurrance to establish any Government
that shall be binding to the People.

13. That the Pretenders to the present Power (persons so worthless that it is
a shame for the Nation to submit unto them) have by mere Force without color
of right excluded their Fellow Members, much greater in Number and Quality then
themselves; and therefore the Laws made by them during that Force (admit
otherwise they had good Authority) cannot in justice Challenge obedience from
the people.

14. Consider, The vast Impositions wherewith the Pretenders do Oppress the
Nations for supporting of Soldiers, whose whole ^mployment is only to suppress
those that Endeavor the KING'S Restitution; and the evident Necessity of
continuing them for that End.

15. That the Soldiers are in truth the Supreme Governors, and have only
delegated their Power to the Pretenders whom they have advanced and supported,
ejected and restored as they pleased: it being no less truly then wittily said,
That they are the Parliaments Army and those are the Armies Parliament.

16. That this Power is now devolved upon and executed by the Common Soldiers,
who knowing their own strength, have gotten the hand of their Officers, and
cashiere and re-admit them with the same facility and pleasure that the
Officers have done their Governors.

17. Consider, The total decay of Trade throughout the three Nations occasioned
by the Disturbances and Oppressions at home, and Fears from abroad,
impoverishing the meaner sort, and reducing them to that Necessity which will
soon force them to Violences; and the small hopes of its return till our
rightful PRINCE be Restored.

18. Consider, The great effusion of Blood and Ruins of Estates which must
necessarily happen if he be restored by Force, either at Home or from abroad,
against either of which we can never be secured, and now more especially the
latter, considering the league between the two potent Princes his Allies, by
whom the opportunity of employing their super-numerary Forces on such an
occasion will doubtless be embraced.

19. That it is the undoubted Design of the Jesuits who have tried his
steadfastness in Religion, to prevent his restitution by his subjects, that he
may be Necessitated to fly unto Foreign power for effecting it, (the most
probable means of introducing Popery) for which purpose they are come over in
Swarms, and in private Congregations, more especially amongst the Soldiers
(with whom they have mingled themselves under the Disguises of more plausible
Factions) do sow the Seeds of perpetual Enmities as well against him as among
our selves, and some of them have boldly affirmed that he shall never be
restored but by their means.

20. Consider, This restitution by treaty in a Free Parliament, the Secluded
Members being readmitted, places Vacant supplied by Free Elections, and both
Secluded and new Elected Members to be admitted without any Oath previous to
their Session is the most hopeful means of reconciling different parties,
providing for tender consciences, easing us of the burden of Soldiers (their
Arrears being paid before disbanding, and they admitted to the use of any
trade) securing purchasers under the States title by an Act for confirmation of
Sales, appeasing Fears and Jealousies, by a Free and General pardon, uniting
the three Nations and settling peace with our Neihghours, advancing Trade,
preserving of Liberties, and restoring the Honor of the Nation; and if this be
not affected, certainly it is the visible judgment of God upon us, who for our
sins infatuates our Counsels, that we cannot discern, or dejects our spirits
that we dare not attempt, or disappoints our enterprises that we cannot attain
the means of our deliverance.

2. Objections, There are against his restitution. 1. That there is no public
Revenue for him. 2. That there can be no security that he will observe the
Articles of the Treaty.


Answer to the first, 1. The fifth part of the extraordinary Annual charge that
the Nation must undergo by Excise and Taxes for maintaining Soldiers to keep
him out, will be a far greater Revenue then ever any King of England enjoyed
besides the Customs: 2. The hearts of the Nobility and Gentry would be
enlarged upon his return freely to contribute for the purchasing of him a
Revenue.


To the second, This World affords no absolute security, but certain it is,
there is greater reason to expect performance from him then that the Nation
should enjoy Peace without him. 2. The Parliament may dispose the places of
strength and trust in the hands of such worthy persons as they shall conceive
may best secure performance of Articles, and we may have more security against
him if he be restored by treaty, then we can have that he shall not be restored
by Force; however it is our duty to do that which is just, and deliver the
Nation from sin; The success we must leave to God, whose hand has been
eminent in consounding all our devices of n^w foundations, and continuing a
spirit of Division among us that we may not Unite without HIM.



