To the Honorable House of Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble
Petition of Commisary Lyonell Copley.
SHOWS;
THat whereas upon a certificate from the Court of Accounts this honorable
House was pleased to Order Your Petitioner forthwith to pay the sum therein
expressed, which notwithstanding his willingness for their satisfaction (if
his life lay upon it) h^e cannot possible in ready money do, most of his
personal estate now lying in the hands of the State in his Arreares and
otherwise, Now forasmuch as the said Committee, not having instructions (as he
^^^ce^^^^) what to allow (...) disallow in Accounts of this nature (he being
the first of this kind they have passed Accounts with) have thought fit to
charge upon him all the Horses, Arms, and furniture of War he has received
from the State, for the raising and recruting of his Troop of Horse (no^ in
their service in his Excellencies Army) to the xxi. of M^rch 1643. and have
valued them at 2033. 16:0: as if he had bought them of the State, though there
was no Ordinance Order of Parliament, or contract of his binding him to make
them good, he not having any use thereof but for their service, which he is
ready to resign and deliver up into what hands this Honorable House shall
think fit.

He therefore humbly prays this Honorable House, he may with their consent
and fa^^r deliver up his said Troop of Horse, with the Arms and other
furniture for War, as they are valued to him by the said Committee, and the
same be accepted as payment which will surmount the said sum expressed upon
the said certificate, beseeching this Honorable House he may then be received
into their favor, and admitted (in what way they in their wisdoms shall
think most equal to a review of his said accounts and his just exceptions
received to the said certificate being well assured he shall clearly make
appear there is a very great sum really due unto him.

And your Petitioner shall ever humbly pray Lyonell. Copley.

Die Sabbathi 19. Octo. 1644.
THe humble Petition of Commissary Copley was this day read in the House of
Commons, and Ordered, that it be referred to the Committee formerly appointed
for Commissary Coplies business, to state the desires of the Petition, and to
report their opinions to the House.

H. Elsyng Cler: Parl: D. Com.

Commisarie Copley, his reasons given into the Committee of the List for his
Excellencies Army, why the Committee of Accounts ought not to have charged him
with the horses and Arms he received for the raising and Recrute of his Troop
at a value as his debt, yet if charged ought to be allowed at the same values
by way of discount if not found to be by him imbesled or converted to his own
use, and that those yet in his Troop or lost upon s^rvice since his account,
ought to be accepted of as good payment, for so much as they are vallued to him
according to the desires of his Petition lately presented to the honorable
house of Commons in this behalf, as also for a revenue of his Accounts.
AT the first establishment of the Army that was not settled or declared that
the Capt. should make good the Horses and Arms he received from the State for
himself, Troop or Company, not was there any Covenant twixt the State and him
to that purpose, nor is there any Ordinance or order of both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, binding him thereto, till the Ordinance of the 26. of
March 1644. which was since the account and looks only forward as by the same
herewith showed does appear.

2. He conceives that beyond all Example and president, and contrary to the
Rules of War and common Justice, that he should be charged to the value of
2000. pounds and upwards for his said horse and Arms, a year or two after his
entertaynment into and progress in the service of the Parliament, the e being
no condition of his part, or so much as any proposal on theirs, whereby he
could imagine that would be expected at his hands.

3. We raised and had before the battle of Newbury, eighty six horses for his
Troop, as by his accounts given into the said Committee upon his Oath herewith
showed does appear, All which were not worth above five pound a horse one with
another, no value being set upon them nor Ticket given for them to any person
by any person by any Committee or person whatsoever, whereby the State can be
charged with one penny for them, neither could they, (had he not charged
himself) have charged him upon any account therewith.

4. The Committee of Accounts (without any just ground as he conceives) thought
fit upon an Account of their own making up to charge him withal the said
horses at ten pound per horse, which he conceives they could not properly nor
rightly do for that they are unacquainted in that way, and not employed for
that end, but principally for that they never saw any of them, it being diverse
Months after the said horses were killed, lost or made away before they were a
Committee.

5. All the said horses were before or at the battle of Newbury either dead
killed, or lost, upon service by hard duty one way or other, except eight at
most he having lost above forty in the battle as he has proved before this
honorable Committee, two only of them being converted to his own use which he
made good to the State as by the said Account herewith showed does appear.

6. He received for the Recrewt of his said Troop since Newbury battle in
horses and money to buy horses with, at ten pound a horse, eighty six more with
which as with the former to a hoof he charged himself upon his said Account
expressing upon his oath each man's name who had them being of his Troop forty
two, whereof he received since the said Ordinance which are not charged upon
him by the said account made up by the said Committee to the 21. of March,
1643, nor did he know that they had charged him with his said horses and Arms
at a prize as his debt, nor how they had made up the said account till payment
of what was certified by the said Committee to be due from him, was ordered by
the honorable House of Commons.

The said horses received for his recrewt and those eight brought from Newbury
battle unless some few which shortly dyed or was utterly unserviceable were
mustred in his said Troop the 20th. of May 1644. which then consisted of
eighty four state horses, forty two whereof are part of those charged upon
him by the said ^^co^n^ at 10^ per horse as by the Muster Roll at tested by Sir
Edward Dodsworth herewith showed does appear, which said Troop of horse now
is and ever since has been upon service in his Excellencies Army, and are the
very same ho^ses he is charged with as aforesaid, and are those only which cost
or can cost the State any penny, twenty three whereof were not wo^th above six
pound per horse, one with another, none of all which were ever seen by the
said Committee nor ought as he conceives to be charged upon him however so
otherwise then the ordinance provides for.

The said horses r^ceived as aforesaid he never had occasion for, nor has use
of, but for the service of the state, except for two of them which he made use
of to his own particular, with which he charged himself upon his said account
upon the same prizes they cost the State.

All the Arms, Pistolls, Saddles and their furniture whatsoever which he has
received both before and since the Account and Ordinance to this day, unless
twelve Saddles and six Backs, Breasts and Pots are to abridle charged upon him
at several prizes, by the said Account, and one hundred pound part of the
price of the said Saddles also part whereof were lost upon service and
otherwise as the horses were before and at the battle of Newbury, three
Pistolls and few or no Arms being brought of that day, And the residue
received since the battle of Newbury they were delivered to his Officers and
Troops mustred the 20th. of May aforesaid who were armed and have served
therewith in his Excellencies Army ever since, none of which as he conceives
ought to be charged upon him however no otherwise then is provided by the
Ordinance.

The said Horses and Arms which he received as aforesaid though he had been
bound to make them good, and they neither lost killed, or made away, the state
could not expect he should pay so much money for them as the said Committee
valued them at, notwithstanding at the time when he did receive them they had
bin really worth so much; because so many thereof as he shall deliver in
again in their kind though lame, spoiled, or broake, or give account for
being lost in such a way as the Ordinance provides allowance, for the State is
bound to accept of as made good in their own sense.

He conceaves that such Horses and Arms received by him as aforesaid as are
made worse in and by the service half in half more or less, and after that
by accident dye, are lost, or made away in such manner as the said Ordinance
provides not allowance for, he ought not to make good so much money for them as
at his first receipt thereof they were valued at, or were truly worth, the state
having had their service by which they do become of little or no value.

He conceaves that the Parliament when they made that Ordinance binding every
Captain to make good his Horses and Arms, intended and concluded to pay the
Captain and his Troop or company constantly, which ought in the first place
to be performed before the other can be expected, because by reason of their
want of pay they cannot provide for and maintain their Horses if they fall
sick, or lame, whereby they are disabled to keep them alive and serviceable
(and the like for the repair of their Armies and saddles which unavoidably
occasioneth the loss of many Horses and Arms, which not being by his or his
Soldiers default he, ought not as he conceaves to be charged with them or pay
for them.

If it be alleged that the Captain is to receive the Soldiers Arreares
thereby to make good to himself the value of the Horses and Arms lost by the
Soldier, and therefore ought to make them good to the State, he answers,
that he conceaves that course to be very unequal and will be of ill
consequence to the State, for there are very many Soldiers whose Horses, or
Arms or both, do dye, or are lamed, or otherwise spoiled that stay not a
month in the Troop, yet may be less, few so long as their Arreares will make
good the value of them, and those that do, yet would be ill taken they should
pay for their Horse and Arms which are worn out an^ spent in the States
service, And so by consequence he conceaves (...) will necessarily follow
either the Captain, or his Soldiers or both, must be discouraged and forced
to desert the employment, or in the conclusion be certainly undone.

He conceaveth that the Oath obliging the Committee of Accounts to deal
faithfully in taking of accounts of the Kingdom relates only to the State, not
to the Accomptant neither have they as yet any bounds set or rules given them
for taking accounts of this kind, his being the first of this nature, and the
way to state the rest, therefore a reveiw of his said accounts according to
such rules as may be given them, is (the foregoing reasons considered) most
just and necessary all the soldiery under the Parliaments service being a like
concerned herein.

He has diverse other reasons to offer to this Honorable Committee for their
further satisfaction, if it shall be necessary, but for that they have not as
yet thought fit to let him see or be acquainted with the reasons they have (as
yet alleged) received from the said Committee of Accounts for his being
charged with his Horse, and Arms as is already set forth, and why those in his
Troop so charged ought not to be accepted at the same values they are charged,
as good payment, he (knowing they cannot be so powerful for his defense)
forbeareth to give any further reasons till they shall please to show him what
is alleged against him, which as yet is his undoubted right, so he hopes
before they report their sense of this business they will afford him, with
convenient time for his answers thereto, that so the true state thereof may
fully appear to the Honorable House of Commons, to whose judgment thereupon
he shall freely submit himself.

Lyonell Copley.

FJNIS

