A Lesson for all True CHRISTIANS.
Which being well observed by old and young,
And practiced with hand and heart, and tongue:
Great comfort in it at the last you will find,
Then mark it well, and bear it in your mind.
By J. C.


Tune of, The Letter for a Christian Family.
Be faithful unto Death and I will give thee A Crown of life. reu 2. 10

ALl you whose minds be high and heavenly bent,
Observe God's laws, and strive for to repent,
Bear thou in mind these lines I shall unfold
And prize them better far then pearl or gold.
BEar thou in mind that Christ died for thy sin
Upon the Cross, thy precious soul to win;
Be frequent still in reading of his word,
Which cuts down sin as with a 2 edged sword.
COnsider well the bitter pains and death.
Our Savior Christ has suffered on the earth
Unto the Cross they nailed his hands and feet,
So for our sins he shed his blood most sweet.
DEfer no time, but pray continually,
Thy sins against the still for Vengeance cry:
Pray to thee Lord thy sins may be forgiven,
And that thy soul may live with Christ in heaven.
ETernal God if it be thy blessed will,
Comfort all those that now are sick or ill;
By Land or Sea relieve them of their pain,
Restore them to their former health again.
FOrbear to swear you children that are young,
You parents pray correct them for their wrong,
And bring them up in fear to serve the Lord,
For fear he scourge them with his heavy Rod.
GReat oaths in vain too many people swear,
The Lord in pieces wilfully they tear:
Strange imprecations they too common use,
With such delights they do themselves abuse.
HOw many false reports abroad do fly,
People likewise are given much to lie:
Likewise dissemble so with one another,
We cannot tell how for to trust our Brother.
IN many places people sudden dye,
Others again fore sick in bed do lie,
Lord give them grace in time for to repent,
And for their grievous sins for to lament.
KEep thou in mind the Judgment day will come,
when thou shall answer for what thou have done,
Whilst thou remainest here on the earth,
Therefore prepare thee for the hour of death.
LEt not malicious thoughts possess thy breast,
Nor wicked actions in thy conscience rest;
In any case do not thy Neighbor wrong,
Neither by thought, word deed, nor yet by tongue.
MAny there be that follow drunkenness,
and make themselves for worse then any beast
And many when that they should go to Church,
Do in an Alehouse or a Tavern lurch.
NOr do they heed, but spend their means in vain
which should their wives and children maintain,
Until they have consumed their whole estate,
And never repent before it be to late.
OTheres there be likewise does rob and kill,
And many a man and woman's blood do spill;
For money to maintain their grievous sin,
And think not on the errors they run in.
PIty it is they have no better care,
But bring their souls and bodies in a snare;
Their bodies here to dye in woeful shame,
Their souls to suffer in eternal flame.
QVire thou after Gods, word, which is so pure
also the Gospel which will still endure;
Seek thou the place whereas thy Soul may rest,
Amongst the Angels whom the Lord has bless.
REgard not thou the sin of covetausness,
Seek for to right the widow and the farther
Help to relieve those that in prison lie,
Also remember man that thou must dye.
SEt not thy mind upon Adultery,
But from the beauty of lewd women fly;
We find in Scripture that it is forbid,
Then mind it well when as you do stread.
TAke heed that you do not false measures use,
With such deceit do not thy self abuse;
To many use it now, the more is the pity,
In every place, in Country, Town, and City.
UNdone are many by this false deceit,
Let me advise such people, and entreat
To leave it off, and mark what I shall say,
'Twill rise against them at the Judgment day.
When thou before thy maker shall appear.
To give account, and eke thy self to cle^^
If well thou'st done, then happy shall thou be,
And live with Christ in Joy eternally.
XAmple take I pray both old and young,
By these few lines that is penned in this song
Bear it in your mind I pray now everyone,
And think ^n it when I am dead and gone.
Young Men and maidens love your parents dear
Honor them still, and seek the Lord to fear,
O mind your Bibles more than all your Pride,
And then before the Lord will be your guide.
ZEalous and faithful to each other prove,
Line not in hatred, but in perfect love,
Peace is a virtue passes gold so pure,
Lord grant it may amongst us still endure,
and Now at last for to conclude and end,
These lines to all true Christians I do send,
To read them over and of them take a view
What here is penned you will find for to be true.
LONDON. Printed by and for A. M. and (...) the Booksellers of Pye-corner and
London (...)


