A Congratulatory POEM Presented To the Right Honorable Sr. JOSEPH SHELDON
Knight and Baronet. LORD MAYOR Of the City of London.
Composed by the Author of the Geneva ballad.
BRave Walworths Dagger, Worthy Lord,
Rebuds and blossoms in your Sword:
Lop the first Letter in his Name,
Your self and he will be the same:
Nature and Grace to You impart,
An Aspect grave, a Loyal Heart;
A Spring-tide-Purse, an Ebbing passion;
Rigor allayed with Moderation;
A Still Voyee in a Thunderclap,
Where Mercy sits in Justice Lap:
With all ingredients that complete
A Perfect Christian Magistrate.
The more's the Pi^ty! some have made
Their Power a Pander to their Trade:
And when the people would be heard,
Have measured causes by the Yard:
For Equity but blundr'ing at it,
More by the Shop-book then the Statute:
These Animals if you would know,
They now and then in the Country grow:
And may be Picked up here and there,
In half the Towns of every Shire.
But never did so Vile Disgrace
Bespot Fitz-Allens Nobler Race;
Whose Ancient Honors here we View,
By Providence, transferred to You,
Whose Port, and presence well may show,
Whom You do Represent below:
That Auful Mildness Writ upon it,
Might make the Quaker Vail his Bonnet:
And him that hops a Reprieve,
Not only Tremble but Believe;
Considering how your Smile or Frown
Can raise him up, or cast him down.
Here we may see (to Londons pride)
Lambeth and Paul's afresh allied;
The Church and City jointly share
A Metropolitan, and Mayor
Of the same stock; whose Name shall last
Till deep-lung'd fame has spent her blast,
Great Joseph! with thy Brethrens leaves
Accept due homage from their Sheaves;
And be to us as much or more
Then that blessed Patriarch was before
Amongst the old Egyptians, who
Endeared the Prince and people too:
So our wise FORD, with Prudence sweet,
Made both ends of the Town to meet:
So noble VINER has likewise
Caused Conduits run, and Churches rise;
And in his Sovereigns statue shown
A lasting Monument of his own.
Oh pious pomp! of all the rest,
These Following pageants are the best,
Which Triumph over Death, and save
The Embalmed memory from the grave.
Whose Aqueduct's, when e're he dye,
Will weep forth his best Elegy.
Pardon, my Lord, although to you
Our prayers, not our Advice is Due;
Let your Heav'n-granted power pursue,
The Hectring, and the Damning crew,
Blasphemous Tongue, and Bloody Hand
Cuts out new mourning for the Land:
Superfluous Trees, by pruning, thrive,
And Laws by Execution live:
We Are subject unto your commanding,
Like Phineh as do Justice Standing:
For if this be your Honors Way,
Factions will of themselves Decay.
My Lord, Your Honors Most Humble Servant.

Printed in the Year, 1675.


