A CONFERENCE Between two Soldiers Meeting on the Road, the one being of the
Army in ENGLAND, The other of the Army in SCOTLAND.

As the one was coming from London, the other from Edinbrough.

The first Part.

November, 1659.

A Conference between two Soldiers Meeting on the Road, the one being of the
Army in England, the other of the Army in Scotland.
England. WEll met fellow-souldier, whence do you come?


Scotland. I come from Scotland.


Engl. What News from thence? we hear you are beginning a new War.


Scotl. No, no, what we do is in pursuance of our good Old Cause, to stand up
for the Parliament, which we hear you have forceably interrupted, and turned
out.


Engl. I pray you let us step aside, and a little reason together: What is that
good Old Cause so much spoken of? Were you a Soldier at the first beginning of
the war, and can remember what was then Declared as the cause of our taking up
Arms?


Scotl. Yes, and then I went out for the preservation and defense of the true
Protestant Religion, the Kings Person, the Privileges of Parliament, and the
Laws and Liberties of the subject.


Engl. Let us pass by that of the Protestant Religion, which was soon after
left out of our Commissions; for we needed not fight for a Religion, but that
we might enjoy Liberty to exercise our Religion. How did you pursue the Cause?
Did you, who are now the Army in Scotland, consent to the taking away the Life
of the King, whom you were to defend, who by the Laws of the Land was our Chief
Ruler?


Scotl. Yes; for when upon better information we found. That Kings were made
for the people, and not the people for Kings: That men are freeborn into the
World, and not any man's slaves; that no man ought to have a Native and
Hereditary Right over others. But that the power under God is originally in the
people, and to be derived from thence, and that all trusts are conditional; We
believed that the King was as well bound to defend his people, as his people
were to be subject to him; and that if he failed of the one, they were
discharged of the other, else the King might destroy them at his pleasure; and
finding that the King had betrayed his trust, and endeavored the ruin of his
people; we took our selves not only bound to defend our selves against him;
but also to call him to an account as guilty of the highest crimes for
destroying the end of his trust, making his power an advantage to our ruin.


Engl. Then you were of our mind, That the safety of the People, is the supreme
Law; and therefore you consented to take away the King. What did you for the
Privileges of Parliament? Do you not remember, That there was an Act of
Parliament, to which the King consented, as well as both Houses, That the
Parliament, nor either House, should not be dissolved without their own
consents, or an Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose? Did you not
also consent to the taking away of the House of Lords, which was one of the
Houses of Parliament?


Scotl. When we found that the House of Lords, as well as the King, exercised
an Authority by Prerogative over the people, without their consent and
deputation; it was seen fit to lay them aside also, as inconsistent with the
peoples Liberties.


Engl. Was not this the highest breach of Parliament Privileges, not only to
interrupt, but wholly to dissolve one of the Houses of Parliament, and that not
for one Session only, but for ever? And I pray you, when Kings and Lords were
taken away, which were two essential parts of the Parliament; was not the
Parliament then dissolved, he being dead by whose Writs they were called, which
gave them the being of a Parliament, and could live no longer then himself?


Scotl. No, for the House of Commons could not be dissolved, without their own
consent, and an Act to be passed for that purpose.


Engl. How could they be a Parliament, which could do no Act of a Parliament?
Or how could they be dissolved by an Act, when no act of Parliament could be
passed for it? they had taken away the Lords, who were to advise, and the King
who was to consent.


Scotl. Its very true, and therefore they presently changed the Government, and
Declared themselves to be a Parliament, without King, or House of Lords.


Engl, Did they not thereby dissolve themselves, and cast off their former
power? And then, from whom did they derive their new Authority? the People
only chose them to go up, and to consider and advise of the great things of
the Nation with the King and Lords, and not to take all the power to
themselves, both the Legislative and Executive, to do what they list, and as
long as they pleased, making the former Act of Parliament (which had no such
intention) a color for it. But since you are so much for the House of Commons;
whether, I pray, did you consent to the turning out so many Members at several
times?


Scotl. Yes for we found that the honest party of the House, who were for
carrying on the good Old Cause; were over-voted by a Major Party, and we were
forced to it, or else our Cause had been lost.


Engl. And were not those most high breaches of the Privileges of that House?
And how could the remaining party be called, a free Parliament? The People
chose the whole Number, and gave them power; and after you had turned out whom
you pleased, should the People be bound by the rest? were they the Peoples, or
not rather your Parliament? But do ye remember, when those we called the
honest Party, came from the House to the Army, and brought their Speaker with
them, and left the rest who over-voted them? Did not you own the lesser Party,
and forthwith go to London, and turn out the other? I pray, by what Law was it
done? and whether, if either party could be called a Parliament, the lesser, or
the greater? And whether did you not in 1653. consent to, or afterward; approve
the turning out the remainder of the whole House?


Scotl. I must confess we did so, and were still forced to it, for carrying on
that Cause which we were called unto; and took our selves bound in Conscience
to prosecute, for the defense of the Peoples Liberties.


Engl. Well, It seems you grant, that for the Liberty of the People, you
consented, in stead of defending, to destroy the Kings Person; in stead of
preserving Parliament Privileges, wholly to take away the House of Lords; and
over and over, to interrupt and turn out the Members of the lower House; and at
last to end the sitting of the whole. And I pray you, Have not diverse Elections
been since made by the People, which (by an Act made by the King, Lords, and
Commons, they had power to do) make void, and supercede all former Authority
derived from them, if any was in being,


Scotl. I am not fit to judge of these things: But I conceive they were a
Parliament at lest, till 1653. or a new Election: But I dare not consent that
they were dissolved any sooner, for many dangerous consequences would follow,
and all Laws since made, might be rendered invalid, to the less of the whole
Nation, and many particular Persons.


Engl. They did not in this last Convention, so well consider, who at one
breath, as I may say, by an Act thrice Read and Passed in one day, made void
whatsoever had been done from 1653, to 1659. without considering the weight and
concernment thereof, to the manifold damage, not only of thousands of
particular Persons, but to the hazard of the Peace of the three Nations,
rendering the union of Scotland and this Nation invalid, and opening a way for
the Irish to return upon the English, and turn them out of their Habitations in
Ireland, and thousands of other mischiefs, which was one great reason,
necessitating the Army to put an end to their sitting. But should I tell you,
that they were dissolved in 1648. it would neither reproach them, nor diminish
that power which they exercised in carrying on the work with us, nor injure the
Rights of the people: And should I also say, that all things done since the end
of their former sitting in 1653. that are pursuant to the ends of our Cause,
are by as good Authority; there will be no contradiction to those Principles,
which ye have walked by, and must own as well as we as the warrant of our
proceedings, which will justify us in the sight of God, and in our own
Consciences, and in due time unto men,


Scotl. I confess it was rashly done to pass such an Act: But I pray go on,
and tell me what other ground, or necessity you had to dissolve them new, for
that is the great thing which dissa^isfieth us, and which we cannot bear.


Engl. Though it might seem a strange thing to you, yet we cannot but wonder,
that you who had joined formerly in the like Acts of necessity with us; nay, we
may say, in much higher; and knew the integrity of many thousands of your
fellow soldiers in England, and their desires after Justice, Righteousness,
and true Freedom, should so hastily Publish a Declaration, and not rather first
send some honest and understanding men to us, to be informed of the Grounds and
Reasons of our Proceedings, and should still persist and pursue your
Declaration, to the hazard of the Peace, and raising a new War in these
Nations, which may make way for a third Party to divide the spoil, and lose
the Fruit of all our Travells. But to satisfy you further of our Grounds; We
that were upon the place, and near them, found by daily experience, a heady
Faction growing in the House, who having a design to engrosse all power into
their own hands, to make themselves absolute; and not only to give what Laws
they would to the people; but to settle what Government they list, and to
perpetuate themselves during their pleasure, (who were but a very few of those
that are interessed in the management and success of the same Cause, and ought
to share with them, and be as well satisfied in the settlement to be made;)
First, contrived to bring the Army to their will, by causing them to take
Commissions from their Speaker; and then (by raising another Force) made way to
supplant them; that so, as any person should in the least cross their design,
or show a dislike to any thing they did, they might, with a Vote of the House
be laid aside, upon the least Information of any Member, without Hearing or
Trial, though the matter was false; which having carried on, they presently
began to show their further purpose: reproved and gave a cheeque to the sober
and modest Petitions of the Army; a Privilege, that the meanest, and fewest of
the people claim. And without proof, or hearing, pickes nine or ten of the
Chief Assertors of our Liberties out of the Army, and lays them aside, and
intended further to have proceeded with more, as is too evident. All which more
fully appears by the Armies Plea, and Declaration; to which I refer you.


Scotl. But I pray you. How can it be lawful for the servant to rise up
against his Master? Did not you lately restore them to the power, and
acknowledge them, and take Commissions at their Bar, and receive their Pay?


Engl. That they were Masters, and we their servants, does not appear by our
restoring them to the power, but rather the contrary; and that we might as well
take it from them, as give it to them, when they abused it. And as for our
owning them to be a Power and receiving Commissions and Pay from them; they had
borne part with us in the heat of the day, had councelled, advised, and acted
with us, as interessed in the same Cause; and we were willing, as they were the
remaining persons that held out to the end of that Civil Authority which God
had blessed with us in carrying on the work, to take them along with us; and as
being a more popular way, then any single person and more suitable, then merely
the Power of the Sword, and that which would give better content to the people,
till such an equal and just frame of Government could be settled, as might
fully answer the ends of our War, and so great an expense of Blood and
Treasure. Yet give us leave to tell you, We were no more servants then they; we
received Pay, as being allowed to us, that went a warfare for the people. They
also had Pay, provided by Law proportionable to their Expenses. Are the
Soldiers servants to their Officers, because from their hands they receive
their Pay? Are the Officers servants to the Parliament, because they are paid
by their Order, not out of their own, but the peoples purses? And are not the
Members of Parliament as well servants to the people, who have allowances
provided for them? Yea rather, are not both the Parliament and Army servants to
the People, to preserve and defend them, and their just Rights and Freedoms? If
therefore both Parliament and Army, shall join to destroy the people; May they
not both withold their Pay, and defend themselves against them, if they can?
and the like against either.


Scotl. I do not well understand this, for the Parliament is the Body of the
People; and they Called, and Commissionated the Army, and paid them; and
therefore the Army are servants to the Parliament.


Engl. That the Parliament was the Body of the people, we deny not; and when it
came to pass that a difference fell between the King and them; they called to
the people, (in effect thus;) We are your Trustees, your Deputies, you sent us
^^ hither to preserve and maintain your Rights; the King has highly violated
many of them, and still persisteth, and by force will compel us to yield to
him. Therefore come and assist us, and stand up for your selves in your lawful
defense, and for your liberties. The people cheerfully to prosecute those ends,
came, and took up the Sword, managed the War, with the advice of their
Representative Body, not as servants to the Parliament; but as those that
entrusted them, that were bound to defend them, while they pursued the ends of
their preservation and safety: Not as Servants, or Mercenary men, for Wages,
(for the Parliament neither had it, nor did give it, but out of the peoples
purses;) but as Freemen of England, for their own liberties, unto whom God
has given the Victory; who now stand not bound in Duty and Conscience to any
assembly of men, no more then formerly to the King, to be commanded to do
their wills: But as Members of the English Nation, to pursue the just ends of
their undertaking, for recovery and preservation of their liberties, as well
against any Parliament that shall violate their Rights, as against King and
Lords, and no more to yield themselves slaves to any new Power or Government,
then they did to the old.


Scotl. I am not willing to say any thing against former proceedings, because
we had our hands therein, as well as you; but this, both you and we may plead
for our selves, necessity forced us to it: But we cannot see any necessity for
this rash undertaking.


Engl. Do you not remember how often the Army has Promised, Covenanted,
Remonstrated, and Engaged, yea, over and over again, to endeavor a through
Reformation, and such a settled provision and security for preservation of the
Rights and Liberties of the people, as Men, and as Christians, as should not be
liable to future violation? If they should fail of this, were they not most
perfidious unto God, and treacherous to the people? And when they found the
Parliament neglecting their duty; and on the contrary, beginning to lay aside
the chiefest worthies of the Army, who had hearts most enlarged, and integrity
most unspotted, and were every way best fitted, not only for the conduct of
the Army, but for carrying on the good ends of the War; should the Soldier
fit still, and hold their peace, and suffer such to be set over them, of whom
they had little, or no experience, whose Principles were known inconsistent
with Christian Freedom, whose interest or abilities, were not able to withstand
the common Enemy; but on the contrary, gave them new encouragement, and fresh
hopes.


Scotl. We cannot easily believe these things, that the Parliament could have
any such designs, for they have still carried on the Work with us.


Engl. Do you not remember, after the King was delivered into our hands, what
tampering was made, what endeavors used for patching up a peace with him, and
how long was it, and with what difficulty obtained, to have Votes passed for no
more Addresses? Was not the Army forced to Petition from all places and
quarters, to have Him and other Delinquents brought to Justice? (when they
found by his seclusion from all evil Counselors (on whom, till then, they
were still desirous to lay the blame) that he was chiefly guilty.) And
afterward how did they still neglect to pursue their duty, the good ends of
the War* but as they were even constrained to it? How often were we forced to
accuse, and impeach, and turn out their malignant tempers, purge them over and
over, and at last turn out the whole? I pray you look back, and tell us, what
good Act did they, to which they were not forced? How often has the Army, and
other good people, Petitioned them? and how often we^^ they by them checked, in
stead of thanked? Do but consider how long time they had, between 1648. that
they changed the Government, and 1653. that they were dissolved, and how few
Acts they made, that are pursuant to the change of Government, and of
continuing good to the people? Which of our burdens are eased? which of our
grievances redressed? does not the whole Land groan under heavy pressures,
which in a small part of that time, might have been eased?


Scotl. We are of the same mind with you, that they were bad enough in time
past; But, we hope, that just rebuke and shame which they have so long layn
under, has made them sensible of former miscarriages, and that they would now
double their diligence, and improve their time to the best advantage.


Engl. Our hope of that, was a great inducement to us, to call them together:
But we soon found our mistake; for within a very few weeks, they began to fall
into sidings, and parties, and the worser got the upper hand. Their time for
near six Months, they passed away, almost wholly in settling the Power of the
Nation, both Military and Civil, in such hands, as they conceived would be
true to them, and their absolute authority, with such artifice, that not any
man might speak a word in dislike of their proceedings, but they could turn him
out with a word; so that, what they had a mind to do, the people might take;
and what they disliked, neither the Army nor any others might offer nor ask.


Scotl. We conceive, that the Military Power, ought to be subject to the
Civil, and this was but to bring the Sword into the peoples own hands.


Engl. We know not why the Civil power ought to be called the peoples hands,
more then the Military; we know where the people have found their greatest
strength; and we hope the Army is as much Civil, as the Magistrate: and we
confess, the ends of our war being answered, and secured; both Swords belong
to the people. But had the Body of the People of England the Sword in their own
hands; you, as well as we, know how soon they would destroy both you, and us,
and themselves. And for this Assembly, neither to settle a Government, with
sufficient caution and security for the enjoyment of our Liberties, our dear
bought purchase, nor to Declare at what they aimed in order thereunto; but
rashly to subject all honest men, and honest interest of the Nation, to the
wisdom, will, and pleasure of that House, and those that should succeed them;
argues either a very bad design, or gross inadvertency, not to be readily
suff^red; and had we yielded to that prevayling party, we may well suppose the
honest interest of the Nation had been laid very low in a short time.


Scotl. But we hear, the chief difference began about General Officers; and
we are of the same mind with the Parliament, that there are enough General
Officers; for we have found how dangerous it is to have men in such great
power, they may make themselves Kings or Protectors, or what they please.


Engl. If the Parliament was against General Officers, why did they in one day
make seven; the Army desired but three or four, to render their Conduct more
entire and regular, and with such subordinations as became the several Trusts;
having found by dear bought experience, That there is no safety, but in order
and discipline: And they were such persons, as the Army knew, and had tried,
and durst follow in the greatest hazards, such as the Parliament themselves, as
best deserving, enployed in the highest Trusts with the Army; and of whose
fidelity, they had been sufficiently assured. And you had no reason to be
offended at it, for your General was one, so great esteem had the Army of him.
But we may well suppose. That had the Army pitched on some persons of the
Parliament, they had not been blamed for asking General Officers; which
clearly appears by those men's carriage, who while they oppose the Army, carry
on their own design, to get themselves named, and then with greediness accept
it. But I pray, why does your General, and Chief Officers blame us, as having
a design to bring the Armies of Scotland and Ireland, in subjection to the
Army of England: and that to nine or ten Persons, and it may be those to a
single One? May we not much rather suspect, that the Parliament, who puts the
whole trust of the Armies of the three Nations into seven hands, which are
less then nine or ten, had a more dangerous purpose? Your General in Scotland
they name for one; Lieutenant General Ludlowe (who was to be in Ireland) for
another; Colonel Overton, who was to be at Hull, for a third: Then three of
the remaining party, which they had prepared, all of one mind, might do with
General Fleetwood, what they pleased, and how soon one of those three might
out-wit, or overperswade, if not overpower the other two, let any man judge;
and whether the Parliaments way, or Armies desire, was more like to set up a
single Person? And thus were the Armies of the three Nations, which hitherto
have been wisely managed by the General, with the advice of his Council of
Officers, brought to the will of three persons, (and those such, as the Army
seldom knew in the Field, and of whose Spirits and Principles, they knew much,
and heard more) either to carry on their designs, or to be turned out at their
pleasure.


Scotl. I confess now you say very much, and I begin to be sensible of a
greater danger then I could before imagine.


Engl. Nay, my Fellow-souldier, this is not all; But to pursu^ their design
further, they hastily pass an Act. That it should be Treason for any Man, to
Receive or Pay any Moneys wha^soever, for Public use, without consent of the
People in Parliament. If they continue to sit, It appears they Resolved, not to
give the Army a Farthing, till they became subject to their wills, and quit
their Interest in the Good Cause we have bin engaged in; but rather to provoke,
and encourage the People, to rise up against them. What sad and dangerous
consequences might have followed, we may well conceive; but we dare hardly
suffer to enter into our though^s; God of his mercy (to the poor People of
England, and to rescue their almost lost Liberties) has we hope, prevented
them.


Scotl. But surely the Parliament intended only to bring the power of the Army
into the peoples hands, and there to leave it; for it could not be out of any
self desigue; they passed a Vote not to sit longer then May next.


Engl. Alas, I have you already, to put the Sword into the peoples hands, that
is, the Body of the Common people, is at once to make void all that ever we
have been doing: That the Sword (while it is in the Armies hand) is in the
peoples, that is, the good peoples hand, and for them whom God has given the
Victory and Power unto, we do plainly Declare: and that we are in their
steads, being in Number as many as at present needs, the rest of our Brethren
are in other services, and in their Callings, and we are one in interest with
them, as also for the good of all, yea, even our Enemies, that in the end of
all our Travells, Peace, and Righteousness, and Justice, might abound to every
one. And as to what you say, That they passed a Vote to sit no longer then May
next: Do not you know how easy a thing it is, one Day to Vote, and the next
to unvote? What preparation did they make then to end their sitting? Was not
their great and main Work to settle the Government? I pray what progress did
they make in that? Had not they spent half their time, merely to secure
themselves, and get all power into their own hands, and scarce took notice of
the Government? And if you say, That they had yet time enough for that, five or
six Months before them: it seems strange that in five Months they can now do
that, which they could not in five Years before. But to settle the Government
is not all, the whole Nation is to be brought into compliance with it, and all
things to be regulated accordingly; and if they could have settled the
Government in the first Month, we conceive there had been work enough for them
to have done the whole Year after in pursuant thereof, and so those will find,
that come to undertake it. But that they intended to spin out the time, and put
a necessity upon all, to have them sit longer, further appears, in that they
kept the whole Nations of Scotland and Ireland, without any Civil Judicature,
and all Offices, both Civil and Military in this Nation, almost in their own
hands, giving only very short times both to the Lieutenant General of the
Army, and also to the Judges, that so all things might either dye with
themselves, and leave the three Nations in confusion; or all men might consent
of necessity, that they might continue. None were fit for any thing, but
themselves; no others worthy to be trusted: How many worthy men stood ready and
willing to contribute their assistance, which might have enabled the House to
have done more in a Month, then themselves alone, by a Parliamentary way,
could do in six? What desires were made, that it might be heard, what honest
Men had to offer concerning a Government, the great concern of the Nation, and
all People therein; and that a Committee for that purpose might be appointed,
that so we might have the advantage of the choycest Lights in the Nation: But,
as if they would make, that all Wisdom, as well as Power, was confined within
the Walls of that House, they would keep all to themselves. And if they
intended (as you say) to sit no longer then May next, so much greater is their
blame; to subject all to their Successors, of whose regular Election,
(notwithstanding all the limitations and qualifications they could provide) we
could not be assured, nor of their adhearence afterward, to the Good Cause of
these Nations.


Scotl. But alas, now you have dissolved all that had any face of Civil
Authority in the Nation; Nothing remains, but the Sword to Rule and Govern,
which is a thing we hate as much as the people can do.


Engl. That which we have dissolved, its true, had the Face, but was no more
the Civil Authority of the Nation, then the Sword; for by virtue of that have
they Ruled: That there was not both a good Government, and Civil Authority
settled, was only their own fault; and their neglect, was the cause of their
first interruption, and our late Innovations, m^n finding in so many Years, so
little Fruit from a Parliament, which made even the name of a Parliament
loathsome to all Men. But it seems, while they can Rule with the Sword, its
well enough, and a good Civil Authority: But when the Sword cannot fulfill
their wills; then all must be Rebels and Traitors: And all that now they went
about (or chiefly) was to get the Sword into their own hands; but what they
would have done after, few know; only we may guess by their former carryage.


Scotl. But I pray, what do you intend further? I hope you do not purpose
always to keep up the Sword. When shall we have a Par^iament, for that only
will satisfy us, and the people?


Engl. To Govern by the Sword, is not more hateful to any, then our selves;
and had the late Assembly gone about the Framing and settling such a Government
as might have answered the ends of our late wars and troubles, they had taken
a wiser course to have engaged both Army and People to them. And as for the
Calling of a Parliament; so soon as a Form of Government is agreed, upon such
Principles and Fundamental Constitutions, as may fully secure our dear bought
Liberties; you will hear, that the Calling of a Parliament will be the first
work.


Scotl. How! when a Form of Government is agreed on; I pray who must agree in
that? Can any do it but a Parliament?


Engl. In England heretofore, Parliaments never had it in their power to meddle
with, or dispute the Form of our Government, that was never in question before
them; Kings were always granted to be our Chief Rulers; and therefore here is
the Ground of your mistake: The difference betwixt King and Parliament, was not
about the Government; but the Laws by which we were to be Governed; which after
a Government settled, will be left to Parliaments, as before.


Scotl. Who then must appoint a Government?


Engl. You must consider, That our war has not been betwixt the people of a
whole Nation (wherein all were of one mind) and a Forreigner; but a Civil War
amongst our selves, one party against another, and a third party looking on.
And finding in the pursuit of that just Cause of Liberty which was begun, That
the very Form of Government was as well burdensome, as the Ruling Person and
his Prerogative; we saw it necessary, to lay aside both together; which though
it begat us new Enemies, and was opposed by many; yet, God was pleased to
prosper, and give us the Conquest over them. And now, (to tell you the truth,
in plain terms) we conceive, that in deciding this Controversy, God has not
only given power to those that were instruments in carrying on his work
amongst us, to secure their own Liberties; but also to see such a new Form of
Government settled, as will fully establish the Rights of all other men, and
deliver them from that bondage under which they have long layne, both as to the
inner and outward man; from which God has now rescued them with a strong hand,
as he did our Fathers of old from Egyptian slavery. And we conceive it is not
only the right, but the duty of all those whom God has kept steadfast, to
carry on this work; not only to see a Form of Government settled in room of
that which is cast down; But such a Form as will in the Principles and
Fundamental Constitutions thereof, fully settle and secure our Liberties, as
Men and Christians, the sum of that good Cause in which we have been so long
engaged. And that they ought not to give up the power which God has given unto
them, unto the common newtrall and disaffected spirit of the Nation, to Judge
of, and determine what has been the quarrel, and what shall satisfy and be
the price of so much Blood and Treasure; which is the only cause, why we
dislike a Free Parliament, that is, a Parliament chosen by the body of the
people, Newters and Enemies, as well as Friends,


Scotl. Truly we fear a Free Parliament, that is, a Parliament chosen by the
whole Body of the People, as well as you; and herein we are in a strait, We
are satisfied, That a Parliament is the best Government; and yet a Free
Parliament will destroy us, and that chiefly makes us call for the old
Parliament, which of necessity, even for self security, we conceived would
adhere to our Cause.


Engl. As to the old Parliament, I have said enough; and if you will have more,
I pray what Jurisdiction had they over Ireland and Scotland, those by whom they
were not chosen, was it by the peoples consent, or our Conquest? I hint this,
to show you how much they have walked by our Principles, which they would now
condemn; and have they not still owned us in all things we did, till 1653. and
justify us in turning out all others, till it came to their own turn, that
did as justly deserve it. And as for Parliaments, viz. Representatives,
Trustees, or Deputies of the Peace, we are clear with you, That all power
being in the people, their Delegated power ought to be Supreme; yet, consider
their Trust, is still conditional, and therefore liable to the same question,
and punishment, as Kings, or others: and we are as much for Parliaments, as you
can be after a Government settled. And seeing our former Government is
dissolved. (I mean Monarchy,) we look upon the good people of England, as
standing with the Sword in their hands (which is their highest State of
Sovereignty, including in it all lower Magisteriall Offices) not subjected to
the Rules of any Form of Civil Government; but what themselves (orderly
Assembled for that purpose) shall think fit to make: which being once agreed,
and settled; We do Profess and Declare our free and ready subjection
thereunto; and either to return to our particular Vocations (if there can be
found sufficient intrinsecall strength and vigor in any such frame of
settlement, (our condition considered) as to support it self against visible
opposition) (...) to be servants to the people to secure the same against all
viol^tors whatsoever.


Scotl. But what? Can you set limits to a Parliament? how can you restrain
their absolute power? that will take away their Freedom, and Privilege.


Engl. After many sharp contests between our Ancestors, and the Kings of
England; our Ancestors at last got a Grant of their Liberties, which were
settled in a Charter, as Fundamental Constitutions, not to be altered; and all
Laws afterward to be made contrary or repugnant thereunto, were to be void,
which was yearly to be Read in Public Courts of Judicature, and a solemn
Curse to be pronounced against those that broke it, which was of force till the
late Change of Government, and yet was never taken as an abridgement of
Parliamentary Power, or restraint of their Liberties; but was rather esteemed
the great Bulwarks of the peoples Freedoms, which neither Kings nor
Parliaments could alter. And therefore, (upon this new Conquest over Monarchy)
we believe, it is the duty of those to whom God has given the Victory, to see
such Fundamental Constitutions settled, as are consonant to the Law of God, and
Principles of Justice and Righteousness, and that just Freedom, both as to the
inward and outward man, which belongs to every man, as a Member of the Creation
of God, (the great work that God has been doing amongst us, and will carry on,
and bring to pass in the whole Earth) and to see the same so fortified and
secured, with provision against all kinds of violation, that the people may be
no more put to make a new purchase of it.


Scotl. Though you should come to a settlement that may have much good in it, I
cannot see how you can secure it; the next Parliament will claim an absolute
power, and will go near to alter it, if it be but even to show their
Authority.


Engl. If such a spirit shall be in the Parliament, as to alter good things
settled: How much further off would they be to lay such a Foundation? and
therefore such expedients must be used, as will prevent that mischief and yet
leave the Parliament Free, which must be provided for in the Form of
Government.


Scotl. I pray what Government do you intend to set up? and seeing you claim
the right of Forming a Government: what must others expect from you.


Engl. We, that is to say, the Army only, do not claim any such right. But
we, that is to say the Body of the good people, adhearents to this Cause in all
the several Nations, who continue still faithful thereunto, (whereof we are a
part, and in our Brethrens stead, left to defend both them, and our selves, in
prosecution of the work, till it be finished) do make this claim; not that we
desire to have the Government in our hands; not that we desire the Sword should
Rule; not that we desire to abridge any other man of his Liberty; or that he
should be a slave, much less a subject to us. But we being called together, in
defense of those just rights in common, which belong to us, and every man in
particular; and having obtained success to our just Cause, We cannot, we dare
not, (lest not only the ruin of our selves, but also of our posterities; and
not only so, but the whole Nations, whom God has given it into our powers to
preserve, as well as our selves, should be laid to our charge) part a sunder,
nor suffer our selves to be divided, till our Liberties and the Liberties of
all men, be secured.


Scotl. But still you will be Judges your selves.


Engl Our own innocence and integrity, is that which justifies us in the fight
of God, from whom we have our strength, who has judged for us. And it is not
reasonable, that we should stand at the Judgment Seat of our Enemies, nor of
those who have not known our Cause, nor put their hands to carry it on. Had all
the people of England with one consent, taken part with us, there had been no
such difference, as to persons or interests. But you know, the greater part of
the Nation were against us; and if they might be Judges, you, as well as we,
understand what would be the issue, though in our principles, their Liberties,
as well as our own will be secured.


Scotl. I pray you tell me what those Principles are.


Engl. I may say in short, all our Principles are summed up in one, founded
upon that just and righteous Rule, wherein is fulfilled the whole Law and the
Prophets; As you would have men do unto you, even so do ye unto them: which
includes in it the perfect Freedom, of Conscience, of Person, and of Estate,
and which we only wait and long to see established.


Scotl. If that be your Principle, I hope we shall never differ; for we do
with as much earnestness as your selves, long to see such a Government, and
Laws settled, as stand upon that Foundation: And if we shall confess, that the
late Assembly was no Parliament, but that their authority is perfecty
determined, that you had good Reason and Right to end their sitting, and ought
to proceed to pursue the ends of the great cause of just Liberty. It will not
at all prejudice the rights of the people; and I believe that generally the
people would be as little satisfied as your selves, to have that Assembly rule
over them. But yet these things seem strange and contrary to our ancient Laws
and Government; and now we know not where, nor how to come to a settlement.


Engl. If you look upon the Parliament, and their proceedings, or on the Army,
and theirs, you will find, that in our whole course, there was seldom any such
agreement, which the Rule of former Laws and Constitutions of Government that
the actions of either could be clearly and fully justified thereby any longer
then the Law of Success and Conquest did uphold them; and the inward warrant
of Justice, and Righteousness did encourage them in such their actings.
Neither could it be otherwise; those Laws that were made for the support of our
former Government, being as contrary to Principles of just Freedom, as the
Governors or Government it self.


Scotl. But I hope you will not thence infer, that therefore you may break
and make void all other our good Laws at your pleasure.


Engl. All Laws that are just and equal, will be found to spring from the Root
of all power, the Law of God, which is the Foundation of all Laws that are
just; and as they are consonant thereunto, they will agree with that Principle
which we own and hold forth, and desire to be found in. And we shall be sorry
if any shall accuse us of the violation of any such Laws; we hope they cannot.


Scotl. Truly for our parts many of us (we can say it) we would not fight in a
personal quarrel, not for the best of Persons, neither for Members of a
Parliament, nor for the Officers of the Army; but for the good Cause of
justice, freedom and Righteousness, in which we have been engaged; that only
will God bless, who respects no man's Person, that work only will he carry
on, and therein (I am convinced by your Discouse,) is the power and true
Authority; and all who are found standing in it, will need no other warrant.
And now Fellow-souldier. I must take my leave being glad of this happy Meeting,
and shall change my purpose of going any further Southward; and shall return
immediately to my Brethren in Scotland, who I hope will be much satisfied to
hear of these things. Only I would feign have spoken a little with you about
the Government you intend to settle. But in a few days, (if you will promise
to meet me) I hope to return, and have a better opportunity. Till then, I bid
you Farewell.

And so shaking Hands, they parted.
The end of the first Part.

