A COPY of a LETTER Written from ROME, July 14th. 1691.
ABOUT THE Choosing of a POPE.
THE Cardinals being extreme uneasy by reason of the excessive Heat and other
Inconveniences of the Conclave, came at last to the Chosing of a Pope. The
Honor of this great (...) Cantelmi and Giudici; for seeing that the
Difficulties for Barberigo, Acciaioli, Conti, and Marcscotti were
insurmountable, they at last carried on the Intrigue for Cardinal Pignatelli,
but with so much Cunning, that the French were the first that proposed him:
Guidici seemed to be very cold about it, saying, the King of Spain his Master
would not like him by reason of some Difference that had happened formerly at
Naples. This made the French Cardinals, the Party of Ottoboni and Alteri, and
some of the Zealots more eager, and they all solemnly declared for him. The
Spaniards finding they had caught the French, gave him immediately their
Votes, followed by the rest of the Zealots and the whole Party of Chigi.
Whereupon the French, being sensible of their Mistake, endeavored to go off
again, and desired the Choice of a Pope should be put off for three days; but
Cardinal Gortz opposed it, telling them, they were no Boys, but Cardinals; that
they had given their Votes once for him, and must not now retract it; whereupon
Gortz and Medici employed all their Endeavors to promote the Business; they
missed twice their Ends, but at the third time they had so good Success, that
Thursday last about Ten a Clock at Night, the Number of the Votes for
Pignatelli amounted to 54, (amongst which were those of Lauria and Spinola,
that went but just returned to the Conclave) and about Three a Clock in the
Morning the Choice of Pignatelli was made known by the Discharge of all the
Cannon from the Castle of St. Angelo, and the Ringing of the Bells. The new
Pope is 76 Years and four Months of Age: He has assumed the Name of Innocentius
XII. and has declared, That as he has the same Name of Innocentius Odeschalchi,
so he intended to follow exactly his footsteps, desiring withal, that all the
Doctors and Servants that attended that Pope, should also serve him, to the
exclusion of his own Domestics. He has also solemnly declared, that he would
endure no Nepotism nor any of his Kindred about him. Amongst the Ministers, he
has confirmed the Cardinal Panciatici in (...) of Datary; Albani in that of
Secretary of the Secret Brevets. The Marquesses Astalli and Cavallieri in that
of Captains of the Guards, Mario Spinola in that of Secretary of the Secret
Brevets sent to Princes, and Nursi in that of Commissary of the Chamber. He has
chosen the Abbot Antaldi to his Auditor, the Abbot Fabroni to his Secretary of
the Memorials, the Abbot Ricci to Secretary of the Cifres, the Abbot Bernardin,
a Dominican, to his Confessor, and Crispoldi Coppieri, and Campo Reale
(Secretaries to the Spanish Ambassador) to his Chamberlains. He has also had a
Conference with Alteri about filling up the Place of Chief Minister and
Secretary of State, and some say Cardinal Spada, and others Imperiali and
Cantelmi stand fairest for it. Yesterday Te Deum was sung, to Morrow is to be
the Coronation-day, and Monday next is the day designed for the Cavalcade to
Monte Cavallo.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1691


