A DOSE for CHAMBERLAIN, AND A Pill for the DOCTOR; Being an ANSWER to two
Scurrilous Pamphlets, Written against the AVTHOR of the ASSES COMPLAINT, and.
WHat ailes this bauling Puppy thus to prate?
I think the Genius of Billings-gate
Has lately crept into his Soul; Alas!
That City Dogs should bait the country Ass?
And does the beast stand silent whilst this Proctor
For Earl and Balaam, which the busy Doctor
derk his dull sides; and not so much as Kick
The Sexton, nor the Piss-pot Emperick?
It Is strange he speaks not, Is his back so strong
To bear abuses that he holds his tongue?
Come, I Will b' his Orator for in some cases
The Lawyers use to plead for none but Asses.
Now what says Chamberlain that Pamplet-monger,
What do thou tell the silly Ass of Hunger,
Should he ( like thee turn Parish-Clark, and cozen
Poor Souls, and sell his Prayers six pence a Dozen,
Dine upon Midwifes fees, and grease his chaps
With Gossips charity and Female Scraps,
Then would his Panch like thine be quickly fraught;
And Men would say, he is better fed then taught.
Thou Priest in Ginger bread, should he but plead
For Drunken sots that cannot Preach but read
Such as thy self, O then the foul-mouthed whelp
Would fawn upon the Ass, and cease to yelp.
Then peace thou Iournyman 'oth Reading pew
Tell us not of a Giddy-headed crew
Or Sick-brain'd Sectaries for all men know
'Twas such as Chamberlain that made them so;
Dumb Dogs drive out their Parrishes, to Roam;
He needs must leg that has no bread at home,
But stay I know what Sir John does intend,
He Would have the Bishops take him for their friend;
Devils pretenses, always were divine; I wish it be not so in Cornhill.

A knave may have an Angle for his Sign;
But Reader take it on a Christians word,
When such men kiss they will soon betray their Lord;
But stay what means the Docter? has he left
His Legal murder and his Venial theft,
His plotting with his Druggest and the Nurse,
Not for to purge the body but the purse.
And turned a Satyrist? I Would thoug^t the man
Had been confind unto a Cl^se-stole Pan,
But it is a mad world, when Hell breaks loose and he
That is a Quack, talks of Divinity;
Then leave your scribbling Sirrah send your verses
Unto your Patients to wipe their A --
The Asses Author scorns to stroke your Beard,
He Will foul his hands that meddles with a T --
Heaven keep this City from Quacksalving Knaves,
That send sound men to their untimely graves.
Here did I think to make an end, but hark,
I have one word more to the Parrish-Clerk;
Let Preachers say God save King Charles, and then,
'Twill be your Cue Sir Clerk to say, Amen.
WILLIAM COOK.


