POEM ON HIS Royal Highnesses Restoration to the Dignity of Lord High Admiral
of England, etc.
THe Royal Name of YORK has too much worth,
For any Common Mouth to Trumpet forth,
His Praise; for who dares venture to relate
The glorious progress of his Royal Fate,
Must be acquainted first that is Royal Sire
Highly esteemed him, (whom all ought t'admire)
Instructed him in all Obedience,
When he should die unto his Son the Prince;
Which took such lasting root in YORKS great heart,
That he never from that Royal Law did start.
His Youth was seasoned with the generous Rules,
The Gravest and most Learned in the Schools
Could teach him, and when that his Age began
To spur him forwards to become a man,
He as impatient of the ling ring time,
Did force his Youth Honors high mount to climb;
Early he thrust his budding Glories out
In foreign Courts; most Princes round about,
Hearing our Hero's Gallantris, Proclaim
The thriving Glorys of his infant Fame:
The French and Spanish King who Graced his hands
With the highest Dignities of their Commands;
By Experience found his Valor such a Prize,
That none excelled, and few could Equalize;
Therefore my Muse with empty Graces Sings
His Fame, which has been better sung by Kings.
Then let us with thankful Reverence,
On bended Knees for his great Providence,
Worship the Rider on the Heavenly Throne,
Who for him showed his great Salvation,
Who saved him from the raging Lyon-Dutch,
Nor suffered one of his cursed Paws to touch
His Royal head, next that the baystrous Seas,
Which hundreds then devoured, durst not to seize
His Life preserving it for higher things,
To subject Scotland to the best of Kings,
And though the heaven permitted swearing Otes,
To be the Bell-Weather to lead the Votes,
Of a rash Parliament to Vote him down,
And Bar him from his just Succession,
Yet still preserves his Title to the Crown.
Which saved him also from the powers of Hell,
(The place appointed for all that rebel,)
The Authors of that dire Conspiracy,
Against his Life and's Sacred Majesty;
That be might raise him up again above,
All Malice to his Sacred Brothers Love:
Who has restored him both by Sea and Land,
To the high Trust of which he had Command.
Thus Armed by his Brothers power, senc'd with the Prayr^
Of Loyal hearts the Illustrious Hero dares,
Do any thing that can be underrstood,
To tend unto his Sovereigns honor and the good.
Of all the Subjects of this happy Isle,
Which has so long been graced with the smile
Of Hea ven, whilst all our Neighbring Countries are,
Shook by the constant Earthquakes of a War.
Therefore in vain shall earth and hell combine,
To part his Tittle from the Royal Line,
And with Religious mask their Plots conceal,
Sinceth Authors and the crimes Heaven did reveal,
And Earth Revenge, and may all Plotters be,
Still Branded with Eternal Insamy,
Who shall Conspire against great Charles and Thee.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.


