A Conscionable Couple: OR,
The valiant Resolution of a Young Man and a Maid,
That have left all their Kindred, as true folks have said:
It Was for their Religion and good Conscience sake,
That they forsook England, a Voyage to take.
These two loving Protestants kindly together,
Are gone to seek Fortunes, there is no man knows whither.
To a curious new Tune, Or, The Faithful Friend.


This does make the world to wonder,
That thou and I must part ^sunder;
Parting from thee s^re does grieve me,
O so lo^th I am to leave thee:
Leave thee, leave thee, I Will not leave thee,
O so loath I am to leave thee.
I love thee deer, yet dare not show it,
Let not thy Friends nor Father know it,
The joys and comforts late abounded;
Now is my heart with sorrows w^unded.
Parting from thee sore does grieve me,
O how loath I am to leave thee.
Thy amorous looks makes me admire,
And set my senses all on fire:
I would fo^ego all earthly treasure,
T^ spend my time with thee in pleasure:
But we must part, which sore does grieve me,
O how loath am I to leave thee.
Thou in mine eye art such a creature,
The like was never framed by Nature:
Thy sweet behavior and thy carriage,
Loves Queen by no means can disparage,
But we must part, which sore does grieve me,
O how loath am I to leave thee!


Cruel Fortune, I must curse th^e,
Cause thy false design and does force me;
Thus to go and have my True-love,
Farewell, ten thousands times adieu Love
We needs must part, that sore does grieve me,
O how loath I am to leave thee!
Mark these words which here are spoken,
This gold Ring keep for a token;
And when I am furthest from thee,
Prithee Sweetheart think upon me,
Part we must, which sore does grieve me,
O how loath I am to leave thee!
It Is long of England's strange Division
And the altering of Religion:
That I am exposed in danger,
And to tr^vel like a stranger;
This of all the rest does grive me,
That I am enforced to leave thee.
My dear Love, when we are pa^ted
I shall be so heavy-hearted,
That no joys I shall recover,
Therefore as thou art my Lover,
Prithee Svveet-heart take me to thee,
Say but the word, and I Will go with thee.
Let Father frown, and Mother chide me,
I Will go with thee whatever be^ide me;
If it were through fire and water,
Lead the way, I^le follow after:
I prithee Sweetheart take me to thee,
Say but the word, and I Will go with thee.
I^ to the Seas thou make thy venture,
I in the ^hip will also enter:
Or if thou on the Shore wilt tarry,
I the self-^am^ m^nd do carry,
So thou vouchsafe to take me to thee,
Speak but the word, and I Will go with thee.
Or if thou will be a Soldier,
Place a Musket on my shoulder:
Put me on some man's apparel,
I will sta^ely fight thy quarrel;
I fear not what man can do to me,
Speak but the word and I Will go with thee.
Neither Sword nor Persecution
Shall break off my Resolution:
Though a^l the world forsake thee
For my Comr^ode I will ^ake thee;
If thou will but take me to thee,
Speak the word, and I Will go with thee,
Farewell Father, farewell Mother,
Farewell Sister, farewell Brother,
F^rewel Friends, and farewell Kindred,
I from my Love will not be hindered;
Now prithee Sweet heart take me to thee
Hap well or woe, I Will now go with thee.
Since thou stand'st firm to the old Religion
My self am of the same condition;
England we will leave, and march together,
No e^rt^ly creature shall know whither;
Conscience moves me to come to thee,
Thou have spoke Love, I Will go with thee.
Finis.
London, Printed for F. Coals T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clark.


