A CONGRATULATION On the Happy Discovery of the Hellish Fanatic, Plot.
To the Tune of, Now, now the Fight's done.
^ [1]
COme now let us rejoice, and the City Bells ring,
and the Bonefires kindle, whilst unto the King
We pay on our knees the grand tribute that is due,
Of thanks and oblation, which now we renew,
For Mercies that we have received of late,
From Prudence and Justice diverting our Fate.
[1]
The Curtain is drawn, and the Clouds are dispersed;
The Plot's come to light, that in darkness did nest,
Jack Calvin's displayed with his Colors in grain:
And who were the Traitors and Villains it is plain:
The Traps that they laid, and the snares that they set,
Have caught them at last in their own silly Net.
[3]
The Foreman himself, that Offspring of Hell,
In whose wicked Breast all Treason does dwell,
To the Tower was sent, with his Triple Name,
Whilst the Triple-tree groans for his Carcass again.
And many Rogues more their Leader will follow
Unto the same place, whilst we whoop and hollow.
[4]
The Libelling Tribe that so long have Reigned,
And sowed Sedition, shall now be Arraigned;
Their Sham and their Lies shall do them no good,
When they come to the tree, there is no shamming that wood:
Jan. and Curtis in the forlorn hope,
Then Vile Smith and Care shall neck the next Rope.
[5]
So, so, let them dye that would Monarchs destroy,
And spit all their Venom our Land to annoy:
If that their Power were to their Malice equal,
And their Courage the same, they would soon ruin all;
But their Courage is low, and their Power but small;
Their Treason is High, and must have a Fall.
[6]
When Trojans of old (our Ancestors) were
in danger of Shipwreck, and tossed here and there
Great Neptune soon quelled those Rebels and Storms,
Withbrandished trident, and freed them from ha^ms;
They fled from his Face, through the guilt of then cause,
As these from our Lion, if he stretch out his paws
[7]
Go Devils, be gone to the Region below,
Here Is no business of yours, or ought left to do:
No Tempter we need, we can act all our selves,
Without any help from you sily Elves;
For what Presbyter acts, he thinks a disgrace
All Hell should outdo him, or dare show their face.
[8]
For produce all the ill that Hell ever hatched,
It Is nothing at all, when it comes to be matched
With what has been Plotted by Traitors of late,
Who aimed at the Ruin of Church, and of State:
By Perjury, Bribes, by subborning all Evil,
By Murder, and worse Than e're came from the D.
[9]
Now Presbyter come and submit thy stiff Neck,
Thou labour'st in vain our great Monarch to check;
Whose Power Divine no Mortals control,
But hazard the loss of both Body and Soul:
Then banish for ever your Commonwealth hope,
Which tends to destruction, and ends in a Rope.
EPILOGVE.
With Wine of all sorts let the Conduits run free,
And each true heart drink the K.'s H^on his knee
No Treason shall lodge in our breasts while we live
To God, and to Caesar their Due we will give;
We Will pray with our hearts, and fight with our hands,
Against all Fanat. when great Charles commands.
LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson next the Cross-Keys in Fetterlane, 1682.


