A Congratulatory POEM On Occasion of His HIGHNESS The Prince of ORANGE HIS
MARRIAGE.
HAil High and Mighty PRINCE! for You Are no less,
By Birth, by Merit, and by great Success.
What is thy Birth and Merit all Men know,
Let then my Muse thy great Success now show:
It Is great indeed, since some occult Decree
Exalts Thee still against seeming Destiny.
For when the Gallic Powers without control,
Swift as those Streams which bore them, down did roll,
And o're-whelm'd lofty Cities in their way,
Which thick upon the Belgic Shores lay:
When with their Swords they plowed up Conquered ground,
And Rooting for their spreading Lillies found:
When homebred Storms, Storms from abroad did join,
And all, to make a State-wreck, did combine;
When the United Arrows broke their stay,
And on their own rough Seas dispersed lay:
Thou did by Miracle walk on those Waves,
And Mount where thousands sank into their Graves.
Thou, who in Calms had long neglected lain,
Were on fierce Billows Backs raised up again:
Nay, at the sight of such a Pilot, straight
The amazed Hostile Cohorts did retreat,
Even of themselves they back again did glide
More swift, than when they rushed down with the Tide.
(Thou being restored) they quickly were dismayed,
And feared the Conquests they themselves had made
Let others brag what their great Troops have done,
Thou perform'st Wonders by mere looking on:
Just so, great Perseus (though o're-power'd) won,
And pressing Numbers Vanquished all alone:
Thy Enemies, like his, Attack in vain,
Since by their Labors, Thou still seem to gain
The Cities which they Captive made, now Free
Remain as Monuments Rebuilt by Thee.
Nor do these Trophies but in part express,
How you are (as 'twere) pursued with great Succes^
Seven Provinces cannot thy Merit Crown,
Though they could do seven times more than they have do^^
Therefore we Welcome Thee to Britain's Shore,
And to enrich Thee, make our selves grow poor,
Not Gold, nor Gemms can purchase the fair Prize,
Which Thou thy self must now Monopolize;
A VIRGIN Princess it is, in whom alone,
More than the Gain of many Camps is won.
Hence forward Thou securely may disdain
Those who small Towns with great Expenses gain
Their Conquests (though they Nations should subd^^
Seem poor, when once compared unto you:
For Thou have got what well may termed be
EVROPA, Kingdoms in Epitome.
LONDON, Printed by T. D. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1678


