A CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE GHOST OF THE RUMP AND TOM TEL-TROTH. Together with
her sad Complaint of that dismal and total Eclipse that is like to fall out
on the 20th day of April, 1660.

GHOST Now like a gashly spright I do appear,
Who once in Pomp, this Commonwealth did Steer
Which way I pleased, But now at last I wot,
No Voice is for me, or my daughter Scot
To sit. Our falls decreed, we must retire
From hence to flames of ever burning fire.

Printed for Mris Nurse the Rumps late Matron, and are to be sold at
Kings-land-Court near the Bishopric of Durham.

A CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE Ghost of Mris. RVMP, and her Adversary Tom Tell-troth.
Ghost. WHat art thou that dare presume to appear on this sacred ground?
whence come you thus booted and spurred, I should known you, as being formerly
acquainted with you, but it is so long that I have quite forgot thy name, pray
let me crave it.


Tom. In the name of blackness what art thou that thus disturb'st the Peace of
an bonest passenger, by thy gashly countenance and shrill voice? Surely I am in
England! or else I Am much mistaken, but this thy usage makes me doubt, for
that I have so long been banished from my Native Country; Pray take compassion
on a wandering stranger, and lead him not astray, he was sent to England, and if
it be so that you prove a happy guide, his name shall soon be discovered to you.


Ghost. It Is England, England! which I and my confederates have usurped the
Government of, and should have none still, had not the Siren voice of a cursed
Judas betrayed me. But pray let me know your name?


Tom. Why then to put you out of doubt, my name is Tom Tel-troth, that have
been banished for conscience sake out of my Native Country above eleaven years.


Ghost. Oh Tom, it seems then you have a time wherein you may show your face
which thus long we have compelled you to hide.


Tom. You compelled me to hide my face, why pray, what are you that have
compelled me so much?


Ghost. Why have you then forgotten your Sovereign Rump that cast you into your
long Exzile.


Tom. I know well enough there was the Fagg end of a Parliament set at the
Stearn at Westminster when I was forced to fly, but little thought I they had
removed their Senate house from thence to this place. But pray tell me are you
that Power (Rump as you call your self) if so i will assure you something is in
the wind: have you of late been humbled for your sins, or what is the matter you
have chosen such a lowly house to sit in such Malencholly weeds to adorn you
withal.


Ghost. Full sore against our wills are we confined to this station, we
nourished a bird to pluck out our own eyes, who under pretense of remvoing a
late obstruction coucht upon us, has totally extirpated us from our
habitation, vile Traitor and disloyal Subject as he is, we come to thee for
judgment, and if as truth thou art thou will but Cohere to us and be so
prevalent with the English People, as if thou please we know thou can, we
will not tell thee how well we will reward thee.


Tom. And are you met withal at last: and have you no place to settle your
Rump upon? ho! ho! it makes my worship smile, I did think as much that your
Ambitious wings at last either would be clipped, melted, singed, or subjected to
some other disasterous chance, and are you caught in one of your own traps, a
Jest worthy to be filed upon the Records of Will Summers.


Ghost. Nay prithy Tom (for now I can think of your name, for my own ends) do
not flout so: you may endanger my health: for I am late escaped from the perils
of a hard and terrible teaming if ever pity moved you, have compassion on a
poor distressed weak despised friendless Rump.


Tom. Why what would you have me do for you?


Ghost. Only help me up the stairs in Westminster Hall that lead you know
whether, for I am so weak I am not able to stand, much less to go alone, and
notwithstanding my weakness for necessitas non legem habit if I take not
possession again before the 20. of April next, I loose my right by the Laws of
the Nation and am undone for ever; therefore good Tom pity the case of a poor
sick and weak Rump.


Tom. Alas I cannot contribute any thing to your relief, for if I should put
forth any thing to vindicate your innocence and harmlesness, and witness
against the illegallity of your exturpation, the people would stone me for a
false and lying prophet, and not receive it as the Oracle of Tom-teltroth.


Ghost. Well hazard that, we know the simple meaning of the people so well,
that if you will but regester us in your table book we shall imediatelv be
invested with the Robes of Saints again, by the honest simple people of England.


Tom. Well Admit I should play the Doctor for once and make your feeble Rump
sit again, what can you say for your selves for demeaning your selves in your
office if you chance to nestle thereagain?


Ghost. Oh we will become the mildest of Rulers, and the mercifullest of
Governors, we will ease the Nation of all the heavy burdens we have brought
upon her, which none can remove so well as we have laid them on, we will vanish
oppression and covetousness far from our Land, and utterly blot them out of our
remembrance and will make glad the heart of all men from the Plowmen to the
Merchant, and make her a Land that shall flow with milk, and trading shall flow
in so great an abundauce that men shall not be able to find places to hoard up
their treasure, all these and what else may be desired will we perform. Honest
Tom play thou the man and we care not.


Tom. Nay but hold a little, two words goes to a bargain, I do not intend to
buy a pigg in a poak neither: you have made a very fair speech and when I have
construed it I can say something to you, you say you will become the cruelest
of Rulers and the unmercifullest of Governors or Tyrants, you will ease the
Nation of all the heavy Burdens that is of all the money, plate, gold, Jewels
and whatsoever riches she has saved from your ravenous and insatiate paws,
because none can remove them so well as you, that you mean by your new found
ways of Sequestration, Taxes, imposition, Excise, unreasonable Customs,
Monopolies and other new found fangles of your own brains, you will establish
oppression and covetousness in a far greater light in the Land then ever, and
most vigorously revive them in the Book of your remembrance, will you make glad
the hearts of all men from the Plowman to the Merchant, viz. such as are joints
of the Rump but none else, but will make sorrow prove the sops of both the
Church and States man, and give your phanatick purity such a large liberty of
conscience that without dispute then the Churches indeed shall suffer
Martyrdom, and the Bells shall serve for Coin to cheat the people whilst you
follow the rule of Haslerigg and Preduaux in hoarding up the good mettal-baggs,
the States man let you alone to plague and punish for he shall live by the
sustenance of Gall and bitterness which shall be all the milk and honey shall
flow in the Land, from your store houses by trading, Is meant the Lobstertorean
trading with the people upon free quarter whereby their gains will be so great
that they may put the same in their eyes and see never the worse, and thereby
they will be (I must confess) much puzzled to find out such small places of
hoarding up as their gained treasure will require, and at last you conclude
very notably all this, and what else may be desired you will perform, it is not
at all by me doubted but that you will perform the contempt now, how do you
think if I should take the pains to Register you and set you forth in your
colors the people will be either so mad and foolish to trust or believe you,
therefore rest your selves contented for believe and you have had a fair time
of it 10. or 11. years my masters what have ye no reason at all: there is reason
in rosting of Eggs, pray let me go for I fear if you detain me any longer upon
this helpless and vain account I shall at last learn the Language of the Beast,
you see it is dark and I 'm a stranger in this Land, so that I scarce know my
own father when I met him, he has so altered his tongue since I have saw him
last and to tell you the truth, I have never a penny in my purse to buy a light,
and I fear you will hardly afford me one out of your bounteous negerallitie
therefore it is but reason you grant me a conductor and none so fit as Atkins
that I may smell my way like a blood-Hound what say ye Gentlewomen can you
grant my request.


Ghost. I grant it only let me sprinkle you with a little holy water, which it
may be may purge you from your filthiness, and open your eyes to have a right
reflextion on me, for your last exposition has only grounded a conceit in me,
that the change of the Climate has formed you and intolerable Lunatic, nurse
Haslerigg bring me hither a Bottle of sweet water of Mrs. Scots own distilling
that I may make this churl an aderifferous Gentleman: Quick, you see it is late.


Nurse. Here Is the Bottle pray sprinkle him to the purpose or not at all.


Ghost. Nay Tom: What wo't not have a dram you know not the excellency thereof.


Tom. Pray tell not me of your poisoning stuff de' think I 'm mad to be
charmed: if you will grant my request if not i will groble out my way in the dark
following the sent of this thick Vapor.


Ye cold A -- st Rump that sat so long for naught had you your Egg to
perfection brought you had not thus forlorn been left god wot to the mercy of
the rope and slaughtring knott and farwell for I came but to tell you a few true
Jests of your own Coining.

One of the Ghosts Emissaries. Oh what a wonderful thing is this that men
should know all our actions, and dive so into the secret of hearts to tell what
I did in my life; Could better Lipsolve been used then I applied for the
salving up the sore of the Commonwealths destruction, and yet in his
construction he should hint so netlingly and truly at every particular point
of our intentions, so well veiled by me, but I cry ye mercy his name is
Tell-truth, I did not think he had his name for nothing, for had he been a
thousand time in thee Mrs. Rump, he could not have spoken more prophetickly
then he has, well: I see there is no hopes of recovery i will return to my infernal
habitation, for its in vain to prosecute the Design any further for a hundred
to one, but he has blazed the truth of all before now, and has given all men
time to provide for encountering us.

GHOST. Before i will go to my infernal place
Of torment, i will adventure here a space,
And like the Phoenix will at last expire
And build a nest shall make the world admire,
Of pure refined glistering yellow Gol^,
And choycest Gems which now my Coffers hold,
And there i will flutter with Icarius wings,
Upon my Nest till all those glittering things,
By bright Sols Beams shall swiftly opperate,
My Rumpish body there shall penetrate;
And make me drop from the top of the lofty Tree,
Such Ashes, that a Phoenix like to me
Shall soon appear; With that a horrid cry
She gave, and made the very Earth to fly
About, and straight at least a thousand more
Black Friends appeared the like never seen before,
With thundering, lightning, flashes from the Sky
And Smoking stinks, Toms valor for to try,
Which Tom beholding, in a grivous fright
Departing nimbly bid the Ghost Goodnight.

Finis Coronet Opus.

