The Contented CUCKOLD: OR, The Fortunate FUMBLER.
Being a Brief Relation of a Young Spark, who Married with a Beautiful Maiden,
and on the Wedding Day, received the Sum of 500 l. as her Portion, with promise
of as much more at the Birth of her first Child, but he being Insufficient to
perform, resolved to Hire his Neighbor Robin the Miller, to help him out at a
dead lift.

Tune of, Ladies of London.
This may be Printed.

R. P.







THere was a Beautiful Damsel of late,
whom many young Men did admire,
One above all of a worthy Estate
came to her, and love did require:
Soon he obtained this amorous Maid,
and all things was decently carried,
Five hundred pounds to her Portion was paid,
the very day that she was Married.
This being paid, and all over and done,
her father to show himse^f Noble,
Said, at the Birth of a Daughter or Son,
This Portion I promise to double:
Therefore I say make much of your Bride,
till then I will still be your Debtor;
Yet Seven Years he did lie by her side,
poor Soul she was never the better.
There was no hopes of an heir being born,
therefore he was much discontented,
All his old Cronies did laugh him to scorn,
alas! he was dally tormented,
Some they would say, were you worth your Ears,
you never would have bauk't such a Beauty,
For to lie by her full seven long Years,
and not perform Family Duty.
True, he would stroke her and make a strange rou^
nay, kiss her, and ca^l her his Honey,
But something else must be done without doubt,
e're he has the rest of the Money:
Many a Sigh alas! she let fly,
I here am debarred of all pleasure,
Had ever Maid such hard fo^tune as I,
I weep and lament out of measure.
Then was he troubled to see her so sad,
for why, she no longer could wave it;
If any help in the World can be had,
my Dearest, said he, thou shall have it;
For as I am a right-hones't Man,
you know I was never unwilling,
But yet I can do no more then I can,
you never wanted Kissing and Billing.
There is a lusty lad lives at the Mill,
who I have a fancy to hire,
Be n^ a man of much Practice and Skill,
I am sure he will grant your desire:
Then will thy joys and blessings abound,
when as he has made thee a Mother;
Before I will loose the Five Hundred Pound,
I Will give the one half for the other.
Yet I will get him as cheap as I can,
I think it is nothing but reason:
He is I tell you a right honest Man.
and knows how to do things in season:
Now it shall be no longer deterred,
I Will go to this Robin my Neighbor,
With me I think he will not stand too hard,
I Will give him Ten Pound for his labor.
He shall be sworn our Counsel to keep,
and not make the Country acqua^nted,
Then what he Sows I do reckon to Reap,
s^eet Wife let the time be appointed:
And he in private shall come and go,
then though you lie often together,
There is no Creature alive need to know,
but that I am still the right Father.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Back, at the Black-Boy on London Bridge, near the Drawbridge.


