A Congratulatory Encomium Upon the happy conjunction of the high deserts of
MR. ROBERT BUCKLE, With the Unparalleled Virtues of MRS. DEBORAH PRINCE.
The 26th. day of May. 1671.
ENter not here vain thoughts or eyes, or hands;
Virtues and highborn Graces give commands
To silence all that rude and lawless noise,
Which purer mirth and chaster minds annoys.
The splendour of this day admits not here
The least offense: Be gone and disappear
Ye cloudy thoughts that fill the lower sphaer:
Sublimed minds and innocence most clear
With heavenly grace are here advanced on high:
Pure virtue with a PRINCELY Majesty
Holds forth the scepter to each noble soul
That BUCKLE can, comply, and so control
Their foolish passions: So these Nuptials shall
Exceed all others: and to ages all
A standing pattern be of Prudence, and
Of rare deportment in Batavian land.
Yet, Reader, dream not of a Stoics feast;
Nor a Saturnin Aspect in the least.
There is a noble thing raigns here called Love,
Of purest extract darting from above:
Bastard is all Religion, and wry-fac'd
Are virtues, if not with its beauty graced.
Love that Prometheus-like the soul inspires;
And fills the lower region with it is fires:
Love that makes dull and breathless souls revive,
And 'bove the lower race of mortals live:
Love that cures horrid evils, dreadful jarrs,
O'recom's and sweetens all perplexing cares.
Love that is the Quintessence of this days glory:
Of which be pleased to take this pleasing story;
Descended from fair Albions stock and race
The matchless DEBORAH with PRINCELY grace
Resembling much her name and worthy Sire
Is now become the object of desire
To every Son of art whose skill can find
A hidden treasure in a sacred mind.
But she whose judgment far exceeds her years
To vainer youths enticements stops her ears:
She se'es through foggy mists of watery lands,
And vouchsafes not to yield her conquered hands
To any, till there comes from English soil
A soul Heroic who will take no foil:
It Is Mr. BUCKLE who her heart has won,
And got the Rhetoric to make two one
Her rare endowments, her composure sweet,
Her humble Lamb-like frame, behavior meet,
Her winning carriage that would melt a stone,
Transporting and enamouring every one,
Prevail with his discreetest thoughts, that he
Engaged is both night and day to be
An earnest Suppliant; till at length She
Spies so much goodness, meekness, modesty,
Such Prudence, such Religious Sympathy,
Firm faith, true love, and real constancy
Within his faithful breast, as there rests now
Naught but a strife each other to outdo
In strains of Love: come you my PRINCE bear sway,
Bear sway, quoth he, my dearest DEBORAH,
My heart yields up to you it is strongest forts:
Command, my hearts Commandress, thus he courts:
Well-spoken DEBORAH eftsoon retorts,
With Eloquence, (for so her name imports)
My ROBERT whose grave Name is thus expressed,
Famous for counsel and advice to rest,
My highest strain of Wisdom's to obey
The dictates of your counsels every day:
My BUCKLE bind me but with your commands:
My greatest freedom lies within those bands.
Thus names conspire in this sweet sympathy,
Yea every letter in this harmony:
R ude though I be, yet have I got the art
O f such a Rhet'rick as can pierce the heart,
B reak through and open that cabinet where lies
E dens fair fruit, the earthly Paradise:
R est can I now in her embraces sweet
T hat is become for me a help so meet.
B orn in an happy hour preserved sound
U nto this day wherein my joys abound;
C rown'd with enjoyment of a Bride, in whom
K indness and goodness rule and overcome,
L odg'd in that purer mind and body, which
E ver esteemed are a prize most rich.
D o not, my dear, do not once doubt to find
E ndeavours of a full complying mind:
B ent to your love, I ventured, to please you,
O ut of that Virgin-state, where I till now
R efreshed was with my retired state,
A nd there in silence deep did contemplate:
H oping to find without distraction
In you more satisfaction.
P ierc'd is my heart, but you do make it whole,
R estore what comforts I have lost, my soul
I s quieted in you; for there is none
N one whom I fancy could but you alone:
C hosen I have, and am contented well;
E ndless contentments in our hearts shall dwell,
Beyond what any tongue can tell.
And now you lovely pair, no longer smother
Your faithful loves: Be happy in each other.
And may all joys continually betide
The modest Bridegroom and the lovely Bride.
The Authors Apology.
The Proverb now is true as heretofore,
I find it so, The Poet's always poor:
Poor is my verse, so is my Genius low;
Yet great's my love, Affections overflow.
At AMSTERDAM, Printed by STEVEN SWART, Bookseller. 1671.


