SIR, Here is the true Relation of the Happy Victory received by the Marquis of
Montrose, against General Lieutenant Bailie, and others of the Rebels, at
Alfoord, Iulii 2. A. D. 1645.
THE MARQUIS of MONTROSE (as I show in my last) being in Stretharle Lindsay
did retire to the Strengths and Holds about Neutile, so that the Marquis could
not without desperate hazard force him to fight; wherefore he resolved to
march back upon Bailie, who was then of return from Innerness, and oppressing
all his Majesty's faithful Subjects within the Shyrefdom of Aberdene.

MONTROSE lifts from Stretharle, and by long marches, the third night
pitcheth in Cro of Mar: Bailie (being then at Neuton in Garioch) moves toward
the Park of Drum (always incamping in the strongest grounds upon his march) and
there resolves to stay until Lindsay should come for his Assistance, who he
had advertized for that effect.

MONTROSE all this time was obliedged to stay in Cro of Mar, expecting his
Levies chiefly of Voluntire Horss; who were slow in coming neither very
considerable at that time when they were come. MONTROSE being thus disappoynted
of his own supplies, and having directed Master Mack Donald, with some Forces,
for raising the Hie-lands, to join with them: When he did understand of
Lindsay's Advance he thought it not fit to hazard one so unequal terms, nor
handsome to seem to march off upon their joining. Therefore, he resolved to
seem to have another design, and matched for Cargarth, which is a strong
ground, and lay conveniently for the Randevouss of all his Forces. Upon which
Lindsay returns to Angus, taking the Regiment of Red-coats; and leaving those
he had, with Baylie in their place after which Baylie removed to the Engie,
and there seems to resolve his stay, upon which MONTROSE marches to
Balvenie, some eight miles from him. And being sufficiently informed of his
Force, resolved to march toward him.

But Baylie removes that same very time, upon which MONTROSE directed out some
Horss, who presently vewed the Enemies whole Horss and Dragowniers their foot
being at a little distance: Whereupon MONTROSE drew up his whole foot the
Armies being at about two miles distance, and commands them to halt there in
their Order he himself goes with his whole Horss, and some four hundredth
Musketeers, for stankers to the top of the next hill, to view the Enemy: Which
they perceaving (after some Skirmishing, with louss Horses) retyreth over a
pass: where they placed some Dragoniers, and thereafter to another pass hard
by it, at the foot of a Bra; to which their Dragoniers retired quyting the
first pass. Upon which MONTROSE advances all his Foot to his Horss, and
puts Musketeers to the first pass. The Enemy draws all their Foot to
the Bra, to which their Horss retired which was an extreme strong ground. Thus
lay both the Armies on hights, and each of them mayntayn a pass in the bottom,
it being already dark, they passed that night: The next morning MONTROSE
(finding there was no possibility to force the Enemy, without much hazard)
directed a Drum to them, and desired they would take it in their choice, either
to pass toward him, and he would march off; or that they would march off,
that he might advance toward them: Both of which they refused; and replied,
they would be at their advantage. Upon which MONTROSE marched off; thinking to
have drawn them after him: But they did not so much as put out a Scout, to see
whither he was gone: So he marched that night to Drumminer.

Where putting off the next day, he resolves the day thereafter, to march for
Alfoord; the Enemy being informed, that MONTROSE men were all stragled
advances toward Drumminer this same morning. Notwithstanding MONTROSE
resolved to continue his march, until he should view, and get intelligence,
and understand perfectly, upon what occasion the Enemy had altered their
Resolution, as not being willing before to fight now so hardilie to pursue it.

His march at Drumminer was not well moving, when the Enemies Scouts appears,
notwithstanding he advances slowly, and keeps his whole Horss, and some
Musketeers on the Rire; the Enemy advances and takes a little to the left
hand: But MONTROSE continues his march to Alfoord; where he incampeth that
night; and the Enemy pitcheth some four miles from him, upon the left hand.

The next morning, MONTROSE going abroad himself (to direct some well mounted
Horss, for scouting certain intelligence, concerning the Enemy) fyndeth (that
they were fast advancing (upon their former intelligence of MONTROSE small
number,) whereupon knowing he was able to fight them, tho not near in number,
and that Lindsay was on his march to join with them, he resolves to draw from
his Quarter toward them; and that he might do it with the more freedom, (the
Enemy being within two miles, he appoynteth a Troup with some louse horss to
Skirmish: But they conceaving that he was marching off, and taking the
retreat, advanced with the more expedition, and crosses the River of Done,
with their whole Horss, and commanded Musketeers, beats in MONTROSE louse
Horses, and advanced their whole Army, within half a mile to him. Which he
perceaving that they would either have him fight, or make an hot Retreat; and
knowing perfectly their numbers, (as in those cases, it is still the best to
be the persuer) resolved to put them to their defense: While they supposed he
had been retiring, he advances fast upon them, with his whole Army, (which
forced their Horss Retire to their Foot) and takes his Stand, within little
more than Musket Shot to them, the Enemy, as yet, not being in posture in
respect all their numbers were not, as yet, come up.

They began both to range themselves, the Enemy fynding MONTROSE resolved to
fight, did assuage their fury, and got the half of the fear, and contenting
themselves not to advance further, betook themselves to dykes and advantages of
ground; where they put themselves in Battaill: MONTROSE being upon a little
swelling hight, they did not well perceive his numbers until they were near
the chock, which made them much the more astonished, he likewise put himself
in order, giving the charge of his Right Wing to the Lord Gordon, and Colonel
Gordon, of the Left to the Lord Oboin, and Sir William Rollok, the Hie-landers
had the Body of the Battaill, led on by Balloch General, Quarter Master
Graham, and William Farcharsone of Innerray, the Irish Musketeers flanked the
wings of Horss, he himself was before the right wing with some reformire
officers, the Master of Napier commanded the Reserve of the right wing, and
Glangarie that of the Hie-landers. Thus framed after MONTROSE had ordered his
Horss to charge at first with Sword: he makes a sign to march upon the
Enemy, who had their Foot within dykes, and their wings a little advanced with
flanking Musketeers: But the Enemy perceaving him march resolutelie upon
them, keeps only their Stand, until the wings were within a very little
distance, then they advanced at a trot where there was a very hot charge, and
warm rancounter: For it was so rough upon the Enemies left wing (their Horss
being so hotly handled, by those Gallant Gentlemen of MONTROSE Right Wing)
that they would gladly have changed their Adversaries, and aimed, to fall upon
the Foot that flanked those Horss: But that MONTROSE himself stopped their
design, with his Right Wings reserve commanded by the Master of Napier, who had
advanced to fall on upon the flank and reire of the Enemy. Which the Enemies
flanking Musketeers perceaving after their salvie retired behind their Horss:
and their Horss perceaving that MONTROSE with the reserve was ready to fall
upon their naked flank, they run Horss and Foot.

The right wing was routed with less difficulty: for after the betting in of
some commanded Musketeers, their horss did not bide the charge only their piks
seemed to make some stay, who being surrounded by the flanking Musketeers of
MONTROSE left wing, were all cut off in the place.

The Enemy was of Foot 1500, and of Horss 500, the whole Foot Officers and
Soldiers, were totallie cut off, except some few Straglers, and twelve
Officers that were taken Prisoners: their Horses had the Chase nine miles, and
were all killed, wounded, or dispersed.

MONTROSE had killed on the Field only seven that were known, after all the
Search, he could make amongst who was the Lord Gordon, a brave Gentleman; who
lived faithfully, and died valiantly, in his Majesty's service; the Lairds of
Balwholy, and Milton also. Where were diverse hurt, Amongst who were George
Dowglass son to the Earll of Morton, who carried the Standart of Horss; Sir
William Hay of Dalgitie Colonel Gordon, the Lord of Gight; all acting the
Parts of brave Men.

IT were to be wished, that people of all sorts and conditions, would take this
to consideration, that the hand of the Lord has now the fifth time given an
eyedent token of His wrath and anger, for the stryvings of this seditious
faction in this Nation, against their Prince. For now this is the fifth
powerful Army, that have been totallie overthrown to them, by the Marquis of
Montrose, without the aid of any, except the Earl of Airlie, and the Lord
Gordon; he being still but an handful, like Gedion's choice, water-leaperty
they trusting in the numbers of their Armies, and multitude of Forces: He
without Amonition, Arms, or that which is the sinews of Armies; saving what
he had from their Camp; they full fraught withal.

When we see their frequent Fastings, and Humiliations, and the Lord still
angry, can we but think, that there is some bosom sins unrepented of, when
we see them humbled, for the ordinary sins of the world, as Adulteries,
Murders, Drunkenness, etc. And yet the Lord still smyting: Can we but
conceive, but there is some extraordinary sins lies hid?

Is it not Achans Wedge? And Babylonian Garment? Is not that stolen Wedge of
Gold there? The Kings Rents he is robbed of here. Is not that Babylonian
Garment there? His Royal Praerogatiue rent from him here. But, Who has
repented of this? Or, Who has thought it a sin at all, amongst other sins?

Truly, it were to be wished, that they would repent them of the Evil Done;
And intended against his Majesty's Sacred Person, and Authority; And, no
question, the LORD would repent Him of the Evil determined against them; and
in the midst of His Anger, would remember, Mercy, to stay the Issue of
Blood, by sheathing the Devowring Sword upon the one Hand; And stop the Fury
of the Destroying Plague on the other.

FJNJS.

