The Countrey-mans VIVE Le ROY.
OR, His Joyful Exaltation for King CHALES his Restoration, In a Dialogue
between DICK a Plough-man, and JACK a Shepherd.
With Jacks Epigram upon Englands Grand TRAITOR.
Dick. COme, Jack shake off thy old disguise,
Of clouded Brows and warry eyes.
Now mourn no more, for what is past
Our griefs have found a cure at last.
For now the youth in every Street,
As they do one another meet,
With hearts full f^aught, and Loyal joy
Echo and sing Vive Le Roy.

Jack. My sorrows are so great and fixed
And with ^uch heavy Causes mixed,
My heart with grief is so oppressed
No joy must ha^bour in my breast;
My dearest friend was snacht away
By Tigers, wolves and beasts of prey,
By who^e most Savage overthrow,
My heart is made the seat of woe.
For want of whom my flocks ^o stray
And by the beast do still decay,
Those few which yet are left behind,
Rob^d of their Fleeces I do find,
My Lambs lie slain before my face,
My sel^ am scorned and in disgrace,
My g^iefes are helpless, till with joy
I shall hear sung Vive Le Roy.

Dick. I was at London the other day,
And sure 'twas in the Month of May,
When the whole City seemed to me
By the great flame on fire to be.
Then as I past a little higher,
I found the Peoples hearts on fire,
Whose zealous flames expressed with joy,
And Caps flung up, Vive Le Roy.
Still as I past along no note,
Was heard that day from any throat,
But what did Loyalty exp^esse,
And their great joy for his success,
Unto his Royal throne, the mi^th
Was greater now then at his birth,
For every Age and Sex, and Boy
Speak nothing but Vive Le Roy.

Jack. Dick welcome home for thou do tell,
Such news which fits my humor well,
My flocks will now with safety feed,
And when they have yean'd their Lambkins breed,
Free from the danger of the beast,
Safe under his protection rest,
For whose Return lets sing for joy,
With heart and voice Vive Le Roy.

Dick. Jack now the case is altered quit,
And we shall all enjoy our Right,
Now we shall have no cause to fear,
The plundring wolf, or killing Bear.
Our Labors now will sweetened be,
With wished content and Unity,
For which we may rejoice and sing,
With heart and voice God save the King.

Jack. Arcadia now is restored to Rest
Which was by Tyrants sore oppressed,
My little Lambs skip ore the plain,
Which were by Tigers well nigh slain,
Forgetful of their former woe,
Securely wander to and fro,
Which on my Oaten pipe for joy,
makes me to play Vive Le Roy.

Dick. Our Horses now return at night,
Acquitted of the Soldiers fright,
For neither they of late, nor we,
Are led into Captivity.
We keep our poultry and our kine,
Now that is thine and this is ^ine,
For which whilst I hold plough my Boy,
Shall whistle out Vive Le Roy.

Jack. Now while my Lambkins feed and play,
I can securely wast the day,
And to avoid the heat of Sol
With pretty Nancie or kind Dol.
Sport in some shade: my Flocks return
I need not fear the wolf's in's Urne,
For which let every Arcadian Boy
Rejoice and sing, Vive Le Roy,

Dick. Come Jack lets go and take a sup,
And drown old sorrows in a Cup,
Of brownest Ale that we can find,
For to restore our drooping mind.
Bring thou thy Dol: I Will bring my Nan
And Frollick it with Cake and Can,
We Will make our Girls no more be coy,
But laugh and sing, Vive Le Roy.

Jack. I like the motion of my friend,
I Will fold my Flock, and thee attend,
To mother Mabs old tipling-house
Where we will take a smart carouse
Of he brown nappy Stuff, till we
Are full of Ale and Loyalty.
We Will drown all care and swell with joy,
Laugh, quaff and sing Vive Le Roy.

Dick. Come Frank strike up a merry strain
Since the King injoys his own again,
When we see our long wished for King,
Let B^nfi^es flame, and the Bells ring.
Fill a full Cup, I Will drink a round,
My heart does as my Cups abound.
A health to our King, pledge all with joy.
Heavens bless the King, Vive Le Roy.

Their wish.
Make have (Great Sir) to our Arcadian Plain,
And bless this Island with your beams again,
Heaven grant that never such another night,
As we have felt since we did lose the Light
May Cloud us any more, O may the Sun
Still shine upon us, and our Day never done
May the Suns influence of thy fair beams,
Give store unto out Plains, Life to our Streams.
So shall our Flocks yield us a good en^re^se
When Plenty's ushered in by welcome Peace.
Long may you live King of the Arcadean Land,
And we learn to obey what you Command.
In Cromwillum Regicidum.
Ad mortem Domirum male prodi^it Iscariotes
Cromwellique dolo Rex bo^us inter^it
Convenere pares solo hoc discrimine Judas
Obtinuit meritas, non tulit ille cruces,
Englished thus.

Judas betrayed his Sove^eign Lord to death,
By Cromwells fraud a good King lost his breath,
Only in this these Traitors different be,
Judas was justly hanged, so was not he.
London, Printed for J. Jones, 1660.


