The Crafty Maid: OR, The young Man put to his Trumps.
He did begin to Woo this Maid
But she not believed one word he said;
She put him off then, with a Jear,
And sent him away with a Flea in's Ear.
To the Tune of The Despairing Maid: or, Fie Love, fie.




IN Moor-fields one Evening Tide,
A pretty couple there I espied,
A dainty young Man and a Lass,
But you shall hear what came to pass,
He strait began to court this Maid,
And thought her heart for to betray:
But she would not yield to his Desire,
As by the Story you shall hear.
To Complement he did begin,
The Maid's Affection for to win,
With Speeches fair he did entreat,
And often said his Heart would break.
Quoth he, I am my Father's Heir,
And have Threescore pound a year;
I will maintain you gallantly,
If thou will yield my Bride to he.
Therefore I pray you be not coy,
For thou shall be my only Joy,
If thou deniest thou will break my Heart;
For did thou feel the deadly smart
Which I sustain both day and night
For thee, which art my Hearts delight;
Therefore my Dearest pity me,
Or I shall dye for love of thee.
The Maid. Good Sir I thank you for your Love,
Of your Discourse I don't approve;
For many now a days I see,
Do bring themselves to Poverty,
By Marrying whilst they are so young,
But I Will not do my self such wrong;
Therefore forbear, thy Suit's in vain,
I will not Marry I tell ye plain.

You say you have Threescore pound a year,
What if thou have, I do not care,
I knew those that had three times more,
And spent it all upon a Whore,
And so may thou for ought I know,
For all you make so fair a Show,
Then he content, and do not prate,
For fear that I should break thy pate.
The young Man. The young Man standing in a mare,
And on the Maid did strangely gaze,
At last he made her this Reply,
And unto her these words did say:
What ails thee for to be to cross?
In troth I like thee worse and worse,
Of all the Maids that ever I see,
I never heard the like of thee.
Sweetheart believe me, or else choose,
I Would have thee know I am none of those,
That spend my means upon a Whore,
Or run upon the Ale-wives Score;
No I will better be advised,
It Is good to be merry and wise;
For Friends I see are very scant,
If that a Man does come to want.

Maid. My Friend, quoth she, what you have said,
Is not half true, I am afraid;
I cannot think you're so precise,
One may see plainly by your Eyes;
Your Hair is of the Color right,
To cozen Maids is your delight;
But thou shall never prove false to me,
Or I will never prove true to thee;
Therefore forbear my Company,
And henceforth come not me a nigh,
For I am not resolved to Wed,
Nor yet to loose my Maidenhead:
A single Life is void of Care,
For married Wives must pinch and spare,
There Charge for to maintain I see,
Therefore a single Life for me.

The Man. Saing thou provest so unkind,
I am resolved to change my mind;
A hundred pound I have in store,
And Threescore pound a year more,
If I can find an honest Girl,
I Will prize her more than Gold or Pearl,
And she shall live a Ladies Life,
After she is Maid my wedded Wife.
And so farewell, thou scornful Dame,
In time thou may repent the same,
That thou to me did prove untrue,
In time thou may have cause to rue;
Before that I will Marry thee,
I Will hang my self upon a Tree,
Rather I Will give my Wealth and Store,
To one that begs from door to door.

The Maid. Farewell, be gone, thou sawey Jack,
With thy Wealth and Money prithee pack,
My Portion is an hundred pound,
In Silver, and in good Gold so round,
Besides my Mother she does cry,
I shall have all when she does dye,
Then what need I care for thy Wealth?
Then as thou say, go hang thy self.
For I am resolved as I begun
To end, and so conclude my Song,
A single Life I hold it best,
And thereon still my mind is pressed;
For Marriage brings Sorrow and Care,
So in it I Will not bear a share,
Since young Men are so sickle grown,
I am resolved to hold my own.
So Maids of you I Will take my leave,
Let no false young Men you deceive,
For many they are hard to trust,
Scarce one in twenty proves just:
I for my own part will advise
All Maids henceforth for to be wise,
And have a care who you do wed,
For fear you bring a Knave to Bed.


