Or, The Plain-Dealers Prayer for a Registry.
THE COUNTRY MAN.s. CASE UNCASED
plenty

peace

emblematic figure holding cornucopia and olive branch (...)her bank for the
poor trades man* (...)arwell griping broker

depiction of bank pray Sir Register this honest deed.


A Register will make us all god send one

His honest Register
your Scrible will not do
.t.will balance them and you

their is noe jncumbrance on it
i Council had upon it

nine -- Morgages are past
now or a sale at last
the d^^ill take.t. for if that be we are undone

beleve him What he says
jle bite you both i^ faith

knaves Acre nine times Morgaged to fool Acre

morg

morg

morg

morg

Morgdg



morg

morg

morg

morg

the Corners only free for our Trader city excellent policy

map with mortgaged plots knavs hall
take this Morgadge and it is Wright or jle be hanged Amen

depiction of manor house (...) grainery for the poor and Needy (...)sent
Releife for landlord and tennant

depiction of granery labourer
farmer
trades man
free holder
jle deal noe longer
Would i nere had seen ye
for oh the Money i hau^
lost between ye

pay my note on sight
(...) When the divils blind
then honest banker

Continual improcvration
good sin stay


delays and demurers fees and erors
This Indenture made in the year 16^

the splitters hospital Who keeps a key himself to let in all he trades with

Remember ye poor

depiction of hospital

AND is the Bill Committed, Heaven be praised,
So let all true and loyal English say;
This to the highest pitch their hopes have raised,
Of being happy in an honest way:
Thanks to our worthy Patriots, Be their Name
Ever Recorded in the Book of Fame.
Nor can they be forgot, our Children shall
Proclaim them blessed, when they look back and see
How bad Men brought their Fathers into thrall;
Plunging them headlong into misery. --
When Egypts Locust made them Egypts Slaves,
Betraying all their Fortunes unto Knaves.
Then 'twas in vain for them to Plow or Sow,
To rise up early, or to lie down late,
When none his dear-bought Pennyworth did know,
But like an Almanac that is out of Date
Their Purchase proved; a Prior Morgage shall
Eject the Cullied Buyer out of all.
This was the fate most commonly of those
That trusted to Conveyance, Oath, or Deed;
For by the Law the Fox no Title knows,
Nor did the way of Banking better speed,
To them who did with Paper-Credit meet;
Their Bags were made their Moneys Winding Sheet.
Such was the madness of that madder Age,
Men stood amazed, knew not what to do,
If by Complaint they thought their grief to assuage,
'Twas but increased, and often laughed at too;
Nor did their loss and misery stop here,
They Are Jail'd at last for buying Wit so dear.
This made the Money-monger hide his Gold,
For want of Credit, that might Current run,
Lest he might share in others fate, when old;
Therefore resolves it shall not see the Sun.
This quickly brought Consumption to all Trade
And many a thousand Bankerupt was made.
Whence Beggary ensued in every place,
To every Parish did a Charge become,
And others desperate, devoid of Grace,
Anticipate their Life, the Gallows some:
Nor could you step without your Doors but see
Objects of pity, Souls in misery.
Hither we have digressed from the way
We first were in, to let you understand
How we by folly have been led astray,
Or madness rather throughout the Land:
What does remain, is, e're it be too late,
To find a Mean, which may amend our fate.
This in the judgment of all sober Men,
Will be this long desired Registry,
Upon whose Fund none can be cheated when
They trade, or trust on that Security:
Which if it pass as it is now committed,
The Just are double blessed, the Knaves outwitted.
In the Book called England's Improvement by Sea and Land, Printed in the Tear,
1676.
To tell the Nature of this Project here,
Is but to hold a Candle to the Sun;
Since it is to admiratic a done elsewhere,
By such an Author never yet outdone;
Whose public Spirit, for his Country's good,
The Jaws of Death and Envy has withstood.
Yet for to gratify those honest minds
Who never saw that Book, it is fit from hence
Some satisfaction they in part do find;
Both of its Use, and of its Consequence:
The want of which, has been the Traders bane,
So being had will set them right again.
First in abundance 'twill increase all Trade;
The Rich, the Poor, will all be gainers by it;
Witness our Neighbors who have trial made,
There Is not a Man that can, or will deny it:
For he that does the Town of Taunton know,
Is well convinced that in Fact it is so. --
Their Mannor-Lands under a Registry,
Not only has advanced them, but has made
Plenty of Money, which their wants supply,
The very Life and Sinews of all Trade,
By which their Poor are by their Labors fed,
Not one that is fit to work that asks Bread.
If this be so, as so in truth it is, --
What Is the Obstruction it is not so elsewhere?
Is it because Men love to do amiss,
Or does old Custom plead a Habit there?
Neither's of force to keep them down, would rise,
But rather Ignorance has shut their Eyes.
Then be persuaded, try for once Conclusion,
Dare to be honest, it is best Policy;
All other Projects have but wrought Confusion,
Affix your Lands but in a Registry:
This honest Credit answer will your End,
Sooner, and cheaper than the Scriblers Friend.
This brings out all the Money un-imployed,
Which now in Corners hoarded up does ly;
The Borrower shall never be denied,
If he have ought within the Registry:
For none will keep his Money in his Chest
When 'twill be safer here, with Interest.
The very Servants will their Wages bring,
Which they most dearly earn, but cannot augment;
And 'midst their greatest drudgery will sing,
When they have Lodged it to their hearts content.
Both John and Joan will lay up all they may,
Where't may be doubled against a Rainy-day.
Nor is that all, when once abroad it is talked,
That Margery and Nell have here a Stock;
They then will pass for House-wives, Moneyed Folk,
And Sweet-hearts will apace unto them flock;
Whence they may pick and choose, and Husbands take,
Will love them dearly for their Moneys sake.
But above all, from hence will flow a Bank
Of Lumber-Credit, will the Tradesman raise;
Whose Art and Study's only for a Rank
Of Egypts Taskers, they do wear the Bays
Of all his Labors, and the Artist's gains
Are only Bread and Water for his pains.
This they pretend, because they bear a stock,
Which the poor Tradesman can by no means do,
Nor never shall he by your bit and knock,
When all his profit does redound to you.
But here is a Salve that cure will this Sore,
He shall have Money on it to pay his Score.
The honest Farmer also here will find
Relief and Credit when the Market's dull,
His Landlord may be needy, or unkind,
His Rent is wanting, though his Barns are full.
Money he has not, sell to loss he is loath,
Engage it here, and so 'twill answer both.
This will prevent the Law-less Massy Bill,
Pretending Law, though in a Tyrants hand,
And keep us quiet sore against their will,
Who swarm like Flesh-Flies all about the Land:
A sort of Vermin haunting every Village,
That do their Food from Country People pillage.
The Widow also, and the Fatherless,
Whose Fortune's often left in the hands of trust,
By his default are often made Penny-less;
And then poor Souls they all a-begging must.
Thus e're the good Man's cold within his Grave,
His Children's ruined by this Trustee Knave.
The Registry will hinder this abuse
Done to poor Infants when their Friends are gone,
If but incerted here unto their use,
'Twill be secured unto every one.
Hark, and be wise, ye tender Fathers all,
Prevent the Cheats may on your Children fall.
Here could I add above an hundred more
That would be happy by this honest Deed;
For every one I named there is a score
Would find relief and comfort at their need:
Defending thousands from the Prisons ill,
And with cheap Bread the hungry Bellies fill.
Therefore in brief acquit your selves like those
True Englishmen who Virtue did imbrance,
No longer be a Prey unto your Foes,
But let them know you are of that Noble Race
That scorn such Actions might dishonor bring
Unto themselves, their Country, or their King.
Now to conclude, let all of loyal mind
Humbly beseech the King and Parliament,
That of their goodness they would be so kind
To pass this Act our Ruins may prevent,
Grant England may a Registry but have,
None need to fear the double-dealing Knave.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1678. And are to be sold by John Oliver in the
Old Bailey, over against the George near Ludgate.


