The Crafty Maids Approbation.
Wherein she shows either Black or Brown,
It Is Money makes them straight go down;
When pretty Girls that Gold has none,
Their fortune is still to lie alone.
To the Tune of, A fig for France.




DRaw near to me young Girls so fine,
Whose means and portion's like to mine;
If you will but hear what I have penned,
'Twill make you smile before I end:
I once had Sweet-hearts fair and young,
Though now from me he is fled and gone;
But i will tell you a very good reason why,
'Twas money did part my Love and I.
When first to me a Wooing he came,
He did desire to know my name;
I told him that my means was small,
He said he valued none at all:
So that my favor he could win,
He valued nothing else a pin:
But now he is gone and I know not why,
It Was money, etc.
Yet for three years his Love stood fast,
And he vowed for ever it should last;
But when my friends spoke of the same,
Then he was for another Dame:
Except so much money they would give me,
No wife for him I must not be:
His words he clearly did deny,
So money did part, etc.
Thus maids may see, so may I too,
It is for money young men Woo:
Though great store of Love they do pretend,
Yet mark what falls out in the end:
When they find your Portions are but small,
Like to a Snake from you they will crawl:
And to another straight they will hye,
So money did part, etc.






If I had a head like a Horse,
Or a body as thick as a Mill-post,
So bags came but tumbling in,
Then my favor every fool would win;
Or was I long-snouted like a Sow,
Or else Crook-backt like our fine Cow:
Have at her then, these boys would cry,
She Is money enough, and what care I.
Young Men don't blush, you know it is true,
For let her name be Mary or Sue,
Though she was blabber-lipt, also blear-eyed,
Yet money all those faults will hide;
Nay, were she the nastiest dingiest slut,
That a man durst not after her crack a Nut;
Had she but money, house, or Land,
I Am sure she would not stick long a hand.
Yet we whose portions are but small,
Let us not be dismayed at all;
Neither let us grieve, lament, nor swound,
For Beauty's worth a thousand pound:
Hanged, though my first true Love be gone,
I Have the same face for another man;
And I Will prove honest till I dye,
Though money, etc.
If two young men talk of a Wench,
As they do sit of an ale-bench;
She Is a good Huswife, the one replies,
But has she money, the other cries:
If she has none she is not for me,
Give me the Cash, hang Huswifery,
I love to finger that, for why,
It Is money did part my Love and I.
By this young Girls may plainly see,
How deceitful these young men be;
They Will search a Maid from top to toe,
Till all her secrets they do know;
Then if her means don't please his mind,
He quickly can turn like the wind:
I must have a wife with more, he'I cry,
So money, etc.
Such affection did that young man bear,
That he often called me his dear;
Such vows and Oaths he made, it is known,
But now he does them quite disown:
But since he is gone, sing farewell he,
I Will slight him more then he does me:
I Will never lament, nor weep, nor cry,
Though money, etc.
I am full glad we parted in truth,
For since I hear he is a cross-grained youth;
But had he proved true, though never so bare,
In wealth or woe i would bear a share;
But now i am free, i will let that slide,
And never think more to be a Bride:
There Is nothing like to Liberty,
Since money, etc.
Thus have I told young Maidens all,
How the weakest go to the Wall;
But she that is full, and her Purse well strung,
She shall have Sweet-hearts come ding dong:
It Is no matter for breeding or sense,
So she has but Cash, he will have the Wench;
Black or brown he looks not o'th dye,
'Twas money did part my Love and I.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger.


