(...) of the princely wooing of the fair Maid of London, by King Edward.
The Tune is, Bonny sweet Robin.




FAir Angel of England thy beauty most bright,
Is all my hearts pleasure, my joy and delight,
Then goant me swett Lady thy true love to be,
That I may say welcome good fortune to me.
The Turtle so chaste and true in her love,
By gentle persuasions her fancy will move,
Then be not entreated fair Lady in vain,
For nature require^h what I should obtain*
The phoen^x so famous that lives alone,
Is vowed to chastity being but o^e,
But he not my darli^g so ch^st in desire,
Lest thou like the phoenix do penance in fire.
But alas gentle L^dy I pi^ty thy state,
In being resolved to live without Male,
For if of our coursing the pleasure thou knew,
You would have a liking the same to ensue.
Long time I have sued the same to obtain,
Yet I am req^^^d with scornful distain,
But if you will grant your good will unto me,
You shall be advanced to Princely degree:
Promotions and honor may often en^ice,
The chastest that lives, though never so nice,
What woman so worthy but could be content
To live in a Palace where Princes frequent.
To brides young and princely to church I have l^d
Two Ladies now lately have becked my bed,
Yet has thy love taken more root in my heart,
Then all their contentments whereof I have part.
Your gentle heart cannot men's tears much abide,
And women least angry when most they do chide,
Then yield to me kindly and say that at length
Men do want mercy and poor women strength.
I grant that fair Ladies may poor men resist,
And Princes may conquer and Love who they list
A King may co^^and her to lie by his side.
Whose feature deserves to be a Kings bride.
In granting your love you shall purchase ren^wn,
your head shall be decked with Englands fair crown
thy garments most gallant of gold shall be ^ought,
If true love with treasure with thee may be boght
Great Ladies of honor shall tend on thy train,
Most richly attired with Scarlet in grain,
My Chamber most princely thy person shall keep,
Where Virgins with music shall r^^k thee asleep.
If any more pleasures thy heart can invent,
Command them sweet Lady thy mind to content,
For Kings gallant courts where princes do dwell
Affords such sweet pastime as Ladies love well.
Then be not resolved to dye a true M^id,
But print in thy bosom the words I have said,
And grant a King favor thy true love to be.
That I may say we^come sweet Virgin to me.
The Fair maid of Londons answer to King Edwards wanton Love.




OH wanton King Edward thy labor is vain,
To follow the pleasure thou can not attain,
With getting thou loosest, and having do wast it,
the which if thou pure have is spoiled if thou have it.
But if thou obtainest it thou nothing have won,
And I loosing nothing yet quite am undone,
But if of that jewel a King do deceive me,
No^R can restore though a Kingdom he give me.
My color is changed since you saw me last,
My favor is vanished my beauty is past,
The Rose red blushes that sat in my cheeks,
To paleness is turned which all men dislikes.
I pass not what Princes for love do protest,
The name of a Virgin contenteth me best,
I have not deserved to sleep by thy side,
Nor yet to be counted for King Edwards bride.
The name of a Princess I never did crave.
No such tipe of honor thy handmaid will have,
My breast shall not harbor so lofty a thought,
Nor be with rich proffers to wantonness brought.
If wild wanton Rosamond one of our sort,
Had neved frequented ^. Henry's brave Court,
Such heaps of deep sorrow she never had seen,
Nor tasted the rage of so jealous a Queen.
All Men have their freedom to show their intent,
They win noe a woman except she consent;
Who then can impute to them any fault?
Who still go upright until Men do hault.
It Is counted a kindness in men for to try,
And virtue in women the same to deny,
For women unconstant can never be proved
Until by their betters therein they be moved.
If women and modesty once do but sever
Then farewell good name and credit for ever,
And Royal King Edward let me be exil^d,
Ere any Man knows my body's defiled.
If women and modesty once do but sever,
Too deep an ^mpression within my heart bears,
Nor shall his bright honor that blot ^y me have,
To bring his gray hairs with grief to the grave.
The heavens forbid that when I shall dye,
That any such sin upon my soul should lie,
It I have thus kept me from doing this sin,
My heart shall not yield with a Prince to begin.
Come rather with pity and weep on my tomb,
Then for my birth curse my dear mothers womb,
That brought forth a blossom that stained the tree,
With wanton desires to shame her and me.
Leave me most noble King tempt not in vain,
My m^lk-white affection with lewdness to stain,
Though England will give me no comfort (...)
Yet England will give me a sad (...)

