A New BOOK FOR CHILDERN To Learn in. With many wholesome Meditations for them
to CONSIDER. With Directions for true SPELLING. And the Ground of true Reading
and Writing of True ENGLISH. By S. C.

Also a Testimony concerning the Father, Son and Spirit, one true living and
eternal God, who is Light; and concerning his working; and how he and they may
be known.

Also, the Devil and his Works manifested, which are to be destroyed, and how;
With several other things, very useful for Children and others to learn, that
they may be turned unto the Light, which is the Gift of God.

By G. Fox the Younger.

Train up a Child in the Way that it should walk, and it will not forget it
when it is Old. A short Epistle.
ALL you Friends of the Truth, this is a Salutation unto you and to your
Children, a fruit of the Plant of Righteousness, which ye know, and can savor
the Fruit thereof, and is given forth from that Spirit in which we are one with
you in the Service of Love and Truth, for the removing the use of such Books
and Catechisms as are sprung forth of the corrupt Tree, which now is to be
burned, and its fruits rejected, and People are to use the leaves of the Tree
that grows by the River of Water, that proceeds from the Throne and Presence of
God for healing. So all Friends be faithful, and walk in that which refreshes
the Plant, the Power of the Lord God.

S. C.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V V W X Y Z.

ft ct sh fl a e i o u.

ab ad af ak am ap eb ed of ek em ep ib id if ik im ip ob od of ok om op ub ud
uf uk um up ba da fa ca ma pa be de fe ce me pe by di fi ci mi pi bo do fo co
mo po bu du fu cu mu pu
A Child may learn the fear of the Lord by ta-king heed unto the Light.

Shall not the Plant that thou have set grow, and be great, and bring forth
Fruit for men to eat?

The Lord's Right Hand has made the Earth, and all things else that is in it.

Man is God's Work, made for his use, his Light is pla-ced to be man's Guide to
keep all things from a-buse.

The Way to ob-tain a good Un-der-stand-ing is to be-gin in the Fear of the
Lord; but such as re-ject the Coun-sel of the Light, Dark-ness and Er-ror is in
all their Ways.

A wise Child pre-ser-veth him-self from Cor-re-cti-on by O-be-di-ence; but a
Fool-ish Child pro-cu-reth Strips by his Re-bel-li-on.

A So-ber Child has E-steem a among the Wise, and a Youth that fear-eth the
Lord shall be ac-count-ed a-mongst the God-ly.

O-be-di-ence to Pa-rents is of good Re-port a-mong all men, there-fore the
Child that li veth in Sub-je-cti-on shall be lo-ved a-bove o-thers.

And the bles-sing of the Lord shall be mul-ti-ply-ed up on such; and his
mer-ci-ful hand shall ac-com-pany them.

The Coun-sel of the Light is the way of Wis-dom, and such as heark-en
there-un-to, ob-tain the true know-ledge.

That which re-pro-veth thee for E-vil is good, and bles-sed are they that love
it, and turn from their E-vil.

That which ma-ni-fest-eth Sin, is con-tra-ry to Sin, and lead-eth in-to Righ
teous-ness, such as fol-low it.

And that which makes ma-ni-fest is the Light, which is con-tra-ry to all the
works of Dark-ness.

That which lead-eth in-to Sin is na-tu-ral, but that which leads out of sin,
and re-pro-veth it, is spi-ri-tu-al.

The na-tu ral man can-not un-der-stand the things of God, be-cause they must
be seen with that which is spi-ri-tu-al. The Light of the Bo-dy is the Eye, and
that is spi-ri-tu-al.

He that ta-keth heed un-to this Light, with it he shall see Temp-ta-ti-ons,
and they that are wil-ling to o-bey it, shall re-ceive Pow-er, and be
pre-ser-ved.

Lit-tle Chil-dren, let your Ears be di-li-gent to hear the Voice of the Light,
for that calls out of e-ve-ry E-vil Way.

That is the Light which tel-leth thee in se-cret thou should-est not do E-vil,
and that is pla-ced with-in thee, to be a Wit-ness for God a-gainst all E-vil.

He that does E-vil ha-teth the Light; yet he can-not hide him-self from the
Judg-ment thereof.

There-fore cease from that which is E-vil, and O-bey the Light with-in, and
then shall thou be de-li-ve-red from Con-dem-na-ti-on.

For the Way of the Lord is Peace to the Righ-te-ous; but he re-ward-eth the
Wic-ked with Sor-row.

So, all Chil-dren and Peo-ple, mind the Fear of the Lord God, that so ye may
be pre-ser-ved out of I-ni-qui-ty, and may come to un der-stand the things that
be-long to your E-ver-last-ing Peace, in this the Day of your Vi-si-ta-ti-on
(be-fore they be hid from your Eyes) Now whilst the Light Re-pro-veth, the Lord
cal-leth, and such as turn at his Re-proof, and answer his Call shall find
Mer-cy, but the Light shall be the Con dem-na-ti-on of the Re-bel-li-ous.

So all ye lit-tle Chil-dren, ex-er cise ^our selves in the Law of the Lord,
which the Scrip-tures of Truth says is the Light; for if ye re-ject the Light,
then ye re-ject the Law of God, and cast it be-hind your backs, and with such
God is not well plea-sed.

And hear-ken not to the de-cei-vers, who keep you from the Light of Christ
Jesus wherewith he has en-ligh ten-ed e-ve-ry one of you, and tell you it is
na-tu-ral, where-as ye know Sin is na-tu-ral, and the Light in Your
Con-sci-en-ces is con-tra-ry to the Sin, and re-pro-veth you for sin;
there-fore be-lieve them not that turn you from the Light, for they are not
Mi-ni-sters of Christ; his Mi-ni-sters turn-ed Peo-ple to the Light, as you may
read in the six and twen-ti-eth Chap-ter of the Acts; and the eigh-teenth verse.

And such are al-so De-cei-vers, who tell you the on-ly way to come to the
Know-ledge of all Truth is by the Scriptures; for the know-ledge of Truth is by
the Spirit of Truth, which is the Light that con-vin-ceth you first of
un-truth, and then being o-bey-ed, does bring to the know-ledge of Je-sus
Christ, who said, I am the Truth, and his Spi-rit lead-eth in-to all Truth.

And such are De-cei-vers, who preach for mo-ney and for Tithes; such can-not
lead you out of Trans-gres-si-on, for they are in Trans-gres-si on them-selves;
for Christ said to his, free-ly you have re-cei-ved, free-ly give; and Paul
made not the Gos-pel charge-able; but these Priests, that preach for fil-thy
Lu-cre, do de-ceive peo-ple, and keep them from be-lie-ving in the light, lest
by it they should come no see their a-bo-mi-na-ti-ons and de-ceits.

And such are no Mi ni-sters of God's Word, who tell you the Scrip-ture is the
Word of God; for they speak con-tra-ry to the Scrip-ture, which says, Christ
is the Word, and was in the Be-gin-ning, which the Scrip-ture was not; and did
be-come Flesh, which the Scrip-ture never did; and made the World, which the
Scrip-tures could not do; and these are Mi-ni-sters of the Let-ter, who are
Mi-ni-sters of the Scrip-ture, and not Mi-ni-sters of Christ the Word, see-ing
the Scrip-ture is nei-ther Christ, nor the Word; There-fore let e-ve-ry one,
Old and Young, High and Low, mind the Light of Jesus Christ within, in the the
Con-sci-ence, and it. Tea-ching, that you may know the Path of Life, and the
Way of Righ-te-ous-ness, that ye may be sa-ved from the Wrath that must come
up-on them, who by con-ti-nu-ing in their e-vil deeds pro-voke the Lord to
An-ger.

And may be made Par-ta-kers of the Mer-cy and Lo-ving-kind-ness of God, which
is laid up in Christ Je-sus the Light, for them that fear him, and de-part from
I-ni-qui-ty.

S. C.

Little Children,
GOD that made the World, and created all Things that therein is, he is not a
Man, sitting as a Man above the Stars, in some one place, which place is called
Heaven, as many of the World, and the Teachers thereof imagine.

But the true God, who was Creator of all things, h^ is an Eternal Spirit, and
he is the Life and Virtue, and Power that upholdeth all his Creatures, and by
him all things consist.

For without him no Creature can have a being, for he gives Life and Breath
unto all that have it.

And this Eternal GOD no Mortal Man can approach unto; for he only has
Immortallity, and dwells in the Light.

And this Immortal God, he cannot be kept in one place, for his presence
fills Heaven and Earth, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, as
says the Scripture.

And this God, who is an Immortal Spirit, he was your Creator, and this is he
whom you are to remember in the days of your Youth.

And to know this true and living God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent (and
freely given to be the Light of the World, that all through the Light might
believe) it is Life Eternal.

Now God the higher Power, he is called the Father, and Christ, the Light, is
called the Son; and Christ was glorified with the Father before the World began.

And Christ the light was (and is) called the Word, which was with God in the
beginning, and was (and is) God; and God the higher Power, and Christ the Word
are One, by whom the World was made.

And the Spirit of Truth that is Life, which proceeds from the Father and the
Son, as say the Scriptures of Truth.

And these, the Father, Son and Spirit, the world and their Teachers call Three
Persons; but they speak they know not what, even as they have imagined,
contrary to the Scriptures. Therefore Children, believe them not.

For the Father, which is called the Higher Power, and the Son, which is called
the Word, and the Spirit, which is called Life, which proceeds from the Father
and Son; these are one, and are not separated.

For he that has seen the Son, has seen the Father also; for the Father is in
the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and the Spirit proceeds from the
Father and the Son, as says the Scripture, and these are one Being and
Subsistence.

Now that Word which was in the Beginiing with God, and was (and is) God, by
whom all things were made, that were made [Mark] in that Word was Life, and
that Life was (and is) the Light of men.

And this is the true light, which lights every one that comes into the
World, that all through that Light might believe, as says the Scriptures of
Truth.

This Light which every one is enlightened withal, the Priests of the World call
it a natural light; but Children, believe them not, for they speak contrary to
the Scripture.

For the Scriptures of Truth say, That in the Word (which was God) by whom all
Things were made, was Life, and the Life was the Light, of Men So Children,
take notice, that the Light of Men is the Life of the Word, which is God: And
this Word is Eternal and Spiritual; and this Word made all the natural lights,
and this Word also is called, Christ the Son of God, whose Life is the Light of
Men.

And this Word became Flesh, and in due time he was made Manifest in the
Likeness of Sinful Flesh, in that Body which was supposed to be Joseph the
Carpenter's Son, and he was called Jesus.

And in him dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead bodily; and this Jesus fulfilled
the Will of him that sent him, and he freely gave his Life a Ransom for many,
as says the Scripture.

And as concerning the flesh, he was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem,
and he was buried, and he is risen again, according to the Scriptures, and he
wrought Eternal Salvation for all them that obey him.

And so, the same that descended, the same also ascended (as says the
Scriptures) he that came from the Father, the same is gone to the Father again.

And he is glorified with the Father, with the same Glory that he had with the
Father before the World began.

And though some have known him after the flesh, yet henceforth know they him
so no more (as say the Scriptures of Truth.)

Now Children, the Scriptures of Truth do declare of God and Christ, and the
Spirit of Truth, which are one; but the Scriptures cannot bring you to know God
and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth.

For no man knows the Father, who is a Spirit, but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveal him, as say the Scriptures.

And they that come to see and know the Son, they come to see and know the
Father also; for the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, as
says the Scriptures.

And they are called by one name which is the Word or the Light; for the Word
is God, and Christ is the Word, and God is Light, and Christ is the Light of
the World, and the spirit of Life proceeds from God and Christ, who are Light.

And whatsoever the Son sees the Father do, that does he also, and the spirit
of Life is not separate from the Father and the Son in the Work.

Now Children, the Father, Son and Spirit, which are one Being, is the true one
only God, which you are to know, believe in, and Worship, which God is a Spirit
of Truth, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in the Spirit, and in the
Truth; and before you can Worship him aright, you must know him, and believe in
him.

And the Knowledge of God, and the Faith in him, man lost through disobeying
the higher Power; and so fell from God in the Transgression, into darkness and
death.

And all Children (and People) that be in Transgression, in their Natural
estate in the Fall, they are out of the Knowledge of God, and out of the true
Faith, and out of the Spirit of Truth, and so out of the Worship of God.

And in this Estate they are alienated from the Life of God, and Strangers to
the Covenant of Promise, even Strangers unto the Law of God (which is Light)
written in the Heart; and so in this estate they are Darkness.

Now Children, although you be darkness, yet the Light shines in the Darkness
(as says the Scripture) and the Darkness cannot Comprehend it; the Darkness
cannot shut up the Light, that is plain to your Understandings.

For the Light breaks through the Darkness, and shows unto you your darkness;
and shines into your hearts, to give you the kn^wledge of the Glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.

So, that which may be known of God is manifested in you, for God has showed
it unto you: Therefore Children, ye should not seek nor look out, nor search in
your own Thoughts to find out the Knowledge of God; for the World by their
Thoughts and Wisdom know not God.

But the Lord God is nigh unto every one of you, for to show unto you your
Thoughts, for he knows your Thoughts, and none of them can be withheld from
him; and he that declares unto man what his Thoughts are, the Lord of Hosts is
his Name; so Children, take notice of that which shows you your Thoughts, for
that is the Lord.

And it was prophesied concerning Christ, That he should be a Light to lighten
the Gentiles, that the Thoughts of many Hearts may be revealed; and again, The
Word discerns the Thoughts and the Intents of the Heart.

So Children, there is something in you, that makes manifest your bad Words,
and your bad Deeds, and your bad Thoughts unto you, and reproves you for them.
Now all things that are reproved, they are made manifest with the Light (as
says the Scriptures) For whatsoever does make Manifest, the same is Light.

And God is Light, who said, to him that thought God to be such a one as
himself, I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thy eyes; and
they that would have none of Gods reproof, they were the stubborn children,
whom God, the Light, brought his Judgments upon; therefore take heed of
rejecting that which does reprove you for sin.

And again, the Scripture says, of the Spirit of Truth, That he shall reprove
the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment; and Christ the Word, he
for Sin condemned Sin in the flesh: So take notice of that which makes
manifest, reproves and condemns you for Sin; for that i^ God, or Christ, or the
Spirit, which are but One.

Now Children, there are but two Grounds or Powers from whence all Peoples
Deeds arise, and by which all People are acted or led, that is to say, the
Ground of Truth, and the Ground of Unrighteousness, and the Power of God, and
the Power of Satan, which is the Devil, who abode not in the Truth: And there
is the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Error.

Now, the Ground, and Power and Spirit of Truth, are of one Nature, which is
the DIVINE NATURE; and the Ground and Power, and the Spirit of Error, they are
also one in their Natures, which is the Cursed Nature, and these Natures are
contrary one to the other.

Now, they that Act any manner of Unrighteousness, it arises from the
Unrighteous Ground; and they are moved, acted and led in all Unrighteous
Actions, that they Act by the Power of Satan, the Spirit of Error.

And they that act any thing that is Just and Right in the sight of God, it
arises from the Ground of Truth, and they are moved, acted and led in all such
Actions by the Power and Spirit of God.

Now these Powers, or Natures, or Spirits being contrary one to another, oppose
one another; and thus Children ye may come to know that it is so, and discern
it by the Light, which makes manifest all Words, Actions and Motions.

For when ye have disobeyed your Parents, or them that have the Rule over you,
in any thing that ye ought not, or when ye have done any Evil, then ye have
been acted by Satan his Power; and then the Power of God has moved in you
against the Evil that you have committed, and then (many times) with the Spirit
of Truth you have seen that you have done amiss, and have been troubled for it.

And when you have told a Lie, the Devil has begotten that in you, for he is
the Father of all Lies; and then the Light of God's Spirit has often times
showed unto you your Lie, and has condemned you for it.

And thus the Spirit and Power of God Opposes the Power and Spirit of Satan in
all things that Satan begets in you, and moves and leads you to do; for the
Spirit and Power of God moves and stirs against every moving and stirring of
the Power and Spirit of Satan, and calls you from the evil to refrain, and not
to join to the Evil Motions, but to the good.

And likewise, where the Spirit and Power of Satan is not yet limited or
destroyed [Mark] when the Power and Spirit of God begets any tender Desires, or
stirrings, or movings in you after Truth and Righteousness, then the Power and
Spirit of Satan moves and stirs in you against them, and seeks to draw your
Minds from that which is good, into that which is evil.

And thus you may plainly see that the light has no fellowship with the
darkness, nor the darkness with the light; for the Spirit and Power of God is
Light, and the Spirit and Power of Satan is Darkness, and these are contrary
one to each other in all things.

And they that join to to the Darkness, and believe in it, they by it continue,
or are made Children of Darkness, and so of the Devil.

And they that join to the Light, and believe in it, they by it are made, or
continue Children of the Light, and so of God.

Now Children, there is a day of Visitation, if ye slight it not, which the
Lord God gives you, wherein you may come to witness this Word of God, in
making you his children through his Workings and Operations of his Eternal
Spirit.

But if ye let slip the Day of your Visitation, and continue resisting the
Workings of the Spirit, and harden your selves against the Reproof of the Lo^d,
then the Spirit of the Lord will cease striving with you, and ye will be shut
up in Darkness.

Therefore, whilst ye feel something which convinces you of Sin and Evil, take
heed unto that; for that which lets you see that ye should not lie, nor swear,
nor be proud, nor wild, nor disobedient to your Parents in any lawful thing
that they command you, nor act any manner of Unrighteousness whatsoever; This
is the Manifestation of the Spirit, which is given you to profit withal, or the
true Light of God or Christ, who are one.

And this ye should mind r^joyn unto (when it convinces you) and to abide in
it, and then ye would come to feel the Mighty Power of God, which ^s Christ
manifested in you, who was (and is) made manifest for this very end, that he
might (and may) destroy the Works of the Devil.

And they that commit Sin, are of the Devil, and in the Devil's Work; for that
is the Devil which begets Sin, and works it in the Members; and they that
join to that which moves to Sin, they become one with the Devil, the Author of
Sin; and so join with him in his Work, and he becomes their Master.

Now Children, Christ that Power of God, he appears against Sin in the Members,
therefore mind the stirrings, and movings and arisings of Christ, the Power of
God (in you) against Sin, and believe and wait in it, and th^n ye will come to
feel Sin, and the Devil, who is the Author of it, consuming even by the
brightness of the coming, or appearing, or Revelation of Jesus Christ, the
Power of God (in you.)

And then you will grow into Soberness, and Stilness, and Quietness, and
Innocence, and true Tenderness and Obedience both unto God and your Parents,
and them that have Rule over you; and then the Blessing of the Lord will come
upon you.

So Children, ye being turned unto the true Light that shows you Sin and Evil,
with that, as ye mind to abide in it, ye will come to see and know, that the
true God, the true Christ, and the true Spirit is but one Being and Substance,
and as ye wait in the Light, with it ye will come to see the Works and Workings
of the one true and living God; and so ye will grow into a good Understanding,
as ye believe and wait in that Light of God manifested in you.

And then ye will come to see and know the Devil also, (who abode not in the
Truth) and his Works and Workings, and as ye abide in the Truth, (which the
Devil is out of) ye will come to feel the Devil and his Works and workings
destroyed and consumed by the Brightness of the appearing of the one God of
Light, who is a consuming Fire.

So Children, ye need not look out, nor strive in your own Thoughts for the
Knowledge of things; but keep your Minds within, in that which calls for
Soberness and Stilness, and Quietness and Harmelesness of Spirit; and as ye
wait in that, ye will be kept in God's fear, then whatsoever is needful for you
to know, the Lord will reveal it unto you by his Spirit.

For the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, as say the
Scriptures; and they that fear the Lord shall not lack any thing that they have
need of; for they that stand in awe of God, the light, they shall be kept out
of Sin, and they shall grow into the pure Knowledge and Wisdom of God and
therein be preserved; for the Wisdom of God preserves all things that are
preserved.

And Children, with the Wisdom of God all God's Creatures must be ordered, and
they that come into the Wisdom of God [Mark] they must first come into the fear
of God; for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and the fear of
God is to depart from Iniquity, even from every Evil Way.

And before any can depart from their Iniquity, they must first see their
Iniquities; and before they can see their Iniquities, their Sins and Evil
Deeds, they must first hear the Light which they are enlightened withal, which
will tell them that they are in Iniquity, and also show them their Sins and
Evil Deeds.

And Children, they that hear the Light, they hear God, for God is Light; and
they that hear God, they hear Christ also; for God and Christ are One (as says
the Scripture) and they that hear Christ, hear the Author of the True Faith,
and so hear the Savior of their Souls; and the Light is that Prophet, which
all that hear not him are to be cut off.

Now Children, that which moves, or leads, or draws to Lying, to Swearing, to
Dissimulation, to Pride, to Covetousness, to Wilfulness, to Stubbornness to
Envy, to Rashness, to Wildness, to Disobedience to Parents, or Masters, or
Dames, (when they command that to be done by you, which you ought to do) or
that which moves, draws or leads you into Gaming, or into any manner of Evil
whatsoever, the same moves, and draws, and leads you from hearing the Voice of
God.

And that which moves, draw^ and leads into any Evil, that i^ the Devil; and
going into the Evil, which the Devil tempts to, that hardneth the Heart, and
the Heart being hardened, that stop^ the Ear that should hear Gods Voice.

Therefore Children, mind that which will show you all the Motions and
Temptations of the Devil, and hear that which will tell you your Thoughts, for
that is God, the Light, who is the Word, and the Word is as a Hammer, to break
the hard Heart; and the Heart being broken into Tenderness, then the Mercy and
Virtue of God will be felt to heal again.

And then the presence of God will be witnessed; for the Lord dwells with those
that are of a broken and contrite Spirit, and tremble at his Word; and in his
presence is fullness of Joy, as say the Scriptures.

So little Children, Learn of the Light, which is Christ, who is meek and Lowly
in the Heart, and he will teach you to be meek and lowly, and patient, and
innocent, and harmless, and to live in true Love and Tenderness, and Obedience,
and Honesty, and Uprightness toward God and toward Men; and then ye will find
Rest and Peace for your Souls.

Now Children, the wisdom of the Lord God is more precious then all the riches
of the world.

They that are of a froward, stubborn, crooked, envious, rash, fretting Nature,
they shall not be acquainted with the Wisdom of God.

But they that fear the Lord, and are of a tender, humble, meek, patient lowly
Spirit, they shall be filled with true Wisdom and Understanding.

They that are wild and studborn, and run into wicked and profane Language,
and Sport themselves in Vanity, and live in disobedience, the Lord God will
overtake them, with his Judgments, before they are aware of them.

The End of a disobedient, stubborn, wicked Man, who will not depart from his
wi^^ ^^^ness shall be full of Torment, Sorrow and Misery.

But the End of an Upright and Perfect man, who delights himself in the Way
of the Lord, shall be full of Joy, and Comfort and Peace in the Lord.

The Way of the Lord, which is the way of Holiness, and the Path of the Just is
the bright shining Light, which shi^eth ^ore and more until the perfect Day.

And the bright shining Light is that which will show you your evil Words, and
your evil Deeds, and your evil Thoughts, and will chek and reprove you for
them; and this is the way wherein ye should walk.

Every good and perfect Gift comes from God, and the Gift of God is perfect;
and God gives Gifts even to the Rebellious; and the Gift of God to the
Rebellious is the Light, which shows him his Rebellion, and for this Cause it
is given him, that he might return from his Rebellion unto God, the Giver.

Now Christ is the Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life and this is the Gift
of God, and they that receive, love, believe and follow the Light, which
shows unto them their Sins, they shall receive Power to come out of their
Sins, and to become Children of God, and that Light, which is the Gift of God,
that shall justify and comfort them.

But they that disobey, reject, despise and hate the Light which shows unto
them their Sins, they shall abide in Darkness; and if they Repent not, they
shall dye in their Sins; and the Light, which was God's Gift to them, which
showed unto them their Sins, and called unto them to forsake their Sins, shall
remain their Condemnation.

Blessed are they that love and obey the Light, and believe in it; for they
shall be kept by it through Faith, out of condemnation, and they shall feel and
know the Light to be their continual Teacher, to teach them that which God
requires them to do, and it will give them Power to do it also.

Little Children, join not your selves to the Wicked, (Mark) neither keep
Company with them that walk in Unrighteous Ways, lest they tempt you to run
into Wickedness also; and so ye come thereby to receive the Wages that Sinners
must receive; and the Wages of Sin, and of such as live in S^n, is Death.

And they that partake with the Wicked in their Wickedness, they also must
partake with them in the Judgment; therefore refrain from the Company of the
Wicked, and delight your selves in the Fear of the Lord.

They that seek to the Wicked for Counsel, they go to a corrupt Fountain; but
they that seek to the Lord for Counsel, and live in his Fear, they shall find
the Treasures of Wisdom, and the Fountain of Life.

Children, delight not your selves in earthly Riches, nor in the Honor of the
World, nor in the Pleasures of the Flesh, nor in gay Apparel, nor in vain
Mirth, in Music, nor in any Evil whatsoever; but let this be your Delight to
learn to know the Lord, and to be obedient unto him.

Now Children, the Light, if ye wait in it, that will learn you the fear of the
Lord, and it will show unto you what the Lord commands you to do, and it will
lead you in Obedience unto God and his Commandments, and so ye will be brought
unto the End of the Matters, and to the whole Duty of man, which is to fear
God, and keep his Commandments; and in the Light his Commandments are seen, and
they that receive the Light, receive Power to keep them, and to such they are
not grievous, but joyous.

Little Children, wait in the Light

G. F.

Something concerning Original SIN.
THE Original of all Sin is out of the Truth, and out of the Light, and its
conception is not in that Power by which all Creatures were made, neither is
its Original in that in which the Original of all Creatures is and does stand.

And although Sin may be in a Creature, it is not by Creation, but by
Degeneration; not by the Power that made Man, but by the Power that captivateth
Man in his Senses, and leads him from the Power that made him, which he
should be Subject and Obedient unto; which Power places a Law in the Creature,
which it makes and forms; and so, as this was (or is) kept, so long does not
Sin enter, but when the other Power, namely, the Power of the Lust, or earthly
desire after something besides the pure Power, and the Law of it takes the
Creatures Senses into the Apprehension of something to be good beside the Law,
and the pure Obedience thereof; here is Sins Original and Conception, and so
then the Knowledge of a Pleasure in Sin that enters into the Heart, which is
darkened with Love and Desire of that which is earthly, and the Love which was
to the Law, which is the Light, that grows cold, and the Affections become
deceived by the Subtilty of the Author ^f Transgression, who is the ^egetter of
the Evil Desires, which is Sin in it self, before ^t be brought forth to
Action, and is of that Seed that is ha^ed in the Womb, and then ^he Power not
being loved, which works to save out of ^he Sin, at length the Feeling of ^t
is lost, and God, the Power, ^orgotten, and the Creature led unto Captivity,
and the Power ^f death and Darkness comes ^p from the Pit of Darkness ^ver the
Soul, which bore the ^mage of him that created it, and ^o then the the
Begetting of the Power of Darkness, the Prince of Iniquity, the Father of
Abominations and Defilements, tha^ begetting, gets a Birth ^n the Form of him
that begot it^ an^ this takes the Dominion ove^ the Creature, and subjects i^
unto Vanity, not willingly (...) but by force, commanding i^ the Members, and
making the^ to be Servants to Unrighteou^ness, brings forth continually
through the Members that by Authority and Power which at the first was but
pe^swaded and enticed unto, an^ so the Continuation of Si^ and the Custom of
sinning takes away the Sense, so that it becomes Natural to conceive Evil, and
to bring forth Mischief, and to act Iniquity; and this is the Nature in which
all men are Children of Wrath, one as well as another, that are in it, without
respect to Persons, Names, Countries, or any other thing whatsoever; for Sin is
the Transgression of the Law; and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression; and where there is a Law, there is Obedience required, which not
being yielded, the Law is broken, and Transgression committed; so that of
Necessity the Original of the pure, righteous, holy Law of God is first, before
the Original of Sin, which is the Transgression of it; and this is that which
is near to every one, even the Law which they should observe and keep, and
fulfill the requirings of it, and not transgress: and who take heed unto this,
do well, and those that transgrses this, do Evil, as did Cain, and then Sin
lies at the Door, which being finished brings forth Death; and so, as many as
have sinned since the Foundation of the World, it has been by their departing
aside from the pure Law of the Power that made them, in their own Particulars,
unto that which their own Hearts l^sted after, and so that having conceived in
the Womb of Darkness, in the blinded and deceived Affection, brought forth the
Sin, which being finished in them, and through them brought forth Death in
their own particulars, by what is done in thine own self, and not by that which
was done in another long ago.

So let none be deceived, but all, both Old and Young, High and Low, Rich and
Poor, mind the pure Law of God in your own Particulars, which by Transgressing
and Disobeying, Sin has gotten Head in you, and so the Reign and Dominion of
Death is come over you, and the Powers of Darkness have prevailed in your
Hearts, and then in the Dark Imaginations of your own Hearts ye have gone to
imagine about Original Sin being in Adam, and so Si^ unto Condemnation and
Wrath to come upon you all; But verily, I say unto you, The Original of Sin,
and the Law, and their Transgression there of, is nearer unto you tha^ Adam,
even the disobeying of the pure Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he has
lighted every one of you withal, which makes manifest unto you what ye should
do, and what ye should not do; and who love and obey this, it will lead them to
that which was in the Beginning, before Sin's Original was.

A few Words concerning such as Mock and Deride at being moved by the Spirit.
OH! Ye Blind and Ignorant People, Children of no Understanding who are so far
gone from the Lord God your Maker, and from the feeling of his Power, that it
is become a Derision unto you: What Lamentation shall I take up for you, O ye
People of England! whose Old Men are Scorners, and thy Children a Generation of
Mockers! In Vain has all thy Profession of the Scriptures been, seeing now ye
come to Mock and Deride ^t the Spirit, which gave them forth: Fear the Lord God
ye Ishmaelites, and Repent of the Evil of your Doings, which have for several
Years done Despite to the Spirit of Grace, Jeering and Mocking at the Lord's
People, who are moved by his Spirit to Worship him, and to Warn you of your
Evil Lives, as if there were no such Thing could be known, as to be led by his
Spirit. I say, what are you led by in your Worship? if it be not by the Movings
and Leadings of God's Spirit? Then who has required it at your hands? but it
seems you are not; for you Mock and Deride at being moved by the Spirit, and so
Mock at the Manner of the Scriptures being given, Holy Men of God Writing them
as they were moved by the Spirit, as says the Scripture: Therefore learn
Understanding, and mind God's pure Fear, that y^ may come to feel God's Spirit
near you, even in you, moving out of Iniquity into that which is Righteous, and
then ye will leave Mocking at the Spirit; for it has been your Ignorance of
it, has been the Ground of your Despising of it; But now, they that mind the
arising of the Light, shall know the Clouds of Ignorance Expelled, and come to
the Knowledge of the Manifestation of God's Spirit, without which the Mind
cannot be Good.

And all you little Children, who have been Mocking and Scorning at the Spirit
of God, and at the Light, consider what you are doing, you Mock at that which
you ought to obey, as has been proved in this little Book, and so remain
Children of Disobedience, in whom the Prince of the Power of Darkness rules in
your Hearts, and keeps you from the Knowledge of God, who is Light, in whom is
no Darkness, as ^ou may read in John 1. v. 5. And remember this, that Mocking
and Scorning, and Jeering, and Deriding, are all Works of Darkness, and not
wrought in the Light, but with the Light are all condemned.

S. C.

An Exhortation to Families, who have desires to serve the Lord God in their
several places, that they may all learn in the Light of Christ Jesus, the
Wisdom and Power of God, who is true Teacher.
O Ye Fathers and Mothers, stand ia the pure Fear of the Lord, and wait in his
Light, that ye may receive his living Wisdom, and live in it, that so ye may be
ordered by it, and with it order all things to God's Glory, and bring up your
Children in the fear of the Lord, Watching over them in the Seasoned Savoury
Life of God, not suffering them to live in VVildness, nor Idleness, nor Vain
Talking (Unreproved) but in the Sober, Meek Spirit, and in the Authority of
God's Lamb, reprove them, and that will reach the Witness of God in them; and
Correct them in the Fear and Wisdom and Freedom of God, in the Patience, and
follow not their Foolish Wills, neither Correct them in your own Wills, nor in
Hast^ness, Rushness or Passion; for if ye do, then that will use the Rod, which
is to be beaten with the Rod of God, and that will make your Children mo^^
Stubborn and Wicked, and this will Offend God; but stand ye in God's Counsel,
and discourage nothing in your Children but Evil, and let them have that which
is meet, ju^^ and reasonable, and no more, that none of God's Creature^ be
wasted; and be ye Patterns and good Example, in all Holiness, Gravity and
Uprightness, unto them; and let them have sufficient Liberty to go to Godly
Meetings, and rather stir them up, and Encourage them to go to such, than
hinder or discourage them; and keep your Minds out of them unto the Lord, and
let your Love to them be in the Lord, that so ye may feel his Blessing come
upon you, and them.

And all ye Children who have Parents, honor (and be obedient unto) them in
the Lord, and mind the Light of Christ in you, and that will not suffer ye to
be Wild nor Wilful, Stubborn nor Vain, but it will check and reprove ye for
all Evil; and if ye will own its Reproof, and believe and wait in it, it will
lead ye out of all Evil, and it will bring ye into Soberness and Meekness,
Tenderness and Innocence, and preserve ye in it, and it will bring ye to know
and remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth, and it will reveal God's
Power and Wisdom in ye, whereby ye will be kept in true order: So, suffer not
your Minds to follow Vanity, neither walk in Stubborness toward your Parents,
(nor others) I Warn ye in God's Fear, lest he shorten your days, and cut ye off
by his righteous Judgments; but mind his fear, and wait therein, that ye may
feel his Grace, and be taught by it, and be obedient unto it, then ye will feel
the mercy and blessing of the Lord.

And all ye that are Masters and Dames, wait in the true Light, that ye may
feel Christ the Power and Wisdom of God to be your Master, that so ye may Rule
in your Places in his Fear and Wisdom; and lay no more upon your Servants, than
ye would be willing should be laid upon you, if were (...) their Places and
Condition* [Mark that] and forbear thre^^ning them, and be not hasty t^ turn
them away if they be wi^ling to abide with you, but in patience and meekness
show them their Place and Service, an^ therein Teach them, if the^ know it not;
and let them have for their Service that which i^ Convenient, Just and
Reasonable, that they may have no jus^ Cause to Mu^mur or Conplain^ and keep
out of Covetousness, least that hinder you from giving them sufficient Liberty,
(who desire it) for going to the Meetings of the People of the Lord; and if in
the wisdom of God ye see freedom to turn any away, give them sufficient Waring,
that they may provide themselves otherwise, for this is but just, and
reasonable; and be not hasty nor rash with them, nor run into Jangling with
them, but if ye have cause to reprove them, let it be in the Fear and Wisdom of
God, in the Freedom and Authority of the Truth and that will reach unto the
Witness of God in them: So be not high minded, but fear, and be patterns unto
them in the lowly, meek and quiet Spirit: and bear with the weak, and forgive
them that trespass against you, and render not Evil for Evil to any, but
overcome Evil with that which is Good, and live in that which overcomes Evil,
that so the Truth of God may be exalted over all.

And all ^e that are Servants, live in the Fear of the Lord, and wait in his
Light, and be obedient thereunto, and also be obedient (in your places) unt^
those that are your Masters an^ Dames, according to the Flesh, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward, serving them in Faithfulness and
Uprightness of Heart, doing what ye do for them, as diligently, faithfully and
willingly, as ye should do any thing to the Lord, for this is right in the
sight of God; and take heed that none of God's Creatures be lost, or wasted
under your Hands, through your neglecting them, or sloathfulness in your
places, wd do not falsely accuse any, or speak Evil behind any ones Back,
thereby thinking to get the Favor o^ Love of any, or upon any other account;
for that is Evil: and be as diligent in your places, when your Masters or Dames
are absent, as when they are present; for this is just and right: and be not
stubborn nor wilful, neither use many wor^s to your Masters or Dames, and if ye
know not well how to pe^form your Service aright, th^^ in true Humility be
willing ^o learn; and take heed of Highmindedness and Pride, or of being wise
in your own Eyes and when ye have any spare Ti^^ allowed ye, being free from
outward Employment, see that ye spend it in the Fear of the Lord, in waiting
upon him (...) his Light, that so all vain Tal^ing, corrupt Communication,
foolish jesting, and all Vanity may be kept out of: and give ye not way to that
mind which is Unstable, which would be often shifting and going from place to
place, for this is not right in the sight of God, but wait in the Light, that
ye may be staid and settled in your Minds; and if ye see Freedom in the Fear of
God (Mark that) to go to another place, then give your Masters or Dames
sufficient notice of it: and if any of you, who know the Truth, come to be
moved of the Lord to go to any place in his Service, be faithful to the Lord,
and when your service which he required of you (...) done, then return to your
place* again, except it be otherway^ ordered in the Fear and Wi^dom of God; and
be diligent in your places, doing the same that ye would others should do unto
you in the like condition; and mind the Lord in and above all things, and be
faithful unto him, and he will be your Reward.

And all ye Fathers and Mothers, and Children, and Masters, and Dames, and
Servants, who have the Creatures of God to buy or sell, or to exchange, live in
the fear of the Lord, that ye may feel his Wisdom to guide you in your Trading,
and do not speak better or worse of the Creatures then you know them to be,
thereby to get the greater gain; for that is Idolatry, it arising from
Covetousness; but wait to feel God's Spirit to bridle your Tongues; and use but
few words in your Trading^ and if ye ask a question therein, do it in
simplicity, and keep in the Light, which is equal, that when ye offer or ask a
Price for the Creatures, it may be in Equality, and let that be your Rule, and
not the Price of the Market, except that be equal; for so ye may reach the
equal Principle on in another, and then stand t^ your Word, and here your Y^^
will be Yea, and your Nay will (...) Nay, and so ye will be kept in the
Doctrine of Christ, with his Light, out of Evil: and ye abiding in the Light,
it will bring you to do to every one as ye would be done unto: and take heed
that ye stir not up the Impatient, Crooked, Disorderly Nature one in another,
with your Words or Actions; but bear one with another, and forgive one another,
and when ye tell each other of a Fault, do it in the Fear and Wisdom, and meek
Spirit of God's Lamb, that so ye may restore each other therein; and when ye
have any convenient time, assemble your se^ves together in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, and wait every particular in the Measure and Gift of God in you,
which is given ye to profit withal; and all wait together in the Light, and
believe in it, that ye may be Children of the Light, and therein watch unto
Prayer, and one over another, and this will beget ye into unfeigned Love; and
walking in the Light ye will have true Unity and Fellowip one with another: and
the Blood (which is the Life) o^ Jesus Christ you will feel cleansing you from
all Sin, so ye will come into the Unity wit^ God. Also, to feel his Word, his
Power and Wisdom (i^ you) by which all things were Created and made, and are
upheld, that therein ye may be ordered in the particlar, and that therein ye
may use and order all God's Creatures to his Glory; and then all false Weights,
and Measures, and Ways, and Worships will be destroyed; and then shall Truth,
Equity, Righteousness, and true Order and Mercy prosper, and run down as a
River: So let your Faith stand in Christ Jesus the Light, and Wisdom and Power
of God, and then true Worship, true Weight, true Measure shall be set up and
established, and then shall the Lord be exalted over all the Works of his
Hands, and so ye will feel his blessing; unto him belongs Dominion and
Honor, for he is worthy of it for evermore, Amen.

By George Fox.

The Lamb and his Day Proclaimed.
THE Kingdom of God is at hand, which comes not with Observation; Salvation is
near unto all that will receive it, Redemption is coming in a Time unexpected,
and Deliverance in a Way not known, as a Thief in the Dark is the Heir come,
whose light out of d^rkness is shining, and that which shines out of Darkness
is it alone that gives the Knowledge of God, whom to know is Life eternal; and
the Brightness of the Day of God is springing forth of Darkness, as the Morning
Sun, after the Darkness of the Night, and Glorious is this day of the
Revelation of God, to all them that have waited for his Coming, who in the Life
of his Power through the Obedience in his love, come to rejoice in his Dominion
over all the Powers of Darkness forever, and sound forth the Dreadful Day of
his Power unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, from the which Christ the
Savior comes to take Peace, and to bring the Sword of God's Judgments into the
Bowels of all the earthly-minded: and in him that judges the Secrets of all
Men's Hearts, do his Followers rejoice, and proclaim him unto you all, that
make an end of sin, who of the Father of Love and Mercy is tendered unto all
that will receive him, that in him who condemns the Evil Deeds and Sin in the
Flesh, Salvation might be attained unto, who now comes unto his own, of whom
many receive him not; for he is come to judge the World, whom God so loved,
that he gave his Son the Light of the World, that whosoever believe in him, (by
whom the Secrets of all Hearts are, and shall be judged) may be saved from
Wrath to come, and find a sure hiding place, when the Wicked shall be cut off
the Earth.

And now, Who will receive the Lamb, in whose Mouth there was no Guile? who
among the Sons of men will recive him that has been slain from the Foundation
of the World? Who will receive him that is the gift of God, which is perfe^^?
Who will receive him that is a man of Sorrows, wh^^e Beauty is hid from the
Prudent of the earth? Who will receive him that the Priests cry out against,
and the Rulers say, away with him from the Earth? Who will come unto the Waters
of Life, and return unto the Fountain of living Mercies, that in his Belly the
springs of Life may be felt? Who can endure to follow him to the End of the
World, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and who receives not Honor of Men?
Who can hear, receive and keep the hard Sayings, and drink his Blood that
cleanses from all Sin? Who is willing to receive him that is the Resurrection
and the Life, whose presence troubled and terrified his own Disciples, so that
their hearts burned within them? Who will lay down their Crowns at the foot of
him that is the light, and mourn over him that is slain, whom they have
pierced, and through patience, long-suffering and Obedience, follow the one
Shepherd in the Regeneration? Even unto them is the Word of Consolation sent.

Therefore be awakened, O all ye Rulers and People; let not your Hearts be
hardened against God's Witness in you; neither stop your Ears, nor close your
Eyes; for of a truth the Lord is at hand; and is come to try you with his
loving kindness and with his Judgments. His flock despised of men, has he sent
in the Meekness of his love, to preach the innocent Life of his Son among you,
in Meekness, Patience, Sufferings and Tribulations, who being reviled, revileth
not again, but in Patience enduring long Imprisonments, yea, Want and Sickness
there, and Abuses, cruel Mockings, Stonings in the Street daily, and Revilings
by Ungodly Persons, whose Cruelty is increased, and their Sins multiplied,
increasing to the day of Judgment, and Righteous Revelation of God's Wrath upon
all Unrighteousness of men, who hold his Truth in that which is not his
Righteousness, which is now brought near unto all that fear before him in
Uprightness of heart, that Truth in the inward parts they might come to know,
and in it worship the God of the Spirits of all Flesh.

H. S.

Read with Carefulness, and Practice with Diligence.
ALL Children that are tender, and young in Years, mind the Lord God, who
created you and formed you in the Womb, and walk in the Fear of God, that God
may bless you in your Growth and Increase of Years, and make you Partakers of
his Heavenly Blessings, and give unto you Life everlasting; all follow the
Light of the Lord Jesus, wherewith you are enlightened, which shows you that you
should not walk in the Foot steps of the Ungodly, in Lying, or Swearing, or
Cursing, or Mocking, or Scorning, or Wantonness, or in any Sin, that you may be
the Children of the Light, and the Children of God, that God may delight in
doing you good; all mind the good Example of your Parents, and be ye Followers
of the good; but where they are not a good Example to you in the fear of God,
let your Modesty and Sobriety and Chastity in Words and (...) unto them; and if
for your well-doing they or any shall hate you, or seek your hurt, still
standing in the fear of God, the Lord will keep you above the Hurt of Man, and
his Children he will care for. So be not ye Learners of any Evil Example; for
all that do learn of the Evil, and follow the Evil, such will the Lord God
reward with sore Punishments and Judgments.

And all you Wicked Children, who are of the Seed of the Evil Doers, that are
learning of the Wicked One to Scoff, and to Scorn, and to Mock, and to do
Wickedly, this unto you is an Evil Example; The Children which Mocked Elisha,
Two and Forty of them were torn to pieces with two she Bears, 2 Kings 2. Verse.
23, 24. Yet sorer Punishment has God reserved in store for all the Children of
Wickedness and Mockers. Wherefore be ye all Warned, and mind the Light of God
in your Consciences, and follow it, that you may receive and partake of the
Store of may receive and partake of the store of God's Mercies, which none that
do wickedly have the Promise of.

THE END.
London, Printed and Sold by A Soul at his Shop in Devonshire New Buildings,
without Bishops-Gate, 1681


