HEBDOMADA MAGNA: OR THE GREAT WEEK OF CHRIST'S PASSION.

Handled by way of Exposition upon the fourth Article of the Apostles Creed; He
suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead, buried.

By John Crompe, Master of Arts of C. C. C. in Cambridge, and Vicar of Thornham
in Kent.

First preached in his Parish Church, and now enlarged as here follows for
more public use.

Galat. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me: and I unto the world.

Haec nostra sapientia est, probe sentire quanti constiterit Dei filio nostra
salus.

LONDON, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at
the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner-Temple-Gate. 1641.

TO THE High and Mighty PRINCE, CHARLES, PRINCE of WALES.
Most Gracious Prince,
IT is reported in the Ecclesiastical History, That when that admirable
Amphilochius (as Theodoret styles him) Metropolitan of Lycaonia, L^b. 5. c. 16.
had supplicated the Emperor Theodosius; Ut Arrianorum coetus ex urbibus
ejicerentur, i. e. That the Congregations of the Arrians, might ^e thrust out
of the Cities; And that the Emperor (as thinking it somewhat an unreasonable
request) had denied his suite; How that the said Amphilochius was silent for a
time; Excogitata admirabili art: Having besought himself of another device,
whereby to bring his purpose and design to pass. And that was this; He
coming not long ^^er to the Court and presence of the Emperor; and s^ying
Arcadius the young Prince (and lately designed Caesar) standing by him, Ipsum
quidem Imperatorem de more salutavit, nullo honor habito filio, i. e. He
saluted only the Emperor himself, according to his accustomed manner, giving
no honor nor respect at all unto the Son. Which the Father observing, and
supposing it to be only forgetfulness in Amphilochius: He puts him in mind
of it, and bids him to approach near unto his Son also, ipsumque osculari,
and to greet him too, as well as he had done the Father. To which Amphilochius
replies; That it was sufficient that he had tend^red his respect and done his
duty to himself. Whereat the Emperor being moved, changes his former opinion;
and thinks now, the neglect of the Son to be no less, no other, then an
affront offered to the Father. Which alteration of mind, together with change
of countenance; when Amphilochius had found to be in Theodosius: He unmaskes
himself, Et propositum sui facti declaravit; by manifesting the drift of his
former carriage. Nam cum clamore (as the Historian speaks) For even with
clamor and loud crying, He thus spoke unto the Emperor: Itane fers graviter
neglectionem filii tui, etc. Do thou so grievously and hainously take the
neglect of Thy Son, and art so vehemently enraged against those that show
themselves contumacious and contumelious toward him? Why then assure thy self
that Almighty God hates likewise those that blaspheme and derogate from the
honor of His Son; yea, and is as angry and enraged as thou can be against
them that show themselves so unthankefull and ungrateful to their most loving
Savior and Redeemer. Which speech and carriage of Amphilochius, when the
Emperor had well both observed and admired, Legem statim scribit qua
Haereticorum coetus prohiberentur; He presently decrees against the said
Heretical Assemblies.

Now that which I would observe (most Illustrious Prince) out of this History
to my present purpose, is no more but this. That whereas the neglect of doing
Divine honor by Theodosius to the Son of God, occasioned the neglect of
civil honor to be done to Arcadius, the Son of the Emperor: I infer,
that by the rule of contraries, all civil honor that can possibly be devised,
is to be given to the Son of our Caesar, our Emperor, by whom so much divine
honor is so readily and heartily yielded to the Son of God. For who that is
not supercilious and squint eyed toward his goodness, sees not? or
maliciously bent against his honor and greatness, acknowledges not; that our
Christian and most Religious King, Defender of the true, Ancient, Catholic
and Christian Faith; honors the Son of God many ways? As first, in his
Christian Laws and edicts; and secondly, in his Christian life and
conversation. In the former whereof, as he may be a President to all Christian
Princes: so in the later, a pattern to all Christian people. So that we which
are his Subjects, especially, if in the one we will not (or cannot in all
things) obey him commanding; yet in the other, we should strive to imitate and
follow him, preceding and proceeding in the ways of godliness, and Religion
before us.

Next in his reverent and zealous comportment of himself, as well in his
public as more retired devotions. As also in his Christian Imprese upon his
Coin (CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO) professing therein to reign and rule only by the
conduct and guidance of this Son of God.

In all which particulars and many more, which might be enumerated, since our
Gracious Sovereign does so far strive and manifest himself to profess to
honor the Son of God: I say, that we ought all of us in our several
callings, to strive likewise in a thankful remembrance thereof, to honor the
Son of our Sovereign: laying at his feet as prostrate before him, even our
Persons, our Prayers, our pains, our wits, our wills, our works, our
affections, our actions, our acclamations; yea, our looks, our loves, our
labors, and if need require, our lives also to do Him service.

The consideration whereof has thrust me forward (most Mighty Prince) though
the meanest of many thousands of my profession in our Israel, which are ready
to tender, some their gold, others their frankincense, and others their myrrh,
of all manner their learning and devotions and contemplations in this kind, to
your sacred name) to come with my mite also, and to cast it into this treasury
of your honor, to make the heap thereof a little the more heavy: not by the
weight or worth of the offering; but by the zeal and true affection to your
name and same, of him that brings it; who although I am a mere stranger to
your highness by face: yet hope as a subject to your Royal Father, and a
servant in the Ministry of the Gospel to your God, to find so much interest
in your Princely favor, as to patronize and protect this succeeding Discourse.
Yet neither for the Authors, but the Subjects sake: nor the manner of handling,
but matter contained in it. In which you shall find a Week of sorrows to our
blessed Savior, which shall procure a world of joys to your Righteous soul:
by being a means after all your joys ended in this life, to translate you
from a corruptible inheritance and Title to a Crown here, to an Inheritance
and possession of a Crown immortal, and which fades not away in the Land of
the living. Which shall ever be the earnest and hearty Prayer unto Almighty
God of

Your most devoted Suppliant and humble Orator JOHN CROMPE.

He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead, Buried.
HAving in my former Treatise (Beloved) discoursed at large, as well concerning
the conception as the birth of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, out
of those two foregoing Articles of the Apost^es Creed; He was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and borne of the Vi gin Mary: I am come now in the next place, by
the order and course of the same, to treat of his suffe^ings under Pontius
Pilate, and his crucifying, death and burial. For so speaks the fourth
Article, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead, buried.

Where the first thing that in my judgment, will require satisfaction, is
this; Why the holy Apostles, or whosoever else they were that joined these
Articles together, and made a sum of belief of them; did make so large a
leap, as to pass so immediately and directly from the first act of his life
to the last, from his being borne of the Virgin Mary to his sufferings under
Pontius Pilate: especially seeing the holy Evangelist speaks of many passages
of his life in the interim and betwixt these, that are very remarkable and
worthy, not only of our observation but our contemplation also and belief.
And it is answered by one thus. Optime a nativitate ad ejus passionem and
mortem fit transitu ubi perfect salutis nostrae summa sita ^st. The transition
from his birth to his death and passion was most fitting and convenient for
this reason, because therein especially consists and is placed the sum and
substance of our Salvation, Nihil enim nobis nasci profuisset, nisi and
redemisset; as he goes on out of Saint Gregory: His birth would have profited
us nothing, if his redemption of us had not followed and succeeded. So that to
suffer and dye for the sins of mankind, was a chief, though not the only
end of his incarnation; which occasioned the worthy Authors and disposers of
this sh rt sum of our Christian belief, to pass from one substantial head
and point unto another; especially from his conception and birth, to his
passion, resurrection and ascension, with all celerity and expedition, leaving
all other circumstantiall parts and passages of his life to their Sermons and
other larger discourses.

Which course likewise Saint Paul himself followed as is plainly to be seen
in his Epistle to the Philippians. Where when he had described and set down
Christ's nativity and birth; he presently thereunto adjoynes his death, as
fetching and deriving from thence the chief fruit and profit of our
redemption. His words (speaking of Christ) are these. He made himself of no
reputation, but took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto
man, and found in shape as a man: here he speaks of his Nativity; and then in
the next words, subjoynes: He humbled himself and became obedient unto the
death, even the death of the Cross. There follows his passion, Phil. 2.7, 8.
Verses.

Yea, and the holy Evangelists themselves seem not to differ much from this
method and order neither, in that they are so exact and punctual in setting
down all circumstances; first concerning his conception and birth, and then
afterward of his sufferings and death; whereas they pretermit and pass over
many act^ons of his life, as Saint John confesses plainly; in saying, There
are many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written
every one, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain the Books
that should be written, John 21.25.

As if his very Incarnation and all other actions of his life, together with
his preaching, and entire and perfect obedience to the wh^le Law, and the like,
tended only to the redemption of mankind by his death and passion, as to
their chief and last end: answerable to that also of Saint Paul elsewhere;
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, and
made under the Law: where ye see his incarnation birth and obedience
expressed: But to what purpose? why, that follows in the next words (viz.) To
redeem them that were under the Law; that is, by his death and passion, Gal.
4.4, 5. Verses.

And thus you see, how the conception of Christ, first is directed to his birth
and incarnation; and that next to his death and passion, as to their first and
last end: Primum in intention, etiamsi ultimum in executione; First in
intention, though last in execution. So that our Creed ye see passes over all
the obedience of our Saviors life, as being nothing else but a step only to
his death and passion, by which especially our redemption is purchased and
procured. As much as to say, let men lay hold by a lively faith on these, and
then doubt not but all other circumstances shall and will concur to their
future bliss and happiness eternally, in the land of the living.

And so this question being thus resolved, I proceed in the next place to the
handling of the words themselves as they lie in the Article. He suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was c^ucified, dead, buried.

In which words, for methods sake, I will observe only these two
circumstances, Quis and Quid, who and what. Who, He, or which; what, suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried. And I will begin with the
latter first, as being the larger subject, reserving the former to conclude at
the latter end, as requiring the deeper and the longer search.

He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried.
HEre ye see, beloved, sundry Circumstances expressed and set down, which to
handle at large according to their weight and urgency, would require even the
least of them more time then at the first I proportioned to my self for the
whole: But because they are the common and ordinary subjects of many, if not
most Sermons, I shall be the briefer in them: Yet I will handle each
circumstance apart, and begin with them according to their order in the Cre d.
As first of the first, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc.

And here I may for an entrance take occasion, without any great digression
from my intended scope, to discourse of all his sufferings from his birth to
his burial, from his Cradle to his Cross, from his very infancy till his
dying day; and show how that tota ejus vita Crux fuit acerbissima, his whole
life was nothing else but a martyrdom, a continual suffering in one kind or
other; Habens in factis observatores, in verbis contradictores and in tormentis
illusores, as Saint Bernard speaks, Having envious and malicious obs^rvers of
his deeds, spiteful and hateful contradictors of his words; yea, scornful
and reproachful scoffers at his miseries and afflictions. In regard whereof
some do apply that saying of the Spouse in the Canticles unto him, when she
calls and styles her beloved, Fasciculum myrrhae, A bundle of Myrrh, Cant.
2.12. Not only because Myrrh was wont to be used in the sacrifices of the old
Law, but also because the body of Christ was so embalmed before his burial, as
we may see John 19.39, and 40. Verses. Or because the Jews, even just before
his Crucifying, dederunt ei bibere vinum Myrrhatum, gave him Wine to drink
mingled with Myrrh, Mark 15.23. which, as Cyrill says, Fellis instar amara
est, ^at^ei^^si 13
is even as bitter as gall.

But I must confess that Mercerus a learned expositor upon the place does not
approve of the bundle of Myrrh in this sense, but acknowledging Quod quidam
nostrorum, etc. that some did so expound it, upon the same reason, yet
concludes himself, That Nil necesse est, etc. there was no need of such an
interpretation: But says he, simplex s^nsus est, etc. the plain meaning of
the place is, that the Spouse says, her beloved was most sweet and grateful
unto her, even as a bundle of Myrrh is pleasing and delightful to the sent;
and he adds his reason too, because Christus in ecclesiam odores spargit
suavissimos, etc. Christ does as it were strew sweet odours of his gifts and
graces upon his Church and chosen.

But beloved, the truth is, it may safely be taken and expounded in both
senses: For Myrrh may be said, after a sort, to resemble the Physicians (...),
that is, it is both bitter and sweet; sweet in the smell, bitter in the taste.
And so is the sacrifice of christ, sweet in the offering, bitter in the
suffering; sweet in the nostrils of God his Father that enjoined it, that
accepts it, and sweet unto his spouse the Church, i. e. the whole number of his
faithful ones, wheresoever dispersed throughout the whole world, for whom it
was performed, and to whose comfort it is applied: in regard whereof she has
reas^n to say as follows in the text; inter ub^ra mea commorabitur, he shall
lie all night b^twixt my breasts; in the same verse: Yet it is bitter, yea, most
bitter unto him that for his sake is content to sustain and endure it. Which
diversity of the apprehension and relish, (as I may so speak) of the
sacrifice of Christ, is by one well expressed after this manner, when he says,
Patitur Christus, and ex hoc dolor; patitur pro nobis, and ex hoc laetitia;
patitur ad suam mortem ut videatis hominem; patitur ad nostram vitam ut ametis
Deum; patitur in cruce, ecce miseriam; patitur ut resurgat, ecce gloriam. And
as well Englished by another, a Divine modern Poet of our own: (truly I am
sure, whether int^ntionally or no, I know not) in this sort: Christ suffers,
and in this his tears begin; C. Flet^^^. Po^^^. (...) Ci^ s^. Triumph.

Suffers for us, and our joy springs in this;
Suffers to death, here is his manhood seen;
Suffers to rise, and here his godhead is, etc.


And thus you see how Christ our blessed Savior may be said to be a bundle
as well of bitter as of sweet myrrh. A sweet bundle to his heavenly Father and
his beloved spouse the Church: but a bitter bundle to himself, in regard of
his continual sufferings, which were so knit and bound together throughout the
whole course of his life, that there was no intermission or release betwixt
them; and therefore justly termed and styled a bundle.

If therefore Solomon could say of man in general, That, cuncti dies ejus
del^ribus and aerumnis pleni; All his days are sorrows and his travail
grief, as Eccles. 2.23. Then much more might the Prophet say of this man in
particular, that he was, Vir dolorum and sciens infirmitates, Esaias 53.3. (i.
e.) A man so composed of sorrows, as that he had a taste and sense of all
humane infirmities: I mean, all that were natural, not sinful. And that
together with our nature, he took all that belonged thereunto, sin only
excepted, as all our weaknesses, our wants, our sicknesses, our sores, our
griefs, our sorrows, yea, all our common infirmities, though not Personal
defects both of body and soul; as is solidly discussed and plainly proved by
a learned Tutor of mine preaching upon the same subject: D. Sa. (...).
The Life and Death of Jesus Christ: whither I refer you for further
satisfaction in this point.

But I take the meaning of the Creed to stretch no farther then to those great
and grand sufferings that went immediately before his crucifying on the Cross,
because it says, He suffered under Pon^ius Pilate: that is, in the time of his
jurisdiction, and by authority derived from and under him, so that whatsoever
things were publicly done and acted against him about this time and by this
means, are properly hereto be handled, and no more. For the name of Pontius
Pilate is not here mentioned, ad personae dignitatem, S^^ 81. de (...).
sed ad temporis significationem, as Saint Austin speaks, That is, not for any
honor or credit given or intended to be given to the person; but only to
express and declare the time of Christ's suffering here mentioned and set
down. For he was Judge, Governor, Deputy, President, Viceroy, or whatsoever
else you please to call such a Magistrate, as had the supreme authority of
life and death at this time in the land of Jury, Judea, and in the City of
Jerusalem; where Christ was to, and did suffer death upon the Cross, for the
sins of the whole World: although indeed his said authority were but
subordinate and derived from the Roman Empire. For you must know beloved, that
Jerusalem at this time, was in bondage with her children, i. e. in servitude
and subjection to the Emperor of Rome: Who as he had under his government the
most part of the neighboring world, and bordering countries round about him:
so among the rest this country of the Jews in which Jerusalem stood, commonly
called and known by the name of Judea or the land of Jewry. Now as our King of
England has his Deputies, Presidents, and Governors in Scotland, Ireland,
Virginia, and other places of his more remote Jurisdictions and Dominions,
where he is not personally resident himself: so the Emperor at this time, had
the like in his several Provinces abroad. And amongst the rest, Pontius Pilate
in this City and Country where Christ now suffered and was put to death; and
therefore is it said, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, (that is) at that time,
when Pontius Pilate was the President of the place, and before whom he was
convented, arraigned, condemned, and the like.

Which beloved, was a very necessary circumstance to be known, ne ex aliqua
part, velut vaga and incerta, gestorum traditio vacillaret, In lo^um.
says Ruffinus, Lest the minds of men should stagger and waver at the report
and tradition of their doings and Christ's sufferings: if in the smallest
circumstance they were left doubtful and uncertain. And therefore it was
thought fit not to be omitted, by the compilers and composers of the Creed, as
well for the confutation and conviction of the Jews that would not believe in
him, as the confirmation and settling of Faith in the hearts of the Gentiles,
unto whom they were to preach him and proclaim him: in that they were able,
and did so punctually design the time, and place, and person under whom he
suffered such and such things: as conventing, arraigning, condemning,
buff^ting, beating, railing at, reviling, mocking, scoffing, scorning,
scourging, crucifying, dying, burying, and the lik^. All which and a great
deal more he suffered under Pontius Pilate, as I shall have occasion at large
to show you in the sequel of this discourse.

To omit therefore the baseness of his birth, and the manifold miseries of his
whole life, wherein he took upon him the shape, not only of a servant, as
Saint Paul says, Phil. 2.7. ut subesset, that so he might be in subjection:
but also of a sinner; mali servi, ut vapularet: that is, of an evil servant,
that so he might suffer correction, as Saint Bernard. Both which are expressed
together by the Prophet when he says; Fecisti me servire in peccatis, Thou
have made me to serve with thy sins, Esaias 43.24. Let us a ^ittle consider of
the time only and manner of his death; wherein most especially he may be said
to suffer under Pontius Pilate. And herein, howsoever I shall be able to say no
more for substance, then what you heard read unto you in the forenoone out of
the Gospel for this day: Palm Sunday.
yet by a little amplifying and aggravating the circumstances, it may so fall
out, that your affections may be moved and stirred to suffer a little in your
souls with him, that suffered so much both in soul and body too for you. And
in my weak handling of these great passions of our most great Lord and Master;
Inspiret, aspiret qui p^ssus est; he that suffered such things for me, I
beseech him to be assistant unt^ me, and to strengthen me. And as Saint
Chrysostom upon the same o^casion bespake his auditors, so let me you: Ser. 6.
Fer. 5. Pas.
Orate fratres ut dignatione qa^ passus, passionis suae revelet arcanum: pray
with me O my brethren unto this our blessed Savior and Redeemer; that as he
has vouchsafed to suffer for us, so he would likewise vouchsafe to reveal the
secrets and mysteries of his said sufferings unto us; that so by my unfolding,
and your apprehending of them, his name may be glorified and our souls saved
at the day of Judgem^nt.

To begin then with the treas^n of Judas. He suffered in that first, that one
of his own company, his own society; one that was numbered among his twelve
Apostles, and had fellowship with them, as Acts 2.17. should become an ag^nt,
and an instrument to betray and de^iver him into the hands of his enemies. So
that it was not a Disciple only, but an Apostle; not one of the Seventy, but
one of the Twelve, that wrought this mischief toward him: Quod auget delictum
detestabile proditoris, says Chrysostom: which increases as well the sin of
the traitor, as the sufferings and sorrows of our Savior: In regard that the
Seventy were neither so near nor de^re unto him; as he goes on; not so f rre
entrusted with his secrets and inward counsels and decrees as the Apostles the
twelve were; they being as it were his tried men; his ^aterva rega^is, as he
styles them: (i. e.) his regal and royal company: I mean, that royal
Priesthood, and chosen generation, which Saint Peter speaks of, 1 P^t. 2.9.
in whom he had already began to build and to lay the foundation of his Church.
Of which number to have one prove a Traitor, it is no marvel if it make the
Kingly Prophet (his type in this) to complain, saying, It was my familiar
friend whom I trusted, and which did eat of my bread, that has lifted up his
heel against me, Psalm. 41.9. And to show that this very circumstance did
aggravate and make an addition to his sufferings, as I say, he goes on in his
complaint yet further, after this manner; If it had been an open enemy that had
done me this dishonor, why then I could have borne it, or if mine adversary
had magnified himself against me, why then peradventure I would have hid my
self from him but it was thou my companion and my familiar friend, which took
sweet counsel together with me, and we walked in the house of God as friends,
Psalm 55.12, 13, 14. Verses. Which must need^ be the greater grief, the greater
pain unto me. For indeed, Illud amicitiae sanctum and venerabile nomen, The
name of a friend is, and ought to be the most venerable and sacred name amongst
us; among all sorts, all societies of men: Sine quo pater, matter, uxor, filii,
affines; quid nisi vana nomina? without which the names of Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Kinsfolk, and the like, are but vain and empty titles. And
therefore says one, Amicum me dici malo quam patrem: I desire not so much to
be accounted a Father, as a Friend: Patres enim sine benevolentia invenia^
multos, sine hac amicum nullum. For it is too easy a matto find many Fathers,
some that are not kind, others that wish not well unto their Children; whereas
there is none, that is not, that does not so unto his friend: Because indeed,
Amicus est alter ego: A friend is a man's otherselfe, nearer unto him then
either marriage or natural kindred, of the same bed or the same blood. For
love, true love, without these Ceremonies and respects, is the more to be
admired, and so by consequent the more to be esteemed: yea, dearer to a man
(says one) then either his arms or legs, as being indeed his whole body and
soul together, answerable to that also of the Scripture: Or thy friend which
is as thine own soul: Deuteronomy 13.6. For, verae amicitiae proprium est (says
Granatensis) unam mentem, unamque animam in duobus esse corporibus: It is a
most true property of true friendship, to have but one heart and one soul in
two several and divided bodies. Et idem velle, idemque nolle (as he goes on)
ea demum firma amicitia est: That being true friendship indeed, when a man is
ready to will and not to will according to the necessity and occasion of his
friend.

Now Christ for his part had performed all the offices of such a friend unto
Judas, he had called him to be his Apostle, made him his friend, his familiar,
caused him to eat of his bread, fit at his table, suffered him to be of his
own mess, and to dip his hand in the dish with him. And if Saint Austins
intelligence be good; and his tradition true: He had farther delivered him
often from death, and for his sake healed his Father of a palsy, and cured his
mother of a leaprosie, borne with many sins in him; as with theft, envy,
incest, Et post Petrum plurimum honoravit, and next to Peter, honored him
above all other his Apostles. All which the Father says of him; Sermon. 28.
but upon what ground, I know not: Howsoever upon sure grounds we may add, as
he does: Quod bursarium illum fecit, that he made him his pursebearer, kissed
him, washed his feet, gave him in the Sacrament, his own body to eat, and his
own blood to drink. Because these particulars of love and friendship toward
him, the holy Scriptures do testify and avow of him. And therefore for Judas
thus to violate the band of friendship toward such a friend, as had done all
these things for him; and would (if he had found him worthy) have done a great
deal more: Yea, that band which has been always held so sacred, as not to
be violated upon any terms, not only amongst Christians, but amongst the
grossest Heathens and prophanest Nations whatsoever. Why in doing this, I say
as he has added one circumstance, one degree to the sorrows, to the
sufferings of Christ: so many more, I fear not to affirm, to the increase of
his own sin, his own transgression: For there can be no greater sin then
the sin of perfidiousnesse, and ingratitude to a faithful friend. Which made
Jonathan, that he would not betray David his friend; no, not to his own
Father, 1 Samuel 1.20. And therefore for Judas to do this, he showed, Quod majus
peccatum habuit, that he had the greater sin, as his Master himself said of
him, John 19.11. in that he was Ingratissimus hominum, as one says; the most
ungrateful and unthankful wretch among the sons of men. No other, no better
than the very Snake or Serpent which the Fable speaks of, whom the Countreyman
in a time of frost and snow finding almost dead and starved with cold, brings
home with him into his own house, and lays him by the fire side: Sensitque
pro hospite hostem mox ut is incaluit ac resumpsit vires, who so soon as by
the heat and warmth of the fire he was a little revived, and began to recover
strength, instead of a thankful guest, proved an enemy ready to destroy him
and his by stinging them to death. Which now (beloved) is no more a Fable, but
a Story; no Tale, but a Truth, answerable to that Prophecy of Jacob concerning
his Son Dan (of which Tribe it is said by some, that Judas was borne) that he
should be a Serpent by the way and an Adder by the path, etc. Genesis 49.17. Or if
yet a Fable, why then in stead of Lupus, it is Judas in Fabul^. For Christ is
this Husbandman, who has nourished and cherished up Judas, as in his own
bosom; and Judas is this Serpent, that upon the first overture and opportunity
stings and destroys Christ unto death. Blanditur coram, mordet absens,
pollicetur amicum, praestat hostem: as Erasmus speaks of an Hypocrite in an
other kind. Epist.
He fawnes upon him to his face, and betrays him behind his back; seems a
friend, proves an enemy; crying to the Jews, What will you give me, and I will
deliver him unto you?

Et utinam Judas solus sic peccasset, says Chrysostom: It were well for the
world, especially the children of God, that for a time must live in it; that
Judas alone were in such transgression, that there were no more perfidious and
treacherous persons in it besides himself. At Deus, bone quam plenus est hic
mundus hujusmodi proditorum? nemo ab his securus, as he goes on: But O good
God, how full is the world of such miscreants; so that no good man is free from
them: But, tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen, It has ever been
accounted both a safe and a beaten way, under the color of friendship to
betray the innocent into the hands of their enemies. David had his Achitophel;
2 Samuel 16. Judges 9. 2 Samuel 4. Judges 16.
the Schechemites their Abimeleck; Ishbosheth his Baanah, and Rechab: Sampson
his Dalilah; Abel his Cain; Joseph his Brethren; and Christ his Judas. But,
Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum; Happy shall those men be, whom
these men's harms shall teach to beware of the like foul transgressions. For
frost and fraud (as it is in the Proverb) have ever had, and ever shall have
ill ends: as it will appear by the most of these. For Judas and Achitophel
hanged themselves. Abimeleck had first a piece of a millstone cast upon him by a
woman, which brake his brain-pan: And because he would not have it said that a
woman slew him, he commanded afterward that his own Page should thrust him
through with his sword. 2 Samuel 4.12.
Baanah and Rechab were slain by the commandment of David; and having their
hands and feet cut off, were hanged up over the Poole in Hebron. And for Cain,
he was accursed; and became a vagabond, and a runnagate upon the earth: Genesis
4.11, 12. And as it is said by some, was afterward shot to death by Lamech;
supposing him to have been a wild beast. And thus you see how the vengeance of
Heaven, and just judgments of God have ever overtaken and befallen such
hypocritical and dissembling Traitors: by whose fearful examples, I wish (I
say) all others to take heed and beware. And so I dismiss the first
circumstance in the treason of Judas; that he was one of Christ's own company,
and a seeming friend.

A second Circumstance may be this; That he did it, Hon. ^ de prod. In ^
nulla necessitate constrictus, as Chrysostom speaks; not constained thereunto
through any necessity, neque invitatus a principibus sace^dotum, nor so much,
nay indeed not at all upon urgencie and persuasion of their part: sed spoute
processit, but upon a voluntary offer of his own; going of himself unto the
chief Priest, and saying, What will you give and I will deliver him unto you?
Matthew. the 26.14, 15. In regard whereof, he shows himself to be the worst of
Traitors; in that he is Spontaneus rather then Quasitus, Chrysostom. ^oco citat.
he was not pressed into the service, but was only a volunteere; Propria
malignitate consilium genuit sceleratae mentis, nullo participe convocato; as
the Father goes on: his Treason toward his Master, proceeding from himself,
from his own inbred corruptions of covetousness, and malice, rather than from
the external provocation and inticement of the adversary, or any other. For if
they had sought out him, and had put him upon the employment, requesting his
help and assistance in such a kind, it might have excused him a tanto,
etiamsi non a toto; in part, though not in whole, from the filth and foulness
of such a fault, it being not altogether so bad (though bad enough) to b^come a
follower, as a leader, in this or in any sin. But the truth is, his enemies
seem not so forward, or desirous to take him, as this false friend to betray
him; and therefore he goes out unto them, without either counsel, or advise
of any other, save of his own lewd heart; and says, What will ye give me,
etc. answerable to that of David, When thou saw a Thief, thou did run
with him: Psalm. 50.18. yea, Thy feet are swift to evil, and thou make haste
to shed innocent blood, thy thoughts are wicked thoughts, desolation and
destruction are in thy ways; says the Prophet, Isaiah 59.7. That is, thou
intendest such things to others; but the truth is, they in the end will light
upon thine own pate; and the pit thou diggest for another, thou will fall into
thy self: as the Wise man affirms, Prove. 26.27.

And therefore let not men be too forward and hasty in wicked and sinful
courses, especially in treasons and treacherous designs, either against Christ
himself, or any others that are in any kind anointed of the Lord; as are
Kings, Priests, and Prophets: but let them advise warily, and look charily to
themselves, before they go on. For howsoever the title of a volunteere be
honorable in a good cause, showing men's freeness and forwardness thereunto;
yet in such traiterous and treasonable practices, as this of Judas, and all
other base and bad actions and expeditions whatsoever, it is ignoble and
inglorious.

But Judas sin and our Saviors suffering stays not, stints not here; for
the truth is, the Traitor has a bag; and if that be empty, it is little
worth: and therefore his Master must be sold, that so he may have something
wherewithal to fill it. For, Ser. 15.
Anima ejus febricitat curis, ut sacellus iste impleatur nummis; as Saint
Austin speaks of the covetous in general: His soul is even sick with care,
until his satchell be filled with coin. And rather then it shall continue so
long, he will Perdere fidem, ut acquirat aurum; He will get and acquire gold,
though he let slip and lose his faith: and therefore cries out unto the
Priests, Quid mihi dabitis? What will you give me? and I will deliver him unto
you. Oh the wickedness, the wretchedness of this base sin of covetousness!
which makes those that are possessed with it, not to startle at the most horrid
acts, that either the malice of an enraged and infernal Devil can invent; or
the sinfulness of man's corrupted and depraved nature perpetrate and commit:
the least hope of gain being thought title just enough, and armor strong
enough for all; either injurious, traiterous, or murtherous assaults, and the
fruition thereof held a sufficient recompense and reward of all such impious
and diabolical designs. And therefore no marvel if the Holy Ghost have
taught us by the pen of the Apostle: That covetousness is the root of all
evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Ser. 11. in Cap. 6. ad Romans Mor.
Propter hanc enim (says Chrysostom) naturae leges invertuntur, cognationis
jura pelluntur, atque ipsius humanae su^stantiae justa debita corrumpuntur.
That is, For this the Laws of nature are inverted, the rights of alliance and
friendship perverted, and the just dues of our humane substances and beings
corrupted. The tyranny of money urging and constraining us to lift up our
violent hands not only against the living but the dead too; as he further
insisteth and proves in the same place: Yea, and for this, not only Cities
and Countries, but Highwayes, Mountains, Hills, and Woods: Orbis etiam
inhabitabilis sanguine seatent and caedibus: Yea, the very inhabitable World it
self, do abound with murders and bloodshed. Because indeed, as the Poet
says, Rem faci^as, remsi possis recte, si non, quocunque modo rem. Means and
moneys must be be had, Legally if it may be, but if not, by any means
whatsoever, Jure vel injuria; be it by right or wrong. So fearful a sin is
Covetousness, making a man to become, Iniquum in deum, in proximum, in
seipsum, injurious and unjust, not only against his neighbor and himself,
but against his God too: For usque ad mortem domini, amor lucri se ingerit, nec
vitae salvatoris quaestus desiderium pareit, That is, the love of profit puts
forth it self even to the death of the Lord, neither does the desire of gain
spare the life of the very Savior of the World. And therefore our Saviors
advise and charge to his followers is, Cavete ab avaritia, beware of
Covetousness, Luke 12.25. Which counsel, if his Apostle Judas had well heeded
and followed, he never would have come here, with his Quid dabitis? What will
ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?

V^ncent. Br^mi. medit.
But O scelerate negotiator, as one styles him; what a wicked Merchant is this?
Qui aestimas illum nummis, qui aestimari non potest: To set a price, a value of
money upon him, whose excellency is unvaluable; as it is said of a faithful
friend such as he was, Eccles. 6.15. in the last Translation (or if you desire
it rather in the vulgar Latin) which is as well to our present purpose: Cui
non est digna ponderatio auri and argonti: The weight of Gold and Silver is not
to be compared to him: (the same place in the Genevah.) Nay to esteem so
vilely and so basely of him, as to set no rate, no value upon him at all; but
to refer the price to the pleasure of the purchasers: Quid dabitis? What will
you give? which is all one (if you transpose the words, you shall find it so)
as to say; Give what you will, so as you give something, and I will deliver him
unto you. Oh! it was never heard before, that he that was a seller (although
never so petty a chapman) would give the buyer leave to set the price upon his
wares; Nisi de re nullius pretii agatur (says mine Author) unless it were of
such wares, as were not worth the buying. And so surely, Judas did est^eme of
Christ, or else he would never have been thus base to have exposed him to sale
as at an outcry, Quid dabitis? What will you give? What is this, but as the
Prophet speaks: To sell the righteous for silver, and the poor for shoes;
Amos 2.6. Nay which is worse, to sell a Savior at a lower price than a pair
of shoes; if both the shoes and the penny too were rated as in these days: a
goodly price to have him valued at, as another Prophet exclaimes, Zachariah
10.13. But O Judas! thou do little consider, that one drop of his blood that
thou sellest at so low a rate, is sufficient to redeem and purchase infinite
Worlds, yea, and thine own soul too; if thou were not worse than an Infidel,
a revolting, despairing Apostata and backslider from thy first faith. But I
have undertaken to express and aggravate, rather the sufferings of Jesus, than
the sins of Judas, and therefore I must not dwell here, only a few words
more for use and application, and so I will finish this point.

Here first then let us take occasion to contemplate, and admire the infinite
mildness, meekness, and mercifulness of our blessed Savior, in that knowing
himself to be thus ignominiously and basely betrayed and sold by this cursed
Caitiffe, yet does not cast him off, not expel him his society, nay does not
so much as Prodere proditorem, not once bewray him to his fellow Apostles, till
he was urged and increated to do it, and then but very closely and covertly,
without naming him, too; but suffers him still to continue quietly in his
company as one of his own followers and familiars to the last hour, thereby
instead of shutting it against him, setting the gate of mercy wide open unto
him, that so he might find entrance unto the throne of grace; if he could but
make use of the opportunity and lay hold upon it: Yea, he converses with him,
sets him at his table, eats and drinks with him, gives him of the bread of
life to eat in his most holy Sacrament (as you heard before) and last of all
washes his feet, as he did to all the r^st of his Apostles; even at that very
instant when he on the other side breathes out nothing but prodition and
perdition against him.

Mira patientia, as Saint Chrysostom exclaimes; Ser. 2. de 51 fer. Pas.
which shows a wonderful patience indeed, even beyond all president or
example; Petrus enim condemnat Ananiam mentientem, Salvator autem patienter
sustinet Judam traditorem; as he goes on: for whereas the Apostle Peter
condemns Ananias only for lying, yet our Savior himself could tolerate and
bear with Judas, though for treason; and that against himself too. But all
this was done, that he might mollify his heart, and win him (if it were
possible) by love, to remorse and sorrow for his sin. For, N lo mortem
morientis, dicit Dominus, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says he by his Prophet, Ezechiell 18.23. but I desire rather that he should
return from his evil ways, and live: Verse 32. of the same Chapter.

But here peradventure some man may object, and say, Judas should not perish in
his sin; Cur cogitationem ejus non mutavit adversam, Homil. de prod. Iudae.
as the former Chrysostom makes the object or to speak; why did he not alter
and change his wicked purposes and intents, before they came to execution? as
being that eternal word, by which all things were made: and so had the heart
of Judas, as well as of all other his Creatures, in his hand^, to alter and
change the courses and counsels of it, as himself should lease.

Chrysostom himself makes answer in the same place after this manner (viz.)
that Judas could not be reclaimed and recalled from his traiterous purposes,
but that it must be either with or against his will. Si invitus, nulla
correctio est, nam mentis malitia necessitate non tollitur: Now if it were done
by violence and against his will, it would not prove any correction or
amendment at all, because the wickedness of the heart and malitiousnesse of
the mind is not to be lessened or taken away by any external constraint;
neither is it the custom or law of Heaven (as I may safely add) to save any
man that is not willing: On the other side, Si sponte (as the Father goes on)
omnia qua meliorare animum poterant, audisse cognoscitur: To have made him
willing there was no means neglected, but all courses taken that were usual
and ordinary to other men in the like kind. As the hearing of Christ's heavenly
Sermons, together with the rest of the Apostles, the partaking of his
Sacraments, the foretelling of his treason; and crying, Woe to him by whom the
Son of man is betrayed: as also the laying before him the torments of Hell,
to fright and fear him; and the hope of Heaven, to weane and win him from his
sins. By which means only his fellow Apostles were settled and established
in the faith of Christ, and reclaimed from their misdeeds. And therefore if he
only of all the rest, would remain obstinate and perverse, by continuing
singular in his wicked purposes, and resolutions; and alone reject and refuse
the former medicines that were provided and prepared by the hand of so skillful
an Apothecarie for his recovery: Non medici vitium est, sed languentis; there
is no blame to be laid upon the Physician, but only upon the patient; as the
same Father in the end concludes the question. And therefore let not any man be
so lewd, as to accuse Christ in his most secret and retired thoughts, for the
condemnation of his treacherous Apostle Judas, but only lay the fault upon
himself; that when his loving and tenderhearted Master would have healed, and
recovered him, yet would not be healed; but continued still obstinate and
rebellious in his sins, just like one of those, Quos non vincas verbo, nec
verbere, neque lauro, neque loro: which are not to be won by words or blows,
neither by punishment nor reward, neither for love nor fear: Et quibus cum
benefeceris, pejores fiunt; but such an one, as the more is done for him, the
worse he is; as the Church of the Jews, of which God by his Prophet
complains; saying, What could I have done more unto my Vineyard, that I have
not done unto it? And yet behold, Quando expectavi uvas, fecit labruscas; When
I looked for grapes, it brought forth wild grapes: Isay 5.4. or like a barren
field, which instead of Barl^y brings forth Cockle; and Thistles instead of
Wheat: Job 31.4.

But O God! that any heart should be so hard, or any mind or soul so
obstinate and perverse, as not to be mollified and broken: Tanta amoris
suavitate, with the sweetness of such love, and the tender mercies of such a
lover; but to continue like Pharaoh, Qui incudem non cor gerebat in pectore,
(as one says) which instead of an heart carried an Hammer, or an Anvile
rather, in his breast and bosom; victus and invictus male gratus, and ad tot
munera surdus: so was Judas deaf to all goodness: stopping his ears at
Christ's charms, charm he never so wisely.

But for use, as well the comfort of the godly, as the terror of the wicked, if
our blessed Jesus be so loving and kind, patient and long suffering toward
those that set him and sell him at so low a rate: then much more will he be so
to those that esteem so highly of him, as to set their hearts sincerely to
love him, and faithfully to serve him all days of their life.

Si honoras O dulcis Domine,
Inimicum amici nomine;
Quales erunt amoris carmine,
Qui te canunt and modulamine? says a Poet.
If he vouchsafe to call Judas friend, which was so false unto him: as,
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Matthew. 26.5. then much more those that are his
friends indeed. Yea, Ye are my friends (says he to his Disciples) if you do
that which I command you: John 15.14. And Abraham is said to be the friend of
God, Esaias 41. and James 2.23. and Christ calls Lazarus his friend, John 11.
Blessed then, yea, thrice blessed are they that have gotten Christ to be their
friend; by whose friendship much good shall redound unto them; as true
pleasure, right and rich profit, and great dignity and esteem. For Christ not
only wishes, but wills all good to his friends; I mean his true friends,
and such as continue to the end. He does communicate therefore all his
blessings unto them, not only temporal, but spiritual and eternal too. He
has taken their humane nature upon him, that so he may the better make t em
partakers of his nature which is divine. He is in them, and they in him; living
and working each in other. They wi l and ^ill the same things, and he makes
them partakers of a l his secrets. And ^or the better confirmation, and
strengthening of this league of ^^iendship betwixt them, he stirs up their
minds to constant and continual prayer and supplication; whereby they do the
more frequently, and familiarly converse and confer together. The godly man
thereby laying his wants and desires, reverently and devoutly, fervently and
freely open, before his compassionate and tenderhearted God, and friend; and
God on the other side, as a true friend indeed, speaking back again to the
heart and soul of his humble suppliant and servant by inlightning his mind
and understanding with divine consolation; and granting of his requests in such
measure as he finds to be fitting and needful for him: O sanctum commercium
in quo de Dei gloria, and hominis salute agitur! O holy and heavenly conference
and commerce (says one) where Gods glory, and man's salvation is so hapily
treated of and advanced! Rejoice then O ye godly, in that you are become of
the household of God, and firmly united unto him; though otherwise you be
odious and hateful to the world. For you are hereby invited to the Supper of
the Lamb; Christ himself being become your husband, and his father your
friend. Love therefore, reverence and fear God, who is the Father of your
family: and he will be loving and careful for you again as for children, and
those of his own household, the household of faith: yea, rejoice (I say) as the
familiar companions of God, the friends of God, the guests of God, the Spouse
of God. For the good shepherd Christ Jesus is your friend, and your friend
Christ Jesus is the good shepherd; by whom seeing ye enter, ye shall be
saved: and shall go in and out, and find pasture, John 10.9. And therefore
bid adieu to all humane friendships and worldly familiarities, as whereby your
mind is drawn away from this that is divine. ^or know ye not, says the
Apostle, that the amity of the world (...) the enmity of God? James 4.4. for
whosoever will be the friend of this world, makes himself the enemy of God;
as there follows. Let God and his Christ then be your friends; and the world,
the flesh, and the Devil, your utter enemies for evermore. And this suffices
for the first use, the comfort of the godly.

Secondly, let us here consider, what a dangerous thing it is to give way at
the first to the vicious inclinations of our hearts and minds, and how near
unto utter ruin such are, as do not betimes vim sibi infer, as one says;
make resistance to the uttermost of their power against the lewd suggestions
thereof, when they do arise. For the devil is a subtle and a sly serpent;
qui uniuscujusque ingenium and mores novit; which knows unto what affections
and lusts especially each man is inclined by nature; and accordingly lays his
baits and snares whereby to entangle and entrap their souls. As the Patriarch
Jacob; when he would have the sheep and goats to bring forth their young
spotted and party colored, used at their watering times and places to lay
rods; Cortice partim erepto, partim retento; with the ryne partly pilled off,
and partly kept on; whereby they became of sundry colors; which shining and
shiming in a clear water; tempore coitus; at the time of coupling and
conceiving, fastened such an impression thereof in the senses of the dammes, as
that it did be spot the young ones in the womb. Ita demon sensibus nostris
varia deliramenta obijcit, Or^n. S^r. 12. de Judah.
etc. (says one) so does the devil continually lay before our senses, many
vain and deceivable objects; that so in one kind or other he may bespot our
souls with sin. As objects and shows of revenge to the wrathful; of luxury
to the lustful; of arrogance to the proud; and especially of farther and
greater gain to the covetous, as here to the traitor Judas. Where we may
justly take occasion to discourse a little farther off the sleights and
subtilties he used toward him in this kind. For this crafty fox, and sly
insinuating serpent, understanding well enough on which side Judas mind was to
be assaulted and assailed (as having found out) that howsoever he were inclined
to many, or as some say, to any sins, so that none came amiss unto him; yet
especially to this of Covetousness: Ea ergo part bostem aggreditur, qua sibi
persuadet aditum facilius fore parandum: Therefore that he might plant his
battery against such a breach where he knew beforehand that he should find the
least resistance: ultro currentem suadet ulterius currere, etc. he persuades
him, that was forward and hasty enough of himself, yet to make more have unto
his gain, and to lose no time nor opportunity, by which he might obtain so
great, so good a prize. For the truth is, he had once before made trial how
this bait, this sweet bait of gain would be entertained and swallowed by this
gaping gudgin: and how his rods would take in this kind, but he did not, he
durst not peele them, nor pull off the ryne as now he did, but went more
closely, more covertly to work. And that was, when he caused him to complain
of profuseness and waste, at Mary's anointing of the head and feet of our
blessed Savior, saying, Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence
and given unto the poor? John 12.5. thereby hiding and cloaking his
covetousness under an hypocritical veil and mantle of charity, and providing
for such as were in want: whereas he said this, not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare that which was
given as there follows, verse. 6. But now that he is thoroughly acquainted with
the mind and manners of his Client, by this former trial and experiment of
him: Non in occulto, sed in aperto pugnat, he fights not so closely, so
cunningly, but goes more publicly and plainly to work than he did before. For
having once found him coming, and gaind his consent and assent unto his wicked
and lewd suggestions, he presently enters into his soul, Rapit hominem,
circum-agitat phantasmata, non jam sub Cortice virgas, sed detectas oculis
probet videndas: he violently possesses the man, compasses and canvasses his
troubled and distracted thoughts and wandering and unsettled imaginations, and
manifests his stratagems to the view of the world without any cover, any care
to hide or conceal the same. For as the Scriptures testify, soon after he
had received the sop, Satan entered into him, John 13.27. that is, took full
possession of him, as the marginall notes expound the place: so that he led and
carried him into what desperate and sinful courses he would himself.

Judas you see could never do; but was quite overthrown and undone by it,
both body and soul for ever. And therefore I say, Principiis obsta, let it be
your care to resist beginnings of evil, and to kill the Serpent in the egg.
As Bernard, Cura in ipso utero pessimae matris praefecari germen: so say I,
take care to strangle the seed of sin whilst it is in the womb, i. e. in
the heart, in the thought, before it come into action, or ever it do see the
light. For Satan knows how to make a n^st wherein to nourish and cherish
sin, even of our smallest thoughts and cogitations, if we neglect them too
long, and permit them to take their own sway, their own swing within us. And
therefore as it is his continual care to suggest unto us, Cogitationes mali
thoughts of evil: so let it be ours so to resist and withstand them, as not to
permit them to become, Cogitationes malas, not to proceed so far as evil
thoughts, i. e. not to nestle or roost within us. For as Luther said well:
Howsoever he could not hinder the birds and fowls of the air from flying over
his head, yet he would be sure to keep from them building nests, and making
harbor in his beard: so howsoever we cannot hinder Satan from buzzing and
suggesting into our hearts and souls wicked and ungodly thoughts: yet we may
so withstand him and them too, as that they shall never burst forth into
actions, and become wicked and ungodly d eds. Because as he that cuts off the
head of the Serpent, slayes the Serpent it self; so he that resists sin in
the first motions and beginnings of it, destroys it so thoroughly, as that it
can never rise up again to prevayle against him, either in in this world, or
that which is to come. For as the conception of lust brings forth sin, so it
is the finishing of sin that brings forth death; as the Apostle speaks,
James 1.15. And he that can thus resist sin it self, when it begins to seize
and take hold upon him; does therewithal resist also the author thereof, that
is, the Devil: Et prosternit inermem, and so confound him, as that he takes
away his weapon from him, James 4.7.
and leaves him naked and without defense; according to the same Apostles
direction: Resist the Devil and he will fly from you, Chap. 4.7. But all this
Judas did not; he did not withstand the first motions of evil in his covetous
heart, but gave full and free way, and consent thereunto: and so is brought
Gradatim ad hanc miseri^m, as it were by degrees unto this height of sin and
misery; as to meditate first of the means how to betray his Lord: and then
secondly, not to meditate it only, but to put it in practice also by seeking
opportunity to do it; as the Scripture testifies. And having found it, he
cries, Quid dabitis? What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?

Once more therefore let me entreat every one of you, to beware of
covetousness, of too much care to fill the bag, lest Loculus prove Laqueus,
quo capiaris and traharis ad interitum; the bag prove but a bait to ensnare
thee, and to draw thee to destruction both of body and soul. And to finish
this point, and say no more of this subject; let me also advise you all, and
often n, to take this into your considerations; That none of Christ's Apostles
perished, but he that bare the bag. And therefore look to it, you that are
masters of the bag; not only in the singular, but in the plural number: for
if Judas perished that had but one, what danger are you in that are masters of
so many? there being many shrewd temptations, and that in several kinds in
men's inordinate and overmuch care and desire to fill their bags: so that
this only has been the occasion of many, if not most sins in sundry others
besides Judas: As of Theevery in Achan, Bribery in Gehezi, Murder in Ahab,
most notorious lying in the Soldiers that were set to watch the Sepulcher of
Christ, hypocritical dissembling in Ananias and Saphira, Simony in Magus;
besides (as I say) Treason in Judas: What will you give me? and What shall I
give you? corrupting all conditions, and callings both in Church and
Commonwealth. But I list not to particularize, hoping that all my hearers and
readers, of what rank and condition soever they be, will make application
themselves, and infer, that Si junguntur in culpa, non separabuntur in poena:
If they join with these m^n in their sins, they must look to be partakers
also of their plagues; as it is threatened, Revel. 18.4. Which consideration may
be a means, Cohibere manum, etiamsi non animum; if not out of conscience of
sin to restrain all men's hearts from affecting, (as I desire) yet out of fear
of punishment to hold back some men's hands from effecting such monstrous and
prodigious impieties; as I hope. And this suffices for the first circumstance
in the sufferings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (viz) the treason of
Judas.

THe second Circumstance which I intend to take notice of in the sufferings of
Christ, (for a large volume would not serve to discourse of all) shall be that
which he took notice of himself, and taxt his adversaries for it, in the 26.
of S. Matthew, Gospel, saying, Ye be come out to me as it were against a
thief, with swords and staves to take me; Verse 25. of the same Chapter. For
the Text tells us, that after Judas had compacted with the Jews for thirty
pence to deliver him into their hands; he received a band of men, and officers
of the High Priest, and came thither with lanthornes, and torches, and weapons,
says Saint John, Chap. 18. Verse. 3. And S. Matthew, and S. Mark, they tell
us what these weapons were; even swords and staves, Matthew. 26.47. and S. Mark
14.43. and S. Luke says, that Judas went before the company: Luke 22.47.

I had thought beloved, that we had done with Judas the last day; yet here you
see it is our hap to meet with him again: Sed tantum mutatus ab illo, ut vix
cognoscas eundem esse; yet so changed, as that you will scarce know him to be
the same man. For then he went up and down like a slimme, and a sly companion,
that had gotten some stolen or counterfeit commodity under a threadbare cloak,
crying in a corner; Sir, will it please you to buy? What will you give me? you
shall have it worth your money; I Will use you well, and afford you a very good
pennyworth. But here he comes like a brave Gallant, a great Commander, in the
head and front of the troop: He is suddenly become a Captain: He has gotten
a Company, and a Band of men; and which is more strange, he has gotten money
to boot. Strange indeed; I believe many of our Martialists in former times, in
the German and Low Country wars, have found it so; which have bin fain to make
great friends, and disburse great sums themselves, before they could attain
to so much honor as to procure a Company: When as Judas ye see has done it in
the turn of an hand; or as we say, with a wet finger. But beloved, the wonder
will be the less, if we shall but take into our consideration the
desperateness of the design, and the danger and difficulty of the employment:
For great undertakings must have great encouragements, and well performed great
rewards: Now this was no less, then even to take and kill the Lord of life;
his very Master, Maker, and Redeemer. A task too hard, and a service too hot,
I hope for our times; so that none I trow will either envy or repine at the
easy and hasty preferment of our n^w Captain Judas: nor readily and willingly
undertake his pains to gain his place; run his hazard to reap his hopes. For
beloved, if they had not met with an adversary that was more merciful, then
themselves powerful, (though they were an hundred to one) they had been all
dead men at the very first onset, the first assault. For Saint John says, that
as soon as Christ had said unto them, I am he; they went backward and fell to
the ground: John 18.6. Ego sum dicit, and impios dejecit. He did but say, I am
he; Tract. 109. in Ioha^.
(says Saint Austin) and the very word cast the wicked to the ground.
Whereupon he demands, Quid judicaturus faciet, qui judicandus hoc fecit? Quid
regnaturus poterit, qui moriturus hoc potuit? He that could do these thing; at
the time of his Humiliation, when he was ready to dye, and be judged by others;
what shall he do? nay, what shall he not do, when he shall come in his Glory
to reign, and be judge himself? Surely he shall cast his enemies lower then
the ground, even to the nethermost Hell at that time; that was able to cast
them upon the ground at this. They went backwards and fell to the ground: And
there they should have layne, if any body else had done such a thing but he.
For, who but a Christ, but a God, would have suffered his enemies; such enemies
to have risen again, when he had once gotten them at such an advantage, as to
have them on the ground? I cannot choose but think, that if Virgils valiant
Captains, Eurialus and Nisus had been there, (of whom it is said: (...) l. 9.
Egressi superant fossas noctisque per umbram
Castra inimica petunt; multis tamen ante futuri
Exitio, etc. that is,
Over hedge and dike they past like men of might,
Their foes to assail within their Camp by night.)
What a work they would have made with Judas, and his cowardly company;
Purpuream vomit ille animam: one should have vomited out his blood and his
breath together. And from another, Caput ipsi aufert Domino, truncumque
relinquit sanguine singuliantem; His head should have been stricken from his
shoulders, and his trunk only left to sigh out his last gasp: Rex idem and
Regi Turno gratissimus Augur; sed non augurio potuit depellere vestem: And that
neither the greatest Priest nor Prophet among them, should have been able with
all their skill, to have prevented the fatal blow; but, atro tepefacta cruore,
terra torique madent: The very ground on which they were fallen, should have
been both moistened, and heated with their blood. And for Judas himself, we
will suppose him to be Rhaetum vigilantem, and cuncta videntem: sed magnum
metuens se post cratera tegebat: A cowardly Captain that would either have hid
himself, or run away for fear. Or to leave the Poet, and come to the Prophet,
if the Angel, the destroying Angel that was in the Camp of Senacharib had
been but permitted to have taken his course; they would have been found in the
morning to have been all dead Corpse as 2 King. 19.35. But Christ a friendly
adversary as ye see, although with the breath of his lips alone, he were able,
not only to astonish, as here, but to slay the wicked, as the Prophet says of
him, Esaias 11.4. Deus enim latebat in carne, (says Saint Austine) For God lay
hid in the flesh, yet commands his followers to put up their swords into their
sheathes, and would not suffer them to strike a stroke in his defense. Sed,
Corpora magnamino satis est prostrasse leoni.
Pugna suum finem, cum jacet hostis habet. Ovid.
Our Judaes lion does care to fight no more,
When once he sees his foes upon the floor.


No, notwithstanding he had them at such an advantage, as that he might easily
have taken them, that came to take him, having them all at his mercy, as we
usually speak in the like kind; yet he gives them their lives. And which is
most to be wondered at of all the rest, his own too. For if he had not, it
could never have been taken from him by force: as he says himself, No man
takes my life from me; sed pone eam a meipso; but I lay it down of my self,
John 10.18. And because I do so, therefore my father loves me, as it is in
the verse before, (viz.) 17.

Now as Saint Chrysostom speaks; Ser. 5. de 5. Fer. Pas.
Vbi animam ponendi potestas est and sumendi, ibi moriendi non est necessitas
sed voluntas: Where there is power to lay down and reassume life at pleasure,
there dying may well be voluntary, but not constrained or enforced: Which
likewise the Prophet affirms, when he says, Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit,
as the Latins read it, Es. 53.7. He was offered, because he would. And the
Apostle also confirms, saying, He humbled himself and became obedient to the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2 8. Now if he did it himself, it shows he was
willing thereunto, or else it should not, it could not ever have been done:
But being willing, he permitted his adversaries that came here to take and
apprehend him, to rise again when he had them on the ground; and which is
more, he demanded of them whom they sought; and when they had told him, Jesus
of Nazareth, he answers them again and again that he was the man, John 18.

All which I say, shows his forwardness and willingness to be taken: Which
yet notwithstanding will not excuse their wickedness, as I shall prove unto
you; For howsoever the Philosophers say, that volenti non fit injuria, There
can be no injury done to one that is wi^ling: yet the Divine, by admitting of a
distinction will deny the Axiom; (...) ^54.
because as Saint Bernard says, In similibus factis, causa dissimilis, simile
recusat judicium: In the same facts, if there be a different cause, there must
be likewise a different judgment. Tract. 7. in Ep^st. I^han
And Saint Austine in this very case, diversa intentio, diversa facta facit: A
diverse intention makes a difference in the fact, though it seem to be one and
the same; as here, God the Father is said, Tradere filium suum pro nobis, to
deliver his Son to death for us: Romans 8.32. and likewise, God the son,
Tradere seipsum, to deliver himself for me (says the same Apostle elsewhere
(viz.) Gal. 2.20. and lastly, Judas to deliver him into his enemies hands. Si
pater tradidit filium, tradidit and seipsum filius, Judas, quid fecit? If the
father deliver the same, and the Son himself; what evil has Judas done? Quae
res discernit (as he goes on) patrem tradentem filium, etc. What is that makes
the difference between the Fathers delivering of the son, and the son of
himself; and Judas his delivering of his Lord and Master? seeing the action
seems to be in all, Quia fecit hoc pater and filius in charitate, fecit hoc
Judas in proditione, The Father and Son, did it out of love and charity; and
Judas out of malice and treachery; his traditio being proditio; not properly a
delivering, but a betraying of him into his enemies hands. So that, as he
concludes the business, We are not so much to regard and consider: Quid
factum, as quo animo and voluntate factum: Not the thing done, as the mind and
intention of the doer: in regard whereof, as the Father is to be magnified and
glorified for thus delivering of his Son, and the Son to beloved and adored for
delivering of himself: So Judas on the other side is to be condemned for
betraying of his Master, though his Master seem and be never so forward, never
so willing thereunto. Nam proditus Christus orbem liberavit universum, and
proditor tamen Gehennam meruit possidere, as Chrysostom speaks. Howsoever the
betraying of Christ, were a delivering and a freeing of the World from much
misery and thraldom, not only temporal and spiritual, but eternal too: yet
the traitor that did it, deserves no less then eternal torments for his
labor, Traditus in coelis patris sedet in dextera, traditor autem apud inferos
collocatus, tormenta debita sceleratus expectat, etc. as he goes on. And though
he that was betrayed sit now at the right hand of his Father in the highest
Heavens: he that did betray him, must expect nothing else but according to the
lewdness and wickedness of his mind and work to be cast into the
bottomless lake, there to be tormented for ever and ever. And this, beloved,
being a Circumstance which of necessity was to be cleared in some one part or
other of this discourse, I thought it fit to do it here, where occasion is in
part offered from the coherence and dependence of that which went before, that
so it may save me a farther labor, when the like objection shall offer it
self again in that which follows, as many times I believe it may: but to
proceed.

They came out against him with swords and staves to take him; Et Judas
antecedebat eos, says Saint Luke, cap. 22.47. i. e. and Judas went before
them: tam pedibus, quam moribus, says one, as well with his feet, as
affections of mischief and malice toward him. So that as he was the foremost
in the consultation and seeking opportunity to betray him as before; so here
again in the execution and finishing of the design. He brought them on upon
the danger, upon the assault, get off again how they can. But beloved, it
should seem by this, that he was not the Captain, but the Lieutenant rather,
whose office it is usually to be the leader and to bring up the men: whereas
the Captain walks in the rere, comes behind to keep them close to their
ranks and files, and see there be no straggling nor starting aside from the
company. Which may very well be. For, as Judas went before, so out of question,
Satan came behind and followed after, carefully heeding all opportunities for
the best advantage of the day; day said I? no, it was no day-worke, it was a
deed of darkness; the blackest, and yet the brightest that ever hell brought
forth: The brightness thereof proceeding from the power and providence of an
eternal God, that was able and willing to work good out of evil for his own
glory, and the benefit of his Church and chosen: And the blackness from the
mischievous and malicious purposes of an infernal devil and his associates,
who held a council of war, against no less then the Lord himself, and his
Anointed, Christ Jesus the Righteous. And if they had found it needful to
have put the trial of the business Praelio navali, to a navall battle or
sea fight, and so had concluded and resolved upon a ship of war for the
employment; why then, Satan had been the Master, and Judas the Mate: but seeing
they found that Landforces only would serve the turn, the mischievous Devil
was made the Captain, and the treacherous Apostle the Lieutenant; who
therefore is said to g^e before them, and to lead them on. And as he led them,
so Satan led him; that is, was his instructor and director in all this hellish
conspiracy and plot. For he had entered into him, as you heard before, and
therefore did not follow only after, but in him; yea, went with him and before
hi^ too.

Neither did Judas go only before this company; but before and beyond all
other traitors that ever were, and ever will be to the worlds end. And that in
a fourfold respect: to wit, in the matter, manner, cause and cruelty of his
treason. The matter first, For none ever did or shall betray God and Man
together in one and the same person, but he. The manner next, in that he did it
with a kiss, the token of love: but the most treacherous token of the lewdest
love, and the unkindest kiss that ever was given. The cause, thirdly, none,
being not provoked at all, except it were by his own wicked and corrupt heart
and sinful soul, and the price as little, even thirty pence: which in respect
of a valuable consideration, is as a thing of naught. The cruelty last, not
being to be paralleld in diverse respects, by any either precedent or subsequent
examples, as shall be showed hereafter. But I must but point, and pass, having
a long journey to go.

But the true reason (as it should seem) why Judas went before the company, as
it does appear by the Evangelists, was this: that he might have the better
opportunity to kiss him. For Saint Matthew says, he had given them a token,
saying: Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him: and forthwith he
came to Jesus and said, God save thee Master, and kissed him, Math. 26.48.49.
Whereupon our Savior Christ replied unto him again, saying; Judas betrayest
thou the Son of man with a kiss? Luke 22.48.

Now Hugo Cardinalis on the 84 Psalm, reckons up sundry sorts of kisses, that
are spoken of and rehearsed in the holy Scriptures and word of God. But for the
maine partition and division, he makes only two kinds of them: to wit, Oscula
bona and mala: good and evil kisses. And among the good, he styles the first,
Osculum unionis naturarum: the kiss of the two natures, Godhead and Manhood in
the Man Christ; according to that of the spouse: Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.10. that is, let him come and show himself in his
humane nature, as the said Cardinal and most of the ancients do expound the
place: which is, foelix osculum, etc. in quo non os ori imprimitur: sed Deus
homini unitur, as Bernard speaks. An happy kiss, by which the Godhead is
united to the Manhood; and not one mouth joined to another. The second, he
styles Osculum poenitentiae; a penitent, or repentant kiss, as that of Mary
Magdalen who ceased not to kiss the fee^ of our blessed Savior, Luke. 7.45.
The third, Reconciliationis, a reconciling kiss^; as that of the father of the
Prodigal; who espying his loose and lewd son a far off, had compassion
upon him, ran to meet him, fell upon his neck and kissed him, Luke 15.20. The
fourth, Congratulationis, a congratulating kiss, as that spoken of in another
place of the Canticles by the Church of the Gen^iles to that of Jerusalem (as
the notes on the same Text expound it) saying; Oh that thou were as my brother,
that sucked the breasts of my mother, I would then find thee without and kiss
thee, Cant. 8.10. The fifth, Foederis, the kiss of Covenant; as that of Laban,
who after the Covenant made betwixt him and Jacob his son in law, kissed his
sons and his daughters, and blessed them, Genesis 31.44, 45. verses. The sixth,
obedientiae, the kiss of obedience; as that which Jacob gave to his father
Isaac: when he called him; saying, Come hither and kiss me my son, Genesis 27.26.
The seventh, Gratiae, the kiss of grace and favor, as that of Solomon: They
shall kiss the lips of him that answers upright words, Prove. 24.26. The
eight, Osculum gloriae, the kiss of glory and honor; as that of Samuel to
Saul, when he took a vyall of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed
him, and said; Has not the Lord anointed thee to be governor over his
inheritance? 1 Samuel 10.10. And these are the good kisses which the said Hugo
has observed and found out to be in the book of God. He has some bad ones
too, though not so many. The first whereof he calls, osculum Meretricis, the
harlots kiss, spoken of by Solomon, when she caught her lover and kissed him,
Prove. 2.13. The second, superbiae, the kiss of pride, spoken of by Job, when
he said: If mine heart did flatter me in secret; or if my mouth did kiss my
hand, Job. 31.27. which is as much as if he had said; if I have been proud of
any thing I have done. The third Idololatriae, the kiss of Idolatry; spoken of
by God himself to Elias, when he said unto him, I will leave seven thousand
in Israel, even all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth
that has not kissed him: 1 Kings 19.18. And lastly Fraudis, the deceitful
kiss, spoken of by Solomon, when he says; The w^unds of a lover are
faithful, and the kisses of an enemy deceitful, Prove. 27.6. And thus beloved,
we have run over so many kisses, till at last we are returned again to the
kiss of our traitor Judas; which we are now to speak of. For if ever any,
then this of all others may be said to be Osculum fraudis, a deceitful kiss:
when Judas being to betray his Master, came unto him and said, Hayle Master,
and kissed him. For, what greater deceit can there be, then, cum per pacis
indicium, Ser. 121. de Temp.
pacis rumpitur sacramentum; as Saint Austin speaks: to break the peace and
league of friendship, that is, and ought to be between man and man; under the
show and sign of strengthening and confirming it: Et ab osculo incipere bellum,
ubi consuevere gentes bella finire, Ser. 1. de 5. ser. pas.
as S. Chrysostom says: and to begin a war there, where others have usually
made an end; that is, in friendly embracing, and kindly kissing each of other.
In regard whereof, he does well deserve: Vt guttur ejus prophanum quod hodie
Christo extendit ad osculum, crastino illud extensurus sit ad laqueum; as the
same Father Chrysostom goes on: i. e. That that profane and unsanctified
throat, and neck of his, which this day he stretched forth thus deceitfully to
kiss his Master, the next day he should stretch forth again, readily and
really to receive the halter; Which accordingly came to pass; for the text
says, He went and hanged himself: Matthew. 27.5. Never any kissed Christ to so
lewd a purpose, and therefore neither with such bad success: For, as Stella
says, Perpende quantum distent osculum Judae and Magdalenae: Do but weigh
with your selves, and consider the great distance and difference between that
kiss of Mary Magdalen, and this of Judas.

For as the Be and Spider by a diverse power:
Suck honey and poison from the selfsame flower.
So Mary and Judas from the kiss of Christ. Judas in facie osculatus est
Salvatorem and periit, Magdalena vero in pedibus, and incolumis, and voti
compos evasit: Judas kisses the face of our blessed Savior, the very fountain
of life, and yet perishes; as a modern Poet says: Judas of life does miss,
Just at the gates of life and bliss:


Whereas Mary Magdalen kisses only his feet, and is become not only safe for
the present, but saved for evermore. The reason whereof is only this: that the
one kissed him Osculo poenitentiae and sinceritatis, that is, With the kiss of
sincerity and repentance: and the other, Osculo malitia and fraudis; with the
kiss of malice and deceit. Mary kissed him, Mentis affectu and commixtione
spirituum; with an affectionate mind and spiritual touch: But Judas only,
O^is attactu and conjunctione labicrum; with an orall touch and corporal
conjunction of the lips: coming unto him, and saying, Hayle Master, and
kissed him.

Now, if any demand the reason why Judas gave this ceremony of a kiss for his
token; it is rendered by Expositors to be this. Because Christ after the fashion
and custom, that was then in use amongst his Contrymen the Jews, (and also
amongst the Romans, and other Nations; as it were easy to show, if it were
much material) did ordinarily after that loving and familiar manner entertain
his Disciples and Apostles at their return, when at any time they had been
absent from him for a season: Vt ostenderet regressum and ingressum eorum esse
gratum, and pacificum; that so he might manifest unto them that their entrance
and return was very welcome and acceptable unto him. And therefore Judas, that
he might be the less suspected, of having any ill mind or meaning toward his
Master; came only in this ordinary and loving way of salutation, crying, Hayle
Master, and kissed him; as you heard before: that so they that knew him not,
either by face or favor, might take notice which was he, and so be able to
distinguish him from the rest of his company, and to take the right man, by not
mistaking one for another, which was all they cared for, their malicious minds
being more bent against him, then any: nay, then all the rest. And they had
some reason to be suspicious, and jealous of his escape; because he had
conveyed himself secretly from them, at the least once before: as you may see,
John 8. and the last verse.

But Jesus takes it ill at Judas hands, that he should make Sigillum
dilectionis signum perditionis; the seal of love the sign of treachery, and a
kiss the key of his Treason; by which himself had manifested so much love to
him, as well as to his fellow Apostles: and therefore cries unto him as you have
heard, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? which, he does
only to show the unsufferable lewdness, and unpardonable wickedness of such
notorious hypocrisy; and not out of any wonder or astonishment at the thing,
considering he could not be ignorant, how, that long before this, Joab did the
like to Amasa, when he took him by the beard to kiss, and smote him with a
sword into the fifth rib; making a friendly embrace the preface to a deadly
blow: as you may see, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10. ve^ses. And Cain also long before that,
not much unlike when he egged his brother forth of doors, with an Egrediamur
for as; come brother, let us go walk, and take together: and in the mean
time, whilst his tongue thus anointed him with oil, his heart and hand
conspired together to murder and mangle, butcher and betray him.

Judas, and the Jews; when he said unto the one, Judas, betrayest thou the
Son of man with a kiss; and to the other, Ye be come out unto me as to a
thief, with swords and staves; and the like: For, Quis erit impatiens in
ferenda injuria ab amico, In Mat. 26.
cum Christus proditur a Discipulo? says Rabanus: who can be impatient, though
he suffer injuries from his friend, when he sees his Master Christ Jesus so
patient before him when he was betrayed by his own Disciple?

Secondly, take notice what a dangerous thing it is to betray Christ with a
kiss, as all hypocritical professors do; and such as making shows of
religion and devotion outwardly and to the world, are yet in their hearts and
souls neither truly religious, nor devout indeed; but having only a form of
godliness, have denied the power thereof, as Saint Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3.5.
And likewise such as eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, when as they are neither truly sorrowful for their sins, nor in
love and charity with their neighbors, neither yet intend to lead new lives;
but come only for custom and fashion sake, as compelled thereunto more by law
than love: and therefore do not earnestly hunger and thirst after the
righteousness of God and his Christ; but retain still voluntatem peccandi; a
will and desire to return to their old sins again, as the dog to his vomit,
and the sow to her wallowing in the mire. But these I say, yea all these betray
Christ with a kiss, in making shows of being his followers and servants, when
as in their hearts and minds they are nothing less. And therefore in their so
doing they are no other, no better than very traitors also to their own souls.

Thirdly, let all Gods children learn hence, to beware of the fair face and
flatteries of the world, which is nothing else but a traitor and a false friend
to all those upon whom it fawneth most; smiling upon some with the pleasing
looks of wealth and riches, kissing others with the lips of love and
pleasures; and hugging and embracing a third sort in the arms of honor and
preferment; and so under the shows of friendship, betraying all to eternal
death and destruction.

And lastly, let every one as Christ advises his Apostles and Disciples;
beware of those that come unto them in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are
ravening wolves; Let them beware of them, I say, that they do not work them a
mischief before they are aware. For, Quando bonum ore faris, mala cord tamen
meditaris, Oscula quae Domino Judas dedit haec mihi, tu das; Their kindnesses
are but like Judas kisses, watching opportunities to betray thee into thine
enemies hands. And therefore says the Poet: Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes: an
enemies kisses are wounds: the overmuch and sudden kindness of such men as
these, are but the very marks of treason. For he that uses me better than he
was wont, will betray me, says the Italian proverb. And the heavenly Proverbs
of Gods Word affirm, That the bitter wounds of a lover are better than the
sweet and sugared kisses of an enemy that hates thee to the death, as you have
heard before out of Proverbs 7.13. And therefore as the Prophet advises, so
let me: trust not a friend, neither put confidence in a Counselor; but keep
the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. For the son revileth
the father, the daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter in law
against her mother in law, and a man's enemies are they of his own house, Mic.
7.5, 6. And this suffices for the kiss of Judas.

But says Christ, ye be come out unto me as against a thief, with swords and
staves. Yea, and which is more, Lord, as to the worst of thieves, to a thief
of the night, with lanthornes and torches. Neither is there cause, why thou
should either wonder, or be troubled at it. For seeing thou art not come to
suffer for thieves as well as for other sinners, there is reason thou should
be handled as a thief, and bear their punishment: although thou know no
sin in thy self, yet God has made thee sin; yea all sin for us, that so we
might be made the righteousness of God in thee, says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.
ult. And therefore thou must, nay thou art contented to be nu^bred among the
wicked; as the Prophet foretold of thee, Isa. 53.12. And if among the wicked,
then among the thieves and robbers as well as any other sinners whatsoever: that
so thou may save some of them that have bin such, and deliver others from
the hands of those, that are and will be such for ever. Thou have told us thy
self, that the thief comes to steal, kill, and to destroy, John 10.10. by
which words, an old Postiller tells me, Par. de tem. (...). 3. post. ^ent.
there are three sorts of thieves designed and described: The devil, death,
and the wicked man. The devil, Quia insidi^tur animae; because he seeks to
destroy our souls. Death, Quia insidiatur vitae, because it seeks to kill us
and deprive us of our lives; and the wicked man, Quia insidiatur bonis, he
seeks to steal from us and rob us of our goods. Now the last of these thou
savest, so many of them as will repent with the good thief, and put their
trust in thee. And the other two thou vanquishest, so that they shall not
prevail either against thee or thine, to their destruction or confusion: as
will be manifested more at large in that which will follow and ensue upon this
subject, when we shall come to speak of thy death, burial, and the like. And
therefore if these thine enemies use thee as a thief in coming out against
thee with swords and staves, torches, and lanthornes, and such other
instruments as whereby they used to take and apprehend thieves and robbers
withal; it is but thy fathers justice against our sins, which thou came into
the world most cheerfully and willingly to satisfy and undergo. But yet I must
confess, that seeing thou were innocent as well from these as all other
offenses, both thy sufferings and thine enemies sins are the greater, in that
they did these things unto thee without thy desert. And therefore there is a
great deal of reason, that they should be punished and thou pitied
accordingly. For if it be a thing much to be condoled and lamented to see an
innocent and honest man to be apprehended, and violently laid hold upon: yea,
dragged and haled, pinioned and manacled too, and so carried to prison; and
thence afterward brought to the Bar, and forced to answer for his life: then
much more when these things are done, Coelorum and Angelorum Domino, to him
that is Lord both of Heaven and Earth, as it was unto our blessed Savior; who
as the Prophet speaks, was led as a sheep unto the slaughter: Esaias 53.7.

Wherefore our Savior did but justly complain of their injustice, in saying,
They came out unto him as to a thief, when they came to take him. For whereas
it is the property of thieves, first, to steal and rob men of their goods; and
then to fly and run away after they have stolen, according to that question
and demand at the Bar; Did he fly for the same? as also to hide and conceal
themselves in corners and obscure places, and many times to lay violent hands;
yea, to hurt and wound those that shall seek to resist and withstand them in
their robberies; as it is said of the Bandettees in France, that they seldom
rob, but they kill too: Why, Christ did never any of these things; but was so
far from doing them, as that he did the clean contrary. For instead of
flying, he went to meet them when they came to take him; and when the officers
knew him not, he told them that he was the man: Vliro se dans in manus eorum;
yielding himself willingly and readily of his own accord into their hands.
And instead of hurting, or being any ways in such kind prejudicial to any
man, he did infinite good to all men; healing them of all manner of sicknesses
and sores, that stood in need of his help either of those ways. And lastly,
he was so far from robbing, or taking any thing unjustly from them, as that
he would never be sole owner, or possess any temporal thing as his own: but
rather spend and employ all such things as he had, as his gifts and graces; his
labor and his learning; yea, and his very life, and all, for the benefit and
salvation of others: and therefore I say, it was a great point of injustice in
them thus to come out unto him as to a thief, with swords and staves.

And that which is added by our Savior himself in the text, adds also an
increase to their mischi^fe, and his misery: that is, that while he was daily,
or in the day time, teaching in the Temple among them, they took him not; but
made choice of the night to do it in: and therefore came with lanthornes and
torches, as well as swords and staves to take and apprehend him: which spee^h of
Christ, howsoever it principally tend to show his power and their weakness in
that they could not apprehend him, nor lay hold upon him till himself was
willing: so that Stultum erat cum gladiis quaerere eum qui uliro se offert, and
in nocte investigare quasi latentem, qui quotidie in Templo docet: that is, It
was but a foolishnes in them to hunt after him with swords and staves, which
did of his own accord offer himself unto them; or to seek for him in the
night, as one that concealed himself, and usually lay hid, when as he was
daily to be seen, heard, and had, teaching in their Temples. Yet, withal it
bewrayes their wickedness also, and their base cowardice; that when they durst
not resist and withstand him in the day time among the multitude, and before
the people; that rather then not do it all, they would be content with an
unseasonable hour, and do it in the night; when his friends, if he had any,
should be all sleeping; and his enemies only waking to do the deed.

^n locum ^e. Mat. 26.
Sed factum congruit tempori and personis, says Saint Ambrose. quia cum essent
tenebrae in tenebros^ tempore, tenebrosum opus exercebant: But the fact was
agreeable enough to the time, wherein, and persons by whom it was performed.

A darksome night to those that were dark with sin,
Being most fit to do their deeds of darkness in.
And Saint Austin says, Sempiternus dies ita membris occultabatur humanis,
Tract. 112. in Evang. ^a^an,
ut laternis and facibus quaereretur occidendus a tenebris: that is, The
eternal day was so vayled and obscured under humane members, that such as were
darkness themselves, could not find him out to massacre and murder him,
except with lanthornes and torches. So that ye may guess (beloved) by the
time and season, as what manner of men they were, so what manner of work they
went about; even no other, no better then a work of darkness. For, Qui male
agit, odit lucem, said our Savior himself; John 3.20. He that does evil,
hates the light. And Saint Paul says, That they which are drunk are drunken
in the night: 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. (and it were to be wished, as not altogether so bad
as now it is, that we could say so to:) and Job says, that Oculus adulteri
observat caliginem: that is, That the eye of the adulterer waits for the
twy-light, and that the murderer rises early, and kills the poor and
needy; and in the night he is as a thief: Job 24.14, 15. answerable to that of
the Poet, Vt jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones, etc. so that this, it
should seem, is the special time, when the Devils ministers walk^ their
rounds, and play their parts, observing another rule of the Poet: (viz.) Noctem
peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem: to cast a cloud upon their frauds, and the
night upon their sins. There being no such time for varietry and villainy as
this; because the nights offspring for the most part, are, as the Orator
numbers them, dolus, metus, latrocinia, frauds, querelae, etc. cozenages,
robberies, murders, and the like.

But the truth is, Judas and this company that come here with their lanthornes
and torches to apprehend Christ, are for the Devil both by night and day,
plotting in the one what they practice in the other; the day being for the
invention, though the night for the execution of their lewd designs. And
therefore we can expect no other but devilish works and actions from them;
neither must they expect any rewards, but what are answerable thereunto: which
is, Go ye cursed into everlasting torments, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: as you may see Matthew 25.41. For Into utter darkness they cannot
choose bu^ run,
That thus with torch-light seek to obscure the Sun.
And this shall suffice as well for the kiss of Judas, as that other
Circumstance of their coming out unto him with swords and staves, lanthornes
and torches, and the like, to take him.

The next Circumstance ensuing these in the sufferings of our Savior, is their
apprehension and taking of him, as Saint Mark says; Then they laid their
hands upon him and took him: Mark 14.46. And Saint John adds, That they bound
him too: John 18.12. At the doing whereof all his Disciples forsook him and
fled, as Saint Matthew says; Matthew. 26.56. And Saint Mark likewise in his
former 14. Chapter, at the 50. Verse. A word or two first of the flight of his
Disciples, and their forsaking him; because I desire to handle his mental
sufferings all together: and then afterward I will proceed to his attachment
and binding; and the rest of those afflictions, which he may more properly be
said to have sustained in his body.

Then all the Disciples forsook him and fled: which is a circumstance
(beloved) that may well seem to add as much to our Saviors suff^rings, (his
mental sufferings I say) as any of the former; to think that they which had
been so long trained up by him, and upon whom he had bestowed so much time and
pains to instruct and establish them in his faith; (they continually hearing
his heavenly Doctrines, seeing his powerful Miracles, observing his holy
conversation and comportment throughout the whole course of his life: and
lastly, acting and performing miracles themselves by his virtue and might
alon^,) should now grow so faithless and faint-hearted, as to fors^ke and
leave him in his troubles; and that even in his enemies hands. It being Facinus
capitale, (as one says) A capital crime, for children in the time of danger
to forsake their Parents, or subjects their Sovereign, or Disciples their
Master. All which notwithstanding, ye see here he has experience of in
himself; being forsaken as a Father of his children, as a Lord of his vassals,
and as a Master of his Disciples; and so left as I say, all alone, even in his
enemies hands. As Job, no doubt his type in this, complains, when he says;
He has removed my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are become
strangers to me; my kinsfolk have failed me, and my familiar friends forsaken
and forgotten me: G. Herbert. Sacred Poen^^. p. 20.
Job 19.13, 14. So that he may justly complain in the words of a modern Poet
of our own: All my Disciples flee, fear puts a bar
Betwixt my friends and me. They leave the star,
That brought the Wise men of the East from far.
But the truth is, he was for a time forsaken of his heavenly Father himself;
which made him to cry when he was upon the Cross, and that with a loud voice
too, saying, Eli, Eli, Lamasabackthani, i. e. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Math. 27.46. And therefore it is the less wonder, that he should
be so of his followers and Disciples, which were but weak and faint-hearted,
fearful, and sinful men. Neither did they do it without a Prophecy, for
Percute pastorem and dispergentur Oves gregis, says Zachary, i. e. Smite the
Shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered, Zach. 13.7. Which very Prophecy
our Savior himself applies to this very purpose, in foretelling and
forewarning them of this their dispersion and scattering, and that answerable
to the said Prophecy, they should all be offended at him this night, Matthew.
26.31. But the forespeaking and foretelling of it, I do confess, does not
excuse them for doing of it, no more then Christ's foretelling of Peter's
denial, did lessen or extenuate the heinousness of his sin.

Howsoever some there are that seem to think, that they had a sufficient
dispensation for this their flight, even from their Master himself, when he
spoke those words unto ^is Adversaries, saying, If you seek me, Sinite hos
abire, then let these go their way, John 18.8. As also when before this time,
he counseled and advised them, That if they were persecuted in one City, they
should sly into anoth^r, Matthew. 10.23. Neither do I find, as I must
acknowledge, any writers upon this subject, whether ancient or modern, Fathers
or other latter Divines, Postillers or Expositors, that are very forward to
censure or condemn this their flight as a notorious fault or a grievous crime
in them, but only as a matter of weakness or infirmity; as not being yet so
thoroughly grounded and settled in the Faith of Christ, as afterward they became
to be. And Erasmus says, In l^c. (...). Mar. c. 24.
that Infirmis licet fugere, It is lawful for the weak to fly, as being unfit
as yet to suffer martyrdom and persecution; in regard (as we may conceive,
that their irresolution and ungroundednesse in the faith, may occasion their
backsliding and revolt at the first sight, and horror of the affliction, and so
bring rather loss than gain, to the cause of Christ. But the time will come
(as he goes on) in quo fugisse negasse est, In which to fly shall be accounted
as bad as to deny. Of which you know, what our Savior himself says, He that
shall deny me before men, shall himself be denied before the Angels of God,
Luke 12.9. But in the mean time when the Gospel and truth of God can gain
nothing, but rather (as I say) suffer much loss and detriment by thy death and
suffering; Fugito, latita, says the same Erasmus still; Fly in Gods name, and
keep thy self close for a better opportunity, till a fitter season do offer
it self in which thou may do good. For by that course, it may so fall out
which Demosthenes speaks of; that, Vir qui fugit, redintegrabit praelium; He
that flies to day, may live to renew the battle to morrow, or at another
time. As indeed it fell out accordingly with these Disciples of our blessed
Savior; which howsoever they were but weak and infirm at the time of the
apprehension or taking of their Master, which as you have heard occasioned
their flight; yet they proved afterward the proclaimers of the Gospel to all
people, and the Heralds of salvation unto all souls; preaching the truth of
Christ boldly to their faces from whose presence they had fled before.

But when a man is so confirmed and settled in his faith himself, as that
withal he is able to strengthen his brethren; and that his death or other
sufferings, whatsoever may be profitable, and bring forth plentiful fruit
unto the Church of God; and his blood be as seed sown in good ground,
springing up to the increase of faith in diverse others: Why then I say, it
shall be a great disparagement for himself, and a detriment to the Church of
God for a follower of Christ to fly: for every one whom Christ has called to
his faith, and the knowledge of his truth, must do his best to bring his
brother to Christ too; John 1.42.25.
as Andrew did Peter, and Philip did Nathaniel. For, Nascitur indigne per quem
non nascitur alter, says the Poet; which if it be true in natural generation,
that he is borne but to little purpose that does not propagate his kind, then
much more in spiritual regeneration; which seeing it is done no way better
then by constant profession of the Gospel, even unto death and bonds: because
Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae; The blood of Martyrs has ever proved the
best seed of the Church: therefore in such cases it is not lawful for him that
professes Christianity and Religion, either to withdraw, or conceal himself;
but he ought rather, occurrere carnifici, even to meet the hangman in the face,
then to step a foot out of the way to prevent and avoyde the danger. For
howsoever, as Bernard says, S^rm. 3. Dominica in ramis Palm.
Persecutio and temporalis omnis adversitas, pro loco and tempore aliquando
fugienda erit: cum autem necesse fuerit, viriliter toleranda* that is,
Persecution, and temporal affliction be sometime according to place and
occasions to be avoided and eschewed; yet when need is, it must be manfully
tolerated and endured.



It is to be doubted (beloved) that Christ has many such Disciples in these
days; many which, Vt comes radios per Solis euntibus umbra est,
Cum latet hic pressus n^^ibus, illa fugit:
as a Poet says:

That can be content to follow Christ as the shadow does the Sun; that is, so
long as it shines: but when once it begins to be darkened with clouds, it
instantly vanishes away. So in time of prosperity, all men for the most part,
will be content to be Christ's Disciples; but when tribulation or persecution
comes for Christ's sake, by and by they are offended; as our Savior himself
says of them: Matthew. 13.21. or as Saint Luke has it, Tempore tentationis
recedunt: that is, In time of temptation they go away; Luke 8.13. yea, many
with the sons of Zebedeus would be Christ's Disciples, if he had an earthly
Kingdom to advance them to places of honor; that so one might sit at his
right hand, and the other on his left: but when it comes to this reckoning,
that they must pledge him of that bitter cup of his Cross, of which he is now
ready to drink a full draught before them; then it is to be doubted that most
of them will be ready to say with the carnal Capernaites in the Gospel, Durus
est hic sermo; This is an hard saying, who can hear it? as John 6.60. But
beloved, we must know that it is not enough for a Christian to confess Christ
and his truth in the Halcyon days and times of peace and plenty, but they must
also stick to it when trouble arises for the same: For it is but an easy
matter to profess the Gospel while all is calm and quiet, and the weather
fair (as we say;) but the trial of constancy and perseverance is to be seen
only in adversity, as one says; Tempore duro est inspicienda fides: As the
valor and courage of a Soldier is best seen in the hottest skirmish; and the
skill of a Mariner best descried and discerned in the greatest tempest: so the
faith and constancy of Christians is best tried in the most grievous
persecutions. For in the days of tranquillity and peace, what hypocrite gives
not way unto the Gospel? Who will not favor it, so long as it is in the
general favor of the world? What Persian so profane, that will not become a
Jew to enjoy their freedoms and prerogatives? as Hester 8.17. But when the
world and the Gospel part, and Truths followers are followed with hatred and
contempt, threatened with fire and faggot; then comes the trial of a true
faithful Christian indeed, and not before.

It is the glory of the Angel of Pergamus, that dwelling where Satan's Throne
was in those days, when Antipas Gods faithful Martyr was slain; yet he had
not denied his name: Revel. 2.13. And the argument is strong for the
uprightness and integrity of Job, against the cavil of Satan; that when the
fence was removed, which he had suggested to be the hold-backe of Job from
blaspheming the name of God; yet as the text says, That Job continued still in
his fear: Job 10.11, 12. We have most of us given the Gospel entertainment so
far at the least, as to become professors and hearers of it; and no marvel,
for it has the credit and the countenance of the times; yea, and the sword of
the public Magistrate in defense and protection of it, (which the Lord of his
infinite goodness vouchsafe still to continue amongst us!) but if such times
should come again as some of our forefathers have lived in; and as were in
the Primitive days of the Gospel, I mean those Marian times of bloody
Persecution; wherein we must either deny, fly, or die, What would we do then?
It is to feared, that it would then be found, that many which now make fair
and glorious shows, seeming close and inward friends to Christ; would give him
the slip with his Apostles here, and disclaim all acquaintance with him, (as
Saint Peter for his part did) rather then expose themselves to danger for his
sake: and our too much love of this frail and momentary life, drive us often
into many base shifts to save it: yea, to hazard the loss of our souls for
ever, only to gain a few uncertain minutes of breathing to a sick and
crazie body. Peter (I say) vowed, though all the world forsook Christ, that he
would never leave him: yet for fear, denies him thrice, and forsweares him
too. Marcelinus twice cast grains of incense into the Idols fire: (...).
Ecebolius turns thrice: Spira revolts and despaires.

But I shall not need to press this point any farther, as being half
impertinent to these days of peace; wherein taking up the Cross to follow
Christ withal, is amongst those duties, which it suffices to perform
praeparatione animae; rather in the readiness of our minds, then the present
action and execution of our bodies: because (God be thanked) it seems to be a
far off. Howsoever, we may do well (beloved) to examine how we stand resolved,
in case the Lord should call us to suffer for his names sake; and to arm our
selves for such a time, though it never come: as a wise Mariner, that in a
calm makes all his tacklings strong against a storm: and as the careful
Fen-man, or Marsh-man, mends all his banks in Summer, to prevent the drowning
of his grounds in Winter. And if we find our hearts to be so firmly set and
settled, that we will rather forsake all, than foregoe our Master Christ Jesus;
our resolution in this kind shall pass for execution, in the sight of God;
and it shall be held as done, which we would have done, if we had been put
unto it, though it never be done indeed. For, Non Martyrium sola effusio
sanguinis consummat (says Saint Austin) nec sola dat palmam exustio illa
flammarum: It is not the sword alone, nor the fire, which makes a Martyr, but a
man may be a Martyr without bloodshed; Et sicca morte; and by a dry death,
attain unto the Crown of a Confessor.

For we must know, beloved, that there are three kinds of Martyrdom. The
first, Operis and voluntatis, both of the will and work; as that of Saint
Stephen, related and set down at large, Acts 7. The second, Operis, sed non
voluntatis, of the work, but not the will; as that of the Infants of Bethlem,
recorded by Saint Matthew, cap. 2.16. The third, Voluntatis, sed non operis, Of
the will, but not the work; as the Martyrdom of Saint John the Evangelist,
reported in the Ecclesiastical History. Eusebius. (...) cap. 31
Answerable also to that of Saint Paul before his death, when he said unto
Agabus and others, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21.13.

Now beloved, we must resolve to be Martyrs in this last kind at the least, or
else we are not worthy the name of Christians. We must resolve therefore, I
say, to continue and abide by Christ, not only in his, but in all our own
temptations also, or else we can never be partakers of his glory among the
Saints of light. For there is no hope of the Crown, if we do not help in
some measure to carry the Cross; neither can we be sharers of the spoils and
booty, if we fight never a stroke in the battle: But either cowardly (with
the Apostles here) run away from Christ; or with Saint Peter deny him, rather
than run the hazard of persecution which may arise for his names sake. For
whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, among this adulterous and
sinful generation; him shall the Son of man be ashamed of when he comes in
the glory of his Father with all his holy Angels, says our Savior himself,
Mark 8.38. And therefore if you would have Christ not to forsake you in
another world, do not you forsake him in this, whether in word or deed,
practice or profession, heart or hand, but be constant in your Faith holding
out unto the end; notwithstanding never so many dangers which may threaten you
for your profession sake. For all the afflictions of this life are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be showed unto us in the life to
come, says Saint Paul, Romans 8.18. And this suffices for this use.

2. Use.
Secondly, Take notice that these Disciples followed Christ, Vsque ad Passionis
tempus; as one observes, i. e. Till the time that his Death and Passion drew
near and was at hand; but then they forsook him and fled: so thy Parents,
Kinsfolk, Children and Friends, and all other good things of this world, will
be content to serve and attend thee whilst thou art alive, and to live like,
as we say: But when the ministers and messengers of death begin once to beset
and encompasse thee about, they will all forsake thee presently, and leave thee
to thy self alone: Which may afford us this use to teach us not to put our
trust in men, nor in any other earthly thing, but only in the Lord our most
faithful and constant friend indeed, that will stand to us, and by us, not
only in this life, but in that other life also which is to come. But I was so
large and long in the last Use, that I am constrained to be the briefer in
this. And therefore I do here end it, when I have scarce made entrance into
it: only showing you that such an use might be made of it, though I have no
time now to enlarge and prosecute it; but am enforced to leave the farther
application and amplification of it unto your selves.

There is one circumstance behind, and that is Peter's denial of his Master,
which might have been here added as a great increase no doubt of the mental
sufferings of our blessed Savior. But I shall purposely omit it because it is
a subject that is very copiously handled by diverse others, and that has been
likewise formerly treated of by my self in this place; so that I should but
actum agere, do that which I had done before, to insist upon it again. And
therefore, the next day (God willing) I will proceed directly to his corporal
passions, and that which for our sakes he suffered in his body, when as it is
said, He suffered under Pontius Pilate. In the mean time, for this present,
this shall suffice.

Mark 14.46. They laid their hands upon Him, and took Him.


HAving formerly at large run through the mental sufferings of our blessed
Savior, as well in the treason of Judas, as the flight of his Apostles from
him, and leaving of him in his enemies hands: we are at last come to treat of
his Corporal Passions, and that which for our sakes he suffered in his body,
when as it is said of him, He suffered under Pontius Pilate.

And herein I can follow no other, no better method, then what his mischievous
and malicious enemies have directed me unto: but that, as they proceed in their
abusive and disgraceful carriage of themselves, and usage toward him, so must
I in my discourse upon the same. And I intend by Gods permission and your
patience, to follow them step by step, until we see the end.

First then, They laid their hands upon Him, and took Him, says Saint Mark,
Capientes eum, quem mundus capere non potest: Apprehending Him, whom the World
cannot comprehend nor contain; according to that of the Prophet, The breath of
our nostrills, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets, Lament. 4.20.

Where it is very worthy of our most serious considerations, to think with
what fierce and cruel countenances, menacing and theeatning looks, malicious
and spightfull minds, this devilish and hellish rabble did invade and assault
our blessed Savior: And so incompassing him round about, did lay their most
wicked and violent hands upon him to take him; Non fidei manus, sed faroris;
Not hands of faith, but fury. So that, Omnes impetum faciunt in^um, in terram
deijciunt, calcant, dilaniant, capillos and barbam evellunt, alapis and pugnis
caedunt; says a Spanish Postiller: They all rush violently upon him, fling him
to the ground, kick him, spurn him, tear him, pull off the hair both of his
head and beard; yea, buffet and beat him with their fists: answerable to that
of the Psalmist, Miserere mei Deus, quoniam conculcavit me homo, as the vulgar
Latin reads it: Psalm. 56.1. that is, Be merciful unto me, O God, for man has
kicked or lifted up his heel against me: and likewise of the Prophet, Dedi
genas meas vellentibus, etc. that is, I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that pulled off the hair; Esaias 50.6. in the last translation.
So that we may safely sing, and say with David in another place; How that he
was compassed about with young Bulls, and mighty Bulls of Bashan did beset him
on every side; gaping upon him with their mouths, as it were a ramping and
roaring Lion: as Psalm. 22.12, 13. verses. Neither could it be more truly
verified of the most counterfeit and dissembling Synon that ever the world
brought forth, then of this sincere Son of righteousness Christ Jesus: how
that, Vndique visendi studio Trojan^.
prophana juventus
Circumfusa ruit, certantque illudere capto. as Virgil 2. Aen.
that is, That the profane multitude strived who should be foremost to mock
and deride him, to put shame and disgrace upon him. All which considered, it
cannot choose but move pity and compassion in the most stony and flinty heart,
that ever the world brought forth, to think and see; that he, who in Heaven is
continually attended and adored, by whole troops of celestial powers, and
mighty armies of heavenly Soldiers, and hosts of blessed Angels, should be so
far debased and deprived of that so great and magnificent glory and renown;
as to suffer himself so readily and willingly thus to be beset and taken by
such a rascal multitude of rude and rugged Renegadoes, men of no esteem or
credit in the world; and all out of his love to us, that so he might deliver us
out of the hands of those our enemies; that held us bound and captive in their
snares, according to their own will, as Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. ultim. and
so were even ready to destroy and devour our souls. If this his so great and
unsearchable love to us, do not cry and call for a return of our love to him
again, let our selves be judges: but because every circumstance of his
sufferings afford us this Use, we will leave the farther amplification and
enlargement of it till hereafter.

In the mean time take notice in the second place; that they did not only
take him, but bind him too, as Saint John says: Chap. 18. verse 12. as it was
typified of him in Ezekiell. Thou Son of man, Tract. 112. in Johan.
behold they shall put bands upon thee, and bind thee with them; Ezekiel. 3.25.
So that, as Saint Augustine says, Eum ligant a quo solvi potius velle
debuerunt; They bind him, of whom they should rather have sought and desired
to have been loosed: Yea, which came into the world only for the same
purpose, says Saint Cyrill; (viz.) to have loosed them indeed, if they would
themselves; to have loosed them from their sins, whom in recompense (as you
see and hear) they bind with cords.

Vinclis Princeps diris addicitur,
Et ut latro ligatus ducitur. That is,
Leading him captive as a Thief,
And bound in chains that is their Chief:
But oh you unthankful and ungrateful wretches, is this the reward you give
unto him, that set you free from the Egyptian bondage; thus to bind him for
his pains? to tie those hands that created and made at the first, and still
preserve and uphold the whole frame of this universal world? And which is
more, are the authors of that liberty and freedom which your selves do now
enjoy? (For I am the Lord the God, which have brought you out of the Land of
Egypt, that you should not be their bondmen: yea, I have broken the bonds of
your yoke, and made you go upright, says this Lord himself unto them: Levit.
26.13.) Haeccine ergo reddis Domino, popule stulte and insipiens; Do ye
therefore so reward the Lord O ye foolish people, and unwise? said Moses unto
them long since: as you may see, Deuteronomy. 32.6. And therefore much more foolish
and unwise now, to think themselves able to bind him (unless he were willing
thereunto) that came into the world, only to let them that were bound to go
free, as the Psalmist speaks; Dominus solvit compeditos, The Lord looseneth
the prisoners: Psalm. 146.7. causing Peter's chains when he was in prison, to
fall off from his hands; Acts 12.7.

And therefore it is but a point of folly, if not madness in them indeed, to
comfort and solace themselves overmuch, in this their new prisoners bondage,
seeing although they have bound him, yet they have not vanquished nor overcome
him: For, Quod vinciunt, non victi est sed volentis; His bonds proceed not so
much from their conquest, as from his own consent. And besides, in this their
binding of him, they do but tie themselves both bodies and souls the faster,
and the surer to their own damnation: as indeed do all others, that in these
days do likewise tie the hands of our blessed Savior by their sins: as
first they do, which either distrust his providence over them, for the
provision and welfare of their bodies; or despair of his mercy toward them
for the salvation of their souls: or lastly, that doubt of his assistance in
any other their temptations and afflictions; whether corporal or spiritual,
whether of mind, or body, or both.

Secondly, they do the like, which do so resist his divine and holy motions
and inspirations, which many times he breaths and infuseth by his heavenly
blasts, into their hearts and souls; as that they do not permit and suffer
him to have his free operation, and work out his own work within them: but
either carelessly neglect him, or wilfully reject him when he offers divine
grace unto them.

Thirdly, they that are ungrateful and unthankful for benefits and blessings
formerly received, do also so tie up Gods hands, as that he can confer and
bestow no more upon them; but do plainly manifest and declare, that they are
very unworthy of those, which they have already had, and received.

Fourthly, they which upon all occasions are not ready and willing to cooperate
with Gods divine grace, by faithful and careful employment of their talents
to farther and greater benefit and increase; but are so cold and sloathfull in
good things, as that they bury and hide their talents: and rather extinguish
and quench the spirit, then cause it to flame and burn out, as they ought to
do, by being diligent and zealous in good works; free and forward to all holy
actions and endeavors. For, Aguntur homines a Spiritu Dei; ut acti agant, non
ut ipsi nihil agant, says Saint Austin; Men are so led and guided by the
Spirit of God, as that by his assistance they must also work and agitate
themselves; and not do nothing toward their own salvation: which the very
word Assistance does plainly import. For he that does help and assist his
friend in any thing, does it not altogether for him; but together with him,
does help to perfect that which he was not able to finish, and fulfill by
himself alone. So, that as the same Austin elsewhere, Qui fecit te sine te,
non salvabit te sine te; He that made thee without thee, yet will not save thee
without thee.

And lastly, the proud Justitiaries, which are ready presently to think
highly, and magnify themselves for those good things that are in them;
(although they be not nata, but data; not their own, but such as they have
received from the Lord: and with the Pharisee in the Gospel, to boast and
brag of their own righteousness and holiness, above, and beyond others;
and that with a kind of scornful rejection, and disdainful detestation and
demonstration of Iste Publicanus, The poor Publican, and all other their
neighbors and brethren in comparison of themselves: as too many in these days
do. Why these I say; yea all these do so bind and tie up the hands of our
blessed Savior and Redeemer, as that he cannot go forward with the work of
their salvation, no more then he could do his great works and wonders in his
own Country, and among his own people, for their unbeliefes sake: as Matthew.
13.58. and Mark 6.5. And therefore let me entreat and persuade you, to beware
of these and the like fearful sins, if ever you mean that God and his
Christ shall save your souls.

And thus in the flight first of his Disciples, and then in the apprehension
and binding of our Savior himself afterward; ye see the truth of those things
fulfilled in these days of the Gospel, which were long since typified and
fore-showne in the time of the Law. First, in the flying of the Israelites
before their enemies, and the taking of the Ark of God; at the news whereof
old Eli fell backward from his seat, so that his neck was broken, and he
dyed: 1 Samuel 4.18. where, since the taking of the Arc, was a token and a type
of the taking of Christ; (as many Writers observe) I see no reason but that I
may safely infer, that the fall and breaking of the neck of Eli, the Priest of
Israel at that time, might fore-shew also the downfall and destruction of the
Jewish Priesthood, and Ecclesiastical Policy, at the taking, or shortly after
the taking of our Lord himself: but this only by the way. Secondly, the
binding and durance of Christ was typified in the casting of innocent Joseph
into prison, because he would not consent to lie with his lascivious and
adulterous Mistress: Genesis 39.20. And lastly, in the binding of Sampson with
fetters and chains, after that Dalilah had cut off the seven locks, and other
hairs of his head; as Judges 16.19, 21. verses.

But I must confess that this our Sampson would easily have broken these
chains, and cast away these cords from him, now; when these Philistims, these
his enemies much worse then the Philistims, were upon him; if he had not been
held with other, with stronger ties then these: they being the chains and
bonds only of his love; and the cords, nay cart-ropes of our sins, that are
able thus to hamper, thus to hold him. His love first, (as the Poet says,
Omnia vincit amor;) is that which does overcome him that is invincible, and
bind him here that is omnipotent: and our sins n^xt, answerable to that of
the Prophet, Funes peccatorum circumplexi sunt me; as the vulgar Latin reads
it, in Psalm. 109. Verse 61. that is, The cords of sin, or if you please, of
sinners, have ingirt and encompassed me round about. As when the razor came
once upon the head of Sampson, he lost his former unconquerable strength, so
that he might be held with cords, and bound with withes: so when the sin of
Adam, whereby he swarved from the will, and deviated from the ways of God,
came once upon the head of Christ, Teneri potuit and ligari; His enemies had
power to hold and bind him: so that he may complain as in the Prophet, He
has hedged me about, so that I cannot get out; and he has made my chain
heavy: Lament. 3.70. The false hands, and the foul fingers of the first Adam,
were lift up after a theevish manner, wrongfully to take and cause the mouth to
taste of Gods forbidden fruit, without the good leave and liking of him the
lawful owner; which gave occasion to our second Adam willingly and readily to
permit and suffer his holy and righteous hands to be bound as a Thief, that so
he might make full satisfaction for that so foul transgression of the first;
and loosen the hands of him and his posterity: in which, by reason of the
former offense, they were fast tied and bound before; according to that of the
Poet: Adae primi vincla se quatiunt,
Adam novum cum nexus ambiunt. That is,
The first Adams bands begin to loose,
When to the second they knit the noose. etc.
Sed proh regem vinctum, pro furum seelere; What a thing is this? nay, what a
strange thing; to see the King bound for the Thieves offense? strange indeed;
but that we are taught and told, that the love of Christ does stranger things
for the love of us then this; and all that he might draw sinful mankind to
the love of him again, as one says; Ligari voluit pro nobis, ut nos sibi
alligaret vinculis charitatis: He would be bound for us, that so he might bind
us unto himself in the chains of charity: yea, as the holy Scripture says,
In funiculis Adam traham eos, in vinculis charitatis; I drew them with the
cords of a man, and in the bands of love: Hosea 11.4. To draw then toward an
end of this point: Tu vinciris ut vinctos liberes,
Vincla mea tu fers in manibus
Tuis, rogo me liges funibus.
Since thou art bound the bond to free,
And that my chains are borne by thee;
With these thy cords, Lord tie thou me.
Yea, knit not only me, but all thy whole Church so fast unto thy self in thy
faith, and fear, and love unfeigned; that neither height above, nor depth
beneath, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor any other creature, as Saint Paul
says, be able to make a separation, or to dissolve the union. And let these
thy cords and chains so far loosen the bands of mine, and of all our sins,
as that they may never rise up against us to condemn us, either in this world,
or that which is to come. Yea, so strengthen us with thy heavenly grace, and
powerful assistance of thy holy Spirit; that we do not conspire with these
thine enemies to bind thee again our selves, by resisting of thy gracious
motions, and most holy instincts, or disobeying of thy will in any thing: but
enable us in all things to do as we say, when we pray as thou have taught us;
Lord let thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Da quod jubes, and jube
quid vis; Enable us to perform, and then command what thou will. Draw us with
these the everlasting chains and cords of thy love, and then we will run
after thee in the savor of these thy sweet ointments and perfumes, as thy
Spouse professes on our behalf to do: Cant. 1.3, 4. And once more let us
pray in our mother tongue, I mean our mothers the Churches language; Thou O
gracious Father, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to
forgive, receive our humble petitions; and though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, by
the means and merit of these bonds and chains, and other the sufferings of
our blessed Savior; and for the farther honor of him the said Jesus Christ
our Mediator and Redeemer, Amen. And this suffices to have been spoken of the
apprehension and binding of Christ, as the first part and parcel of those
corporal indignities, which for our sakes He suffered under Pontius Pilate.

In the next place he is carried to the seat of Judgment, and before an whole
Bench, and Court of Judges, which are four in number; two spiritual, and two
temporal. All wicked and very unjust, as by the sequel of this discourse, it
will plainly and manifestly appear; especially the two spiritual ones, Annas
and Cai^phas; which were so far from upright Judges in this cause, as that
they were indeed most violent and partial adversaries; maliciously affected
toward him, that was here brought before them to be judged according to the
Law. For who ever heard before that Judges did act the parts, either of
pleaders or accusers; or went about to enquire for false witnesses, and suborne
them to come in against a prisoner at the Bar; or one that stood before them
to answer for his life, as these Judges did? For Saint Matthew and Saint Mark
both tell us, that as well the chief Priests and Elders, as the rest of the
Counsel, sought for false witnesses to put him to death: Matthew. 26.59. and
Mark 14.55. whereby it appears that they were very enemies unto him, upon
whose life they meant to sit as Judges; which was a most wicked and unlawful
act in them: and such as made Saint Chrysostom upon a like occasion to refuse
to stand to: Eccl. Hist. lib. 8. c. 17.
saying, Se nolle temerarium aliquid subire and manifestos inimicos far
judices, as Sozomen relates; That he would not abide by any judgment or
censure that should be given by his enemies. And it is an ordinary and usual
practice in the Courts of Justice amongst our selves, for a prisoner, if he
know, or but suspect any of the Jury to be his enemies, to challenge them; and
they shall be put by from passing upon his life or cause. And in some cases, if
a man doubt of the integrity or uprightness of any Court, whether Spiritual,
or Temporal; he may remove his action, and cry with Saint Paul, Appello
Caesarem, I appeal unto Caesar; or some higher Bench: whereas our Savior ye
see here does none of these things, but is content to let them take their
course against him, though his own innocence be never so eminent and evident,
and their injustice and iniquity never so great.

But indeed, the truth is, these were the supreamest Courts of that place and
time, in which his cause was to be tried, as well Ecclesiastical as Imperial;
of Caesar, as the Synagogue: so that from these, except to the Throne of
Heaven, there lay no appeal. Now if this be not a great degree of suffering in
him, thus to fall into the hands, not only of his enemies, but such as were
unrighteous Judges also: yea, so many of them; all four such, never an upright
one amongst them; and yet to have no other place to appeal unto: judge ye. If
any should demand of me, Plus vident oculi quam oculus.
what is the reason that in our Courts of Justice there are usually so many
deputed by the supreme authority, to sit as Judges together: I might reply
with one, that amongst diverse, this surely is none of the least: Quod ubi pauci
Judices sunt, Machiav^l de R^pub. Venet. l 1. cap. 7.
facile a paucis corrumpi, and in suam sententiam pertrahi queant: That if a
single man or two of them perchance, should either for favor or friendship,
p^ece vel precio, either by entreaty or reward, be drawn aside to the
perverting of justice: or not be ready and willing upon all occasions to right
the cause of the innocent; yet they should not all be such: But that the one
half of them might stand up for truth and equity against the others; or if it
should so fall out, (which God forbid) that major pars should vincere meliorem;
The greater part should sometime oversway the better: yet, that one at the
least should speak his conscience freely, and plead the cause of the innocent
boldly; that so the injustice and unrighteousness of men might not altogether
prevail against the truth, which is of God; but that aequum and bonum, that
which is right and good might take place: and true judgment and justice be
seen to flourish in our Land. For where all are such, as in this case of
Christ, that there is never an honest or righteous man upon the Bench; there
righteousness it self is sure to be arraigned, and innocence condemned;
Justice perverted; and all Laws, be they never so sacred and religious,
violated and broken.

Now in our Saviors case, I say, besides that some of them had declared and
manifested themselves to be his enemies: why the others also, as well as they,
were wicked and unjust too; there being not one of them ready, patrocinare, or
to defend the cause of this innocent: no nor to speak a word to purpose on his
behalf, although he were the most righteous and harmless person that ever the
world brought forth, but he suffered some kind of injury and indignity or
other from them all, every one of them apart, as shall appear unto you more
plainly by that which follows and succeeds. For howsoever Pilat made a show
indeed of pleading his cause against the Jews for a time: yet the catastrophe
and close of all will make it manifest, that he was as wicked and unjust in his
degree and kind as any of the rest.

But let us take them in their order. For Saint John tells us, that they led him
away to Annas first; who was father in law to Caiaphas, which was high Priest
the same year, John 18.^3. So that howsoever the cognizance of the cause at
this time belonged properly to Caiaphas, as being the present high Priest, yet
the catchpoles and soldier, that took and haled him along, carried him first
to Annas; non tanquam ad judicem sed ad hostem; veluti praedam ostentantes, In
locum.
as Erasmus speaks: not as to a Judge that had power to censure him: but as to
an adversary, that had a desire to see him, thus under arrest, and in his
enemies hands. And therefore as bragging and vaunting of their prey, and
glorying in their conquest over him, they carry him unto him, who they knew
would rejoice together with them; and give them praise and thanks, rather then
the least discountenance for what they had done unto him. And besides, Annas as
it is probably to be thought, was of the conspiracy to take him, being one of
those that had hired Judas to betray him; and procured the band of soldiers
from the civil Magistrate to assist and help him in the action and
employment. For three of the Evangelists, viz. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, do
all tell us, That he went to the high Priests, in the Plural number: and They,
not He; appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver, etc. as Mat. 26.14.15. Now
then, There being more then one of these high Priests that had done thus, Annas
must needs be the second man; because we read not of any other about this
time, but only of Annas and Caiaphas: who by turns, as it should seem, had
managed the high Priests office for some while together; as appears by the
relation of Saint Luke, who says, That Annas and Caiaphas were the high
Priests when the word of God came unto John the Son of Zacharias; and he
began to preach in the wilderness, Luke 3.2. Now then, if these were the men
that had promised Judas his pay, and it may be the soldiers some gratuity for
their pains; why then, they had reason to repair unto them both, to give an
account of their employment and undertaking, and especially to Annas first, as
being the Elder man, and one whose habitation was nearer then the other, In
locum.
as Saint Austine and some others do imagine and conceive. But whatsoever were
the true cause, it is evident and apparent by Saint John's relation, that to him
he was first carried and brought. Neither did he take himself to be so voyded
and deprived of all jurisdiction, but that he had power and durst presume to
examine him, and question with him. For so is it said, That the high Priest
asked him of his Disciples and of his Doctrine, John 18.19. which the ancients
generally allow to be Annas; though Calvin, I must confess, In locum.
and many other Neoterickes think otherwise, viz. That he was not questioned
at all, till he came into the common Council: And then that Caiaphas was he
that did it; Annas being present, and sitting by as his assistant upon the
bench; or at the least, that this question was not dem^nded him till then; unto
which he gave that answer, which occasioned a stander by to strike him. For
hereupon, He the said Calvin, takes occasion to observe the excessive rage and
unrulinesse of these enemies of Christ; together with the tyrannical
discipline that was exercised by these high Priests: That while they seem to
sit as Judges, Interea saeviunt, ut truculentae belluae; yet they are as savage
as the most furious and fiercest beasts. For in the midst of their Council and
Assembly, where ought of all places to be exercised and shown the greatest
gravity and decorum in their proceedings, a common officer or servant amongst
them, assumes so much license and liberty to himself, as in the very time of
examination and handling of the cause, in the open face of the court; and in
sight of both the Judges; to strike the prisoner even without any offense, and
that without any check or reproof from them again for his so doing. And
thereupon concludes: Non mirum si intam barbarico consessu damnatur Christi
doctrina; a quo non modo eis aequitas exulat, sed eis quo que humanitas and
pudor. It is no marvel that the Doctrine of Christ should be condemned in such
a barbarous assembly, whence not only all right and equity, but even all shame
also and humanity is banished and exiled; so far Calvin. And Buissonius in his
Evangelicall harmony, says; Non dubium est, quin Johannes nomine Pontificis,
non Annam, sed Caiapham intelligit: It is not to be doubted, but that Saint
John by the name of high priest in this place, means not Annas but Caiaphas.

But when, or where, or by whomsoever this question was asked; it is evident by
the text, that when Christ's answer thereunto pleased not the standers by, one
of them, dedit ei alapam, says the vulgar Latin, i. e. gave him a box on the
ear, or as our last translation reads it, smote him with the palm of his
hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? verse. 22. of the former
eighteenth Chapter of the Gospel written by Saint John. Whereupon Saint
Chrysostom exclaimes: In locum.
Exhorrescat Coelum and contremiscat terra de Christi patientia and servorum
impudentia: Let the heavens be sore afraid, and the earth tremble and shake for
dread at Christ his patience, and the servants impudence: Et quod alapa Deus
percuti petuit, and to think that God could receive a box on the ear, or be
stricken with the palm of the hand, O Angeli qui haec intuemini, quomodo
siletis, etc. O ye Angels which behold these things, how is it possible that ye
should be silent! how can you contain your hands from fighting, and your
tongues from speaking in the Lords defense? or is it because you are astonished
to behold so great insolence and madness in them, and so much mildness and
meekness in him? so great sauciness and perverseness in them that offer it;
and so much patience and humility in him that suffers it? To think that a
Master should be stricken by his servant; and the Creator by his creature; yea
the Lord of the whole earth, before whom the very heavens tremble, and
infernal powers shake and quake for fear: should receive such an indignity
and affront from a sordid and base slave, yea a vile worm, and very scum of
the earth.

O eternal Father and Creator of all things, look with the eye of pity and
compassion upon that amiable countenance and lovely face of thy Christ ( sole
illustriorem, as Cyrill speaks, more bright and beatious then the Sun) that
is, thus smitten with the foul fists and fingers of sinful man. How can
thou so patiently put up so great an indignity offered to thine only Son,
and the Worlds only Savior? What punishment should he be accounted worthy of,
that should offer the like violence, or once make but a show of lifting up his
hand against the son of an earthly Sovereign; or other the pettiest King or
Prince of the World? when as all the Kings of the Earth are but weak and
feeble bulrushes and mushromes in comparison of this King Christ Jesus, who is
both Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium; King of Kings and Lord of Lords, as
the holy Scriptures style him. The hand of Jeroboam that was a King himself,
being stretched out against but a Prophet of the Lords, dried up and withered
presently, so that he could not pull it in again unto him, 1 Reg. 13.4.
whereas behold a greater then a Prophet is here (yea, one that is King, Priest,
and Prophet too, all in his own person) that is stricken with the fist, and
yet strikes not again, nor makes any other the least resistance. Consider
also how God smites Vzzah with present death for but lifting up his hand to
uphold and stay the Arc, being not thereunto lawfully called, 2 Samuel 6.7. How
many deaths then is this man worthy of that presumes thus to lift up his hand
against the Lord of the Arc himself, and to smite him on the face; as
Zedekiah a false prophet smote Michaiah the true Prophet of the Lord on the
cheek (our blessed Saviors Type no doubt in this) because he did not answer
the King according to his desire, 1 Reg. 22.24.

But, O manus infaelix! says one, This was an unhappy hand indeed that was
thus daring and audacious, as to strike that heavenly face; whom not only the
Cherubims and Seraphims and all the celestial powers above, but every created
nature also besides, strive to worship and adore that divine countenance, Tam
diu in mundo desideratus; so long desired to be beheld and seen in the world
before it came, with so many wishes and prayers, ( O u^inam disrumpat coelos;
Oh that he would break the Heavens and come down, Esaias. 64.1.) and so many
sighs and tears begd at the hands of God by the Patriarchs and Prophets:
yea, the very joy of Angels, which they had long expected to look upon, and
rejoiced with joy unspeakeable when they were once made so happy, as to behold
and see it indeed. That face, of which Moses spoke when he said unto God: If I
have now found favor in thy sight, Ostende mihi faciem, as the vulgar Latin
reads it, O Lord show me thy face, Exodus 33.13. and David likewise, when he
said, Ostende faciem tuam and salvi erimus, Cause thy face to shine upon us, O
Lord, and we shall be saved. Psalm. 80.3. This, this is the very same face, I
say, which these profane rabble do so foulely abuse, and seek to disgrace by
striking it in this scornful and contemptuous manner; yea, spitting upon it
and blindefolding of it too; as you shall hear hereafter. In which, that of
the Prophet is wholly fulfilled, which you heard but in part before, when he
said in the person of this our blessed Savior; I gave my back unto the
smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers: and I hid not my face from shame and
spitting, Esaias 50.6. Answerable also to that which himself foretold unto his
twelve Apostles, saying, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be
fulfilled to the Son of Man, that are written by the Prophets. For he shall
be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and shall be spightfully
entreated, and spit upon, Luke 18.31, 32.

O blessed Jesu! the meekest and the mildest Lamb upon the Earth; Whose heart
is so hard and stony, as not to be ready to burst for grief and melt into
tears, at the consideration of this thy wonderful and unparalleld patience?
whereby thou so quietly suffer that most beautiful and glorious face of
thine (For in es speciosus prae filiis hominum, fayrer then the children of
men, says the Psalmist of thee, Psalm. 45.2.) to be thus shamefully handled,
and ignominiously stricken and spitted upon, by base and ignoble persons,
servile and inferior fellows. I nunc homo superbe and impatiens, qui subito
c^mmoveris, says one; Go now thou proud and impatient man, that art so
suddenly moved at the least indignity and affront that is offered thee, and
can not brook nor bear a distastefull word, nor put up the least and
smallest offense without thy wrath and fury from thy friend or neighbor.
Inspice hoc vivum patientiae exemplum; Look upon this lively and lovely
picture and pattern of patience, and learn of him to be meek and lowly in
heart, that so thou may find rest unto thy soul, as himself exhorts
thee, Matthew. 11.29. Consider the whole course and passage of his Passion, from
the first to the last, from the beginning to the ending of it, and you shall
find that he was not once Commotus in adversarios, moved or stirred to the
least choler against his adversaries, but showed all mildness and gentleness
toward them that was possible, both in his speech and looks, his words and
works. If ever we mean then to have a share and interest in his sufferings,
let us endeavor so near as it is possible to conform our selves unto them in
meekness, and patience, and gentleness, and lowliness of mind and all
other christian virtues which he has practiced and performed before us. For he
is left unto us, propter exemplaritatem virtutis, for an example of patience,
that we should follow his steps, says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21. And this
suffices for this time.

John. 18.24. Now Annas had sent Him bound unto Caiaphas the High Priest.


Annas idem quod affligens. Boskier con. de Pas.
AFter the injuries and indignities that our blessed Savior suffered at the
hands, and in the house of Annas, whose very name signifies, Afflicting; as a
modern Postiller has well observed. The History of the Gospel goes on, and
tells us; how in the next place he was sent by the said Annas himself, and
carried bound to the catchpoles or officers unto Caiaphas, the present high
Priest for the same year; where the Scribes and Elders were assembled, and a
Council held, which sought for false witnesses against him, to put him to
death: Matthew. 26.57, 59. verses. whereupon one in a compassionate and
sympathizing manner, cries out; Ad Tribunal duceris O Jesu, Osari^^.
cui flectitur omne genu: Thou, O Jesus, at whose gracious name all knees do
bow, as well of things in Heaven and Earth, as under the Earth, as Saint Paul
says: Phil. 20.10. art contented to be made to bend and bow thy self at the
Bar; and before the tribunal of mortal and sinful man: Immo pudendum plane
and indignum, says another; quod Judex decretus vivorum and mortuorum, jam
judicandus trahatur ad sacrilega nequissimorum Judicum subsellia: which is a
shameful and unworthy thing, that he which is decreed by the Parliament, and
Court of Heaven, to be the supreme Judge of quick and dead, as the Scripture
testifies; saying, The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son: John 5.20. should yet be haled and dragged along by the violence
and insolence of a rascal and scurrill multitude; to the corrupt and
sacrilegious Benches and places of torture, rather judicature, of most wicked
and injurious Judges. And yet thus our poor Savior was contented to be
served; to be used and abused for our sakes: yea, he was carried to the high
Priest, Cujus erat de lepra judicare, To whom it belonged to judge and
determine of the leprosy: Deuteronomy. 17.8. Quia reputavimus eum quasi leprosum;
because the wicked do esteem no otherwise of him, then as of one leprous and
smitten of God, as the Prophet foretold, Esaias 53.4. Nay, false witnesses are
also sought, for to come in against him; whereby under the color of Law, they
might the more securely and without danger of uproare and tumult among the
people, seem to have some just cause to take away his life. As Jezabell dealt
with Naboth, so do these painted walls with Christ: Because he would not give
his Vineyard to the oppressor, Set (says she) two men, sons of Beliall,
before him; which may bear witness against him, as if he had blasphemed God
and the King: 3 Kings 21. So because Christ would not give his Fathers honor
unto the Devil, when he bade him fall down and worship him; false witnesses
by his, and his instruments instigation and procuring, are sought for to
slander and accuse him unjustly, laying to his charge things that he did not,
that he knew not, says the Psalmist: Psalm. 35.11. So that the mouth of the
wicked, and of the deceitful are opened against him, speaking against him with
a lying tongue: Psalm. 109.2. compassing him about with words of hatred, and
fighting against him without a cause, as there follows, verse 3. without a
cause indeed. For, though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies
against me; as himself complains by his Prophet, of them and their
ingratitude: Hosea 7.13.

But there was a seeming show and pretext, I must confess, of much sincerity
and uprightness in their proceedings against him. For here is a Council
solemnly called, and met as you see, and that of the greatest and gravest; the
learned and the wisest men amongst them, as of high Priests, Scribes, Elders;
besides the spectators and by standers; before whom it could not be thought, or
once imagined, but that all things should be fairly and uprightly carried, by
such an Assembly: so that as one says, Quis non bona sperasset ab hoc coetu,
and multitudine, and reverentia tam illustri? Who could expect any thing but
good from this so famous and illustrious a convention and meeting, as well in
multitude and populousness, as reverence and show of honesty? Speciosa enim
hic multa; Seeing here were met together so many fair and specious pretexts of
nothing else but sincere and upright dealings, as a congregation and gathering
together of the most renowned and famous men of the City; a certain form of
judicature after an orderly and solemn sort: a production of several
witnesses, and the like. Sed larvata haec omnia, All these are but masked and
dissembling appearances; a vizard only, and no true face of justice: seeing the
text tells us, that for all their fair shows, their intent was foul; even to
put him to death: so that he had his doom before his day of hearing, and his
judgment before his trial. For, Ante coitionem consulta decreta, facta and
fata sunt omnia, says one; All things were determined and decreed concerning
him, before ever they came together; which is a piece of the greatest
injustice, and a knack of the lewdest and vilest knavery, that either the
Devil can invent, or his instruments actuate: when a man shall have his cause
sentenced before it be heard, and himself condemned before he be legally
convict: this is right devilry indeed. And yet this is our Saviors case in
this assembly, witnesses against him are pretended to be sought; but yet they
must be false ones, speaking as the Court and Council would have them; or else
they shall not be heard. For, seeing Truth is to be condemned, it must be done
by falsehood, or not at all: and therefore, all you that are lovers and friends
to Truth, stand by: here is no need of your testimony at this time: Hac curia
non vobis patet; The doors and gates of this Assembly are so far from being
open to you, as that on the contrary, they are shut against you: so that, Exeat
hac aula qui vult esse pius; He that is so godly and strict in his Religion, as
that he cannot be content either to speak, or hear leasings; to equivocate a
little, and stretch his conscience; to pleasure his friends, and confound his
foes: he may, nay he must depart the Court.

It is very fitting, I must needs say, that all public Officers and
Magistrates, for their better advice, direction, and information in all cases,
should have their Assistants and Counselors of State, and public acts be
done in public assemblies: as well for the praise, and honor, and
encouragement of those that do well; as for the open and exemplary punishment
and conviction of those that do offend. In regard whereof it is true which one
says, Consilium est bonum; Counsel is good: (For, Vbi consilium, ibi
prudentia; Where there is Counsel, there is Wisdom, says a wise man indeed:
and where no Counsel is, the people fall; but where there are many Counselors
there is health, says Solomon; Prove. 11.14.) but yet take this withal, as
mine Author adds: Si sit bonorum, if it be of good men, and to good purposes.
For otherwise the meetings and Assemblies, Councels and Conventicles of the
wicked, are dangerous and deadly; because they travel of mischief, and bring
forth ungodliness, says David. Psalm. 7.15. Yea, The Kings of the earth stand
up, and the Rulers take counsel together; but wherefore is it? even to destroy
the Lord, and his anointed: Psalm. 2.2. As likewise it is said of the
Pharis^es, That they went out, and took counsel against Jesus how to destroy
him; Matthew. 12.14. and what they plotted and advised upon then, that they put
in practice now. For in this their public Assembly, in the high Priests house,
they seek for false witnesses to put him to death: So that this surely was no
just and lawful Council, but a rude and disorderly Conventicle of
bloud-seeking, and bloud-sucking Tyrants: like that of Joseph's brethren, when
most unnaturally they conspired against their own innocent and harmless
brother to slay him: Genesis 37.18, 20. verses. And that of the Jews against
Jeremy, when they cried, Come let us devise devices against him, and smite him
with the tongue: Jeremy 18.18. by which means they dig pits for his soul,
as there follows, Verse 20. As Joseph likewise was cast into a pit, Verse 22.
of the former Chapter: both which were types of Christ in this conspiracy,
raised against him by the Jews his kinsmen, according to the flesh, at this
time.

But they were best to take heed that they fall not into the pit themselves at
the last, which they thus dig for others. For, Consilium malum consultoribus
semper pessimum; Evil counsel proves always in the end worst to them that
give it: And therefore, Blessed and happy are those men that walk not in such
counsels of the wicked, says David; Psalm. 1.1. as at which (as one said
pleasantly, and yet properly) the Holy Ghost told him, He was not at leisure to
be present: who absenting himself likewise from this Congregation, and
conventuall meeting of the high Priests, Scribes, and Elders at this time; it
cannot properly be called a Council or lawful Assembly: but struma tantum
Civitatis, as one terms it; An ulcerous bunch only, or swelling raised by
the disorder and distemper of the City: which upon the apprehension and taking
of Christ, was suddenly in a confused manner congregated and gathered together;
the most part neither knowing why, nor wherefore. And thus much be spoken of
this wicked Council and Assembly it self. Now let us proceed to the Acts of
Court, and first to the examination of the prisoner at the Bar.

You have heard already of his being brought from the house of Annas to the
house of Caiaphas the present high Priest, and of the great concourse of all
sorts and degrees of people, to see and hear his examination and arraignment.
Now therefore in the next place, you are to hear and see of what matters and
particulars he was there questioned and examined; which Saint John tells us in
the 19. verse of his former 18. chapter, to be twofold, saying, That the high
Priest then asked Jesus of his Disciples and of his Doctrine, of his Doctrine
principally, as may be supposed; that so they might charge him with Heresy or
foul errors, against the Law of Moses, and Religion established in the Church,
and so have whereof to accuse and censure him in the court spiritu^ll: and
secondarily, of his Disciples; that so they might bring him within the compass
of sedition, as a disturber of the public peace and quiet of the
Commonwealth; and have whereof to condemn him in foro civili, or the court
civil.

The specialties of his examination concerning his Doctrine, might happily be
these, or to the like purpose. As first, who was his Master or Instructor in
his new Doctrine which he had lately broached and preached to the people?
Secondly, why he did seek to innovate and alter their long practiced and
accustomed rites? and in stead thereof, bring in his own new devises, as in
particular; why did he seek to thrust out and extinquish their old and ancient
ceremony of circumcision, with his own newfangled and newfound waters of
Baptism? Thirdly, why he was so cynicall in his life and conversation, and so
free in his declamations against the Pharisees, Scribes, Priests, Elders; yea,
and even Herod himself? and why he alone would seem to be wiser then all the
world besides? And being but three and thirty years of age, why he was so bold
and saucy in such a satyricall manner to bite and whip his seniors? Fourthly,
why he preached in the fields, and in other secret and private places? And
lastly, whether he could teach any thing of which their own learned Rabbis,
the Priests and Scribes and Pharisees before named, were ignorant?

Concerning his disciples, he might likewise be demanded the number of them
first, and why he being a man but of a mean fortune, should take upon him to be
better guarded and attended, then others of greater place and calling? yea, qui
sunt, ubi sunt, and qua mente eos collegerit, as Theophylact says, what they
were, where they were, whence they were, to what use and purpose they were? and
whether it did not savor of sedition and disturbance of the State, to lead
about such a crew of disciples and followers after him, without the approbation
and warrant of authority? As also in the second place, concerning their
strowing him in the streets; why with such pomp, but four days before he
entered into the City; the people spreading their garmentss and cutting down
branches in his way; and his own Disciples putting their own clothes upon
the beast he rode on, and attending on foot in great state behind him?
thirdly, what was become of them, since the time of his taking and
apprehension? and whether it were not a token of their guiltiness of some
disorderous and riotous practices, that they should thus fly away from him, and
leave him in his distress? Lastly, he might be urged to bewray where they
were, out of a pretense of danger to the commonwealth, so long as they lay
skulking up and down the City, hiding themselves in secret corners; and
therefore it was very fitting they should be roused from their starting holes,
and brought together with himself their master, to public punishment for
their disorders, that so at the last, the State might be freed from fear of
further danger by these means.

So that, Late quaesitum ac quaestum reor, says mine author, we may easily
conceive him to be thoroughly sifted and examined to the full, of all such
circumstances, whether concerning his Disciples or his Doctrine, as might in
any the least degree advance and help forward his condemnation. Sicut, Horat.
de art. Po^t.
Reges dicuntur multis urgere cucullis,
Et torquere mero, quem perspexisse laborant
An sit amicitia dignus, etc.
As Kings are said by many cups to try a man, whether he be worthy of their
friendship or not: so the high Priest, by many quirkes to try Christ, whether
on the contrary he might not deservedly be found to be the subject of their
hatred, and object of their despite or not. Neither was Synon more strictly
questioned by Priamus concerning the Trojane horse: Virg. Ae^. ^. 2.
Mihique haec edissere vera roganti,
Quo molem hanc immanis equi statuere? quis author?
Quidve petunt? quae Relligio? aut quae machina belli?
then Christ by Caiaphas, of his Religion, Doctrine, Disciples; their practices
and pretexts, and lastly their course of life, that so by their questioning him
in many things, they might trip him in something to his destruction and
confusion: as the Pharisees in the former time of his life, are said to
question with him, only to tempt him, and trap him in his speech.

But, Frustra jacitur rete ante oculos pennatorum, says Solomon: In vain is
the net spread before the eyes of all that has wings: Prove. 1.17. Oculos ad
praevidendum, pennas ad praecavendum; Eyes to foresee the danger, and wings,
that is ways to prevent the danger. For Christ was so wary in his answer, that
they could take no just hold or advantage against him to his prejudice, till
himself was willing to afford it: and then it was rather Scandalum acceptum,
then datum too; An offense not given by him, but taken by them. As they were
still ready to snatch at all oportunities that might but seem to give a color
to his condemnation before the people.

But though many false witnesses came in to testify against him, yet found
they none, says Saint Matthew: Chap. 26.60. because indeed their witnesses did
not agree together, says Saint Mark; Chap. 14.56. So that, Quotiescunque
interrogando tentarunt, ut invenirent unde accusarent cum; sic eis respondit,
ut omnes eorum retunderentur doli, and calumniae frustrarentur, says Saint
Austin: Tract. 113. in c. 8. Ioh.
How often soever they tempted him by questioning, that so they might find
whereof to accuse him; his answers were still such, as that thereby their
calumnies were frustrated, and their crafty devises retorted, and returned
empty into their own bosoms. For, says he; Quid me interrogas? interroga eos
qui audierunt, etc. So that, for answer to the present question concerning his
Doctrine, he appealed to the testimony of his very enemies themselves; saying,
I spoke openly to the World, teaching in the Synagogue, and in the Temple,
whither the Jews always resort; so that in secret I have said nothing: Why
ask thou me? Ask them which heard me what I have said unto them; behold
they know what I said: John 18.20, 21. And to that other question concerning
his Disciples, he was silent; answering nothing that we read of in the
Scriptures at all: of which there might be many useful reasons given, but that
I find no leisure at this time, for farther excursions then needs must; having
such abundant matter more pertinent to our present purpose of Christ's suff^ring
under Pontius Pilate, to insist upon: only let me add this one note and
observation more, out of S. Austin, by the way; Vbi Jesus non respondebat, ibi
sicut ovis silebat: Where Christ did not vouchsafe an answer, (as at this time
and some others of his arraignment and trial, he did not;) there he is to be
taken for the Lamb, spoken of by the Prophet Esaias; which being brought to the
slaughter, yet he opened not his mouth; and for the sheep, which before the
shearer is dumb: as Esaias 53.7. Vbi vero respondebat, sicut pastor docebat: But
wheresoever or whenever he did make answer, there he is to be taken for the
Pastor of his people; giving them instructions how to carry, and answer for
themselves upon the like occasions.

Concerning that therefore which he gave in answer, this may be said; that
perceiving by the drift and scope of the question, that they were desirous to
possess the peoples minds of his being guilty in an high degree of innovation
and sedition: he shapes his answer accordingly, in this manner: (viz.) whereas
thou suspectest me, Seditiosum quendam esse, and in occulto consilia stru^^tem,
as Theophylact; that is, To be a seditious person, and one that plots mischief
against the State in secret; I tell thee, Nihil in occulto locutus sum, I spoke
nothing in secret; that is, nothing in the least manner tending to sedition:
neither, as thou imaginest, do I innovate, or speak any thing of mine own
broaching; Dolosa vel occulia mente, with a reserved or deceitful mind. This
is Theophylacts exposition of this answer. And he gives his reason too, why he
understands it so; Quia nisi sic intellexerimus, quod ad suspitionem Pontificis
haec dixerit, videbitur mentiri: nam multa dixit in occulto, etc. because if it
be otherwise understood, he may seem to have spoken falsely: in regard he spoke
many things to his Disciples. And for that other part of the answer, Why ask
thou me? ask them which heard me; Non pertinacis, sed fidentis in dictorum
veritate, says he; The words are not to be taken as of one obstinate in his
opinion, or stubborn in his own will and way: but as of one that was
confident in the truth of what he spoke, and therefore he said, Ask these mine
enemies; these treacherous Ministers of thine, which have apprehended and bound
me, and brought me hither: They are present in the face of the Court, therefore
let them speak, if they know any thing that may tend to these abuses or
disorders by me. Then which there can be no more undoubted demonstration of the
innocence of any man, then when he is ready to appeal to his very enemies for
testimony of the truth of that whereof he stands accused. Hom. 8^. ^n c. 18.
Ioh.
Thus far Theophylact. And Saint Chrysostom to the same purpose: Id
veritatis maximum est argumentum, quum quis inimicos in testimonium adducit; It
is the greatest argument of verity, to be contented to put the trial of a man's
cause to the testimony of enmity. And therefore says Christ, Why do you ask
me? Ask them; for behold they also know what I said: which is as much as if he
should say thus, It is but a folly for me to make answer to your demands: For
you will not believe me, though I should speak never so much, or so often the
truth unto you: I am content therefore that you should ask these that are of
more credit amongst you. For mine own testimony is of no validity, seeing you
have disabled it so far, as to account no otherwise of me, then as of a
thief or robber: and therefore have brought me bound unto your Bench and Bar
of pretended justice, that so I may be punished accordingly. So that, Cui
detraxistis famam, detraxistis etiam fidem; Seeing you have taken away my fame,
you have detracted also from my faith. (A trick not altogether a stranger to
these times, to accuse the innocent, thereby only to discredit and disable
their testimony.) Nam quae sit fiducia capto? says the Poet: There is no trust
to be given to a captive: but you will be ready to suppose, Dum miserum fortuna
Synonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget. Virg. (...) 1. lib. 2.

Since my fate has made me wretched and miserable; it will not leave me till
it have made me wicked also, and a liar like your selves: and therefore ask
not me, but ask these mine enemies; for they all know what I said.

But how fair, and true, and just, and reasonable soever this answer of
Christ; (as also that other concerning his being the Son of God, related by the
rest of the Evangelists:) may seem to us and all others that are his friends:
yet they are not so unto these his malicious adversaries, but at these two
answers offense is taken even at all hands: Scandalum acceptum, (as I said
before) though not datum, which occasioned a world of injuries and indignities
presently to be put upon him in the high Priests Hall and House: yea, and in
his very presence too. For some began to spit upon him, and to cover his face,
and to buffet him; and to say unto him, Prophecy unto us who it was that smote
thee. And the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands, and such
like; Mark 14.65. and John 18.22. And Saint Luke adds, That many other things
they spoke blasphemously against him: Luke 22.65. So that here you see then
several and sundry Acts, not only of force and violence, but also of contempt
and disgrace; shamefully and undeservedly put upon our blessed Savior: As
spitting upon him, blind-folding him, striking him with their hands and fists;
and lastly, jearing and flouting him, by saying, Prophecy unto us who it was
that smote thee. Of the stroke with the palm of the hand, or box on the
ear, I have spoken at large already. I will add a few words more concerning
these other indignities, and then I will proceed to their carrying and leading
of him away to Pilate; and his turning over to the sword of justice, and
temporal officers hands.

And first of their spitting in his face; which to do, was accounted a matter
of great infamy and reproach among the Jews; as is plain and evidently that
place in the book of Numbers, where God speaks unto Moses, concerning his
sister Miriam, saying; If her father had but spit in her face, should she not
be ashamed seven days? Numb. 12.14. And again, The woman is allowed to spit
in the face of that man as in his disgrace and infamy, that will not raise up
seed by her unto his brother: Deuteronomy. 25.9. And even among our selves in these
days, we account it among the worst of injuries and affronts to be so served.
And yet our Savior ye see suffers it for our sakes; answerable to that in the
Prophet, when he speaks, as in his person, saying, I hid not my face from
shame and spitting, Esaias 50.6. and Job likewise; They abhor me, they flee
far from me; and spare not to spit in my face: Job 30.10. O let us behold
then with horror and dread that divine countenance, which is so much honored
and adored in Heaven; and the very aspect whereof cheeres the whole City of
God; how for our sins it is defiled and become deformed here on Earth, by the
contempt and scorn of sordid and shameless miscreants: yea, so far abased
and abused, as that no place is thought so fit and convenient to void their
excrements in, and to receive their filthy drivell, as the face of the Savior
and Redeemer of mankind.

And when they have fulfilled their malicious minds in thus spitting their
fill upon them, then secondly they blindfold him; Vt audacius and
inverecundius eum percutiant, says one; that so they may the more boldly, and
without shame, smite him with their fists: or as I should rather think with
another, They did it, lest the admirable form and beauty of his countenance,
being too long vexed and beheld amongst them; should so far at the last,
mollify and lenifie the hard hearts of all beholders, as that they should be
moved to mercy, and drawn to take pity, and have compassion upon him; even
whether they would or no. To prevent which inconvenience, (as they accounted
it) Faciem illam illectricem obnupsere; They vayled and hood-wink't as it were,
that alluring and heart-winning countenance: As knowing the power of's beauty
to be such,
To draw even iron like load-stones with the touch:
because, Speciosus praefiliis hominum; He is fairer then the children of men:
as you heard before out of Psalm. 45.2.

Thirdly, some think they might do it out of horror and shame to behold in
what a pitiful plight they had made him themselves with their beastly spawling
and spitting in his face; as loathing and disliking any longer to look upon
him; by reason, nauseam etiam ipsis spectatoribus foeditas illa provocabat: his
foulness and filthiness was such, as that it made them ready to sp^^ to see
it. But, sive velarit horror, sive splendour, c^udelitatem certe velantium,
velum hoc non velat, sed revelat, says one, whether it were his horror or his
splendour that occasioned this veil over his face; it is most evident, that it
does not veil nor cover their cruelty toward him, but rather reveal it and
make it manifest to the eyes of all the world.

Neither did they only spit on his face and blindfold it, but buffet and beat
it too; which is their third indignity; wher^by they made it swell and become
full of bunches all over; as one says, Colaphis illi tuber totum caput, facies
livida, forte and excussi dentes, by these blows of their fists, his whole
head was swollen, his face become black and blew, and his teeth ready to fall
out of his jaws. For there may be supposed to be this difference between
Alapas and Colaphos* that one is given, a palma aut vola manus, with the hand
open: and the other, a pugno clauso, with the fist shut; whereby the stroke is
the greater, and the more offensive; yea, many times astonishing to him that
feels it. Now the box on the ear spoken of before, was after the first sort:
and the buffeting of him and beating here was of the latter. Whereby they made
him as it may be imagined, to reele and stagger again with the violence of
their strokes; and his eyes, as it were to startle in his head, and to bleed
even through mouth and nose.

And then in the fourth and last place, they scoff and scorn him saying,
Prophecy or areade unto us, who it was that smote thee: yea, and many other
things they spoke blasphemously against him; as you heard before out of Saint
Luke cap. 22. which of all other his injuries and indignities may well be
accounted none of the least. Nay, some there are, that fear not to affirm,
that, Christi illusio ac subsannatio, omnium acerborum prope acerbissima; etsi
fortiter ab illo lata: This kind of taunting and piercing of him, howsoever he
bore it patiently and manfully, as all the rest of his afflictions; yet it may
reckoned among the greatest and bitterest passages of his passion, because as
the Poet says, Nil habet infoelix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
There is nothing more miserable, even to the greatest misery, then to see it
self become the scorn and laughing-stocke of others: especially of enemies.
Boni namque viri atque prudentes, multo indignius contumelias, and aliorum
contemptum, quum corporis dolores ferunt, says another; All good and wise men
do take more grievously and haynously the contumelies and contempts of their
adversaries, then the sufferings and afflictions of their bodies: Quod illis
quidem vita, his autem honor and existimatio petatur; because life only can be
taken away by the one; but honor and estimation, yea, good name also by the
other.

And thus you have briefly heard and seen Christ's sufferings in the high
Priests Hall, and House; where first, innocence has been arraigned at the
Bar, truth accused, and righteousness condemned: when as all this while
injury and injustice has sat upon the Bench. And secondly, you have seen how
like mad Dogs, felly and fiercely hi^ enemies have assaulted and insulted on
him: some casting on his face the skowring of their filthy mouths; and others
striving who might strike him first, and abuse him most: and how with a wanton
and merry malice, aggravating injury with scorn; they have covered his eyes;
and bid him aread who it was that smote him: yea, so great pleasure have they
taken in this kind, as well of tormenting his body, as of vexing his soul;
that they would not suffer him to take any rest: but, as one says well; They
used this despite for their disport, Dr. Heywood. Sanctuary of a troubled
soul. Vir. Aen. 2.
to pass away the dullness of that dismal night; dismal indeed. For as the
Poet, Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet, aut possit lachrymis aequare dolorem?


No tears are able to set forth, nor tongue to tell

The mischiefs of that night, wrought by the power of hell. But Saint
Chrysostom here demaundss why they did these things unto him, seeing they were
resolved to kill him; what need was there thus to shame him, when as so
suddenly they meant to slay him? and makes answer himself, That in all this
they do but bewray their own cruelty; who like huntsmen that have found the
Fox, or Wolf, or other noxious beast they sought for, are so transported with
violence and fury against it, as if they were even mad for joy; making great
triumph: and with unwonted insolence, and contentment to their minds,
insulting, and even trampling upon their prey; as the Philistims made Sampson
their may game and recreation for their pleasure, after they had put out his
eyes: Judge. 16. But whatsoever scornful or malicious reasons they propounded
to themselves in doing it, our most blessed Redeemer had most merciful reasons
toward us in suffering it. For, In Christum nihil valuisset, nisi quod ipse
voluisset, says Saint Austin; They could have done none of these things unto
him, Tract. 112 in Io^^^
unless his own will h^d been consenting thereunto. And therefore that he
might satisfy for the pride of man, that was the original of all evil unto
us in our first Fathers fall, and the root and foundation of all other
wickedness in our selves, his posterity till this day; he would descend to the
very lowest step of humility and dejection; yea, baseness and infamy, that
so he might search the very bottom of our wound; and by that means his
medicine and application prove plentifully and sufficiently effectual to cure
the desperateness of our malady and disease. Yea, he went so low in this
kind, that if we do but compare his corporal afflictions with these of his
contempt and scorn, we may worthily make question and doubt, what was the
thing which was most wonderful and terrible in his whole Passion: An dolorum
acerbitas qua corpus ejus laniatum est; an contumeliarum and irrifionum
indignitas, quibus etiam anima sauciata est: Whether the bitterness of his
tortures and torments, whereby his body was rent and torn; or the indignity of
his contumelies and reproaches, wherewith his soul also was sore wounded and
afflicted. For in this latter, as well as in the former, (yea, much more in
this then that) Longissimo intervallo omnes Martyrs superavit; He went beyond
all the Martyrs in many degrees. For they knew that the more and greater were
their sufferings for the name and faith of Christ, the more and greater also
should be their glory and honor among those of their own, the Christian
profession: which to very Heathens and natural men is a kind of encouragement
sometimes to bear their pains the more patiently and cheerfully; and
therefore much more to Christians: considering that Gods glory is increased by
their afflictions, as well as their own. When as at the time of Christ's
suffering, there was nothing to be imagined more ignominious and opprobrious,
then what he endured: Tam apud suos quam exteros, as well amongst his own
friends and followers, as strangers and those that were without; whether Jews
or Gentiles: so that he might justly complain, as in the Prophet; Torcular
calcavi solus, I have trodden the wine press alone; and of all the people
there was none with me: Esaias 63.3. But I was a reproach, not only among mine
enemies, but especially also among my neighbors; so that fear came among ^ine
acquaintance: and they that did see me without, conveyed themselves from me,
etc. Psalm. 31.11, 12. O let us contemplate and admire then (that so our
thankfulness may be increased, and our pride abated) the infiniteness and
immensity of the love of Christ unto us: that being the wisdom of his
heavenly father, would yet thus become the foolishness, and scorn, and
ignominy, and contempt of the world for our sakes and sins. Taking upon him,
I say, our foolishness, that so he might make us wise unto salvation; our
scorn and contempt, that so he might make us partakers of his glory: as also
our curse, that so he might make us heirs of the eternal blessing and
inheritance with the Saints of light. Yea, he would have his hands bound, and
his eyes blinded, that he might neither take notice of, nor see our sins: no,
nor yet inflict vengeance upon us for the same; but with great mercy, and
patience, connive and wink at them: expecting our repentance, and return from
them; beholding and punishing only in himself those great offenses which we
have perpetrated and committed: O inaudita bonitas! O vere paterna viscera! O
unheard of kindness, and truly paternall bowels of pity and compassion! who
ever heard before of any one that would be content to be made a scorn, to save
them from scorn that scorned him; or to be derided and flowted, to keep them
from contemptand shame that jeat'd him: or that would dye, to save those alive
that killed him? Surely, as there can be no more horrible and heinous offense
imagined, then for reasonable creatures to proceed so far in irrationality
and impiety, as to lay violent and brutish hands upon their Creator and their
God; as these Jews upon Christ: so on the other side, nothing can be conceived
to be so excellent and eminent, as the goodness and charity of that Creator,
which is contented to bear the punishments, and scorns, and scoffs of those
his creatures, by whom he is so assailed and assaulted, vilifyed and abused; as
our Savior Christ of these Jews.

Let us then for use and application of this point, be ashamed to be proud of
any thing which we either have or do; whether it be wealth, or wit; learning,
or living; greatness, or goodness: seeing the Son of God, and glory of
Heaven, did not disdain to become thus humbled for us, and for our sakes. And
let us beseech his infinite goodness and mercy, that although he have
permitted and suffered himself to be brought to such a low degree of
humiliation; as to have his divine and heavenly face to be thus sullyed and
soyled, by the foul and filthy, impure and unclean spawling and spitting of
the Jews: and his holy eyes to be vayled, and himself to be derided and
scorned in such a contemptuous and disgraceful manner, that yet he would be
pleas^d to pr^serve us from being accessaries to these their fearful evils,
by giving unto us such a measure of his s^ving and sanctifying graces, as
whereby our souls made after his own image and likeness, may be kept so pure
and clean from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, as that they may not
be contamined or defiled with any the least foul or sinful, either thoughts,
words, or works. And that he would also vouchsafe farther, to remove and put
away from our hard hearts, that veil of ignorance and ingratitude; wherewith
by reason of our sins and transgressions, they have deservedly a long time
been vayled and covered; that so from henceforth we may carefully endeavor our
selves to serve him with all love and diligence in righteousness and true
holiness all the days of our lives.

For they first spit and spawle in the face of Christ, which defile his image
and similitude in their own souls, with impure and unclean lusts and
desires. As also they do the like secondly, That reject and set light by his
holy and heavenly motions and inspirations, pr^senting themselves oftentimes to
assist and help them in the purging and purifying of their said souls from
such uncleanness. And they likewise in the third place, which with unhallowed
hearts and hands do offer to receive the most holy and sanctified body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament: Coming thereunto without reverence or sense
of piety and true godliness, before they have thoroughly cleansed their souls
from the sullage and filth of their sins by hearty sorrow and unfeined
repentance for the same.

Secondly, They veil and cover the eyes of Christ, that do not readily and
willingly lay open their sins before him by confession; but extenuate and
lessen their weaknesses and imperfections with counterfeit pretexts, and vain
and idle excuses: as if they could dissemble and cloak them before the face of
Almighty God our heavenly Father. As also they that are so audacious and daring
in their sins, as to commit them with an high hand, without either fear of
God, or shame of men, ac si non videret Deus, as if God either could not, or
would not, or did not see them.

Thirdly, They speak slanderously and scandalously of Christ, which speak
irreverently of holy things, or when professing to be religious, yet they
speak like worldlings, without either edification or profit to such as hear
them.

And lastly, they mock and scoff at Christ with scorn, and contemn his
messengers and Ministers; or indeed any other his poor Saints and Servants
whatsoever. For he that despises you, despises me, says he himself; Luke
10.16. And therefore for conclusion, let us pray, From these and such like
fearful sins, as were thus committed by these wicked Jews, against our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

John 18.28, 29, 30. Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the Hall of
judgment, or Pilates House; and it was early. And they themselves went not
into the judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat
the Passover.

Pilate therefore went out unto him, and said, What accusation bring you
against this man?

They answered and said unto him; If he were not a malefactor, we would not
have delivered him unto thee.


WHat passed upon our blessed Savior in the house of Caiaphas, and
Ecclesiastical Conventicle rather then Council of the Jews; you heard the
last day. So that now in the next place we are to see how he was handled before
Pilate, and the Temporal Judges: unto whose Court and custody he was delivered
and turned over after they had wrought their will, and fill of mischief upon
him among themselves: where first, we shall not do amiss to observe, the
fulfilling of Christ's own prophecy, and foretelling of this very passage
himself. For in the 18. of Saint Lukes Gospel, 31, 32. verses, we find him
thus saying unto his Disciples, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things
shall be fulfilled to the Son of man, that are written by the Prophets; For
he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, etc.

Which prophecy, I say, is now accomplished, in his being turned over from
Caiaphas the high Priest of the Jewish Synagogue; unto Pontius Pilate the Roman
Deputy, or President: who was not only a Gentile himself, but his
jurisdiction also was from the Gentiles, as the Romans and all Nations (except
the Jews) were accounted in those days. And this was pre-ordained by the
fore-determined Counsel of God to be done accordingly, for these two ends or
reasons. The first, that he might be put to death: which by the Jews Law,
(as they will seem to affirm) he could not. For themselves tell Pilate, in
the very next words after our Text; That it is not lawful for them to put any
man to death: Verse 31. The second, for the manner of his death; that he might
be crucified. For so is it farther specified in the 32. verse: (viz) That it
was done, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying what death he should dye: which is expressed to be crucifying,
Matthew. 20.9. To which place this passage in Saint John does allude.

Now the fulfilling of this prophecy of Christ's own self concerning
himself, shall afford us only this Use at this time; because as I told you at
the beginning, I must point and pass; my discourse upon this subject
increasing to a bigger bulk then I aimed at, or intended at the first: To let
us see and know, That there was not the least circumstance of his passion,
which he did not foresee, and foretell himself; so that none of these
things came unwittingly or unwillingly upon him, or by chance, as upon a mere
man: but all by the fore-determined Counsel of God, as I say, and his own
consent. And therefore having so much foreknowledge of his own afflictions,
he might have avoided and shunned them many ways, if he would: but to let us
understand the greatness of his love unto us; he would not refuse any torture
or any trouble to do us good: but willingly and readily perform all things
requisite for our salvation; giving his soul as an offering for our sins, as
the Prophet foretold: Esaias 53.10. So that without any tergiversation, or
regret, he suffered himself freely to be presented before Pontius Pilate, and
the judgment seat of the Gentiles, although he knew that he went but to his
own death and condemnation; as Pilate told him; That he had power to crucify
him or to loose him: John 19.10. unto whom notwithstanding Christ gave this
answer: (viz.) That he could have had no power against him, except it had
been given him from above: Verse 11. of the same Chapter; that is, from the
Court and Council of Heaven; of which himself was a principal member.

Secondly, we may consider also a little of the season, which they took to
carry Christ unto Pilate in; which is expressed to be the morning: or as our
text says, while it was early. So that, as it should seem, when the fatal
night was once over, they neglected no time; but made haste to shed his
innocent blood, and to deliver him over unto the sword, not of justice, but
injustice, as it is evident and apparent enough to all the world; even to the
very Judges themselves, as will be shown hereafter. David in one place says,
That howsoever heaviness or sorrow may endure for a night; yet joy comes in
the morning: (viz.) Psalm. 30.5. when as our blessed Savior here can find none
of this joy, neither morning nor evening; but after a dismal night, as you
heard before, meets with as dark a day: where we may observe, that Christ our
Lord suffered some injuries and indignities or others for our sakes, at all
times and hours, both of night and day. First, from the evening (which was the
time of his appprehension) till the morning, as you have heard already; and now
again from the very morning till the evening, as here follows: Tota nocte
vexatus, and tota die sine intermissione cruciatus, says one; Vexed all the
night, and tortured all the day without ceasing or intermission. For at the
first hour he is carried to the Judge, and before him accused; at the second,
examined; at the third, condemned; at the fourth, he was scourged and crowned
with Thorns; at the fifth, he had the heavy burden of his own Cross laid
upon his shoulders; at the sixth, he was crucified; at the seventh, the
Soldiers cast lots upon his garment; at the eighth, he had Vinegar given him
to drink; at the ninth, he dyed; at the tenth, he had a spear thrust through
his side, whereout came water and blood: and at the evening, or toward the
latter end of the day, he was buried.

O sweet Jesus, there was some great cause surely why thou would at every
new hour, thus suffer new punishments and afflictions for our sins: and it
can be no other but this, because we do every day of the year, and every
hour of the day; yea every minute and moment of every hour of each several
night and day, provoke thy heavenly father to wrath in one kind or other; by
new transgressions and delinquencies. And therefore that thou might satisfy
and appease the said wrath of his, as well for the circumstances as the
substance of our sins, thou would be punished for them at all times, as well
at morning and evening, as at noone day. It is but meet and right then, that as
thou sufferedst continually from one end of the day unto the other: so on the
other side, that we should pray continually, as the Apostle exhorts; and
sing praises unto thee, both night and day without ceasing, for so great a
benefit.

Thirdly, let us observe, that though these Jews sent Christ unto the
judgment Hall of Pilate, yet they went not in themselves: Their reason being
this, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the Passover, as
our text says: Because, as it should seem, it was accounted an unlawful and
an unholy thing for a Jew at the time of that high and solemn Feast, to enter
into the houses or societies of any of the Gentiles: which were esteemed no
otherwise then as unclean among them. But hereupon Saint Austin cries out, O
Impia and stulta caecitas! Tract. 114. in Johan.
habitaculo videlicet contaminarentur alieno, and non contaminarentur scelero
proprio: O impious and foolish blindness, to think that they could be more
defiled by the habitation and external society of strangers, then by their
own proper and internal sins. Alienigenae Judicis praetorio contaminari
timebant, and fratris innocentis sanguinem fundere non timebant: They were
afraid to be contaminated by the judgment Hall of the Roman President; yet
feared not to shed the blood of their own innocent and undefiled brother:
which is the right property of all hypocrites, to strain at a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel; to think it a more heinous thing, Pulicem quam hominem
occidere, as Calvin speaks; To kill a flea at one time, then a man at
another; To be overcurious and ceremonious, yea, and in very deed
superstitious too about small matters; and yet to let the weightier matters of
the Law alone: as mercy and judgment, and fidelity, and the love of God, and
the like: for which neglect, our Savior himself condemns the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23.23. and Luke 11.43.

But howsoever it be, these Jews that they may seem rightly to eat the
Passover, do pretend to keep themselves pure and clean from all foreign
defilements; Caeterum immunditiem includunt praetorii parietibus; when as yet
they confine this defilement only to the walls of Palats hall or house of
judgment: not doub^ing otherwise in the public face as well of Earth as
Heaven, to deliver the innocent over unto death and damnation. But our Savior
himself tells them, that knew best how to define defilement, That such
murders and evil thoughts and false testimonies and slanders and the like,
which they practice here against him: These are the things which defile the
man, Mat. 15.19.20. Lastly, they do honor the figurative passover with a
deceiveable and fained reverence, when as they offer violence with their bloody
and sacrilegious hands unto the true passover, endeavoring as much as in them
lies, utterly to overthrow him, even with an eternal destruction. But I must
not dwell here.

Pilate therefore in the next place, went out unto them, and said; What
accusation bring you against this man? Where let us observe, That although this
Gentile bore no great affection to that Religion which the Jews at this time
professed, but rather disregarded it; yea, slighted and laughed at it in his
mind: Yet in his first hearing of the cause, he discharges the part of an
upright and just Judge amongst them, in bidding them to show what accusation
they brought against the prisoner, whom with such tumult and clamor they had
brought bound unto him. As if he should say thus: Whereas you Jews have
brought here one of your own Nation to be sentenced to death by me; I tell
you, I cannot, I must not, I will not, I dare not do it, except you can show
me some just and lawful cause why I should. For, si accusassa sufficit, quis
innocens? if to accuse alone were sufficient, who should be innocent? Neither
is it the manner of the Romans to put any man to death, unless he be first
convicted and found guilty of some grievous and heinous, yea, capital offense
against their own Laws. For, as for your superstitious ceremonies, of
violating your Sabbaths, eating of Swines flesh, speaking against Moses, the
Prophets, the Temple, or your God, I have nothing to do with them: Ad meum
Tribunal non pertinent, They come not within the compass of my Inquiry. And
therefore bring him not to me, but take him and judge him according to your
own Law, verse 31. of this Chapter. Aurea plane Pilati exordia, says one,
utinam par epilogus, Pilate begins well, and it were well for him, if his end
were answerable.

But they for reply and answer hereunto, cry out and say, If he were not a
malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee; as if they were angry
with Pilate, because he would not rest satisfied with their examination and
trial of him, without any more ado: as if he were bound to stand to their
prejudicate and unjust sentence, and so become an instrument only of their
malice; to execute whomsoever, and whatsoever, they, with the consent of their
arrogant and malicious high Priests, should determine and decree. Where we may
behold (as Calvin observes) the insolency of those men, that without the fear
of God, are lifted up to great dignities, and high places of honor in the
world; be they Ecclesiastical or Civil, whether in Church or Commonwealth:
who being blinded with the splendour of their power and eminency, think it
lawful for them to perpetrate and commit any injustice or iniquity whatsoever,
without control. As these take it as a check to their pride and greatness,
that Christ is not by Pilate accounted a malefactor, only because they accuse
him: If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee.
But O ungrateful and unhappy Jews! let us hear some relation from you, of
the evils which this your Messiah has done; and the injuries and violences
which he has offered unto you: for which you thus call and count him a
malefactor, and think him worthy of death. Are they any other, if you rightly
examine them, and your own consciences, then preaching the words of life unto
you? then healing all manner of your diseases, by restoring sight to the
blind, hearing to the deaf, speaking to the dumb, going to the lame, and
life to the dead? Ask them that have received these great blessings and
benefits from him; an also those other, that were possessed with Devils, and
infected with leprosies; The one cleansed, and the other set at liberty by him:
Inquire of these I say, whether Jesus be a malefactor or not? and you shall
hear them all make answer with one voice, and unanimous consent, in the words
of him that was borne blind: If this man were not of God, he could do
nothing; John 9.33. So that as a modern Poet has well observed, If either of
these could but any grace have won,
What would they not to save his life have done? G. Fl^t^ner. Poem, called
Christ's Triumph.

The dumb man would have spoke, and lame man would have run.


And yet you say, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him
unto thee.

But we that are Christians, and profess to believe in him, that is here
accused for a malefactor by these Jews, may make better use of this their
slander and false accusation brought against him* if we do but seriously
meditate and consider with our selves, how truly in this he took the form of a
malefactor upon him: whereby, he that knew no sin, became sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, as Saint Paul
speaks; 2 Cor. 5. ult. like smooth and innocent Jacob, presenting himself
before his heavenly father, in the rough and rugged habit of his sinful
brethren; and the hairy skins and coats of reprobated and rejected Esau, that
so for a time he might steal away the blessing from our elder brethren, these
wicked and accursed Jews, and confer it upon us Gentiles, that are but
younglings in Gods favors, in respect of them: As also for ever entayle it
upon his own heirs by faith, whether of Jews or Gentiles, from the elder
brethren to us both; the lapsed and fallen Angels: which because he knew, could
never be thoroughly accomplished and effected by any other means, then by
taking unto him, and putting upon himself this sinful garment of ours:
Therefore he would never make any defense or excuse for himself, how often
and before how many several Judges soever he were accused; as professing to be
desirous and most willing, if not found, yet at least to be accounted guilty;
that so, though not such in his own person, yet in ours he might suffer death
and torments as a delinquent, to free us from them that have deserved them; and
to whom they are truly and indeed due, and do properly belong.

Which if it be so, why then surely we can never sufficiently magnify and
extol this his great goodness, and inutterable love and charity toward us;
thus to cloathe himself with the rags of our wickedness, that so he might
invest and adorn us with the robes of his own righteousness: to expose
themselves to the danger of the Laws curse, to make us heirs of the eternal
and everlasting blessing: insomuch as he cries out unto his heavenly father in
the Prophet, Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me
with all thy storms: Psalm. 88.7. because indeed the just wrath of his eternal
father, and other punishments due only to us for our sins; he would they
should be laid upon his own shoulders: and therefore is he silent and stands
mute before the Judge, when they cry out against him; If he were not a
malefactor, we would not have delivered, etc. And they to make their accusation
good, and that so withal they might be sure (as they think) to leave some
aspersion upon him, (having learned one of the Devils lessons; Calumniare
fortiter and aliquid haerebit; To calumniate strongly, that so, if not all that
is said, yet something at the least may stick fast, and remain behind)
therefore they lay to his charge, and pretend to accuse him of a threefold
crime or transgression, saying; First, that he went about to pervert the
people; yea, subvert and overthrow their Nation. Secondly, that he denied to
give tribute unto Caesar. And lastly, that he made himself a King: as it is
to be seen, Luke 23.2. Sic tria excogitantes quemadmodum facerent crimina, ubi
nullum invenerant; as it is said of Gn. Piso in Seneca; seeking how to make
three faults there, where indeed they found not one. But all this does but the
more proclaim them to be the true children of their father the Devil, as
Christ himself called them; John 8.44. For he was a liar from the beginning;
and so will continue to be the father of lies unto the end.

For, for the first, Christ was so far from stirring up seditions, or raising
tumults and dissentions among the people; as that on the other side, he strived
and endeavored what he might, to congregate and gather them together in one;
even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, as he professes
himself* Matthew. 23.37. Secondly, instead of denying Tribute unto Caesar, he
paid it in his own particular; when he bade Peter to take twenty pence out of
the Fishes mouth, and give it for them two: Matthew. 17.27. as also he preached
it to the people saying, Give unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's; Luke
20.25. And lastly, he was so far from seeking to un-king Herod, or
dis-throne Caesar; as that he professes his Kingdom not to be of this world:
John 18.36. And therefore as Seduliu^ well sings, Hostis Herodes impie
Christum venire quid times?
Non eripit mortalia,
Qui regna dat coelestia. That is,


O thou wicked Herod, and enemy to all goodness! Why fear thou the birth of
the Messiah? who although he give Kingdoms that are eternal; yet will take
away none that are temporal: But seeing he found them settled, and established
at his coming; will only add this new honor and blessing unto them: Vt
etiam Ecclesiae Dei fi^nt, That they may become so many Churches of God: but
for any of their former Rites, Privileges, or prerogatives; Nulla part
imminuere, aut labefactare vult, says mine Author; he will not diminish or
lessen them in the least degree; either by himself, or Ministers: which shows
those Popes who have undertaken to dispose of Princes Diadems, to be no Vicars
of Christ, but of the Devil rather, who offered to give away all their
Kingdoms at a clappe: Matthew. 4.9.

Let us then for Use and application of this point, beseech our merciful
Redeemer; that through that great and unimitable humility, and patience of his;
whereby he (being the Judge of quick and dead) would yet permit himself to
stand in our stead, as guilty, before the Bar and Bench of a corrupt and
unrighteous Judge: and there to hear and bear so many calumnies and false
crimes, as were ob^ected against him by his enemies; without the least reply in
his own justification or defense: he would vouchsafe to grant unto us such a
measure of the same graces of his, as whereby we may be enabled, patiently to
suffer and endure all injuries and opprobries, contumelies, and reproaches
whatsoever, inflicted and raised against us by the men of this world. And that
further he would take away from us that propensity and readiness, whereby we
are all prone and forward to cover our weaknesses and imperfections: yea, our
very foulest sins and transgressions with the figge-leaves of vain and idle
excuses; that so condemning our selves in all things, we may not be condemned
at the day of judgment; but be thought fit to be made partakers of grace in
this life, and glory in the life to come: For he that covers his sins shall
not prosper; but who so confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy: Prove.
28.13. As also yet further, let us herehence learn to be obedient to those
that have the ove^sight over us, be they good or bad, do they right or wrong.

For se^ing the Son of God was so submissive before Pilate; surely it behooves
not any man that challenges an interest in his sufferings to be refractary and
disobedient to his superiors, and lawful deputed Judges; but rather to yield
and give way to his very equals, if not inferiors; since he being God,
submitted himself to the power and ordinance of man.

Secondly, let us hence also learn to be patient; if at any time we receive
ill at their hands of whom we have deserved well: seeing Christ does the like,
not only from these Jews, but also from our selves: who notwithstanding we be
so many ways obliged and bound unto him, yet we do both negligently serve
him, and daily and hourly offend him by our foul transgressions.

Thirdly, when at any time our well doings are ill construed, and our good
intentions ill taken; yet let us therewithal be cont^nt: seeing our Savior,
that is the only Truth of the world, was accounted no other, no better then a
very Impostor and Seducer; a Malefactor and Deceiver: it being indeed a maine
property of all envious and malicious men; Vt, etiam per ornamenta feriant; To
wound and strike those they hate and oppose, even through their ornaments and
best deserts.

Fourthly, let us take heed and beware of falling back from Christ, and the
ways of Christianity and Religion: as repenting of those hours we have spent
in his service; and of those holy and heavenly inspirations we have tasted of
in his Temples: for by our so doing, we do nothing else but accuse him for a
Seducer; as if he had beguiled us with these sweet baytes, thereby to entangle
and ensnare our souls.

And lastly, let us beware of slandering and falsely accusing of our blessed
Savior himself: which every one does, that does it to his neighbor, or
Christian brother: Aut falsi aliquid imponendo, aut malum verum exaggerando,
aut sine causa defectus illius aliis aperiendo; as mine Author speaks: Either
when he slanders him wrongfully and unjustly, or increases and exaggerates his
faults and imperfections beyond the truth; or lastly, when he lays open and
declares his defects and infirmities to others without lawful cause or calling
thereunto. For detraction may be committed three manner of ways, says
another: (viz.) Per falsi mali impositionem; Hugo Car. ^n Ps. 12
aut per very mali ampliationem; aut per very boni diminutionem: that is,
Either when a man speaks of his neighbor some evil which is false; or
inlarges and amplifyes that which is true; or lessens and extenuates that which
in him, and it self is good. Solet enim men's livida, manifesta mala
multiplicius exaggerare, and de suo addere; dubia quasi ad partem deteriorem
invertere; and aperta bona, quia negare non potest, art qualibet offuscare,
says a third: Phil. Gr^v. Canc. Paris.
An envious and malicious man and mind is accustomed to increase and enlarge
his neighbors known and manifest weaknesses; by still adding something
thereunto of his own invention: and for those that are doubtful and
uncertain, whether so or not; to interpret and construe them always in the
worser sense: and such things as are evidently, and plainly good in themselves;
because they cannot be wholly denied, to darken and blemish, by casting some
aspersion or other upon them. Primum est, obloquutionis; Secundum,
derogationis; Tertium, detractionis: The first, which is to scatter and raise
an evil fame upon another, is called obloquy: The second, which is utterly to
take away his good name, is called derogation: And the third, which is only to
lessen or diminish that good opinion, which his neighbors and the world has
of him; it is called detraction.

And thus you see the truth of that which Solomon delivered long since: How
that a man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is like an
hammer, and a sword, and a sharp arrow: Prove. 25.18. which are three
instruments many times of much hurt; as of breaking in pieces, cutting asunder,
penetrating and piercing deep, yea even to the very bowels and inward parts:
so that nothing is more pernicious then a false witness, which wounds a man,
not only in his fortunes and his honor, but often in his life too; as these
Jews did Christ. Yea, lying lips, and a deceitful tongue, as David likewise
says; are as the sharp arrows of the mighty man, and as the coals of
Juniper: Psalm. 120 4. Whereby he shows (as our marginall notes express) that
there is nothing so sharp to pierce, nor so hot to set on fire, as the
slanderous tongue; with which notwithstanding our blessed Savior, as you have
heard, was much afflicted both in his life and death. But as his own glory and
our good is much increased by his patient bearing it; so their sins and
punishments are, and shall be much the greater that did it: as also shall be
all theirs that fall into the like foul transgressions toward their
neighbors. And therefore for conclusion of this circumstance, let me use only
the Wise man's exhortation at this time: Refrain thy tongue from slander, for
there is no word so secret that shall go for naught; and the mouth that
speaks lies, slays the soul: Wisd. 1.11. And thus much of their slandering
of Christ; by saying unto Pilate, If he were not a malefactor, we would not
have delivered him unto thee.

But in the next place, Pilate perceiving by some passages and carriages of the
business, that it was for envy only that the Jews did thus persecute and
prosecute Jesus, and bring him unto him: He therefore endeavors by three
several ways and means, if it be possible; to deliver him out of their
hands, and to save his life: As first, by turning him over to Herod: secondly,
by ballancing him with Barabbas: and lastly, by scourging and crowning him with
Thorns.

And for the first, he took hold of the occasion of his being borne in
Galilee, a part of the jurisdiction belonging to Herod the Tetrarch; to
dismiss him from himself, and to send him unto him, who was also at that time
abiding in Jerusalem: as it is said, Luke 23.7. Now Herod indeed was very
desirous to see him, and had been so of a long season: because of the great
and admirable report and fame which went abroad of him.

Whereupon at the first he was very jocund and joyful of his coming; Non
pietate motus, Not moved thereunto through any piety; but hoping to have seen
him wrought some of his Miracles in his own presence: of which he had heard
so much by others. And to that purpose he questioned with him concerning many
things; as it is said, Verse 8. of the former 23. Chapter of Saint Luke. But
because he inquired but upon vain curiosity (as one says) and with no true
intent or end; Christ answered him nothing: Dr. Heywood. Sanctuary of a
troubled soul. In locum.
answerable to that of Saint James, Ye ask and do not receive, because ye
ask amiss: James 4.3. or rather, as Calvin says; because he was resolved to
be obedient to his fathers ordinance; and to submit himself to drink of that
bitter Cup, the doom of death, with patience and silence; which his said
heavenly Father had tempered and provided for him: and for which purpose
especially he came into the world in the similitude of our sinful flesh, that
he might suffer it, and undergo it in our stead and for our sins:
Therefore, says Calvin, he would not seem to plead his own cause, nor
defend his own innocence in any kind: but sponte obmu^escit, he was resolved
for silence, let his adversaries say or do what they would, because indeed he
knew that we were guilty, whose persons he then sustained, though himself were
not. Vt sic etiam Adami excusationes in peccatis, taciturnitate a bonis possit
diluere, says another, as also that by his silence from good words, he might
wash away and make satisfaction for the vain and idle excuses of Adam, when he
would have cast his sins upon his wife, by saying, Mulier quam dedisti mihi,
the Woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me, and I did eat; Genesis
3.12. Whereupon Herod with all his grave counselors and gallant Courtiers,
when they saw they could get nothing out of him, neither works nor words, De
Passione.
(For as Cyprian says, Nec potuit altitudo potestatum extorquere ad
interrogata responsum; sed Herodis and Pilati contempsit vestigia, i. e. He so
much slighted and disregarded the ways and courses of Pilate and Herod, as
that the height of their power was not able to wrest an answer from him to any
of their demands) therefore they interpreted his silence for simplicity, and
did openly contemn and despise him. And for the plain declaration, not so
much of his innocence, as of his simplicity; they array him with a white
garment, and send him back again to Pilate, that he, who in his life time, had
been taken for a man of evil behavior; as namely, for a glutton, a drinker
of wine, and a companion of sinners, Mat. 12.19. for a blasphemer, Mark 2.7.
for a sorcerer and one that cast out Devils through Beelsebub, Mat. 12.24. for
one possessed with a Devil, John 8.48. and now also toward his death, bound
(as you have heard before) by the Jews as a thief, reproved and stricken in
the house of Annas, as one arrogant and saucy; accused by Caiaphas of
blasphemy, and before Pilate, as a malefactor, a mover and stirrer of sedition;
a seducer, a rebel, and as one that aspired to the kingdom, Luke 23.2. should
now likewise for the close of all, as being the last of infamies that could be
imagined to remain, to be put upon him, be accounted by Herod (the last also
of his unjust Judges) for no other then a very fool, an idiot, or passing
simple man.

But soft Herod; art thou and thy great Courtiers and wise Counselors, well
advised to condemn Christ for a fool, because he is silent? or rather is not
all your wisdoms at a fault in this your so doing? Surely they are, if
Solomon, who was wiser then you all, spoke the truth; For he says, He that
refraineth his lips is wise, and in the multitude of words there wants not
sin: Prove. 10.19. then which I am sure there can be no greater folly. And
again, He that has knowledge spares his words; and even a fool, when he
holds his peace, is counted wise: and he that shuts his lips is esteemed a
man of understanding: Prove. 17.27, 28. By this divine testimony then, who is the
fool now, Herod? either Christ or thou? Thou that spakest many words, and
questionedst about many things, which in time will turn to thy greater
condemnation; or Christ that was silent to the worlds eternal salvation? As
David then seemed a mad man unto Achis, when indeed he was not so; but had
his wits and senses better about him then himself: 1 Samuel 21.14. so Christ
seems a fool to Herod, when as in truth there was never any so truly wise as
he, among those that have been borne of women.

Let us here then a little contemplate and admire the perverse and erroneous
judgment and censure of the world; That, that eternal word of God, and
uncreated wisdom of the Father; which at the first made, and still preserves
this whole universe in which we all live, move, and have our being: yea he, in
whom are hid all the treasuses of wisdom and knowledge, as Saint Paul
speaks, Colos. 2.3. should yet by Herod and his Courtiers, be reckoned,
arrayed, and derided as a fool.

If this be not an unheard of example, as of humility in him, so of
foolishness and madness in them; let the truly wise of the world (if any such
there be) Judge. O sweet Jesus, who, or what has led and directed thee to this
height and degree of folly; as for us that are fools and mad men indeed, to
become willing to be accounted a fool thy self? Surely it can be no other but
the transcendency of thy love unto thy Spouse the Church, that has wrought and
brought this foolishness upon thee; whereby, with thy Kingly Prophet David,
Thou art ready to cry out, I will yet be more vile then thus; I will be base
and low in mine own sight: 2 Samuel 6.22. O let not any man then be proud of his
wisdom, seeing God has chosen foolishness rather, to confound the wise: but
by all means possible decline and avoyde humane and worldly honor and
estimation: Yea, and that which the world for the most part accounts wisdom
too; but it is indeed no other, no better then very folly before God: that so
at the last he may arrive and attain unto that true and undoubted wisdom,
which shall make him everlastingly happy in the Land of the living. And then
though the world deride and scorn him, laugh and jeare, flout and point at
him; yea, beg him for a fool: yet let it not trouble nor grieve him, but let
him rejoice rather, in that he is thought fit to be accounted a fool for
Christ's sake; and to be made conformable in some things to the Image and
similitude of his blessed Savior, the Son of God: who was not only counted,
but clad as a fool too, as you have heard already. For they put upon him a
white garment, as says the Geneva and vulgar Latin; or a gay and gorgeous
roabe, as our last translation reads it: Luke 23.11. not as a roabe of honor
or excellency, but of infamy and disgrace; as all Expositours conclude upon the
place.

Which may afford us also this second Use; That though our attire and habit be
not always so costly and comely, as that of our neighbors; yet, that we be
not dejected nor cast down therewith, seeing Christ for our sakes refused not
to wear such a scornful and contemptuous garment, as his very adversaries
were pleased to put upon him. Neither let us judge of men and their worth,
only by their outside; since, Saepe sub attrita latitat Sapientia vest:
Wisdom may be, and often is clad but in a Fools Coat. As likewise, Vilis
saepe cadus nobile Nectar habet: Beggarly bottles oftentimes hold rich Wines.
And therefore Saint Chrysostomes Exhortation is, Ne homines ex habitu
contemnamus; That we should not contemn men, no nor condemn them neither,
Plutar. in vita ejus:
ever the sooner for their habit: (as Philopaemen the Orator was set to cut
wood, because he was so homely attired: Vita Terent.
and Terence was placed but at the lower end of Caecilius Table, Quod erat
contemptiore vestitu, because of his homely outside.) But look only to the
mind, and soul, and inside of a man; yea, to the hid man of the heart, to
see that that be without all corruption, as the Apostle speaks; 1 Pet. 3.4.
and then let the outside go. As on the other side, Virum non a vestimentis,
immo nec ab ipso corpore; sed ab anima laudare decet and admirari: Man ought
not to be honored and admired so much for the outward garments of his body;
nor yet for his body it self: neither (seem it never so comely and hansome in
our eyes) as for the inward graces and endowments of his soul: For what profit
is there of all outward ornaments or presence; Cum anima mendico sit omni
miserius induta? (as our Chrysostom goes on) When our soul is more miserably
clad then the basest beggar? as being wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked; as is said of the Church of Laodicea: Revel. 3.17.

There might be many more Uses made of Christ his being posted and hurryed too
and again, from one Judges house and authority to another: as first, carried to
Annas; from him secondly, to Caiaphas; from Caiaphas thirdly, to Pilate; and
from him to Herod: and lastly, from Herod back again to Pilate. As also of
the scorn and contempt that was put upon him by the rude and rascal
multitude, in all these his several passages too and fro, from one place unto
another: men, women, and children, of all ranks and conditions following him;
with howting, and showting at him, as is usual in such cases; especially when
he was arrayed in that scornful and disgraceful habit, spoken of last
before: and so carried through the more public and eminent streets of
Jerusalem for the nonce; and of purpose only, to have him gazed upon as an
Owl, and bayted as a Bear: when, if ever any man, then he much more, might
justly complain, as in the Prophet: Factus sum in derisum omni populo, and
canticum eorum tota die; I am become a scorn to all people, and their song all
the day long: Lament. 3.14. But time and other occasions will not permit me to
speak of all: and therefore this shall suffice.

John 18.39, 40. Ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the
Passover; will you therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?

Then cried they all again, not this man; but Barabbas: now Barabbas was a
robber, etc.


THese words (beloved) are spoken by Pilate the Roman President, unto the Jews
that were Christ's accusers, and very urgent with him to have him crucified: who
because he knew that for envy they had delivered him unto him, as it is said,
Matthew. 27.18. Therefore he endeavors, as I told you the last day, by three
several ways and means, if it be possible, to save his life, and to deliver
him out of their hands. First, by turning him over to Herod: Secondly, by
ballancing him with Barabbas: And lastly, by scourging and crowning him with
Thorns: Whereas therefore he had prevayled nothing by the first means, (viz.)
by sending him to Herod; as you heard then also at large related and dilated
unto you: Therefore in these words, as you see, He makes trial of the second,
by propounding unto them whether they would have Barabbas or Jesus let loose at
this their great and solemn Feast of the Passover. For so says the text,
Will you that I release unto you the King of the Jews? or as it is in S.
Matthewes Gospel: Whom will ye that I release unto you; Barabbas, or Jesus
that is called Christ? Matthew. 27.17.

O sweet Jesus! now or never there is hope and comfort near; that after thy
many tortures and troubles formerly recounted, which thou have so quietly and
patiently put up and borne at the hands of thy malicious and unkind
Countrymen; yea, Kinsmen according to the flesh: Thy life notwithstanding
shall be spared, and thy person set free and at liberty again at the last. For
seeing thou art balanced in the scales with Barabbas, the greatest malefactor
of thy time; and a necessity laid upon the people of releasing either thee or
him: it cannot possibly be imagined, but that thou must be taken, and he cast;
thou saved, and he condemned. For, whereas he has been a Thief, and taken
away by violence the bread of the poor and needy; Why, thou have been a
feeder of them, and a supplyer of their wants and necessities upon all
occasions? whereas he has been a Cutter and Robber on the highways, and by
that means wounded and mangled the peaceable passengers, traveling as it
were, between Jerusalem and Jericho: Why, thou as the good Samaritane, have
healed them again, by binding up their wounds, and pouring in Wine and Oil
unto them: whereas he has been a Murderer, (as Mark 15.7.) and slain the
living; Why, thou have been a reviver and restorer of life unto them that have
been dead. All these therefore, and thousands more, unto which thou have been
helpful and beneficial in one kind or other, will call and cry out aloud,
Set free and at liberty unto us, not Barabbas our cruel enemy; but Christ our
courteous friend: yea, our kind and common benefactour.

For it is impossible, even in the judgment of Pilate himself, that any
should be so ungrateful as to do the contrary; which occasioned him to make
tender of the most notorious delinquent that was then in durance amongst them,
to be in competition with Christ; that so he might be sure (as he upon good
ground and reason, conceived and imagined) not to fail of the freedom and
release of Jesus. And yet for all this, They cry out amain, with one voice and
unanimous consent; Not this man but Barrabbas: as ye see in the text.

O unheard of impudency and iniquity! thus to deny the holy one and the just;
and to desire a murderer to be delivered unto them, as Saint Peter afterward
cast in their teeth: Acts 3.14. Commutatio infoelix, says one; An unhappy
exchange for you Jews, thus to desire the Wolf before the Lamb; the noxious
and violent, before the righteous and innocent; the impious and ungodly
life-taker, before the peaceable and merciful life-giver: wretched men that ye
are, so to prefer death before life; sin before God; and Barabbas, nay the
Devil before Christ: with whom ye shall be sure for your pains, to suffer
eternal pains in hell fire; except you can, and do repent and be heartily
sorry for the same: Non quod per Pascha liberatis nocentem; Tract. 11^* in Ioh.
c. 28.
sed quod occidistis innocentem, as Saint Austin speaks: not so much, because
through the opportunity of your Passover, you have freed and spared the life
of him that was a wicked thief and robber; but because you have slain the
innocent and harmless Lamb, who was undefiled and without spot. Quod tamen
nisi fieret, verum pasca non fieret; as the Father goes on; which yet, if it
had not been done, he could never have been the true Passover, pointed at by
all the legal sacrifices and shadows of the old Law.

And therefore it shall not be amiss for us Christians, to look to another;
to an higher hand and cause of this choice; then only to the mischeivous
malice of these Jews, which if we do, we shall find that it was not Christ
the second Adam only that was laid in the scale against Barabbas; but the
first Adam also, which was a greater murderer and theife then he. Yea, and the
sins also of all his posterity throughout all ages. Zacha. 5.7.
Which lying like Zacharies talent of lead upon Christ his shoulders, his
person alone; must needs press down that scale lower then the other, that
bore the sins only of one man, though never so great a murderer and
malefactor. Brunus.
In regard whereof I do not wonder to find some writers comparing Barabbas to
the live sparrow spoken of, Levit. 14.7. Qui dimittitur ut in agrum avolet, as
the vulgar Latin there reads it: Which is let loose to fly in the open field,
because his single burden of sin alone was not so great a let and hinderance
unto him, as the burden of the sins of the whole World laid upon the back of
Christ, the other sparrow, there also spoken of, whose wings were thereby
clipped; and himself indeed killed for the cleansing of the leaper. For though
Christ's burden laid upon our shoulders be Onus allevians but a light burden,
lifting up and making fresh, according to his own saying. My yoke is easy and
my burden light, Mat. 11.30. yet our burden laid upon him, is onus onerans; a
burden pressing down and making faint, pressing down indeed, his body to no
less then the bottom of the grave, and his soul to hell.

In regard whereof in the second place, he is styled by others: The Lords lot,
chosen by Aarons successor (though much degenerated) the high Priest, to be
offered for a sinne-offering; as was appointed by Moses Law; where if we take
the pains to search, we shall find: as two sparrowes spoken of before in
Levit. 14. So two Goats, Levit. 16. presentable before the Lord at the door
of the Tabernacle of the Congregation whereof one should be for a scape-goate;
and the other for an offering to the Lord, as it is there said. By which some
of the Ancients (as B. Bilson tells me) understood Jesus and Barabbas: Jesus to
be slain as an offering to the Lord, and Barabbas to be sent to the Jews
desert or wilderness, bearing the sins of the people that cried, Let him be
crucified, let him be crucified.

Which if it be so, then once more, nay evermore, let us meditate of the mercy
and love of Christ toward us: and muse upon his lowliness and humility, that
was content not only to take our nature upon him and therein to suffer death
upon the Cross for our sins; and so, as I have said, to become our
sin-offering: but also to be compared with the greatest malefactor of those
times. And by public sentence, yea votes and voices of the people, to be
pronounced a greater delinquent and more worthy of death then he. And let us
beseech his infinite goodness, by that great dejection and submission of his,
whereby he was contented thus to be rejected by these Jews; neither did
disdain to be adjudged worthy of death, and to have Barabbas a wicked robber
to be preferred to life before him: that he would give us such grace; that by
how much we are inferior unto himself, by so much he would inflame our
desires the more ardently to be willing to bear the contempt and rejection of
this World, and as cast down through the sense of our sins and infirmities,
and unworthines every way; account no otherwise of our selves then as of the
scorn and scum thereof, the basest and meanest among the sons of men. For,
Quare superbit homo cujus generatio culpa,
Vita labor, nasci paena, necesse mori?


Why should man have any high thoughts, or be proud in any thing; whose very
conception is sinful, his birth paineful, his life laborious, and his death
unavoydable? As also in the second place, let us continually pray unto him,
that he would not permit and suffer us for any respect whatsoever, whether of
fear or favor to forsake our obedience and respect toward him; but still
prefer his honor and worship, and love, and friendship before all earthly
advantages whatsoever; yea, and before our lives too.

And for further use and application, let us be content with patience and
silence to bear it, if at any time we see the wicked and lewd, and those that
we know to be worse then our selves, to be preferred before us, either to the
honors, or in the favors of the world, seeing Christ was contented to let
sinful and wicked Barabbas to be preferred before him in these Jews esteem.

Secondly, let us take heed of preferring vice before virtue; the flesh before
the spirit; the honors, and profits, and pleasures of the world, before the
honor, and worship, and service of God: for in doing all or any of these, we
do but prefer Barabbas before Christ. Neither let us upon any occasion
connive and give way to any unbeseeming or unfitting practices and
imperfections contrary to our own consciences; either to please our selves, or
for fear to displease others; lest we be like Pilate, who because he would not
offend and displease the Jews, he appointed Christ to be scourged, and
Barabbas to be loosed. Nor yet farther let us upon any terms whatsoever, be we
Magistrates or inferiors, justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent: for
in so doing, we do justify Barabbas, and condemn Christ. And for the last
use, let us all know, that how often soever it pleases God to put good motions
into our minds, of setting Christ at liberty; either in his poor members that
are in durance, or in any other pressures and oppressions whatsoever; or in our
own souls, where he is imprisoned by our sins: and we neglect the
opportunity, either through some pretended difficulty; or remissness and
weakness of our own resolutions and resistance: in both these cases, and
diverse others like these: we cry with these Jews, Vivat Barabbas, and
crucifigatur Christus; Let Barabbas live, and Christ be crucified: which how
fearful a sin it is, you have heard before. But I must proceed.

Pilate prevailing nothing more toward Christ's discharge by this second
means, then he had done by the former; He resolves yet further to try the
third, as hoping though their malice be never so great, and minds never so
violent and outrageous against him for the present; yet partly by respite of
time, and partly by the severity of some corporal punishment, the heat of
their hate might at last be appeased, and so his life spared: for he was
desirous and willing to release him; as it is said, Luke 23.20. And therefore
for this purpose, he determined to lay so sharp a punishment upon him, as
might suffice (as he had reason to think) to assuage their fury; and satisfy
their bloody and cruel desires. So that hereupon in the third place, (as I
say) he gave commandment that he should be scourged; Quod non ob aliud
fecisse, Tract. 116. in Ioh. init.
credendus est Pilatus; (as Saint Austin speaks) nisi ut ejus injuriis Judaei
satiati, sufficere sibi existimarent; and usque ad ejus mortem saevire
d^sisterent: which we cannot imagine to be done for any other intent or end,
then only that the Jews being satiated, and glutted as it were with these
injuries and tortures inflicted upon him; might think themselves satisfied,
and sufficiently avenged to their content, and so desist from shedding his
blood and taking away his life. For scourging was a punishment which for the
severity of it, was appointed by Moses Law, only for grievous offenders and
malefactors of an high nature. And yet with this limitation and restriction
too, that it should not exceed forty stripes, lest a brother should seem vile
unto them; as you may see Deuteronomy. 25.3. And the infamy of it was such, that the
Romans did exempt their Citizens from it, as is plainly to be collected out of
Acts 22.25. And therefore a Scho^le-man calls it Foedum supplicium; a foul and
a filthy punishment.

Which makes Granatensis a learned and devout Postiller to cry out, Quam
indignum verberum supplicium, non in Domino dico; sed in quovis etiam homine
abjectissimo? how unbeseeming and unfitting; yea, indigne and unworthy a
punishment and chastisement is scourging and whipping? not only in the Lord,
but in any other inferior and contemptible man whatsoever? Est enim hoc omnium
suppliciorum vilissimum; quo pueri, quo mancipia, quo latrones plectuntur, (as
he goes on) as being the vilest and most infamous of all other punishments,
wherewith only children, bondslaves and pilfering laroones or rogues use to
be corrected and chastized. And yet our great Lord and Master Jesus Christ ye
see, does not disdain to undergo it for our sakes, that so he might bear in
his body those wounds and stripes that we have deserved by our sins* as also
that thereby he might animate and encourage his Martyrs and Confessors unto
patience and constancy in their like indignities and disgraces, which he knew
the World in succeeding ages would put upon them for his names sake.

Neither was this kind of punishment and affliction of his, only infamous and
opprobrious; but terrible and tormenting too. For the soldiers and other
executioners of it having once their warrant confirmed by authority from Pilate
for doing it, did presently strippe him of his garments, and fasten him to a
post or pillar (as it should seem by many writers the manner was) and then
charge and discharge upon him such bloody blows: as if he had been both the
greatest offender and the basest slave in the World. And that not with a single
scourge or rod alone; but with several and sundry kinds of them; if we may
take the word and warrant of some Antiquity. For it is fathered upon Saint
Hierome by sundry Authors which I have read; That there should be six of these
scourges, whereof two should come with their thorny rods; two with knotty
whips, and two with iron chains, or linkes, or wyers; sharpened for the nonce,
and their points bowed inward like an hook, only to rent and tear his skin
as they went; and to make wounds and gashes in his flesh. And when the first
two had wearyed and tired themselves, as it were, with the earnestness and
violence of their blows and strokes; the others to take their places: till by
alternate and succ^ssive turns, they had added stripe upon stripe, and wound
upon wound, latter upon former, and new upon old, so long; that he was all over
in a goare blood. For his stripes were not stinted according to the Jewish
manner, to 40. or 39. strokes alone: But the sentence being executed by the
Roman Soldiers, and after a Roman sort; Sine numero, servorum instar,
flagellatus est: He was corrected as a Roman slave, with as many stripes as the
Executioners pleased to give him; whereby he had from the sole of his foot to
the crown of his head, no whole or free part in him, as the Prophet speaks;
Esaias 1.6. which notwithstanding he was not unwilling it should be so; nay, he
was most desirous to have it so; because in his mystical body the Church for
which he suffered, Nulla pars sana, atque integra esset (as says mine Author)
There was no part whole and found; nothing therein but wounds, and swellings,
and sores, full of corruption: Esaias 1.6.

Yea, some affirm that there issued from his body, Fluenta sanguinis, streams
of blood; others, Rivi sanguinis, whole rivers. But these hyperbolicall
particulars are no matters of faith; and therefore in them I leave every man to
believe as he list; only we may and must believe his torments and tortures to
be much the greater, because as the former Prophet Esaias says elsewhere, He was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; The
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, so that with his stripes we are
healed: Esaias 53.5. As also because these Pharisees and other his enemies might
be afraid (as a Postiller well observes) that Pilate, because he scourged him,
would not have been drawn to crucify and kill him after: Curaverunt ergo
taliter eum flagellari, ut inter flagella animam daret; They provided therefore
that he should be so scourged; that, as they hoped and desired he would have
even breathed out his last, and yielded up the ghost under these tormentors
hands; Quod and factum fuisset, nisi divinitus vitam cruci reservasset, as my
Postiller goes on: which accordingly had come to pass, unless his divinity
had preserved and reserved his humanity to dye upon the Cross.

But this yet is not sufficient to satisfy the malicious minds of these, not
men, but monsters of cruelty and impiety. And therefore after the soldiers had
thus scourged him: They brought him into the Pretorie or common hall once more,
and there again they strip him, and put upon him a purple robe: and pressed
upon his head (which you know is a very sensible and tender part, and which
before had scap^t the whip) a crown of sharp thorns, that so, mill
puncturis, as one says, with a thousand stings, they might torture and torment
him: yea, and put a reed in his hand in steed of a Scepter; and scornefully
bowing themselves, salute him king of the Jews; and spit upon him the second
time; and taking another reed, smote him therewith upon the head.

By all which actions it appears; that they were as much, if not more
desirous to take away his reputation as his life. For they sought but only the
ordinary torment of the cross, by which to take away his life: but to take
away his reputation, they ran into all these; and many more strange inventions
equally composed of torment and shame; wherein cruelty seemed pleasant, and
mirth full of malice (as it is well observed by Doctor Heyward:) out of whose
Threatise, called The Sanctuary of a troubled soul, give me leave, with your
patience, (only for haste to finish this point,) to insert here a few lines,
well fitted there by his devout heart and skillful hand, to my present purpose.
They shall not be many, neither wholly his; but interlaced sometimes with other
notes and observations, as well of mine own as other men's.

The very heathen (says he) for the most part, in their execution of justice,
did observe this rule; to do it with all outward gravity and grief, and not
with any light, either gestures or jests; whereby they might be suspected of
taking pleasure in taking punishment, nor with any extraordinary severity
(excepting some few Tyrants) which might make a show of private revenge. But
(as he goes on) it was not sufficient for these savages to crucify Christ;
except they did it both with derision and despite. Their malicious minds must
of necessity be satisfied, as well with his shame as with his blood: and that
after an unusual manner. For when was purple before that time used for
dishonor? And who ever before that day had been crowned with thorns? The
purple reached but to a scorn; but the thorns went further: For look how
many thorns did pierce his flesh, so many streams of blood could not choose
but issue from him; so that, as another says: Purpuratus jam Christus totus,
intus ac foris; corpore sanguinolento and vest purpurea. Christ is become
purple all over, as well within as without; having a deep died sanguine body,
as well as a purple garment. But it was not by chance and at adventure, that
he was clothed in purple, and therein mocked; but as the holy Ghost made
Caiaphas to say, It is expedient that one should dye for the people. John.
11.50. and likewise Pilate; What I have written, I have written, Joh. 19.22. So
it made the soldiers, to scorn him in a purple garment, in token that
whatsover they did to his reproach, should follow afterward to his greater
honor and renown. For Livy tells us, that Romae, vestis longa and purpurea,
Imperatorum and Triumphantium. i. e. At Rome, a long purple garment was the
habit of the Emperors, and such as had triumphed after some great victories
and conquests: And not only at Rome, but ubique ea in pretio fuit, says
another author, it was in high esteem also in other places; which does
evidently appear to be so by sundry passages in sacred history: For the
curtains and hangings of the Tabernacle, were appointed by God himself to be
of purple, as ye may see, Exodus 26.1.36. verses. And Daniel the Prophet of
God, was promised by Belshazzar as a great reward of honor unto him; that if
he would read the writing, and show the interpretation thereof, he should be
clothed in purple, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and be the third
ruler in the Kingdom, Dan. 5.16. as also Holophernes canopie of his bed on
which he rested when Judith came unto him was woven with purple, Jud. 10.21.
And therefore howsoever these Jews array Christ in purple, only in scorn of
his Kingship, because he was usually styled King of the Jews, yet his heavenly
Father, and the whole Court and Council of Heaven had an honorable purpose
toward him in permitting it.

Neither was it without a mystery that they set upon his head a crown of
thorns. For God having cursed the earth, because of Adams sin, to b^ing
forth thorns and briars unto us, This curse has our Savior now taken upon
himself; so that the points of these thorns are broken in his flesh; and all
things are now blessed, all things reconciled, all curses and crosses both
healed and hallowed with his blood; insomuch as all true Christians may now
gather grapes of thorns: which before this time could not be done, as the holy
Scripture does intimate unto us. Go forth therefore, O ye daughters of Sion,
and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him, says
the Spouse in the Canticles, chap. 3.11. For, vere spectaculum dignum visu,
Deus spinis coronatus: It is a spectacle worthy your viewing, to see God
crowned with thorns. I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, says
Moses, Exodus 3.3. which was God himself in a flame of fire in the midst of a
bush; the bush burning, yet not consumed; unto which sight notwithstanding, he
could not draw near, until he had pulled off the shoes of his feet; as there
is to be seen, verse. 5. Let us therefore pull off the shoes of profaneness
from the feet of our affections, that so we may go with him, and behold this
great fire of love wherewith the Lord burns; and this bush in the midst
whereof he stands and is enclosed: which if we do, we shall see before us
the unextinguishable and inconsumptible love of a kind and tenderhearted
Father, offering to sacrifice his Son; yea, his only Son for our sins,
and behind us we shall find, Arietem haerentem cornibus inter vepres; the
Ram, or rather the Son himself, as willing to be caught by the horns in
the midst of the bushes, that so he may be offered. And therefore, as every
bird fitteth upon the thorns in the orchard, as it is said, Baruch. 6.70. so
let us draw near and make our nest in these bushes; that we may find shelter
against the stormy winds of affliction; and parching, yea, scorching heat of
temptation, and all adversaries as well spiritual as corporal, hunting our
souls to destruction. And abandoning the colors of all other Captains and
Commanders, as the world, the flesh, devil and the like; let us keeepe our
selves fast and close in firm fidelity and sincere loyalty under the royal
standard only of this our King; although by these his enemies in derision and
scorn he be crowned with thorns. For the points of these thorns pierce not
at this time so deep into our Saviors head; as in after time they shall
pierce into the sides and souls of all adverse and opposing powers whatsoever;
especially such as thus deride and scorn him in his miseries and affliction.
For etiamsi Tale diadema non honorem, sed horrorem adducit: Horret tamen
Christus magis asperitatem morum and linguae stimulos quam spinarum aculeos,
says our countryman Gillebert. In Cantica.
Although such a Diadem as this, bring not honor, but horror rather to him
that wears it; yet Christ does more abhor and disdain the bitterness of
their malice and asperity of their manners; yea, the stings of their tongues,
than points or prickles of their thorns by which they thus think to torture
and torment him.

But to proceed and grow toward an end of his sufferings under Pontius Pilate,
when he saw that Jesus was in so pitiful a plight, that he supposed the
sight of his goared body and gashed head sufficient to break the bloody
purposes of his enemies: He took him, and led him forth to the people and said
unto them; Behold the man. John 19.5. what would you have more? if it be for
malice that you are so violent against him; behold how miserable he is. If for
fear; behold how contemptible. But as for fault, whereby he should deserve
death; I can find none, but he seems to be a man without a mate; a Prince
without a Peer, having none to match him, that I can find, among the sons
of men, as being a lamb without a spot, a Dove without a Gall. I can find no
fault in him.

Which if it be ^o; then Diogenes may set up his staff; put out his light; and
hang up his lantern by the walls; seeing Pilate here, presents before his
eyes, the man whom he sought for; using his humane reason to good purpose: as
being more innocent and harmless in his conversation, then Adam in his
integrity. For whereas Adam bore indeed in himself, the whole humane nature;
yet he did it but to destruction: whereas this man does it to restoration and
redemption. Behold therefore this man, says Pilate; I can find no fault in
him.

But quo minus proficit, eo magis ardescit invidia; says Ferus. It is the
nature of envy, that the less it prevayleth, and the oftener it is prevented
and withstood, the more eager it is in its pursuit. And therefore the more
backward and cold in the cause they find Pilate; the more forward, ardent and
earnest are they. So that being insatiable in their cruelty toward him; they
importune him, some with persuasions; and others with confused clamours and
cries that he might be crucified. They were of their fathers, the Devils
mind; quem nihil satiat nisi animam sauciat; as one says of him. Whom nothing
will please and content but death and final destruction: so no torture, no
punishment will serve these men's turn but Christ's death. And no death neither,
but that of the Cross will satisfy their desires: and that makes them cry so
often and so loud, Let him be crucified, let him be crucified. O the
inconstancy and impiety of an insolent and many headed multitude! What a
miserable case are they in, that must be tried and judged by thee? which art
content with these Jews to honor Christ and his Ministers one day with all
reverence and respect; cutting down branches from the Trees; and strowing them
in his way; and crying Hosanna the son of David: blessed be he that comes
in the name of the Lord. Hosanna thou which art in the highest Heavens, Mat.
21.9. And yet within a few days after; the wind of thy breath being turned, to
cry out again as fast on the other side (as ye see) Crucifige, Crucifige: Let
him be crucified, let him be crucified. Sic stultus ut luna mutatur, Says
the wise man. So does the foolish multitude change like the Moon. Ecclus 27.11.

But neither are they culpable of inconstancy alone; but of impiety too; and
that in the highest degree. For what insolences and outrages will they not
perpetrate and commit, if they be frustrated and crossed never so little in
their ways and wills? The very Son of God himself and Savior of the World
(and therefore much less his Ministers) being not able to escape scotfree; if
he come once within their clutches, or within the compass of their custody
and command, which gave occasion to the Holy Ghost to prescribe that caveat to
these people of the Jews long since, viz. that they should not follow a
multitude to do evil; neque in judicio plurimorum acquiesces sententiae; ut a
vero devies, as the vulgar Latin reads it, neither in judgment shall thou
rest or rely upon the sentence of many to decline from truth. Exodus 23.2. And
yet for all this warning so long before hand; they and their Judges too, split
themselves upon the same Rock at this time. For Pilate, although before he had
openly declared both that Christ was innocent, and that he had authority to
quit him: yet giving place either to the favor or fury of this multitude of
the Jews, rather then to justice, he pronounced sentence of death against
him; and delivered him to the pleasure of his enemies, to do with him even
what they would, as you may see. Luke 23.25. By which it appears plainly, that
Vox populi is not always Vox Dei; the voice of the people is not always the
voice of God.

And thus you have heard how and what Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Whose judgment was very unjust by his own confession; because he gave
sentence of death against him, whom thrice before he had pronounced innocent,
which certainly was in him, the greatest piece of injustice that could possibly
be committed. And therefore S. Cyprian says, Frustra funestas manus judex in
praetorio abluis, a sanguine Domini to profitens innocentem. Thou washest thy
defiled and polluted hands, O thou judge, but in vain: seeing (profess what
thou will, yet) thou can not (as David) wash them in innocence; but thou art
guilty of the death of that just man in as high a degree even as the Jews
themselves. For in that thou do not absolve and acquit him; but give out
thy sentence of condemnation against him, notwithstanding by thine own
confession, after diligent and exact trial, thou can find no just cause of
death in him; Caussam tibi facis cum Judaeis communem: as the same Father goes
on. Thou make thine own cause no better (for all thy washing) then even
common with these his enemies. Illi se proditione, tu parricidio te condemnas:
For as they are guilty of treason and treachery against him; so thou of
Parricide: Illi lingua, tu ferro occidis; they slaying him only with their
tongues, in slandering and false accusing; but thou with the sword, seeing thou
had power to loose him, as thou saydst thy self (especially being innocent)
and yet thou did not. And therefore tam te quam illos inauditae crudelitatis
scelus involvit; the sin of this, unheard of the like, cruelty, involves thee
as well as them. Veniet etiam anima tua in manus judicis quem condemnas;
fractisque tribunalibus tuis, judicaberis and demergeris in profundum inferni:
so that thy soul shall come into the hands of that same Judge, whom thou have
thus condemned: and after thine own judgment seat and throne of injustice is
dissolved and broken down in this World; thou shall be judged thy self and
condemned to the very pit of Hell in another World: eruntque tibi and Iudae
scelerato in tenebris and Gebennalibus flammis poenae irremediales,
inconsumptibiles ignes, dolores perpetui, and tormenta aeterna; and thou as well
as wicked Judas, with all other unjust Judges that do not repent; shall be calf
into utter darkness and hellish flames together, where ye shall suffer and
endure pains that cannot be withstood nor avoided; burnings that cannot be
extinguished nor put out; perpetual sorrows without surceasing; and eternal
torments without hope of ending. Thus farm Cyprian of Pontius Pilate his
injustice; and thus far I of our blessed Saviors sufferings under him. From
whose fearful sin and punishment due for the same, Libera nos Domine, good
Lord deliver us.

Now from the injustice of these judges under whom our blessed Savior thus
suffered, let me take occasion to leave a few instructions to the Judges of
our times. And I will begin with that Quaere of the Holy Ghost. Are your minds
set upon righteousness, O ye Congregation; and do ye judge the things that
are right, O ye sons of men? Ps. 58.1. that is, according to the order,
rightnesse and straightnes of that Law of God, which he set and appointed you
to judge by, when he said unto Moses; that Judges and Officers he should make
in all the Gates throughout the tribes of Israel; and they should judge the
people with just judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.18. quasi dicat (as an expositor upon the
place) non tantum in ore habeatis justitiam; sed in opere: as if he should say;
it is not enough to talk of righteousness with your mouths; and in your
words; but you must practice it also with your hands, and in your works.

Now then let us take notice that there are many things requisite to this right
and just judgment; which ought therefore to concur and be found in all
Judges whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or civil.

The first whereof is this, that what they require of others, they Peter says,
It is but just, that judgment should begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17.
and therefore they ought not to do as the Scribes and Pharisees which our
Savior speaks of, which bind heavy burdens and such as are grievous to be
borne, and lay on other men's shoulders; when as they themselves will not moove
them with one of their fingers, Matthew. 23.4. but they that are Judges of the
Earth, ought themselves to love righteousness, as the wiseman exhorts them,
Sap. 1.1.

The second is; that they keep themselves close to the prescript Deuteronomy. 17, 18,
19.20. verses.

That they do thoroughly fifth the truth and depth of the matter Job professes
that he did, saying, Caussam quam nesciebam diligenter investigabam; I was
diligent to search out the cause which I knew not, Job. 29.16.

That they be no accepters of persons. For qui cognoscit in judicio faciem, non
been facit, says the Wise man, as the vulgar Latin reads it, Prove. 28.21 He
that in the time of judgment knows a difference of faces, does not well, for
such a one will transgress for a piece of bread, as there follows in the
latter part of the verse; and therefore elsewhere he says: It is not good to
accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment: Chap.
18.5.

Exodus 23.2.

Ecclus 7.6.

Exodus 23. 3. i. e. in a bad cause; For otherwise, it is said but three verses
after, Thou shall not wrest the judgment of the poor in his cause, verse 6.

verse 8.

consilio, non prece, by counsel and deep consideration in a man's self, not
by request of other men: For as Bernard says well, Vbi non licet facere quod
volo, quis locus rogandi? Where it is not lawful for a Judge to do what he
may have a desire, it may be to do himself, there surely can be no place left
for the suits and requests of others. And these are the nine things requisite
to the performance and execution of right and just judgment; which whatsoever
Judge shall faithfully fulfill and keep, he need not fear the censure of any
Court here; or the face of an angry Judge hereafter.

There might much more have been added concerning these particulars, but that
I am not ignorant, that Verbum sapientibus sat est, A word to such wise men is
enough; in regard whereof I have chosen rather to leave this short caution and
remembrance only to our Honorable Judges and other subordinate Magistrates,
than to presume to give them either larger instructions, or the least
reproves. And this suffices for Christ's sufferings under Pontius Pilate.

John 19. verse. 16.17, 18. Then delivered he him unto them to be crucified. And
they took Jesus and led him away: And he bearing his cross, went forth into a
place called the place of a skull; which is called in Hebrew Golgotha, where
they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in
the midst, etc.


WHen the sentence of death against our Savior Christ was once given,
Curcified.
then presently in all haste the cross was prepared, and the condemned person
brought out; and the heavy tree (as it appears by Saint John's Gospel in our
Text, verse 17.) was at the first laid upon his own shoulders, which had been
unmercifully battered with whips before, whereby they tormented him not only
with the sight, but with the weight also of that which was appointed to be the
instrument of his death, which painful burden notwithstanding, together with
the weight of all our sins, he refused not for our sakes to take upon him,
but proceeded on his way with incredible alacrity, both in love toward us, and
in obedience to satisfy his fathers justice; as a true Isaac bearing the wood
for the sacrificing of himself. For mortem non coactus, sed ultro subiit
Christus, ut voluntarium esset sacrificium: nam sine obedientia, nobis expiatio
parta non esset, In Job. c. 18.
says Calvin. Christ suffered death willingly and not by constraint, that so
his sacrifice might be voluntary. For without willing obedience to his Fathers
Ordinance, our atonement and the expiation of our sins could not be wrought:
whereupon S. Austen discoursing upon those words of S. John, Et misit filium
suum sacrificatorem pro peccatis nostris (as he reads them) 1 Ioh. 4.10. God
loved us and sent his Son to be a sacrifice for our sins; demands this
question: Vbi invenit hostiam? ubi invenit victimam quam puram volebat offerre?
where did he find a pure and clean sacrifice fitting for himself to offer?
And when he has thus propounded gives the answer himself in these words.
Alium non inv^nit, seipsum obtulit. He could find no other, and therefore he
offers himself as if he should say: he made his humanity the sacrifice, and
his divinity the priest.

But howsoever he were never so willing and obedient himself; yet his
countrymen and cruel friends must not loose their turn. For they will have
an hand in this business (though never so much to their cost) as well as he,
wherefore after they have conducted him to mount Caluary, the place of his
execution: there they speedily erect his cross and display his bloody banner,
and soon after crucify him thereon, as ye may see, Luke 23.33. which part of
theirs, as it was acted with much violence to show their malice; so it was
suffered by him with more willingness, and patience to manifest his love.
Answerable to that of the Apostle, he humbled himself and became obedient unto
the death, yea even the death of the Cross. Phil. 28.

Now this kind of death was accounted in those days, not only the most
shameful and ignominious death; but the most cruel and tormenting too; as ye
shall see anon: wherefore these Jews, howsoever they had four kinds of death
for malefactors among themselves (as our reverend and learned Bishop of Exet^r
in his passion Sermon has well observed) one of which was ordinarily used to
those that did offend of their own Nation, as the Towell, the Sword, Fire and
Stones, and each of these above other in extremity, yet they rejected and
refused all these whereby to take away Christ's life, and chose this Roman death
of crucifying, as accounting it the worst of all: which we may suppose they did
the rather, because their own Law says: cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23. so that their malice was such as it should seem toward
him; as that they were desirous, not only to cross and crucify him, whereby
to rid him him out of his life: but to curse him also, if it were possible and
in their powers, in the life to come. But yet as ^. Jerome well notes; He is
not therefore accursed because he hangs; but therefore he hangs because
he is accursed being made (...), that is, acursed for us as, S. Paul speaks,
Gal. 3.13. And therefore howsoever the Jews made choice of this death for him
out of the depth of their malice, and venomous hatred against him: hoping
thereby not only to destroy his body, but his soul too, yet he (that was able
to work good out of evil, and turn their mischief and malice owards him, to
his own glory and the benefit of his Church and chosen) had other reasons in
the secret of his own counsel, which they little dreamed of, why he would
undergo it, and take it upon him.

As first that the curse might be imputed unto him, which was due to us: and so
we by his curse might be redeemed from the curse of the Law, as the former
Apostle says we are in the former place. And therefore says Aretius: Ideo
cruce passus est Christus, ut omnis maledictio, etiam a forma supplicii in illo
concurreret. Therefore did Christ suffer on the Cross, that by the form and
manner of his suffering, every curse might concur and be found in him, which
was due to us, yea he himself bare our sins in his body on the Tree, that
we might be delivered from sin and be healed by his stripes, as S. Peter
says 1 Pet. 2.24.

Secondly, as S. Chrysostom and Theophilact assign it, ut ipsius aeris
naturam mundaret, and terram sanctificaret sanguinis suae distillatione, that
he might cleanse and perfume the air with his holy and Heavenly breath, and
sanctify and hallow the Earth with the streams of his sacred blood,
distilling and descending down from his blessed body. Medicina enim quae
removet maledictionem terrae, est sanguis Christi, For the only Medicine that
is able to remoove the curse of the earth is the blood of Christ.

Thirdly, as Anselmus says, That hanging in the air on the Cross, the foot
whereof was fastened in the Earth, and the top looking toward Heaven, he might
show himself to be the true Mediator betwixt God and man; by reconciling
Heaven and Earth together, and reducing our humane nature to the society of
Angels, and so making a perfect peace and union betwixt the things above and
the things below.

By such strange and contrary means does God show his power and providence in
working our salvation and redemption, giving us life even by his own death,
and that the most accursed death too, even the death of the Cross. Optimum
faciens instrumentum vitae quod erat mortis pessimum genus, as one says;
making that the best instrument of life, which was the worst kind of death;
worst indeed, as we shall easily perceive, if we will vouchsafe to look
another while into the manner of it, together with the counsel and cruelty of
the Jews in inflicting it, as we have already done into the mercy and
goodness of Christ in suffering it. For besides the infamy and ignominy of it,
as you have heard already; it was a terrible and bitter death too: where he
felt the uttermost of those pains, which incensed and enraged malice was able
to inflict, and man's nature able to endure.

For the better and more clear expression whereof, it is observed by some,
that Christ's Passion on the Cross, had in it all the four dimensions, as
length, breadth, height, depth. Lenght first, in regard that the Cross was a
lingering slow death; Vbi diu vivebatur, and mors ipsa protendebatur; ne dolor
citius finiretur: which gave no quick dispatch unto the patient, but protracted
and prolonged his life, keeping him a great while together upon the Rack under
the sharp sense as well of our sins as his own pains. Now it is truly said,
that Acerbissima est mors quae trahit poenam; it is the bitterest kind of
death, wherein the pains thereof are long continued and delayed, and not
presently or suddenly finished and dispatched. For to have death prolonged when
a man is under the stroke of death; is to die many deaths at once. Now it was
full three hours betwixt Christ's affixion to the Cross, and his expiration on
the Cross. For he continued there from the sixth hour until the ninth, as
the Evangelists declare. Let a Poet then make the application.

Poem. vocal. Christ's Triumph. page 49. by G. Fletcher
What better friendship then to cover shame?
What greater love then for a friend to die?
Yet this is better, to asselfe the blame,
And this is greater for an enemy.
But more then this, to die not suddenly
Nor with some common death, and easy pain,
But slowly, and with torments to be slain.
O depth without a depth, far better seen then said.
Secondly breadth: For here we may justly take occasion to behold how many were
the crosses which he endured upon this one cross for us. First, his legs and
hands by rude and boisterous hands are violently pulled out at length to the
places fitted for his fastening, then pierced through with sharp iron nails,
which were so big, Lib. 1. c. 17.
that as Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History reports, Constantinus eos
acceptos in fraena and gal^am mutavit, and ad bella usurpavit. Constantine
having received them from his mother, made of them a bridle and an helmet for
his own use in the time of war, which if it were so, it is no marvel if the
Prophet in his person complain: Foderunt manus meas, and pedes meos, as the
vulgar Latin reads it, Psalm. 21.17. They dug, as it we^e, or pierced deep
into my hands and feet, as it is in our English translation, Psalm. 22.16. Then
in the next place; he is raised from the ground, upon his cross, where, by
the weight of his body, his wounds are opened and enlarged, his nerves and
veins rent and torn asunder, and his blood gushed out abundantly. Thirdly,
his body exhaust of spirit and blood, is exposed naked to the cold air; the
Sun, during all the time obscured with a strange and unusual eclipse, as it
were, with horror impatient at the sight of those indignities, which were then
offered ^o the Son of God. Fourthly, he is afflicted with a wonderful and
exceeding drought, which Cyril says, was Vnum ex gravissimis tormentis; one of
his greatest, sharpest, and most grievous torments; occasioned by his former
wearisome travel, his sweating agony, and the effusion of so much blood. His
fifth pain was the want of the use of both his hands and feet, whereby he was
info^ced to hang immovable upon the cross; as being unable to turn any way
for his case; or to change the position and site of his body upon any terms.
The sixth and last, the blasphemous and contumelious words; which the
Pharisees, Scribes and Priests breathed out against him, which is more piercing
to an ingenuous and noble nature than any corporal punishment whatsoever (as I
have in part showed you before:) And in regard whereof it is said of Alexander
the great; that he forgave many sharp swords, but never any sharp words.

But the length and breadth of our Saviors cross is not greater than the
height and depth of it. That passion may be said to be deepest which
surpasses other passions in the sharpness and intensivenesse thereof. Now,
that our Saviors passion did so, it will easily appear by this first: That it
did not surprise him suddenly, but was long before foreseen and expected of
him. For if you search the Evangelists, you shall find his arraignment and death
often repeated from his own mouth, as Matthew. 17.22. and again, Matthew. 20.17.
as also Luke 9.44. And in the 18. of the same Gospel; He reckons up all the
particulars, as his delivering to the Gentiles, mocking, reviling, spitting
upon, scourging, putting to death, and the like, as you have heard before. Now,
as long as he foresaw he suffered: For the expectation of evil is not less
than the sense: but as to look long for a good thing is a punishment; so for
evil is a torment. And as for those proverbs, or sayings; Expectatio minuit
dolorem; expectation does diminish and lessen grief: and Iacula praevisa minus
feriunt: darts foreseen do wound the less. They are true, of such evils as
may be avoided and averted, either in whole, or in part. But not of those which
cannot be eschewed by the utmost of our Art and industry. For, for a man to be
blasted with a flash of lightning, or smitten with a thunderclap; troubles him
less to take him on the sudden when he thinks not of it; then, if it were
told him before, that at such an hour he should perish by such a means; for
this lingering expectation of it, does possess the soul continually with
horror and sad affrights.

Add to this, as adding more measure unto this; That the body of Christ was of
a most perfect temper and sound constitution; as being the immediate
workmanship of the Holy Ghost, by whom it was composed and framed in his
mothers womb without any the least help or assistance of man at all; now, the
stronger and purer the complexion is, the more lively and vigorous are the
senses; and so the more sensible either of pain or pleasure, according as the
objects are diversified. Thirdly, to make it yet more full; such was the
excess of Christ's love to man, intending a plenteous Redemption, that he
would not suffer his strength as in a dying man to languish and decay by
degrees, that so in the close nothing at all should remain; but even to his
last breath, he would retain that vigor in him, that he might fully feel the
smartnes of his pains, a principio passionis usque ad finem, from the first of
his passion, to the last, which that strong cry of his, when he gave up the
ghost does witness. For the Text says, that, clamavit voce magna, and
expiravit; He cried with a loud voice, or great cry, and gave up the ghost,
Mark 15.37. which strong cry shows that nature was strong in him: For, non
solent moribundi exclamare; dying-men are not accustomed to cry out so loud. So
that there is no questino to be made, he might have lived longer, but that (all
things being once accomplished to make our Redemption perfect and entire) he
would now die: Thereby to show himself to be Lord both of life and death. The
rareness and strangeness of which act wrought as rare and strange an effect
in the Centurion which heard it; For the hearing of him cry thus, made him to
cry out too, vere hic homo filius Dei erat, Truly this man was the Son of
God, verse the 39. of the former fifteenth chapter of Saint Marks Gospel. And
so Auditus invenit quod non visus (says S. Bernard) oculum species fefellit,
veritas auri se infudit. Ser. 28. i^ Cantica.
His hearing found out that which his seeing could not, by reason his mean
outside and exernall form deceived his eye: when as the truth infused it self
into his ears, answerable to that of the Apostle, Faith comes by hearing,
Romans 10.17.

The fourth and last is the depth thereof, which consists in this; That Christ's
passion was a full and solid passion, that is, an absolute and pure passion,
not mixed with any comfort to mitigate and ease it. Our cup of sorrows is never
in that extremity of bitterness, but that there is still some sugar mingled
with our gall; some sweet cast upon our sower; some consolation tempered with
our affliction. As for instance, it is deemed one great comfort in adversity to
have some of our friends about us, to condole and lament with us in our
sorrows. But alas, in the very entrance of his troubles, Christ is abandoned
of all. His Disciples, as you have heard, when this heavy storm begins to
fall upon him, forsake and leave him; one of them forswears him, another runs
away naked, rather than he will stay and confess him; who then shall comfort
him? Himself? Sometimes indeed our own thoughts find a way to succor us,
unknown to others (as my Lord Bishop of Exeter well observes) but alas, with
him at this time it is not so: For his soul is filled with evil; as the
Psalmist speaks in his person, Psalm. 88.3. who then shall do it? His Father?
Here, here was his hope, sed proh dolor! but out alas, no comfort as yet
appears from him; For he delivers him into the hands of his enemies; and when
he has done, turns his back upon him as a stranger, showing no compassion on
his passion, but rather wounds him as an enemy. Because, indeed, the Lord would
break or bruise him; as it is said of him, Esaias 53.10. B. Andrews non sicut.


It is strange, yea very strange, (says one) that of none of the Martyrs, the
like can be read to this of our Savior, when he says (My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?) who yet endured most exquisite pains in their
martyrdomes; yet we see with what courage, with what cheerfulness, joy and
singing, they are reported to have passed through their torments; Videor
mihimetipsi super rosas incedere; says Tiburcius, I seem to my self to walk
upon beds of roses, when he was forced to walk upon hot burning coals
barefoot; will you know the reason? Saint Austin sets it down; Martyrs non
eripuit, sed nunquam descruit: He delivered not his martyrs indeed; neither did
he forsake them: but as he delivered not their bodies, so he forsook not their
souls, but conveyed into them the dew of his Heavenly comfort, which was an
abundant supply for all they could endure othe^wise. Not so here, but
Vindemiavit me, says he in the Prophet, as the vulgar Latin reads it, Lament
1.12. that is, he has left me bare and naked, as the vintager leaves his Vines
when he has gathered and plucked off the Grapes. It is fathered upon Leo to be
the first that said it, and all antiquity allows of it; Non solvit union^m,
sed substraxit visionem. The Union was not dissolved, but the beams and
influence of comfort were for this time restrained, so that his soul was as a
dry, thirsty, parched heath ground; without any the least moisture or
refreshing of Divine consolation, Lib. 5. de Eccl. c. 17. p. 16.
yea he was destitutusomni solatio, as it is in Doctor Field, destitute and
void of all that solace, he was wont to find in God, in this fearful hour
of darkness and time of this his doleful Passion. The Wrath of God and his
indignation furiously marching against him, to require of him, as who had
undertaken it, The full recompense and satisfaction for our sins, as says
Doctor Robert Abbot that learned and painful preaching Bishop of Salisbury.
L. 3. Contra Bishop p. 114.


And now by this time, I doubt not, but that you plainly perceive; how that
Christ's pain and cross was the deeper and wider by all these crosses and
torments thus considered. And therefore, behold and see, all ye that pass by
(says he himself) if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done
unto me. Lam. 1.12. the very Chapter and Verse cited last before. For I am like
unto water powered out; all my bones are out of joint: my heart like Wax is
molten in the midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a potsheard;
and my tongue cleaves unto my jaws, so that thou have brought me even to the
dust of death. For Dogs have compassed me; and the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me, yea they have peirced my very Hands and my Feet, says the kingly
Prophet in his person, Psalm. 22.14, 15. verses, etc. And yet for all this, Amor
tenebat in cruce quem mors non potuit tenere in Sepulchro; His love still held
him on the Cross (as you have heard already) whom the violence and strength of
death could not hold in his grave; as you shall hear hereafter.

And thus you see, not only how, but why also Christ was crucified, as well in
his adversaries, as his own counsel and decree. They out of malice and hatred
toward him; He out of love and pity to us; suffered under Pontius Pilate and
was crucified upon the Cross. A word or two for use and application, and so we
will conclude these two circumstances of this Article.

Did Christ then suffer such things, yea, and far greater then those that you
have heard related unto you? (The afflictions and anguishes of the soul, being
much worse then those of the body, (These being but love tricks says one, to
what his soul endued) which notwithstanding we have but slightly touched upon;
as not altogether, in my judgment, so properly appertaining and belonging to
the Creed) why then we shall do well, a little to examine and consider the end
and causes why he did so: which if we do, we shall find, that it was not his
own, but our sin that brought all this evil upon him, according to that of
S. Peter, Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example to do the like, who
did no sin himself, neither was there guile found in his mouth, but they
were our sins which he bore in his body on the tree, 1 Peter 2.21, 22.
verses, as the Prophet likewise had foretold, saying, he has taken upon him
our infirmities, and he has carried our sorrows, Esaias 53.4. We have an usual
saying amongst us, that Charitas a semetipsa incipit; charity begins at home,
but Christ's charity ye see did not: for it began, proceeded, and ended all in
us: so that whatsoever our Savior, either Ferebat or gerebat, as one says,
either did, or abid, it was for us, both, Natus nobis and datus nobis, Esaias
9.6. Doctor Clarke.
He was delivered out of the womb for us, and he was delivered up to the
Cross for us. For, for us men and for our salvation, Incarnatus est, says the
Nicene Creed, he was incarnate of the Holy Ghost and was made man, and for us
men also Condemnatus est, he was condemned to die upon the Cross, so that he
was bred for us, and shall be dead for us, all that he suffered being for our
sins.

The Jews then are not the only actors in this tragic story of Christ's
suffering under Pontius Pilate and crucifying on the cross: But we are as
deep in as they, nay deeper in then they, as being the principalls, and they
only but accessaries thereunto. Because we were, Causa sine qua non, The cause
without which it had not been done, but they were our sins for which he was
wounded; and our selves for whom he was crucified. So that, Peccata mea,
peccata tua, peccata Adami ac omnium filiorum ejus caussa fuerunt passionis and
mortis silii Dei, says one, they were our evil motions, our vile thoughts,
our corrupt words, our ungodly works; that set Pilate, Herod, Annas, Caiaphas,
Judas and the Jews a work, what they did, they did it but as our instruments
and agents, so that to say the truth, Not Satan the tempter, nor Judas the
traitor, not Caiaphas the high Priest, nor Pilate, the judge: not the Jews
that conspired against him nor the false witnesses that accused him, not the
band of men that took him first, and derided him after, nor the Soldiers that
pierced him: no nor yet the very executioners that nailed him, on the Cross:
are so much to be accused and condemned for his sufferings as we, we I say,
even our selves and sins: which notwithstanding, is not spoken in favor or
excuse of these, or any of these. (For for such clients, I believe never any
man was so lewd as to become an advocate) but only to let men see and know,
yea, and acknowledge too, the greatness and grievousnesse of their sins; the
cure whereof occasioned all these fearful evils upon our blessed Savior,
before it could be thoroughly accomplished and effected. For hoc font derivata
clades; all the fore spoken of and last expressed afflictions and troubles of
his proceed only from this fountain and original. So that we, sinful we,
bound him with cords, beat him with rods, buffeted him with fists, crowned him
with Thorns, yea we reviled him and railed on him with our tongues; we nodded
at him with our heads, we thrust him through with spears, we betrayed him with
a kiss; We peirced his Hands and Feet with nails, we condemned him with
false witnesses, we powered shame and contempt upon his person; we judged him as
plagued and smitten of God. For in as much as our faults and offenses procured
these things to be done unto him, we are the doers of them and the dealers in
them, as himself is said to complain in the Poet.

Huc me sidereo descendere fecit Olympo,
Hic me crudeli peccatum vulnere fixit.
Hither have your sins brought me down to live a poor and contemptible life,
and here have your faults fastened me upon the Cross, to die an ignominious
and shameful yea bloody death.

of mortifying and crucifying them, we crucify him; as if to have done it once
had not been sufficient, but that as the Apostle speaks, we must crucify
again the Son of God, and make a mock of him, Heb. 6.6. so that we may use
S. Paul's words to the Galatians, though in another sense, Jesus Christ is
evidently set forth before our eyes and crucified amongst us, Gal. 3.1.

Thus hypocrisy bends the knee with ludibrious devotion, and bids, Hayle King
of the Jews; Presumption puts a reed, a rod, and scepter into his hands: The
children of darkness buffet and beat him; yea, and bid him prophecy who smote
him. The profane spit in his face: The sacrilegious cast lots for his garment:
the Schismatic divide his seamelesse Coat, which the rude soldiers did not.
Popularity washes her hands as innocent, yea to please men condemns Christ.
The drunkards in their carowses and unhallowed healths, give him a potion of
Gall. Bribery, extortion, covetousness, uncleanness, and all other kinds of
common and ordinary sins, prefer Barabbas before him. Simony crucifies him
between two Thieves. Heresy rackes his bones and disjoynts him. Superstition
betrays him with a kiss and despights him with seeming honors. Apostasy
denies him with his Apostle Peter, yea and forsweares him too. The roarers with
laughs and scoffs crucify him afresh: and with their blasphemy and outrageous
oaths, tear (O cause of tears) his Nails, his Sides, his Flesh, his Hands,
his Arms, his Bones, and all his Joints, and Members a sunder. These are our
offerings for Christ his sufferings.

But Oh beloved, was it not enough that he died once for us, but that we
through these our sins must put him to death still? Were those pains of his
so little and so light, that we should every day redouble them? Is this the
entertainment that so gracious a Savior has deserved by dying for us? Is
this the recompense of that infinite love of his, that we should thus cruelly
vex and wound him with our sins? If compassion of his smart cannot moove us;
yet let compassion of our own souls prevail with us. For how can we hope or
expect to find redemption by his Blood, while we continue by our horrid and
heinous sins to make new gashes in his Sides; to rub his Wounds afresh and
cause them stream a new, that were even closed up before? An act more Jewish,
then that of the Jews themselves. Let us then at the last for shame, by our
true and unfeyned Repentance, forsake that tyrant sin, which detaineth us in
servitude, shake off his Chains, cut asunder his Bands, and by a lively faith
run strongly, violently and speedily unto Christ, who hangs on the Cross, as
you have heard and seen, Habens ibi caput inclinatum ad osculandum, cor
apertum ad diligendum; and manus exteasas ad amplexandum. Having, not only his
Head bowed down there to kiss us, and his Heart open to love us: but his
Hands also stretched out wide to embrace us, and receive us upon our first
return. And therefore return, O Shulamite return, return, as it is said,
Can. 6.12. and this suffices for the first use.

Secondly, has Christ suffered all these things under Pontius Pilate? and
been content to have been crucified on the Cross also, only out of love to
us? Why then surely this requires a return of our love likewise back again
unto him. For nimis durus est animus, qui si dilectionem nolit impendere, nolit
rependere. It is too bad a disposition, that will neither offer love, nor
requite it being offered, as S. Bernard speaks.

If then there be any spark of ingenuity, or dram of good nature in us, let
us not deny him the affection of our love, that spared not the effusion of his
own blood for us, but from so many springs as he had members, drank salvation
unto us in a full cup thereof. And as a part of our love, being as the fuel to
keep that fire of his love still burning on the Altar of our hearts; let us
again and again consider what Christ has suffered for us. For the fruits and
benefits of the frequent commemoration of Christ his passion, nec pauci sunt,
nec parvi, says one, are neither few nor small, but these four at the least,
custodia a peccatis, spes firmior, praesumptio infirmior, charitas flagrantior,
it will keep and preserve us from falling into notorious sins and
delioquencies, strengthen and confirm our hope, weaken and abate our
presumption; and lastly, kindle and inflame our love and charity, as well among
our selves as toward him and his heavenly Father, which last I have especially
chosen to enlarge upon at this time. To which purpose therefore, mark once
more, I beseech you, how the Church speaks to each faithful soul, saying;
Come forth ye daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon, with the crown
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart, Cant. 3.11. So say I, O ye faithful souls,
daughters of your mother the Church, Go forth; Egredimini de sensu carnis, ad
intell^ctum mentis, Go out of the sense of the flesh, and come to the
understanding of the mind, come, I say, a little out of your selves, and by
holy meditation, behold your King Solomon; the true peacemaker, and your King
too, Christ Jesus (who though his Kingdom be not of this world, yet is a King
even in this world) with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him, that is,
with the crown of thorns upon his head, wherewith his mother, the Jews
Synagogue ( quae ei non sc matrem exhibuit, sed novercam, which herein proved
not her self indeed a kind mother unto him, but rather a stepdame) crowned
him, i. e. fodicavit and lancinavit, says Tertullian, galled him and gored
him. In the day of his marriage, i. e. in the day of his passion upon the
cross, when he was married to his Church built out of his side, as Adam to his
Eve created of his rib: In the day also of the gladness of his heart, i. e. in
the very season of his suffering, which was as joyful to him as a geniall and
nuptial day unto a bridegroom: come forth, I say, see him, consider him, and
meditate on him; Et palleat sub spinato capite membrum fieri delicatulum, and
let us be ashamed under an head so crowned with thorns, to become members of
delicacy and wanton niceness; sed studeamus ut membrorum vita capitis sit
corona, as Austin, but let us rather endeavor that the austere and mortified
lives of the members may be the crown and glory of the head, and freely
acknowledge and confess every one of us, Et quantum valeat, and quantum
debeat, as the same Father, as well his own worth, in that God would vouchsafe
to suffer such things for him, as his own debt and obligation of love and
thankfulness back again unto him for such his sufferings. And this he
expects and looks for at all our hands; crying out unto his Spouse in the
Canticles to this purpose, that she would set him as a seal on her heart, and
a signet on her soul, Cant. 8.6. which is as if he should say; Though I am now
going from thee for a time, yet forget me not: but as a loving wife frames the
Image of her dear husband in her heart; and as a longing woman imprints the
form of the thing which she longs for, on the child in her womb; so set me
as a seal on thy soul, think on me, delight in me, Figar tibi totus in
cord, qui totus pro te fui fixus in cruce, let me be wholly fixed, yea,
fastened in thy heart, which have been wholly fastened for thee on the cross.
And as that famous Artemisia so much affected her dead husband Mausolus, that
she took the dead ashes of his urne, and mingled them with her drink, and so
intombed his dead carkas in her living body; so do thou my Spouse, let me live
with thee, and in thee, even after my departure, eat me and drink me in the
Sacrament; let me be still in thine heart and on thine arm, in thine
intention, in thine operation, within thee, without thee, every where, and at
all times let me be beloved and thought upon on earth, as I am, and ever will
be careful of thee in heaven; let us, O let us then fulfill his desire now,
that he may accomplish all our desires hereafter. And this suffices for
Christ's sufferings under Pontius Pilate, and his crucifying.

Mark 15. verse 37. And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.


Dead.
THe next circumstance to be handled after the crucifying of Christ, is his
death, For so says the Creed; He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, etc. which is the very same with the Text read unto you; Jesus cried with
a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. For to give up the ghost, we all know in
our daily and ordinary experience, is as much as to dye, or to have our souls
separated from our bodies, which before did live, act, and appear together. So
that to say Christ is dead, is as much as to say, that after he had endured
manifold torments, as well in soul as in body, here upon the earth, that at
the last, per dolorum and vulnerum violentiam (as one says) through the
violence of the said wounds and afflictions, the natural frame and complexion
of his body (the conserver of his life before) being dissolved, his said soul
and body were separated asunder, vere and realiter, as truly and really as when
any one of us dies; Sermon. 131. ^ Temp.
so that, sicut in veritate natus, ita in veritate mortuus and sepultus est,
says S. Austin: As he was borne a man in the truth of our humane nature; so as
truly as any man else does, or ever did, he again died and was buried.

And thus we are come at the last to the sum of Christ's obedience unto his
heavenly Fathers ordinance, when commending his spirit unto him, in cruce
expiravit, he gave up the ghost upon the cross; or, as it is in the Creed, He
died, For so says S. Paul, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the
death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. yea, he was made a little
inferior to the Angels through the suffering of death, that by Gods grace he
might taste of death for all men, Heb. 2.9.

In which we may behold (as one says) Omnium Christi passionum, ac
afflictionum terminum. i. e. the end and termination of all Christ's sufferings
and afflictions; His consummatum est, or small finishing of all that belonged
to his pains and our peace; to his sufferings and our satisfaction. And till
this was finished, there could no peace be perfected, nor satisfaction of our
debts acknowledged. For as the Apostle says, stipendium peccati mors; The
wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. according to the great Lawmakers decree at
the first; In what day soever thou shall eat of the forbidden fruit, thou shall
die the death, Genesis 2.17. And his Laws are like the laws of the Medes and
Persians; they must not, nay, they cannot be altered.

And therefore there was a necessity laid upon Messiah, that he must be slain,
as the Prophet speaks, Dan. 9.26. For he that will take upon him to become a
Mediator unto God for sins; yea, and a redemption for sin too, he must be
content to pay the wages of sin, which as you hear, is death: For God is not
so wholly composed of Mercy, as altogether to neglect Justice, but his Law must
be thoroughly satisfied, before his Gospel can be effectually preached, Vt sic
justitia vinceretur diabolus, non potentia. That so the devil may be
vanquished by justice, not by power: So that thus it behooved then, Christ to
suffer and to rise again from death; that repentance and remission of sins
might be preached in his name to all nations, as he says himself, Luke
24.46.47. verses, yea, for this cause is he the Mediator of the new Testament,
that through death, which was for the redemption of the transgressions which
were in the former Testament; they which were called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance. For where a Testament is, there must needs be the
death of him that made the Testament; for the Testament is confirmed when men
are dead, for it is yet of no force as long as he that made it is alive;
wherefore neither was the first ordained without blood Heb. 9.15, 16, 17, 18.
verses, O come and hearken then what God has done for our souls, ut animas
nostras eriperet, animam suam posuit; he has laid down his own life that he
may save ours, and ut me a morte eriperet, In Psalm. 65.
mortem accepit, says Arnobius; and that I might live, he has been contented
to suffer himself to die, He gave up the ghost. Which phrase of expiring, or
giving up the ghost; as it shows his death and sacrifice upon the cross for
our sins to be voluntary; so his humane nature to be perfect and entire, as
well of a reasonable soul, as of humane flesh subsisting, as it is in
Athanasius Creed, notwithstanding never so many lewd and lying fancies of some
heretics to the contrary; so that Totus homo in Christo, as Saint Austin
speaks; The whole manhood was assumed to and by the Godhead, and not one part
of it alone. And in the same whole nature, he accordingly suffered under
Pontius Pilate, all those tortures and torments formerly recounted, and at last
died; which if it were not so, then were we, which have believed in Christ, of
all men most miserable, as being still in our sins; our preaching, and your
believing all but in vain, as Saint Paul inferres, 1 Corinthians. 15. For, si
aliquid ei defuit, non totum redemit; says Saint Ambrose: If he wanted any
part of man, then he saved not the whole man: For it is out of all question;
that whatsoever he assumed not, he redeemed not, as Nazianzene. But taking
all in reality of association and assumption, and dying according to all, in
verity of dissolution and disjunction; he redeemed all, even our whole persons
consisting both of souls and bodies.

Which brings this comfort and consolation unto us; that natural death which
at the first was inflicted as a curse upon Adam, and all his posterity, for
transgressing of GODS Commandment, as you have often heard already, is now
changed by this Death of Christ from a curse into a blessing, insomuch as
blessed are the dead, which hereafter or henceforth die in the Lord, Revelations
14.13. Yea our own death is made hereby a very bridge, or pathway as it
were, to lead us unto life. For he that hears my Word and believes in him
that sent me (says Christ himself) has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. John 5.24. Yea he
therefore took our humane nature and Flesh upon him, that he might destroy
through his own death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil,
and that he might deliver them which forfeare of death were all their life long
subject unto bondage, etc, Heb. 2, 14.15. verses.

Again, hereby the second death is also quite taken away, from all that are by
a true and lively faith ingrafted into Christ. There being no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus; as Saint Paul concludes, Romans 8.1. answerable
to that of Austin. Mors Christi simpla, mortem nostram duplam desiruxit: The
single death of Christ, has destroyed that double death of ours, unto which we
were all liable by reason of our sins. And therefore as the same Father says
elsewhere, O quam been te tuo impetu diabole percussisti: How well has the
Devil wounded himself through his own violence, seeing his cruelty in
sparing none, no not Gods own Son; has brought life and safety to others;
but destruction and confusion only to himself. For Ille sanguis (as he goes
on) quem effadisti, te vicit, me redemit. That very blood of his which thou
have wrongfully and unjustly shed, has vanquished thee and redeemed me. Prae
valuisti in paradiso, sed victus es de patibulo: And although thou prevayledst
and had the day in Paradise, yet thou have lost it again; by being conquered
and overcome upon the Cross. O quam grande mysterium, which is a great mystery
indeed, ut mors quae per lignum venit, per lignum superaretur: that that death
which came from the fruit of the tree, should upon the Tree be vanquished and
overcome, and that gate of life which was shut against Adam, should now be
opened to a thief.

By which it appears that Mors Christierat muscipula tantu^ diaboli: The death
of Christ was only a trap wherein to catch the Devil; Which he was willing
therefore to set up: Vt injusta mors, justam vinceret mortem: That his
undeserved death might free them from death that had deserved it. Et liberaret
reos just, dum pro eis occidebatur injuste, as the same Austin still: and that
he might acquit and discharge those that were guilty, because he that was
guiltless or not guilty was put to death for them: whereby because Non habebat
peccata propria digne delevit aliena: He that had no sins of his own did
worthily blot out the sins of other men. He gave up the ghost.

And here I might dismiss this point, had I not promised you at my first
entrance into this discourse, to show you a Quis Quis.
as well as a Quid: Who suffered as well as what. For here, if any where, is the
most proper place to bring it in. For seeing we have proved at large, as well in
our former as in this present tract; that (He) was the second Person of the
sacred Trinity that took our nature upon him, and in it suffered all these
things under Pontius Pilate for our sakes; why, here may arise the greatest
difficulty and doubt of all the rest, whether He could also dye. Whether He
that is God of God; yea, very God of very God; of the same substance with the
Father, and therefore equal to him as touching his godhead; by whom also were
all things made that were made, and so is Lord likewise both of life and death;
whether this so great, so good a person, could be subject unto death himself,
because our Creed tells us, not only that He suffered under Pontius Pilate and
was crucified, but that he dyed too; which to our natural reason and humane
capacities, seems (I must confess) to have two absurdities, if not
impossibilities in it, at the least. The one that Christ should dye, being
without sin, seeing death is the wages only of sin, as you have heard
already out of the Apostle, Romans 6.23. The other that he could, being the Son
of God.

For the salving and solving of which latter doubt (the former being
sufficiently cleared before) we must know, that God, in the person of Christ,
might dye, though the Godhead could not. For being a mixed person consisting of
two natures, as of Godhead and Manhood in one and the same subject; the one
passible and mortal, and the other impassible and immortal: that which was
humane and passible might suffer and dye, Citra ullam divinitatis injuriam ac
detrimentum: without any detriment or injury to the other. Ser. 64. in Evang.
Ioh.
So that, as Saint Austin says, Mortuus est filius dei, sed secundum carnem
mortuus; non secundum verbum quod caro factum est. The Son of God is indeed
dead, but it is only in his flesh which he took from us; not as he is the
word of God which took our flesh, and thereby dwells in us: but in that he
dyed, De nostro mortuus est, it is only in what he had from us; as in that we
live, de ipsius vivimus, it is alone by that life which we receive from him.
Nec potuit mori de suo, nec vivere de nostro: So that as he could not dye in
his own nature, so he could not but dye in ours, unless he would still have
been obnoxious and liable to the accusation of the Devil and all other
adversaries, of not taking really and truly our humane dying nature upon him.

And therefore as in the birth of Christ, humility was assumed by Majesty,
weakness and infirmity by power, and mortality by eternity; that so a perfect
mediator might be found to reconcile God and his sinful creatures together;
so for the final finishing of the said reconciliation and atonement; and for
the paying of our nature his due by death: the inviolable and impassible nature
of God, is likewise united to our nature that is passible, that so the said
Mediator may become able to perform all things requisite for our redemption,
by suffering and dying in our nature, although otherwise he could neither
suffer nor dye in his own.

And not only able to do it, but truly active also in the doing of it:
Compend. Theol. p. ^. c. 42.
For passibilitas ad satisfaciendum vel merendum non sufficit sine passione in
Actu, as Aquinas speaks. Passibility or a power to suffer is not sufficient to
merit at Gods hands, or make satisfaction for our sins, without actual
suffering indeed. No man being reckoned or accounted either good or evil by
his ability alone to do such and such things; but only because he has or
does actuate and perform them. Nec laus aut vituperium debentur potentiae sed
actui, as he goes on: so that praise or dispraise is not properly due to
powers, but only to Acts. In regard whereof Christ took unto himself: Non
solum passibilitatem nostram ut nos salvaret, not only our passibility and
power to suffer or dye, but that he might perfect and accomplish our redemption
to the full, and stop the mouth of all accusers whatsoever whether wicked men
or evil Angels, he did truly and indeed both suffer and dye; undergoing all
things for us, which by reason of our forefathers fall, we should have
undergone our selves: the chief whereof is death, ad quam omnes aliae
passiones humanae ordinantur sicut ad ultimum: unto which all other humane
passions do tend and are directed as to their last end. Thus far Aquinas.

And thus you see (beloved) how Christ the Son of God consisting of two
distinct natures as well divine as humane, should and could, might and did
suffer and dye, Salva tamen proprietate utriusque naturae: The property and
propriety of each nature notwithstanding being still preserved and reserved to
it self entire. As for instance, by the virtue and power of his divine nature,
he caused the soldiers and band of men which came to apprehend and take him,
to go backwards and fall to the ground: whereas in the weakness of his humane
nature, he was afterward apprehended, bound, imprisoned, carried before
several Judges, scourged, spit upon, derided, buffered, and at last condemned
as guilty. Again by the virtue and power of his divine nature, he converted
day into night at the time of his passion; and caused all the elements to
tremble and shake for dread: and yet in the weakness of his humane nature; his
hands were fastened with nails unto the wood of the Cross, and his whole body
stretched out upon it. By the virtue and power of his divine nature he opened
again the gates of Paradise to the good thief: And in the weakness and
imbecility of his humane nature, in the greatest depth and hurl of all his
troubles, he cries out unto his Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? By the virtue, and in the power of his divine nature, he offered up prayers
and supplications, with strong cryings and tears, unto him that was able to
save him from death; and was also heard in that which he feared, as the Apostle
speaks; Heb. 5.7. whereas in the infirmity and weakness of his humane nature,
he yielded up his spirit with commendations of it into his Fathers hands; and
gave up the ghost.

In all which passages of his Passion, then ye see, his divinity was never
totally eclipst, but still sends forth some beams of his might and majesty,
even in the midst of his greatest weakness and infirmity; and all to let us
see and know, that though his manhood suffer and dye, yet is his Godhead still
perfect and entire. And therefore though we hear much and often of the death
of Christ the Son of God; yet let us not be offended, nor troubled at it;
considering the admirable efficacy of it. In being, as full of horror and
terror to the wicked: so of comfort and consolation to the godly. So that in
nothing is that saying of the Apostle more true, then in the death of Christ.
Virtus in infirmitate perficitur, Power and strength is made perfect in
weakness: 2 Cor. 12.9. De duplici Martyrio.
For as Cyprian says, Ibi fracta est Satanae Tyrannis; ibi devicti sunt
inferi; ibi triumphatum est de Diabolo; ibi dejectus orcus, coelum apertum,
etc. Therein is the tyranny of Satan broken, and the infernal powers
overthrown; the Devil subjected, the Principalities of Hell dejected; and
Heaven it self opened to all true and faithful believers. So that, as he
goes on, Quid homine mortuo contemptius? quis enim vel Caesarem mortuum metuat?
sed Christi morte quid efficacius? velum Templi scissum est; terra concussa;
saxa discissa; monumenta aperta, etc. Although nothing be more contemptible
then a dead man, no man fearing, no not Caesar himself, when he is once dead:
yet nothing is more efficacious and powerful then the death of Christ: whereat
the veil of the Temple was rent, the earth did quake, the stones did cleave,
and the graves did open of themselves: so that many bodies of the Saints which
slept arose, as it is said Mat. 27.51, 52. verses.

A reason of which powerful effects, is this: that although the soul and body
of Christ were separated asunder by his death, a neutro tamen horum recesserit
divinitas; yet his divinity was separated from neither: But, Tam Dei virtus in
Christo, ex operibus quae fecit, apparuit; quam fragilitas hominis ex passione
quam pertulit, as Lactantius speaks. Inst. l. 4. cap. 14.
The power of his Godhead manifested it self in these his powerful works;
as well as the frailty of his manhood, in those other things which he suffered.

So that, Factus est homo, suscipiendo quod non erat; non perdendo quod erat,
as Saint Austin speaks: Although, Sermon. 60. in Johan.
by being made man, he took that which before he was not; yet he did not loose
nor let go any thing of what he was: Sed manens Deus factus est homo, But
continued God, although he was likewise made man. Accepit te, non consumptus
est in te, as he goes on: He indeed took thee unto himself, O man! but yet
did not consume or spend, waste or diminish himself in thee.

So that we must hold and believe, as that most Reverend, Incarnat. of Christ
the Son of God.
learned, and painful Archbishop of Armagh well observes: That there are two
distinct natures in Christ, Godhead and manhood; which are so distinct, as
that they do not make one compounded nature: but still remain uncompounded
and unconfounded together. And yet though never so distinct in their natures,
they are as firmly and fully united again in the person, as can possibly be
imagined and conceived: seeing in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, as the Apostle affirms; Colos. 2.9. that is, by such a personal and
real union, as does inseparably and everlastingly conjoyne that infinite
Godhead, with his finite manhood; in the unity of the self same individual
person. So that by reason of the strictness of this personal union of these
two natures in the person of Christ; whatsoever may be verified of either of
those natures, the same may be truly spoken of the whole person, from
whethersoever of the natures it be denominated: so far Doctor Usher.

Which if it be so (beloved) then by this time I hope you are as well satisfied
in the Quis, as the Quid; Who it is that suffered and dyed, as what he
suffered? (viz.) even Jesus Christ the Son of God, which was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary; as you have heard out of the former
Articles: even he also is the He, which suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, buried, etc. the worlds Creator, and man's Redeemer; the
Almighty God himself. Totus Christus, though not Totum Christi, whole Christ,
though not all of Christ; was the Quis, which was the passive Agent, and active
Patient in all these things: for Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the
ghost.

Neither let it seem strange to any man, that that should be predicated and
spoken of the whole person of Christ, which can be verified but of one of his
natures; seeing without any note or thought of strangeness at all, we do the
like daily in our own and ordinary discourses; even concerning our selves, and
proper actions. For whereas the whole person and compound of man consists of
two parts; and those very different in their qualities and operations, as of a
soul and a body: whereof the one is carnal, the other spiritual: and each
has his proper actions and employments accordingly by themselves; as the body
to eat, drink, sleep, walk, run, ride, suffer hunger, thirst, heat, cold,
and the like; and the soul to understand, conceive, remember, forget; to be
cheerful, or sorrowful; angry, or well pleased; and such like: either of
which cannot truly be verified of the different part, as not the bodies actions
of the soul; nor the souls operations of the body; And yet we usually refer
both, and all to the whole person: and that without any incongruity or
unpropernesse of speech; considering the firm union that is betwixt them. So,
by reason of the hypostaticall union and communion of properties, that is
betwixt the two natures in Christ; Divine, and Humane: That which is proper but
to one, may safely be predicated, and spoken, and applied to the whole.

Vigilius.
As also if man, whole man, may in himself have two such contrary qualities; as
to be able to dye, and not to dye: To dye in his body, and not to dye in his
soul; as our Savior himself has taught us: saying, Fear not those that can
kill your bodies, but not your souls: Then much more may Christ, whole Christ,
dye in one nature, and yet live in another. And in him, God be said to dye too;
and Man to live for ever. In him, I say; the second Person only of the
Trinity. For to speak it of any of the other two persons, whether Father or
Holy Ghost; it is no less then blasphemy: and that which never came so much as
in the thought of any orthodoxe Christian; much less divine: although some
Heretics there have been called Patro-passioni, which have seemed to atribute
suffering to the Father. Dr Clarke.
But a learned Clarke of our own calls it an unlearned heresy, sprung of
Scriptures misconstrued, Christ's speech especially; I and my Father are one,
etc. and therefore I will not so far trouble my self or Readers, as to go
about to confute it. Sed his perplexioribus disputationibus praecisis, as
Chitraeus speaks: but leaving all such intricate and perplexed discourses, as
Heretics did usually beat their brains about, we will fall to use and
application. Fides enim dum simpliciter proponitur, intellectum illustrat; dum
autem altissima ejus mysteria aperiuntur, and applicautur; voluntatem incendit,
says one. For as the mysteries of faith, simply preached and propounded do
illustrate and inform the understanding only: So being opened and applied,
they stir up the will and affections also; by kindling in them an holy zeal
and heavenly devotion toward those objects their said faith apprehends and
lays hold upon; especially in this mystery of the suffering and death of
Christ: Vbi maxim, amore and charitate nobiscum certasse Deus videtur, as my
Author goes on. Wherein above all, God seems to provoke man, by the
excessivenesse and superabundance of his love first shown, to make a return
of his love and thankfulness back again unto him.

Well then, for our better proceeding in this kind, let us take notice with
Aquinas, that In Christi passione and morte quatuor consideranda sunt, in the
death and suffering of Christ, there are these four things to be considered.
viz. Dilectio ejus, reamando: amaritudo ejus, compatiendo: Fortitudo ejus,
adversa patienter sustinendo: and utilitas ejus, gratias agendo: that is, His
love first, which as I have already said and shown, should provoke us to love
him again. His bitter grief and sorrow next, which should move our pity and
stir up compassion in us toward him. Thirdly, his fortitude, in undergoing all
things so potently and powerfully for us; which ought to be as a motive and
incentive to the like valor and fortitude in us, in enduring trials and
troubles for his names sake: and lastly, the benefits and profits that we reap
thereby, to work gratitude and thankfulness in us for such his inestimable
mercies extended toward us: Of the former of which uses, I spoke sufficiently
the last day, so that the second only shall be that which I will insist upon
at this time.

And that is this, Gregory says, Moral. 19.
Tanto quisque est perfectior, quanto perfectius sentit dolores alienos. that
is, Every Christian is by so much the nearer to perfection, by how much he is
more perfectly and truly sensible of another miseries and afflictions, and
then surely much more, when it is of the miseries and afflictions of his
blessed Savior himself.

And therefore as he has had compassion on us, for the miseries which we by
our sins have procured to our selves; so let us have compassion on him, for
the sufferings which our miseries likewise have procured unto him. For there is
no reason, that seeing he out of his love did vouchsafe to suffer and dye for
us; that we should be so ungrateful and unthankful as not to be willing to
suffer with him. It is Saint Austins just complaint against the merciless and
hard-hearted Jews: that whereas all the elements were disturbed and out of
course at the death of Christ; Sola corda Judaeorum non moventur, only the
hearts of these his persecutors, could not be mollifyed and broken, no nor
brought to shed a tear for him, that shed his blood, and lost his life too for
them.

Which is a grievous complaint indeed: that seeing at the Passion of Christ,
the veil of the Temple was rent, the rocks did cleave, the earth was moved,
the graves were opened, and the whole World was overcast with the mournful
darkness of sorrow and lamentation (as you have heard before) as if it did all
suffer with him, solus homo non compateretur pro quo solo Christus patitur.
These should suffer for whom Christ suffered not, and only man be found void of
compassion, for whom alone he suffered this passion.

O let us then (beloved) imitate and follow his example, and not theirs: For
his words toward them are as smooth and soft as oil, when as their both words
and works toward him, are no other, no better then very swords: crying out
against him, Let him be crucyfied, let him be crucified, when as he prays for
them: Father forgive them, they know not what they do. So that although these
Jews may seem to be composed even of Iron and flint, Ser. de Pass. Dom.
having hearts harder then the nether Millstone: Lapide^ tamen percutiunt
molliorem, de quo resonat tinnitus pietatis and ebullit oleum charitatis, as
Bernard speaks, yet the rock against whom they smite is of a milder and
gentler temper; from whence proceed only the noise of water pipes running
through the streams of piety, and boiling up and over, with the oil of
charity. Quomodo potabis Domine desiderantes te torrente voluptatis tuae, qui
sic perfundis Crucifigentes te oleo misericordiae tuae? as the Father goes on.
How will thou then O Lord, drench those that hunger and thirst after thee, with
the full torrent and current of thy everlasting pleasures, that do thus
besprinkle those that crucify thee with the oil of thy mercies?

O let us, let us then, follow not them, but him, in our tender-heartednesse
and compassion toward him; that as he has had, and still has compassion on
us; so we may not be like these Jews, pitilesse and uncompassionate of him.
For non potest^sse in corpore qui non vult pati cum capite: Christ suffered for
none but such as suffer with him. For howsoever to himself, he be now in
Heaven, and suffer no longer; yet to us he ought to be still on earth, hanging
in our sight upon the Cross, as being crucified amongst us: as Saint Paul
says, Gal. 3.1. And therefore it becomes us by compassion to carry about in
our bodies the sufferings and dying of our Lord Jesus Christ, that his life
also may be made manifest in our body, as he again, 2 Cor. 4.10. When David
willed Vriab to rest him and take his ease, 2 Samuel 11.11. Vriah answered, Shall
the Ark of God and Joab my General with it, be skirmishing in the field, and
shall I take my ease? So say I (beloved) shall we see our Captain and noble
General Jesus Christ, fervently fighting, in bloody conflcts for us and our
sakes, in our defense and quarrel; and shall we take our pleasure and pass on
securely? Shall he be crowned with thorns, and we with roses? Shall he spend
his days in dangers and distress, and we pass our time in dalliance and
delights? Oh no (beloved) no; but let us by true repentance and sorrow for our
sins, have some feeling and compassion of those things which Christ suffered
for us, by the sense of that sorrow which we feel for sin in our selves: and
if we will be partakers of his passion, let us pray I say for compassion, that
we may not only look upon the Cross, and see him dead as they that looked
upon him whom they had pierced, John 19.37. but also that we may be crucified
with him, and feel him dye; as she that was pierced when she looked upon him,
as it was foretold of Mary, Luke 2.35. And let us beseech him to give us hearts
of flesh which may suddenly be broken into powder and dissolve into tears, if
not for his pains (who did sweat drops of blood trickling down to the ground,
and afterward dyed) yet for our own sins, which then bred his sorrows, and
now work our woes. Ser. de Pas^.
Immo vigilate animo fratres (says Saint Bernard) ne infructurse vos hujus
temporis sacramenta pertranseant: Watch, O my brethren, in your hearts and
souls, and let not the mysteries of this solemn time of Christ's Passion,
pass over your heads unprofitably. But seeing he bestows on you so plentiful
a blessing and redemption: Date receptacula munda, give it kind and clean
entertainment: Devotas exhibentes animas, mentes vigiles, etc. yielding unto
him devout souls, watchful minds, sober affections, and pure and undefiled
consciences, for his so many and so great graces extended toward you. Neither
let your particular and private profession of Piety and godliness alone, put
you in mind of this your more then ordinary solicitude and carfulness at
this time, but the general observation and practice of the whole Church also:
Cujus filii est^s, whose children and sons you are; Vniversi siquidem
Christiani, sacra hac septimana, aut praesolito, aut praetorsolitum pietatem
coluni, says he. For all Christians whatsoever in this Great and Holy Week,
do observe holiness, and practice Piety more then usual, in assuming and
taking upon them extraordinary modesty, humility, gravity, Vt sic Christo
patienti quodammodo compati videantur, that so they may seem to have a
compassion and fellow feeling in themselves of those things which Christ
suffered for them, Quis enim tam irrel^giosus, qui non conpungatur, quis tam
insolens ut non humilietur, etc. For who is so void of all godliness and
religion, as not to feel compunction? who so haughty and insolent as not to
put on humiliation? who so furious and wrathful, as not to be mollified and
assuaged? who so forward to delights and pleasures, as not to be willing to
abstain and forbear them? who so flagitious and nefarious, as not to bridle
and keep himself within compass? who so malicious and full of wickedness in
any kind, as not to clo^th himself with the weed of woe, and garment of
repentance at this time. For nothing in the world was ever better done; Quam
quod factum est a Domino his diebus, then what the Lord has wrought in this
Week for us. Neither can any thing better, or more useful be commended unto
the world; Quam ut ritu perpetuo celebret, etc. then the celebration of the
same by a perpetual right; that so the memorial of his abundant sweetness,
and kindness in this kind; may every year, in the longing and desire of our
souls, be preserved and continued amongst us. For, nihil tam ad mortem, ^uod
non morte Christi sanatur. There can be nothing so deadly in us, which the
death of Christ (at this time sustained for us) does not make whole unto us.
Thus far Barnard.

So that we may all then justly say, What a good Friday was that to me; though
otherwise (O Savior) a Week of pains to Thee? Hebdomada Paenosa; a Painful
Week, so Bernard. H^bd^mada Magna.
Hebdomada Magna; a Great Week, so Chrysostom. Paenosa sibi, Magna mihi;
Painful to him, Great to us. Not that there be more Hours or Days in it,
then in other Weeks; Sed quia Magna quaedam and ineffabilia bona contigerunt
nobis in ea, Hom. 29. in Genesis
says Chrysostom; but because great and unspeakeable good has in the same
betided and befalne us. For therein, says he, is our daily warfare finished;
death extinguished; the curse removed; the tyranny of the Devil dissolved; and
his vessels broken asunder and taken from him. God is become reconciled unto
men; the Heavens made passable and penetrable, all distances conjoined; the
hedge removed; the windows opened, and men and Angels brought to converse
together: so that the God of peace has pacified and appeased all differences
whatsoever both in Heaven and in Earth. And for this cause do I call this, The
Great Week (says he) because herein the Lord has conferred such a many and
multitude of his Great gifts amongst us. In regard whereof also it is, That all
the Faithful do the more diligently at this time, apply themselves to the
works of mortification, fastings, watchings, nightly devotions, and deeds of
charity, Tam dando quam condonando, as well in giving to those that want, as
forgiving those that have offended us; that so they may seem to give honor
more then ordinary to this Time and Week; in which the Lord above others has
so far benefitted, blessed, yea and honored us. Nay (as he proceeds to say)
Kings and Rulers themselves are not ashamed to let it appear, how venerable
and sacred they hold these days; by commanding a cessation and rest from
civil Functions and employments; shutting up the doors of all Judicial Courts
and places of Judicature, and by removing out of the way for this time all
shows of difference and debate, strife and contention amongst men, whereby
with the greater freedom, tranquillity and peace of mind; Liceat ad
spiritualia recte perficienda festinare; they may perform rightly and
reverently their spiritual devotions.

And not only so, Sed and aliam liberalitatem ostendunt; They show their
bounty and liberality also another way; and that is this: by letting loose
prisoners, and granting their pardon and release to such as are in durance at
this time; that so they may imitate and follow the example of our Lord
himself. Because, Sicut ipse gravi nos peccatorum carcere exolvit, and
innumeris bonis frui fecit: eodem modo and nobis faciendum est, ut simus
imitatores misericordiae Domini nostri: As he has set us free from the prison
of our sins, and made us partakers of many happinesses besides: so ought we
to show mercy unto others, as he has done to us; according to his own precept
in the Gospel, Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful: Luke
6.36. And thus you see, how we may, and ought all to honor and celebrate this
Time and Week; in which so much good has been done, and kindness shown unto
us. So that I beseech you, (as mine Author Saint Chrysostom concludes) that
now, if at any time, you would be pleased to lay aside all your vain and
worldly cares and cogitations; and with pure minds purged from all impieties
and corruptions, as well of flesh as spirit, you would with diligence and
watchfulness attend to your devotions. And let none that is now entered into
the House of God, have any wandering thoughts, or regard to his secular and
worldly businesses and affairs: Vt digna laborum mercede recepta, iterum domum
proficisci liceat; That so he may return unto his own house and home again,
laden with a full recompense and reward of all such his spiritual labors. And
thus far Chrysostom of the Great Week. And thus far I of the sufferings
and death of Christ, in the same Week: or his giving up the ghost.

Buried.
THe utmost point and period of the sufferings and death of Christ, and the
last degree of the dejection and humiliation of his assumed humanity; is
reckoned by the general consent of most and best Divines to be his burial:
that is, when after his death, his body like other men's, was laid into the
ground; that so men might see and know that he was dead indeed: according as
it was foretold of him, That he should make his grave with the wicked, and with
the rich in his death, though he had done no wickedness; neither was any
deceit in his mouth: Esaias 59.3. For as Jonas was three days and three nights
in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth,
says he of himself: Matthew. 12.40. For the better record of the truth of which
prophesies, all the four Evangelists have reported and set down the manner of
it; as ye may find in them, if you please to have recourse unto them: Saint
John shall serve for my purpose in this place, as being somewhat larger in some
circumstances then the rest, who describes the order of Christ's burial in this
sort. After the death of him, (says he) Joseph of Arimathea besought Pilate
that he might take down the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him license. He
came then and took Jesus body. And there came also Nicodemus, and brought
Myrrh and Aloes, mingled together about an hundred pound. Then took they the
body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen clothes, with the odours; as the
manner of the Jews is to bury. And in that place where Jesus was crucified was
a Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepulcher, wherein man was never yet laid.
There then laid they Jesus, because of the Jews preparation day; for the
Sepulcher was near; John 19.38, 39, 40, 41, 42. verses.

Where ye see then a large description of the solemnity of his burial; in
which we may observe, that though his enemies did crucify him, and put him to
death; yet his friends only take care to bury him, and have him decently
interred. Which argues the sincerity of their affection toward him; though as
yet they durst not openly confess him for fear of the Jews. And it was more
fittingly done by these, then it could have been done by his known Disciples;
because, as Saint Austin says, Ser. 117. de Temp.
Si Apostoli sepelirent eum; dicerent non sepultum quem Judaei nunciaverant
raptum: The world might have been apt to believe that he had never been
buried at all, seeing the Jews gave out that he was stolen away. And because
he dyed to save other men, it was but reason he should be laid in another man's
grave. Vt quid enim illi propria sepultura, qui in se propriam non habebat
mortem? says the same Austin: Ser 133. de Temp.
For why should he have a Sepulcher of his own, to whom death nor burial did
not properly belong? Vt quid illi tumulus in terris; cujus seeds manebat in
coelis? Or, why should he look for a Tomb on earth, whose habitation and
abiding place was only in Heaven? neither indeed had he any: For Saint Matthew
tells us, that Joseph laid him in his own new Tomb, which he had hewne out
in the Rock: Matthew. 27.60. And thus much briefly of the manner of Christ's
burial.

The causes thereof is the next thing to be considered; which are assigned by
Writers upon this subject to be diverse. I wi l prosecute only some few of
the chief, and so conclude. The first whereof shall be this, (viz.) That the
truth of his death might thereby be manifested and confirmed. For living men
use not to be buried, but only such a^ are dead. To which purpose also some
other parts and passages of his Passion may be urged and alleged As that a
Soldier thrust a spear into his side. That he was taken down from the
Cross, so soon as they perceived him to be dead indeed. That they anointed
and imbalmed him to the burial, and wrapped him in linen clothes; and the
like. For as by touching, handling, and seeing of him; as also by his eating of
broyled fish afterward, and part of an honey-combe; we conclude the truth of
his Resurrection: so by these other circumstances, the truth of his death.

Secondly, that in his Grave he might bury all our sins; for which that curse
was imposed on us: In pulverem reverteris, Thou shall return to dust: Compend.
Theol. c. 49.
Genesis 3.19. For as Aquinas well observes, Sin has brought upon us, not only
infirmities and afflictions in the time of our lives; but defects also even
after our death, as well in our bodies as our souls. In our souls, to descend
to the lowest Lake, contrary to the nature of spiritual essences; which should
ascend rather to the highest heavens: and in our bodies, to return again to
the earth from whence they were taken; contrary to the Law of our Creation,
which was to have been so quickened by the spirit of life, as not to have died
at all; but to have lived together with the soul for ever.

Now this defect of our bodies, is to be considered (as our School-man
speaks) Secundum positionem, and secundum resolutionem; either according to
its position, or resolution. Its position, is only to be laid in the ground;
Its resolution, is also to be dissolved into the first elements of which it was
compacted and composed. The former of these Christ would, and did undergo, but
not the latter; according to that of the Psalmist: Non dabis sanctum tuum
videre corruptionem; Thou shall not suffer thy holy One to see corruption: (
viz. by the putrefaction of his body) Psalm. 16.10.

The reason whereof is this; because as the matter or materials of Christ's body
coming from the nature of man; was in regard thereof to be returned to 'its
proper and accustomed place under the ground: ( Locus enim corporibus debetur
secundum materiam praedominantis elementi; that is, Place is due to bodies
according to the matter of the predominant element, which is Earth.) So the
frame and composure of his body, coming not from man; but from the virtue, and
power, and workmanship of the Holy Ghost, was not to be dissolved: neither
would he, or did he undertake it; because herein he was singular, and differed
from other men. Thus far Aquinas.

Thirdly, he was therefore buried, to show that we by Baptism are buried
with him into death; (as the Apostle speaks) that like as he was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in
newness of life: Romans 6.4.

Fourthly, he was buried and rested in his grave the whole day of the Jews
Sabbath, that he might sanctify an eternal Sabbath of rest unto his children,
unto which although they were at first created; yet (by reason of sin and the
Devils malice) they had been deprived, unless he had dyed and been thus buried
to restore it again unto them.

Fifthly, he was buried, to the end that he might hallow the earth by his
sacred body, to become a receptacle of rest for the receiving of our bodies
also: Which must needs be a great comfort to the godly to know and believe, how
that by his grave and buryall; he has sweetly perfumed our graves wherein we
shall be buried: and instead of stinking houses of perdition, has made them
chambers of quiet rest and sleep unto us: so that as the Prophet says, Peace
shall come and they shall rest in their beds (that is, their graves) every one
that walks before him, Esaias 57.2.

And in these respects, and sundry others which might be thought upon: The
buryall of Christ, is esteemed by some Ancient Fathers, to be more h^nourable
then his birth; according to that of Saint Austin: Gloriosior est sepuli^ra
quam nativitas in Christo, ista enim co^pus mor^al^ genuit, illa edidit
immorta^e. Because that brought forth a body which was mortal, so that it both
could, and did dye; whereas this restored and returned it immortal, and which
can dye no more; but lives and abides now for ever. And as after his birth,
he fell into many tortures and troubles, miseries, and afflictions in this
life: so after his buryall he has passed immediately from death to life in the
land of the living: So that Religiosior plane est ista quam illa nativitas, as
the Father goes on. This latter birth of his, is more to be celebrated and held
sacred then the former; because in that the Lord of the whole World was kept
close prisoner, nine months together in his Mothers womb; whereas this
detained him only three days in the womb of the earth. In which respect, Illa
cunctorum spem tardius protulit: Haec omnium salutem citius suscitavit, That is
said, but to delay our hope, and this to finish more speedily our Salvation. In
regard whereof also the Prophet says: That Sepulchrum ejus erit gloriosum, as
the vulgar Latin reads it: Esaias 11.10. that is, His Sepulcher or burial shall
be glorious: not by reason of the stateliness of his tomb; or magnificence of
the pomp and solemnity at his burial. For herein it is very likely that the
Sepulcher and sepulture of Alexander the Great, and many other earthly Princes,
might far outstrippe and overgoe him, exceed and excel him much: but only,
Quia ex morte ad vitam and gloriam aeternam revixit, as says Chitraeus;
because herehence he passed presently from death to life, and from mortality
to immortality and eternal glory: whereas all those great Monarchs of the
World, as well as meaner persons; remain under deaths arrest till this present
day, and so are like to continue to the Worlds end.

And therefore, although these Potentates of the earth can find neither comfort
nor glory in their grave, though they go with never so much pomp and glory to
it: Yet we which are Christians, do expect and look for both by reason of
the buryall of this our Savior who (as you have heard) has hereby sanctified
our graves to be unto us as our beds, wherein our bodies rest from their
labors till the general resurrection at the the latter day, and further has
opened unto us a way from thence to eternal glory: So that although we dye and
be buried as other men, yet we shall rise again with him from the earth to
life everlasting.

And lastly, to conclude; we may from this buryall and sepulture of Christ,
learn and note the civil use of the grave, to be necessary and fitting for
all persons and people whatsoever, to bury their dead out of sight, and from
annoyance, and offense that they may otherwise come from their deceased bodies.
It being reckoned among the blessings of God, to be decently and comely brought
unto our graves, and so laid and put into them; and not to be cast out as wile
carcasses to the beasts of the field, or fowls of the air: as it was
threatened and imposed as a curse upon Jeconiah, to be buried as an Ass is
buried; even drawn and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem, Jer. 22.19.

And therefore Diogenes is too currish and uncivil to say, Cast me out and lay
a staff by me; as seeming to take no thought for seemly buryall at all:
whereas the Saints of God have always had a special care of it. Abraham
purchasing a possession of buryall (the first purchase that we read of in the
book of God) wherein to bury his dead out of his sight, as ye may see, Genesis
23.4. And the Son of God himself (the subject of our discourse at this time)
submitting and permitting his body after his death to be put into a decent and
comely grave; as here you see.

But yet if it so fall out, as oftentimes in wars, in pestilence; in drowning
and the like, it does: That the godly happen to be deprived of seemly and
Christian buryall; as the two witnesses of Christ, through the rage and
inhumane cruelty of their persecutors were, as it appears, Revel. 11.8, 9. Let
all men know, that this is no hurt or detriment unto them either in the
resurrection of their bodies, or salvation of their souls: No more then the
st^tely and pompous tombs and buryall of the wicked can benefit or profit them
either of these ways. For all the pomp and honor done unto their bodies,
cannot keep their name and fame, from shame and dishonor, no^ their souls
from the fire of hell torments and confusion. Luke 16.22, 23.
The rich glutton dyed and was buried (richly no doubt and sumptuously) but his
soul for all that went to hell, where it was tormented. Lazarus dyed likewise,
and no mention is made of his buryall; but yet it is expressly said, That his
soul was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom; What profit then had the rich
man in that his body was buried; or what disprofit or hurt was it to Lazarus
though his body were not?

Let us not be careless then of the decent and comely burial of our bodies,
nor neglect to hew us out a Tomb, as Joseph here had done; or to provide
Coffins or Graves for them: but above and before all, let us be careful to
provide that our souls may be carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And
this suffices for the burial of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I will conclude the whole discourse with Saint Augustines Prayer upon the
Passion, in this manner. O thou most gracious God, which for the redemption of
the world did vouchsafe to be borne into the world; to be circumcised as a
Jew; and yet to be rejected by the Jews thy Contrymen, and Kinsmen,
according to the flesh: to be betrayed by thine own Apostle Judas the Traitor,
and that with a kiss, the sign and pledge of love: Yea, to be bound with
Cords, and so led as an innocent and harmless Lamb unto the slaughter; to
be undecently and uncivilly presented and offered to the sight and view of
Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, and Herod, to be accused by false witnesses; to have
thy sacred body tormented with scourges, and thy blessed soul tortured and
afflicted with revilings and reproaches; to be besmeared with filthy spittle,
and to be crowned with piercing and pricking Thorns: to be beaten and
buffeted with fists, stricken with rods, blindfolded in thy face, despoyled of
thy garments, fastened to the Cross with nails; and so lifted up upon the
Cross naked, in the wide and open air: To be accounted and crucified among
thieves, to be offered Vinegar and Gall to drink, and lastly, to have thy
sides wounded and broken, pierced and launced with a spear: Thou, most
gracious Lord, I say, by these most holy and sacred sufferings of thine, (which
I, though most unworthy, do thus recount and recollect) as also by thy holy
Cross and death, deliver me, and set me free from the punishments and pains
of Hell; and vouchsafe to carry me with thee to that blessed place of rest, and
Paradise of pleasure; whither thou carryedst that good thief that was
crucified with thee: who with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, live and
reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.

