The Crafty Maid's GARLAND, Containing Four New SONGS.

Trick for Trick, or the Squire's Son well fitted.

The Lady's Answer that was tricked of her intended

Husband the Squire by Molly his servant.

Sally's lamentation for her dear Billy,

The swains complaint for Dorinda,

figure of a lady

Printed for M. Deacon, at the Horse-shooe in (...) street

1st. Trick for Trick or the Squires Son well fitted
A Batchellor near Oxford who was a squire's son.
he kept a handsome house keeper the which he doate^ o^
He Would often take her by the hand fetching a sigh and cry,
O love me dearest Moly or for thy love I die,
Young Molly then Replied I am but a fitly Maid,
At your follies I admire don't banter at this Rate,
says he I do not banter Love and that you soon shall see,
speak up my pretty Molly love can you fancy me.
With Oaths and protestations he made a solemn Vow
With twenty Opera^ions but mark good people now
Poor Molly being entangled in fickle Cupid s snare.
he quickly got to bed to her as you the truth shall here
But when poor Girl she proved with child and he of it did kno^
the squire guickly changed his mind and did to another go^
to one that had much wealth in store but when she knew tha^
she cried to my grief i find there is deceit in Men,
she was a merchants daughter worth* bun red pou^^s a yea^ the^
But mark what follows after more cruel and seve^e,
Poor Molly being big with child is grieved her heart to s^
the squire love another! O woeful perjury,
her ^ather was not willing that she should married be,
Because she was an heiress therefore they did agree,
to marry the next morning before the break of Day,
To me at the Church door just as the Hour of three.
Young Molly was told of this by one that was her Frien^
I will come even with him Girl and that you may depen^
That i will come up with for all his Perjury,
That for the trick which he has done i will (...) him to a I^
he writ a letter privately and sealed it with her hand
And sent it to the Lady to let her understand,
That he was taken very ill therefore my dear I say,
Pray let the wedding be put of an ill ano her Day.
Young Molly the next Morning by one a Clock arose,
Before the Day was dawn put on her finest Clothes,
Likewise a new kapt Riding-hood the same was faced with green,
Which she put on for fear her great Belly should be seen
With a mask upon her Face to the Church she did retire.
Just at the Hour where she met the Parson and the Squire,
Who did salute her wi^h a kiss and thus to her did say.
bless be the star that brought us both to see this happy Day
Then married they were presently befe the break of Day
The squire took his lovely bride and hom^wards took his way
And as he rid along the road said he my dearest dear.
If your Father knew of this Lord he would stamp and swear,
The Damosel gave a smile but gave him no reply.
And when he came to his own Door he light imediately,
Down from his stately steed he took his lovely bride,
Bringing of her within the doors he made her this Reply,
You are welcome here my dear unto your habitation,
And going to salute her he burst into a Passion,
Oh me says he what have i done and started at the sight
says she don't be concerned you have done a thing that is right
You cunningly deceived me when my Maidenhead you got
but now if you will believe me you are fitted for the blot
You love the tops of vessels but cannot endure the draggs,
But now your like to see it out as sure as Eggs are Eggs,
2d. The Lady's Answer that was trick't of her intende^ Husband the Squire by
Molly his servant.
To the same Tune.
NO Lady in the Nation is more unfortunate?
I Am in a hopeless Station as here i shall relate,
I am bereft of my true love whom i dear admire,
Behold young Moll her craft improved to rob me of my Squi^^
Behold i am a fortune in dowed with Gold so bright,
The squire did importune to gain me Day and Night,
(...) purple^ ^ate and wining air and charms did me invite
I must confess i loved my squire more then Lord or Knigh^
He gained my affection by Cupid i was led,
It was my loves election i thou't with him to wed,
my Father not consenting I thou't him most unkind,
But Molly circumvented O was not she unkind,
The appointed time was fixed in the morning before Day
Our heart were intermixed we thou't of no delay,
it was three in the Morning on which we both agreed,
When skies was dark adorned and Clouds in fable weeds,
But ah the night before this my dreaming happiness,
when nothing filled my thou'ts but bliss I looked for nothing les^
A letter i received which Molly did invent,
By her i was deceived and Robbed of my content,
You heard how Moll continued in mask and Riding-hood,
And how she me deprived you all have under stood.
Ah she did with my Squire wed unknown to him indeed.
And ah i thou't him sick in bed her pr^ject did succeed,
In true light loose carriag'd Molls chastity was lost,
(...) could ^he kept from marriage alas it was quite crossed,
O make a wife of such a one besides of mean degree,
but i alas in vain make moan, Moll has deceived me,
^ome take away my ^iging fine my Chains and costly Jims?
^o more i^ splendour i will shine my pearls and Diamond ring
or ever I will lay aside and mourn for his sweet sake
Virgin i will still abide since Moll my love did take,
(...) never shall forget my squire so long as life shall last,
(...) love to me was so entire as many knows are past,
^las by Moll we are both betrayed in sadness i may sit,
^ho'd think a silly servant maid had got such subtle wit;
Farewell my dear beloved squire adieu forevermore
^ut i have lost my hearts desire whom dear i did adore,
^o lady in the Land all round is drove to such a case,
^y self in sorrows now is drowned bedlam must be my place
(...) would give all my wealth rather then have lost my dear
which Moll has got from me by stealth O she was too severe
No Lady was so trick before that ever yet was born,
Now Moll, has her shame restored and I of him am scorned
3. The Answer from Sally in our Ally to Billy in Piccadilly
OF all the Lads that are so smart,
there is none i love like Billy?
He is the darling of my heart,
and he lives in Piccadilly,
there is never a Lad in London town,
is half so sweet as Billy?
He is the darling of my Heart,
and he lives in Piccadilly
His ^ather he makes Casting-tops
and youngsters fo^^ks do buy them,
His Mother she bakes wardens hot,
and through the streets does cry 'em
But sure such folks could never beget,
so sweet a ^ad as Billy
He is the Darling of my Heart, etc.
When he goes by I leave my work,
I love him so sincerely,
My mistress comes like any turk,
and Rales me of severely,
But let her scold her Belly full,
I Will hare it all for Billy,
He is the Darling, etc.
Of all the Days that is in the week,
I dearly Love but one Day,
And that is the Day that comes betwixt,
a Saturday and Monday,
For then I am dressed in all my best,
to walk abroad with Billy.
He is the Darling, etc.
^y mistress takes me to the Church,
and often am i blamed?
because i leave her in the Lurch;
as soon as ^ex^ is named,
leave the Church in Sermon time:
and slink away to Billy,
He is the darling etc
^he Winter evenings they are long,
(...) Billy will want Money,
I save my Vales and wages too.
and give it to my honey,
and would it were ten thousand pound,
i d give it all to Billy,
^e is the darling etc,
^y mistress and the Neighbors flout,
at me and my dear Billy,
^hey fear me too i cannot stir out,
i think it is silly.
^ut (...) long year will have an end,
and then i will marry Billy.
O then we'll wed and then we'll bed,
in spite of Piccadilly.
The Swains Complaint for Dorinda.
O Dorinda be more kinder:
how can you be so severe:
^o see the grief that i lie under,
Do not kill me with despair
^or here poor i must lie and cry,
O love me, love me or i die,
O Dorinda she is transporting
^he all delights and all is free,
All obliging and diverting;
Kind in every one but me,
She is always in a fla^^,
O she is all that i can (...),
For to ease me of my sorrow,
then should i some comfort find (...),
For to ease my love sick heart,
But all my wishes are in vain,
it is Cupid cruel Cupid,
Strikes me on the fatal vain,
O woe is me unhapy lover,
that ever i should love invain,
Now my grief is almost over
Here i have not long to remain,
So ten thousand times adieu
For i shall i shall never lay my Eye on you
As Dorinda she was walking
Underneath the myrtle Tree.
there she spied her lover talking
To himself most mournfully.
Staight into his Arms ^he flew,
O with sweet kisses and Embraces,
there his old love did renew,
Pray my dearest cease your mourning,
Do not grieve you yondr^ heart,
Since to you Love i am returned,
Of your grief i will bare a part,
Here is my hand you have my heart,
O love but me as i love thee,
and you and i will never never part,
FINIS.

