The Country FARMER: OR, THE Buxome VIRGIN.
To a New Tune. called, New Market, or King James's Jigg;




THere was a brisk Lass both Bonny and Brown,
That courted her Sweet heart, in our Town,
She laid by her work, her wheel, and Yarn,
To find out her love in the Farmers Barn,
Quoth she, if thou will be married,
We Will high to the Priest, then to bed,
My Virgin Treasure i will give thee Ned,
That is to be plain my Maidenhead.
You know that my love is a Flame of Fire,
And burns when it cannot obtain desire,
My Beauty is now in it is bloom and prime,
And I cannot, nor wonnot delay the time:
I long for to taste of those tender joys,
Those soft Kisses, and wanton Toys,
That every Maid in her Wedding enjoys,
When Lasses with Lovers get lusty Boys.
A Garland of Flowers my love shall wear,
And i will give him a lock of my coal-black-hair,
At every Wake my love i will treat,
And i will give him kind busses as Cream-Bowls sweet;
Thou shall be my Buck and i will be thy Do,
And i will Milk, and thou shall mow,
I Will Card, and i will Spin, while, you Harrow and sow
And call upon Dobbin with Hey-ge-woe.
Quoth Ned, for your Love I take no care,
But busy my self with my Plow, and Mate.
Young Cupid I think is a lazy Loon,
And besides I intend for to marry Joan?
Quoth Nell, as for Joan she will never Wed,
She lies like an Eunuch in her dull Bed,
She Is ugly, and Old, looks paler then Lead,
Not like a Brisk Lass of a Woman bred.
Young Colin upon Martilla's Cheeks
A thousand delightful pleasures seeks,
He kisses her often by her own good will,
And will scarcely once let her all night lie still:
Come touch but my lips, with those lips of thine,
They are all melting, and all divine,
Like Grapes that appear on the Springing Vine,
As plump, and as soft, and as sweet as thine,
My dearest quoth Ned, i will but clout my shoone,
And we will be Married before it is noone:
I Will go to the Church and a License bring,
And buy thee a dainty fine Golden Ring:
I Will give thee to ride on my pacing Roan,
With the Gray Pillian I lent to Joan,
Ah! ways me poor Jugg, how will she make moan,
That Fate has designed her to lie alone.
While Jugg feels the pains of Cupids Dart,
That wounds the breast of each Lovers heart,
She Will sit and she will sigh upon the Plain,
And rehearse her disloyal Shepherds name,
While thee my dear Gill in my arms i will hugg,
And hide thee in the soft Sheet and Rugg,
Poor Joan shall look pale, that never looked smugg,
Adieu to my gentle sweet Iugg-Iugg-Iugg.
Though Juggy be crusty what need I care,
For she may have Lovers enough to space,
But now she is lately so sower grown,
She minds not the young men that make their moan,
Yet lusty for Life, and full of good will,
I was yesterday, so I am still,
Ale bring all my Grist to my true Lovers Mill,
And hugg and make much of my Gill, Gill, Gill,
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball in Pyecorner


