CHRIST ALONE EXALTED In the PERFECTION and ENCOURAGEMENTS of the SAINTS,
notwithstanding Sins and Trialls.

Being laid open in several SERMONS.

By the late spiritual and faithful Preacher of the Gospel, Tobias Crispe,
D. D.

Volume III.

Psalm. 71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. Isal. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy Light
is come, the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for
Henry Overton, and sold at his shop in Pope's Head Alley, (...)

To all that live godly in CHRIST JESUS.
Precious Hearts,
IT is your honor above many Professors in the world to seal in your
sufferings the most refreshing and ennobling truths of Christ. Your life, which
is bid with Christ in God, is that spark of glory, which has always attracted
the most venomous envies of those men, who make the flesh their residence. Be
confident of this, that did you live in your selves, you should live more
quietly in the world; were you lower as Saints, you should be higher as
Creatures. Never expect to build peaceably upon earth, while you lay not your
foundation in the dust: The carnal mind cannot but be enmity against that
which is the Basis of your Principles, suitable to that expression of our
Savior, Joh. 17.14. The world has hated them, because they are not of the
world, even as I am not of the world. It has ever been the policy of usu^pers,
to keep down those which can justly prove their descent from the royal blood,
lest they and their ill go^^en glory fall together: so those that have ^nd^^^
i^vested themselves with the titles of the Saints, presently contend for a r^om
in the seat of the scornful, to disparage and destroy those who can clearly
show their communion with a higher blood than their own; where Christ does most
sweetly and clearly r^ign, there the flesh will most presum^tuously and cruelly
ty^annize. However (S^^^ts) though it be your Fathers pleasure, to al^ot you
the vailey of the shadow of ^eath for your flesh to walk in, whilst your
condition is in its infancy, yet know that your glorious union with the Son of
God shall be more than enough in the pate (...) se^^ure you: The world may out
run you, and come first to the top of their glory, but su^ey (...) the end, the
inheritance will be yours, their first shall be lost, and your last shall be
first: Esau out-^^^stles Jacob i^ the womb, and con^s first into the world, and
according to the signification of his name, he is a great doer, a cunn^^ing
hunter he was; but Jacob that comes forth last, takes the game; Esau was the
firstborn, but Jacob goe^ away possessect of the birth right, and blessing
also. Thus does your Father deal with you to make your latter end in brightness
to outshine your beginning: Neither will your God deny you bread here in the
midst of famine: Heaven rains Manna in a wilderness, the Rock gives water in
the heat of drought, Believe it (you Gospel-Christians) your beloved shall be
all to you in the want of all; that possession which he has in you, will for
ever entitle you, A Spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed, he will be in you an
everlasting head for your supply to all expenses in all conditions; when the
moisture of every thing below him shall he exhousted by the creatures, which
suck all they have from thence, even then, and so to eternity, shall Jesus
Christ be to you in the height of his fulness. I know nothing you have that is
long-lived but Jesus Christ. Earth, more grossly carnal, and Heaven, more
re^inedly ^crnall, shall pass away, even the Kingdom of Heaven, so far as it
is made up of forms and administrations, shall wither and die; but the Kingdom
of God within you shall never be shaken. That divine nature which has
swallowed you up, shall for ever fatisfie you with variety of contentments. Let
not therefore your hearts be troubled ye believe in God, believe also in Christ;
you are satisfied, that the fullness of all things dwells in God, be also
^onvinced, that Jesus Christ, by his Fathers appointment, is made partaker of
the same fullness: For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness
dwell. Now, what ever Jesus Christ has as Mediator, you in your measure enjoy
it; for it is the great ordinance of God, that all the Saints should be sharers
and partners with Jesus Christ, we are fellow citizens with him, and so
interessed in the immunities and privileges of the same Charter with him; that
as in our first state we had all which Adam had, so also in our second, we
have all which Christ has; Why then does palenesse appear in your faces, and
trembling sit upon your lips? as if in the frowns of the creature all your
felicity was buried. Oh remember you are one spirit with him, whose presence is
a constant spring, in a vision of whose glory your beauty will be always
lovely. I leave it as my humble request to you, tha^ you would not forget your
resting place: For the least ignorance of that will make you apprehend every
condition full of anxietie: this was that which was the bottom of Isreal's
misery, Jer. 50.6. They have, says the Text, forgotten their resting place:
Or, their place to lie down in, as the original will bear it. If you make the
creatures, or your ordinance privileges, your duties, or your own
righteousness to be your resting places, the least disturbance in the pursuit
of all, or any of these will be very grievous and distracting; but if the
Spirit helps you to remember him to be your rest, who is the rest of God,
trouble upon any of your enjoyments below himself, will not have an us comely
i^ fluence upon you. To see a man tre^ting and vexing, that whilst he was
riding his journey, noises did keep him waking, would easily evince our reason
to believe that this man had forgotten that his resting place was somewhere
else: So to see you, whilst you were in your travel, discontented at that
unquietness wherewith you are infested, would-bring you under this suspicion,
that you had sergotten your resling place; Israel expected beds in the
wilderness, when God had appointed Canaan to be their rest, and his was the
ground of all their murmurings against Gods dispensations. Oh that the Spirit
therefore would always in the midst of sin and misery, lead you to the
rock that is higher than your selves or any thing you esteem above your
selves. Many, as they create troubles, so also create remedies, even such which
God never sealed: many times we sin, and then endeavor to make use of sin for
a cure: we break a command of God, and then call upon some duty or other b^low
Christ, to make up that breach; and thus we bring a double pain and vexation
upon our selves. When a wound is made by a weapon, a contrary plaster applied,
makes it more incapable of cure then it wa^ before: So it is with all
^istempers in your souls, by reason of sin; if you look upon any beside the
brazen Serpent, your distemper will return with double vigor upon you. But
certainly, one vision of Jesus Christ will hid defiance to the stoutest of your
lusts, and all the powers of darkness combined with them, and in an encounter
wilmore than conquer them. The Host of Israel was very great, and well prepared
for the battle, but if ever the day be won, David must come into the field. Our
fastings and prayers appear a huge Host, but they will rather gaze upon, than
engage against an enemy, if Jesus Christ be not in the field; but the very
c^^nte nance of Jesus Christ does soon ^ill the enemy and the avenger, and
makes all the^ issue of sia in the soul, to orove abortive. The marrow of all this you have clearly laia open in the demonstration o^ the Spirit, in the
following Sermons, which I am confident, to all that are led by the ^perit,
will be a full vindication of the truth of Christ, and of the worthy Author from
those bas^ aspersions cast upon both, by pride and ignorance. You shall sinde
the sum^ne of this Work, to be the sole exaltation of the Lord Jesus in Saints
and duties, and the debasing and trampling upon all flesh that sha^ aspire to
the seat of Christ, the reviving and encouraging of drooping hearts, by
presenting Christ, not themselves, in al^ his accomplishments to them. Now, if
the world shall haptize this doctrine Antinomianisme, the Lord grant that all
the doctrine preached throughout the world, may deservedly he caled by that
name. Ye tha^ know Christ, be not afraid, notwithstanding all the censures of
the world, to read the book, and receive the truth; be assured it is not
presented to thee as a bait, which is an (...) troduction to a snare, but if
the Spirit of Jesus accompany it, thou will certainly say, as Christ did, I
have meat to eat which ye know not of. I should rather cloud the work, then
honor it, if I should proceed to a further commendation of it. I leave it
therefore to the Spirit to make out the worth of it to the spirits of the
Saints, and am concluded under this faith, that all the malice and carnal
wisdom of this generation shall never be able to interrupt the course of it.
As for the Author, though he was never known to me, yet those works of his
which I have perused, do encourage me to believe that whilst he lived in the
world, he lived in God, and now his earthly tabernacle being dissolved he is
taken up into that fullness which he only saw in part whilst he lived here;
and though whilst he was upon earth, it might he his portion with his Lord and
Master to be mocked and buffeted in the High Priests hall, yet now sits with
him (...) fruition of that glory for which ^e was the^ a susserer, what ^ow
re^eatins, but that ye^ which through the Spirit have tasted the sweetness of
(...) Ministry in the same spirit, look up to your Father, and neg of (...)
that those who survive in the work of the Gospel, may go on where he left,
and in the plentiful effusion of the Spirit, the glorious truths of Christ may
be amongst the Saints, as the Sun in his height; and amongst the rest, forget
not him (though unworthy to be numbered with them) who i^ ambitious of nothing
else, but to he

All in Christ, and nothing in self, Geo. Cokain.

To the impartial READER.
READER,
TRUTH needs no shield to shelter it; her o^^n bare breasts are armor of proof
against all daring darts of ignorance and pride; and therefore walks fearlesse
in the midst of all those vollies of bitter words: who ever vaunts in putting
on his harness? Truth only triumphs in putting it off; this never quits the
field without the Garland: God that calls to the combat, carries on with a
conquering hand; the gates of hell assaolt, but prevail not: we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth. The Prince of the air musters up his
forces, and retreats; his black guard falls on with him, and are shamefully
bea^e back, kings, with their armies fly before it; the powers of darkness,
like Jebu, march against it, suriously they attempt -- storm: but a the
brightness that is before this Sun, the thick clouds remove; one of truth
subverts the tents of darkness^. What is stronger then truth, wh^^e going out
is as the morning, and ^^eth up to a glo^^ious day? That ancient Em^^eme is a
true Image of truth: a candle in a lanthorn, upon (...) bill, beleaguered (...)
blasts, (...) the flag of defi^^ce, with this Morto, Frusi a. It is bu^ lost
labor, to dig a trouch about that city for which the Lord ^ath app^^ted
salvation for walls and bulwach^; but though it be secured from subve^sion, yet
it is not protected from opposition: You know how it went with Christ; was not
his cradle cut out of the same wood, of which his cross was made? His first
entrance upon the stage of this world portended a black day at his departing:
his sudden flight into Egypt from Herod's barbarou^ jealousy, was but the
Prologue to that sad T^agedy which he ended on M^unt-Calvary; nor may his
children or servants expect better antertainm^nt; bonds or afflictions, or
both, abide them that are faithful; they have called the Master an impostor,
(...) Beelzebub; Is the servant above his (...)? I know this s^^vant of truth
has had (...) in suffering for it; ^n^^^^s men pursue those that out-go^ them;
a P^^^s^e will frone any, even Christ, that shall (...) to teach them beyond
their old divi^^y. Much dirty geer has been cast upon the Author of this book,
which, if it could have fastened on him, I were (by special engagements) bound
to wipe it off; but a false tongue cannot make a guilty person: Rabsheka's
railing made no breach in Jerusalems walls. Christ alone must be exalted, and
all flesh made his footstool.

But there be some that seek to darken the wisdom of God with the words of
man, and draw a specious vail over divine mysteries, that so (it may be not
intentionally) understanding is hid from the simple; these make a fair show in
the flesh. But I had rather see the King in his plainest clothes, then his fool
in a painted coat. Where is the Scribe? where is the wise? where is the
disputer of this world? The loftiness of man must be laid low, his glory
buried in the dust, all his perfections come to an end: but if thou desire to
see truth in a comely dress, and clear complexion, thou may have a full view
thereof in this ensuing Discourse. Say not the Treasise is too small to contain
so vast a subject, but rather admire his skill that discovers so much of heaven
through so small a prospective. We applaud their art that contract the wide
world into the narrow compass of a slender Map: What a deal of worth is in a
little Diamond? How do men prize the dust of gold? Despise not small things;
say not it is a little book; a ^ittle star may light thee to Christ; great
bodies have most humors; grosser volumes commonly are thickened with too much
earth. If thou ask what is in this? I answer, as the voice once spoke to
Austin, Toll, Lege: or as Philip to Nathaniel; Come and see. If I should say
all that I know of the Author, some that know me, would say that I flatter him,
because of my relation to him in his life, though I know there is little to be
gotten by dead men's favor. But this I shall be bold to affirm, there is no
Antinomianisme in the Title or Tract; and from all vicious licentiousness of
life, and scandalous aspersions cast on his person by lying lips, I stand upon
mine own experience, and more than twelve years knowledge to vindicate him;
let the father of lies, and all his brood come forth and make good their charge
against him. I fear not to appear in his cause; yea, if I should not open my
mouth in his behalf, whose industry and integrity, God and his Saints have so
much approved, and from whose labors and yokefellow I have reaped so much
comfort, if yet I should be silent, I desire to be marked with a black coal.

Try him now, and judge, thou will find no poison in his hive; no Serpent lurks
under his leaves; Toll, lege, come, and see whether Jesus of Nazareth be not
here; not sealed up in a Sepulcher, and guarded with a rude train to keep his
Disciples from him, as the High Priests use to do; but thou shall find him in
his garden, opening his fountain, blowing on his spices, leading into his
banqueting house, staying with flaggons, comforting on every side: thou shall
find more in this book then I will promise; only be persuaded to peruse it; if
thou love thy rest, read it: Here is news of dry land, footing for thy
soul, the Olive branch does witness it; fear not, be not dismayed; the waters
are abated; let not thy sloth make thee guilty of thy misery. Will not the
weather-beaten Mariner employ all his strength and oars to thrust into a quiet
harbor? Is any thing more desired by the chased Heart, then the cooling
streams? How do men, pursued by the enemy, rejoice in the shelter of a strong
hold? Can any thing be more welcome to a notorious offender, justly condemned,
then a gracious pardon? Is not God and his Righteousness all this, and much
more to a poor creature in such conditions? Behold, an Haven, a Brook, a
Tower, a Pardon, a full, a free Pardon, a Ransom for thy soul; the
righteousness of God breaking through the sides, the hands, the heart of
Christ, to make way to thee, to revive thy ding, drooping, bleeding heart.
Incline thine ear, hearken for the time to come; hear, and thy soul shall live;
forsake not thine own mercies, to observe lying vanities; lean not to the
reeds of Egypt, when thou have the rod of Gods strength put into thy hand: Shall
there be a price in the hand, and no heart to it? It may be thy feet have not
yet stumbled, though thou have walked on the hills of earth, the Mountains of
the world, the high Mountains of the flesh, thy way has been smooth and
easy; so is the wild Asse's till her month overtake her: thy conscience,
perhaps, has fancied some shadow of peace by the dull glimmering of an earthly
spark: but they that walk in the light at last lie down in sorrow, Isaith
50.11.

Be not proud therefore, but give glory to God, before he cause darkness,
before he turn your light into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness; that darkness that might be felt, was not the least of the Egyptian
plagues: What greater torment then the conscience once sensible of being
destitute of the light of life? The Authors aim is to lead thee into Goshen, to
guide thy feet into the way of peace; follow him, walk in the steps of the
faith of our Father Abraham; that faith, o^ which circumcision was no cause,
nor evidenc^ to himself; for he had it, and he knew he had it, before he was
circumcised; by this faith he gave glory to God, we give glory to the robe of
Gods righteousness, when we put none of our own under it to make it sit
uneasy, nor wear any of our own upon it, to obscure the full glory of it,
thou will find this garment the best fashion, and as well held forth by this,
as by any man, whost intentions were to cover all blemishes, all sins, to hide
all deformity with it; yet to shelter no lust, nor sin under it. I might launch
out into his life, and call in all his practice to prove it; but till more need
require, I shall refer thee to Mr. R.L. in his preface to the first volume,
and to the present trial of his doctrine. Let a Christian heart moderate a
critical eye, and find fault who can. The God that once breathed the rich
knowledge of himself through the frail organs of this earthen vessel, into the
ears of those that heard him, now dart a greater glory of his righteousness
and grace into the eyes of all their understandings that shall read him.

I know I can add no worth to this work; it is of divine value, it has the
stamp of heaven, the Image of God is on it; the Author is gone home, and yet
living with the Lord, though some think the Saints dye, and like the wicked,
leave a stink behind them. I deny not the mortality of any, nor need I hang
thi^ man's hearse with odoriferous Encomiums yet he that visits his friend,
though never (...) godly, in the grave, had need take a little Frankincense in
his hand, if he be buried amon^ men; all the air in the world is so
contagiously infected with the stinking breath of the living, that you cannot
come near the dea^ without a bundle of myrrh. Malice and mad^nesse, like a
Gangrena, stands at the tomb antent of every blessed soul, crying, Noli me
ta^gere. Of all men, one would have thought (...) sweet a man as Christ, had
needed no spices (...) his Sepulcher; for he did no evil, and he sa^ no
corruption; Yet Joseph would not inten^ his body without sweet odors, though M^
had bestowed a whole box of precious oynment on his feet in his life time, but
a little before his burial. Let the Saints walk never wisely, warily,
circumspectly; let them kee^ their feet as clean, as sweet as they can, they
h^^ need have their winding sheet and coffin p^^fumed; I say not with the
Parasiticall smo^ of a perfumed Oration, but with a just vi^^cation of their
innocence, as occasion shall ^^quire. But I hope there will be need of no
^^gagement from me this way in the Authors (...) hal^^; for his two last
Sermons in this volu^ are a clear vindication of him from those common
^spersions laid upon him and the doctrine he preached, which for that reason
amongst others, are now come into the world before their full growth, the Author
being taken away before he could bring forth all his conceptions in the
pursuit of those two subjects; which we desire the Reader heartily to accept
as the last breathings forth of the Spirit in that precious Saint whilst he
was below. But if this stops not the mouth of envy, I shall not think any
cost too great to raise up and continue the memory of truths favorites and
friends; nor esteem any labor too much, whereby I may approve my self the
friend and servant of Je-Christ Jesus and his Church, otherwise then which (by
Gods grace) thou shall never find,

The subject of Christ, and servant of his Saints, Henry Pinnell.

A brief Table of the Heads of these SERMONS.
SERMON I.
UPON Isaiah 41.10. Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness. p. 1 Wherein are observed: First, the
temper of spirit God aims to reduce them to, not to fear. page 11 Wherein, I.
What it is not to fear, or be dismayed. p. 13 II. What it is we must not fear
nor be dismayed at. p. 18 1 Not our sins explained and proved p. 19 2 Not the
sins of others. p. 27 3 Not afflictions or chastisements. p. 29 4 Not men. p.
31 1 Not their wrath. p. 32 2 Not their policy. p. 33 3 Not their instruments
of cruelty. 34 III. What are the fruits or disadvantages by fearfulness: 1 In
respect of God; which are, that it casts slanders, 1 Upon the power of God. p.
40 2 Upon his faithfulness. p. 41 3 Upon his care and providence. p. 42 4 Upon
his free grace. p. 43 5 Upon the sufferings of Christ. p. 44 2 In respect of
Gods service. 1 By weakening faith. p. 45 2 By damping all other religious
services, as prayer, etc. p. 45
SERMON II.
Secondly, the course the Lord takes to reduce them to this temper of spirit,
as to be free from fear and dismayednesse, which is by proposing to them the
motives in the Text, I am thy God, etc. Where are observed, 1 What it is for
God to be thy God p. 62 wherein the faithful propriety in God is largely
explained in general. 2 What he has, who has God for his. Where his treasure
is looked upon: p. 72 1 In regard of the quality, or worth of it. p. 74 2 In
regard of the virtue of it. p. 75 3 In the universality and variety of the
usefulness of it. p. 76 3 By answering several Objections, is showed how it
is so well with those that are the Lords by their interest in this treasure,
notwithstanding some appearances to the contrary beginning. p. 78 4 How God
does become their God, and upon what terms. Answ. Freely from Gods own good
pleasure in Christ. p. 88 5 How God is found or known to be the God of his
people. Answ. 1 By the Spirit of God as the efficient. p. 93 2 By faith as the
passive instrument; laying hold upon the word of grace. Subordinately in
Prayer, and other Ordinances. p. 94
SERMON III.
UPON 1 John 2.1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not: and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our
sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. Herein observe, 1 First, the
connection of these words: These things I write, that ye sin not; where this
point is offered. Doct. That the knowledge of Propitiation and forgiveness, is
the strongest means to restrain sin. p. 106. This is, 1 Proved from p. 106 by
Scriptures at large. 2 Objections answered, from p. 119 to the end.
SERMON. IV.
2 The words themselves; wherein four general heads are considered. I. What it
is for Christ to be an Advocate, and how he does manage it. p. 152 Answ. 1
Aduocateship is an office to plead the indemnity of the client in a way of
Justice, Christ having made satisfaction unto Justice. p. 153
SERMON. V.
2 He manageth his Advocateship by his intercession or continual
representation of his satisfaction, as Alsufficient for us. p. 169, etc. II.
Whose cause it is that Christ does undertake to be an Advocate for. Answ. 1 For
all Believers at all times. 173 2 Yea, for all the elect in some degree, though
they be for the present in a state of unbelief. p. 175 III. How Christ is
gifted or qualified for this office of advocateship. p. 181 Answ. He is, First,
Christ. Secondly, Jesus. Thirdly, The Righteous. 1 He is Christ, that is,
anointed, which imports 1 That he is authorized and called to this office. p.
182 2 That he is sufficiently gifted thereunto. p. 185 2 He is Jesus, i.e.
Certainly saving those he pleads for. p. 187
SERMON. VI.
3 He is the righteousness; hence is observed: 1 That all the strength of
Christ's plea consists in his Righteousness. p. 197 2 What this Righteousness
is. 1 Negatively: Not the righteousness of our works. p. 221 2 Not the
righteousness of faith it (...) as acted by us, and (...) in us. p. 214
SERMON. VII.
3 Here ^^^^sonally is showed, that justification in the Court of heaven, is
before faith. p. 225 2 P^sitevely, The righteousness of Christ as Mediator,
God and man. p. 238 That is, 1 His active obedience. 239 2 His passive
obedience. 241 3 There is an access of value coming hereunto by the dignity
of the person, being God as well as man. p. 243
SERMON. VIII.
4 An Objection; that faith is said to be our coming to Christ, therefore there
can be no union before it: which is at large answered from p. 258. to the end.
SERMON. IX.
IV. What it is for Christ to be the Propitiation for the sins of the people.
p. 288 1 Explained first in its type; It is to have him for our Mercy-seate:
where, 1 Where only the incense of our services being offered, are acceptable.
p. 290 2 Where the Scape-goatis prepared, that has carried all our sins into
a land of forgetfulness. p. 291 3 Where God returns all his gracious answers
to us. p. 291 2 In its own nature, being the same with Aton^m^n, or
Reconciliation. p. 292 to the end.
SERMON X.
UPON Solomo^s (...) ^4 10. Thou art all fair my L^ve, and (...) spot in thee:
Herein, 1 He digressed by way of Apology, to clear himself (...) in
imputations cast upon him. page 322. As, 1 The first slander; that ^^e had
affirmed that the Righteousness of Christ, as God-m^^, was not sufficient to
make a complete righteousness p. 322 2 That he had denied Christ, by denying
faith and repentance. p. 325 3 That he should affirm, that an elect person
might live and die an Whoremonger, an Adulterer, and in all kind of
profaneness. p. 326 All which he utterly renounceth as false and slanderous.
ibid. 2 He returns to the Text; wherein is observed; That the Church is the
Spouse of Christ; and this great grace is set forth in 2. things; 1 In the
consideration of the great inequality of the persons matched. p. 328 2 The
manifold privileges that come by this match or relation; as, 1 We thereby
become the sons of God. p. 335 2 We are thereby made joint heirs with
Christ. ibid. 3 We hereby partake with Christ in all his honors. ibid. 4 The
Spouse of Christ is hereby freed from arrest. ibid.
SERMON XI.
UPON Colos. 1.18. He is the head of the body the beginning. page 337. Wherein
is considered: 1 Who this is that is the head. p. 343 Who is described 1 By his
divine nature and Godhead. 344 2 By his eternal personality. p. 345 3 By his
distinct humane nature. p. 346 4 By the personal union of his divine and
humane nature together. Ibid. 5 By the mystical union, whereby Christ God-man,
is united with his body the Church. p. 346 2 What this office of Headship
imports. 348 Namely, 1 That Christ is the beginning of the being of his Church.
page 349 2 He is the beginning of all the privileges and prerogatives of the
Church. page 357
GODS COVENANT with his People, the ground of their security.
SERMON I.
Isaiah 41. Verse. 10. Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am
thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.


IN the former part of this Chapter, (which we will speak a little of, because
it will make way to the discovery of the true scope of this Text) you shall
find the Lord graciously acquainting his people, concerning his mind, in
sending Christ into the world, and what tumults this sending of Christ should
raise; how the Lord repelled that outcry; what sucecsse he gives unto this
Christ raised up in spite of all the malignity and force raised against his
power and glory.

And it is worth your observation, beloved to consider how the Lord does
manifest this a^ a Preamble to this very Text. In the first verse of this
Chapter, the Lord seems to represent unto us the malignity of the world, under
the name of Islands and the people; and to present them in such like posture, as
Demetrius and his fellows stood in, in his time, in the 19th. of the Acts of
the Apostles, upon Paul's setting up o^ Christ, there was a horrible tumult
raised it that particular against the Doctrine of Christ so is seems, the
Islands and the people, were it such a kind of posture here; therefore the Lord
is pleased to call for silence: Keep silen^^ before me, ye Islands; such a
noise there was as I may say, that God could not be heard; and therefore first
he requires silence, and then, i^ stead of that confusion that was among them
in respect of their madness; he desires them to deal somewhat rationally
with him, he charge the world to put out all the strength it has, Bring
forth your strongest reasons, Le^ them come near, and let us reason together
in judgment. Now, that which the Lord speaks, is a^ intending to hear what
they could say for themselves in their opposition of Christ; for so you see
plainly in the second verse there, when the Lord had got silence, he pleads
the cause of Christ, by way of expostulation, as if he had said: what madness
is it in you, to set your faces against this setting up of Christ? For who has
raised up the righteous man, and called him to his feet, and given him to rule
over Kings? Why do you contend in this manner? can you tell who it is that
sets him up? If ye did but know against whom ye rise up, it would appear to
your selves to be a vain contention; And therefore in the fourth verse of this
Chapter, he answers the question himself, and therein shows the vanity of
their opposing him. For, says he, the Lord has done it, who is the first, and
who is the last. If you fight with me, what will you get by it? Be ye sure, I
will manage the thing, it is the work of mine own hands, and it is I that
raise him up, even to rule over Kings. and therefore you do but kick against
the pricks, in your contending with me.

The Lord proceeds further, to show the certainty of the prevalency of Christ,
in the latter end of the second verse, and in the third verse, he goes on, to
let us see the fac^^lity of Christ's prevalency, and not only the facillity,
but also the extent of the prevalency of Christ, both how easily, and how far
he should prevail.

This matter is of excellent consideration, He shall pursue, says the Text,
and he shall pass on safely, or, as it is in the margent, he shall pass on in
peace, as much as to say, when Christ takes upon him to set up his own
Kingdom and glory in the world, every one that sets his face against him,
shall fly before him, and Christ will be the pursuer, and in the pursuit, he
will so overtake them in the flight, that they shall be easily destroyed.
Therefore Christ shall run quietly and softly, he shall not run after them too
hastily, there shall be such softness in the pursuit of Christ, that the
overcomming of the opposers shall seem to be a time of peace, there shall be
such little opposition of him.

In the fifth verse, the Lord goes on, and tells of the fruit of this conquest,
and the victory Christ shall have when he comes to reign in his. Church: the
first fruit of it, is terror to them that set their faces against the Kingdom
of Christ, the Islands were afraid: Secondly, the Lord shows what an ill use
they made of this fear, whereas it should make them stoop to the Scepter of
Christ that was too hard for them: like malefactors indeed, when they saw
themselves overmastered, they assembled, and gathered themselves together, they
hoped to raise up more forces, and then they will try it out once more again
with Christ. Besides, you may observe, what a politic, devilish practice they
use, to bring down Christ again when he was raised, that which has been the
main and grand plot of Satan, even to raise up Idols, and set them up by
Christ, to steal away the hearts of people. It was the policy of Balaam,
counselling Balak to lay stumbling blocks before Israel, to entice them unto
the Idols of Moab; and it was the counsel of Jeroboam to overthrow the
Kingdom of Christ, to set up Calves in Dan and Bethel, that so there may not
be a going unto Christ. So you have it in the seventh verse; The Carpenter
encouraged the Goldsmith, etc. Well, the Lord having thus discovered what
opposition there would be, at the setting up of Christ; begins to speak
somewhat comfortably unto his own, giving encouragement to his own people: the
opposition indeed of the world never stirs, nor moves God; because he know well
enough how he can blast every attempt: yet, because he knows that his people
have some flesh remaining still in them, the appearance of a tumult, and the
opposition of the Gospel may, peradventure, put them into an affright. The
Lord therefore endeavors to hearten his own people, against the frights that
they might take, in regard of the outward appearance of opposition; and this he
does in the words of the Text: Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not
dismayed, for I am thy God.

Now, lest there should be a mistake to whom the Lord directs this speech; for
the intent of the Lord may be mistaken in the extent of the people to whom he
speaks; and therefore in the 8. and 9. verses, the Lord shows to whom he
speaks such encouragements: But thou Israel art my servant, and Jacob, whom I
have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.

Object. Why some will say, It seems then that in this Text, Gods speaking of
comfort, and encouragement, is confined only unto the people of the Jews that
are the children of Jacob, and the seed of Abraham, and therefore what ever
comfort there is in the Text, there is little comfort belongs unto us?

Answ. Consider the ninth verse, and then it will appear, that though God
speaks of Jacob, Israel, and the seed of Abraham, yet he does not speak of the
seed according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit; for in the ninth
verse, you read the words thus: Thou whom I have chosen, and taken from the
ends of the earth. That Jacob then, and Israel, to whom the Lord speaks these
comfortable words, is the Jacob and Israel that is called from the ends of the
earth. Now, if you would know what is meant by the ends of the earth, the
Prophet will tell you, in chap. 43. of Isaiah and the 5,6,7. verses, Fear not,
for I am with thee, I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from
the West; I will say to the North, Give up, and to the South, Keep not back:
bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the earth, even
every one that is called by my name. As much as to say, this Israel and Jacob,
to whom the Lord speaks, not to fear, is a people gathered from the East, and
from the North, and from the South, and from the West; now the seed of Jacob
naturally considered, is not of that extent, as to overspread the World every
way, however, the last clause, that it is, even every one that is called by his
name, puts it out of doubt, that it extends also to us Gentiles.

This I note, beloved, that so we may not only have a guess that the
comfortable language frequently mentioned by the Prophet, belongs unto us, as
well as the Jews: but that we may see that it is the mind of the Lord, that he
has revealed it himself, that it does indeed extend it self unto us; for, by
the way, solid comfort will not be raised upon mere guesses or presumptions,
taking things for granted, without the sense of a good foundation to bear up
such comforts. All the comfort people have, when they run upon guesses, is
only abiding with them so long as there is not administered an occasion of
discomfort. But all the comforts in the world will vanish that have not some
firm foundation when they are struck at, and when some tempest beats against
them, to cast them down. And therefore it is good to be established in every
truth wherein comfort may be received.

Now, from this passage, as it has reference to the coherence, I may observe
unto you, that, When ever the Lord Jesus Christ is set up in freshness, and
glory, and beauty, he does always meet with strong opposition: I say, the Lord
Christ, that righteous Man, was never raised up, but a storm was raised with
him; there is an everlasting fighting against the glorious light of Christ's
Gospel, when ever it breaks out. You may see the truth of this, beloved,
especially since Christ's personal coming at all times; no sooner did the
Apostles begin to preach Christ, as raised from the dead, but a madness and a
fury grew upon those that thought themselves in authority, as the Scribes and
Pharisees; their swords were presently drawn, their prisons set open to clap up
those that preached Christ; Herod killed one, imprisoned another, intending to
kill him too. Beloved I need say little of this, your own experience may now
be a sufficient witness of that which, perhaps, you feared long before. Now is
come the time of reformation, and purging of the Church, the time is come of
setting up the Ark, and bringing Dagon down: you see the fruit of this, you see
what combustions this has raised in the world: let Christ himself be never so
peaceable, yet when he comes, men will pick a quarrel with him; therefore by
the way, as it is a truth in general, so is it in particular cases too: When
ever we the Ministers of the Gospel, devote our selves only to set up Christ,
and labor might and maine upon this work, we must expect to have the world
about our cares. And for you, beloved, if you dream of peace and rest in the
world, if you dream of finding of friendship and amity, and applause with men,
while you endeavor to set up the Lord Christ, you mistake your selves
exceedingly. You must look for uproars, and tumults, and clamours from the
world, and there will be these continually attending you.

In the second place, from the coherence, you may observe, As mad and desperate
as the world is, and the enemies of Christ are in fighting and making
opposition against Christ; yet no weapons formed in this kind shall prosper.
The Lord has raised him up, says the Text, and he shall rule over the
Heathen, and they shall be as dust before his sword, and as driven stubble
before his bow. I say, this shall come to pass, and therefore it is no great
matter how majestically the world looks, and how mighty it makes it self,
for, beloved, if all the World should combine against one person, that stands
for the cause of Christ, rather than Christ should sink, this person should
be able to withstand even the whole World. But however, let tha^ person be
borne down to the ground, or over-borne with the World, Christ shall never be
over-borne, Christ shall reign in glory, and triumph, not only in Heaven, but
also in his Church too. When all comes to all, let them fight never so
desperately, Christ shall be the conqueror, he shall puriue, nay, he shall
pass on^ softly; he shall not need to take any great pains, nor toil, to
maintain himself thus set up, and destroy his enemies, he shall do i^ with
ease.

But this is not that I mean neither; I come therefore to the Text it self:
The Text is a word of encouragement, or a word of heartening, held forth to
those spirits that are subject to faint and droop, in respect of the
affliction^ that are likely, or at least seem to be likely to grow upon the
Church of Christ; Fear not, be not dismayed, I am thy God, I am with thee.

In the words, there are two generals very remarkable and observable:

First, the temper of the spirit that the Lord aims to reduce his people unto.

Secondly, the course the Lord takes to reduce them thereunto.

The temper of spirit that the Lord desires to reduce his people unto, is
delivered in a double expression; Fear not; be not dismayed. They are both
one, saving that dismayednesse is the highest extremity of fear; so then the
temper that he endeavors to reduce them unto, is a quietness, and
settlednesse, and undauntednesse of spirit.

Secondly, the course that God takes to bring them to this temper of spirit, is
a proposal of motives and arguments of sufficient effect, and prevalency to
pull down vain fear out of the heart; Fear not, for I am thy God; I am with
thee, and so forth. The result of the Text is briefly this: They need never to
be afraid, nor dismayed at any thing, though it appear never so hideous, who
have God for their God, and present with them, and a help unto them. Beloved,
these are times, as I hinted before unto you, that require such a cordial as
this, now mentioned unto you: For now in a more eminent way then ever before,
is the glory of the Kingdom of Christ contested against, and attempted to be
thrown down to the dust. Now, when we hear of evils, our hearts are subject
to be dismayed, and especially when we see them with our eyes; the sword is
drawn, nay, blood is drawn, the hearts of men are full of faintings, and many
almost at their wits ends; many begin to suspect what will become of things,
out of the fainting and suspicion of their spirits. And therefore now, now it
is time to bring forth, out of the treasures of the Lord, that, that may stay
the spirits of the people of God; that is, such an encouragement as the Lord
himself gives, which will be the best way in the world to establish our
hearts; namely, when God will say to a soul, Fear not, be not dismayed; for I
am thy God: it is a cup of consolation indeed. And that we may draw it forth
to you, with the better advantage for you to drink deep of it, let us take
these particulars into consideration:

First, what it is, not to fear, nor to be dismayed.

Secondly, what it is, that we must not fear and be dismayed at.

Thirdly, what the fruit of fear, or dismayednesse is, or what prejudice or
disadvantage fear, or dismayednesse brings along with them.

Fourthly, we shall then consider the motives of the Lord, to take us off from
these distempers of fear, and dismayednesse; namely, because God is our God;
and in that we shall consider.

First, what it is for God to be thy God.

Secondly, we shall consider, what strength there is in this Argument, God
being thy God, how this takes off fear and dismayednesse. And,

Thirdly, seeing there is such strength in this Argument, we shall consider how
God does become the God of persons and people, that so you may see the way to
enter into this privilege to have God for your God, and so to be secured from
fear and dismayednesse.

To begin with the first, what it is for a person not to fear, nor be
dismayed. I have observed concerning all the passions and affections of men,
that the sense of them far better open their nature, then any discourse
possibly can. When a fit of fear, especially when the height of dismayednesse
it self seizes upon a spirit, that spirit may read a playner lecture to it
self of that Passion, then all the Rhetoric of men in the world can express;
I mean, fear is such a passion, as every one knows better by those experiments
they have of it, what it is, then another is possible able to discribe. It is a
very distracting, disturbing, confounding passion; it is a kind of besotting
passion, that makes men lose themselves, especially, if it be in the extremity
of fear, It arises from an apprehension of some unavoidable, insupportable
evil growing upon a person, and occasioned either by some symptoms of that
evil, or by some messenger or other relating it, or by some foresight of the
evil in the eye. Now, as evil appears greater or lesser, and more or less
tolerable, so the passion of fear, is more or less in persons. In brief, I
will give you but a touch of the nature of this passion, and you shall have it
delivered to you in the words of the Psalmist, where he sets it forth by its
contrary, by what it is not to be afraid, or not to be dismayed, in 112 Psalm
the 7. and 8. verses, the Psalmist has diverse expressions, that plainly show,
what it is for a person not to be afraid, He shall not be moved, says he,
his heart is fixed, he shall not be afraid; his heart is established. Mark
the phrases, and in them you shall have a full Lecture read to you of a heart
not afraid nor dismayed. First, it is a heart that is not moved nor stirred:
suppose evil grows on, it may be the sword, the enemy appears bigger and
bigger; still the dangers are greater and greater; what is it now not to be
afraid? It is not to be moved at all at any time; so far forth as the
appearance of danger moves the heart, or turns it, so far he is afraid. So
the other phrase does import, His heart is fixed. You know, that fear in the
heart, is oftentimes expressed by the shaking and trembling of it; and
therefore the Holy Ghost expresses it also by the shaking of the tops of
trees, so it causes an unstedfastnesse of spirit. Now says the Psalmist, they
shall not be afraid, whose hearts are fixed, that is, as a post that is set
deep in the ground, and rammed in, stands fast, so that if you thrust against
it, it stirs not, it is fixed: so when any thing beats against the heart to
shake it, and to overthrow it, when the heart of a man stirs not at it, it is a
fixed heart, and is not afraid. And so the phrase that follows; his heart is
established, signifies that it is made a stable and firm heart, so that it
cannot be shaken. In brief, to have a heart not afraid nor dismayed, is to
have a heart calm, that looks with a regardlesse eye, as I may say, upon
evils when they do grow out. You shall see beloved, this affection or temper
of spirit, not to be afraid, in that sense I mention, excellently described
unto you in the third of Daniel, and the 16. verse, and there, when ever you
would know whether you be afraid or no you shall find always as in a Lecture,
the thing discovered unto you. You know what danger was in the eyes of those
three children, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednigo, there was a hot fiery furnace
prepared for them, seven times hotter than ordinary; the King proclaims that
what ever he be that will not fall down and worship his Image, should presently
be cast into this furnace: This was enough to startle a person, and make him
tremble. But how is the temper of the three children expressed there? We are
not, say they, careful to answer thee in this matter. These threatenings,
though very fearful in the eyes of others, seemed but a matter of nothing to
them, they made a tush at it, We are not careful to answer thee in this
matter. Even so people are then free from fear, who when evil is coming,
care not for it; a man when he cares not for any thing that assailes him, he
rusheth in upon it, and although it seem to threaten unto him some mischief,
yet he is confident it cannot hurt him. So far forth as you^ can overlook
evils drawing on upon you, more or less, not regarding them, in respect of
any hurt they can do you, so far forth are you free from fear.

Object. You will say, none in the world can have such a temper of spirit, when
dangers are growing, especially great and thick upon them.

Answ. No: What say you of these three children? I speak of men now, they were
careless.

Object. You will say, it may be, that was an extraordinary case.

Answ. Nay, you shall find, that the very ground of the undauntednesse of
their spirits was the same which the Lord proposes in this Text, to put us out
of fear. We are careless to answer thee in this matter. Why? Our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us. The carelessness of their
spirits was grounded upon a common principle of the whole Church, and upon the
same, the Lord proposes to all the rest of his people, as well as to them;
they being confident God was their God, neither the greatness of the King, nor
the violence of his threatenings, could stir them a jot, they were all nothing
to God, who was their God, who was able to deliver them, and would deliver
them. Their confidence in this, was that which made them break forth into this
bold expression, We are careless to answer thee in this matter. But now let us
consider, what the people of God should not fear.

Object. What, to be afraid of nothing? does not the Lord himself commend
fear to men? Nay, is not God himself called the fear of Isaac? and yet would
you make us to believe, that we should have no fear?

Answ. I answer, there is a threefold fear; here is a natural fear, a
religious fear; and here is a turbulent fear: A natural fear is nothing
else, but such an affection, as is in men ^y nature that they cannot be freed
from; such fear was in Christ himself, without sin. There is a religious
and godly fear, and that is nothing but an awful reverence, whereby people
keep a fit distance between the gloriou^ Majesty of God, and the meannesse of
a creature, and it is opposed to sauciness: And the^ there is a turbulent
fear, and that is a fear (...) disquietnesse; now all disquieting fear, is
tha^ which the Lord endeavors to take off from his people.

Well, but what are the things, you will say, we should not be afraid, nor
dismayed at^ Perhaps I shall pitch upon things people are much afraid of, and
will think strange the^ should not be afraid of them.

First, I must tell you, the people of Go^ his own people, they need not be
afraid (...) their sins; And yet let me not be mistaken, (...) do not say, we
must not be afraid to sin, b^ they need not be afraid of their sins, they
the have God for their God, there is no sin the ever they commit, can possibly
do them an^ hurt. Therefore, as their sins cannot hu^ them, so there is no
cause of fear in their sin^ they have committed.

Object. Some will be ready to say, This (...) strange; All the evils in the
world that com^ they grow up from the sinfulness of men. If man be afraid of
any thing, he should be a^fraid of sin, from whence all evils do flow.

Answ. I answer, beloved, it is true, sin nat^rally is a root bringing forth
all manner of evil fruit, The wages of sin is death; but yet I say, what
ever sin in its own nature brings forth, yet the sins of Gods peculiar people,
they that have God for their own God, their sins can do them no hurt at all,
and in that regard, there is no cause of fear from any of their sins, that
ever they have committed. Beloved, I conceive this may seem somewhat harsh to
some spirits, touching the truth of it, especially to such as misconceive the
drift at which I aim, which is not to encourage any one unto sin, but to ease
the consciences of the distressed: I desire you to resolve with your selves
this one thing, so far forth, as the Lord reveals it, so far you will sit down
contented with the mind of the Lord revealed to you; and I beseech you, kick
not against the truth. There is not one sin, not all the sins together of any
one believer, that can possibly do that belie^er any hurt, real hurt I mean:
and therefore he ^ught not to ^e afraid of them. How will that ^e made good,
you will say? I will make it ap^eare out of the seventh to the Romans, from ^he
midst of the Chapter, to the end, you see ^ow the Apostle carries it along,
especially about the 15. and 19. verses, where it is true, the ^postle
expresses himself in heavy complaints against such sins as befall believers:
The good that I would do, that do I not, and the evil the I would not do,
that do I; insomuch; that in t^ last verse but one, the Apostle with much veh^
mency, puts the question thus: O wret^hed m^ that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of the death? Some will be ready presently to sa^ here you see
plainly is a fear of sin, or ought (...) be, here is a body of death in men to
be affra^ of. But give me leave to tell you, that the Apostle in this Chapter,
as I conceive, do^ personate a scrupulous spirit, and does n^ speak out his
own present case as it was at the time when he speaks it, but speaks in the
pers^ of another, yet a Believer; and my reason (...) this: Because the
Apostle, in respect of h^ own person, what was become of sins, w^ already
resolved; therefore I conceive he do^ act the part of a troubled spirit, that
in respe^ of the multitude and prevalency of corruption was ready to cry out, O
wretched man, who she deliver me from the body of this death? But ma^^ how the
Apostle answers this question, whither it be his own case or another, for
will not stand upon that, and you shall plain^ see the Apostle concludes,
though there (...) such mavelous filthiness and prevalency (...) sin, yet it
cannot do any hurt at all. But, sa^ he, I thank God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ who will deliver me from this body of death As much as to say, Indeed,
till a man look to Christ, there is nothing but matter of bitterness and
evil to be seen as the certain fruits of sin, and there can be nothing but
bitterness in sin, in regard of the evil that is like to follow it. But when
persons can once look to Christ, the case is altered. What does he thank God
for? He thanks God, that though naturally a body of death grew up by sin; yet
there is no prejudice in this kind can come to him, through Christ. Now, that
the Apostle does plainly mean, that he thanks God, in that sin could not do
him, or others any hurt: mark how in his thankfulness he expresses himself in
the beginning of the 8. Chapter; There is now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ, that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. There you see
the ground of the Apostles thanksgiving; namely, that now there is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ. No, you will say no condemnation in
Hell, but yet, as there is remainders of sin in Gods own people, so there
will some evil or other fall upon the commission of sin; mark what the
Apostle speaks of it in the 2. and 4. ver^^; Would you have the clear mind of
the Spirit ^in it. There it is held forth; The Law of the Spirit of life which
is in Christ, has freed me from the law of sin and death: for what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent forth his Son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. The
Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, has freed me from the Law of sin, and
death. Here Christ stands for the deliverance of his people from condemnation,
from eternal wrath, say some; yea, but says the Apostle, we are delivered
from the Law of sin and death; what is the Law of sin, but what the Law may do
to persons, for those sins which are committed by them? Now what can sin do
when it is condemned? It is true, take a Traitor, as he is at liberty, he may
do mischief, but take him as he is arraigned, and condemned, and as he is bound
and manacled, he can do no hurt. Now sin is condemned to the Believer, it
can do no hurt at all to him; for what hurt can that do unto a man which is
carried into a Land of forgetfulness, to avoid further prejudice of such
persons that are endangered by it? When men have been found dangerous unto the
State, (...) has been a common practice to banish them the Kingdom, into a
place far remote, when they cannot have any opportunity of doing any mischief,
and when they are banished, the^ are not to return again, upon pain of
death. Now, beloved, our Escape Goat has carri^ our sins into a Land of
forgetfulness. Consider further; suppose a man be entered into many bonds, and
they are for great sums; It is true, while they remain bonds in force, such
a man is subject to fear arrests; but put the case these bonds are all
cancelled, that the debt in the Creditors book be blotted out, what hurt then
can these bonds do unto a man, when the seal is torn off, and all the writing
in the bond is blotted out? If a man saw a thousand such bonds, in which he
were obliged, it would affright him no more then if he saw none at all. True
indeed, every sin is a great debt, and we commit sins daily and hourly against
the Lord, and the torments of Hell is the merit of the least sin in the world;
for, I speak not this to extenuate any sin, but to show the greatness of Gods
Grace, and to ease, upon good grounds, distressed consciences. Therefore, such
as look upon these sins, as uncancelled, and these debts, as true debts; it is
true, so long these sins may work a horror and trembling in persons, but for
Believers that are the members of Christ, they may read fairly all the sins
that ever they have committed, they may read also the desert of these
transgressions, which should be executed and inflicted upon them, if they were
not cancelled and blotted out. But mark what the Lord speaks, in the 43. of
Isaiah, I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own
name sake, and will not remember thy sins. Now, what prejudice can that do,
that is blotted out? I say, every debt of a Believer is a cancelled debt, so
that the Lord himself has nothing at all to lay to a Believers charge: For,
how can that Scorpion do hurt, that has lost his sting, and spent his venom
in the sides of Christ, and left it there? It was Christ that was wounded for
the transgressions of his people, he was bruised for the iniquities of the
faithful, the chastisements of their peace was upon him, says the Holy Ghost,
in the 53. of Isaiah, and the 5. verse. What hurt can there be to whom there is
peace from God, and nothing but peace? It is true, our sins themselves do not
speak peace, but Christ bearing the sin and the wrath that these sins do
deserve, his chastisement, or the wrath he sustained, speaks peace to every
Believer, whose transgressions be did bear. Therefore, beloved, be not
afraid, ye that are Believers, and members of Christ, for fear of wrath
breaking down from heaven upon you for such and such sins, which you have
committed, for they can do you no hurt, all your sins together can do you no
harm, all the sting and poison of your sins were spent upon the back of
Christ. Mark that excellent expression of the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 15.56, 57.
he tells us there indeed, that the sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law; so that here seems to be a sting in sin even to death it
self. But mark what follows, thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus Christ.,
that has given us the victory. What does he mean? even the victory of
overcoming of sin, and death, that is his true meaning. Though naturally sin
has a sting, yet there is a victory over this sting. Christ is the death of
it, as he took away the sting of it, so that the sins of Believers set up to
affright them by Satan, or his instruments, they are but Scare-crows and
Bugbears, things to fright ignorant children indeed, but men of insight and
understanding, are able to see that they are counterfeit things. It is true,
before men come to see the light of the Gospel of Christ, their sins stare in
their faces, seeming to spit fire at them: but just as you shall have children,
it may be, put one of their company into hideous postures, and a fearful and
terrible representation, causing every one that knows it not, to run from him:
so sin, as it is set up by Satan with a terrible visage, as it were to spit
fire in the faces of the godly, and faithful, seems very threatening and
dreadful. But they are to know for certain, it is but a made thing, there is
no fear from the sins of Believers, all the terror and fearfulness of sin
Christ himself has drunk it, and in the drinking of it, Christ himself our
life, was crucified, and in that regard, I say, all the terror and gastlinesse,
and hideousness of sin, as it is represented by Satan, is spent, and ^n it
self is dead. It is true, indeed a living roaring Lion is a terrible creature,
but in a dead Lion there is no more fear then is in a stick, or a stone, to
him that knows he is dead. While sin is alive, it is fearful and corrible, and
deadly; but when sin it self is dead, then there is no more terror in it then
is in a dead Lion.

Thus I speak concerning sin, not as it smiles upon a man, with a promi^ing
countenance before it be committed, for so it is most dreadful and odious to
the faithful, as that which crucified their sweetest Lord: but as committed,
and lying upon the conscience of a Believer, endeavoring to drive him to deny
the love and free Grace of God to him, and the all sufficiency of Christ: For
in this regard it is crucified by Christ, and so a Believer need not be afraid
of sin. Indeed, terrible it man seem to be at first, but there is no just cause
of terriblenesse in it, for it can do no hurt. Therefore the Apostle telling
us of the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us,
says, that Christ has nailed them to his Cross. So that the sins of
Believers are crucified with Christ; they that are Christ's, have crucified, the
flesh, with the affections, and lusts thereof. We commonly understand this, as
if our mortification and denying of sin, were the crucifying of the flesh: but
the Apostle speaks otherwise there, and you may see, he intends, that they that
are Christ are crucified with him, as much as to say, Christ's dying upon the
cross for Believers, his death became the death, that is, the expiation of sin
for them, that it should be no more terrible unto them, nor affright the people
of God. I have in^isted the more upon this, because indeed, it is the root from
whence all other fears spring: For, from crosses and afflictions, which come
upon persons (of which we shall speak presently) they run immediately to their
sins, and conceive that it is their sins that have put stings into them, and
makes them so bitter; still therefore they are perplexed with fears, as long as
sin is upon them; Certainly, some fearful thing will come upon them, Why? they
have committed such and such sins, these be the cause of their fear. But
beloved, either deny plainly that Christ dyed for your sins, and that he has
borne the whole wrath of God, that sin has deserved, or sit down by this truth
that sin did hurt Christ so much, that it cannot hurt the Believer for whom
Christ did die.

Secondly, as we should not fear our own sins, being Believers, and members of
Christ; so neither ought we to fear the sins of others.

Object. You will say, supposing there be no sins of our own to pull down
judgment, yet the world is full of iniquity, and abundance of sins there are
upon the times that bring down wrath from Heaven.

Answ. Though it be true, that National sins bring down National judgments
and wrath; yet all the sins of the times cannot do a member of Christ a lot of
hurt. And therefore, as they cannot do him any hurt, so he need not be afraid
of them. I will make it appear, that the sins of the world, the crying sins of
the times, can do a Believer no hurt at all: Mark the plea of the Lord, often
mentioned in Ezekiel, against the people that hit him in the teeth, as if he
were unjust, The fathers say they, have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens
teeth are set on edge. He pleads his own innocence in it, and directly
answers, that the soul that sins shall dye; As much as to say, he that does
commit the fault, shall bear the burden of it; thou that art not the committer
of the fault, thou shall not bear the burden of it. Therefore the sins of the
times that are committed by the wicked, they cannot do Gods people any hurt.
The childrens teeth shall not be set on edge.

Object. I, but, some will say, I have had some hand in these sins, I did not
reprove these sins, or, I did not separate my self from them.

Answ. I answer, suppose that the members of Christ are in some sort accessory
to these sins yet, so far as you in your own persons, have been actors, or
partakers of these transgressions, Christ has borne these transgressions, and
suffered for them. It is not some sins that Christ bears, and leaves some sins
for Believers to bear, and so also leaves some punishment for Believers to
suffer; for it is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; and
that he does take them all away, appears, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Christ his
Son, cleanses us from all sins. Whether then you consider every elect
person, as he sins by himself, or as he shareth with others, all these
sins the blood of Christ cleanses him from; and therefore, I say, the sins
of other people, they shall not, they cannot be imputed to him that is a
Believer.

Object. But, you will say, surely the Lord does send crosses and afflictions
upon his own people, as well as upon the people of the world many times, and
should we not therefore be afraid of them?

Answ. Therefore in the third place, let me tell you, as there is no occasion
nor need; nay, as people ought not to be afraid for the sins of others, so
ought not they to be afraid for the chastisements of the Lord upon them.
Consider but the true nature of fear, look upon things as they are in
themselves. If there be occasion of fear in any thing that may come, there
must be evil in these afflictions, or else there need not be fear: now there
is no evil in them, but all are exceeding good, and they work for good, and
that that works for good, is not evil; every agent produces effects
answerable to its own nature: an evil tree brings forth no good fruit, no
more does a good tree bring forth evil fruit; so then, if there be nothing but
good in all the afflictions of the people of God, then there is no cause of
fear, there is an apprehension of evil in a thing, if there be fear, but
there is not a just apprehension of evil in a thing that is good; be assured
of this, there is no fear to be had of afflictions, let them be never so tart,
let them be never so great or many. Oh, says one, I shall be undone, as others
are, that are plundered, here the heart is disturbed and distracted. But
beloved, suppose you lose all that you have, even the wife out of your bosoms,
and your children out of your arms, and so you be deprived of all, yet there is
no evil in them, and therefore you ought not to be afraid. There is nothing
but good a them: the Apostle in the 12. Hebr. tells us, that it is true, for
the present, no affliction seems joyous, but grievous; yet he takes away all
occasions of fear, though for the present they seem evil, yet afterward,
says he, they bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness to those that
are exercised therewith. What hurt is in them, when they bring forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness? In afflictions, they are refined as Silver,
and as Gold. What hurt is there to Silver in the fire, when nothing is intended
but the separation of the dross from the Silver? When the Lord afflicts his
people, he sits as a Refiner to take away the dross. The afflictions of Gods
people are nothing but the refinings of God, to take away the rust. What hurt
is there in Physic, especially in good physic, when the body is distempered?
They that know the benefit of it, will they be afraid of it, though it make
them sick for a time? It is true, ignorance and suspicion of the operation
will make men afraid, but the Lord has made it known to us, that all his
chastisements are the fruits of his love, and this is the end of all, to take
away their sins. It is true, men need not fear that the sins they commit shall
do them hurt, but the Lord makes use of afflictions, to purge out sin from the
conversation, where it is a trouble and burden, both to the faithful and
Brethren, though he does not revenge himself of any before committed.

Thirdly, as we ought not to be afraid of sin and afflictions in general, so
for the present we should take notice, that they that have Go^ for their God,
must not be afraid of men. The enemies of God, they that fight against God,
there needs no fear, either of their wrath, o^ of their policy, nor of their
meances, nor o^ their cruelty. There is no cause of fear of an^ of these. It
is true, there is doubtless, an implacablenesse of rage, and an unchangeable
resolution of revenge, if possibly they could, eve^ to bring fire from Heaven
to devour the servants of the living God: But if their rage were more desperate
then it is, there is no cause at all to fear, in as much as God is the God of
such a people. In the 120. Psalm, you shall see that there is no cause to
fear, though there be never so much evil approaching. This Psalm was made
of purpose, to set forth this thing, that the godly need not fear the fury of
the oppressor: If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against
us, they had swallowe^ us up, when their fierce wrath was kindled against us;
but blessed be the Lord, says the Psalmist, that has not given us as a prey
to their teeth; ou^ soul escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the
snare is broken, and we are delivered. Here is fierce wrath, but yet here is
escaping as a Bird out of the snare of a Fowler, and how comes this to pass?
the Lord is their help, and he is on their side: If the Lord had not been on
their side, they had been swallowed up quick; and if so be the Lord be on our
side, what need of fear is there at all of their wrath? The Psalmist tells us,
that surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath thou
shall restrain, Psalm. 76.10. See what little cause, there is of fear from the
wrath and rage of men there shall nothing but matter of praise come forth to
the Lord out of it. Will thou be afraid of that by which the Lord shall be
praised? The Lord is praised by the wrath of men, and all the superfluity of
wrath, all that is over and above, more then is for the glory of God, the Lord
will restrain that, The wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of
wrath thou shall restrain. The wrath that is more then for his praise, the
Lord will be sure to keep it in, and the wrath that is for the glory of God,
will thou be afraid of it?

Moreover, as you ought not to fear the wrath of men, so you ought not to fear
the policy of the enemies of God. Though hell it self combine with them, to lay
snares to entrap the people of God, there is no cause of fear of them; ^et
there be Achitephels among them, whose counsel is as an Oracle of God, yet the
Lord will turn their counsel into foolishness. The Lord of such a people, he
confounds the wisdom of the wise, and brings to naught the counsel of the
prudent, where is the Wiseman where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of
this world? He has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise, as well as the weak things of the world to confound the strong. Now, if
the Lord choose foolish things to confound the wise, or the wise things of the
world to confound themselves; why oughtess thou to be afraid?

Thirdly, there is no occasion of fear (to them that have God for their God) of
the instruments of cruelty. Let them have all the instruments that cruelty it
self can invent, fear the^ not; fear not their swords, fear not their guns
fear not their engines of war. No weapons formed against the Church of Christ
shall prosper. What need we to be afraid of that which shall not prosper? Now,
the Lord says plainly, that no weapon formed against the Church shall prosper.
You know indeed, that unto a naked breast, a sword is terrible, but where then
is a coat of male to sense off a sword, he tha^ has on this coat, is, or need
be no more afraid of the thrust of a sword, then when the^ is no sword at all
thrust against him, especially when he knows his coat of male is sword proof,
that a sword cannot pierce it. Armo^^ of proof, you know will keep out a
bullet when a man knows his armor is of proof indeed, he cares not whether he
has a dagger thrust at it, or a pistol shot against it or no, he fears not,
he cares not: The armor of believers, is pistoll-proof, it cannot be shot
through.

Object. But you will say, many are slain, will you condemn all that are
killed by their enemy, as not Believers?

Answ. Mistake me not, I do not say they are sword-proof, so that the same
thing may not befall unto them, as unto others; but only so, that nothing that
befalls them, can be truly evil unto them and in respect of the soul, all
that the enemy can do, cannot destroy the souls of Believers.

Object. Do you not see them dead, you will say?

Answ. But mark what the Apostle says, Our life is hid with Christ in God. It
is true, there is a natural life, and that life may be destroyed as well as
the life of a wicked man, but yet the soul of a Believer is not destroyed, the
soul is cannon-proof, all the devils in hell cannot destroy it; The life that
I now live, I live by the faith of the Some of God; Christ himself is our
life. Now, when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear
with him in glory. So that Christ himself may be killed before our lives shall
be destroyed by the enemies. You that are Believers have this advantage of
your enemies the unbelievers, you may take away their lives, but they cannot
take away your lives. They have but one life, a natural life, but they that
are Believers, have a life in Christ; nay, Christ is their life, he himself
shall be annihilated before they shall. All the power of the sword cannot take
away that life from you; it is true, they may take you out of this world, and
the comforts of it; but know, this world, when the Lord will have the soul
separated from it, is a comfortless world. If the Lord himself should answer a
person to give him life in the world, when himself has purposed to take him
out of the world, the world and life it self would be a hell to him. Beloved,
know this, that the Lord intends only your good in all your changes, and that
which is best, the Lord provides for you. Though your life be taken away from
you, where is the loss? where is the hurt? Consider it well, beloved, death is
but the opening of the prison doors, to let you out of prison; it is but the
arriving of a vessel into the haven of rest. What does the sword do when it
enters into a Believer? it makes but a change of immortality for mortality, of
life for death, of strength for weakness, of glory for shame, of holiness for
sin. It does but pull down a rotten house of clay, to give possession of
mansions of glory. It does but take persons from a cottage at will, to enter
into a Lordship of inheritance: for it gives full possession of an eternal
inheritance. The sword, that enters into the breast of a Believer, it does but
put him into the chamber of the Bridegroom, and consummates the marriage of
the Lamb to that person. It is the fulfilling of the great cry of the Saints,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ: It takes the Bride into communion, and fellowship with her long-looked
for Beloved, and gives her possession of those things that take up her longing.
While we are in the flesh, we are absent from the Lord; we enjoy the vision of
Christ now but in hope, and we enjoy it but darkly: but when this earthly
tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have an house not made with hands; says the
Apostle. It does but carry the Believer out of a barren, blustering,
troublesome wilderness, unto his home, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of glory. What hurt is there in all this? Confider this,
that when the worst comes to the worst, if ye should be brought into the
greatest strait that ever man was in, when cruelty shall rage and swell to the
very top, and to its utmost bounds. This is that which stays up the heart, and
makes the weakest spirits strong; and the want of this, makes the strongest run
away. When a man shall think with himself, if I should be now thrust through
by the sword of the enemy, what will become of me? If I be not a member of
Christ, I shall go to Hell for ever. Oh, how will this startle him. This in the
heart of the stoutest soldier, is enough to make him run away, have he never
so much courage; but when a man shall stand in the face of an enemy, and the
bullets fly about him on every ^ide; if when he shall thus think with himself,
What if one of these should hit me, what shall become of me? whither should I
go? If he can but say in true faith, Heaven is mine, and Christ is mine, I
shall go presently unto God my Father, at whose right hand are joys for
evermore; I cannot have a better turn done unto me, then by one of these
messengers, to be sent presently thither. It is recorded, that there was a man
had a spear run at him, by one that sought his life, and entering, it happened
to lance an ulcer, that all the Physicians could never cure; that thrust of the
spear, cured the ulcer. Oh, beloved, all the world is not able to cure the
ulcers that are in Believers, in respect of the cohabitation and practice of
sin; for sin will arise, and break forth in spite of all the world, and they
shall not cease to sin, till they shall cease to be here below: Now the sword
that enters into the hearts of the Believers, and members of Christ, that sword
at one thrust perfectly cures all the ulcers of sinfulness, that there shall
never arise any more after that: Now what hurt is there in that spear, that
cures in stead of killing?

This, beloved, I speak by way of encouragement, to all the faithful; when
the enemy looks big upon you, and your hearts are ready to faint, consider what
the Lord says, I am your God, be not afraid, nor dismayed: Sometimes I
observe people look upon Believers with an evil eye, because they do not see
them of such dejected countenances, and so full of fearful expressions as are
in themselves, or are in others: Thereupon they presently censure them to be
such as are void of sense, and full of security. But consider, has not the
Lord promised, that they shall not be moved with evil tidings? Is there
nothing in all the promises of God? Will you say there is no strength, nor
truth in him, in whom is the fullness of all, that when you find such an
undauntednesse of spirit in any man, that when men speak of fire and sword,
and the cruelty of the enemy, shall say, we are careless, as touching this
matter, you shall say they are stupefied, or carnally secure? Do you not
therein charge the three children for the same? Shall the people of God, who^ut
of the apprehension of God being their God, and being out of the gunshot of
sin, say, we fear not touching this matter, shall they be condemned for it?
They know: wherein pain is, and misery is, and death is, which thou art not
sensible of. Do not then condemn God therefore. Is thine eye evil, because
Gods is good?

Now, what are the disadvantages by this dismayednesse of spirit? there are
three sorts of them:

First, fearfulness and dismayednesse of spirit does produce a great deal of
prejudice unto God, not simply to the being of God, but to the glory and honor
of God; fearfulness and dismayednesse, cast many slanders upon him.

1. Slanders upon his power.

2. Slanders upon his faithfulness.

3. Slanders upon his care and providence.

4. Slanders upon the freeness of his grace.

5. Slanders upon the efficacy of the sufferings of Christ.

To touch of these a little, which by the grace of God, may quit your hearts of
these fears.

First, it casts a slander upon the power of God: If you lend a man an hundred
pounds, and he give you a bond to pay it you again, it may be you fear you
shall not have it again; What is the ground of it? I doubt, say you, he will
not be able to pay me. When fear arises from such a Principle, now does not
this cast an aspersion upon the ability and sufficiency of the man? If you did
think he were an able man indeed, you would not suspect him: so when you see
such and such evils growing toward you, and you begin to be afraid, and to
cry out, Doubtless, I shall sink under them, God is not able to deliver me, at
such a time; I say, Unbelief of the power of God being the occasion of such
fear, it thereby casts an heavy slander upon God.

Object. But some may say, I did never doubt of the ability of God.

Answ. If you do not, yet Israel did, Can God, say they, give flesh in the
wilderness? And consider with your selves how often it has been in the hearts
of people, when they have been in any great extremity; How shall we escape?
there is no possibility for us to avoid this evil. Is not this now a calling
in question the power of God, in such fears as these are: If so, then is there
a great scandal cast upon the power of God.

Secondly, it likewise brings a scandal to the faithfulness and truth of God.
Some will say, I do not question whether God can do this, but all my fear is,
whether he will do it or no. This fear arises from hence; there is a
suspicion that God will not do it. Now, I ask this question, Has God said he
will do it? Has he said, I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee? Has he
said, that all things shall work together for our good? Has he said it? and
do you fear he will not do it? What do you make of God? Is not God as good as
his word? Is God and his faithfulness out of credit with you? Has God said,
and will he not perform? If a man has promised to give you a hundred pound,
and when he is gone, you fear you shall never have it, do you not call in
que^^ion the honesty of this man? do you not make him a lier? Has not God
promi^ed to save you and defend you? to be your shield and buckler? now you by
fear calling this in question, is this any better, then to charge God with
dishonesty? and to make him a liar, that he has said, and will not make good
what he has said?

Thirdly, you charge the providence and care of God; you know what God has
said, Be careful for nothing, but in all things make your requests known to
him; and bids cast your care upon him, for he cares for you; do you think
God is mindful of you, and cares for you when extremity of danger comes upon
you, and you fear you shall miscarry in such a danger, either you must think
that he does not mind you nor regard you, or if he does, he is not able to
help you. This was David's fault, he runs on in this manner: Has he so gotten
to be gracious, has he shut up his loving ki^dnes^e in displeasure: will be be
merciful no mere? he charged God with forgetfulness.

Fourthly, you cast a scandal upon the free grace of God. When thou art thus
afraid thy fear is that such an evil will overtake thee, and withal, thou
look upon thy deserts, and thou say this may well come upon me, I have
deserved it; I have committed such and such sins, and they will certainly
provoke the Lord to send all these evils I fear upon me; because thou have
sinned, thou do fear such punishments will come upon thee, con^^der how thou
scandallest the freeness of the grace of God; there is no avoiding of evil,
say thou, because sin has been committed, yet herein does grace indeed
consist, that though sin be committed, yet there shall no wrath be provoked,
nor punishment in^^icted. So often as men fear afflictions from ^ins committed,
so often they slander the grace of God There is no way for me to escape, for I
have sinned, will men think. When a scholar shall come home to his father, and
cry. I have committed a fault, there is no escaping the rod, for every fault I
commit, I shall (...) whipped, is not this to cast a scandal upon the clemency
of the Master? as if he were so rigid that he would pass by no fault. If you
upon sin committed, fear the falling of wrath and judgment, what do you
think of God? do you not plainly declare, that there is no clemency in him?

Lastly, you cast a slander upon the suffering of Christ, you that fear wrath,
because you have committed such and such a sin; Beloved, to what purpose tend
the sufferings of Christ? was it not for the sins of men? did the Lord behold
the travel of his soul, and was he satisfied? and when he is satisfied, will
he come and exact a new payment, after that satisfaction given and
acknowledged? either God must be dishonest, to exact payment twice for one
debt, or Christ's satisfaction was insufficient? If Christ did not bear all the
wrath of God, but you must bear some of it your selves, where is the efficacy
of the suffering of Christ? If the sufferings of Christ were sufficient,
wherefore should you then fear any wrath at all? Certainly, you must either
say, Christ has not born all indignation, and so make the Scripture a liar,
which ^aith, he beheld the travel of his soul, and was satisfied, and the
suffering of Christ of none effect; or else, though sin has been committed,
you cannot fear wrath, or any evil, as the effect of wrath to be afflicted.

The second prejudice of fear is, as it respects Gods service; it may appear
diverse ways to you:

First, so far forth as fear possesses the heart, so far forth is faith
suppressed; this fear is the cutthroat of believing; In quietness and
confidence, shall be your rest; where there is rest, there is confidence, and
where there is no rest, there can be no considence; there fore as far as you
fear the afflictions of the world, in respect of your sins, so far are you weak
in faith; Faith makes men sit down satisfied and settled in spirit, whereas
fear fills men full of questioning and doubtings of things: when things are
dark, and not clear, there are disputings, but faith, that puts an end to all
doubts and fears; wherefore, so long as there is fear, there is unbelief.

Secondly, fear and dismayednesse is prejudicial to all religious duties:
first, it is a damper of prayer; Beloved, you know, that the life of prayer
lies in faith, If any man pray, let him ask in faith, says St. James, Faith
is the wing of prayer, and carries it up to heaven; clip the wings of prayer,
and the motions of it must be slow. Beloved, you that are afraid, does feal and
dismayednesse take hold of your spirits? mark in such a fit, what hearts you
have to pray. In brief, there is this great prejudice in fear, it makes all the
duties that persons perform, merely selfish. You know that a servant is very
diligent for his master, when no danger comes, but let the servant be in fear
of any danger, he will leave his masters business to shift for himself, and
seek for his own safety: So consider it well, whether your hearts are not for
your selves in your services, when there is a strong passion of fear in your
spirits: when a man is in prayer against some evil he fears is approaching
unto him, what prayer is it? He is altogether for himself, that he may be
delivered from his present fear; there is not a thought (so far as this fear
prevails) that God may be glorified all the while, but only of the evil that
is upon him, or that is like to fall upon him whereas the Believer should serve
with sincerity and singleness of spirit; he should do that which he does as
unto the Lord, (says the Apostle) Do not mistake, it is not the
spiritualnesse, nor the fervency in the performance of duties that carries it;
duties are not expiatory helpers with Christ: But, I say, when duties are
performed as to the Lord, and for the Lord, and not to, and for himself, then
are they right as services. But all our hope that we must have in any
condition, must be only from the grace of God, and all our performances that we
do act, must be to the Lord for what he has done for us. Therefore, seeing it
is the Lord himself that calls upon you, and claps you on the back, and bids
you be not afraid, take courage from the Lord, and quit your selves like men.
In danger be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: There is this
difference between Gods call and man's call, to do any thing; men call men to
services and employments, but cannot give them power and ability to perform
that which they are called unto; but God calls and gives influence of his own
to make men do such things as he calls them unto. The Lord says, Fear not,
and in the voice of the Lord there is life, to frame the same temper in your
hearts. Christ, he shall stand over your dead hearts as he did over the dead
body of Lazarus, saying, Lazarus, arise, who immediately arose: the word of his
mouth carried life into it, and with it: So it says, Fear not, and immediately
it takes away all fear from the spirit of that man he speaks inwardly unto;
other men may speak, and speak their hearts out, and never the better, but when
God calls upon you not to be afraid, he is present in his Ordinances, merely
for his own sake, to hold out this undauntednesse of spirit to you, it is now
with you if you embrace it: it is at your doors, he will make you of a strong
and undaunted spirit, he shall strengthen you as that Leviathan the Lord speaks
of in the 41. of Job, which esteemed Iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood,
because his scales were so strong: know this, that Believers are the Leviathans
of God, he will so steel their spirits, that they shall cut Iron as straw, and
Brass as rotten wood. The Lord is able to put such a spirit into you, and he
will make good his promise, wherein he has engaged himself, that his strength
shall be made perfect in weakness; therefore, though you have said, My
strength fails me (...) yet the Lord shall be the strength of your hea^ts,
and your portion for ever; thus you shall give that to the Lord that fearful
men rob him of, that is, the glory of his power, of his faithfulness, of the
freenes and riches of his grace, and care of his peoples welfare, and Christ of
his sufficiency, wherein he has promised plentifully to supply you with all
spiritual strength and vigor, that you shall run and not be weary, that you
shall walk, and not be faint. In a word, there are a few civil respects that I
will mention as motives against this fear, I will but touch them.

First, know, fear, especially dismayednesse, puts a man besides his wits, that
while he is in such a passion, he is to seek for common ways of safety; so
that whereas men think that fear will h^lpe them to avoid danger, commonly in
amazedness, you shall have people stand still, not able to stir or slip aside,
to save themselves. Besides, this fear is such a rack and torment, that
commonly those evils so much feared, prove not so hurtful nor evil to a
person as the present fears; and besides this, fear many times, it does not
only daunt the spirit of a man in himself, but proves very dangerous to others:
you already have had sufficient experience not long since, of the evil and
mischiese this fear had like to have occasioned in the Army, a thousand to one
it was, that the fear of some had not made all the rest to fly; and it was a
miracle of mercy, that there should be so great a fear in the Army, and the
Army yet stand so to it; fear at such a time, is of a wonderful spreading and
dangerous nature; fearfulness in one, kindles fearfulness in many, and so not
only men's persons, but also the Cause it self is hazarded, but these are but
low things in respect of the prejudice God himself sustains in the fear of
men; therefore, for your encouragement, consider what the Lord has in store
for you, nothing he has, nothing he is, or can give, does he think too good
for you, but he is willing to part with it to make you happy; he parts not with
his goods, but with his Son for you; nay, beloved, he parts with that which is
more, if any thing can be more then his Son, that is, himself: Will you now
deprive your selves of the sweet enjoyment of all these, by your base and
unbelieving and fearful hearts? Nay, rather let us freely receive, let us
thankfully acknowledge, and confidently rest upon our Fathers abundant mercy,
expressed in so many blessings; but especially in the gift of his only Son,
given unto us, that we might serve him, without fear, in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75.

SERMON. II.
Isaiah 41. verse. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for
I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.


Upon the like occasion that is now offered unto us, I have (peradventure, in
the hearing of some present) made entrance into these words I have read now
unto you; I shall give you but a taste of what I have formerly spoken, so much
as may serve by way of introduction to that, in which I mean to spend the
remainder of this time.

The occasion of these words, you may see in the former passage of this
Chapter. At this present instant, a great tumult and uproar was raised, upon
the raising of the righteous Man, from the East, that is, the setting up of
Christ: Such a noise there was, that God was fain to call for silence, verse. 1.
and for their plea, at the latter end of the verse. If they have any thing to
say against this business of setting up of Christ, let them bring their
strongest reasons, (says the Lord.) Having thus obtained silence, the Lord
makes his plea against their tumultuous opposition, verse. 2. Who is he that
has raised him up, and has given Nations to him, and made him to rule over
Kings? I the Lord did it, says he, verse. 4. What have you to say to me? He
shall prosper, and he shall prosper with facility, and ease, he shall go
softly, he shall never run for fear of being circumvented; He shall go in a
way that his foot has not trod before, he shall go further then he has gone;
and what say they to this, when God speaks? Yet the tumultuous men will not be
quiet, they lay their heads together, as you find, they consult to find out
help: nay they conspire, the Carpenter and the Smith have laid their heads
together.

Now, because there is such a combustion when Christ is set up, lest the people
of the Lord should be possessed with dismayednesse and fear of miscarriage,
the Lord turns his speech to these opposed: Fear not, I am with thee, be not
dismayed, I am thy God. Christ, when ever he is exalted, did, does, and will,
find great opposition, but in spite of all opposition Christ's exaltation shall
prosper, all their opposition shall not hinder; nay, he will go softly, that the
world may see that he is not afraid of all opposition whatsoever. First, in
this Text, the Lord is pleased to provide a pillow, as for a King, for the
heads of his people, or a staff for their trembling hand: a pillow to support
their sinking spirits they are apt to be discouraged, it seems the Lord is
pleased to take their condition into his hand, to speak to the occasion of
their trembling, and to give out such words that may be a stay, that they may
stand fast, though blustrings grow greater then they are.

The Textis nothing else but a gracious encouragement, or a comfortable support
of a sinking spirit. The encouragement is in these words; Fear not, be not
dismayed: the grounds and arguments by which he would prevail with them not to
fear, nor be dismayed, are in these words: I am with thee; I am thy God; I will
help thee; I will up hold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. The
point is this; That they that have God for their God, need never fear, nor be
dismayed, seeing this their God is with them, will help them, strengthen them,
and uphold them with the right hand of his righteousness.

Concerning this fear and dismayednesse, we spoke largely the last time we
spoke upon this occasion.

1. What it is, not to be afraid.

2. What we are not to be afraid of.

3. What the inconveniences of such fear are.

In brief, not to fear, is no more but a composedness, and setlednesse of
spirit, against any evil that comes Excellent is that expression in the 112.
Psalm, verse. 8. They shall not be afraid of evil tidings. What is that? Their
heart is fixed, their heart is established, they shall not be removed. Here is
the expression of a fearlesse heart, a heart fixed, a heart established, a
heart not moved. You have it likewise excellently set out in Daniel 3. in an
example, the 16. verse. in the story of the three children, being sentenced to
be cast into the fiery furnace; they came before the great King Nebuchadnezzar,
and he spoke big to them, and tells them what they must trust unto, if they
will not fall down and worship his Gods. Mark now, how their fearlesnesse and
dismayednesse is expressed: We are not careful to answer thee in this matter,
our God whom we serve, be will deliver us. See what a disposition this
fearlesnesse is, and then what is the ground of it. We are not careful to
answer thee in this matter; here is a true fearlesnesse if when ever evil
comes, men can say, it matters not, we are ready for it: And look into the root
of it, and you shall find it in their answer; our God is able to deliver us,
that made them so careless in so weighty a thing; Our God whom we serve, he
will deliver us.

Secondly, what it is we should not fear. I answer, first, we should not fear
God himself, as to do us any hurt; fear him with awful reverence we must A
Believer that is the servant and chosen of God, need not fear that God will do
him any hurt. It is God that justifies, therefore it is not God that will harm
thee. The heart of God is to his people; My bowels are troubled for thee,
says God to Ephraim. Can he hurt them while he is troubled for them?

Secondly, they must not fear their own sins, I do not say, they ought not to
fear to commit sin, but they ought not to fear what hurt their sins can
do them, seeing they are blotted out. If a man have subscribed unto, and
sealed a hundred Bonds, and all these Bonds be quite cancelled, and blotted
out, he need not fear no hurt these Bonds can do him: Paul in the 7. of Romans
complains indeed of a body of death, and the power of sin; but in the closure
of the Chapter, he shows how little he fears any thing that sin could do:
Thanks be unto God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. What does he thank the Lord
for? that though his firts were so great, yet they could not do him any hurt,
nor any of Gods people. Look into the beginning of the 8. Chapter, it is
plain: There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: For the Law of the Spirit of life that
is in Christ, has freed me from the Law of sin and death: For, what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.
What hurt can this do? Now, beloved, give me leave to tell you, if you be
Believers, and weak in faith, I dare be bold to say, nothing cuts the heart so
much, in respect of fear of evil, as the sins you do commit: these will be
swords to your hearts. But if you be Believers indeed, the sword is broken, the
sting is gone; The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law, 1
Cor. 15. but thanks be to God, says the Apostle, that has given us the
victory over sin and death: so that we may boldly say, Oh death! where is thy
sting? Oh grave! where is thy victory? If you be the Lords, and the Lord be
yours, if you be Believers, you may triumph as the Apostle does, Oh death!
where is thy sting? It is gone; nay, Oh death! (says the Lord in the Prophecy
of Hosea) I will be thy destruction. I beseech you, give not care, either to
Satan, or to whatsoever instrument he has, that would possess you, that
though Christ dyed for you, and has borne your sins himself upon the Cross,
or upon the tree, (as the Apostle Peter expresses) yet those same sins will
do you hurt, and prove a mischief and bane to you. I say, there cannot be
greater despite done, nor affront offered unto Christ, then to make the
Believer conceive that he was not able to bear their sins, nor the wrath of
God sufficiently for them, but that they must be wounded, notwithstanding all
that Christ has done. If Christ be hurt, as much as sin can hurt him, how can
any man be hurt by it, for whom Christ suffered? If Christ upon the Cross took
the sting out of it and carried it to his own grave, how comes it to have a
new sting? or did Christ dye in vain? If he took away the sting of one sin, and
not the sting of another, there were need of another Christ, it seems, to take
away that sting that is behind, and so Christ has not perfected for ever them
that are sanctified. I desire you to hear with patience; this is the first
ground of all your comfort in affliction, that sin is gone, for then all
afflictions in the world cannot discomfort, seeing all discomfort arises from
sin, which is the sting of affliction. Hereupon the Apostle triumphs, Who can
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who can
condemn? Contrariwise, the soul is in the greatest bitterness, when sin
remains, and the sting of it is not taken away, but when God is reconciled, as
he is to the faithful; for, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; how then can finne do hurt?
when it is not to be imputed? God does use to reckon when he does take payment.
If God does not reckon with men, he will never smite them with wrath; as is the
wrath, so must be the smart, and harm, and hurt, that person is to sustain, in
respect of the sins committed. Chastise he does indeed, for special ends, but
the sin does not at all hurt: And though the Lord does afflict, that will do
you no hurt neither; afflictions are the physic of God, to purge and
sanctify the conversation: Will a man think, that is ready to dye of the
stone, or wind-cholick, or stoppage in the fromach, if a Physician comes, and
gives him a bitter potion, that he does do him any hurt, when he knows it is
to recover his life, and save it? he knows he dies if he heals not the
infirmity; God uses no physic, no chastisement and affliction, but it shall
work for good: so the Apostie expresses it, in Hebr. 12. No affliction for
the present is joyous, but grievous; yet afterward it brings forth the
peaceable fruits of righteousness, to them that are exercised therewith. It
bring^th forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness, what hurt is there in
all this?

But I must go on, and come to that which I have more particularly to deliver
to you, and that is upon the consideration of Gods motives, by which he does
attempt to prevail over the spirits of his people, not to be afraid, or
dismayed, come what can, or may come: you know God is best able to persuade;
God best knows what Rhetoric will take with his own people: A man that has
had the breeding of a child, and so comes to observe the temper of it, can
better tell then any other, which way to win him: God has the breeding of his
own children; nay, God goes further, he has the spirits of his children at
his own beck, and therefore can best tell which way to work upon their spirits,
and to beget that in them which he calls for of them. The Lord would have them
not to be afraid, nor dismayed: Let the Lord propose his way to bring them to
this composedness, and fixednesse of spirit, it is but presumption in any
creature to conceive, there may be better ways to work upon the spirits of
men, then that which God prescribes. And it is worth your observation to
consider, that when the Lord puts his people upon a composedness, and
fixednesse of spirit, he does not say, Fear not, for you have fasted, for you
have prayed, for you have forsaken your sins, and denied your selves, and
walked holily with me, and therefore, because you have done this and that,
Fear you not. The Lord does not say so here, he has higher Propositions that
he proposes, that have more excellent virtue to move his people: He says,
Fear not, I am toy God; I will help thee, and uphold thee with the right hand
of my righteousness. The prop for the upholding of spirits against fear, when
evil comes, it is without a man's self, in him that is a rock, and
unchangeable: The Lord does not say, You change not, therefore you are not
consumed, you continually proceeded in holiness, you waver not, therefore you
are not consumed: but, I am God, and change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed. I say therefore again, If you would have setlednesse of spirit,
you must go out of your selves, and fetch peace of spirit out of God himself;
and I dare be bold to say, take all the sweetness and comfort of all the
world, of all the creatures mixed together, extract the quintessence of their
own excellencies, all these together shall never settle a heart, nor make it
secure and free from fear, but only this proposition, that God is their God.
And by the fruit of this principle, a poor tottering spirit is under-propped,
and under-set here with four pillars, at every corner one, as I may so say, I
am thy God, I am with thee; I will help thee, I will uphold the with the right
hand of my righteousness: or rather, there is one main principle, and three
subordinate supporters affixed unto the main principle, for sometimes you shall
see great weights laid upon some great pillar, and for the better securing of
that which is laid upon it; you shall have some short pillars branching out
from the main, spread out wide, and so upholding. This present discourse seems
to be such a main principle, that is, Gods being a God to such a people, I am
thy God, this is the foundation, this is the great pillar: I am with thee, I
will help thee, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness;
they are the three supporters that do issue out of this main principle; for
they are all but branches flowing from this privilege of Gods being your God.
These I say are sufficient to keep the most tottering spirit in the world
immovable, like Mount Sion, never to be removed. I shall take the Principle,
the main support, into task, at this present, and therein consider what
excellency of support there is in it: Fear not, I am with thee; be not
dismayed, I am thy God.

In the handling of this, that you may the better see what stability there is
for a tottering spirit in this support, let us consider:

First, what it is for God to be thy God.

Secondly, what a person has in this, who has God for his God.

Thirdly, by way of answering objections, show how it is so well with those
that are the Lords, if this be true, that God himself is their God.

Fourthly, how God does become their God, and upon what terms.

Fifthly, how God will be found of them to be so as he is become.

There are excellent usefulnesses if the truth be well fifted, and dived into.

I will begin with the first, what it is for God to be thy God.

There is much in it; nay, I will say more, there is more in it then is in any
one thing, delivered in Scripture. I will go yet further, there is all in it
that does concern the present and future wel-being and happiness of a
Believer, I say, all is in this one thing, I am thy God. While you have all
things else but this, you have but the rays of the Sun; while you have this,
you have the Sun it self in his brightness, and glory, and luster. But to
clear this thing a little, what it is for God to be thy God, or my God, you
must not understand, that the Holy Ghost speaks here in the full collection of
all, nor that he is to be understood as speaking in the plural number, because
he takes in the whole world, but he is to be understood, of all the members of
Christ as one body, and also the passage is to be understood distributively, of
every such particular person, and so he is thy God, and my God, and their God,
I am their God, is all one with, I am thy God. In the Scriptures you shall
find a most vast difference between God simply and abstractively considered,
and God relatively considered; and that we must note beforehand, that you may
know wherein the strength and comfort of this passage lies. For God to say,
Fear not, I am thy God, is ten thousand times more comfortable, and has more
in it, then simply for God to have said, Fear not, I am God. I say, there is
far more stability and support in this expression of God, considered as our
God, then as he is considered simply and abstractively without relation to us,
for so it imports only to us the incomprehensible, perfect and complete being
of God, as he is in himself. But God considered in relation here, as he is thy
God, imports to us, not only what God is in respect of his absolute perfection
and compleatnesse, but what he is to those persons whose he is, so that the
phrase does import, not only what God simply is, but also, that whatever he is,
in and from himself, the same he is to those persons whose he is. It is worth
the observation, that the Scriptures plainly hold out, that when ever the Lord
is spoken of in reference to wicked persons, God is never mentioned in way of
relation of propriety unto them, but only as he is spoken of in reference to
his own people. You shall not find in all the Scripture, God said to be the
God of any person that is a wicked man. But, lest there be a mistake, you must
know that this relation of God to people, may be considered, either as common,
or as special and peculiar. It is true, take a Church, as it is mixed, so
sometimes the Lord is spoken of in relation to them: as for example, in the 20.
Chapter of Exodus, I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the house of bondage. Here is God spoken of in relation, I am
the Lord thy God; and this seems to be spoken collectively to the whole body of
the Church, one with another; but always observe this rule, Where the Lord is
mentioned in relation to a mixed people, that is, a Church consisting of mixed
persons, all the privileges from such a relation of God, in reference to such
persons, are but common privileges: So in that very Text, I am the Lord thy
God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; Observe, he calls himself
indeed, their God, take them conjunctively, one with another. But wherein their
greatest privilege was, which they had, in having him their God, he expresses
thus: I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, which
was but a common privilege, and therefore, though God be said to be the God of
people, being mixed, yet he is not so their God, as he is the God of his own
people, the living members of Christ: those that are mixed, they receive some
common propriety, or common things in that propriety; but they partake not of
the whole propriety. Usually in Scripture, the phrase, I am thy God, is spoken
only to the Lords servants, his chosen, that he will not cast off, and so it is
to be under^o^d in this Text, as it is in the words immediately before the text:
For you shall see that God speak^ peculiarly of his own elect people, and faith
of them, and to them; Fear not, be not (...), I am thy God, etc. You shall
find, beloved, that the Lord does frequently express himself, when he does
comfort and stay up his people, in this relation as being the best motive that
can be to uphold their spirits. In Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears
the Lord, that walk in dar^nesse, and sees no light? let him rest in the name
of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. Here is the very basis, the great
pillar to bear up even in a state of darkness, God is his God, let him stay
himself upon him, because of this relation, He is his God. Beloved, a man that
does trust to another man's estate, he trusts to a broken staff, as we say, and
may be deceived, except that estate be made his own: a child of light can
never be able to walk in darkness, except he have assurance that God is his
God, by whom he stands: God is my rock and my salvation, says the Ps^lmi^,
Psalm. 62.2. Who is a recke save our God? Psalm. 18 31. So Thomas not being
present when Christ did make it appear to the rest, that he it was that
suffered, and rose again, because he would not believe Christ was risen, he
received this check, Because thou have seen thou believe, blessed are they
that have not seen, and y^ have believed. Now, Thomas having such a check what
had he to rest upon but this: My Lords and my God? When Christ seemed to be
angry he closed with this, O God, thou a^^ my God, thou can not forsake me,
thou can not be wanting to me, thou art my own.

It will be worth the while to consider, what the Lords being a man's own God
is: I am t^^ God. The best way to set this out unto you, is to speak as
plainly as may be, even in the familiarest way, by which you may reach some of
the depth of this mystery. I am thy God, is a^ much as to say, thou have a
propriety in me: or I am thine own, even as much thine own as any goods, or
any thing else in the world is thine; look therefore what difference you may
observe between these two things; Much treasure, great revenews in general,
and thus much treasure is mine, and this great revenew is mine and this land is
mine, I say, what difference you observe between these two particulars, things
simply considered, and things considered as yours; the same difference there is
between God simply considered, and God considered as thine. You know what
difference there is in the spirits of men, looking upon things in these two
considerations. There is this difference in outward things, a poor man looks
upon the riches and honors of great men with a wan heart, and un^omfortable
spirit: Now the ground of it is this, he looks upon them as none of his own.
Two malefactors are condemned to die, one has a pardon sent him, the other
has none now look how these two persons do differ, looking upon this one
pardon, so are you to conceive of the difference between God simply being God,
and God being their God. He whose the pardon is, can say, It is my pardon, Oh,
his heart leaps within him, conceiting he has found a ransom, he has
received his life again, his heart is taken up infinitely in the consideration
of his pardon; But look upon the other man, he sees the same pardon, and looks
upon it with a trembling heart, and sad spirit. Now all the difference of the
case of these two persons, depends upon the propriety in the one, and want of
propriety in the other: A wicked man may think of God simply as God, but he can
never say, (til God reveal unto him that he is an elect person) that God is his
God, and think upon him as his own God, see then how much thy case is better
for thee to consider God as thire then to consider him in himself, and how
great thy privilege in of having God to be thy God.

But what kind of propriety is it? I answer, thus much it imports, as much as
when thou say, that such money is thy money, or such land is thy land. If
you will have the nature of propriety, in the 5, of the Acts and 4. verse, the
Apo^le will tell you in general, what propriety is: The land (speaking of that
which was sold by Ananias) was it not thine own? When it was sold, was not the
money in thine own four? So then, for a man to have a thing as his own, is
to have it in his own power, to do with it as it is b^st, and most prositable
for his own advantage, to the utmost extent of the worth of the thing: As for
example, suppose a man has money in his purse, he wants bread, he has this
money in his own power to dispose of it for the supply of this want, and so in
general he may make use of all his money for the supplying of all his wants:
So Gods being a man's own God, imports, that so far as God will go, as I may so
say, for a man's use, and for the supply of all his necessities; so far he has
power with him, God himself is engaged to give forth himself to the utmost for
such a man's good. Now, Gods All Sufficiency reaches beyond all wants; so that
he that has God for his God, he has him for all the uses, that can be for his
good. If a man be many hundred pounds in debt, and has land that is his own,
he may make use of it for the best to make him a free man again, engaged to
none: He may sell it, and dispose of it as far as it will reach, to pay his
debts, and to procure his discharge. But if it be another man's land, and not
his own, then he cannot make use of it to pay his own debts, but must remain as
he was before: So the Lord is able to make up every thing that is defective or
wanting, to all that have propriety in him; I do not say that a man can sell
the Lord, but I say, so far as God can reach, with his Allsufficiency, so far
may I draw up from him, as from a well of salvation, whatsoever I stand in need
of; The believer has as free and uncontrollable right in God, being his own,
as he has in the money in his purse, and the land that is his own. The one
is not more in his power then the other. It is true indeed, a man may abuse his
land or moneys, and so he may abuse God too, but using things as men use things
that are their own, that is, for their best advantage, they have as much use
and interest in God for the uses they have occasion to use him in, they have as
much power with him as any thing in the world they conceive to be in their own
power. When God gives gold and silver to men, he gives but some thick clay from
himself, but when God communicates himself, he gives all that he is; and he
that has God for his God, has every thing that God is, or can do. God can
do nothing in the world by his Omnipotent power, he can devise nothing in the
world by his infinite wisdom, but all this is as much in propriety his, who
has God for his God, as it is Gods own. Gods propriety in himself, is but that
he is his own; Gods peoples propriety in him is, that he is theirs. All the
difference will be this: God in respect of himself, has the disposing of
himself by himself, and no other disposes of him, but himself: As for the
people of God, because they know not how to dispose of him, as I may say, to
their best advantage; therefore he is pleased to give out himself according to
their several occasions, as he in his wisdom sees most conducing to their
good, and so does it for them: As for example, a father has an Inheritance of
his own, the child of this father has land by inheritance too; now during
minority, the child is not capable to manage it, now the one has as much
propriety in his land as the other, all the difference is this; the father
disposes of his land for his own use himself, the child has his land
disposed for his use by the father; but I say, the propriety is the same. So
far as God may be useful for a creature, so far God is the creatures to do
good to the creature; I do not speak here according to the foolish fantasy of
some, nor conceive as if there were a transmutation of the creature into God,
but I speak of God in respect of his usefulness for accommodation, so far as
it is possible for a creature to have him. He has made over himself in
particular: man may have a propriety in God p^^sed over unto him, as those good
things of God that we enjoy are not transmuted into man's nature, nor is man's
nature changed into that good; but so far as they may be useful to him, or so
far as they may conduce to his welfare, so far he may make use of them: So when
God is thy God, so far as he may be useful to thy good, so far he is as much
thine, as any one thing in the world is thine. Be it far from thee therefore,
to think that God is able to do thus and thus, and to do good in such and such
a case, and yet I cannot, I shall not have God for such a good to may self;
this man that so thinks must needs conclude, God is not his God. Was it ever
heard, that a man had money in his purse, and yet wanted bread, and did perish
for want of bread, except there were no bread to be had, to be bought for
money? So this is to deny the All Sufficiency of God to think that he cannot,
that he will not supply us with all needful blessings; Assure your selves as
God is your own, so as far as may be for your good, you have him as much as
any thing that is yours; only you have not the dispo^ng of him to your selves
and for your selves, but that he has in trust for you. And this will serve to
give a hint by way of answer to some questions by and by. Thus considering what
men have, in having God let us now take it into our consideration, what the
stock and treasure is, in having him to be our God. It is true, there are some
things, in which creatures have propriety, and yet are little the better for
them, in that the things they have propriety in, are not of sufficiency: A
woman may have propriety in a Husband, and yet she may be a b^gger, if he be a
beggar; she can have no more then he has; therefore propriety simply is no
comsort, but the nature of the thing wherein there is propriety: If God be an
empty and scant propriety, then there were but little comfort in having God
himself but mark, God that does make himself over in covenant, the God of such
a people, is the greatest, richest, most incomprehensible treasure that can be.
You have heard of some, that have been raised from beggars, to huge and mighty
estates, they have been had in admiration, that they should be made so rich.
What should the sons of men do, if they were able to apprehend what infinite
superlative treasure they have all at once cast upon them, when God casts
himself upon them. Beloved, I do conceive it a matchless mercy of God, that he
does reveal but glimmeringly for the present, and some smatch of the trcasure
that we have in him for cortainly the over-brightnes, and the over-excellency
of that fulness, he gives unto us in himself, would swallow us up, we should
not b^ able to endure the glory of it, if the Lord should reveal all unto us;
and that is the reason wherefore we know but in part now, because we should be
confounded in the knowledge of all that is to be known, and all what God is to
his own people. There are three particulars whereby specially you may observe
what great treasure people have in having God to be their God.

1. In regard of the quality of the treasure.

2. In regard of the virtue of this treasure.

3. In regard of the sovereignty and the universality and variety of
helpfulnesse in this treasure.

First, in regard of the quality of the treasure: men may have many things,
which may be of little worth, for want of excellency of quality: There is a
great deal of difference between a heap of Dust in propriety, and a heap of
Diamonds; he that has one, may be a beggar, and the others having the same
quantire, is the richest man in the world: So we having propriety in God, are
the richest persons in heaven or earth, by reason of the excellencies that are
in him. Some men have not many acres of land, but those few acres they have, in
regard of the riches of them, are more worth then many millions of other acres:
One acre, as I may say, of propriety in the Lord, is worth a thousand of the
richest proprieties in the world. I say, so rich is God, and every thing that
is in him. All things that are given to in^oy, they are but beams of this Sun
of righteousness, and if there be so much glory in the beams, what is there in
the body of the Sun it self? David, when he considered the countenance of the
Lord, and the superlative excellencies that are therein, he breaks out into
admiration of the excellency of it: There be many (says he in the 4 Psalm.)
which say, Who will show us any good? but Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us; and thou shall put more gladness into my heart, then when
their corn, and wine, and oil increase. Mark, while others look for good, he
looks for the light of Gods countenance; when others look for wine, and oil,
he looks for Gods gracious countenance, and having that, he lies down and
sleeps, as one filled and satiated. There is abundance of treasure and
superlative excellency in God; silver and gold are not to be compared untohim;
Nay, the Apostle Peter comparing of silver and gold unto Christ, says, they
are but corruptible things in respect of Christ's blood: how much more is God
himself, whereunto Christ's blood is but the means? now the means is
subordinate unto the end for which it is a means. If then the blood of Christ
be so precious, that silver and gold are but corruptible things in comparison
of it, what is God, that the blood of Christ brings us unto?

Secondly, consider the virtue of it: for God to be the God of people. Many
things are of worth in the world, that are of little virtue in themselves; many
things are worth a thousand pound in respect of their value, but when they come
to use, and to afford virtue, they are but dry things, and unprofitable, they
can never cure the sick, nor warm the cold, nor recover the weak; such are gold
and silver in themselves, they can afford the weak heart no nourishment, they
have none in them. A little bread in the house, in a famine, is worth a house
full of silver; so God, being your God, if there were no operation and
suitablenes in him, and a kind of fullness to supply your wants, then your
propriety in him were much the less con^derable. But you shall find the Lord
is not more rich then he is sull of virtue unto all tho^^ to whom he is a God:
The quintessence of a virtues are in him, all the virtues of the world are but
beams that proceed from him, they are bu^ fruit that drops from him, he is the
root, from which all virtue is derived. The virtue of (...) is more eminent in
God that gives power (...) the Phylicke, therefore God must needs be in ^^ad of
all these, and in the room of them, and abundantly supply the want of all. It
was an excellent speech of a woman which lived in Queen Mary's days, from
whom, because of her courage for the truth, they would take away her bread, to
whom she answered, That if they took away her broad, God would take away her
stomach. There is such an usefulness in God, that he serves for all the
necesities in the world: And consider this more fully, observe the variety of
uses that there are in God, to all that he is a God unto all; all manner of
plenty, all sorts of plenty and variety are comprised in him. Reckon up all the
wants men are subject unto, many Physicians and Chirurgions have dived into the
several and various kinds of diseases incident unto the body of man; but
suppose every creature should ^t down, to ca^ up every particular di^ease, or
want that it is subject to, or any one of his kind, it would make up more
Volumes then are ye^ in the world, by setting down particularly every defect
that is incident to the whole creation one time or other^ yea, were the wants
multiplied to infinite millions more then they are indeed, yet there is such
variety of help and supply in God and such plenty in all those ^e^ rall
varieties, as that there is no infirmity, no disease, no lack, but there is a
fullness of (...) for it in God, especially to his people, after he is become
their God; for all this virtue he puts forth in their behalf who are his, and
whose he is, so far as it may be for their good. As for the quantity of
goodness and treasure that is in God, the truth is, beloved, it is nor to be
expressed: the word quantity, is but a representative word, to set out how much
usefulness and help there is in God to our apprehension; for quantity has
dimensions and bounds, and are, and may be compassed, but there is no bounds
of helpfulnesse in God, there is no want upon you, but we may say of you as of
a Map, the Map may be but the breadth of a man's hand, and yet it describes
countries that are of vast circumference. Beloved, you are the Image of God, it
is true; but yet you are the Image of God as in a little Map, that has the
world enclosed in it: God is an infinite vastness, far above your capacity, be
you as empty as the creature may be, you are but as a Nut-shell, to be filled
with the waters of the whole Ocean. God is an Ocean of treasure and goodness,
to fill you up with this treasure, is to fill a Nut-shell with the Sea; the
truth is beloved, the Lord is so full, that much of this fulness goes by a
flood-gate, as I may so speak, because there is more then will run through thy
Mill, but still there is as much as will fill it, and keep it in a perpetual
motion, never to stand still: Art thou sick? God has health in him art thou
poor? God has wealth in him* Art thou in any extremity? God is a Comforter, he
is the God of all consolation; Art thou at thy wits ends? his wisdom is
infinite; Art thou weak? he is omnipotent; there is no disease nor infirmity,
but remedy is most plentifully with him.

Object. But some will say, Is the propriety such in God, and is God so
abundant to those that have propriety in him? How comes it then to pass,
that those whose God he is, are so far to seek as they are, for many things
that their God can supply them with, having many things in himself that they
want? How many are the complaints? How many are the things that they want, that
God could supply? It seems therefore, that there is not such propriety as that
he is, or may be so useful to his people, and that they may have power of it.

Answ. For answer to that, let me tell you, that there is nothing in God,
wherein he may be useful for the good of a person, but the Lord does pou^e out
himself into this person, and is never wanting nor lacking to him there is
nothing thou complainest of, that God does not afford thee out of himself: but
it is not good for thee, that thou should always have those things which
thou think thou want (...) it is no infringing of propriety, to withold
from a man some things, at some times, that are his own: As for instance,
suppose a man b^ in a desperate humor to kill himself, and draw his own sword
to run himself through, he is but a ferry friend, that will let a man have his
own sword to do himself a mischief* Suppose a father of an unthrifty son has
an estate of this child's in his hands, because the estate is the childs, were
it wisdom in the father to let him have the ordering and disposing of this
estate, to waste it unthriftily and unprofitably? were it not the property of a
wise father, to keep it for better uses and purposes for his son? There is
nothing that the Lord does hold from his own people, to whom he gave up
himself, but that which in the use thereof would do them more hurt then good.

Object. Yea, but peradventure you will say, you do not speak of such things
that God might afford that will do us hurt, but to those that God has given
himself unto, there are wanting many things that would be very good for them,
they are very much distressed, and God has in him that which will case them;
they seek to God for it, and they cannot find redress, though it be in God.
If God be so beneficial, then why cannot they have that is good for them out
of him?

Answ. I an^wer, there is nothing that is good, but you have it out of him: ^^t
me tell you, beloved, you are not always ^it to be judges what is good for
you, of those things that God has in store for his people. A man may be in a
distemper, and may judge amiss: You know when a man is sick of an Ague, he
may exceedingly crave and desire drink, he may shake, and he may ask for that
that is his own in his ^^cknesse, and yet for all this greediness of his
(...) it is a loving wifes duty to keep this drink from him, till the wise
Physician permit; thus would it be with us. If the Lord should give us those
things that we think good we should soon bring an old house over our heads, as
they say.

Object. But some will be ready to say, There are some things that are good for
me, and I have them not.

Answ. Let them be what you can imagine, let others judge so as well as you,
yet I shall stand to this, as I said before, and make it good, that there is
nothing in the world that is truly good for the faithful, that God withholds
from them to whom he has given himself, let it be never so special a gift, it
is not good at that time, for that person from whom it is withheld: For
instance, some will be ready to say, the thing that I want is this, I have a
stony and hard heart, and fain would I have a heart of flesh. I ^^de I have a
dead and wandering spirit in Gods service, and fain would I have a settled
spirit, fain would I have a cheerful heart, and free spirit, are not these
good for me, will you say? And yet I seek God for these many times, and having
Gid, they are mine own it seems, because they are in God, and he himself is
mine. How can God be said to be my God, and all he is, and has, to be mine,
and I cannot come at these good things which are in him, and are so needful
for me?

I answer: First, that God in giving himself unto persons, gives himself to be
communicated unto them at sundry seasons, and in diverse kinds and measures,
and yet so, that he will be Judge of, the fitness of the time. The question
then will be this; Is it softness, or more softness of heart you seek for? Is
it a largeness, or more largeness of heart you seek? I mean this, that which
you seek and inquire after from God as your God; is it something you have
nothing of? or, is it for more of something you have already? If you say, it is
something I have nothing at all of: I have a stony heart, and I have no
softness at all in it. That is false, there can be no seeking of God, where
there is no softness, and all hardness; for the Lord must first soften the
heart to seek him. But you conceive there is no softness at all, because the
apprehension of that which is wanting, swallows up that which is enjoyed, and
the want of that which you have not, swallows up that you have. Is it more that
you would have in respect of measure? But you will say, Is it not good for me,
though I have a little softness, to have more; and when I have a little
spirituality, to have more enlargednesse of spirit then I have? Is not this
good for me?

I answer: You must distinguish of time, God does not see it better at this
instant, that thou should have more softness of heart then thou have, and
this I am bold to affirm, if the Lord did himself judge it were better thou
should be more spiritual at this instant, beloved, I speak of a person to
whom God gives himself, he would not detain nor withold it at all from thee:
Mark it well, you shall find, that all the spirituality belonging to a
Christian, is the mere gift of God to him, and only at the disposing of God
upon him, and without the leave of the creature, he may make whom he will
partaker of it, and in what measure he thinks meet; so that the creature can
enjoy no more of spirituality then God will give him, so runs the Covenant,
that you may not think that your spirituality depends upon your selves, and the
putting forth of your selves for it: A new spirit will I put within thee, and a
new heart will I give thee; and I will take away thy stony heart, and give thee
a heart of flesh; and I will write my Law in thy inward parts, and I will put
my fear into thy heart; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people,
and I will remember their sins no more: here is the conclusion, now how shall
men come by it? must it not be of his own good pleasure, and is it not as he
has freely passed the donation of it? he gives it, and he gives it freely; he
does not in this Covenant condition with men in any one particle, as a
condition to get any thing to our selves. Mark the Covenant well, where ever
it is, whether in the 33. of Jeremiah, and the 31. verse, or in the 36. of
Ezekiel, or in the 8. to the Hebrews, where the Covenant is again and again
recited mark it, there is not one clause of the Covenant, that God will have
men do this and that good* God does not put them upon the bringing of any one
thing in all the world to make up the Covenant, but all that is required of the
person covenanted withal, the Lord is bound to make good all those things to
that person. Now, if so be the Lord did see more of these spiritual
enlargements requisite for thy use, he that has made such a solemn engagement
of himself for the performance of all that is to be wrought in thee in the
Covenant, would not withold that at this instant from thee; thou know not
what a corrupt use thou at such a time might make of them; for some through
more abundance of spirituality and spiritual enlargements have abused them, to
grow more proud and scornful; Paul met with such, to whom being puffed up with
pride, says he, What have thou that thou have not received? wherefore then
boastest thou? Beloved, your own experience may witness: Look into the world,
you shall find some persons more eminent in spiritualnesse, there is more
abundance of pride in those persons: As for example, you shall find some more
excellent in prayer, some more excellent in other gifts, what follows? The
corruption in the heart of man gathers such corrupt in ferences from hence,
that pride rises in the heart from such parts, that another Saint, because he
has a stammering tongue, though equally sound hearted with himself, yet is not
fit for such a ones company. God is a wise God, he knows the measure and
proportion that is fit for every member of Jesus Christ, and that proportion
he does not withold. I speak not this with any intent, but that people
should still rise to as much as can be attained, but that people still press
hard to the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ.
Beloved, when we seek God in his own way for increase of any good, for soul
or body, let us stand to Gods good pleasure; and, beloved, for encouragement,
let me tell you, if ever the Lord would have withheld any thing for the
sinfulness of his creatures, he would have withheld the gift of his own Son,
but while we were enemies, Christ dyed for us, would not God spare his own
Son, but deliver him up for us all, while we were enemies: seeing the
delivering up of his Christ, was for the good of his people, will he now
detain small things, in comparison of him, in consideration of weaknesses in
us? Mark the Apostles words, he that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up to death for us, how will he not with him give us all things that are
good for us? as if he had said, Thou poor wretch, want such and such
spirituality, thou seek them, and thou can not find them, and by and by
thou cryest out, that such and such sins hinder God, that he will not give thee
such grace as thou need, and at last, thou questionest, whether God did give
thee Christ, or no; Nay, when thou were viler then now thou art, thy vileness
then did not hinder, but that he freely gave his Son for thee, thy vileness
much less shall hinder thee now, to bar from thee those spiritual gifts that
God intends to give to thee. Here objections start up, this is the way to make
persons slack duties, and to be careless: but if we would preach that God
will not give till we mend our selves, and leave our sins, were not this a far
better way to put men upon it then thus to preach? let me tell you, we must not
be more wise then God, that all that the creature has, might appear to be from
the grace of God, and so he have the praise of the glory of his own grace; I
say again, it is no sinfulness in the creature shall hinder Gods communicating
so much of his Spirit as he sees useful to creatures, and he will take order
that they shall not take a licentious liberty to go on in sin, or neglect
seeking God, because they know it is not their seeking makes God answer for
what they want; for it is not your amending nor reforming, that gets God to
communicate more to you, but that he does it, is merely for his own sake, from
his mere motion, out of his mere compassion, the riches of which was purchased
by the blood of Christ, this is the only spring and fountain that brings forth
to you the fullness of God in such measure as you have; as he is yours, so
whatsoever in him is fit for you in season, he shall cease to be his own, when
he ceases to be yours, and therefore, beloved, I shall beseech you, that you
will not stumble at God himself, as if he were so humourous and peevish, that
every little thing, not that any sin is in its own nature little, but
comparatively, every infirmity and failing, should make him pull his hands into
his bosom, and refuse to give his grace; the Lord from all eternity,
determined what to give to every Saint, and had every act of every Believer
before his eyes; so that if they would have been provocations to him to keep
his gifts he should never have bestowed any upon him. But I must tell you, it
is the foundation of all our comfort in all our failings in this life, that
there is nothing that we enjoy from God, but what was appointed us before, and
no sin (...) committed, but what was from eternity before God, and if any sin
should have hindered God, he would never have set down so fully and graciously
what he would do; so that if the Lord has already manifested the greatness of
his purpose and love, by communicating himself to you, assure your self, this
being established, nothing in the world shall hinder the communication of any
thing whatsoever, that may make for your good. Well, let us go a little
further, and counder how God does become the God of people. I must tell you,
that for lack of clear distinguishing between these two things, how he does
become theirs, and how he is to be theirs, the confounding of these that are so
distinct, occasions a great deal of confusion in the minds of men, for these
two go al for one but you shall see the difference of them, and the different
principle from whence they flow.

First, how does God come to be the God of people? You will say this is of
great use, it is worth the hearing, let it cost what it will, to have God for
my own: but I say, there is no more treasure in God to be for our use, then it
is free to; I say, the gift of God for our own God, is as cheap as it is rich.
God rever looks the creature should bring any thing that he might procure of
God to be his God, but we do partake of this mearly and properly from the
pleasure of his own will. I say, there is originally and efficiently, no other
motive, nor nothing concurring to make him our God, but only the good pleasure
of his own will, he would do, and he would do it simply for his own sake; and
therefore it is so. Beloved, look but upon the creatures, God communicates and
gives his Image only to the sons of men, Let us make man after our own Image:
How does man thus become partaker of the Image of God, more then the rest of
the creatures? You may plainly see, there is nothing in man himself, nor in any
other creature, that procures this privilege to him. Man was made but of one
common lump with other creatures, he was made of the same materials, even that
Toads and Spiders were. Now, that which was the cause, why man had the Image of
God, and no other creature, the same is the cause why Believers have God given
up, and God given up to be their God, and the reason of both is from the good
pleasure of God. It is true, there is a propriety of land many times made over
unto persons, in respect of amiablenes or desert conceived to be in these
persons, and so it is conferred unto them; but in Gods conferring himself to
the sons of men, there could not be such motives in these creatures. The ground
is this: if any thing could be a motive to the Lord, it must be the most
excellent thing the creature has since the fall, their fasting, and prayer,
and mourning, and weeping, and self-denial, and mortification, and cleansing
of themselves, and amending, and the like; but it was impossible, beloved,
there should be any motive, out of any of all these things, for God to
communicate himself, and to give himself over to people; for all these
performances, and what ever else are in man, they are but branches that issue
from this main root, Gods being their God. If they be spiritual gifts, they
issue out of this principle [God is our God]; there is no man that believes,
that fasteth, that prays, that mourns in a truly gracious manner, but God
is first his God, and being his God, does communicate these things to him. How
can that then be a motive to God, to communicate himself to men, that is not in
man till he has communicated himself? And indeed, is but the issue of that
communion that he has afforded unto men? So then, I say, it is impossible that
God should fetch any argument, or any motive to make himself our God, from
what we do. And if we could do any such thing, yet there cannot be any moving
power in such performances, to obtain God for our God; for in the very best of
our performances, there is unrighteousness, there is filthiness; any, the
Prophet says, that all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, sweet motives
to prevail with God, for such a gift as to communicate himself. No, beloved, it
is not what we do, but what he in his own thoughts has freely determined to do
for us.

Object. But you will say, Christ makes God to be our God.

Ans. I answer, beloved, in some sense, that is true, but as I said before,
originally, Christ does not make God to be our God Give me leave to open this
clearly unto you, for I must tell you, that Christ himself is mavelous chary,
and wary, not to assume, or take to himself that which belongs unto his Father,
nor should we give to Christ himself that which belongs unto God peculiarly,
as giving Christ himself unto us. Christ says, Give to Caesar the things that
are Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods; and this holds as true between
God and Christ, as Mediator, Give unto God the things that are his, and to
Christ the things that are his: For our Savior, in John 17. at the beginning
of the Chapter says, speaking to the Father in prayer, I have finished the
work that thou have given me to do: What work was that? toward the latter
end of the Chapter you shall find: As thou Father art one in me, and I in
thee: so also they may be one in us; as much as to say, that thou might
communicate thy self to them: observe it, Christ does profess, that it is the
work that his Father has given him to do, that he did not put himself upon it
originally, but the Father did put him upon it. The truth is, the mere good
pleasure of God, contriving, determining, and ordaining this communicating of
himself, was the first original and ground that Christ was sent into the
world, that he was conceived in the womb of a Virgin, etc. And the Lord by the
obedience and righteousness of Christ, has actually brought all the benefits
of the Gospel upon us, to which end Christ has done this work: But the first
conception of it, and the foundation of it, was the thing by which he was
Christ and Mediator; and therefore Christ could not be the original of that
eternal decree and purpose of God to communicate himself to us, for the
execution whereof Christ was sent into the world. The Schools have a rule,
that the end of a thing is first intended, though it be last in execution; so
this, that God would communicate himself to the sons of men, being the end for
which Christ was sent, though till Christ had by virtue of his death made way,
there was no actual communion, yet still it was the end of Christ's coming into
the world, it was in the mind of God before the means was in being. Therefore
if you will have God to be your God, you must not think that such and such
things will make God to be yours. Nothing will get God to be yours, but his
own free motion from himself by his Son.

Secondly, there is a way by which God is found to be the God of such people^
now these things being confounded together, put people into a labyrinth,
thinking the way to find God, and to get God, is all one; now, although it is
the mere good pleasure of God himself, that does bestow himself upon us; yet
he is pleased to chalk out a way, whereby he may be found to be our God, and
that we may find him to be so, we must meet God in those ways he uses to be
met in.

But you will say, How does God usually manifest himself, and how is he found
of his people to be theirs?

I answer, there is an efficient of our finding out of God, or a passive
instrument of finding him out; the way of finding out of God efficiently to be
our God, is the Spirit of the Lord, acquainting the spirits of men with the
mind of the Lord. I say, he is the efficient. All the world is not able to
work any impression upon the spirit of a man, that the Lord is his God, but
only the Spirit of the Lord, must persuade the spirit of man, that he may
receive this principle. It is true indeed, the Spirit of the Lord does it
according to the word of Grace, and speaks no more to the spirit of a man, but
what is in the word of Grace; but the word of Grace it self does not of it
self work this impression, that God is my God, or thy God, but the impression
is wrought by the Spirit of the Lord.

Object. What serve all the Ordinances for, will you say? is not here a crying
down of Ordinances? There will be still this scandal cast upon us: But let me
tell you, there is a most comfortable use of Ordinances, though they ^erve not
to such high purposes as these are: I say, though they are not efficient to
beget, and find out, and reveal to the spirits of men the things that
concern God: yet besides the efficient revelation of God to be our God from
the Spirit alone, there is a passive in^^rument, by which the Lord does make
himself ^nowne to be the God of his people, but that way is merely passive, and
not active.

First, passively God makes himself known to be the God of his people, by the
word of his Grace, and Faith laying hold upon the word of Grace revealed, and
more subordinately in Prayer, Fasting, receiving of the Lords Supper, and such
Ordinances, so far as they are mixed with faith. Now give me leave in a few
words to communicate unto you the full use and utmost extent of Gods thoughts,
concerning the Ordinances that he has propounded, how far forth he would have
the creature look upon the Ordinances, and as much as may be, put upon the use
of them, so far forth as they are useful. Know therefore, as I said before,
that all these Ordinances are but passive ways of conveying this great Gift,
the knowledge of God to be our God. I mean more plainly thus: These
Ordinances, are only of, and in themselves, empty dry channels, or pipes,
through which the Spirit of the Lord brings from God himself the Spring, these
riches, and conveyes the same into the spirit of a man: Look as a channel
dug in a dry ground, is the way through which the Spring conveyes his water
into a Cisterne, the channel it self communicates none of its own, only it is
a passage, through which the Spring conveys his water: so are all the
Ordinances, even Faith it self, Prayer, and all other services, they are but
channels, through which the Spirit of the Lord passes, and brings from the
Lord himself (the Spring and Fountain) the revelation of God to be our God. In
all the rest of the gifts of God, which he has so freely bestowed, never a
gift of Gods Spirit procures any thing of its own, our faith has nothing of
its own, fasting, and prayer have nothing of their own, but as the Lord has
been pleased to make these Ordinances to be passages to convey himself to the
sons of men, and so they are to be made use of by the sons of men: Faith, as
it apprehends the Lord Jesus, and other Ordinances as therein true faith is
exercised, and no ^therwise. And indeed, beloved, this is the lodestone to
provoke persons to the use of all Ordinances, God has ranked them together,
that the Lord has so much, and so often promised through them, to convey
himself: You are kept by the power of God through faith (says the Apostle)
unto salvation. As if he should have said, The Lord does convey himself, and
the manifestation of his own salvation through our believing. The Spirit of
the Lord passing through the Ministry of the Gospel, as the breath of man
passes through a Trumpet; the Trumpet is the instrument, the breath is the
Spirit of the Lord, the Trumpet adds nothing to the breath. Now know, beloved,
so far as you will attend the Ordinances, because God calls out to Ordinances,
and because you have heard the Lord promise to bestow such things upon you in
the Ordinances, so far you shall attend the Ordinances according to his
pleasure; but when you ascend so high, that the Ordinance does get things, then
you rob the Lord, and give more to Ordinances than God has given; now, though
the Ordinances have no efficiency of their own, in that nature I have spoken,
yet there is good cause for all Gods own people to esteem very highly of
Ordinances, and to be joyful of Ordinances, and to long much after Ordinances,
to make much of them: For why? the Lord has made his promises to be found of
them, and to be with them in Ordinances. In the day of adversity, call thou
upon me; and I will deliver thee. And here by the way, know from hence what is
the exspectatio of Believers themselves, which they ought to have of the Lord,
for such things, when they come to such Ordinances: that so, when we attend
the Lord in his Ordinances, we may find him in them. In Ezekiel you shall find,
there was a constant motion, but it was because there was a spirit stirring in
the wheels; there is no motion in the heart of man nor ordinances in the world,
but as the Spirit of the Lord is in them. The Lord has promised to meet with
us in these Ordinances, or else they would be as dry as any thing in the world.
Therefore as the poor man lay at the beautiful gate of the Temple, not because
the gate would relieve him, but because it was a place of concourse, where
honorable men resorted, from whom he might have alms: So in the Ministry, in
Fasting, and Prayer, and all other services, there is the gate of the Temple of
the Lord, there is the place G^d makes usually his concourse and resort, there
is the place God appoints to give the meeting; therefore, in expectation from
the word of his grace, that we may find him in Ordinances we do refort to
them. Now, what derogation is there all this while to the Ordinances, while we
make them but thus passive? The richest treasure in the world may come to a
man, through the poorest vessel; the treasure is never the farther off, nor
never the worse, because the vessel is poor. It is no matter of what price the
means of conveyance is, so that the thing we desire be conveyed to us by i^,
only w^ must no^ give i^ that which is abovaits due. To a^c^ibe the obtaining
of these things t^ Prayer, and Ordinances, that is, to make gods of them, if
we think anything she move the Lord, but hi^ bowels in Christ, you invert the
course of the Gospel. The Lord says, I am he that blotte^ out thy
transgressions for my name sake. Tha^ which God does to m^n, is done to them
for his own sake. He will not be so much bound t^ any creature, as to ferch the
least motive from the creature, to do good to it. Look therefore as you would
speed, want upon the Lord, where he says, you shall speed.

And this shall be encouragement sufficient, to wait upon all Ordinances, of
all sorts, where the Lord appoints; that he will for his own sake give you a
gracious an we^, and bestow all good things upon you, that you stand in need
of, in Ordinances; this is motive sufficient, I say, to stir you up to attend
upon Ordinances, and yet not to make gods of them, to ascribe that to them,
which belongs alone to God, who does all ordinarily through Ordinances, which
is the only way to disappoint you of your hope, when you exspect help from them.

Object. But what is all this to fasting, will you say?

Answ. This is a day of fasting, why do you fast, you stand in need of other
things? If you consider the nature of fasting aright, you shall find there is
nothing more proper for this day, then this thing, God to be thy God, to keep
thee from fear, What is the end of fasting but this, to get a prop and support
from sinking, by reason of approaching evils? Who knows, whether the Lord
will repent and leave a blessing behind, says Joel, when he proclaimed the
day of a fast? then to find the Lord with his hands full of blessings, is the
end of a Fast. Now, if you will find the Lord your God, you shall find the
utmost that you can in fasting, for in him you will find that which will stay,
and support you, when greatest extremities grow upon you. Therefore I have no
more to say to you, beloved, but only to commend this work to the Grace of God,
and to the power of his Spirit, that is able to fasten it upon your spirits for
your everlasting comfort.

SERMON III.
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not: And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our
sins only, but for the sins of the whole world.


OF all the Prophets, Daniel alone had this prerogative, to be called, The
greatly beloved of the Lord; you may find it in the 9th of Daniel. And this
greatness of his indearednesse was expressed in the manifestation of the
greatness of the riches of the Gospel unto him in a more singular manner than
to others. So the Lord does express it by his Angel: Thou art greatly beloved
of the Lord, therefore am I come to tell thee, that seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people, and (...) City to finish transgressions, and to put
an end t^^^n, and to make reconciliation for iniquitty, and (...) bring in
everlasting righteousness. And among all the A^^stles and D^^cipies that
conversed with Christ, his D^^ciple John had the privilege which Daniel had
among the Prop^ets, to be called The beloved of the Lord; the beloved Disciple.
And as an argument of that he is admitted (...) in the bosom of Christ. And of
all the Apostles that conversed with Christ, you shall find none of them hit
so upon the great G^^ce of God to the sons of men, as this Apostle does,
compare the Gospel which he wrote with other Ev^^gelists writings, you shall
find a vast difference between the manifestation of the free grace of God to
them and to this (...) also writing this Epistle, follows the same strain
therein; in ^he former Chapter, he delivers not^ us two admirable pass^ges, the
one is, The bl^ud of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins; and the other is,
He is faithful and just to fo give us one sins: two great manifestions of the
^hsolute freeness of the Grace of G^d to the sons of men. Now, this Apostle,
in the 4. verse of the first Chapter declares one main end, for which he does
publish this free grace of God: I write these things, says he, that your joy
may be full: implying, that there is fullness of joy in the Grace here
revealed, and it is fit, that little children that have fellowship with the
Father, and the Son, should have the knowledge of this excellent Grace of God,
that their joy^ may he full.

Now, whereas he speaks of Gods forgiving freely, he would not have people
mistake, as if his revealing of pardon of sin, did intimate, that people did
not sin any more. And therefore he anticipates it in the 8. verse, If any man
say he has no sin, he deceives himself, and there is no truth in him.

S^n we do, but the grace of God stands in this, that when we sin, sin is
forgiven, and it is an act of justice for God to forgive these sins that are
committed. Beloved, I ^^^ceive the world clamou^s extremely against that, in
consideration of the fearful fruits (as they conceive) of such publishing the
Grace of God to men. Tell men their sins are forgiven, tell them whatsoever
sins they do commit, being Believers, their si^s shall do them no hurt: This is
the way, say they, to all manner of licentiousness, this brings Libertinisme
into the world, this opens the flood gates for floods of sins to overflow the
Church. But the Apostle prevents this great objection, and he does not only
prevent it, but he establishes the direct contrary to the infrence men make
from the free Grace of God. And this he does in the words of my Text. And
observe it well, were it not an Apostle of Christ that spoke these words, there
are many Zelots in the Church would condemnit, not only for Heresy, but for
the greatest absurdity in the world. This appears plain, for there are two
things the Apostle drives at, in these two verses.

First, an inforcement of something that he would work upon little children, as
he calls them, that have fellowship with the Father and the Son.

Secondly, the great argument the Apostle uses to prevail with them to
entertain and embrace that which he would fasten upon them.

The thing that the Apostle would fasten upon believers was, that they would
not sin. For which cause he writes these things to them. The argument by which
he would prevail with them to do this he calls upon them for, is a strange one
in the opinion of most men. Observe the argument: If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, etc. Put them together, and it amounts to this; I
would have you not to sin. Now, the only way, and the best way, to prevail with
you not to sin, is this, I will acquaint you with this truth, that if you do
commit sin, there is an advocate with the Father, that shall take order that the
sin you commit shall do you no hurt at all. Though you do sin, he is become the
propitiation for your sins; therefore fear not, though you do sin, of any
hurt that can come to you by these sins. So that this is the argument by which
he would prevail with them, and us against the commission of sin. Now, what an
absurd argument seems this to be, not only to the world, but even to zealous
professors also, to prevail with men to the forbearance of sin, to tell them
before hand, that if they sin, there is an advocate for them, and he is the
propitiation for their sins? That this is an argument for men to forbear sin,
is such a Paradox, not only to the world, but even to professors themselves,
that for ought I see, in matters of Religion, at this day, there is nothing so
vilely calumniated, as the publishing of this free grace of God to men, in this
way, as being the high way to break out into all manner of sinfulness
whatsoever. This, say men, is that which lets go the reins into the neck of
Libertisme; this is that which makes men take liberty without control, freely
to commit any sin in the world. Who ever is of this mind, I must tell him,
before I go on, he does directly cross the wisdom of God, and directly give
the lie to the Apostle here, that expresses with much infallibility to the
world, how little hurt the knowledge of the pardon of sin can do do to persons
in Jesus Christ, in that he passes it as an argument to prevail from sin. I
shall beseech you, beloved, not to have any regard to any words I shall say of
my self to you, but as I shall speak the full mind of the Holy Ghost; And I
shall give you one point first in general, which is the main scope of the
Apostle here, and afterward handle the several branches of it particularly.

First, I say, take the general scope of the Apostle here, and then, as the
Scripture will evince the truth, so for the truths sake receive that which
shall be delivered, though for the present it may seem otherwise then ordinary.

The point that arises out of the words is this; observe how naturally it
^riseth out of the words:

For a person, who has fellowship with the Father and the Son, one of the
little children, which the Apostle speaks of here; for such a person to know
before hand, before he does commit sin, that there is an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the pr^pitiation for sin; to know
this, I say, i^ so far from being a spur to provoke him to the commission of
sin, that it is one of the strongest arguments, and the best motives toprevail
with such persons to refrain from the commission f sin.

First, see how naturally it lies in the Text; that you may see the Doctrine
is no fanc^, not opinion of men, but the clear truth. It appears plainly, that
the Apostles business, here, is to take men off from sinning, and that appears
in the beginning of the tex: These things I write unto you, that you sin not.
And the^ immediately follows these words, If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father. To what purpose does he bring in these words, if he does not
bring them in as a motive to prevail with them to the thing he persuades them
unto. Nay, he tells us plainly, he does write these words on purpose to them,
that they do not si^. What was it that he wrote to them before? First, I say,
he writes this, that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin; and then
agai^^, I^ we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to f^rgive us our
sins. And now says he, These things I write unto you, that you sin not; If any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
Here, says the Apostle, these things I write unto you, that you sin not.
Suppose one man should come unto another, and tell him, there is such a friend
of yours will do such and such things for you, for he has told me he intends
such good things to you, and I tell you these things, that you may comply with
this man, that will do all this for you. Beloved, is not here compliance to
this man provoked by the graciousnesse and kindness revealed from such a man,
that he will show? Yea, this mercy and favor revealed, is the spur to cause
him to comply. So the Apostle says here: If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. These things I write unto you,
that you sin not. It is plain therefore, that the knowing what shall become of
our sins; namely, that they shall do us no hurt; the knowing of this before
hand, is not the opening a sluice or a floud-gate to provoke to sinfulness, but
a bridle to restrain men from sin: For you shall find by consulting with the
Scripture, that the Holy Ghost is not rare, but very plentiful in opening of
this very truth, that the free Grace of God, and the security of a believer
from sin, is therefore made maifest, that believers might not sin.

Look in the third Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, see how fully the
Apostle Paul manifests this very business we have now in hand. In the 23. and
24. verses of that Chapter, he begins to re^ate, (after he had showed the
desperate condition of man by nature, in respect of what he himself could do)
he begins to relate the admirable free Grace of God to men, even while they are
enemies, while they can do nothing that is good; therein establishing of free
Grace; and then he comes to show, that this revelation of grace, thus, is a way
to put them upon more obedience, than if it should be hidden from them. Observe
the words: But now the righteousness of God, says he, in the 21. ver. without
the Law is manif^sted, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the
righteousness of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon
all that do believe: for there is no difference, for all have sinned, and
havecome short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be the
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins. Mark how sweetly and excellently he preaches the free grace
of God, concluding all under sin; and in a desperate condition in respect of
sin, and then he brings in the righteousness of Christ; nae^ly, free
justification by him that is the propitiation for our sins. But now, what is the
fruit of all this? The Apostle in his time found, that the preaching of this
free grace unto men as they are sinners, raised this very objection that is on
foot to this day, and I believe, will be to the end of the world; and therefore
mark the last ver. of that Chapter, after he had ended this great discourse,
and laid down his foundation and ground, that a man is justified by faith,
without the works of the Law; The object. that comes in is this: Do we make
void the Law through faith? God forbid, nay, rather we establish it.

Mark the expression, few will subscribe to this sentence which the Apostle
delivers: That to preach to men (though the desper^test sinners under heaven)
there may be as free justification as for the righteousest and holiest man in
the world, though by the deeds of the Law there be no justification, though
there be nothing but condemnation by the Law pro^^unced against him; yet
notwithstanding there is justification for such men, and that this is the means
to restrain from sin. Why, say some, this gives liberty to all uncleanness,
for a man to know, that notwithstanding his wicked estate, he shall be
justified freely, and he shall be saved, it is impossible he should miscarry.
Who will not take liberty to sin, when he knows, that though he does sin,
though his sins be never so great, all his sins shall be done away, he shall
not receive any heart at all by them, though he does commit them? is not this to
make void the Law, you will say? Mark the Apostles answer, God forbid; nay,
rather we establish the Law. that is, the preaching of this doctrine to you
that are Believers, little children, that have fellowship with the Father and
the Son, will not make void the Law: You cannot take liberty from this free
Grace revealed. The preaching and publishing of this free Grace of God, does
more effectually win believers to obedienceand forbearance of sin, then any
other course in the world that can be taken. This says the Apostle is a
doctrine that does establish the Law, and not make it void, that is, it does
establish men in obedience to the will of God, and bring them nearer in
conformity to the Law, and does not set men loose to the breaking, and
violating, and frustrating of the Law, and to profaneness.

And so the same Apostle, in the self-same Epistle, having in the 4. and 5.
Chap^res gone on in an unparalled way, in the revelatino of the admirable
Grace of God, speaking of Abraham, that he was justified, being yet
uncircumcised, to show that we are justified when we are in the worst of
sinfulness; and sweetly speaking in the 5. Chapter, when yet we had no
strength Christ died for us; and while we were yet sinners Christ died for us;
and when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:
and in the latter end of the 5. Chapter, having showed the free gift and Grace
(...) God to us, being considered as lost persons in Adam, at the beginning of
the 6. Chapter, at verse. 1. the Apostle meets with the same objection in
substance, and answers it more fully then he did before: The objection is this;
Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid, says he, How shall
we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? The sum and substance of
the objection is this: Is there so much Grace, that where sin has abounded,
Grace abounds much more? then it seems, that the more sin a man does commit
the more will the glory of the Grace of God appear in the pardoning of these
sins, and so I shall glorisie God best, when I commit sin most, will some say.
So that the preaching of the abundance of grace where sin has abounded, seems
to let men loose to the commission of sin as much as possibly. The Apostle
answers this with, God forbid: as if he had said, God will never suffer any
Believer, though never so weak, through any such truth revealed, to break out
into any sin, because where sin has abounded grace has abounded much more, God
will never have them to make any such abominable inference from such truths:
And he also gives the reason why they cannot make such use of the grace of God.
How shall we that are dead unto sin, live any longer therein? to the Apostle,
the inference of the objectors from this argument, seems so absurd, that he
does appeal to the adversaries themselves, how such an inference as this can
follow such a Proposition. He does not say positively, that they cannot live in
sin that are dead to it, but he puts the question to them how it can be? And
whereas some may answer; yea, they may easily do it. No, says the Apostle,
they that are partakers of this Grace, are dead unto sin, and how can they live
in it, when they are dead to it? The glorious power of this Grace revealed,
strikes sin dead in men, or rather strikes men dead to sin. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, says the Apostle, for you are not under the Law, but
under Grace. And as you shall hear by and by, the Apostle makes the very Grace
of God to have that power in it, as to break the neck of sin in the Believer.
This is the most certain truth of the Text, and springs directly from it.
There is a death unto sin, where there is a revelation, effectually of the
Grace of God to persons to whom it does belong. It brings a dart with it to
slay sin. The law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ, has freed me from
the law of sin, and death; and what the law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sent forth his Son in the simili tude of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; so that although to reason and sense,
the preaching of the free Grace of God to men, and to publish what the Lord,
has done for them for his own sake, and that beforehand, may seem to be a
doctrine that gives liberty to sin, and so to be a licentious doctrine; yet it
seems to the Apostle, that there is nothing that does more establish a
restraint from sin, then the manifestation hereof.

In the 11. to the Romans, toward the latter end of the Chapter, the Apostle
tells us, that God has concluded all men under sin that he might show mercy
upon all: and therefore he falls out into admiration, O the depth of the riches
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways ast finding out! Now, what follows? Having prevealed this
unsearchable Grace, see how he begins in the 12. Chapter and 1. verse: I
beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your
bodies a living sacrifice, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.
And be not conformed to this world; but be transformed by the renewing of your
minds, that is, I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you refrain from
sin. What mercy does he mean? Even the mercies of God concerning the
freeness of his Grace, manifested before in all the 11. Chapter. Now, if the
Apostle had been of some men's minds, that the preaching of the free Grace of
God were a dangerous doctrine to set men loose to sin, he would never have used
the mercies of God as an argument to prevail with men to refrain from sin. He
would not have published that which should have been of such dangerous
consequence, but he would rather have been filent, so far would he have been
from revealing of it as an argument to the contrary, were the revelation of it
the way to bring men to looseness and licentiousness, it had been the wisdom
of Paul, and the other Apostles, to have concealed it, which certainly he would
have done, had it been so. But the Apostle was not of that judgment; and
therefore, in 1 Corinthians. chap. 6. and toward the latter end, he draws his
argument after the same manner: You are not your own, you are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and spirits, for they are Gods.
Observe here, that the injunction which the Apostle gives the Corinthians, is,
that they should glorify God in their bodies and spirits; and what is the
argument by which he would persuade them to it? You are bought with a price:
But, will some say, it seems I am bought, and the price is laid down for me
now, I am sure enough, I am safe, the gates of hell cannot prevail against me,
I may live as I list, for no danger will follow now, I may take liberty to sin.
Now, if the Apostle had known that this consequence would justly have followed
upon the preaching of this Crace, he had dealt very discourteously with the
people of God, and absurdly by enforcing a conclusion from a ground contrary to
it, by revealing such a doctrine as this is. Therefore surely the Apostle would
never have used this expression of being bought with a price, if he had known
that this would follow: but contrariwise, he knew that there is no way in the
world, will so much prevail with Gods people to leave their sins, as by
telling them before hand, that their sins are forgiven them, and that they are
bought with a price.

In 2 Titus, from the beginning to the 12. v. you shall find how the Apostle
urges Titus, that he press a holy conversation answerable to old men and old
women, as also to young women, and young men; and also a conversation suitable
to servants: and especially he writes concerning them, that they should not
purloin from their masters, but show all faithfulness. But what is the
argument now, by which the Apostle urges all these things upon these men? See
in the 12. and 13. verses, and you shall find, that the argument is the same
we have now in hand: For the Grace of God, says he, that brings salvation has
appeared, teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world. As much as
to say, The Lord has made known, and revealed his salvation to you, and you
see it before you, Salvation is brought unto you; and not your well-doing, but
the Grace of God is that which brings this salvation to you. Then may I do
what I list, will some say: No, says the Apostle, This Grace of God that
brings salvation, brings this too; It teaches us to deny al ungodliness and
worldly lusts; and that we should live godlily; soberly, and righteously in
this present world. I say, it is blasphemy against the truth of the Holy Ghost
in these several passages of Scripture, to say, or to maintain, that this is
a necessary inference from the revelation of the free Grace of God to men
beforehand, that thereby men will break out into sin and uncleanness, and
give up themselves thereto, and that this is the way to give up the reins into
the neck of vice and licentiousness.

I will give you but one passage more, although I confess, I have gone further
in the clearing of this business by Scripture, then I intended: because. I
know it sticks so in the hearts of opposers and quarrellers, and cavillers that
are ready to spit fire into the faces of those persons that are assertors and
maintainers of the free grace of God, and the publishers thereof to the people
of God. I will give, I say, but one place more in confirmation hereof; namely,
that which the Apostle delivers in 1 John 3.9. the words are these, He that is
borne of God sins not (says he) because the seed of God abides in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God. He that is borne of God; What
is that? It is no more but this, he that is received into Grace by Christ,
becomes one with Christ in respect of the spiritual union between Christ and
such a person. To be borne of God, and to be a new creature, is all one. To be
new creatures, is to be such as we were not before. More fully, a new creature
is a person that is translated from himself into Christ, and he stands before
God as Christ himself, and not as he is in, or of himself. Now, such a person,
says the Apostle, sins not; because the seed of God abides in him; nay, he
cannot sin, because he is born of God. There may be some difficulty in the
expression, but you must know, the intention of the Apostle John here, is to
take off the objection against the Doctrine of the free Grace of God, that it
is a licencious Doctrine, to take off, I say, the reproach that is unjustly
cast upon it. And so the meaning of the Apostle John is this, He that is borne
of God sins not, that is, he cannot take such liberty to sin, he cannot
make such licentious uses of the Grace of God, as to walk in sinful courses,
though his sins shall not hurt him. I say, this Licentious living in sin, is
the thing the Apostle speaks of here: He that is borne of God sins not. And
the reason is, because the seed of God abide^ in him, that is, there is an
overruling power planted in him, to overmatch the propensity of the flesh that
remains still in Believers, that it should not have that liberty and power that
naturally it would have, by virtue of such a Principle implanted; Not that the
Apostle speaks absolutely of sin, that a child of God shall sin no more;
for that were to make the Apostle John himself the lier, and that by his own
words; and to speak against himself: For he says in another place; He that
says he has no sin, deceives himself, and is a lier: And King Solomon also,
who says, that there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins
not, Eceles. 7.20. Therefore by sin in this place, he must needs mean a
licentious liberty taken unto sin.

Beloved, I know there are many objections raised against this truth; I shall
briefly run through some of them to you, and if it be possible, clear this
truth unto you at this time, and vindicate the Gospel from those abominable
untruths cast upon it; and that I will do the rather, because thousands in the
world turn away from the Grace of God, and dare not venture themselves upon
it: Because they fear, if they should adventure themselves upon these
principles of free Grace, they should presently take liberty to sin, and so
fall away and apostatize: Oh! how many have miscarried and refused their own
mercies, and have not received the Gospel to this day upon such conceits, that
the receiving of it should make them break out into ungodliness. I know here
are many here present, cannot but witness, they are afraid to close with free
Grace, though never so fully proved and manifested in Scripture upon this
consideration, that it will make them live loosely.

Object. 1. First, some will object and say, we know many Believers, that do
take liberty to themselves, when once they have been acquainted with such free
Grace that has been preached.

Answ. For answer to this: First, I say, that if Believers from this Grace
published, do take liberty, they take but what God gives them. The end of
Christ's coming, and preaching the free grace of God to men, is this very thing,
that in it the Lord might proclaim liberty to the captives, which are Christ's
own people. Christ came of purpose, as you shall find in Heb. 2.15. to
deliver those, who through fear of death, are subject to bondage all their
lives long. And therefore, says Christ, If the Son shall make you free, you
shall be free in^e^d, that is, if the Son give you liberty, then you shall
have liberty indeed. So that it Believers do take this liberty upon this
ground, they take but that which is their own, purchased unto them by the
blood of Christ, and given unto them freely by God their Father.

Object. 2 But some will say, It is a true Christian liberty that Christ
allows, and this indeed is a liberty that Christ gives men to be delivered from
the captivity and bondage of sin, which they were under before: But many that
profess this doctrine, are known to be more slack in the performance of
duties, and to grow more and more cold in their zeal, and careless in the
practice of Religion, and are more regardlesse of sin; and in a word, take more
liberty to sin since such Grace has been revealed.

Answ. For answer to this, Beloved, first you are not to expect perfection of
works from Believers in this life, and that they should be free from all manner
of sin. I know none of those that have the most indignation against this
doctrine of the free grace of God to men, but will yield, that they themselves
are not without failings, they ought not therefore to aggravate the weakness
of their brethren, much less ought the truth of God to be charged with the
failings of men. But suppose some do make evil uses of the free Grace of God
sometimes, and are thereby encouraged to be more bold with sin; as they are not
to be upheld in it, nor allowed, so ought not their fault to be laid upon the
free Grace of God, which effectually teaches us the contrary: For, though
Believers in infirmity may happen, at some times or other, to be overcome with
strength of passion and corruption, to fall into sin, upon consideration that
the free Grace of God will save them; yet shall we therefore conceal this Grace
of God, because men take that liberty which it does not give? I say, beloved,
if this should be a standing rule, God should never have revealed the Gospel
to the sons of men. I know no Believer so perfect in a course of sanctification
and obedience, and abstinence from sin, but his corruption may occasion him to
take advantage, even from the Gospel it self, to sin. But certainly, I dare
be bold to affirm, there is not any Believer, that is a true Believer indeed,
that does maintain this Principle, that he may sin without control, because
the free Grace of God has abounded. I dare say further, that it is a bold
slander, and that no man is able to make it good from true evidence, that there
is any that does take constant and frequent liberty to break out into
sinfullnesse, because he knows what shall become of him, and that his sins are
done away by the blood of Christ, so that they shall do him no hurt. For the
belief of this, does certainly and effectually teach and produce an hatred of
sin, and a love of holiness; So that certainly, this is more then can be
proved against any true Believer, that he should approve himself in any sin
upon this ground. If indeed Believers were in their own keeping, then what
sin might they not fall into? But they do not stand upon their own legs,
they do not go in their own strength, they do not walk by their own principles;
for, says the Apostle, You are kept by the mighty power of God through faith
unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And again, says the Apostle Paul, The life that I
now live, is by the faith of the Son of God that loved me, and gave himself for
me, and I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. It is not a Believer now
that lives, but it is Christ that lives in him, and he is the predominant
principle whereby his actions are swayed: And as the Believer is carried along
according to the principles of Christ he cannot fall into sin. It is true
indeed, Christ for reasons best known to him, may let loose the reins and the
cords wherewith he holds a Believer for a while, and then he may fall into
sin; but this comes to pass, because the Grace of God is hid, and not because
it is manifested unto him, and believed by him; and at length the power of
Christ shall pull them in again, and restrain them, even by those cords of
love, whereby they were first drawn unto him. And the Believer has the
engagement of Christ himself, that he will never, fail him, nor forsake him;
and he has promised, that his strength shall be made perfect in weakness,
and his grace shall be sufficient for him. And that (...) they are not under
the Law, but under G^^^^, therefore sin shall not have dominion over them, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.14. So that except Christ will give up one of his
own members to make it his constant practice to abuse and turn the Grace of
God to sin, he shall not do it But Christ has undertaken that sin shall not
have dominion over that person, that is a member of his.

Object. 3. But some will say, There are many that do admire and adore the
Doctrine of the free Grace of God, that yet are notoriously known to live in
all manner of lewdness and licentiousness, and that upon this ground, because
their sins are laid upon Christ; and they say, we may live in sin, and do what
we list, and what is their argument? Oh, say they! our sins are laid upon
Christ, and Christ died for them.

Answ. For answer to this, I profess, I never heard from any person of credit,
that there are any such monsters as these are, that dare presume to make it
their practice to be drunk, and to break the Sabbath, and to curse, and to
swear, and to live in uncleanness, and all manner of vileness and
abomination, because all their sins are laid upon Christ, that say, they are
Believers, and they shall do well enough. There are many that are taxed for
such; but for mine own part, I cannot say any thing to the truth of this
charge, by mine own experience, of any man in the world: But it may be there
are such monsters as these are, in the world: And the Apostle Paul said there
were such in his time, that because the Grace of God did abound, therefore
would make sin to abound, and turn the Grace of God into wantonness; and
therefore it is probable there are such now. And if there be any such, let me
deal plainly with them, for my part, I must account them the greatest monsters
upon the face of the earth, the greatest enemies to the Church that ever were;
and I say of such dishonourers of the Church, and disturbers of the consciences
of Gods people, that they are carnal, sensual, and devilish. They are the
greatest enemies to the free Grace of God, and the greatest subverters of the
power and purity of the Gospel, and the greatest hinderers of the course of it,
that are under heaven: And I dare be bold to say, open Drunkards and Harlots,
and Murderers, that profess not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, come infinitely
short of those persons in abomination. No persons in the world, do so wound the
sides of Christ, as he that does profess the Gospel, and yet live wickedly.
And if there be any such here, let me tell them, their faith is no better then
the faith of devils; for they believe and tremble, and that Christ will have a
heavier reckoning and account for such when they come to judgment, then for any
persons under heaven besides. How many thousands have forsaken their own mercy,
and despised the free Grace of God, accounting it a licentious doctrine, and a
doctrine giving liberty to sin, and all because of the occasion that such
persons as these do give by their vile conversation? Well, beloved, admit that
the free Grace of God has been thus abused by such wretches, look over the
whole Scripture, has not the whole Scripture, both Law and Gospel, been
abused, as well as this particular Grace? Is not Christ set up and appointed
for the rising and falling of many in Israel? Is not he appointed as well to be
a stumbling stone for the falling of many, as to be a corner stone for the
rising of many? Is not Christ set up as a Rock for some to build upon, but to
dash others in pieces? Is not he set up for a stone of offense to grind many
to powder, as well as to be a foundation stone to others? Assure your selves,
the Gospel of Christ, as it shall make Believers far more holy then they can
be that receive not the Gospel: So there are some that shall grow far more
filthy, and take occasion from the Gospel and Grace of God to this filthiness.
But in the mean time, shall the children want their bread, because Dogs catch
at it? Will not you give your child a bit of food all the day, and all the
week, because when you give it them the Dogs snatch at it, and it may be pull
some of it out of their hands? Shall the children starve for want of bread,
because Dogs abuse it? Nay, beloved, the children must not want their bread,
because Dogs abuse it; neither must we make that bitter and sour which God
has made sweet: Because wicked men abuse the Gospel and free Grace of God,
shall the people of God be deprived of that which God has appointed and
provided for them? Let me ask this question of you: Did not the Lord himself,
from everlasting, as clearly see and know, even long before he did reveal it,
how his free Grace should be abused, when it should be preached, as we our
selves see it abused? If it be such a dangerous and pernicious thing to preach
the free Grace of God, why did he give such a large commission, and such a
strait charge to his Apostles and Ministers to preach it to every creature? If
the publication of it be so dangerous, who must be blamed for it? must not God
himself that has commanded us to preach it? Beloved, if the Ministers ^f the
Gospel preach the mind of Christ unto his people, shall they be traduced and
opposed for it? Do ye not through us wound the sides of Christ, and God
himself? Is not this to charge him that is wisdom it self with folly? For if
Ministers do declare this doctrine, it is no more then that which God has
before revealed unto them, and given them commission for. But if Ministers out
of a carnal and needless fear of liberty, instead of preaching the mind of
God, shall preach themselves; (let it be never so specious and well liked of by
men) they shall be judged of God as coming in their own names, as being not
sent by him.

Object. But you will say, it may be done with caution and limitation.

Answ. I answer, let us not be more wary and cautious then God would have us
be, to put mixtures of men's doings to the obtaining of the Grace of God, while
the Lord himself does pour out his grace to men simply for his own sake,
without consideration of any thing in them. The children being yet unborne,
speaking of Jacob and Esau, when yet they had done neither good nor evil, it
was said unto Rele^ah, The elder shall serve the younger, as it is written,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; men will be a mincing of this truth,
and they will tell you, if you will keep close unto God and if you refrain
from sin, especially from gross sin, God will love you, and then you may apply
these and these promises to your selves; but God speaks plainly and expressly
here, Before they had done either good or evil, Jacob have I loved. The Grace
of God is passed over to men as they are ungodly, while they are yet enemies
and sinners; men being yet unborne, when there is nothing in them considered,
but pollution in blood and menstruousnesse, God casts his loving kindness, and
establishes it: before Jacob had done any thing, before he had any good
intention in him, God loved him, and had appointed this Grace for him. This is
the Grace of God revealed, and he has revealed it, and exhibited it thus
freely to men. Now, is this the Lord himself that speaks it? Has the Lord
given us commission and charge to preach this Gospel and Grace of his, and
shall we be blamed and opposed, and scandalized for speaking those things that
God has commanded us to speak, and has put into our mouths, saying, we preach
a doctrine of loosnesse and licentiousness, and give men leave to do what they
list? And yet all this is but grounded upon carnal fear, and needless
jealousy of a licentious liberty.

Obj. 4. But some will say, the preaching of the terrors of the Law, and the
wrath of God, and damnation, and hell fire unto men, is a safer way to take men
off from sin, then to preach Grace and forgiveness of sins before hand. It
is better to lay the foundation first in the preaching of wrath and damnation.

Answ. For answer to this, I say, if we preach wrath and damnation, we must
either make them believe they lie under that wrath, and that wrath shall come
upon them, or we must make them believe, that though there be wrath, yet i^
shall not fall upon them. Now, if we tell them of wrath and damnation, and the
terrors of the Law, and say they are secure from them, they belong not to them,
to what purpose do we tell them of wrath, we had as good hold our rongues
and say nothing: If we should terrify them, and make them to believe, being
Believers, for of those I speak, if they commit these and these sins, they
shall be damned, and so come under the wrath of God; and except they perform
such and such duties, except they walk thus and thus holily, and do these and
these good works, they shall come under the wrath of God, or at least, God
will be angry with them; what do we in this, but abuse the Seriptures? we undo
all that Christ that done, we in^ure and wrong the Believers themselves, we
tell God that he lies to his face: For, if we tell Believers, that except they
do these and these good works, they shall come under the wrath of God; what
is this, but to tell God that he lies, and to bring the faithful under a
covenant of Works? Look into the 54. of Isaiah, and the 9. verse, and you shall
see how it is a belying of God, to say, that Believers may come under wrath and
damnation, except they do thus and thus; the Holy Ghost speaks there of the
time when the seed of Jacob shall inherit the Gentiles, that is, the time of
the Gospel. In the beginning, the Lord tells us of an everlasting kindness,
that should never depart, nor be made void, and he confirms it thus: This is as
the water of Noah unto me, says the Lord, for as I have sworn that the
waters of Noah shall never go over the earth again, so have I sworn, that I
will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee: The mountains shall depart, and
the hills shall be removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart from
thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord.
Observe it well; has God made such an oath concerning these very times so
firm, and so stable, that the earth shall be drowned again with water, before
it shall be broken; That he will not be wroth with his people, nor rebuke them
any more; and shall we say to the people of God, shall we tell Believers, if
they sin, they shall come under Gods wrath, and except they do such and such
good works, God will be angry with them, and that after he has so sworn and
engaged himself, that he will not be wroth with his people any more? Is not
this to make God a lier? Again we do not only so much as lies in us, make
God a lier, but we offer an insufferable affront unto Jesus Christ, and strike
at the very heart of the whole office of Christ's Mediatorship. If we say that
God is wroth with Believers for whom Christ died; for what end did Christ
suffer death? I say, if this principle be a truth, that God will be wroth
with his people, and angry with them, then Christ died in vain: For God could
have been but wroth, he could have been but angry with his people, if Christ
had never died And to bring the people of God under wrath and vengeance again
for their sins, is to take away all the virtue of the death of Christ, and to
make it of none effect: And how will this principle stand with that in the 53.
of Isaiah, where it is said, that he beheld the travel of his soul, and was
satisfied? Was God satisfied with sufrerings of Christ, having the sins of
men laid upon him, and yet is God wroth and angry with Believers for those very
sins again, which before he acknowledged satisfaction for? If so be a man be
indebted unto another, and the creditor be willing to take a surety for the
debt, and this surety comes in and pays this debt for the man he was bound
for, and he thereupon gives a general discharge under hand and seal, shall he
yet by and by after take the debtor by the throat, and clap him up in Gaol,
when the surety has answered for the debt before, and after he has delivered
under hand and seal that he was satisfied, and that his book was crossed? Who but
must say it is injustice in the highest degree? What justice, what equity is in
this? Beloved, Christ became our surety, God accepted of him for our debt, he
clapped up Christ in Gaol, as I may so say, for the debt: God took every
farthing of Christ that he could demand of us; he is now reconciled unto us,
he will not now impute our sins to us, he has acknowledged satisfaction, it is
upon record; And now shall he come upon them again with fresh wrath, for whom
Christ has done all this? Shall he charge the debt upon them again? He has
forgotten the death of Christ, it seems, if this be true. Therefore know thus
much, that it is against the death of Christ; it is a making of it of none
effect; it makes the coming of Christ to be in vain, to say that the wrath of
God will break out upon Believers, if they commit such and such sins. And
for this that I have said, If any man can produce one Scripture against it; if
any man can show in all the Book of God, that it is any otherwise then I have
delivered, for my part, I shall be of another mind, and willingly recant my
opinion. But I see the Scripture runs wholly in this strain, and is so full in
nothing as in this, that God has generally discharged the sins of Believers.
Oh then, take heed of falling into that error of the Papists, that say, that
God has taken away the sin, but not the wrath of God due to sin; that he
has forgiven our sins, but not the punishment of sin: But I beseech you
consider, that as our sins were then upon Christ, he was so bruised for our
iniquity, that by his stripes we are healed, and the chastisement of our peace
was so upon him, that he being chastifed for our sins, there is nothing else
but peace belongs to us: And the chastisement of our peace was so upon him,
that he beheld the travel of his soul, and was satisfied. Christ was so
chastised, as I have often said, with the rod of Gods wrath, that it was quite
worn out, and wholly spent it self upon him. This is apparent in the very
tenor of the new Covenant it self: It runs altogether upon free Gift and Grace.
God takes upon himself to do all that shall be in Believers, asking and
requiring nothing at all of us. It is true, he says there shall be the new
heart, and a new spirit, and that there shall be a new Law written in the
inward parts: But he requires it not of the Believer, but he himself has
undertaken to do all, and bestow upon the Believer. A new heart will I give
thee, and a new spirit will I put into thee; and I will take away thy stony
heart, and I will give thee a heart of flesh. He does not say, you must get
you new hearts, and new spirits, and you must get your stony hearts taken away;
and you must get you hearts of flesh. But I will take the work in hand, and I
will see all done my self. All runs freely upon Gods undertaking for his
people. Seeing therefore God does all things freely of his own accord in us,
then, beloved, see how the Grace of God is abused by those that would make men
believe, that the Grace of God depends upon men's doings and performances, upon
actions in the creature, and tell men, if they do it not, the wrath of God
will follow thereupon. This likewise batters down to the ground that way of
urging men to holiness, which some men hold forth; that if men do not these
and these good works, and leave these and these sins, then they must come
under the wrath of God, and that the wrath of God is but hidden all this while
they do these and these good works, but if they fail in any of these, then
the wrath of God will break out upon them; whereas they ought rather after the
example of the Apostle, to excite them to these good works, because they are
already freed from wrath. Certainly, this that I have delivered proves this
sufficiently, that the appearing of the Grace of God does teach men to do the
will of God effectually, the love of God constrains the faithful, and not the
fear of wrath.

But to conclude, do not mistake me, in the mean while, I have no thoughts, as
if wrath and vengeance were not to be preached, and made known even to
Believers; yea, beloved, wrath and vengeance is to be made known to them, and
that as the deserts of sin, and as the means to keep men from sin.

Obj. But now, some may say, this seems to be against all that you have said
before, this seems to overthrow all that you have delivered.

Answ. Observe me well, do not mistake me, You must know, that wrath and
vengeance must be revealed to Believers, and it must be known to the end to
restrain them from sin, but not in that way men do ordinarily think; I mean
thus: Wrath and vengeance is not to be revealed, as if Believers were to fear
them, or as if Believers should come under them; but wrath and vengeance is to
be revealed, as Believers are secured and freed from them, that so they should
fear to commit and fall into sin, not for fear of coming under wrath, but out
of love, because God has been so gracious to them, as to deliver them from
the weight of so heavy wrath and displeasure, that otherwise must of necessity
have fallen upon them, and so their walking with God in a holy conversation, is
a fruit of the mercy already shown, and does not go before, as a thing by
which the mercy should be obtained and procured. They serve God, because they
are delivered from wrath, and not because they might receive deliverance from
under wrath. It proceeded from joy, in consideration of wrath already past, and
not from fear of wrath to come; so that the wrath of God is preached unto
them, not that they are to come under it, or that they are in that way to fear
it; but that they may see what they are delivered from, that they may see what
they did, and should, and others must lie under; that they may see Gods love
unto them therein, that this may draw them to obedience, and that this might
restrain them from sin. And now they say, because I have been delivered from
so great a wrath, therefore will I sing and rejoice, and I will walk before
the Lord in the Land of the living, and I will triumph in the Lord my
deliverer, leading a life answerable to the love of God, bestowing such a
deliverance upon me; and so by this preaching of the wrath of God, as being
freed from it; the more one sees what he is freed from; the more he sees what
Christ has done in bearing that wrath for him and consequently, the more he
is stirred up to walk before God in more cheerful and com^ortable obedience,
and the more thankful he will be. And the more he sees what God has done
for him, the more obedience he sees he owes unto God.

And now, if any persons here present, have an evil opinion of the Grace of
God as a thing of dangerous consequence as a licentious doctrine and that it is
a means to make men take liberty to sin; let them learn from that which has
been said, to mende their minds, and to correct their judgments, knowing that
the Holy Ghost is of another minde^ that the revealing of the Grace of God, is
the best way in the world to take men off from sin; so far is it from
letting loose the reins for persons to break out into all manner of
sinfulness.

SERMON. IV.
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not: And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world.


I Have elsewhere made an entrance, in respect of some generals these words
afford; time being precious, we shall be as thriving of it as possible may be;
only a few words, so far as may serve to bring us where we were, and then we
shall bring you on (through Gods assistance) through the particulars this Text
holds forth unto us.

The main scope of the Apossle in this place, is to endeavor to take the
people of God off from running into sin. But, first, he uses an argument to
prevail with them which seems absurd unto the world, and doubtless goes for
little less then foolishness among men, if not worse then foolishness: I
write to you that you fin not. Well, but how will he prevail with them? If any
man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for
our sins: As much as to say, this is the best way to prevail with you, that
you sin not, to know before hand, that if you do sin, you have an Advocate
with the Father that will take away your faults, and save you harmless.
Indeed, it is accounted absurd; but this is the common strain of the Gospel,
to make this the best argument that can be imagined, to prevail over people
from the committing of sin, to let them know how gracious God is unto them,
even to the forgiving of their sins they shall commit; and that which we noted
as the main body of the Discourse was this: For such persons, who have
fellowship with the Father and the Son, to know before hand that they have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation
for their sins, I say, to know this before hand, before they do commit sin, is
so far from being the opening of the floodgates to sin, that it is a
shutting down thereof, to stop the course of sinfulness. The Holy Ghost is
very plentiful in this very way of arguing to prevail with people not to
sin, showing clearly thereby, that the proclaiming of the free grace of God
to men in the pardon of their sins, and letting them know it before they do
sin, does not destroy obedience to the Law of God, but does establish it better
than any other arguments can do You may see it clearly in the 3. to the Romens
23. and 24. verses compared with verse 31. For all have sinned, and have come
short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to he the
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of their sins the^ are past through the forbearance of God. In
these verses, the Apostle preaches free Grace, in the absolute freeness of
it, even to persons that are utterly undon, and know not what to do, and in
the last verse of that Chapter, the Apostle brings in an objection: Do we
make void the Law through faith? God forbid, we rather establish the Law. The
Apostle making his conclusion, we are justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law; this, says he, does establish the Law, and does not make it void, to
know, that from all the sins we do commit, we are freely justified by his
Grace; this does establish obedience, and does not make void the Law: So in the
6th Chapter of the same Epistle to the Romans, the 1. and 2. verses, the
Apostle having gone on to declare the exceeding riches of the Grace of God in
the 4. and 5. Chapters, he makes the same objection in substance that he did
before: Shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? God forbid; how
shall we that are deaunto sin, live any longer therein? Wherein he shows
plainly, that though some may collect that this is a way to make men continue
in sin, to preach the exceeding riches of the Grace of God; yet he says, there
can be no such conclusion drawn therefrom by just inference: How shall we
that are dead unto sin, live any longer therein? Wherein he puts it to the
Objectors themselves, whether they can make it out, how it is possible it
should be so. Therefore the Apostle does make use of it, as the strength of
his argument to prevail with people: In the 12. to the Romans, I beseech you
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice. You see
he makes use of mercy, and what mercy is it? In the latter part of Chap. 11.
he seems to intimate what that mercy is: O the depth and the exceeding riches,
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Why wherein? It follows, in that he
has concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. I beseeeh
you by these mercies, (says he) and all other mercies of free Grace, present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, not conforming
your selves to this world: as if he had said, mercy is that which will prevail
with you most of al, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, and not conform
your selves to the world, but I must go on to that we have yet to consider. I
have spent some time in Objections and Answers, but we cannot now dwell upon
them. We are to consider now the specialties of the argument the Apostle uses
here to prevail with people that they sin not.

Beloved, this very Text is the opening of the fountain that is set open
for^^ne, and for uncleannes; it is a spring of strong water to revive a
fainting and swooning spirit; it is the prop of a sinking and tottering soul,
to keep it from sinking and perishing: In it the Lord Christ is revealed unto
us, an All-sufficient succor to all his own, notwithstanding all their sins
that ever they do commit. Herein we are to consider:

1. The matter of this argument.

2. The force and strength of it, in reference to the thing the Apostle would
argue from hence.

First, concerning the matter of the argument it self that is contained in
these words: If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

The force of it lies in the reference of it to the thing the Apostle calls
for, wherein we may consider what prevalency this Position has to keep from
sin; namely, for persons to know, that when they do sin, they have an Advocate
with the Father.

We will begin with the matter of the Argument first, and in this Proposition
there are two things observable.

First, a Supposition.

Secondly, a Provision of indemnity against the mischief of the thing supposed.

The Supposition laid down, is in these words; If any man sin: or, If any man
do sin.

The Provision of indemnity is in these words; We have an Advocate with the
Father, etc.

In the supposition you may note,

First, the thing supposed, and that is Sin.

Secondly, note the time which does illustrate it; he does speak of present
and future sins.

Note, I say, the time whereunto the Apostle does refer the thing supposed; he
does not say, If any man has sinned heretofore, in the Pretertense, but he
speaks of the time present, If any man sin, that is, if any man do sin; there
are some things that are spoken of the present time that are in force but only
that very instant in which they are spoken; and that in stant being past, the
thing it self is also past. But for this exptession, If any man do sin, it
is not a transient, but a permanet expression: The Apostle speaks not only of
his time, and of the people of his time, If any man sin now; the words are not
to be understood of that very instant only, and exclusively, as having
reference only to those that did sin in his time, then these words should have
been transient: But the meaning of the Apostle is, that the present of which
he spoke, should be a standing present time, and the words should be of force
for present, even as long as the Word of God should remain upon record. If any
man sin. So that the words are to be understood of this present time, and all
present times that shall be in the next age that shall succeed: If any man
sin now, or if any man sin in the next age; so that there is to be understood
a perpetuity of present time, to be included in this expression (If any man do
sin). It is of great concernment, beloved, that you receive this truth,
unless you exclude your selves from the benest of the Advocateship of Christ:
For, if the words were spoken of the present time, and intended only for that
time wherein they were expressed, what should become of us, that live so many
ages after that time? They must therefore be of a perpetual and permanent
being.

Thirdly, note in the supposition, the nature of it, if any man sin, says
the Apostle; this word [If] here admits of a double construction; either the
Supposition imports a thing possible, but not likely, or a thing that may be
likely to come to pass, or rather a thing that may, and will come to pass.
Either it is a supposition, in case a thing is, which it may be, will not, or
a supposition by way of confession and granting of the thing supposed. In this
place, John puts not the word If by way of supposition, as if it were only
likely there should be a sinning? and if there were a sinning, there were an
Advocate; but he puts the word here by way of concession, as if he had said,
there must and will be sinning; We Gods own people, shall fall into sin, it
cannot be denied. But for refuge, when there is such sins committed, know
that there is an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Thus you
have the first part of the Text branched out unto you; namely the Apostles
Supposition.

Secondly, consider the Provision that the Lord by the Apostle holds forth unto
persons that are Believers, the Members of Christ. I say, the provision the
Lord holds out by the Apostle for their indemnity against these sins that they
do, or shall commit; namely We have an Advocate with the Father.

In this Provision observe,

First, the office assigned for the making good of such provision.

The office assigned here, is mentioned in these words, We have an Advocate
with the Father.

Secondly, note in this provision, the person to whom this office of
Advocateship is given, and therein the ability and qualification of this person
to this office to manage it effectually, in these words, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

Thirdly, the issue and the event of the execution of this office, in these
words, He is the propitiation for our sins.

In the office that the Lord sets on foot for the provision of indemnity
against sin, being committed, you may observe in it:

1. The office it self, and that is an Advocateship.

2. The propriety of this office, or the relation of it to the persons that are
the members of Christ. The Apostle does not say simply and abstractively, there
is an Advocate, but he speaks relatively, we have an Advocate, that is, our
Advocate, etc.

Thirdly, this Advocate is set forth, not only in his relation to men, as he is
their advocate, but he is declared also, and set forth as he has relation unto
God: He does not say simply, we have an Advocate; but I say, the Apostle does
declare the excellency of this office of advocateship in respect of this
circumstance, With the Father, we have an Advocate, and that with the Father,
we have an Advocate he is ours, and not only so, but he is an Advocate of ours
which the Father, which notes unto us, that the plea of Christ for indemnity
from sin, is not in any inferior Court, where, if there be a sentence of
acquittance, procured, there may be a charge from an higher Court: But the
Advocateship of Christ is managed for our good, in the highest Court of all,
with the highest Judge; that when he gets a sentence, it is definitive and
determinative, and there is no other Court that can take upon it the
determination of the case, or call in question the trial of that which has
been determined there.

Lastly, the provision in respect of the office assigned, is excellently
illustrated by the circumstance of time, when the office is on foot, or when
the officer does manage it. The Text does not say, we had an Advocate, or we
shall have one hereafter, but he speaks in the Present Tense, We have an
Advocate, that now is to agitate it. It is but a cold comfort for a man to say,
being now a beggar, he had abundance of wealth, neither does it give him
fullness of comfort, to say that he shall have abundance of wealth hereafter;
but herein lies his comfort and happiness, that he can say in truth, I am
rich, I have abundance of all things. It is but cold comfort for a man, to say,
I had a friend in Court once, but he is dead now; If he had been alive now, it
had been better with me then it is, I should have sped well, I had then carried
the cause on my side, he would have done so and so for me. I, but here lies a
man's comfort, that he has a friend at Court that will do him a good office at
his need: The Apostle says here, we have an Advocate. As therefore I said of
the present being of sin committed; so I say of the present being of our
Advocate. It must not be understood to be a transient, but a permanent
sentence, it was in force in the Apostles time, it is as full in force in our
time; and we may as well and truly say, We have an Advocate; and in after
ages, the Church of God shall say, to the end of the world, in their times, as
truly as we now, and the Apostle in his time said, We have an Advocate with the
Father.

Secondly, consider here the person managing this office of Advocateship, who
is described unto us by three admirable and notable titles, that are proper and
full for the comfort and encouragement of those whose Advocate he is: He is
Jesus Christ the righteous, says the Text, this is our Advocate. First, he is
Jesus; and that is a word that imports a Savior, as the Angel expounded it,
Luke 1. And they shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. An admirable encouragement to lift up the heads of dejected and
drooping spirits, when the Advocate comes to plead: this Advocate is their
Savior, that is, his plea is of such force and prevalency, that he saves his
client.

Object. But some may say, many times in suits of Law, men have skillful
Lawyers to plead for them, which are able to save them who are not admitted to
plead for them, because they are not called to the Bar.

Answ. Yea, but this Jesus is Christ too, this Advocate does not rush into this
office of his own head, without warrant, but is called to it: For, as you shall
hear afterward, the word Christ imports anointing to the office. Many a good
Lawyer indeed, may not be admitted to come to the bar of Common pleas, although
he can plead the cause of his client the best of all, he must be authorized and
called unto the bar, or else he may not speak. But the Advocate provided for
the indemnity against sin, is Christ, he is called to it.

Thirdly, it is Jesus Christ the righteus, and that imports the strength of the
plea he has, by which he becomes a propitiation for sin, it is his
righteousness that prevails in heaven, to get the sentence to go on the side
of his client.

Lastly, you may observe here, the issue what will become of this Advocateship,
what effect it will have at the last. Many men, who have causes in suit, are
restless to know how their cause will go, when they come to trial, fain they
would know on which side the verdict will be given: and it is a great
refreshing to persons, to know beforehand, that the cause will go on their
side. Now, the Apostle does here intimate unto us, what will become of the
cause before it is tried. He is such an Advocate with the Father (says he)
that he is become the propitiation for all the sins of Gods people, and what
that is, we shall show hereafter. Beloved, this is a large field of excellent
variety of sweetness and fatness, we must take the particulars into
consideration, that we may discuss them the more orderly; and I hope it will
be no difficulty to gather some of the flowers in this garden, and the Spirit
of the Lord assisting, there may be sucking, yea sucking so, that persons may
be satisfied that they may suck and be satisfied at the breasts of consolation.
That we may the better lay our mouths to this breast, and draw more easily
the milk thereof, let us briefly consider these particulars.

First, concerning the office here spoken of, we are first to consider, what it
is to be an Advocate, and how Christ does manage this office being in heaven. I
say, first, what it is to be an Advocate with the Father, and how Christ does
manage it.

Secondly, whose cause it is that Christ does undertake to be an Advocate for.

Thirdly, how Christ is gifted and qualified for the comfortable managing of
this office of Advocateship.

Fourthly, what it is to have Christ to be the propitiation for the sins of
his people; this I conceive contains the sum of the whole drift of the Apostle
in these words.

To begin with the first, what the office of Advocateship is, and what it is
for Christ to be an Advocate, and how he does now manage it in heaven for his
elect.

First, this office to be an Advocate, as it is appropriated unto Christ, I
do not find that it is once more mentioned in all the Scripture besides this
place. Of an Intercessor and Redeemer, and the atonement we read frequently in
Scripture, that Christ is all these, but that Christ is an Advocate, we cannot
find where it is mentioned in all the Scripture but in this place, and
therefore it will be the more difficult to find out the intention of the Holy
Ghost, what he means by this office of Advocateship. The word Advocate in the
original is (...), and the some word is used by John in the 1 of John and the
26. verse, and attributed unto the Holy Ghost, and is there translated the
Comforter, (...), says the Text, The Comforter will come. Now, the same word
that we have here Advocate, is also (...). And indeed, the proper singification
of the word is, A Comfortable Advocate. But the thing it self, What is this
Advocateship, will you say? It is a borrowed expression, and an allusion,
opening the prevalency of Christ with the Father, for his own people; it is
taken from an office among men. Advocates in the Common Law, you call them
Counselors, but in the Civil Law, they have this very title of Advocate. The
office is this; namely, being well experienced in the nature of the Law, and
the Rules and Principles of Justice; when ever a cause comes to be tried, they
are to make clear the Principles of Justice, and so to plead out Justice on the
behalf of the client, for whom they plead. I say, the office of an Advocate
is, to plead the cause of a person as it stands in equity and justice, and to
demand and require a sentence of acquittance and discharge from Justice and
equity it self. Herein an Advocate differs from a Suppliant; a Suppliant makes
only requests, and depends altogether upon favor alone, so as if he should
stand to the rigor of Justice, he must be gone, and his cause must miscarry: I
say, this is the proper office of a Suppliant or Petitioner; but an Advocate,
he stands to the justice of a person, whose cause he does plead, and puts the
issue of the trial even to Justice it self; that as the cause can be cleared
to be a just cause, so the Judge would pass a sentence upon the cause: just
so, I say, is it with Christ pleading the cause of his own people with the
Father, in respect of indemnity from sin; for his Advocateship is this,
namely, to lay the Law to the Father, to plead justice in the discharge of the
sinner that does commit sin, that it is but right and justice to discharge
him: and it were an unrighteous thing, and in justice, if he should not; I say,
it is most certainly true that Christ stands here upon justice, and he will in
righteousness have God to discharge his own people from all the sins that they
do commit; and he pleads that it is an unrighteous thing, to charge them with
them, or to plague or punish them for them.

Object. But some peradventure, will be ready to say, this cannot be, that
Christ as an Advocate, should plead for indemnity upon terms of justice, for
in the strictness, and the rigor of justice, the soul that sins must die:
And the Gospel seems to say, it is only and solely Grace that any person is
discharged from sin: For in justice there cannot be a claim made of pardon and
discharge from sin, but all the plea must be merely bounty and favor.

Answ. This objection seems to have a great deal of strength in it. How may
these two things stand together, that Christ pleading justice, God must
forgive; and yet notwithstanding justice does sentence a person unto death, if
he sins? For answer to this, you must learn to distinguish, and I desire you
warily to observe this distinction, that so you may plainly see a
reconciliation of that which seems impossible to be reconciled: I say, observe
this distinction, namely, first, consider the pardon or discharge from sin, in
regard of any thing laid down in consideration of the sin committed by the
person who does partake of this pardon. And secondly, consider this pardon, or
indemnity and discharge from sin in reference unto Christ who gets this
discharge. Now, I say, in the former consideration, that is, in respect of us
that do partake of this discharge from sin, and in regard of any thing that we
can bring in recompense for that sin, or satisfy, in this regard it is merely
and only Grace, that sinners being the members of Christ are discharged. When
you, or I commit sin, that God does discharge us, that God does not lay our
sins to us, that God does not give sentence of damnation upon us for such and
such sins as we do commit. I say, it is an act of mere Grace alone, Justice
cannot (...) pleaded in this case.

But, secondly, consider the indemnity from sin, in respect of Christ, who does
get this discharge, and does purchase it of the Father. Then Christ is to be
considered two ways: First, as Christ is allowed by the Father to stand in the
room of such persons, whose cause he pleads: Or, secondly, Christ is to be
considered, as he has actually made full payment unto the Father, his
satisfaction being allowed and admitted before thereunto. Now, I answer,
considering Christ in his being allowed by the Father, to stand in the room of
the persons whose cause he pleads; so this discharge from sin by Christ, it is
an act of Grace; Christ cannot plead justice, that he should be allowed. There
was not a tie upon the Father, that Christ should be in man's room, and that
the Father should be unrighteous, if he did not ordain him to be so; it was
an act of free Grace in God, when men were under the curse, and became
miserable bankrupts, that Christ should make satisfaction for them: When one
man does owe another money, it is not an unrighteous act in this creditor to
refuse a surety, he may make the debtor pay the debt himself, if he will; it
is matter of grace, it is mere courtesy so to do: Even so it is matter of
grace, that Christ is admitted to come in the room of man, and to stand in the
stead of man (...) to bear the sins of man. For him to be (...) to bear the
wrath of God for these sins that another has committed, this is an act of
grace; and in regard of these particulars, is the Scripture so frequent in
these expressions of the free Grace of God, in communicating this discharge,
and pardon of sin unto sinners. But, secondly, consider, Christ allowed of the
Father to stand in the room of men, as he has come forth, and paid down the
utmost farthing that God in justice could demand for, or in consideration of
these sins that are committed by his people: I say, when Christ has deposited,
or delivered up into the hands of his Father the utmost farthing that he could
charge upon Believers, or demand on their behalf; this being received by the
Father, acknowledgement being made by him, upon the receipt of what Christ has
paid, this, I say, considered, it is an act of justice and righteousness, that
the Father should justify and acquit these persons, for whom he has received
of Christ this satisfaction, and accordingly has acknowledged satisfaction
under his own hand and acquitted them. You know, though it be in a man's power
and liberty whether he will take a surety, or the principal for his money,
yet when he has taken a surety, and he has made payment, it is an act of
unrighteousness in the creditor, after the acknowledgement of full
satisfaction, to come upon the principal again, and to make him pay the money.
And it is a plea grounded in Law, that if that cause come in trial again, the
Judge ought to acquit the principal, if it be proved that the debt is paid by
the surety. Now, Christ has paid all that the Father could ask, and God has
acknowledged full satisfaction for all: He beheld the travel of his soul, and
was satisfied. Now, being satisfied, it is an act of justice and
righteousness, that the Father should acquit a person in this kind: Suppose a
person should be brought before a Judge in a cause wherein he owes the Judge
himself such a sum of moneys, and borrowed it of the Judge himself, an
Advocate comes and pleads the cause before the Judge, that it is true, there
was so much money lent, and borrowed, but, says the Advocate, I my self
became the surety for that man, I paid every farthing, there is the acquittance
you gave under your own hand. Now, I ask this question, the Judge being
convinced, and a righteous Judge too, of the truth of the plea, whether in
judgment he ought not to acquit that person, whose cause is pleaded before
him? He took saits faction, he acknowledged satisfaction, he could have but
satisfaction of him, therefore in justice he must discharge him. The same case
is between God and us; it is true indeed, Believers do commit those things
that are in their own nature debts: Forgive us our debts, as the word is: but
when this cause came to be agitated, and pleaded before God the Judge himself,
to whom the debt was owing, Christ the Advocate came, and stood up and pleaded,
that he himself being become the surety of a better testament, upon it he
came, and paid the whole debt, and he having satisfied his Father, he
received under his Fathers hand, that he had paid every farthing, and that he
was satisfied, and that upon that satisfaction his people should be discharged.
Now, this plea is grounded upon justice it self; Observe but how fully and
clearly the Apostle speaks the same things in the 1. of John 1.7. the Apostle
tells us expressly, that the blood of Christ his Son, cleanses from all sins;
and here, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins; and again, in the
former Chapter, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins. Mark well that the Apostle grounds himself upon Christ's
satisfaction; namely, his blood that does cleanse us from all sin. Upon this
ground he does conclude, that it is an act of faithfulness and justice in
God, to forgive sin. I dare say, none are so ignorant in these days of
light, as to think there is such a proportion between confession of sin, and
forgiveness of sin, that confession can balance forgiveness, and so
consequently, make it an act of justice. No, the Apostle does ground the force
of justice upon the blood of Christ that is shed. Therefore, if you do observe
it well, you shall find that the Apostle speaks of confession, by way of
anticipation, or prevention of fear; you know the common Proverb in the world
concerning a Malefactor apprehended, is, Let him confess, say we, and he
shall be hanged. Why so? because, if it be disclosed, the Law lays hold upon
him, and he shall be sure to die for it; and therefore, in natural policy,
his safety lies in concealing of it. But now, if satisfaction has been made
by a friend of his to the Law, and accordingly a pardon sued out for him, there
is no danger in his confession at all. Now, the Apostle in this place, having
before said, that the blood of Christ his Son cleanses us from all our
sins, from hence he gathers encouragement unto the people of Christ, that
they should not fear, so as to conceal their sins, lest being known, they
should do them a mischief. But says he, lay all open before the Lord, there is
nodanger to be supected now: For God is faithful and just to forgive them;
therefore the hiding of them should prevent no evil, because no evil should
come upon them for them, though they were laid open never so naked. Therefore
was this spoken by the Apostle, to take away fear; and this is the ^rue meaning
of the Holy Ghost therein: I say, to take away fear from the damage that would
ensue, if we should confess our sins what they are. Paul writing to Timothy,
mark what he ascribes to participating of the excellencies of Christ, even of
righteousness and justice: I have fought the good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: Mark, a crown of righteousness is laid up, in which is
included the discharge from sin, and participating of glory, and a crown of
righteousness prepared and laid up: But mark the foundation of his confidence,
that he shall partake of it, It is a righteous Judge that shall give it, he
shall give it out of righteousness it self, justice shall prevail with him to
do this thing for him. Whence it is, that Christ is called so frequently,
Righteousness, The Lord our righteousness, as you have it in the 33. of
Jeremiah, a Prophecy concerning the righteous Branch, and his name shall be
called, The Lord our righteousness, that is, the Lord that is righteous, makes
us one with God, and does communicate his own righteousness unto us, that we
may be the delight of the Father. Give me leave to tell you, beloved, that God
is so unchangeable in all his Attributes, that even Christ himself is not able
to obtain any thing of the Father that may be any ways prejudicial to the
nullifying of any attribute whatsoever; I say, Christ himself can get nothing
of the Father, whereby his justice may suffer, or be violated. Christ must make
it clear, that justice shall have its full due, and God shall not need to bate
one grain of what justice does expect, or else Christ himself can have nothing
of the Father: For Christ came not to destroy the Law, and so he says himself,
much less did Christ come to destroy that which is essential unto God. Gods
justice is essential unto him,: If Christ violate justice, he should destroy
the very being of God himself. Therefore without giving justice satisfaction,
this would be a derogation to the Father; therefore when Christ does plead with
the Father for the sons of men, that they might have discharge from sin, he
does make it manifest that all he does ask of the Father he does ask according
unto justice; nay, Christ makes it to appear that justice is as much satisfied
in discharging of Believere from their sins, as it is in the damnation of the
Reprobates in hell, for their sins. Justice (...) no more right in their
damnation, then it has in the others acquittance and discharge. In the
damnation of the Reprobates in Hell, to satisfy justice, there is no more but
the wrath of God revealed from Heaven, and executed upon them. Now for those
Believers that are the members of Christ, and are discharged by Christ from
their sins, the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, and poured out upon his
Son in their behalf, who sustained in respect of the proportion of justce
equivalently to all the torments the Repriobates in Hell do sustain. So that
Christ has as fully satisfied the justice of God for his elect, as it is
satisfied in the damned in Hell, who suffer in their own persons. Surely there
had been no need of Christ's coming into the world, if Believers might have been
saved, and justice violated without satisfaction: But now justice had been
violated, had not a proportionable recompense been made before the sin had been
discharged from off the person committing the same. Therefore the Psalmist
speak admirably, when he says, M^rey and Truth has met together, and
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: This place is appropriated
unto Christ, showing, that in managing the work of Redemption of the sons of
men, as he does ex^^ M^^cy, so he does not diminish Justice and Righteousness,
but carries the business so, that they both of them have their due, and both
of them have so their due, that they agree one with another; nay, they do
embrace and kiss each other: they come to rejoice and triumph in the
satisfaction of each other. And therefore it is but an ignorant imagination in
the hearts of some men, that God will grow more remiss, in respect of the sins
of his own people; that God is not so much offended with the nature of sin,
after Christ died, as before: For God has all the abhorring, detesting
thoughts of sin in the nature of it, since Christ is dead, as he had before he
died. It is altogether as abominable unto him as before it was: Christ did not
come to make sin less fil^^^ to the Lord, or to make a person, where sin is,
more lovely, or less hateful before God but rather declares, and sets forth
the wrath of God (...) sin in the highest degree. Where eve^ the Lord sees
sin, and not Christ upon the pers^n taking away that sin, the Lord cannot but
hate both the sin, and the sinner. All the pleasure the (...) takes in the sons
of men, proceeds from a purity Christ put upon them, and the taking away of
that sinfulness from them which otherwise could not but stir up indignation
and wrath in the Lord against the per^^ns where he finds it. I say, this is
the ground upon which Christ plead^ justice, that so it might appear there is
no violation of it, but the Lord is as well satisfied as if the person
transgressing had lain under the wrath deserved, in his own person. I could
wish I were able to speak to you in so sull and clear language, that not one
dram of this glorious mystery of this Gospel of Christ might be hid for the
comforting and refreshing of your spirits. The thing I drive at, being, that
all the people of Christ might know wherein lies their strong consolation, not
in themselves, as if they did not sin; nor in themselves, as if they could m^ke
amends for their sins; but in him who has made perfect amends for them, and in
whom they are accepted with the Father, (as if they themselves in their own
persons had made this amends) who has presented them so complete in himself
unto the Fathers eye, that the Lord is pleased to look upon them as upon his
own innocent Son, and to take pleasure in them with the same pleasure that he
takes in his Beloved. And if ever you mean to have your consciences and your
consolations established, and well grounded, concerning the pardon of your
sins, you must see that Christ has only pleaded, and does plead out your
acquittance and discharge, and this your indemnity, even to the sans^ (...) of
justice it self. For if justice be not yet (...) if the Lord has yet a plea
against your ^ouis, and if Christ has not fully answered it, but lef^^ us plea
with God, who shall stand up before him; Christ being silent to plead for you?
Gods jur^ce comes in and pleads terribly against you, and will exact
satisfaction of you; therefore you must receive this principle, if you will be
established in consolation; that as there is mercy in respect of us, who bring
nothing in consideration of our sins: so there is righteousness and justice in
forgiving of sin, in respect of Christ our Advocate, that does manage his
office, and makes it known for this very end, that in knowledge thereof we
might have the stronger consolation.

SERMON V.
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not: And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.


WE have formerly (as some of you may remember) entered upon these words;
wherein the Apostle makes the proposal of the Grace of God in Christ, the
encouragement unto people to forbear sin. The first thing we noted therefore
from hence, was this: That the knowledge of an Advocate that becomes a
propitiation for sin, even for such as do commit sin; I say, the knowledge of
this Grace is so far from opening a gap unto a licentious life, that indeed, it
is the best means and help in the world to keep us from sinning. The last day
we fell upon the matter of the Argument which the Apostle uses, to dissuade
little children from sin: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous Herein we proposed to be considered,

First, what this Advocateship of Christ is, and how Christ does manage this
office of Advocateship.

Secondly, whose cause it is that Christ does here plead.

Thirdly, how Christ is gifted and qualified for this office of Advocateship.

Lastly, what the issue of this Advocateship of Christ is, proposed in the last
words of the Text; He is the propitiation for our sins.

Concerning the first, what this office of Advocateship is; the sum is
briefly this. The office of an Advocate is to plead out the cause of a man, as
it is in justice and right; so that the Advocateship of Christ consists in
pleading forth the discharge of his people, even from the principle of right
and justice.

Whereas it is objected and indeed seems a thing unreconcilable; namely, that
this discharge from sin, goes all along under the notion of Grace, and free
Grace, and pardon, how can this be, if it be merely an act of justice, for God
to forgive sins?

This may easily be reconciled with a distinction; discharge from sin, in
respect of us, or what we can bring by way of recompense for the sin committed,
is merely free Grace. We can bring nothing at all. Also in respect of Christ
as he is allowed to stand in the room of us, it is Grace too. But, thirdly,
Christ being allowed and admitted, and the Lord having taken the full payment
he could ask at the hands of Christ, and acknowledging satisfaction upon such
payment; this act of Christ makes it an act of justice and right, that God
should forgive sins; and therefore the Apostle in the first Chapter of this
Epistle of John, tells us, That the blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
cleanses us from all our sins: And therefore he concludes, that he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. But I cannot insist upon what I have
formerly delivered. Now, peradventure some (though I confess a little
overcurious) desire to understand how Christ, being now in Heaven, does
execute this office of Advocateship, or in what sense he is said to plead the
cause of his people. I call it a curious querie, because the Scriptures are
very sparing in declaring the manner of Christ's managing this office. That he
is an Advocate, is clear enough; how he does deal with God in the execution of
it, is more obscure. Frequent mention is made indeed of Christ's intercession in
Heaven; be ever lives to make intercession for us, as the Apostle testifies,
he does intercede for the Saints, says the holy Ghost, yet though this be so
frequently mentioned, and the comfort of Gods people much laid upon this;
n^^ely, this intercession: yet the Scriptures are very sparing what kind of
intercession he makes whether he prays to his Father in heaven, as he did upon
earth, or no? The like I say o^ this business of Advocateship. Some few
passages of Scripture there are, that will give some ^int, at least to have
some glimmerings of the very manner of Christ's Advocateship, and the ex^cution
of it. In Heb. 11.4. there is something that will give us some light: B^ faith,
says the Apostle, Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, whereby
he received, or obtained witness of God, that he was righteous, by which, he
being dead, et speaks; that is, by which sacrifice, he being dead, yet
speaks. The sacrifices, you know, they were Christ in the Antitype: for all
the life of sacrifices from which persons obtain testimony of God, that they
are righteous; is Christ himself. And it is Christ in sacrifice that speaks,
even when the sacrifice it self is offered. I conceive therefore, beloved, as
sacrifices speak in respect of a prevailing power they have with God, when he
sits in judgment: we are to conceive likewise of the Advocateship of Christ,
which i^ nothing else but the speaking of Christ, is in such a kind managed
after such a manner: Christ speaks as sacrifice speaks; for indeed, Christ as
Advocate, pleads only as a sacrifice form an. In the 12th Chapter of the same
Epistle, and the 14. verse, you have another expression, having a little more
cleernesse in it. We are come, says the Apostle, to Mount Sion, the City of
the living God, to an innumerable company of Angels; and to Jesus the Mediator
of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things
then the blood of Abel. Here you see whereas the Apostl in the former Chapter
imports a voice, or a plea in the mouth of sacrifices, in this Chapter and
verse, he speaks more plainly, and puts a voice or plea to that which is the
life of sacrifices; namely, the blood of sprinkling, the blood of Jesus Christ:
We are come unto the blood of sprinking. And this blood is that which speaks
better things then the blood of Abel. You know that there was a strong plea in
the blood of Abel, which cried from earth to heaven, till it brought vengance
upon the head of Cain. The blood of Christ has a stronger plea, and has a
stronger cry, and is for better purposes: So that under favor (for in this I
shall not contend much) so far as I can see, the value, and working, and desert
and preciousnesse of the bloodshed of Christ, that is the plea that Christ
makes as Advocate in heaven; that when a Believer does commit sin, the efficacy
of this bloodshed is fresh in the pretense of the Lord, in the behalf of that
poor wretch that has thus sinned; I say, the blood is present, and the whole
efficacy, power and virtue of that blood is fresh in the thoughts of the Lord.
And as it is thus effectual and powerful, it procures the discharge, and
brings the discharge and acknowledgement of the Lord to his thoughts too, (if I
may so speak) whereby he is pacified toward them, and pleased with them. This
is always before him, and present with him; yea; present before him, when the
sins that a Believer commits are present; and the counterplea of the value of
the blood of Christ, overcomes the natural plea of the sin it self. But I
will not dwell upon this, but rather hasten to a second thing very
considerable, which is,

Whose cause it is that Christ does plead with the Father: or, for whom the
value and virtue of his blood does plead. I remember the Disciples when Christ
spoke generally concerning his betraving, were very inquisitive. Is it I, says
one? Is it I, says another? I doubt not, but in regard of the prevalency, of
the plea of the blood of Christ, many persons present will fall upon this
inquiry: Is it I that he means? is he my Advocate? Am I his client to plead my
cause? I shall endeavor to make it clear, and to resolve it, is the Apostle
does here propose it.

The plea that Christ puts up for the persons whose c^use he does undertake,
are first, all sorts of Believers whatsoever, high or low, rich or poor; ^ay,
strong or weak; Christ, I say, pleads their cause, he is the Advocate of the
weakest Believer i^ the world; Nay, more, he is the Advocate of the weakest
Believer, when he is the greatest sinner, I mean, when he falls foulely, when
he falls, it may be, through the weakness of his faith, making him suspect
that Christ will be silent in his cause, in regard of such failings and
sinfulness; I say, he is then as properly the Advocate of such a person a
Believer, who, peradventure, falls into some scandalous evil, at that very
time when this person that is a Believer falls thus: Mark but the Apostle, If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; he makes no exception,
neither in respect of persons, nor in respect of sins. If any man sin, he does
not say, if any man sin merely of infirmity and common frailty; but in
general, If any man sin; as if he had said, there must something be done by
Believers, that goes beyond the being of sin, before they can be excluded from
having interest in the Advocateship of Christ. Here the Apostle speaks
expressly, there is an Advocateship of Christ for Believers finning, without
exception. I know it is too frequent among many, that more gross sins then
ordinary in a Believe^, do not only waste the conscience, but do also interpose
between such a person and Christ, of which we shall have occasion to speak
elsewhere: For present there is a co^^eit, that if a Believer sine more then
ordinarily, presently there is just c^use for him to suspect Christ will not
sufficiently manage his office for him, an least Christ has not sufficiently
managed it already; so that there is ju^t cause of fear. But let me tell you,
to the everlasting consolation of Gods people, that there is no sin which a
Believer can commit, which can exclude him from the benifit of this
Advocateship, or bring him beyond the bounds of this large grant: If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. And if it be any man, you will say,
it extends to all men in the world, as well as Believers, if any man sin. Nay,
there is a restraint in the words, and you shall easily see it: If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father. If any of us that have fellowship with the
Father and the Son: it is not every one that has Christ for an Advocate, but
those that are Believers. Those that have right to fellowship with the Father
and the Son, are only spoken of in this place. I speak this, to the end that
those, who (...) fear of death, are subject unto bondage all their lives long,
^ay know that Christ is co^^e to deliver them, and reveals this truth on
purpose to deliver them from the fear of death, and bondage, by being their
Advocate for their sins. He is an Advocate, he is a propitiation for every sin
of his. The words run in the general to the end: If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for our sins. The Apostle
does not say, he is not an Advocate for such and such, but for such and such
Believers, that sin so, and so; if they commit sin so and so agravated, and if
their sins rise to such an height, there is no propitiation for them. But the
Apostle speaks in the general style; If any man sin, and he is the
propitiation for our sins; and yet, beloved, I must be bold to go a little
further in respect of the persons whose cause Christ does plead, and in whose
behalf Christ is an Advocate; I say, it is for all sorts of Believers; nay, I
go further, it is for more then present Believers, even for some who are not
for the present Believers, but remain as yet in a state of unbelief. In brief,
Christ is the Advocate of the cause of every person in the world, for whom he
paid the price of redemption, whether they be persons already called, or
persons not yet acquainted with the Grace of God: for every Elect person, as
well unconverted, as converted, Christ does equalty, in respect of the
substance of his plea, interpose; but when I say he plead; as well for the
unconverted, as for the converted, I mean for such unconverted persons, as do
belong unto the election of Grace, and have their portion in the price of his
blood. Beloved, for mine own part, I cannot yet conceive any other considerable
difference, between the plea of Christ for the converted persons, and the Elect
unconverted, but this circumstantiall difference; namely, that the value of his
blood is equally of force, to Believers and unbelievers, being elected, saving
that the Belevers have this privilege, that the Lord Christ pleads for the
manifestation of this discharge unto this converted person, but pleads not for
the present manifestation there of unto the unconverted elect person, tell such
time as he shall be called to the faith, and by that faith, that thing be made
evident which before was hid: I say, the pardon of sin by the blood of Christ,
is (...) full for the unconverted elect person, as fully passed over in grant,
I mean, to that person, as to the Believer himself. God does add never a tittle
of pardon it self more to him that is a Believer, then to that person not yet
converted to the faith, in regard of the substance of the pardon it self. For
the clearing of this to you; I beseech you note what is the rise or groundwork
of the pardon of sin. Secondly, note when this pardon of sin is complete with
God. These two things considered, you shall perceive that all the pardon, in
respect of the substance of it, that God passes over unto men, he does pass
it over before their conversion. Look, I say, upon the rise; the true rise, or
original of the pardon of sin, is the gracious grant of God, upon the blood of
Christ shed. This is the only foundation of pardon; I say, Gods gracious grant
upon the sheding of the blood of Christ, there is no pardon appliable to any
person in the world, but what pardon is to be found in the word of Grace. Thou
that art a Believer at present, thou have the pardon of thy sins in thy spirit,
thou art assured of it; Where had thou this pardon? Did thou not fetch it
out of the word of Grace? Then as soon as the word of Gods Grace was first
published, this Grace of the pardon of sin was held forth. If thou foundest it
not here, thou found'st it some where else; but tell me, where will you have
this Grant of God to build upon, if you will not have it in the word of Grace?
You will say, the Spirit of God will reveal it unto you. It is true indeed;
but if the Spirit of the Lord does reveal a grant to you of Grace, it is
according to his Word. The Spirit speaking out of the word o^ Grace to men,
speaks no otherwise but according to this word of Grace in men; and if that
there be a contradiction between the inward voice, and this word of Grace, that
is enough to give you cause of suspicion; yea, you may be confident, that that
voice within you, in respect of such contradiction, is a false voice; I say,
that the Lord Christ sends us unto his Word, and from the word we take out the
pardon of sin we have. Now, beloved, I beseech you consider, if all pardon to
all the Elect to the end of the world be contained in this word of Grace, there
is no more pardon then what is written there; then it must needs follow, that
God passed over his act of pardon of sin at that instant, when he entered this
pardon in the volume of his Book. Is there no pardon till thou art converted
and called? then the pardon of all thy sins are not to be found in this word of
Grace, because this word of Grace was written before thy conversion: So that
either you must deny the pardon that is properly and truly revealed in the word
of Grace and must seek out some newer then is revealed, or you must acknowledge
the pardon that is granted unto men, is in regard of the substance of it, as I
said, as soon as he had left it in the volume of his Book. So that it is plain,
that as Believers coming to believe, fetch out of this word of Grace their
pardon; so unconverted persons elected, have their Grace equally in this word,
only the Lord hides the publication of it to them, till such time as he is
pleased to call them, and give them faith to read their portion here, as other
Believers have read theirs before. Its true indeed, though the pardon of every
unconverted elect person be equally passed over by the Lord, yet till the
conversion of such persons, he gives no more hint of it to such persons than he
gives to the Reprobates themselves. This is that will take away the suspected
inconveniences that may follow upon the pardon already granted before
conversion: For whereas men may think this will make unconverted men presume,
to know their pardon before conversion: I say, it is true, there is such a
pardon for him, but he knows it not, nor ever shall he know it, till he be
brought out of darkness to the glorious light of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Otherwise how can it be true, that all the sins of Gods people, past, present,
and to come, are all of them at once pardoned, as the godly learned Protestants
say? I say, how can this be true, except there be pardon passed before
conversion? Whence shall a Believer coming to believe, fetch all his comfort,
that all his sins, while he was in rebellion were pardoned, if there were not a
grant of this pardon extant before; upon which, as upon a ^^e foundation, his
believing might stay it self? How comes it to pass, that persons are not cut
off before they are called; if their sins are not pardoned, which stand between
the wrath of God and them? Nothing else but the blood of Christ stands between
them, even between the destroying wrath of God, and Gods people that do commit
sin, even before conversion. In a word, where will you find a new act of God
since the grants that are registered here in the Book of God? Certain I am,
that the persons pardoned were not converted, when this was made: And if there
be, or come after this was first made, a new grant. either it must be entered a
new here, or it must be in a new book by it self. If therefore all the pardons
are as ancient as this record is, then all pardons whatsoever are ancienter
then the present believing of any person that now lives. Hence we may let
persons know, that it is but a rash expression to say that such and such a
person is in the state of damnation (if it be meant he is so before God) while
he remains in the state of unconversion, and the wrath of God abides upon that
person, though elected, till he be called.

Beloved, let me tell you, the state of the unconverted elected person, is as
sure from danger of final miscarriages as the estate of a Saint in glory;
Saints in glory stands in glory by the blood of Christ alone, the same blood
has purchased the pardon of sin for the unconverted, elect person; so that the
same dicharging of them, by the blood of Christ, concerns the one as much as it
does another. But I say, still the unconverted person cannot make any
conclusions from all this, because he cannot know his portion till he come to
believe.

The third thing I proposed, is to know how Christ is qualified and gifted to
such a vocation as this is: His office is of admirable use to men. To be a
propitiation for the sins of men, and to get the discharge of God manifested to
a person for whom he does plead, it is of great consolation. So then it must
needs be that the Counsel or Advocate that is to plead the cause be well gifted
for that employment. It is too well known, that a righteous cause many a time
miscarries in the world through the deceitfulness or simplicity of the
Counsel. When mon come upon life and death, it concerns them much to have a
skillful Lawyer to plead for them, or else for lack of urging that which is
most necessary to be pleaded, the men miscarry and perish. The Holy Ghost
therefore, beloved, is pleased to import unto us, not only that Christ is an
Advocate, and whose cause it is that Christ does plead; but also does
communicate unto us the largeness of the gifts of Christ, for the managing of
this ^ffice. I will not go beyond the Text it self, to communicate to you the
fullness of the gifts of Christ, to manage this Advocateship of his, even to
that effect and issue that is heart can desire, that is, more then thy heart
can desire. There are three titles, appropriated in this place unto Christ, all
of them very aptly and sweetly manifesting, the excellent gifts of Christ, as
Mediator, or as advocate for, or on the behalf of poor believers, to wit,
Christ Jesus the righteous; We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ
the righteous; every title shows how he is gifted.

First, the title Christ, contains much in it to strengthen our confidence in
this our counsel that is to plead our cause Christ is a word that properly
signifies anointed, and is derived from a word which has the same
signification in it. Now, anointing, if you remember well, carries two things
along with it:

The first is, the separation or calling of such a person anointed to some
special office.

The second thing imported by it is, the abilities and gifts of the person for
the office he is called unto. So that our Advocate being Christ and called
Christ here, this imports unto us: first, the lawful authorizing and calling
of Christ unto it, by him that does indeed, authorize him: Secondly, the full
and large abilities Christ has to manage it.

First, I say, the title Christ does import unto us, Christ's lawful call to
plead: You know what the Apostle says in the Epistle to the Hebrews, No man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
Where he further cleers up, how Christ was called, and lawfully called unto it:
The Lord has sworn, says the same Apostle, and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; Here is his calling. O^ what
moment is this, will you say? I answer, of great moment, Let Christ be never so
able to plead, except the Lord admit him to plead, he must hold his tongue: You
know in the common Law it self, there are Students in the Law, and there are
Counselors; then Sergeants at Law; the Students in the Law, it may be, are
more able to plead a cause, and can do it better then some Sergeant at Law, or
some others that are called; but yet because he is not called, he, must hold
his tongue. Beloved, were Christ our Advocate a Novice, and not graduated, if
he were not called to the Bar, though he can plead never so excellently with
God, he could not be heard, God will give a call before he hear. So Christ is
called.

Yet again, when men are called to be Counselors, yet they cannot plead at
every Bar. At the Common Pleas, none plead but a Sergeant at law; though many
Counselors be able Lawyers, and better gifted then some Sergeants, yet this
will not suffice, he is not called to that Bar in special, and therefore they
must not come till they have the call as the Sergeants have. The Lord does not
bid us to seek his face without a Mediator, but he that is the Advocate at the
Court of Heaven is the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, one Man, the Man Christ. He
that has the best Rethoricke in the world to plead his cause must have him as
a Sergeant to plead for him; he cannot be admitted into this Court to plead for
himself. The Ministers of God are in some sort the pleaders of our cause, yet
they themselves must have this Sergeant to plead for them when they come to
this tribunal of God, and he alone is admitted to it. And it is a great matter
to know what kind of Christ he is, that is singled out; and then you must
know, that if all the world offer this service unto you to plead your cause
before God, it would not avail, if this Man Christ were not freely assigned and
called to plead your cause; you are gone for ever, nothing in the world can be
heard but Christ.

Obj. You will say, the servants of God are heard when they pray.

Answ. I say, Christ is only heard when he Prays; you must pray in faith,
says James, Let him not think that he shall obtain any thing at the hand of
the Lord that wavers; he must ask in faith, that is, he must ask in Christ, for
faith rests not upon it self, but upon Christ. It is Christ gets every thing
for men, it is not they themselves, nor their prayers, but it is Christ that
prevails. Now, this Advocate Christ, he speaks his mind, and is admitted to
speak his mind to the full: But this is not all, Christ is gifted and
qualified that he may plead effectually: There may be some unrighteous Judge in
the world, that may call men for favor, as a father calls his son, whether he
be gifted and qualified or no, that is not regarded. This man for some
by-respects, shall come to the Bar, but God is a righteous Judge, a Judge that
has no partiality: Christ indeed is his Son, but Christ his Son is not called
merely for favor, but as he calls his Son, so he breeds his Son: You know,
beloved, that at the Inns of Court, the Judges, and primest Lawyers, are
teachers of Students, and when they find them to be proficients, then they
call them, and admit them to the Bar. So Christ is the Student, and the Father,
he does instruct and tutor him, he breeds him up, if I may so speak, after the
manner of men, to be fit for the Advocateship, and then when he was fit, he put
him out unto it. You shall find anointing, as in the word Christ to import
gifting of men, when they are called out: Aaron, he was anointed, he was gifted
to make atonement: and so of Saul, when Samuel anointed him, the Text says,
God gave him another, he gave him a regal heart, and when he made him a King,
he gave him the heart of a King, he gave him a kingly spirit. And this was that
which Solomon prayed for, when the crown was set upon his head, that God would
give him a wise and understanding heart, to go in and out before his great
people, and the Lord answered him, and gave him wisdom; so that there was none
before him, nor after him like unto him: Even so God did with Christ, he was
anointed to be our Advocate, and as he anointed him, he gifted him for it, as
he says, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. Christ is the person that
must bring help, and therefore his person shall be mighty. In Psalm. 68. verse.
18. you shall see there, that God did gift Christ, when he called him forth:
Thou art ascended up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men. Here the office of Christ is to deliver captives, and for this
purpose must be gifted, if he be not qualified unto it, he will fail in the
execution of it. The Apostle recites the same passage, but above all, that
place in Isaiah 42. and the 2, 3, 4, 5. verses, does manifestly clear this
matter, Behold my servant, says the Lord, mine elect, in whom my soul
delights, he shall not fail, neither shall he be discouraged; I will hold
him with my right hand, he shall not be dismayed, (says the Text). Here you
see in the words, how many expressions the Lord uses, to show how he
qualifieth his Son Christ, that so he may be fit to manage his business.

But further, in the second place, he is not only called Christ, but he is
Christ Jesus, says the Text, and the title does further illustrate the
excellency of Christ's qualifications to be an Advocate; Here is Christ Jesus.
Jesus, is a name importing the effectual prevalency of Christ in his plea. I
will not stand to clear the signification of it by the Etymology of the word,
but for a more sensible understanding of it, the word is taken up, and examined
by the Holy Ghost himself, in Mat 1. verse 21. when the Angel brings the
tidings of his birth, he gave his name, They shall call his name Jesus; for he
shall save his people from their sins. Jesus is as much as to say, a Savior of
people from sin. Now, see how admirably our Savior is qualified: he has not
only Rethorick and Law at his fingers ends, as we say, but he has an admirable
prevalency in his Rethorick. There is not any cause that Christ yet took in
hand, that miscarried; not any client that ever Christ pleaded for, that at any
time was cast, but he that pleads is still the Savior of his people. This
Jesus pleads so, that he saves them from their sins. It is admirable to
consider; let the sins produced against a person be never so many, never so
heinous; let the witnesses come in, and swear never so punctually, and prove
never so fully the crimes committed against such a Law; yet such is the faculty
of this Advocate with the Father, that he is Jesus, that he stops the
judgment, the sentence cannot go forth. This Christ as he is Jesus, is first
the bail of men's persons, till the day of payment. You know the nature of
bailing, persons should go to prison presently upon the trespass, but bail
takes men off till judgment be given, or perfect satisfaction be made: As we
have sinned, so in legality we ought to lie by it presently; but Christ comes
before hand, even the Advocate, and passes his word for these persons, that
there shall be current payment in due time, binding himself body for body, that
there shall be appearance at the day; but that is not all, when the day is
come, though most witnesses prove point-blanck the crime objected, and the Law
pleads the just desert of the punishment provided in that behalf, yet this
Advocate steps in, and pays all the Law can demand: I my self have satisfied
the Law on their behalf, says he, therefore there can be no more asked of
them. This you know, that if a man have borrowed an hundred pounds, and he be
sued never so violently, and witnesses come in, and prove the debt never so
clearly, yet if a surety comes in, and enters bond for him, yea and pays the
debt for him, if he has been discharged, and has an acknowledgement of
satisfaction made on the behalf of that person, then there is no judgment
comes out against that person that borrowed the money, though the thing be
proved. This is the case with our Advocate, he is the Surety of a better
Testament, and pleading, when matter of fact is proved, and the Law speaks
directly against it, and justice pleads for such a penalty to be inflicted; yet
then is the Savior produced that makes current and full payment. There could
not be expected any stopping of the sentence for the client, by pleading for
them, but there must first be a satisfying of all: This is the Saviors office,
and as a Savior, so he is the satisfier.

Thirdly, this Advocate is Jesus Christ the righteous; and this title imports
two things to us, and they are very considerable; and they have either respect
unto us, or they have respect unto God, and both of them show, how admirably
Christ is gifted, how sufficiently he is qualified: For this office of
Advocateship, as it has reference unto us, he is Christ Jesus the righteous;
as much as to say, the true and faithful. Faithfulness and righteousness are
taken for one and the same thing, for dealing truly with persons. Many a one
loses a goodcause for the unfaithfulness of his Counsel, they make against
their clients for bribes, and play on both sides; they deal not honestly with
men, they carry the business in a dilative way, they will not dispatch the
suit, they have all the arguments of delay: But this your Advocate, and our
Advocate, is the righteous Advocate, the faithful and true witness, he deals
ingenuously and uprightly; this one you may trust, and put all things into his
hand. Many times men put their whole business into their Counsels hands, to
sink or swim. But here is an Advocate that is faithful, here is no danger of
sinking, you may put all into his hands, you need not fear at all, he is the
righteous and faithful Christ, the faithful Advocate. But the principal thing
I intended in this righteousness, is that wherein the strength of his argument
lies, that he does plead in the behalf of his client, that is, the Advocate
Christ is so righteous, that this very righteousness of his shall carry the
cause on your side, even to a full dicharge, even from all sins whatsoever
Beloved, the whole security of persons from wrath and Hell, from sin and death,
hangs upon this one hinge of his righteousness. As there is force enough in
his righteousness, so the cause prospers on the clients side; if that should
fail, nothing in the world can uphold the cause. It will be therefore of mighty
concernment to consider First, how clear the Scripture is, that lays all the
burden of the task in pleading upon his righteousness, and further, to
consider what kind of righteousness of Christ that is, that carries such a
strength in Christ's pleading for his people. Both of them need to be cleared,
especially the latter passage. For the first, the Scriptures will be clear of
themselves, only the latter passage, what kind of righteousness it is that has
that prevalency, is to be made apparent. A righteousness, and his
righteousness most grant; but some mistake there is in the minds of some
people, that reach not the height of the Gospel, what that righteousness is,
that has such a prevalency. The present time will not give me leave to handle
it fully; and I will not do it by halves, and therefore I will leave it to
another time.

SERMON IV.
1 John 2. verse 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc.


IN these words, you have the Apostles conclusion, and his Argument to enforce
it: his conclusion is, that he would not have them to sin; his argument is, If
any man do sin etc.

The first thing that we have observed out of these words, is this; That it is
a powerful argument to prevail with persons, such as John writes unto, not to
sin, to let them know, that though they do sin, yet they have an Advocate with
the Father.

We are fallen upon the consideration of the Argument it self.

First, in the matter of it. Secondly, in the for^e of it.
Every Argument has some firmness in it self, from whence is produced some
good inference: That which has not a power in it self, is not able to make
good another thing. Concerning the matter of this Argument, you have,

First, the Apostles Supposition.

Secondly, a Provision against that which this Suppesition might do; or,
against that which he does suppose a man might do.

First, I say, here is a Supposition: You may sin, though you be little
children. The Provision against the evil that sin might do, is in the
following words. Though we do sin, yet we have an Advocate with the Father.
'And concerning this matter of the Argument, we have these things proposed
considerable:

First, what the office is, that is here ascribed unto Christ, in that he is
called Advocate, We have an Advocate; and how Christ in Heaven does exercise
this office.

Secondly, whose cause it is that Christ does plead by ver^^e of this his
office.

Thirdly, how this Advocate is qualified unto this office.

Lastly, the issue and the event of the execution of this office.

Concerning the first; this Advocateship o^ Christ, is a plea founded, or
grounded upon Justice; Christ does not appeal in his plea to mere mercy, but
his client shall stand or fall, as Justice it self shall pronounce a sentence.
And, concerning the second clause of this first part, Christ does exercise this
his office in Heaven, rather virtually then vocally: He speaks as his blood
does speak, We are come to the blood of sprinkling, says the Apostle, in the
12th Chapter to the Hebrews, that speaks better things then the blood of Abel.
We came further to consider, whose cause it is that Christ does maintain and
plead.

First, I say, of all Believers, he calls them little children, as well as
strong men, even the cause of little children, even when they have sinned
without limitation of this sin, they shall commit: For he does express himself
in general terms, it is the cause of those that do sin: If any man sin.

Secondly, the cause, not only of present Believers, but also the cause of all
the Elect, Believers or unbelievers, if they be elected. It is true, they shall
believe in time, but yet, I say, Christ is an Advocate of them, while
unbelievers, if they be elected. There is not a sin in the world, but as it is
damnable in its own nature, in the rigor of justice, so it does not allow of
any forbearance; it is only Christ that makes the forbearance, evun until they
are called. Then we came to consider how Christ our Advocate is qualified to
manage this office with that efficaciousness and success to the comfort of
those whose cause he does maintain. The qualifications of Christ are expressed
in three things in the Text.

First, for the title, he is anointed to be an Advocate, he has a lawful call
to the Bar; nay, he is privileged, there is none to plead but himself.

Secondly, it is Christ, anointed, that is, gifted, and made an able Minister:
in the 42. of Isaiah, and the beginning of the Chapter: in the 1. v. the Lord
tells us, how he shall not be dismayed, he will hold him up, and, says the
Text, There the Isles shall wait for his Law; we must understand it two ways:
The Isles shall wait for his Law, that is, the Isles shall now be directed and
guided by him as their Lawgiver: or, we may understand it thus, he shall be so
good a Lawyer, that the Isles shall wait for his Law, as much as to say: If a
man have a cause to be tried, he hears of a good Counsel, and a Lawyer very
expert in the Law, such a man waits for such a man's Law, he waits for the Law
out of his mouth, he hopes he will plead his cause so well, that it shall go
well with him. God makes Christ so good a Lawyer, that when he comes to plead
his Law, he shall carry the sentence on his clients (...).

Secondly, he is Jesus, (...) the Text, and in that is imported (...)
equalification of Christ, to exercise his ^ffice of Advocateship, Jesus, as
much as a Savior; and it shows the efficacy of his ple^, he pleads the cause
of his clients so strongly, that he says.

Thirdly, the qualifications of Christ unto his Advocateship, s^mported in the
third title, he is Jesus Christ the righteous, says the Text, He is Jesus
Christ the righteous, in a double sense, and in both of them is declared the
excellent qualifications of Christ to Advocate for us.

First, he is Jesus Christ the righteous, that is, the raithfull, a Con^sellor
that will deal truly with his client; A Counsel that will deal uprightly, a
Cou^e^ that will not fall.

Secondly, this Advocate is Jesus Christ the righteous, (...) Christ who has
such a righteousness^, as ^^at the whole strength of his plea, the force ^f his
Argumen^ that he does ^^^e in his (...) together in his righteousness. The
(...) expression imports what Christ himse^^ is, this imports what his Argument
is; I say, the only argument that has the carrying power, to lead the cause,
to state the conclusion for the client, the only force of the argument lies in
the righteousness of Christ; this is that (...) is that (...) this is that
which makes (...) thing with God to so give and to (...) I say, his
righteousness, this is (...) which the whole (...) which all our (...) that
keeps us from (...), nothing else could be (...), of all things in the world,
(...) be more searched into and (...), then this one truth; nam^ly, that it is
the righteousness of Christ that prevails in plea with God for a person that
does sin, and this righteousness of Christ only. I shall therefore endeavor
for the clearing up of this thing; that the strength of Christ's (...) God, does
lie in his righteousness. Here (...) I shall endeavor to show you,

First, evidently on^ of Scripture, that it is this righteousness of his, and
only this righteousness of his, that prevails with God for the discharge of a
member of Christ when he does sin.

Secondly, we shall consider what this righteousness is that does so pr^vail
with him.

First, I say, the Scripture, or rather the Holy Ghost, in the word of Grace,
holds forth this truth frequently unto us, that all the strength of the plea
with God, and consequently all the ground of solid comfort unto us, does wholly
depend upon the righteousness of Christ and nothing else: Look into Psalm. 50.5.
and 6. verses; for David even in his time, was mavelous clear in this truth:
Gather my Saints, says the Lord in that Psalm, such as have made a covenant
with me by sacrifice, and the heavens shall declare his righteousness. Gather
them together, that is, bring them to judgment, such as have made a covenant
with me by sacrifice, and then when they stand in Judgment, The heavens shall
declare his righteousness. The Text does not say, the heavens shall declare my
righteousness, though that also is a truth, that the heavens do declare both
Gods and Christ's righteousness: Gods in passing sentence of absolution,
Christ's pleading so for this sentence that God in justice cannot but pass, the
sentence: The heavens shall declare his righteousness, says the Text. Either
understand it thus, the righteousness that shall be pleaded, is the
righteousness that comes down from heaven, of which we shall speak more
hereafter: or thus, the righteousness which Christ shall plead, shall be so
clear and evident in the prevalency of it, that the Sun in the Firmament, the
Sun in Heaven has not a cleerer brightness in it, then this righteousness
shall have to clear up the business: Gather my Saints together that have made a
covenant with me by sacrifice, says the Text. What sacrifice, will you say, or
what is there in sacrifice, that the Lord should be in covenant with his
people? Look into the 51. Psalm, and verse 19. you shall there see what there
is in sacrifice that makes a covenant between God and his people: Then shall
thou be pleased, says David, with the sacrifice of righteousness;
righteousness in the sacrifice, is that which does procure a pleasedness in
God unto those persons, unto whom sacrifice does belong, or for whose use
sacrifice does serve; I say, righteousness in the sacrifice, not an inherent
righteousness in the typical sacrifice it self: For, says the Apostle, it is
impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin. But there is
a righteousness that is declared from Heaven, and annexed to the sacrifice,
the righteousness of Christ, this is that which puts an end to the quarrel,
this is that which makes an agreement between those that are at difference: And
in the 51. Psalm, and the 14. verse, you shall see, beloved, David has such a
confidence in the righteousness of Christ, and does so make it his refuge, as
that in the greatest of sins as he was ever overtaken with, he betakes himself
unto that, Deliver me, O Lord, from blood-guiltinesse; and there you shall
find he does express himself thus, namely, The God of my righteousness;
these you shall plainly see deliverance from blood-guiltinesse, is ascribad
(...) the righteousness of God; and he wai^s for his deliverance, even out of
the power which that rightcousness has with God: For that purp of in the 71.
Psilme, and the ^ verse. and in the 19. verse. or there abouts. First, you (...)
here makes the (...) hereus^^^ (...) ^^emity, Deliver me O Lord in thy
righteousness; and afterward you shall (...) this righteousness (...) not
leave it: My mouth shall show forth thy right (...): And I will make mention of
thy righteousness, and thine only, s^^th the Tex^ there, v. 16. Mark the
expression well, set David be in what condition be will, he veilmake no other
pl^a in the world, but this, I will make mention of thy righteousness, and
thine only. Whether you will understand it of Gods righteousness s^^ply, as
Judge, or of Christ's righteousness, as he is the Advocate, they come all to
one reckoning: For, i^ God d^^^eliver in a righteoussentance, or according to
righteousness, deliverance does proceed from righteousness plended. So that,
I say, if you understand of the Lord, then you must conceive the righteousness
of Christ is the ground, why God pronounces a sentence of righteousness: And
in the 143: Psalm, and the 11. verse, you shall set David does there again
ascribe his deliverance unto righteousness still: Quicken thou me, O Lord, for
thy names sake; and for thy righteousness sake, says he, bring my soul out
of trouble. The Prophet Isaiah coures behind none in Evangelicall sweet (...)
comfort of Gods people, he is marvelous full concerning this thing; namely, the
(...) of the people of God by the righteousness of Christ. Look into Isaiah,
Chap. 1. verse 27. Sion, says the Lord there, shall be redeemed with
judgment, etc. and the converts with righteousness: Here you see, beloved,
that the Church of God shall be brought to judgemens. Judgment, you know, is a
sentence passed by a Judge; and there shall be redemption unto Sion, even by
judgment; and this sentence of a Judge must be pronounced, for the deliverance
of the client: This is our comfort, we shall be saved by righteousness, says
the Text. In Isaiah 41. you shall fee how the Lord sets out Christ in this very
term, Who has raised up the righteous man, says the Text, in verse. 2. and
has set him as his feet? I the first and the last, says the Lord, in ver. 4.
Christ, I say, is held forth unto men, as the righteous man raised up for the
good of the sons of men. In the 51. of Isaiah, the Holy Ghost tells us, about
the 5. and 6. verses, that God will make judgment to rest as a light upon the
people, that is, when the Lord brings his people unto judgment, it shall be a
lightsome day unto them, and though a lightsome day, yet who can stand before
his Judgment? Mark the ground of the lightsomness of the day, when they shall
come unto their trial; My righteousness is near, says the Lord, my judgment
is gone forth, my salvation is gone forth; therefore it should be a lightsome
day, because there shall be righteousness in that day to plead out that
judgment that shall be given on the behalf of the clients of Christ: In Isaiah
53. verse. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and he shall be
satisfied; that is, God shall see the travel of the soul of Christ, and God
shall be satisfied. But how comes it to pass, that God is pacified by
beholding the righteousness, the travel of the soul of Christ? By his
knowledge, says the next words, shall my righteous servant justify many. There
is a great deal of difference to understand the meaning of the phrase righteous
servant; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant just ifie many. For my own
part, I think, the plain sense does carry much light in it, as much as to say,
Christ knows so much concerning the prevalency of his own righteousness, that
he pleads so with the Father by it, that he shall be sure to carry the cause in
the behalf of his client, when he pleads it; he knows so much, I say, of the
prevalency of his righteousness, that he is sure he shall carry the cause for
their justification, when they come to their trial. In the 59. of Isaiah, and
16. verse, you have an excellent expression; there the Lord, says the Text,
wondered that there were none, that he could find never an Intercessor,
therefore, as it follows, my arm has brought salvation. But how does his arm
bring salvation? my righteousness, so it follows, it sustained me. Observe it
well, there is none in the world to deal with God on the behalf of men, but the
Son of God, Christ himself, there could not one come in to help him. There is a
mighty charge laid against poor Believers, containing such a bulk of
transgressions, with so many aggravations, that Christ himself had sunk under
them, being alone, had not his righteousness sustained him; this was that
which held him up in the whole plea, till the sentence was given, on the behalf
of his clients; for be put on righteousness as a breast plate, In the 51. of
Jeremiah, and the 5. and 6. verses. of that Chapter: Behold, the days come:
or, In those days I will raise up a righteous branch unto David; In those
days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and the name
wherewith he shall be called, is, The Lord our righteousness. Here is a
righteous branch raised up, this follows next, th^^ shall be sav^d. How to? In
that there is a righteous branch (...) for it. Israel shall (...) shall be
saved, in the word and from (...); but in that (...) up, Judab that be (...)
himself, that (...) Judah when the (...). God himself (...) not only (...)
Jerusalem, (...) shall not cast our (...) is raised no, which shall in (...)
Judah to dwell safely. And the reation of all this is not abley rendered;
nam^^y, in that this righteousness is become our (...), and he is so become our
righteousness, that his very name is, The Lord our righteousness. It is very well
worth your observation, how still the last refuge is fastened upon this
eighteousnesse of Christ. In the 9. of Daniel, and the 24. verse, Yet seventy
weeks are determined unto thy holy City; to what purpose? to sinish
transgression, to put an end to sin, to make reconciliation for iniquity and to
bring in everlasting righteousness. Mark it well; this sealing up or the
Vision, that is, the establishment or the forgiveness of sins, and the
finishing of transgression; I say this sealing up follows after the bringing in
of everlasting righteousness, and this everlasting righteousness is the
righteousness of Christ. Therefore in the 4. of Malachi and the 2. verse, you
shall find, there is heath apprep^^ated unto Christ, and there you shall find
where the ^^tue lies, that Christ has such a bealing: Unto them, says the
Text, that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousuesse arise with healing in
his wings; therefore a healing Sun, because he is the Sun of righteousness;
and the v^tue in the wing of Christ to heal, is the righteousness of Christ.
I have been more copiou in these passages of Scripture, before the coming of
Christ, that people may not think, that to depend only and (...) upon the
righteousness of Christ for security and comfort, is a new thing, but was knows,
and was a refuge from the beginning. The Apostle Paul speaks more clearly then
any of the rest, I shall instance but in two passages, for the truth is, all
the Epistles of the Apostles are full of the thing. The strength of the plea of
Christ in the behalf of his people sinning does stand in his righteousness:
For this purpose, look into the 3. Chapter to the Remans, in the begioning of
which Chap. you shall see how mightily the Spostl pleads to the convincing of
all the world of sin, and the fruit of that sinfulness, you shall find from
the 13. verse forwards, a description of the sins of men. In the 20. verse he
makes a conclusion: Therefore by the deeds of ehe Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight. Now, after he had taken off all that might possibly be
in man toward his remedy, and refuge, all that possible might be in the Law
for the people to rest in, he begins to establish the foundation, upon which
the safety and deliverance, and security of Gods people, does indeed depend:
But now, says the Apostle in v. 21. The righteousness of God without the Law,
is manifest, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
that do believe; for there is no difference, for all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, to declare his righteousness at this time, that he might be
just, and the justifier of those that do believe in Jesus. You see here is an
inculcating again and again, that it is a righteousness; namely, his
righteousness, which God has set forth to be a propitiation, that is, the
righteousness of Christ, to declare his righteousness, says the Apostl, upon
all, imports unto us the sole refuge for the remission of sins, is only the
righteousness of Christ: Look also into the 5. of the Romans 18. and 19.
verses, As by one man's disobedience manywere made sinners, so by the obedience
of one, many shall be made righteous Our transgressions are the issue which
Adams disobedience brought forth, that obedience of one man is our security,
and deliverance from Hell, and death, which one man's disobedience brought into
the world; all of it is frustrated and evacuated by the obedience of one, and
by the righteousness of that one: Nothing but the obedience and righteousness
of Christ setting persons free from the fruits of unrighteousness and
disobedience in Adam, is able to make them righteous. I hope, by this time, the
truth is cleared enough, that there is nothing to be mentioned but only his
righteousness, nothing can hold water, nothing can hold plea but this
righteousness of Christ. You shall therefore consider out of all these
passages what that righteousness is that has efficacy and prevalency with the
Father, for the discharge of a member of Christ when he sins.

First, you shall see this negatively.

Secondly, positively; and therein we shall endeavor to declare what
righteousness of Christ that is that does relieve us.

First, negatively; there is not any righteonsnesse of a Believer which he
acts, which can possibly have any force in plea with the Father for the
discharge of a person that has committed a sin; I say, no righteousness of a
Believer which he acts, and I mention that righteousness which he does act,
because the very righteousness of Christ it self, is indeed the righteousness
of a Believer: For, he is our righteousness, The Lord our righteousness, as
you have heard. As he was made sin for us, and became our sin by impuration, so
we are made the righteousness of God in him, that is, Christ's righteousness
is as much become our own righteousness, as our sins became Christ's sins: And
as Christ bare the whole fruit of our sins, by being made sin for us; so we
enjoy the whole fruit of Christ's righteousness by being made righteous in him;
therefore I say not simply no righteousness of a Believer, but no
righteousness of a Believer which himself does act, has the least force in
plea to prevail for the discharge of (...). I must ^ell you, there is no
divine Rethoricke, there is no omnipotent excellency in any righteousness
whatsoever, which a Believer can put up unto God. It is not your turning from
your evil ways, it is not your repentance, though never so cordial and
large; it is not your departing from iniquity; it is not your doing good has
the least force or power of plea with the Father to prevail with him for your
righteousness, for your discharge, or to move him to give the sentence upon
you, that you are discharged. No righteousness, I say, whatsoever you can do:
For the best righteousness that ever man did perform, Christ only excepted,
has more in it to make against the person that did it, then it has to make
for him to obtain a sentence of discharge; and my reason is this: In the best
righteousness of man, in turning from sin, or in repenting or mourning, or
what ever else there is to be thought of, there is abundance of sin, even in
the very best actions that are performed. And where there is sinfulness, there
is a plea against the person; so that if you bring that righteousness to plead
with God, to prevail with him, you bring that which may be objected against
you, and may prove a strong plea to mar the cause that is in hand. I beseech
you, beloved, observe the Apostle in the 7th Chapter to the Romans, where, I
think, I shall meet with these things, which most people in ignorance do most
commonly make their chiefest plea, whereon they build their own comforts, and
their whole comforts, as if all were well between God and them thereby; yet you
shall their find, how the Apostle, though qualified in that manner, as he was,
does both renounce any such plea, and also does betake himself to that plea we
are now in hand with: The Apostle says there expressly, To will is present with
me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not: I delight in the Law of
God, in the inner man, but in the mean while, there is a law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of
sin; out of all which principles, observe, I beseech you, these particulars:

First, the Apostle, though he did see he fell through infirmity, yet he
clearly perceived his heart was upright toward God; so that he said, To will
is present with me, the good that I would do, that do I not; and the evil
that I would not do, that do I. Though the Apostle was overtaken, yet his
heart was toward God still: when he did evil, his heart said plainly, It is
not with my consent; when he could not do good, his heart told him, it was for
lack of power, and not because he did not desire it. Now, come to persons that
walk exactly, as the Apostle did, they are overtaken with a sin; what is there
comfort when they do sin? though I be overtaken, the frame of my heart is right
still, my heart is sincere toward God, my heart is right, it is directly
contrary to my disposition, I do not do that evil I do with a full bent of my
spirit; and in regard my heart is thus right, there is comfort to me, though I
have sinned: Suppose your spirits were in that frame the Apostles was in at
that time, I ask but this, Do you not draw comfort still from the plea of this
disposition your spirits do make? When you have committed a sin, do you not
fetch comfort from thence? Ask your hearts, and they will answer, yea, we have
done so, and we may do so. I beseech you consider it well, when the Apostle had
argued the case thus, what was the final conclusion, and the sole refuge that
he does fly unto, or the plea that he would trust unto for his deliverance and
comfort? He does not say in the conclusion, I thank God, to will is present
with me, I thank God, my heart is in a good frame and temper, though I was
overtaken; I say, Paul does not make use of this plea, but he betakes himself
to this, I thank G^d through Jesus Christ; and there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ; and it is the law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ
has freed me from the law of sin and death. So that the whole refuge of the
Apostle, was not any inward disposition, as if he could plead out comfort unto
himself therefrom; but the plea was without himself, even in Christ, and
therefore he gives thanks unto Christ for deliverance: So in the 2. Chapter to
the Philippians, you shall hear the Apostle, toward the beginning of the
Chapter, pleading the same thing there, as he did here; namely, that it is not
any righteousness that he can reach unto, that he dare venture the plea upon,
or his own comfort upon: First, he tells us, that touching the righteousness
of the Law, he was blameless. This was before his conversion, you will say? It
is true; but after his conversion, he tells us also of a righteousness he had
then: But beloved, does Paul put out his own righteousness to plead for him?
Does he expect his comfort, or the Answer of Heaven for discharge upon the plea
of that righteousness of his? Nothing last; for, says the Apostle there I
account all things but loss and dung, that I may be found in him; not having
mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but the righteousness of God,
which is by faith in Jesus Christ. Surely, beloved, if the Apostle had reckoned
that his righteousness could have had any force in plea, he would never have
rejected it as dung: That man that thinks he has strength in an argument,
will not fling that argument away, and not make mention of it for the trial of
his cause, if he thought there were any power in it. But this the Apostle did,
he accounted his righteousness dung, even the righteousness of his, after he
was converted; and in that regard, he durst not be found in that, but only in
the righteousness of God, which is by faith in Christ. He does not simply say,
he would not be found in the righteousness of the Law, but exclusively also; he
would not be found in his own righteousness; so that he b^^s out his own
righteousness quite, there shall no plea at all go along through his own
righteousness: The righteousness of Christ shall speak for his plea, or else
he would look for no good issue at all; this, beloved, is the way.

Let me give one touch by way of application; you may easily perceive, how
mightily people are mistaken, and therefore no marvel they do live so
uncomfortably; no marvel they are in fear of death, and thereby in bondage all
their life long, while they run for the refreshment of their spirits to their
own righteousness, to the plea of their own works; and will have their hearts
eased upon that righteousness that they themselves do, whereas nothing gets a
gracious discharge from their Father, but only Christ, and his righteousness.
Therefore, beloved, how ever it may go with some for a harsh thing, to take men
off from their own righteousness, in respect of speaking comfort unto them,
and to lead them to the righteousness of Christ revealed in the Gospel, as
that from which they may draw all their comfort, though this may found harsh to
some people, that have not been trained up in the way of the grace of God, and
in the freeness, of it revealed in the Gospel; yet I doubt not but in time,
the Lord will be pleased to reveal to us, that running to Christ out of our
selves, and disclaiming of our own righteousness, and seeking of comfort from
it; that leaving our own actions, and all that can be imagined to be in us, or
can be done by us, will be the thing that in the end will establish our hearts
and spirits, yea, and fill them with joy and peace in believeing.

It remains, that we should further conf^ler one thing, that I know startles
some persons, or at least lays blocks in their way, before I can possibly come
unto the righteousness of Christ it self, that makes up the strength of plea
with God for poor creatures.

Object. Some will object, Though all that we do of our own will not hold plea,
yet there is a righteousness of faith, will some say, and that pleads with the
Father, and that gets the discharge of sin from the Father; Beloved, there is
some dispute about this point, and I shall not desire to enter into it; I shall
only in a few things, endeavor to clear up the truth as clear as possibly I
may, that I may go on.

Answ. I answer in general, so far forth as the righteousness of faith is the
righteousness of Christ, there is strength in the plea of that righteousness,
but the righteousness of faith must be considered merely and only, as it is
Christ alone, and not as it is any righteousness of faith it self, as I may so
speak: If any strength of faith be brought in, as concurrent to that
righteousness that pleads out the discharge of a sinner, over and above what
is simply and only Christ's own righteousness; I say, that is no righteousness
to be pleaded, nor has power, nor force in plea at all. I shall give two or
three passages by way of hint: It is true, the Apostle in the 10. to the Romans
tells us, The righteousness of faith speaks on this wise; importing a
righteousness of faith, which indeed before was called the righteousness of
God himself, they submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God; but,
beloved, I take it the righteousness here, is called the righteousness of
faith, as faith is the hand that does close with the righteousness of God; not
as if this righteousness were properly faith, but merely objective, as we say,
Faith, as it lays hold upon that righteousness which is only Christ the
object thereof, in 1. Romans verse 16. the Apostle says there, I am not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God to salvation, to every one
that believes.

Mark it well, here is the power of God to salvation revealed. In what is the
power of God to salvation? It is in it, says the Apostle, that is, in the
Gospel, of which he was not ashamed; so it is the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes, but the power of God to salvation is not in
believing, but, in it, that is, in the Gospel. And what is the Gospel of Christ
there? Certainly, the Gospel of Christ there, is not faith, but the object of
it^ For it is said to be revealed from faith to faith. But, if you look into
the 2. or Luke, and the 10. verse, there you shall see plainly, what the Gospel
of Christ is: An Angel came from Heaven to the Shepherds, and speaks thus:
Behold, I bring you glad tidings, that is, I Evangeliz^, so the word is in the
original; ^^ring you glad ridings of exceeding great joy; for unto you is born
this any in the City of David, a Savior, that is Christ the Lord. The word
Gospel in the Romans, is the very same word drawn from the same theme with
that in the 2. of Luke, verse 10. It is as much as to say, the Gospel is glad
ridings of great joy, and what are these glad tidings? A Savior is born unto
you. So Christ a Savior born to men, is the Gospel; and says the Apostle, I
am not ashamed of it, that is, I am not ashamed of Christ borne a Savior, for
this reason; Christ is the power of God to salvation, to every one that
believes. In the 1. of Peter, and the 1. Chapter, the Apostle tells us, We
are kept by the power of God through faith, unto salvation; where it is plainly
imported, that faith unto salvation is the thorrow fare, it is but a mere
channel, through which the righteousness of Christ does run, not communicating
any righteousness it self, by which a person may stand righteous before God,
or have discharge by the Lord, or from the Lord. This I would fain know,
beloved, in every act, or in any act of believing, is the act of believing
absolutely perfect, and complete in all things, without any defect at all, or
weakness? Or, Is there some imperfection? There is some imperfection you must
say. If then there be imperfection, this I would fain known, how that thing
that has imperfection, that has unrighteousness in it self, can constitute a
person by it self righteous; Can Faith chargeable with unrighteousness, make a
person unrighteous in himself, stand righteous before God? The Apostle in the
7. to the Hebrews, telling us of Christ, says, It behooves us to have such an
high Priest, harmless, holy, undefiled, and separate from sinners; if Christ
himself had had finfulnesse with his righteousness, that very righteousness
of Christ it self would not have served the turn; and therefore it behoved him
to be holy, harmless, and undefiled, and without offense. Beloved, Christ
himself could not constitute us righteous before the Father if he himself had
not been holy, and without sin; and can it be imagined, that faith that has
unrighteousness in it self can make us righteous* This is the sum of that I
shall speak at this time. I hope, the things that I have spoken will not be
offensive to any; for I desire freely that this, and all that I have, or shall
deliver unto you, may be received as they agree with the light of the Gospel,
that is to be the rule to measure all truths by, and the rest that remain^ I
shall come to the next day.

SERMON VII.
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not: And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.


WE have observed already: First, from the connection of both verses together
(the latter containing an Argument in it, to enforce a charge in the former)
That the making known of this discharge from sin, before sin be committed, is
so far from opening a gap unto licentiousness, that it is one of the best means
in the world to restrain men from licentiousness.

Secondly, we came to consider the Argument, and in the Argument, the matter of
it and the force of it. The Argument that prevails with men not to sin, is:
That if any man sin, he has an Advocate with the Father.

We have considered what this Advocateship is, and I showed ^is a plea,
grounded upon Justice: We have ^^^er considered for whose cause it is.

First, it is the cause of Believers, and the cause of Believers when they sin;
and not only the cause of present Believers, but of the Elect, although not yet
Believers, which yet in time shall be such.

We came also to consider, how Christ this Advocate is qualified unto this
office of Advocateship.

The qualifications of Christ are intimated in the three titles here attributed
unto him.

First, he is Christ: that imports, 1. A lawful call to plead. 2. A sufficient
furnishing him with skill to plead.


Secondly, he is Jesus importing the efficaciousnesse of his plea: He pleads so
well, that he saves his people from their sins, he carries the cause.

Thirdly, Christ's qualification to his office of Advocateship, is imported in
that attribute of Righteousness: Jesus Christ the righteous, and that contains
in it, the strengh of his plea whereby he does attain to the salvation of those
persons whose cause be does plead. Concerning this last attribute we have
observed, that the righteousness of Christ contains in it the strength o^
Christ's plea, as Advocate whereby he does become the propitiation for the sins
of his clients; I say, the strength of his plea lies in this, that he is Jesus
Christ the righteous; we have therefore proposed to be considered,

First, how clear the Scripture is in this truth, that it is his righteousness
that carries the cause of a poor Believer when he has sinned, and gets the
discharge for his sin, after it is committed; I say, the plea lies in his
righteousness. I cannot insist upon the Scriptures mentioned, they are very
plentiful.

We came further, to consider what this righteousness of his is, that has
such a strength of plea in it; the resolution of this I distributed into two
heads: First, Negative, Secondly, Affirmative.


First, the righteousness which carries away the cause, and obtains the
discharge of a Believers sin, is no righteousness of our own, no, not so much
as the righteousness of faith, as it is our act of believing. Here we left the
last day. I will give you a touch of the impossibility that faith should so
plead for the discharge from sin in its own name or strength, as to carry away
the cause on the side of this person sinning. It is true, the Apostle speaks of
the righteousness of faith in the 10. to the Romans, about the 4. verse. A
righteousness of faith there is indeed, but that righteousness which is here
given and ascribed unto faith, is afterward appropriated to the Word, that is,
unto the Gospel, that is the righteousness of faith speaks on this wise; say
not in thine heart, who shall ascend up into Heaven? that is to bring Christ
from thence; or, who shall descend into the deep? But what says it? The Word
is nigh thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth. That is, in the word, in the
heart, and in the mouth, that is, the word of Faith, and so not, the
righteousness of a man's own act of believing I cannot dwell upon what I have
delivered before.

There are some things briefly to be considered, even about our believing, as
it has a stroke in the discharge from sin, or in the pardon of sin. The truth
is, beloved, some hand faith has in this business; but it is not any
righteousness in the act of believing that carries any stroke in it. If you
will consider it well, you shall easily see, there is no more righteousness in
our believing, as we do act believing, then there is in any other gracious act
whatsoever we do; there is no more righteousness in the act of our beleving,
then is in our love of God: nay more, there is as much sinfulness in our act
of believing, as in our acting of other gifts. There is no man under Heaven
has attained unto that height of believing, or that strength of faith, but
there is still something wanting, some imperfection and sinfulness in it: And
as there is weakness and imperfection in believing; so it is not possible that
this believing should give forth such a righteousness, as to constitute a
person who is unrighteous in himself, to be righteous before God. That which
cannot set it self complete and righteous before God, can never set another
righteous before God, Faith must be first just it self, or else it is not
possible it should be imagined it can ever by the righteousness of its own act
justify another. Beloved, what ever the Scriptures speak concerning faith
justifying, it must of necessity be understood objectively, or declaratively,
one of these two ways: Either faith is said to be our righteousness, in
respect of Christ only, who is believed on, and so it is not the
righteousness of his own act of believing, but the righteousness of him that
is apprehended by that act of believing: Or, else you must understand it
declaratively, that is, whereas all our righteousness, and all our discharge
from sin, flowing only from the righteousness of Christ alone, is an hidden
thing; that which in it self is hid to men, does become evident by believing.
And as faith does make the righteousness of Christ evident to the Believer; so
it is said to justify by its own act declaratively, and no otherwise. And
whereas in the 5. Chapter to the Romans, and the 1. verse, the Apostle there
says, being justified by faith, we have peace with God. In Romans 8. verse. 33.
the Apostle says, It is God that justifies. Now, I beseech you compare these
Texts together, then tell me whether the act of believing, except it has
reference to the object, which is Christ, of it self does justify. whether or
no these two places ca^possibly be reconciled without contradiction. It is God
that justifies, and it is Faith that justifies; Faith is not God, neither is
God Faith. If therefore it be faith in justification, in respect of its own act
that justifies, it is not God that justifies us; and if it be God that
justifies, then it is not Faith in respect of its own act. How will you
reconcile it? When therefore the holy Ghost speaks of faith justifying, it
speaks of faith as laying hold upon God for our justification, and therefore
though faith does here appear as that which does lay hold upon the
righteousness of God, yet faith here cannot be said to be that righteousness
that does justify us.

Ob. But I know some will be ready to say, it is not to be understood, as if
says had any innate power of its own to procure the discharge or pardon from
sin; but says is to be understood as the Isntrumental cause, that lays hold
upon that justification, and so it goes before the justification of a person,
and it is to be understood no otherwise.

Answ. I shall desire to keep in the plain path for the clearing up of this
truth, and so far as possible may be, I abhor to walk in the clouds, in a truth
that so highly concerns the comfort and establishing the consciences and
spirits of men; and therefore, I say, that faith, as it lays hold upon the
righteousness of Christ, it does not bring this righteousness of Christ to the
soul, but only does declare the presence of this righteousness in the (...)
that was there, even before faith was. I beseech you mark me well, I know,
beloved, I have many very catching ears about me; I speak it the rather, that
there may be the more warines, because there are frequent mis-understandings
and mis^^^ings of the things I deliver, especially by those that come to catch
I say again, there is no p^^son under Heaven, reconciled unto God, justified by
God, through ^he righteousness of Christ, but this person is justified and
reconciled unto God before he does believe. And therefore faith is not the
instrument radically to unite Christ and the soul together: but rather is the
fruit that follows and flows from Christ the root, being united before hand to
the persons that do believe; so that the efficacy and power of believing, is
to be isntrumental for the declaration of an act that was done before, only it
was hid. For the clearing up of this to you, beloved, consider that expression
in the 12. Chapter to the Hebrews, verse. 1. Faith, says the Apostle, is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Faith is
the evidence, says the Text, of things not seen. The Apostle here does not
give any efficacy to faith to procure or bring forth a new thing, but he gives
to faith only an evidencing power, and that not to evidence any new thing, but
to be an evidence of things not seen, that is, of things that were before in
being, but were hid: but by faith come to be apparent, and cease to be hid, and
are manifest and open when the evidence of faith does bring them forth to
light: Either you must say it is not in being till faith is come, and so faith
does more then evidence, even beget, and give being to the very thing, or you
must confess the thing indeed was: but faith makes it evident that before was
hid and obscure. Now, though faith be honored with the greatest business of
all the gifts of the Spirit of God, yet that Christ may not be robbed of that
which is peculiar unto him, and properly his own, that is, to give complete
being to our justification, that it should be given unto faith it self: I say,
give me leave to propose to you some particulars, wherein it is as clear as the
daylight, that it is impossible for any person under Heaven to believe, till
such time as this person be first united unto Christ, and become one with him,
and that faith it self being but a fruit that flows from our union with him, is
not the uniter that knits Christ and a person together, I shall not need to
insist upon that place I have often made mention of in the 16. of Ezekiel: But,
beloved, when you take this point into consideration, I beseech you remember
that passage in the 8. and 9. verses. The time when God fastened his love upon
the Church, was the time of the blood of the Church; When I saw thee polluted
in thy blood, I said unto thee, Live. In verse. 7. it is three mes repeated,
When thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, Live; and in verse. 8. Thy time
was be time of love, that is, the time of thy blood that he spoke of before,
this time was the time of love; And I spread my skirt over thee, says the
Text, and I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine; then washed I thee with water; yea, I thoroughly washed thee from
thy blood. Here is first loving and spreading the sk^^t over the Church, before
the Church is washed: Here is not first washing, and then loving and spreading
the skirt over them; but here is first a spreading of the skirt in blood, and
after that comes washing, and thoroughly washing from blood. If any man do think
that this washing is to be understood of sanctification, let them but consider,
whether or no there be a through-washing from blood, a perfect washing from
blood, such a washing from blood, as that the person so washed, is presently
all fair; or, as the Prophet speaks expressly in that Chapter, complete in
beauty, that is, perfect, and that through his comeliness put upon this person.

But to go on, consider, I beseech you, beloved, that expression in Isa. 43.22,
23. the Lord there is pleased, first, to deciare himself concerning his people,
in what a condition they were, their condition was this: Thou have not called
upon me, but thou have been weary of me: yea, thou have wearied me with thy
sins, and thou have made me to serve with thy transgeessions, says the Lord.
And mark what follows; I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins; Here the people whose sins
God blotted out, are not considered as believing people, but are considered as
a people that wearied God with their sins, and people that made him serve with
their transgressions: they are considered as a people that had not so much as
an heart to call upon God, but were quite weary of God, for so he does express
himself, concerning this people; and even while he does consider them thus,
even then, he for his own sake blotteth out their transgressions.

And in the 53. of Isaiah, whereof I spoke so largely heretofore, if you mark
well, in the 6. verse, you shall see plainly, there is nothing but sin
considered in the person, whose iniquitles the Lord laid upon Christ: All we,
like sheep, have gone astray, we have turned every one of us to our own way,
and he has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Here is not a consideration of
people as believing people, as though there must be a believing, before there
can be a discharge from sin; but there is a consideration of people before they
are believing people, even while they are a people going astray, and turning
every one to their own way. But the most notable expression of all to this
purpose, is in the 15. of John. I desire you that you would seriously consider
the strength of Christ's plea in that place, about the 4. and 5. ver. you see
Christ comparing himself, in the beginning of the Chapter, says, I am the
Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; every branch in me that bears fruit,
my Father purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: every branch in me
that bears not fruit, is cast forth as a branch, and withers. But the main
thing that I defire to be observed, is this: Abide in me, as the branch abides
in the Vine; for, as the branch that abides not in the Vine, cannot bring
forth fruit, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Out of which passage of
Scripture, I shall desire you to observe briefly these particulars,; wherein, I
hope, it will be clear and plain unto you, that it is impossible a person
should believe, till Christ has united himself to this person. I know,
beloved, there is none, or at least I cannot meet with any yet, that will deny,
but that faith or believing is a fruit of the branch that grows upon the
Vine, that is, one of the fruits of the Spirit, that are wrought by the Spirit
of Christ in those that are Christ's: For in the 5th Chapter of the Epistle to
the Galatians, toward the end of the Chapter, you shall find the Apostle
reckon up the fruits of the Spirit, and he takes up faith for one of those
fruits amongst the rest. If therefore believing be a fruit that persons bear
by virtue of union to the Vine Christ, then it must needs follow, men must
first be in Christ, then believe; For, if persons do believe before they are
united, and their union by by a faith that they do act, then surely the branch
must bear this fruit, before it be in the Vine, before there be union. And, if
faith be the uniter, it is present before the union be made, and so the branch
does bear fruit before it does abide in the Vine, contrary to Christ's words:
For it is maintained and affirmed, that it is faith that does make the union,
and therefore cannot be a fruit of that union. Beloved, this I would fain know
of any person, Is faith the gift of Christ, or no? Is it Christ that works
faith in those that do believe in Christ, or no? The Apostle in the 12. Chapter
to the Hebrews, and the 2. verse, says expressly, that Christ is the Author of
our faith. Is Christ then the Author of our faith, and yet is that faith the
Author of our union unto Christ? Can a father beget a child, and yet this
child beget his own father? Does Christ beget faith in us by virtue of our
being united unto him? and shall this faith beget that union of which it was
but a fruit? From whence shall persons that do believe before they are united
unto Christ, receive this faith of theirs? They are not yet united unto Christ,
and therefore it cannot come from him, for we can have nothing of Christ but by
virtue of union, and then it proceeds not from the Spirit of Christ neither,
for we partake of that only by virtue of union with him too From whence should
it come then? If you have it not from him by virtue of union, it is not from
the V^ne that his person is incorporated into already, because there must be
union before there can be communion: All communion with Christ, all
participating of any thing of Christ, proceeds from the union persons first
have with him; he is the root, and as the branch is incorporated into the body
and root, so sap and i^fluence it communicated and flows out into the branch
from the root. But this, you will says is but a parabolicall expression, and
Parables preve nothing.

I answer, whereas Christ is pleased to apply the Parabie, his application of
the Parable has as full a proof in it self, as any Scripture whatsoever.
Now, in this place you shall find, that Christ does make exact application of
it himself to the purpose we now speak of, as we sinde in these words: As
the branch cannot bring forth fruit, except it abide in the Vine, no more can
ye, exceptye abide in me: I am the Vine, ye are the branches, etc. Ye cannot
bring forth fruit, except ye abide in the Vine; and do you abide in the Vine,
when you are not unitted unto Christ? No man can say it. Can you bring forth
fruit before you are in the Vine? Can you believe before you are in Christ?
Beloved, it is as great an absurdity to say you can, as to say a branch can
bring forth fruit without a root. So that, beloved, you must hold this for an
undeniable truth, you cannot bring forth fruit, except you abide in the Vine. I
can bring many other passages for the further proof of this thing, but this
will suffice. Mistake me not, I do not any way aim at any derogation to
believing, but my desire is, that believing might have its proper office, and
may not encroach upon the office of Christ himself. It is the Lord himself, of
his own mere Grace, without respect to any thing in the world, in men, that
makes him give his Son Christ unto persons, that he might be the justification
of them. In the 42. of Isaiah, and the 6. verse, you shall see there expressly,
Christ is given of the Father, and he is given as a covenant by the Father,
before ever men have eyes to see, before ever they have faith to behold Christ:
I will give thee for a covenant to the people to open the blind eyes. He
himself as the Covenant, and as given, must open the blind eyes, or else they
shall never be operted. We must not have our eyes opened, and than have Christ
given to us, but Christ is first given, and then our eyes are opened: We must
not believe, that so we may be in convenant with Christ: but we must first be
in covenant with him, and then believing that must follow as the fruit of the
covenant. If we have faith before we be united unto Christ, if our eyes be
opened before Christ be given to be the covenant, then Christ is anticipated
and prevented: For, whereas he comes of purpose to open the blind eyes, and is
given for this very thing, to open the blind eyes, the eyes are opened already,
and this work is done before he comes; and so his coming, and the end thereof,
is made frustrate, and in vain in that respect. In brief, suppose that our
faith does act toward the discharge of our transgressions, then it must
follow, it is not only the righteousness of Christ that pleads by way of
Advocateship with the Father for this discharge. If thou come to the Lord, and
plead out that for thy self by virtue of thy faith, which his righteousness
alone was appointed for to do, and do not wholly cast thy self upon that, as
that which will bear thee out in all thy approaches to God; but join thy faith
withal in the manner I have spoken, and say in thy heart, I believe, and in
that plead thy discharge; if you put this into your plea for the discharge of
sin, Christ only is not your sole Advocate, but your faith also does concur
with Christ in this office of Advocateship, and so you make it your Savior,
then which, what can be more dishonorable and more derogatory unto this
glorious office of his? For if we must believe before God will justify us,
then the simple and only plea of Christ's righteousness alone is not
all-sufficient for God to pardon or to discharge sin: For, suppose I have not
yet believed, now the righteousness of Christ, it seems, has not strength
enough, till my believeing come in, and join with that righteousness: But it is
only the righteousness of Christ that pleads out the justification of a person,
and not the concurrence of our believing that pleads it out; our believing, I
confess, gives comfortable testimony that God has freely justified persons,
in and through the alone righteousness of his Son Christ, our believing does
conduce to the declaration and manifestation of that which God for Christ's
righteousness sake did do. By faith we have evidence of this thing, but it is
not our believing that works the thing it self. Now, it remains we go on, and
consider further affirmatively, what this righteousness of his is, that carries
the whole strength of the plea, for the discharge of the people of God from
their sins which they have committed; I say, it is his righteousness, and his
alone. Now, this righteousness is to be considered in the quality, quantity,
and nature of it: concerning the quality and quantity of it in brief; that
righteousness that has the strength of plea for the discharge charge of the
sins of Gods own people, both for quantity and quality, it must be so
powerful, and so large and spacious, that it may serve to cover the whole
nakedness of the person whom it does concer^^; I ^ay, this righteousness of
his has so much power and extent, and spaciousness^ in it, that it will serve
to cover all: As large as the necessity and want is, so far it can cover. See
how the Lord taxes the Church of L^odice^, Revelat. 3.17, 18. Behold, thou
say thou art rich, and art sul^ of goods, and have need of zothing; well,
not withstanding her high conceit of her self, that she was rich, yet she was
poor, says the Text, and naked, and lacked all things; and my council is,
says he, that thou buy of me gold, that thou may he rich, and that thou buy
white raiment of me, that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear. Here
Christ puts the Church upon the way by which she may be secured from that he
charges her withal. That he charges her with, is poverty, and wretchedness,
blindness and nakedness; the course he puts her upon, is to receive of him
gold and white raiment: it is white, there is the excellent purity of it; and
this raiment is so large and spacious, that if she should be covered therewith,
not a jot of the shame of her nakedness shall appear. And in the 19. of the
Revelations, and the 8. verse, you shall plainly see, that this white rayme^t
is nothing else, but the righteousness of the Saints: and it was granted unto
her, says the Text, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white; for this clean linen, says the Tex^, is the righteousness of the
Saints. The righteousness of the S^^uts not the righteousness acted by the
Saints, but the righteousness or Christ, imputed to the Saints, and that is
the pure, clean, and white linen: So in that text I mentioned unto you in
Ezekiel. 16. verse. 8. you shall find there this righteousness expressed, by a
^kirt spread over a person to cover the shame of his nakedness. The sum is
only this; the righteousness of Christ is such a kind of righteousness, that
there is an ample complete fullness in it to serve for every purpose to extend
it self to the u^most of every transgression; That there is not so large a
spreading of sinfulness; but this righteousness spreads it self perfectly
over all, that none of this sinfulness does appear.

But all the difficulty still lies, what righteousness this is of Christ, that
is expressed to be so full and large, and pu^e.

For answer to this, you know there are two distinct natures in Christ; he is
perfect God, and complete man, and answerably there are two distinct
righteousnesses in Christ: there is the essential righteousness of Christ;
the inseparable righteousness of his Godhead; and there is also the
qualitative righteousness of the humanity. Now, although it be true, that in
respect of the ineffectable union of these two natures, both these
righteousnesses areinseparable to the person of Christ; yet it is as true,
there is no more confounding of the righteousnesses of these two natures, then
there is of the natures in the person; but we must consider as distinctly the
one as the other. Now, the question lies mainly in this, whether of the
righteousnesses it is, which pleads the discharge of a sinner, whether the
righteousness of God, simply as God, or the righteousness of the humane nature.
I answer, it is the righteousness of Jesus Christ; God simply considered is not
Christ, nor the human nature simply considered is not Christ neither: But it is
Christ God and man, ineffably knit and united in one, that makes up Christ.
Accordingly I say, as Christ does confist of God and man jointly; so the
righteousness that becomes the righteousnesss of Christ's people, is the
righteousness of both united, and not the righteousness of each severally. The
simple righteousness of the humanity of Christ alone, is too short, is too
narrow to cover all the filth of all the sins of all the members of Christ: the
simple essential righteousness of the Godhead alone is not communicable to
the persons of men; but it is a righte^usnesse of God-man that carries the
strength ^f plea for the discharge of a sinner, and some^^ing from both natures
must necessarily con^ur to the discharge of sin.

First, for the righteousness of the humane nature of Christ, it consists of
two things.

1. In active obedience. 2. In passive obedience.
In doing the will of God commanded.

In suffering the will of God imposed upon ^im. This I say, is the
righteousness of his hu^ane nature. God, as he is simply considered, (...) not
capable of either of these two qualitative ^ighteousnesses: The Divine nature
is not ca^able of them; God is not capable of obedi^nce, because there is no
supreme above him, ^o whom he should yield obedience; and God ^s not capable
of passion, he is not subject to ^uffer; therefore this obedience and
suffering are properly the actions and passions of the hu^mane nature, yet both
of these do concur necessarily toward the discharge of a Believer from sin: His
active obedience, that is in doing the will of God; his passive obedience, in
suffering the Will of God. Compare these things together, as they stand
together in the 5. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, 18, 19. verses, you
shall plainly there perceive, that the obedience, the doing of the will of God,
is one branch of righteousness requisite in Christ toward the discharge of
persons from their sins; As by the offense of one man judgment cam^ upon all
men to condemnation, says the Apostle, so by the righteousness of one, the
free gift came upon al^o the justification of life; here is a comparison, or
rather an opposi^ion, set between Adam offense, and Christ's righteousness; as
Adams offense brought judgment, so the righteousness of Christ brings
justification and life to men. Yea, but what is that righteousness that is
there spoken of, will you say? the Apostles own words will tell you plainly:
For, as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one, many are made righteous. Observe it well, We are made righteous; How? It
is by the obedience of one, that one is Christ. Well, but what is this
obedience? It is an obedience set in opposition to Adams disobedienc^. What was
Adams dis^bedience? the breach of the Law. What must Christ's obedience be then,
but the fulfilling of it? So it must be certainly true. It is directly against
the Gospel of Christ to exclude the active obedience of Christ from power and
share to plead out the cause of those that do believe; I say, the active
obedience of Christ comes in to make the plea for this discharge; and as the
active, so likewise the passive obedience of Christ too; the Scripture is more
full in this, then in the other, because it is the compleate^nt of all, the
lastthings Christ went through for the discharge of the sins of men: You shall
see there is no fruit that does illustrate the discharge of a person from sin,
but it is appropriated unto Christ suffering. If you speak of reconciliation,
which consists of Gods exceptance of persons, and his agreeing with persons in
the death of all controversy between God and a person; for that is
reconciliation, when persons that were at varia^ce, are now made friends, and
all things that were objected between them areanfwered, and no more for one to
say against another; I say, if you speak of this reconciliation to God, it is
appropriated to the blood of Christ: God was in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself; not imputing their trespasses unto them: But how, will you say,
and by what means comes in this reconciliation? In the 5. Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and the 6. verse, you shall see how they come to that
reconciliation: If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son; now much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. So
that reconciliation you see, is attributed unto the death of Christ, that was
the last act of the ^on of God for man: So again, You who were afar off, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ. Here you see the same thing in substance,
given unto the blood of Christ, though in other words: Men that were afar
off; men that God was at controversy with; men who were at great distance from
God, by the blood of Christ are made nigh again: So likewise, the satisfaction
that God takes for the discharge of sin, which God has acknowledged, is said
to be the travel of the soul of Christ: He shall see of the travel of his
soul, and he shall be satisfied with it. The Apostle speaks in the general in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, without blood there is no remission of sins; Christ
entered with his blood once, into the holy of holies, and thereby he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Infinite it were to quote
Scripture for the illustration of this, that to the sufferings of Christ,
(which are indeed all summed up in his blood, in the sheeding of blood, because
that was the last of all, and the chiese of all,) all blessings are attenbu^ed,
^s reconciliation, adoption, etc.

Thirdly, beloved, although it be most true, that the active and passive
obedience of Christ's humane nature must concu^, to make up a righteousness,
yet both these together, are not enough, ^here must be something more then all
this. That is strange, will some say, what can there be more required, then the
active and passive obedience of Christ, to make up the righteousness of a
person? Is not that sufficient? Let me tell you, beloved, what the Holy Ghost
speaks of the righteousness whereby we come to be righteous, and discharged
from sin; he speaks in a higher strain then to app^opriate it to the active and
passive obedience of Christ's humane nature only. In the 10. to the Romans, and
verse 3. when the Apostle taxes the Jews for going about to establish their
own righteousness, that which he taxes them withal, is, that they did not
submit themselves to the righteousness of God: Now the righteousness of God
is manifested, says the same Apostle; and in the 5. Chapter of the 2. Epistle
to the Corinthians, and the last verse; He was made sin for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. I say, therefore, beloved, that the
righteousness by which we attain to our discharge from sin, and the pleading
out of that discharge is the righteousness of God. The righteousness that
does give the full discharge to persons from sin, must have something that is
proper to God himself, conferred or added to the humane righteousness of
Christ, as giving dignity to it; I say, something that is proper to God
himself, must concur with the active and passive obedience of Christ to make up
a complete righteousness for the discharge of a sinner It is a known rule,
nothing can give more to another, then it has it self; the very active and
passive humane obedience of Christ can give no more to man then that active and
passive obedience has in it self. Now, man considered as a sinner, has need
of more then barely the humane active and passive obedience of Christ to make
him righteous; the sin that man does commit, has its extent according to the
dignity of the person against whom the sin is committed. You know, beloved,
that crimes against Magistrates, have a deeper tincture in them then any
ordinary crime: The self-same offense committed against a Prince, that is
committed against an inferior person, has its additions of extent and
heinousness according to the person of the Prince offended. Now, sin is
committed against an infinite Majesty, against an Infinite God, and so has a
more deepnesse of tincture and filthiness in proportion to the injury done to
such a Majesty; in that respect sin indeed becomes an infinite crime: For,
still according to the injury done, in respect of the person injured, so is the
offense; you know the difference in slanders: slander a poor man, and it may
be the action will not hear above ten pounds for it; but slander a rich
merchant, whose credit goes far, there men lay an action of a thousand pounds
for the slander of such a man in regard of his degree, the richman being
greater then others, and his credit being of greater value, the offense in
taking away his credit is so much the more heinous and higher. Now, by how much
God is greater then man by so much is the hainousness of transg^ession
committed against God beyond all other transgressions whatsoever. Now, beloved,
that righteousness that must save a person harmless, must have an extent in
it that may reach as far as the transgression branches it self forth. Take unto
your consideration the transgression committed against a Divine Majesty, take
the active and passive obedience of Christ, as it is acted by his human nature
only, it (...) but a created thing, it is but a fi^ite thing (...) cannot
extend to such a height as to an^^^^ ^n proportion with the offense of the
divine Majesty. Beloved, let it not seem strange, that the very Godhead it self
must confer something of its own to the active and passive righteousness of
Christ to make it a complete righteousness. The divine nature does give value
and virtue to the obedience and sufferings of the human nature. The divine
nature adds so much, as to raise up that created obedience to an infinite
value and height of worth. All that I contend for at this time, is but this
very thing; namely, that the divine nature must give worth, and that simply the
active and passive obedience of the humane nature of Christ is not sufficient
of it self, without something of Gods own be communicated unto it to discharge
a Believer from an infinite fault or guilt.

But what it is that God does communicate (more then this, that he gives value
to the humane righteousness) and how he does communicate it, is a secret we
know not. But this we are sure of, we are made the righteousness of God in
Christ, and that righteousness of God is the righteousness by which we come
to have our discharge from sin. The Apostle tells us in the 2. Chap. of the
Epistle to the Collos. In him, speaking of Christ, dwel^ the fullness of the
God head bodily; and we are complete in him, says the Text, the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in Christ, and we are complete in that fullness of his, our
compleatnesse consists in, and springs from the fullness of the Godhead in
Christ, as from its fountain: There is certainly something in it worth our
observation, that the Holy Ghost should take notice of a fullness of the
Godhead in Christ, before he speaks of a compleatnesse which we have in
Christ. Surely it does import that Christ does communicate something that is
Gods own unto us; and yet this will not import any essential thing that is
wrought in our persons, as if Christ did substantially change our natures into
Gods nature, or Gods into ours, which were a gross absurdity. But this there
is, there is a communication of an infinite value and virtue to the active and
passive obedience of Christ: For the righteousness that becomes ours by which
we stand complete with God, it must have so much value, as I said, as may stand
in proportion to the breach of the Law of God. Now, if there be but a
righteousness of Christ's humane nature consisting in his active conformity to
the Law, and suffering for the breach of the Law, and we to stand in this
righteousness, this righteousness will not make us complete: For, mark, he
that is complete, by the righteousness of Christ, that righteousness must
serve for every purpose whatsoever; if there should be some defect, which the
righteousness of Christ, as it is acted by him in his human nature does not
make up, in respect of such defect, we could not be complete by it, although,
that even as it is humane, it is absolutely complete in his kind, and without
defect. This righteousness of a man does consist in a conformity to the will
of God revealed, and that in all relations whatsoever, and in all actions of
those relations: Suppose a Magistrate (besides his common duties he is to
perform, as he (...) man, or a Christian) must perform the (...) his public
relation, he must do justice in judg^ment, and the like. Now, (...) he should
be exact in all the common (...), as he is a Christian, and should still fail
in (...) duties o^ this public relation, he is not completely righteous,
because there is a want of a Mag^^^rares righteousness. Now, what is it that
makes this man complete in Christ? it must be the fi^^ing up that which is
empty in him; there must be that found in Christ's righteousness that may fill
up this deffect, or else there cannot be compleatnesse in this person: So
likewise, if a father, or a mother do fa^l in the duties of their relation,
they must go to Christ for a righteousness to supply this and all other
defects. Now, where will you find it in Christ? He never was a Father, nor a
mother; Christ did never perform these several offices requisite to the
several relations; Christ never brought up children; Christ was never a
Magistrate. When a father fails in the duties of his re^ation, where can he
find out a righteousness fit for him to make it up in Christ? Now therefore
the divine nature either must add some eminency of worth that must serve in
the stead thereof, unto that the humane righteousness of Christ, which his
active and passive obedience, as humane did not particularly effect, or else
there cannot be a complete righteousness given by Christ unto this person; and
therefore, whereas it is objected against the active obedience of Christ; for
as much as it does not serve for us inregard it is not every way answerable
unto the unrighteousness done by man, therefore there must come a
righteousness of faith in stead of that righteousness. I say, the remedy is
worse then the disease, and my ground is this; I^ Christ's active obedience
through nonperformance of some particulars required of us, be not a complete
righteousness for every circumstance required, much less faith, wherein as
acted by us, there is both omission of good, and commission of evil, which
simply is sin, whereas the active obedience of Christ could not be charged with
the least sin in any kind; I say, much less can faith fill up this emptiness,
being it self sinful, seeing the active obedience of Christ, being free from
the least spot of sin, only through notperformance of these several duties of
these several relations; and being but a created righteousness, could not
fill it up; and therefore I collect from hence rather, that a supply here is
from the dignity of the God head, which could not be in the active and passive
obedience of Christ, and this shall be in the stead of every particular
circumstance which ought to have been in the perfect accomplishment thereof. So
that though we fail in our relations, as of fathers and mothers and
Magistrates. And the active obedience of Christ has not these particulars in
it; yet this is supplied by the eminency of worth of the person being God
himself, and it cannot possibly be any otherwise supplied, but by the giving
such infinite value and virtue to that which Christ did, that though Christ did
not every particular circumstance which is wanting in us, yet notwithstanding
it does amount in value to all particulars which we should have done.

Now, it remains that we should only consider wherein the strength of the
plea of that righteousness does consist; we have considered what that
righteousness is; namely, the active and passive obedience of Christ, made of
infinite value, by a supply of worth from the dignity of the person super-added
thereunto; we should now, I say, have considered wherein the strength of the
plea of that righteousness does consist.

There are but two ways by which persons may be acquitted in judgment, being
charged with any crime: Either by pleading and proving not guilty, or by
pleading and proving full satisfaction made, though there be guilt; either of
these two ways are enough to plead out a full discharge.

As for the first way of plea, Christ manages it not, that is, Christ does not
plead non factum, Christ does acknowledge this and that person did commit such
and such transgression. It is true, this he does not deny; but the strength of
the plea of Christ does consist in the latter, that though the fact be done,
yet Christ by virtue of this righteousness pleads out a satisfaction, and by
virtue of that satisfaction, he pleads out a full discharge for those that are
his members

SERMON VIII.
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc.


YOu have heard from these word: First, an Argument to prevail over the people
of God, to abstain from sinning: My little children, I write these things to
you, that you sin not, in the words before: This is urged as an Argument to
persuade them; namely, We have an Advocate with the Father. We have considered
already the force of this Argument to prevail to this thing required; and we
have considered something concerning the nature of the Argument it self.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. Here we considered what
the Advocateship of Christ is; namely, to plead a sentence for his peoples
discharge according to the rules of justice and equity.

Secondly, whose cause it is that Christ does advocate or plead.

Thirdly, how Christ is qualified and gifted unto this office of Advocateship:

He is first Christ that is called of God, and furnished by the Lord unto it.

Secondly, he is Jesus Christ, an effectual, and prevailing Advocate, an
Advocate that saves every client harmless, whose cause he does plead. Jesus
is as much as a Savior of his people from their sins.

We have considered thirdly, further, that Christ is qualified with
righteousness; and herein also the strength of the plea of Christ, or the
Argument of his plea: He pleads discharge from sin by virtue of his own
righteousness. Now, because this discharge does depend upon this
righteousness of his: We have proposed to your consideration what this
righteousness is, that has such strength of plea, as to obtain discharge from
sin to the members of Christ after they have committed sin; we have proposed
it first negatively, secondly affirmatively. The righteousness that obtains
discharge from sin, is no righteousness of our own, nothing we do has
prevalency in the Court of Heaven with God for our discharg^. It is not our
tears, our prayers, or our fasting^ that do prevail with God, but the
righteousness of Christ only; by the way a word o^ two before I go on: Let
none think that the denying efficacy unto our performances for the procuring of
our discharge from sin, does wholly take away or derogate, or eclypse these
performances, which are the things God himself calls for at our hands. I am
not ignorant, what an aspersion is rather by men collected, then what can be
justly raised out of what I have delivered; as if there should be a slighting
and a derogating from the performances that are the business of a Christians
conversation; as if denying efficacy to prevail for discharge, should be the
overthrowing of these performances in Gods people. You know what is said of
fire, It is a good servant, but a bad master, useful in the harth, dangerous
i^ the top of a house: I say, the like of all performances whatsoever; keep
them within their due bounds they are for excellent uses, and for excellent
purposes; Let them break out of their bounds, and they are dangerous: Rivers
are useful, but when they overflow their banks they drown all, they are good
creatures within the banks, and water is useful and necessary for many
purposes, but nothing more dangerous and destructive when it rieseth too high.
Exact performances once into the Throne of Christ, give performances the
peculiar privileges of Christ; and they deny Christ, keep them in
subordination to Christ, they are useful in their kind: Pr^yer, and fasting,
and circumspect walking, and holiness of conversation, so far as they are
kept within these bounds; namely, the glorifying of God, the manifestation of
thankfulness, and our due obedience to divine Majesty, doing good to others,
and as they are looked upon as the Ordinances of God in the performances of
which, the Lord will be graciously pleased to meet with his people, and in them
make good to them, things that are freely given by him before in Christ, so
far they are exceeding useful: As for instance, God calls forth unto prayer,
he calls forth unto fasting, what is the encouragement of men to perform these
services, not a prevalency that these services themselves have with God, but
because that he has promised, that when his people call, he will answer: So
for the promise sake, we are encouraged in the expectation that the Lord will
be as good as his word, when we meet with him where he calls us forth to meet
with him, so far we are encouraged: These things will I do, says the Lord,
yet for all this, I will be inquired of by the house of Israel. Observe it
well, and in it you shall see the usefulness in seeking God in any way that
the Lord will be sought in.

First, the Lord says, These things will I do; the Lord has bound himself, he
cannot alter it, the word is gone out of his mouth, the thing shall come to
pass, when it is once gone out of his mouth, he will make that good for his
own sake, and I will be sought unto by the house of Israel: I will do it, you
shall seek me; and when you seek me, I will make it good. So when we come to
the Ordinances, we look to what God has promised, and upon what God has
engaged himself to make good to us: And when we are upon the Ordinances, our
eye is, or ought to be, upon the promises, not upon our performances, and the
Ordinances, as if these our qualifications, and doing this or that were the
procurers of that we desire, but the procurer of that, is that which moved the
Lord to make a promise.

Secondly, as our righteousness has not plea in it to prevail of it self
for discharge of sin after commission, so neither has faith it self any
prevalency for the discharge of sin. I say, the plea of says it self, has no
efficacy and strength in it to get discharge from sin. Faith improperly is
called the righteousness of God. Look into the 10. of the Romans, the Apostle
expresses himselft us: The righteousness of faith speaks on this wise. etc.
Here by the righteousness of faith there cannot be meant the righteousness of
the act of believing, but the righteousness of Christ believed on.

I came to this assertion, that faith has not such prevalency of plea to
discharge from sin; I say not a prevalency of plea, as to obtain the discharge
from sin; Nay, says has not this prevalency, so much as to be an instrument
to unite a soul unto Christ in its first union. I shall desire, beloved, in
this case, yet once more to be marked and heeded, both attentively and
spiritually, and ingenuously, and heartily. The assertion I delivered was this,
and the reason why I deliver it again, I will tell you by and by. There is, I
say, not such a thing as an uniting and cementing, nor knitting power in faith,
as that faith does, or should become the instrument to unite a soul in its
first union unto Christ: For, before such believing, a soul is united unto
Christ, and a soul must be united unto Christ before it does, or can believe: I
said this of elect persons still, and so carried it along to the end of the
discourse: That an elect person is united unto Christ before he can believe on
Christ. Something I said before for the clearing up of this truth, that a soul
must be united unto Christ by Christ's own power, before can there be believing
on him. But, beloved, whereas we had thought the truth had been cleared up
sufficiently, I have found it otherwise; I find that many stick and stumble at
this assertion, there must be believing, fa^ some, before there can be union
with Christ and it is believing it self that makes up the fir^^ union with him.

Since the last time I spoke unto you, I have received, and I suppose, from an
ingenuous spirit, for under such a style it comes, an objection against this
assertion, and weighing the objection, I sinde it of weight enough to require
an answer. Besides, I find that diverse other persons, exceedingly stick and
stumble at it; and therefore I shall desire to clear up this one thing, both by
answering such objections that may be made against it, as also by letting you
see what dangers necessarily follow upon the contrary. I shall, and do commend
the candidnesse and ingenuity of those that seek to be informed in things they
not yet so clearly understand, while they do it with a spirit, rather seeking
satisfaction, then to maintain contention.

Object. The objection proposed is briefly this: Our Savior very frequently in
the Scripture holds forth believing, or faith, under the notion of coming unto
him. The inference i^ this, coming does imply, or suppose a distance between
the person and Christ, till there be coming. The effect seems to be, that he
that comes to another is at distance from him till he be come. The upshot or
conclusion is this: If believing be a coming to Christ then those persons that
do thus come by believing, before their believing are at distance from Christ;
and if at distance from Christ, then there can be no union between Christ and
them till their coming draws them, and makes them nearer, and so their coming
does unite them. The ground of this objection is taken out of some portions of
Scripture, diverse are objected for it, and one seems to have some strength with
it, and that is in John, 5. chap. and the 40. verse^ You will not come to me
that you might have life* Whence it is inferred, that there is no life till
there be coming, and this coming is believing, and so consequently there can be
no union till there be this believing. The Argument indeed is laid as strong as
may be, and peradventure, may seem to have an undeniable strength in it. Now, I
shall desire and endeavor to answer this objection as heartily as it was made,
and it may be, other objections that may be made like unto this shall be
answered in the answer of this.

And, that you may better understand the answer unto it, and the truth cleared,
I shall answer two ways, and it shall be,

1. In respect of the matter of the Argument.

2. In respect of the proof of it.

First, in respect of the matter of the Argument; The matter of it is this:
before coming there must be a distance, and coming is believing, and therefore
before believing, there must be necessarily a distance, and so consequently
there must be no union.

Answ. For answer to this, beloved, we are to take into consideration: First,
what is meant by distance, and then what by coming. If by distance in this
place be meant disunion, as it seems it is, (because the thing urged in the
objection, is that there is not a union) then we shall proceed on accordingly.

First, for this word coming; you know full well, that coming is but an
Allegorical expression; and you must know, that all coming will not
necessarily infer a distance before coming: Mark the expression in the 7.
chapter to the Hebrews, He is able to save to the utmost, all them that come to
God by him; here is mention made of coming to God, and of Christ ability to
save them that come. Now, consider this with your selves: Suppose a Believer
has been a Believer many years together, and so also as long united unto
Christ, Whether or no does not such a Believer still come to God by Jesus
Christ? Certainly, Believers, after they are Believers, do frequently come unto
God. Now, does coming import a distance before there be a coming? then there is
a distance, even a disunion (for such a distance we are speaking of,) between
Christ and Believers themselves, as often as ever they do come. Observe that in
the 17. chapter of John, where Christ speaks to the Father himself. And now,
Father, I come to thee; Here Christ comes to the Father. I ask this question,
Was Christ at a distance, or was Christ dis-united from the Father before he
did come to the Father? For he says, now I come to thee; it seems, before this
coming, Christ was dis-united, if the Argument be good, that where is coming,
there is a distance, and this coming makes up union that was not before. It
seems by this, there was no union, but a distance between Christ himself and
his Father till now at this very time that he does come: But Christ himself, in
that very same place, testifies the contrary, saying, Thou Father art in me,
and I in thee. In a word, coming, it seems, must import believing: Suppose it
be so, must there be distance, or disunion always before such a coming? then
consider this, that Believers, even to the end of their days, have occasion
ever and anon to renew their acts of believing, that is, to renew their act of
coming to Christ: For, still take this along with you, that coming and
believing are all one, for so faith the Objector. Well, is coming and believing
all one? then Believers have cause every day, and every hour, to believe a
fresh, that is, to renew acts of believing and is there distance of disunion,
before there be such coming? then it must follow, there must be union and
disunion, and union again, and disunion again, and this as frequent at there
is the renewing of the acts of faith.

Object. But some will say, peradventure the first act of coming to Christ, or
the first act of believing, does import disunion; but all after acts of
believing do not import disunion.

Answ. To this I answer: Mark where the strength of the Argument lies, and you
shall plainly see, there is the very same reason for after believing, as there
is for the first act of believing: The first act of believing is coming, and is
not two, three, or four acts of believing coming too? What coming is there more
in one act of believing then in other acts of believing? If this be a general
rule, that believing is a coming, and coming argues a distance, and distance
must necessarily be before coming, hence it must follow in brief, that it is no
solid Argument, persons are dis-united, or not united unto Christ before the
act of believing, because believing is a coming unto him: For, you say and
grant, that there may be, and often is, a coming unto Christ by faith, and yet
there may be union before such coming.

But now, to come to the proofs, to the texts of Scripture that are brought in
for the confirmation of it: You will not come to me, that you might have life.
The strength of the Argument it seems, lies in this; there is no life till
there be coming, and coming is for life it self; there fore there is no union,
till there be coming by way of believing.

For answer to this, and so to clear up the meaning of the Holy Ghost: In this
text of Scripture, we are, first, to consider, what our Savior means by coming
in this place; You will not come to me: And secondly, we shall consider, what
this life is that Christ speaks of which they should have in coming to him.

And to begin with the first, what that coming is our Savior speaks of in in
this place; You will not come to me, that you might have life. I will not
insist upon this, that Christ did speak to the opposers, men that did contest
with him, and so that he does speak to persons with reference and relation unto
others: For, I verily believe, though our Savior speaks this to the Pharisces,
who certainly never should come to (...) Christ, nor have life by Christ; yet
his intent was to speak to them to whom the life of Christ did belong, and who
should come to him. Let us therefore I say, consider what he means by coming in
this place. In John 6. verse. 44. there you shall have our savior plainly
expounding unto you, what he does mean by coming unto him: No man, says he
there, comes unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. Mark the
expression well, and therein you shall perceive what Christ means by first
coming unto him: For, in that place, You will not come to me that you might
have life, Christ speaks of first coming, and not of after coming: No wan
comes unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. In which words
you may perceive the act of first coming to Christ, is rather by, and from the
Father, then by any activity in the person that comes: For, coming there, is
plainly attributed unto a drawing act of the Father. So that the first coming
to Christ, is just like the coming of a froward child to meet the mother; the
child has taken a stomach, and is sullen and dogged, the child will not
stir; if the child be carried, it strives and strugles, wherefore the Father
of this child is fain to take up this child, and by a kind of force to carry
it with an overmastering strength where meat is. The child comes to his meat,
but how? not by any act of the child, as if he did come of himself, but by the
power and over-mastering of him that brings the child: A coach we say comes to
town; when it is but drawn to town, and yet it is said to come. The Coach is
wholly passive, the child is passive in coming to meat; and so every elect
person at his first coming to Christ; the coming of this elect person to Christ
is a passive coming: And the coming of this person is nothing else but the
Fathers over-mastering and drawing of this person elected unto Christ. In the
31. of Jeremiah, the Lord speaking there of the conversion of Ephraim, Thou
have chastised me, says Ephraim, and I was chastised as a bullock unacquainted
to the yoke; convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Ephraim here
appropriates the act of his conversion, not to any coming of his own, but only
to the Lord himself, acknowledging, that the work of bringing unto Christ is
the work of Gods own drawing; nay, he shows, that he himself was so far from
coming, that he did confess, that when God took him first in hand, to bring
him to Christ, he was as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. It is true, in a
common speech the bullock is said to come unto the yoke, even a bullock
unaccustomed, but how? by mere force he is brought to it, and not that he is
brought willingly to it. Beloved, you must either establish the rotten
Principle of Free Will, that is, a pervious principle of a man's own spirit to
come to Christ, or you must confess that persons at their first coming unto
Christ, are merely passive. It is a known principle: we are first acted, or
actuated, before we do, or can act; there is not only a weakness simply before
calling, but there is a deadness, and therefore there cannot be coming; and if
there be, it is merely passive, and the whole business must be the Fathers own
drawing. In the 110. Psalm, and about the 3. verse, the Lord speaks to Christ
thus: Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power. There is no
willingness till the overruling and overcoming power of Christ comes in to
make and frame a willingness even contrary to the natural will.

The sum then briefly is this, and so to apply it to the Text objected, You
will not come to me, that you might have life, that is, it has not pleased the
Father to draw you unto me, that you might have life. I cannot conceive how
there can be any other sense given to the Text, but that it is the Fathers sole
and only power, and the overcoming act of his, to bring to Christ, that there
may be life. Now, what will be the sense of the words? it will be only his,
there is no principle of life from Christ, ^ill the Father by his overruling
and over^nastering power, do bring unruly and cross spirits unto Christ.

Object. But it may be some will say, though this coming to Christ be the act
of the Fathers drawing, yet there is an act of believing when the Father does
draw.

Answ. I answer, it is not possible there should be an act of our believing
while the Father is first drawing; mark what believing is in sum and
substance, it is but a yielding to ^he mind of the Lord revealed; I say, the
yielding of man's spirits to the mind or God; while persons are contradicting
persons, they are not believing persons in respect of those things that they do
contradict: To believe, and to contradict the same thing, is a contradiction:
For, to believe, is to sit down satisfied with the thing that is related and
reported; as long therefore, as persons are contradicting persons; as long as
their spirits are cross spirits, as long as they do kick against that which
God does propose unto them, so long do they not believe. Now, while the Father
is drawing, that very drawing is an argument of resisting, and a kind of
kicking against that which the Father does aim at: For, if there were yielding;
if there were a submitting; if there were a willing coming on to the truth
reveald, what need there any drawing? men do not draw those things that do come
of themselves, And therefore I say, during the Fathers first act of drawing,
the Father laying violent hold, as it were, upon the person, there is no act of
believing. The truth is this, the Father gives his elect to Christ his Son:
Thi^e they were, says Christ, in the 17. of John, and thou gave them me; and
the Father that gave the elect unto Christ, he gives unto Christ also power,
both in heaven and in earth: so says Christ in the 28. of Matthew, and in the
latter end, All power, says he, both in heaven and earth, is given me: Go
teach all nations, as much as to say, I give you Apostles, and Ministers, that
follow you, a commission from my self, a commission to preach, and in preaching
to convert; and how so? All power in heaven and earth is mine. So that,
beloved, the Lord takes his elect as they are selfwilled, and as they are
untamed, he brings them as they are self-willed and untamed to his Son, and by
virtue of all power that is given to that Son, when they are brought unto him,
he himself does break, tame, and bring them to his own bent: The Father, says
Christ, judges no man but has committed all judgment to the Son. Take notice
of it, that now, as Christ is ordained the Mediator of the covenant, the Father
does nothing toward, or concerning his elect people, but what he does by his
Son, it is the Son does all; so that all that the Father does, is to deliver up
elect persons, such as they are in blood, enemies, and rebellious, he delivers
them up to his Son: and the framing of their spirits to his own bent, is the
sole work of Christ himself; Christ is become by the donation of the Father,
the life and the soul of every elect person. Now, the Philosophers do observe
of the natural soul, that it is the framer of its own body, and the maker of
its own organs, that so they may be fitted for it to act its own will: so may I
say, is it with Christ, Christ has the framing and the disposing of the whole
man, to bring every thing in this man to his own bent: The Father bringing the
creature, as he is a stubborn and stiff-necked creature, so delivers him up to
his Son; so that, I say, there is not a pevious foregoing act wrought by the
Father without Christ; I say, no previous act of believing wrought by the
Father, or by the Spirit, without Christ, by which a person comes, and does
close with Christ, but the Father does give that person without any faith at
all, or any qualifications whatsoever, to his Son; and his Son, Christ himself,
he frames and creates that very faith in persons to come to him; and therefore
in the 42. of Isai. v. 6. you shall plainly see, there is not an opening of
blind eyes, a giving of believing eyes, to close with Christ before Christ
himself be given, and given as a covenant to persons: So says the Text, I will
give thee for a covenant; Here you see Christ passed to persons, not with a
supposition, that when persons do believe he shall be theirs, and they his,
but, I will give thee for a covenant to open the blind eyes; Here is not the
eyes opened before Christ comes, but Christ comes when the ey^ are blind, and
when he comes, he opens the eyes that are blind.

But to go further; Let us suppose, that coming into this place, is spoken of
believing: Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life; it cannot follow,
that although there be no life till believing, therefore there can be no union
till believing: I say, if it possibly might be imagined, that there may not be
life from Christ, till believing, yet it follows not, that there must be
believing before there is union. Nay, beloved, there is nothing cleerer in all
the world then this principle; namely, Suppose there cannot be life before
there be believing, yet there must be union before there can be life fetched
from Christ; I say, there must be union before believing can fetch life from
Christ: For, suppose that the fruit upon a branch should have such a faculty to
draw life into the branch from the root; though this would be a strange
conceit, that the fruit growing upon a tree, should have a faculty to draw life
from the root to the branch, whereas the root communicates life to the branch,
and the branch by virtue of that life communicated, brings forth fruit. But
yet, suppose the fruit should draw life into the branch from the root, that is,
suppose that faith which is a fruit, growing upon a member of Christ, that is a
Believer, and a branch of that body; suppose that faith this fruit should have
such a faculty to draw life from Christ the root into the branch, yet it is
impossible that faith should draw life into the branch, till the branch be
united unto the stock* For, beloved, that is Christ's comparison: I am the Vine,
ye are the branches; Now, take this comparison; suppose a branch growing upon a
wild Olive, is cut off from the wild Olive, and for the present it is not
united to the good Olive tree; Now, can a wild Olive, or suppose it to be a
good Olive upon this branch of the wild tree, can this fruit upon the branch
draw life from the root of the good Olive tree, while it is separated and laid
aside, and is not united to the good Olive, from which root it must draw life?
It is known to all men, that communion is the fruit of union; there is no
participation nor communion of any thing that is Christ's, but as it does flow
from union with Christ; so that either you must say, that faith which you speak
of, is not of Christ the root, but has some other root and fountain from
whence it has its being and essence; or else you must confess, if Christ be
the root, then it must come from Christ by virtue of union of a Believer to
Christ first.

Finally, suppose it should be, that coming is believing; suppose that this
life spoken of here, is not in persons till they do believe: What is meant by
life here? Beloved, I beseech you consider, the Apostle tells us, our life is
hid with Christ in God; and Christ is the life of the world, that is, of the
elect. It seems then that the life of every elect person has a being in
Christ, before he does believe; believing therefore does not produce a new life
that was not before, only it manifests that life which was before; and it makes
that life which was before, an active life; or is an instrument by which that
life that is hid in Christ, does now after believing, become an active and
appearing life in this person. So that all that can be made of this, is but
this; till believing, there is no activenesse of the life of Christ in the
person that is elected, his life is in Christ, and was in Christ, and reserved
in Christ, till the time of believing for him; and then does he the elect
person, become active in life, when Christ does give him to believe actually.

But to say that this believing should give the first being of that life that
should be in persons, is to say, there is not the life of the elect persons in
Christ before they do believe.

In a word, beloved, I shall seriously desire you, that with candidness and
ingenuity of spirit, you would take into your consideration, those dangerous
consequences that must of necessity follow, if you will receive this for a
Principle, that there is no justification and union at all belonging unto elect
persons, till they do actually believe in Christ,; I say, If this be
maintained, dangerous consequences must needs follow upon it; if persons are
not united unto Christ, and do not partake of justification before they do
believe, but that believing is the instrument by which they are first united,
then mark what will follow upon it.

First this, that in some respect there will be a bringing to life again the
covenant of works. How will that be, will you say? I beseech you consider it
well; The Apostle will tell you so as well as I: The Lord told Adam at first,
Do this and live; If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, says
Christ to the rich man: And the Apostle in the 10. Chap. to the Romans, about
the 4. and 5. verses, tells us of the covenant of Works clearly: Moses, says
he, describing the righteousness of the Law, says thus: He that does these
things, shall even live in them; mark here the covenant of Works, out of these
expressions, is this; namely, for persons to do, that they may live: The
covenant of Grace runs upon contrary terms; men must first live, that they may
do: God in his covenant of Grace, gives life first, and from life comes doing.
In the covenant of Works, there must be first doing for life.

Object. But you will say, how does this follow out of this conceit, that men
must believe, before they shall live in Christ.

Answ. I answer, thus; you must of necessity press upon your selves these
terms, or such like, I must do, that I may have life in Christ, I must believe,
there is no life till I do believe; now, if there must be living first, then
there is doing before living.

Object. But it may be you will say, Faith is opposed to Works and doing.

Ans. I answer, when it is opposed to Works, it be understood objectively, that
is, it is understood of Christ believed on, and not of the act it self of
believing; for it is certain, beloved, our act of believing, is as much our
doing, as our acts of love, or our acts of charity, even as much our doing as
any of these. So that here must first be doing before life be obtained; if
persons must first believe before they have union with Christ.

Secondly, if there must be our act of believing before there be participating
in Christ, then mark what will follow; those sins which were once laid upon
Christ, and taken away from the elect; for they could not be laid upon him,
unless they were taken from them, they are, it seems, returned back again,
upon this Believer, whereas they were charged upon Christ, whereas Christ once
paid the full price, whereas upon the payment of this price, there was
acknowledged full satisfaction; so that those sins were once blotted out; I
say, if there must be believing before there be union with, or interest in
Christ, it must necessarily follow, that till such believing, the person of
that elect, does bear his own transgression, and is chargeable for his own
transgressions, and his transgressions are imputed unto him. But how can it
stand with the glory of the Redemption of Christ, that Christ should have all
iniquity laid upon himself, carring all iniquity like the Escape Goat into the
Land of forgetfulness, and yet till the time of that elect, persons believing
these sins are returned from the Land of forgetfulness whither they were once
carried, and they are afresh charged upon this person agine. Did Christ bear
them away? and did Christ return them back again? Where did you ever find,
that sin once taken away, and carried away by Christ from the person offending,
did return back again upon the person from whom Christ took it way?

Thirdly, suppose this, that men have no interest in Christ till actually they
do believe in him, then it must follow, that these persons, till they are
actually believers, are under the hatred of God: For, if they bear their own
transgressions themselves, then God being a jealous God, his holy and pure
nature everlastingly hating iniquity, and also the person upon whom iniquity is
charged; there must be a hatred of God upon these persons till they do believe;
and to conceive that God does hate these persons, is to conceive that God may
love and hate the same person, whereas he says, in the 19. Chap. to the
Romans, concerning Jacob, that being yet unborn, Jacob have I loved; here you
see love is communicated to Jacob, being yet unborn. Now mark, Jacob when he
was not yet born, was not an actual believer, till after times, Jacob was not
come to believe. Well, had Jacob no interest in Christ and the love of God till
such time as he did believe? Yea, be had so says the Text. I, but yet Jacob
must be hated till he does believe, because Jacob, till he does believe, must
bear his own transgressions; so that here must be at the ^ame time, upon the
same person, both the love and hatred of God, and how can these contraries
stand together?

Yet again; Suppose persons have no interest in Christ until they d^e actually
believe, it must follow from thence necessarily, that there is a believing in
such persons before they have union with Christ, and then you must make some
other root from whence this believing of persons must spring; as for Christ, it
has nothing to do with him, for he has nothing in regard of communicating his
Grace and Spirit to do with them; but they are Beuevers, and their believing is
that which knits the knot between Christ and them; Whence comes this believing?
where is the root of it? Is Christ the root? then have they first union with
Christ, that they may receive it from him; then must they first be united unto
Christ, and made one with him, and live in him, and by virtue of union with
him, receive this faith as a fruit of that union. If it proceed from some other
root, I beseech you consider how it can be, and how can this be avoided, but
that this conceit must needs be exceeding derogatory to Christ, to make another
foundation besides Christ, whereas in Heb. 12. it is expressly said there,
Christ is the author as well as the finisher of faith? Beloved, upon these
confiderations, for my own part, I have received this principle that I have
delivered unto you, and merely the vindication of the glorious privileges
which are proper and peculiar unto Christ alone, is the occasion that I do
refer the being of faith it self unto Christ, and to nothing else in the world,
and that I may uphold these particular and glorious prerogatives that are
proper to Christ, that he may not be robbed of any of them. To this end, I
deliver it to you, that elect persons have a participation and share in Christ
himself, even before they do believe, and let none conceive that this takes
away or diminishes from the prerogative of believing neither. For there are
glorious things done by faith unto believers, God has honored it above all
mere creaturs in the world; he has made it the conduit pipe for the conveyance
of all that peace and comfort; nay, of all that strength which believers have
all their lives; no faith, no comfort; no faith, no peace of conscience; no
faith, no pleasure to walk with God: through faith Christ conveys himself in
speaking peace to the foul, in bidding the soul be of good cheer; the soul lies
in darkness, while it lies in unbelief. But still that which is proper and
peculiar to Christ alone, is not to be ascribed unto believing. I should now
proceed (having as well as I can, taken away the rubs) to that which I purpose
to follow. But the time is past.

SERMON IX
1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins etc.


We have considered already the Office of Christ here spoken of; his
Advocateship: We have considered the cause he manages, and also the persons
whose cause it is that he does manage. The cause he manageth, is in behalf of
the sins of his people, and the persons are not present Believers, but all
elected persons, though yet unbelievers: We further considered, the indowments
and qualifications of Christ unto this Office.

First, he is Christ that is called of God unto it, and furnished by God for it.

Secondly, he is Jesus, he takes no cause in hand, but he saves his client.

Thirdly, he is Christ Jesus the Righteous, the efficacy of the plea of Christ
lies in this righteousness of his, that being the soul hinge upon which the
door turns. In the large opening of this righteousness unto you, I spoke
first, negatively. The plea that prevails for the discharge of ^in, is not our
works; no, not our faith; but it is the righteousness of Christ himself that
onlyserves to make up the strength of this plea: Secondly, affirmatively; There
is,

First, an active righteousness of Christ; For, by the obedience of one man,
many shall be made righteous, Romans 5.19.

Secondly, the passive righteousness of Christ: The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. But it is the divine righteousness,
or dignity of the divine Godhead that adds an efficacy and life, and virtue,
making the active and passive righteousness of Christ a complete
righteousness, that we might be complete in him; and we gave a touch to you,
wherein the efficacy of the plea of this righteousness stands. The efficacy of
it stands in the satisfaction that righteousness has made to the justice of
God. In judgment there are but two ways to be acquitted, either just proof,
that the person upon trial is not guilty, or being guilty, the Law is already
satisfied. The strength of the plea of the righteousness of Christ, insists
not upon the first way, he^ grants the persons whose cause he pleads, had for
matter of fact, done the thing that is charged; but the strength of his plea
is, that the Law on their behalf is satisfied already. This latter plea being
good, has the like force for acquittance and discharge as the former has; So
that the sentence of judgment can no more pass upon the person for whom the
Law is satisfied, then it can upon persons that never transgressed the Law.

Now it remains to be considered by way of objection out of the premises, how
this can be, that the justice of God should be satisfied, seeing the
satisfaction of justice is the bringing of a recompense to answer in proportion
for the offense that is committed. The ground of the objection is this, all
that Christ, as man, brings unto God, comes short to make a full recompense. I
told you before, that the divine righteousness is that that makes the
righteousness complete, and that a mere humane righteousness is not able to
effect, till it be infinite, or be made infinite by the divine righteousness.
Now, when Christ brings a recompense to the Father for the transgressions of
men, that that he brings to him by way of recompense, should not be that which
was his own before. Now, what ever the divine righteousness is, that i^ Gods
own, the active and passive obedience of Christ's human nature, that is brought
to him, but the divine righteousness is not brought. You will say, this is just
as one man owes another an hundred pounds, and he sueth this man for it; now,
the debtor, he cannot raise above ten pounds of this money: but the creditor
must make it up out of his own purse. So then here is the ground of the
objection, and the truth is, this matter contains in it, the depth of the
mystery of the Gospel, that justice should be satisfied by bringing a
recompense for transgression, and yet the recompense, as it is brought, is not
so much as will answer the injury that is done of it self. It is true, there is
enough in the divine Righteousness to make the satisfaction for the injury
done; But how is this divine Righteousness brought?

It is most certainly true, therefore, even where there is satisfaction of
justice in this case, there is also mercy too: For, although God be just to
forgive sin, yet observe the phrase well, you shall find, that where the
Apostle speaks of justice in this act of forgiveness of sinz, he speaks of
mercy too: You know, to forgive a thing is an act of grace and mercy; yet, even
while there is forgivenes there is manifested the act of justice, Justice it
self takes its course, even while there is forgiveness. But this, you will say,
does not resolve the question: Where can there be a satisfaction of justice,
seeing there is not brought by way of recompense, that which might be
proportionable to the injury done?

Answ. 1. First of all, justice is satisfied in the strictest sense, when there
is such a plenary and equivalent recompense given, that the person injured
thereby, is in as good estate every way, as he was before the injury done: When
a man is trespassed against, and does sue the man for this trespass, and when
the man does make up, and bring in as much recompense as the injury comes to;
so that the party trespassed is worth as much as he was before, here is a
plenary satisfaction of justice. Now comes in the objection, and says, that
the justice of God cannot be said to be so satisfied, because the active and
passive obedience of Christ, as humane, bring not in so much to God as the
injury comes to, and what is from the Godhead, is Gods own before.

Secondly, therefore some say, that there is a satisfying justice properly,
though there be not a full recompense, as in every point to answer the injury
done; I will but give you a familiar illustration of it, that you may not say,
it is not unknown, and an unheard of thing, that justice is satisfied, although
no plenary recompense in the former sense for satisfaction be brought. Suppose
one man murder another, an ordinary case; now, for a plenary recompense to the
injury done, he that is slain must be in statu quo prius, that is, he that is
slain must be made alive again; and till that person slain be restored to life,
here is not a complete recompense made. But how is it possible, that any man
that has committed murder, should make this full and plenary recompense to
the person that is injured? He cannot restore life to him again; and yet for
all this, although he cannot bring in a full recompense in this way, this man
may properly satisfy justice: For, if life answer for life, if the murderer
be executed, the Law and Justice may truly be said to be satisfied. Here then
they say, that there may be satisfaction of justice, and yet not the fulness of
recompense in the strictest sense brought in. Justice, I say, is satisfied in
this respect, because here is as much brought in by way of recompense, as is
possible to be had. You know, beloved, you have a Proverb, Where there is
nothing to be had, the King must lose his right: when a man pays all that ever
he has, he can pay no more, he does satisfy justice. In this sense justice is
said to be satisfied, when the Law of justice is satisfied; and so the
satisfying of justice does not necessarily imply the fullness of recompense in
the strictest sense, according to the injury done. How comes it to pass, when
a murderer is executed, that upon this execution of the murderer only, the
Law does esteem this tobe a recompense, and justice to be satisfied, though it
be not a plenary recompense answering the injury that is done; but only as it
answers to the Law, that is the rule of justice, so it is satisfaction: Even
so, say they, the justice of God is truly satisfied, when the will and pleasure
of God is fulfilled, whether or no there be a bringing in a full and plenary
recompense. If the will and pleasure of God be satisfied, concerning
transgression, that satisfaction of the will of God, is the satisfaction of the
justice of God. Now, what is the will of God? It is this, that in the day that
man sins, man must die; either he must do it in person, or he must do it by
deputation, for among men the satisfaction of the Law is made, either in the
man's own person that is the debtor, or his surety that will pay the debt for
him. The Law in some cases, looks more upon the thing that is brought in to
answer to it, than it does upon the person that does bring the thing in. The
justice of God looks upon the fulfilling of his will, although it be not by the
same person that sinned; this alters not the nature of (...) thing, whether I
my self pay the debt, or an^ there for me pay my debt, the payment is sat^
factory, so in that the will of God has (...) utmost bounds for the satisfying
of justi^ whereas transgression must be recompense with death. Now, Christ the
surety of (...) people, going under the punishment, and (...) filling the
punishment, the Law is satisfied, be cause every tittle of the Law is
fulfilled, an^ there is nothing in the Law remains to (...) answered.

But yet, thirdly, I say, further, that the satisfaction of Christ is complete,
even in the strictest sense, although it be granted that the bare sufferings
and righteousness of the humane nature cannot effect it without the divine
nature, and the righteousness thereof and whereas it is urged, that the
righteousness of the divine nature is Gods own already, it is granted, and that
both because it is essential unto God, and incommunicable unto the creature;
therefore, and also for the reasons alleged before in the objection, it cannot
be formally, either the whole, or any part of our righteousness; yet
notwithstanding the divine nature, and so the divine righteousness does so by
the Hypostaticall Union fit and furnish Christ to be an All-sufficient Savior,
and satisfier, that thereby the person of Christ is so glorious, that his
active and passive obedience is thereby made of infinite worth and ^alue, that
so he might give satisfaction for ^s, complete and perfect; and that in the
strictest sense, making a full reparation and restoration of all things in the
behalf of the elect, for whom he undertakes, and brings upon them salvation to
the uttermost.

In brief, beloved, and so to conclude this business, though there may be some
hint given for your better understanding, by way of illustration, how justice
may be satisfied yet the truth is, the fullest and most satisfying resolution
wherewith persons ought sit down without further dispute, is not by
argumentation, but by divine faith. Suppose we could not sound the bottom of
this Principle, that Gods justice should be satisfied, yet we may sit down as
fully resolved that it is satisfied, though we know not how it should be so, in
that the Lord reveals to us he is satisfied, whose word must be more to us
then all the evidences and demonstrations in the world can be by way of
Argument, that here Christ is said to be the propitiation for our sins, that
God himself does acknowledge elsewhere, that he is satisfied. What matter is
it to me how he is satisfied; I mean, in respect of resolving me by way of
Argument, how he should be satisfied, his own^ Word speaking it, and resolving
it to us, is that with which we should sit down withal, without any further
dispute. If therefore all this while you cannot know how he is satisfied, your
believing upon the testimony of God^ Word that it is so, may be as full a
satifaction to you; yea may be, a more full resolution to your spirits, then
all the arguments and demonstrations in the world can be.

And so I come in brief, to the last clause of the Text; namely, the issue of
this Advocateship of Christ, in the behalf of his people when they sin. The
issue is this, He is the propitiation for our sins; I say, the words contain
in them the upshot, or the conclusion of the pleading of Christ, telling us
what this pleading of Christ comes to at the last; it comes to this, that by
this pleading of his, Christ becomes the propitiation for our sins. The main
thing to be considered here, that we may understand aright our portion in this
Grace, is to know what this propitiation means, or what it is for Christ to
be a propitiation. Beloved, there is abundance of marrow and fatness in this
very word, and I doubt much of it is lost, in respect of sense and comfort, for
lack of understanding the extent of the word: That you may the better therefore
dive into the mystery of this Propitiation, you must understand, that the word
in the original (...), is of the same original and signification with the
word the Septuagint translation does use, when they do interpret the Hebrew
word that is rendered by Mercy-seat, for Mercy-seat is here Propitiation, he is
our Propitiation, that is, he is our Mercy-seat. And if you would know in
Scripture what it is for Christ to be our Mercy-seat, look into the 16. Chapter
of Leviticus, and the 14. and 15. verses, you shall there find the main end,
for which this was erected by the Lord; For of all those Ordinances that the
Lord did establish among the Jews this Mercy-seat was the uppermost. Now, if
you mark in the 16. Chapter of Leviticus, you shall find three things
especially appropriated unto the Mercy-seat.

The first is the sweet incense that none ought to make upon pain of death, but
Aaron alone, that incense must burn upon the Golden Altar every morning before
the Mercy-seat.

Secondly, you shall find that the most notable of all the Rites and Types of
the Jews, was to be prepared before the Mercy-seat, the Type of the Escape Goat
with the Live Geat, as you may find it registered there, and handled at large
in that Chapter. The Live Goat must be brought before the Mercy-seat, and Aaron
must lay his hand upon the head of it, and, then the Escape Goat must be sent
into the Wildernesle, and carry the sins of the people into a land of
forgetfulness.

Thirdly, at this Mercy-seat, as it is in Exodus 30. chap. verse. 6. the Lord did
appoint to meet with Moses, and there to speak graciously unto him; and there
God will hear him speak, and God will be heard to speak, and will return his
gracious answer at the Mercy-seat. Well then, to come to the business in hand,
that I may clear it the better; Christ is our Mercy-seat, that is, the incense,
or the sweet savor that smells with acceptance and delight in the nostrils of
the Lord, as I may so speak; I say, that which makes a sweet savor, is the
Mercy-seat. Incense, had it been burned any where else, (but here according to
the appointment and commission of the Lord every morning) the very place it
self, being changed, would have taken away the savor of the Incense before the
Lord, therefore the Mercy-seat is that for which the incense becomes a sweet
savor; as much as to say, all our prayers, and all our duties and services
(notwithstanding our sins, being believers (become as a sweet savor to the
Lord, as they are presented up before the Mercy-seat by Christ; he is the
Propitiation then, that is, it is he by whom our persons and performances
become a sweet savor to the Lord, a sweet incense. Again, the Escape Goat and
the Live Goat to be slain, were to be prepared before the Mercy-seat, as much
as to say, our sins ^re carried away into a land of forgetfulness by virtue of
Christ; as the Escape Goat being presented before the Mercy-seat was made a type
capable to carry away the sins of the people in(...) a Land of forgetfulness;
So that as we are presented unto God, in and through Christ, (...) our sins are
carried by Christ into a land of ^rgetfulnesse.

Lastly, before this Mercy-seat the Lord appeared, and at the Mercy-seat God
will return his gracious answer; as much as to say, in Christ, and through
Christ, the Lord returns ^ll the gracious answers that are returned to ^is
people upon earth; Not a voice of grace, ^ot a voice of peace, not a voice of
comfort is ^o be heard, but at the Mercy-seat: For mark ^t well, you shall
find God has made over all that gracious language of heaven unto his Son
Christ, and only unto his Son Christ there ^ame this voice from heaven when he
was bap^ized: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am ^ell pleased. But upon the
Mount the voice was (...) little more plain; for upon the Mount it ^ith: This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well ^leased, hear him; as much as to say; all
the grace I have to speak to men, I have put it into the mouth of Christ my
Son, and not a voice is to be expected of grace from me, but as (...) comes
out of the mouth of my Son; there is not a word of comfort to be heard, but as
it is spoken from the Mercy-seat; so that putting these three things together,
in respect of the sacrifice of the Escape Goat (the Text in Leviticus telling us
of an atonement that is made by the presenting of this sacrifice before the
Mercy-seat.) In a word, the sum of all is this:

1. In and through Christ our Advocate, we become a sweet favor to the Lord.

2. There is an atonement made with the Lord for us, our sins being carried
into a land of forgetfulness.

3. And in Christ, the Lord does speak all the gracious language of heaven, to
us.

Now, whereas at this Mercy-seat the special thing intimated unto us, is the
atonement that is made. It seems that propitiation has reference in the
signification of it, to atonement, as when a man desires one that is at
variance with him, that he would be propitious, that is to say, he would admit
of a propitiation, or atonement, Now, that you may know what atonement is, and
so propitiation likewise, Look into the 5. of the Romans, and the 9. and 10.
verses, there says the Apostle, If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God, ^y the death of his Son, much more being reconci^ed shall we be saved by
his life. Reconciliation, What is that? Mark what follows, and not only so but
we rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received
atonement: First, you see he makes a Proposition hypothetically, by way of
supposition: If when we were e^emies we were reconciled, much more being
reconciled shall we be saved by his life. And in the next words, the Apostle
proves that there is reconciliation, or rather shows the fruits of it, being
obtained: We rejoice, says he, In what? We rejoice in him by whom we have
received the atonement. What is atonement? Atonement in this place is but the
reconciliation which Christ makes between God and persons; So that the upshot
is, Propitiation indeed, comes at the last, or runs at the last into this
cistern; namely, reconciliation with God; herein lies the efficacy of the plea
of Christ for his people committing sin: Christ is the Mercy-seat, the
Propitiation, the Atonement, or Reconciliation. This is the issue of the plea
of Christ; when Christ does plead for discharge, this pleading produces
reconciliation between God and this person. If we could but dive into the
mystery of reconciliation between God and us, we should then find the
comfort of this Office of Christ to be a propitiation for us. Now, if you will
know what this reconciliation is, which is indeed an interpretation of
propitiation: observe, I pray you, beloved, how the Apostle does illustrate it
in the 2. chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians. and the 13. verse: You that
were sometimes afar off, has he made nigh by the blood of Christ.
Reconciliation is making nigh those persons who were sometimes afar off; and
that you may the better understand this being afar off, look into the 1.
chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, the 21, and 22. verses, the Apostle
there will tell you, in what respect the members of Christ, the elect are said
to be afar off: You who were sometimes alienated, and strangers, and enemies
in your minds by wicked works, has he now reconciled. So then to be afar
off, and of afar off to be made, nigh, is as much as to say, that persons who
were alienated in respect of enmity, in their minds, in regard of wicked
works, these persons, notwithstanding all that enmity, in respect of wicked
works, they are made nigh, they are reconciled. You know well, in respect of
the persons of men, who are elected persons, they are from all eternity in the
purpose of God, made nigh by the virtue of the blood of Christ, that in time
should be shed, which virtue of that blood is effectual in the eyes and
thoughts of God from all eternity, so that although in respect of the nature of
wicked works there be a separating and an alienating nature and quality, yet in
regard of the efficacy of the blood of Christ, being in force with God, the
persons who are elected in the thoughts of God, are nigh to him in purpose,
from eternity. So that alienation and estrangement, in respect of eternity
against God, is not to be understood, as if elect persons were in very deed,
and properly at any time decreed to be separated absolutely from God; no, God
had them in his thoughts, as the objects of his love from eternity, and these
thoughts of being nigh were intended to be executed through that blood that was
continually in his eye: But, says the Apostle, you that were alienated in your
minds through wicked works; that is, you who so far forth as you wrought
wicked works, had that in you, which in its own nature was the cause of
alienation, and could not admit of your being near, and being in the thoughts
of Gods love, till there were reconciliation made: by Christ has he made nigh;
that is, whereas these wicked works were those things that did in their own
nature actually and for the present, make you walk at a distance from God, and
so in respect of wicked works you were afar off, you are now made nigh by the
blood of Christ, that is, Christ has taken away sin, the cause of that
distance between God and you, and also has revealed himself unto you, being
Believers; and in revealing himself to you, he has made known to you the
eternal counsel of God concerning your reconciliation, and that now you are
actually and really in the very bowels of God, and also he does in some measure
subdue and destroy the power of Satan in those wicked works; so that there is
now a neernesse; I say, there is a more neernesse even in conversation with
God, after calling and believing, then there was before calling; and the blood
of Christ is that that make persons who were far off, nigh again to God. And
this is the reconciliation; namely, where as there was a distance before, there
is now a neernesse; and this neernes is by the blood of Christ, as by a
sacrifice of propitiation. That you may the better understand the nature of
reconciliation with God, you must know, that reconciliation properly imports
thus much, that whereas there is variance, ^^^angement, and a controversy
between person and person, a person is then said to be reconciled, when the
breach is made up, and the controversy is ended, and the quarrel is done, and
the persons at variance are become friends again. You know, as long as there is
hitting in the teeth, as long as there is secret grudges, as long as there is
objectings one against another, and prosecuting one another in respect of
injuries done, so long there is not reconciliation; When men are reconciled
they lay down the bucklers, they quarrel no more, they fight no more, but walk
as friends together. And if they should walk as friends in outward semblance,
and yet should bear rancor in their spirits one against another, this were but
an hypocritical reconciliation. In^cconciliation, the very heart it self is
made friends with persons reconciled. All this imports unto us this much,
Christ is become to believers the atonement, one that makes a peace with God,
he is he that ends the controversy, and the quarrel, between God and them;
whereas God was injured, and might have prosecuted the Law with violence upon
us, Christ does bring to pass, that the Lord lays down the buckler, to have
no more to say against a person, but to become friends with him. You know, that
reconciliation is such a thing, as is not only a making friends to day, but a
making friends so, that there may be a continuation of this amity. You cannot
call this reconciliation, when men are brought together, and their
controversies are ended now to day, but upon the same controversy they will
fall out again to morrow, here is not reconciliation; for, in reconciliation,
there must be a burying of all that which was the subject and matter of the
quarrel. So Christ being our reconciliation, he making our peace with God, does
not bring God to be friends with us to day, so as to fall out with us to morrow
again; but to be friends with us for ever. Therefore by the way know, that
every person reconciled unto God by Christ, is not only a person becoming a
friend of God now, but a friend of God for ever: And as Christ does take away
the present anger of God against him to day, so he takes away all quarrels and
controversies for ever: So that a person reconciled shall never have God at
controversy any more with him. Some, it may be, do conceive, Christ does
reconcile God and us in respect of sins that are past; but if I sin anew, say
they, God must have new controversies, and new quarrels. But, beloved, remember
this, he did bear all the iniquity at once upon him; and when he made the
reconciliation with God, he brought in all the trangressions of men, from first
to last, and so ended the quarrel with God, in respect of every transgression,
even for sins future, as well as for those that are past. He dealt so with God,
that he did reconcile him to you in respect of them. So that Christ must either
leave out those sins you think breaks the peace with God in the agreement he
made; or, if he did not leave them out, then that reconciliation does as much
concern those sins, as other transgressions already committed. Now, think
whether of these be true doctrine, either that Christ should leave some sins
out, that are brought now again into controversy, and so God be again at
controversy, and begin to fall out with persons for them; or whether he make
agreement for all, and all comes into reconciliation. Therefore, I say, suppose
two men are at variance, they have a hundred actions one against another; a
friend comes in and agitates to make up the business between them, he brings
in every one of these hundred actions to this agreement, he deals so with
them, that all the controversy between them in respect of these actions shall
die; and so he makes them friends. Now, I ask, when all the trespasses and
actions are brought into the agreement, may these men fall to quarrelling and
suits of Law for any of these particulars brought into the agreement? They
cannot do it, beloved, if Christ brought in all the transgressions of his
people into the agreement, and they were all satisfied for, by him, every one
of them: His blood cleanses from all sin, as says the Apostle: I say, if all
were brought into agreement at once, how comes it to pass, that God should
again fall out, and be at controversy with men for any of these sins that were
in the agreement before in that reconciliation made? Therefore, know for
certain, for your everlasting and eternal consolation, that there is nothing
shall be able to separate you from the love of God in Christ, nothing shall
make a breach between God and you, who are the people of God. Every sin which
in its own nature indeed makes a breach, is taken into the agreement that
Christ makes with the Father; and if there should be such an objection rising
in your hearts when you have committed a sin, now God is at controversy with
me for this. A^k your he arts this question: Was this sin brought into the
agreement of reconciliation, or was it left out? Did God accept of the
reconciliation when this transgression was in the agreement? how can he then
fall out again for this that was in his thoughts when reconciliation was made?
But this may seem to be but discourse only, and therefore take a view of some
passages of Scripture, whereby you shall see as clear as the light, that Gods
reconciliation to men, is one entire and simple act. This reconciliation being
once made, there is no more quarrel and controversy that God should prosecute
these persons reconciled. Look into the 9. Chapter of Daniel, and the 24.
verse, there is a time mentioned of making reconciliation; if you look into the
Prophecy, you shall therein see the effects that do accompany the
reconciliation made. I have heretofore recited other effects unto you, but not
this: Seventy weeks says he, shall be determined upon thy people and holy
City; for what? for the finishing of transgression, for the making an end of
sin, and making reconciliation for iniquity, and bringing in of everlasting
righteousness. Observe it well, when reconciliation is made, then there is an
end of the matter that did breed and feed the controversy and quarrel. When
there is a controversy of God against a person, the controversy must spring
from the sins of that person; but when there is reconciliation made, there is a
finishing of transgression, and a putting an end to sin. Take away the cause
and the effect vanishes of it self; but observe the Text a little more yet to
show the unchangeablenesse of this reconciliation, when reconciliation is made,
there is, says he, in the next word, brought in everlasting righteousness.
Righteousness, as you have heard before, is that that does both beget, and
feed, and preserve peace and reconciliation with God. So then, this fountain of
righteousness must be drawn dry, before the peace that is made by this
fountain can be wasted. How comes it to pass a Lamp goes out, but because the
oil is wast^d that feeds the Lamp: so the righteousness of Christ is the oy^
that feeds the reconciliation made: Either this righteousness must be spent,
or the Lamp of peace cannot go out. But, says the Holy Ghost, there is brought
in upon reconciliation, everlasting righteousness; So that it is clear, when
God reconciles himself to persons, they are reconciled for ever to him.
Consider also that excellent expression in 54. of Isa. in the 9. and 10.
verses: This is to me, says the Lord, as the waters of Noah: For, as I have
sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth; so have I sworn
that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee any more; the mountains shall
depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart
from thee, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. The very express words
show the excellent qualities of that reconciliation that is produced by the
bringing in o^ a better covenant there spoken of. Mark it well, I beseech you,
for there are admirable expressions in it: The thing God proclaims is this,
That he will not be wroth; that he will not fall out any more with his people;
and this thing the Lord confirms by an oath: as I have sworn that the waters of
Noah shall be no more upon the earth: so have I sworn I will not he wroth with
thee, nor rebuke thee any more. You see here the confirmation of it by an oath,
and what can be more binding then the oath of God?

Well, secondly, take notice of the continuance of this: He has sworn, and
will not be wroth, nor rebuke, but how long will not he be wroth, nor rebuke?
Even so long as floods shall cease to drown the world. God has sworn, that
till the world shall be drowned with water again, God will not be wroth with
his people; so says the Text: As long as water shall not come upon the earth,
nay longer, if longer may be, The mountains shall depart, and the hills shall
be removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart from thee as much as to say,
the loving kindness of God shall remain steadfast to the people reconciled to
him, even longer then the mountains shall stand fast, and the hills unremoved.
This I say is established by such a firm covenant, by such an oath, and out of
the mouth of so glorious a Lord, that the hearts of Gods people may be
established and secure, that God will not be wroth with them.

Object. But where as some may say the Lord speaks in this place, in the 17.
verse, In a little wrath have I hid my face for a moment; therefore it seems it
is not to be taken for such a perpetual forbearance of wrath.

Answ. Consider, that all along this Chapter the Prophet speaks of the Church
of God, in a twofold estate: he speaks to it one while as it is a wife of
youth; and another while, as her breasts are grown: As a wife of youth; so the
Lord for a moment hid his face; but as a wise that is grown up, so the Lord
will not be wroth with her, nor rebuke her any more. The Apostle Paul does most
excellently expound this different estate of the Church, in the time before and
after Christ: In the 3. Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, and the latter
end of that Chapter, and the beginning of the 4. Chapter, There was, says he,
a time of minority, wherein, even an heir, being but a child, differs
nothing at all, in respect of outward carriage from a servant, though even then
he be Lord of all. In the 4. Chap. and verse 1. to the Galatians, and this time
of being a servant, is not for ever, says the Apostle, but till the time
appointed of the Father. Here, in respect of outward usage, during this
minority, there is no difference between such a person, and him that is not an
heir at all, but he is under Tutors, and Governors, that is, he feels alike of
the rod, and still this is till the time appointed of the Father: See how the
Apostle expounds the words, even so we says he, while we were children in our
nonage, were in bondage under the elements of the world; we did partake of the
common calamities of the world, but how long was this? When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. There was a redemption, even in the minority of the Church, when the
Church was at the youngest age, there was redemption, but not a redemption in
respect of that which he speaks of here, that was a redemption from that
condition wherein the heir did not differ from a servant; therefore, most
properly, according to the coherence of the words, the redemption most properly
and specially spoken of here, was a redemption from a condition wherein they
did not differ from servants, into a condition wherein they should differ. So
in the 54. Chap. of Isaiah, verse 8. there is such a difference in this two-
fold estate of the Church, as is between a wife of youth, and a wife grown up;
What is that, you will say? I answer, you know, even among men, they marry
children when they are but two or three years of age; the child, she is a
married wife, and yet for all this, while she is four or five, yea, six or
seven years of age, she is used as one that is not married, there is no
difference between this child and one that is not married, both are corrected,
and both are whipped; but when she comes to riper years of age, and has the
actual fruition of her husband, then she comes to be freed from the rod, and
receives all the immunities and privileges of a wife, which she, though a
wife, did not enjoy before: And so in this Text, the Church as a child under
age, and wife of youth, is visited for a moment, and there is a kind of hiding
the face of God while she is as the wife of youth; but when the time of riper
age is come, then this shall be as the waters of Noah to me; as I have sworn
that the waters of Noah shall no more drown the earth; so have I sworn that I
will not be worth with thee, nor rebuke thee. Thus beloved, you see, that God
once reconciled, he never falls out with his people any more. It is true
indeed, he does chastise them, he does correct them, but he never does it in
wrath, he never does it in sury. In the 27. of Isaiah, and the 4. verse,
speaking of his Church, that he would watch it night and day, he says, fury is
not in me; he has no acquaintance with fury, in reference unto such persons.
And therefore, although it be true, there may be afflictions, and these
afflictions may be exceeding tart to the flesh; even when a person is grown,
and when a Church is grown up; yet notwithstanding there is not wrath in these
afflictions: Every son, says God, I love, I rebuke and chasten: There is
love even in chastisements, and the fruit of it is love, to take away sin.
The end why God sends these afflictions, is not in wrath for sin, but to
purge them from their filth. God takes occasion when his people do sin, to
chastise them in love; but that chastisement is no fruit of the wrath of God,
it is no fruit of the curse of God, nor sentence of the Law, but the tender
compassions of a loving Father, that makes use of them for his childrens good:
There is as much reconciliation with God under the rod, as when persons are not
under the rod: A father may love a child as dearly when he corrects him, as
when he gives him plums. It is thus with God, children reconciled to him, as he
corrects a child committing a fault, he never whips him but there is fear he
will commit it again; and therefore he does chastise him to prevent a fault;
He does not punish him to pacify his anger for the fault committed. So God, in
respect of the Church, for the purging of his Church, and for trial in these
respects, he will chastise, and in chastising he will convey the Spirit of
amendment to them; but in respect of what is done, were it not to have them
purged for the future, he would never afflict his people for that which is
past. So that, I say, though this be the great Objection that troubles men's
spirits, they fall daily into troubles and afflictions, here is wrath and
enmity, reconciliation is not firm, God is now fallen out; yet, beloved, know,
that God is not fallen out with his people when he chastises them. No man
under Heaven can suffer under afflictions, more then Christ himself did; yet,
says God, he is my beloved Son, not my hated Son, but my beloved Son, I
afflict. It is true indeed, as the Apostle Paul speaks: No affliction at first
seems joyous, but grievous; yet, afterward it brings forth the pleasant
fruits of righteousness to those that are exercised therewith. Consider this
one thing; Can God pour wrath when he intends only the good of his people, to
purge his people, to bring them as gold out of the fire? Certainly, what David
had experience of, shall be the fruit of all the afflictions of all the members
of Christ, though they be never so many, and great: Before I was afflicted, I
went astray, but now I have learned to keep thy Laws. Whereupon he says, that
it was good for him he was afflicted. God afflicts to teach, God afflicts to
draw home, God afflicts to refine and purge: You know, the Merchant does not in
wrath fling away his gold, when he puts it into the refining pot; it is no
argument of less love, only he would have his gold tried and refined, and the
dross taken away out of it: It is so with God; all the members of Christ, all
that Christ has prevailed for with the Father, they are the beloved of the
Father, and the darlings of his soul, and his love cease not; nay, his love
diminishes not to them when they are under the rod.

One word of application, and so I shall have done: Is it so, beloved, that
Christ is such an Advocate, that having such a strength of plea in his
righteousness, he produces such a good issue, as to bring at the last,
reconciliation? In a word then, you know what to trust unto for your souls
discharge and comfort: In many things we sin all; what should uphold your
spirits, that your sins should not sink your souls? Here is held out unto
you the great Supporter, the Righteousness of Christ, the Righteousness of
God: I will uphold thee with the right hand of thy righteousness, Isaiah 41.
verse. 10. fear not, be not discouraged; and why? the close of all is this; I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness: If you go any where
else for support, when sin is committed, your sins will sink you, and swallow
you up, nothing can bear you up in respect of the weight of sin, but the right
hand of his righteousness; that alone is the thing that must uphold your
spirits; or nothing at all can do it; O that the Lord would be pleased to work
upon your spirits, to betake your selves to this support, and to fix your
spirits upon the fullness of support and strength, that is, in this
righteousness of his. When the Israelites were stung by the fiery Serpents, it
was not the applying of a plaster could heal them, only the brazen Serpent
could heal them, and nothing but the brazen Serpent. Oh, look upon the brazen
Serpent, the Lord Jesus; look not upon any other plaster in the world, but
him, to heal your wounded souls stung with the Serpent of your sins; though
they may serve for other uses, yet they have not so much virtue in them, as to
heal the sting of sin: Fix your eyes here, cast your selves here, rest here,
let the weight of your souls lean here: He that believes shall be saved; he
that believes not shall be damned; He that believes shall be established; he
that believes not, shall not be established. Oh, go not to Christ, as if there
were not enough in him to answer your transgressions, that you must carry
something else with you to him, that may be a help to your discharge; if ever
discharge from heaven come unto your spirits, it is only the hand of Christ by
his Spirit, that must bring it down to you; and nothing in the world can do
it, but that discharge, as it is recorded in the Word of Grace, in things that
come by relation unto men, and so are opened unto them. How can men be
satisfied concerning the thing reported, but upon the credit of him that is the
reporter, thereof to sit down satisfied by faith concerning the truth thereof?
Let a man tell me never so good news, if I do not believe him, my spirit is
not satisfied. So, concerning the discharge from sin, beloved, you hear it
related from heaven: We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Now, there is no way in the
world to know that there is such a thing as an Advocate and Propitiation, but
as it is revealed from heaven. The Apostle John: he indeed reveals it here;
if he had delivered it merely as he is man, so it had occasioned suspicion
and doubting, but as it is the revelation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ
himself by the Apostle, so we are to stick close unto it, and we shall find
rest unto our souls, as we can credit the report of it; therefore as the Lord
will work upon your spirits, take up your rest where rest is to be found; so
your souls shall rest, you shall lie down and sleep in peace and safety, you
shall sing and leap for joy; and you shall have all peace, and joy in
believing. O that men would keep up the dying language of a Martyr: None but
Christ, none but Christ, in matters of faith, and stability of spirit; in
matters of peace of conscience, as well as in matters of salvation, And so I
shall commend this word to the grace of God, in respect of the issue thereof
upon your spirits.

SERMON X
SOLOMON'S SONG, 4.10. Thou art all fair, my Love, and there is no spot in thee.


THe Gospel of Christ being the great and invaluable treasure of the Church,
the Helena for which the Church should contend; yea, the Sanctuary and refuge
thereof; It has pleased the Holy Ghost to present and hold forth this Gospel
in variety, or change of raiment, as I may so speak; sometimes presenting the
Gospel, as it were in a cloud, more darkly by Visions and dreams, when deep
sleep was fallen upon Gods people. Thus the Lord in former ages frequently held
out the Gospel, especially in that notable example of Jacob, who, while he
slept, had the Gospel preached unto him, in the vision of a ladder, that
reached from earth unto heaven, by which the Angels ascended and descended;
which Ladder was nothing else but Christ, by whom alone the sons of men do
mount, from the lowest condition of Sin and Misery, to the highest condition of
Grace and Glory. Sometimes the Gospel was brought forth to the Church with a
mask upon the face of it, I mean, in hard Riddles, and dark Sentences, to
exercise the wits of Gods people; and thus among other times, the Gospel was
presented unto Sampson. You know the Riddle that was put forth, occasioned by a
Lion shine by him, which being dead, there was a stock of honey in the Lion,
which represented unto his thoughts, the admirable benefit and privilege of
the preaching of the Gospel: Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong
came sweetness. It was nothing else but this; Jesus Christ the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, by death had a stock of honey, not only nourishing, but sweet
to the eater. Sometimes again, the Gospel was presented, though not with so
dark masks, yet with a vail over the visage and face of it, that though some
of the beauty of it might be seen, yet in respect of the glory of it, in an
obscure way; and thus the Gospel was exhibited unto the Jews in their types
and shadows, and thus the Gospel was held forth in their Sacrifices, Temples,
Tabernacles, Altars, Mercyseat, and Incense, and the like: In all of which
there was a general darkness; namely, a putting over the face of Moses a vail,
who in that represented Christ the Mediator, as he was to be exhibited unto the
people in those times; and yet, although for royalty and honors sake, the
Gospel was veiled; yet sometimes the Holy Ghost was pleased to lift up the vail
for a moment, as it were, that there might some glance of the beauty of it
appear; Even in those times, now and then, a Prophet would out with some
admirable expression of the Gospel: But this was but as the breaking forth of
light in a dark night. Sometimes again, the Gospel was presented in a
Prophetical habit, and so it was held out, as it were, at a remote distance,
that even an elevated and supernatural eye had as much as it could do to see
it in the proportion of the Gospel. And this was the dispensation of the Gospel
in the Prophets. Sometimes also the Gospel was presented under a parabolicall
habit; and thus it pleased our Savior to exhibit it in his time, delighting
much to see it in this dress: in so much, that all the Gospel he spoke,
almost, was clothed in that habit; and so the kingdom of heaven was likened
unto Leaven, hid in three measures of meal, and unto Mustard Seed, and unto
Treasure hid in a field, and so he goes on, setting of it forth under all
sorts of comparisons to illustrate it. Finally, the Gospel is presented
sometimes without either vail or mask over it, in its own proper beauty,
shining forth from the face of it, nothing at all hindering the prospect of it,
in its own proportion; and thus was the Gospel presented unto the Disciples,
when they said unto Christ: Now thou speak unto us plainly, and not by
Parables. Unto us that live now, at this present the Gospel of Christ is
represented in all these variety of dresses together to administer the more
delight. It is accounted one of the greatest pieces of honor in a State for a
Prince to have changes of raiment every day. Now, the Lord will put so much
state upon his Gospel, that it shall not always go in one dress or habit

Now, the Text that I have read unto you, holds out the Gospel in Christ's own
way, which was so much affected by him, I mean, in a parabolicall habit. The
most glorious excellencies of the Gospel, as it does pertain to the Church of
God, are composed in this Text: Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in
thee. This text, as the whole song throughout, is nothing else but an elevated
strain of discourse between Christ and his Church, or a song tuned to the
highest note that ever song was sung; which discourse is an interchangeable
speech between Christ and his Church; the Church acting her part first, in the
second verse of the first Chapter: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth; being amiable sweet discourse indeed: then she falls upon the high
commendation of this love of hers, exalting the praise of her husband Christ
above the sky, which kindled such a strong affection in her, that she seemed
to be far from him, that she was not near enough unto him; she called unto him
therefore, that he would draw her nearer unto him: Draw me, and we will run
after thee, says the Church. And that she may come the nearer, she begs of
him, to tell her where she may find him in a nearer communion with him than
yet she had. Hereupon, her part being ended, Christ he begins to tune his note
to an higher strain, in answering the Church, than the Church began to him: If
thou know not, O thou fairest among women, says Christ; here after his
commendation of her, he directs her where she may meet with him; by the
footsteps of the flocks; by the tents of the shepherds, there she shall have
him. And then he falls again upon the exalting and commending of her excellent
perfections, by many and several comparisons: the Church by and by in the 16.
verse, retorts the commendation that Christ gives unto her, upon Christ again:
My Beloved is fair; Behold, my Beloved is all fair, and pleasant. Thus you see,
here is a making forth of the praises of each others excellency, and of the
high esteem each has of other, each to other in their mutual discourse:
Christ says of the Church, Thou art the fairest among women; the Church she
replies again, Behold, thou art fair; and thus they go on in admirable
expressions of the praises of each other. I would be too large to run over all
the particulars of the sweet intercourse between Christ and his Church Now in
the Text, Christ retorts that commendation back again unto the Church, that
the Church before had given unto him: Thus she having begun to fall into the
high commendation of her love, he afterward follows, O thou fairest among
women; she retorts it upon him, Thou art fair my Love, thou art all fair. Well,
Christ will not have it rest there, he will have the last word, as I may say,
he retorts it back again to her, saying, in the words of the Text: Thou art
all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee: So that here is an out-vying, as it
were, between Christ and his Church, which should mount highest in the praise
of each other, extolling the excellency of each other unto the skies; the
burden of the song being this still: Thou art fair; thou art all fair my Love.
In the words themselves, you may observe in general, the high commendation
that Christ gives of his Church, and unto the Church her self; in which
commendation, you may note:

First, the most gracious amiable title that Christ gives unto her, he calls
her Love, the sweetest title a Husband can give a Wife; but there is an
addition of one Article that does mightily advance the indearednesse of Christ,
in respect of the specialty thereof; namely, MY LOVE; thou art all fair, MY
LOVE.

Secondly, note here in the words, the matter of the praise, and commendation
that Christ gives to his Church, it is expressed in that which is accounted
most desirable; fairness; thou art fair; but in this matter of praise there
is a double addition that does exceed the praise the Church gives unto Christ
before. The Church is not only fair, but all fair; Thou art all fair, my Love.

Secondly, for the further illustration of this beauty, there is a second
addition; Thou art all fair, thou have no spot in thee.

Finally, in the words you may note the time of which Christ speaks: Every man
receives this Principle, that in glory in Heaven, there shall be perfection of
beauty, in which the Church shall stand. But if Christ had spoken of the state
of glory, he would have declared himself in the future Tense, Thou shall be all
fair my Love. But it is observeable, Christ speaks here in the present Tense,
of the present time of the Church, as he has communion with her here in this
world: Thou art all fair. There is a great deal of difference between the
Tenses. It is one thing to say of a man, Thou shall be rich, and another thing
to say, Thou art rich. It is true, the Church shall be all fair in glory, and
it is as true, the Church is all fair now: Thou art all fair my Love, there is
no spot in thee.

That these words are the language of Christ unto his Church, may appear to
you, if you will consider.

First, what is spoken before; there is the commendation of the breasts. Now,
commendation of breasts has reference to the Spouse; but most plainly it
appears in the words that follow the Text, in the 8. verse, Come with me from
Lebanon my Spouse, says Christ; either they must be the words of Christ to the
Church, or they must be the words of the Church to Christ; but they cannot be
the words of the Church to Christ, for the Church does not call Christ the
Spouse; for the word Spouse is spoken in reference to the woman, and not to the
man. You shall have it further cleared in the contents of the chapter, which
show the drift of the whole chapter, the Author of the contents holds forth
according to the Hebrew, where the Genders are more distinct then in our
English; that these very words are the expressions of Christ unto his Church.
Whereby you see that this is no new doctrine, neither is it set forth by any
obscure person, being delivered by Solomon, or rather by Christ personated by
Solomon, that the Church should be all fair and without spot.

The Proposition is briefly this: That the Love of Christ is all fair, and
without spot, You may remember, beloved, that I have hitherto at large
endeavored to set forth the Gospel of our blessed Savior to you, in the first
great part thereof (the Gospel consisting principally in two things, the
negative and the affirmative privileges of the members of Christ their great
privilege, and invaluable benefit, being, first, exemption from evil; and
secondly, a participating of all good things.) All the discourse I have had
with you hitherto, has had reference principally to the former branch of the
Gospel, setting forth to you the gracious discharge of the members of Christ
from all miquity; and so consequently from all the fruits of iniquity in these
words: And the Lord bath laid on him the iniquity of us all; and I have further
showed you, how the people of God, and members of Christ, do partake of such
discharge as this is, which is the way of God, by which the sons of men,
Believers, can have their portion, and their possession of this immunity: and
that out of the Text of John: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

It was in my thoughts, beloved, to have made present progress into the Text
that I have (...) unto you; but yet in some respect a necessary lies upon me to
give you a brief touch of some things I have formerly delivered, by way of
acquitting my self from injurious slanders. It is, and has heen my portion,
and I know, not unknown to many of you, that while I have labored freely, and
by the assistance of the Spirit of the Lord, endeavored to make known the
mind of the Lord to the comfort and rest of the weary and heavy laden, I my
self have not wanted my burden; yet, were it not for the Gospels sake, lest
that should receive prejudice, I should never open my mouth to vindicate a
truth, as it does concern my self, in so public a way. But as there has been
most false imputations laid upon me, in respect of the Gospel; so for the
Gospels sake only, I shall acquit my self publicly before you of such things
as are most injuriously charge upon me. It has been affirmed, and that by
persons, who have gone for persons of credit, (and consequently the wound must
strike the deeper, and the report must take the greater impression) it has
been given forth, I say, that in my discourse among you, I should deliver to
you, that the active and passive obedience of Christ considered as (...), that
is Christ considered both as (...) and man, that the active and passive
obedience of Christ, in reserence to both his natures, has not a sufficiency
in it to make up a complete righteousness for us; and further, that the ground
of it should be this; Namely, that Christ did not perform the several duties
of the several relations wherein many persons stand; as the office of a
Magistrate, and the relation of a Husband, etc. For the vindicating of my self
herein, I shall repeat the matter I delivered before, and you shall also know
the truth of what my judgment is in this thing; and then leave it to the
Church of God, whether it be a slander or no. This I then said; that the active
and passive obedience of Christ properly, are the actions and passions of the
humane nature; for the divine nature is not subject to obedience, because there
is not any superior to whom the divine nature should obey; neither is it
subject to passion, God cannot suffer, and therefore doing the commands, and
suffering the punishments, are more proper to the actions of the humane nature.
And this humane nature is but a mere creature, and therefore the actions of it
as a creature, cannot extend to a proportion answerable to the injury done by
sin to God: For this cause, I say, as I said before, there must be an addition
of virtue from the divine nature of Christ to make the active and passive
obedience of the humane nature a complete righteousness. So that all I said is
this: That the actions and passions of the humane nature, are not sufficient to
make up our righteousness a complete righteousness, but there must be
something of the divine nature superadded to raise up a righteousness
proportionable to the transgressions we commit. And that expression concerning
the not performing of duties of these several relations; I spoke it only to
this purpose, to show wherein the humane nature of Christ in obedience, did not
fulfill every thing in particular, which is the duty of a man; and that
therefore the divine nature of Christ by the eminent dignity thereof, is, as I
said before, to make up that righteousness a complete righteousness.
Concerning this, whether it be truth or no, let the Church judge, according to
the word: As for (...), Christ as God and man, it is well known, I used not the
word, neither had I the thing in my mind, nor in my tongue to the purpose they
allege it against me. In a word, this I say, that Christ as God and man, has
in himself an absolute compleatnesse of righteousness, for all the elect
persons. There need not be a going forth from Christ to any thing in the world
besides for a perfect righteousness.

Secondly, there is another charge deep indeed, and I appeal to you that have
frequently heard me, whether ever you have heard any such thing from me;
Namely, that by way of inference I should deny Christ, How true this is, let
the whole course of my Ministry witness, which altogether aimed and
endeavored the exalting of Christ above all the creatures in the world, and
except my being so busy with this truth be become an occasion of so manifest
slanders and false aspersions that are raised, I know not what should be the
cause of them. But, beloved, how is it, that I should deny Christ? In that, say
they, I deny repentance unto life. Now, whether ever I did so, I appeal to you
that heard me: This I say, concerning faith and repentance unto life, in brief
that neither faith nor repentance has any efficacy of their own to produce
life, but those that attain to life, in time the Lord gives them to believe
and repent indeed.

But a third charge is ^ more strange then all the rest, this I must touch
also. I will name no persons, nor hint them; but my scope is to deliver plainly
unto you, the truth of my own thoughts, and so lie under censure, or be
acquitted. The charge is this, that I should affirm that an elect person should
live and die a whoremonger, and an adulterer; and in all kind of
propitanenesse; and, though living and dying in this kind of profaneness, he
shall be saved. Which, how contrary it is unto the whole course of my
ministry, ye are witness. I dare be bold to say, you all know it to be a
gross, notorious, and groundless slander. You know, concerning this thing; an
elect person being an elect person, it is impossible that such an one should
mis-carry, and not be saved. He that is elected unto salvation, either Gods
election must be frustrated, which is impossible, or this person must attain
unto salvation. I think no man of those that have cast this impuntion upon me
will deny it; but withal, this I said before, and so I say still. There is no
elect person, suppose him to be capable, and come to years, shall die before he
be called, that is, before the Lord give faith to this person to believe, and
in some mea^ure frame this elect person to walk by the Spirit according to the
ruse of the Sp^it. In a word, this person is changed in conversation. The
principle is this: He that believes shall be saved; and he that believes not
shall be damned: and, No^unclera thing shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven;
every soul therefore, being elected, as it shall be saved at last, so is it, or
shall in time be called and enabled to believe and walk as a child of light, If
this be not true doctrine, then I desire my mouth may be stopped.

Having thus endeavored to take off those aspersions, though not in respect of
my self; yet in respect of some of you, who peradventure may receive such
things for truth, especially coming out of the mouths of such persons as those
from whom the charge comes.

Now, to the Text that I have taken to my self to handle; namely, Thou art all
fair my Love, there is no spot in thee. I shall say but little concerning this
latter branch of the Text, it having been all my work heretofore to set forth
this immunity we have by the blood of Christ, the cleansing from all sin. I
shall keep my self to the former branch: Then art all fair my Love. Let us
therefore take into consideration these particulars, that will give some hint
of the grace revealed here.

The first is, who this Love is, of whom Christ speaks.

Secondly, why this person that is so fair is here called my Love.

Thirdly, what this fairness is that is appropriated to the love of Christ.

Fourthly, what it is for the love of Christ to be all fair.

Fifthly, when this time is, that this love of Christ is all fair: Thou art all
fair my Love.

I will begin here with the first; namely, who this is here, that is called the
Love of Christ. The next words will unriddle the question, Come with me from
Lebanon my Spouse. The love of Christ then here, is the Spouse of Christ. And,
beloved, if you knew all, you would soon see what glorious, unspeakable and
unsearchable excellencies are contained in this Grace, that the Church should
be admitted into the bosom of Christ to be the very Spouse of Christ.

There are two things very considerable by which you may perceive at the least
some of the glory and excellency of this privilege, to be the Spouse of Christ.

First, if you consider the inequality of the persons that are matched.

Secondly, if you will consider the great privilege that will issue from such
a match as this is. The word Spouse, you know, is nothing else, but a title of
relation, in reference to a Husband. Now, I say, first consider the inequality
of the persons matched, and therein you shall see an admirable condeseending
and grace. I remember, in the first book of Samuel, when the servants of Saul
came to David, to make mention of Saul's mind concerning David's marrying Saul's
daughter, David was in a kind of astonishment, and amazement. And when they
spoke to him of the matter, David replied: Seems it a light matter unto you,
to be the kings son in law, seeing I am a poor man, and my father of a small
house in Israel. This was strange news to poor 'David; What? presently to marry
the Kings daughter, and to be the son in law to a King, being a poor man as I
am, is this a small matter in your eyes? Much more may we be astonished, that
we poor miserable wretches should marry the son and heir of the world; nay, the
Son and Heir of Glory. Shall this seem a light matter to you to be the Spouse
of a King, to be the sons and daughters of the King of kings? It was an
admirable witty expression of Abigail in the 25. Chapter of the first book of
Samuel, verse. 41. when David sent messengers unto her, to commune with her, to
take her to be his wife, Abigail in humility, replied to the messengers thus:
Let thy handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord; a
high strained complement, if it had been a mere complement: But it was real,
so it does express the great distance she conceived there was between her self
and David; and therefore does not spare to show her thoughts of her great
unworthiness to be matched with Davi^k Let thy hand maid be a servant to wash
the feet of the servants of my Lord. This is an office good enough for me, to
wash the servants feet, and not to lie in the bosom of David; Why, what a
great matter was this? she was as rich as Davil was; and you may manifestly
see, she was very beautiful, and her stock and parentage was of as good a
stock as David's; There was but this difference, a kingdom was promised to
David, and he was anointed king, but yet, for the present, a persecuted
anointed; but yet, notwithstanding, she admires the great condescending of
David, that he should take her to be his wife. Oh then, beloved, what must be
the condescending of the Son of God, the Heir of the world, and the express
Image of the Father, and the brightness of his glory, as you have it in the 3.
verse of the first Chaprer of the Epistle to the Hebrews; I say, for this great
Heir, this mirror of Beauty, the brightnesle of the glory of the Father, to
stoop to match himself to a creature; surely, I say it were a great
condescending. But since he was so pleased to condescend so low, as to match
himself to a creature, he might well have chosen the highest lineage of the
creatures, the highest and most noble stock of creatures, he might have matched
himself with Angels, but this makes his condesent more admitable; he descended
lower, he took not upon him, says the Apostle, the nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham. And, beloved, were it to creatures, and the lowest of
creatures simply, the condescent had not been so great, there may be some
beauty in a country maid, though homely attired, as well as there may be in a
great personage in richest apparel, being of great stock, and portion. Had
there been beauty, though there had been no lineage nor noble blood, this were
something; but as this blood became ignoble and traitorous blood, in respect of
the first fathers rebellions, and treason, so this traitorous blood could not
contain it self within its bounds; but, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, from the
crown of the head, to the sole of the feet, there is nothing else but wounds,
and bruises-swellings, and soars, and loathsomeness in blood, even such a
blood, as that person is cast out to the loathing of its person, that no ey can
pity: That Christ should take such a nasty beggar, such a beggar, as stinks
above ground, as we may well say, in regard of its filthiness, that has no
sound part, but being full of botches and soars, and putrifactions, running
over all parts, from head to foot; I say, that Christ should take such a
creature, and no place should serve this creature but his bosom, his bed; and
no communion, no fellowship serve, but the nearest communion and fellowship
that possible may or can be imagined, even a communion and fellowship that
extends it self to a kind of oneness, and highest degree of unity. Oh the
astonishing greatness of the love of Christ! They are said to be one flesh, as
Christ and his Church are set forth by the Holy Ghost, in the union between man
and wife; so that, beloved, the Church as she is the Spouse of Christ, so she
is made one flesh with Christ. You have some monstrous births in the world
sometimes, that have had some deformed parts growing unto them, as you may see
at this time in some place about this town, a young man with another youth, as
I may say, united in him at his belly, whereby he is evceedingy (...), and very
(...) of it. and (...) by the anysomnesse of it; when, by that lise of him that
bears it, becomes worse then death to him. Beloved, such were some of us; nay,
such were all of us by nature, I, when Curist first took us we were such
monsters, we were thus silthy, loathsome, nasty, ugly things. And though we
were thus by nature; yet Christ has admitted us, not only into his house, and
now and then into his presence, but to sit continually before him; yea, to be
his Spouse: He makes us flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; what a
condescending is this? It is true, beloved, Christ he covenants, and
accordingly he has done this; namely, cleansed this person, after he had
coupled himself to this person: But, I say, to take persons before this change,
to take them in such a loathsome abhorred filthy condition, and make them one
with himself, is so strange a condescending, that all the world is not able to
purallel it, shall I say? no, not come near this act of Christ: A king may,
peradventute, sancy some worthiness, some beauty, something or other that may
be pleasing to him in a beggat, and marry the beggar for that he fancieth to be
of worth, and delight in het; but, beloved, hoy, could Christ cast his love on
such persons. Whom he knew were (...) when Christ (...) them, then they (...)
in the face of Christ, being full of enmity, (...) and rebellion, even bitter
enmity against, (...), flinging from him as the greatest enemy in the world?
Beloved, by nature, every person, till Christ himself tame that person, has a
spite against Christ, and sights against him, and is so full of malignity
against him, as to cast dirt even in the face of Christ; and yet for all this
inequality and disproportion between Christ and the Spouse, Christ makes this
person, this loathsome wretched person, this rebel and traitor, his Spouse.

Now, beloved, if the Lord will but open your spirits, to look into this
inequality, and disproportion, and see not only the distance, but even the
extreme contrariety between Christ considered as he is in himself, and you in
your selves, how can you but break forth into admiration and amazement, even to
astonishment?

It was a notable expression of John, in the 1. Epist. Chap. 3. as I take it,
verse. 1. Behold, says he, what manner of love this is, that the Father has
snewed unto us, that we should be called the sons of God? Now we are the sons
of God; and yet does it not yet appear what we shall be. He begins with this
note of admiration, Behold, and he follows it with an interrogation, as not
being able to answer it himself, What manner of love is this? why, wherein
expressed? That we should be called the sons of God. This is a great love, and
yet ye know that sonship is a relation below a Spouse; How then should we
break forth, if it were possible, into a higher admiration then ever John did,
and say: Behold, what a manner of love is this, that we, poor miserable
creatures, should be called the Spouse of Christ! Now we are the Spouse of
Christ; yet does it not yet appear what we shall be.

It remains we should consider, secondly, the privileges of this relation, and
therein see the great loving kindness, and unsearchable goodness of our God,
that is pleased to match his own Son unto us, and by such a match to make us
partakers of such excelient and glorious privileges and immunities. I will but
name them:

First, as we are the Spouse of Christ, so we are the children of God; he that
marries the kings daughter, becomes the kings son by that match: but that is
not all.

Secondly, by this match we become heirs; if sons, then heirs, heirs of glory,
coheirs, and joynt-heirs with Christ; a great privilege, if you consider of
all the wealth and siches you have by Christ.

Thirdly, this Spouseship intitles the Spouse of Christ, to all that ever
Christ has; it intitles her to all the honors of Christ; it intitles her to
all the communicable titles of Christ.

Fourthly, this Spouseship secures the Church the Spouse of Christ, from all
arrest, from actions, and all suits, let the debt be never so great, the
creditors cannot come near her for one farthing; I say, the consideration of
this will add also to the exalting and magnifying of the exceeding riches of
the grace of God in Christ to men, to show what a blessed condition this
Spouseship is to those that are strangers unto both; hearing the Love of the
Church to be the chiefest of ten thousands, may by the power of the Spirit of
the Lord, be won to seek afterhim; it was the very same case in the Canticles,
The daughters of the world say unto the Spouse of Christ, hearing her so extol
her love, What is thy beloved more then other beloveds, that thou chargest us?
Oh, says the Church, My Beloved is white and ruddy; my beloved is the chiefest
of ten thousands; now, when they had heard of the excellencies of Christ, they
began as last to have their affections taken too, and to say, Whiterh is thy
Beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? Even so it may pleave God, when
by my endeavor the excellencies of the privileges of the Spouse of Christ are
set forth, and the gloriousness of the privileges of the Gospel manifested; I
say, when these appear, and when Christ as the chief of ten thousands, is
declared, some may seek after him, yea, and embrace him with joy. But I cannot
stand now to speak of them; but hereafter, God willing, if I shall have further
opportunity.

SERMON XI.
COLOSSIANS 1.18. And he is the head of his body the Church the beginning.


THE Apostle, after his supersciption and direction of his Epistle, wherein he
makes mention of his commission for the exercise of his Apostolical office,
and after his Apostolical benediction given unto them, comes to give an
account of the cause of the writing of this Epistle. It was this; namely, he
had received comfortable intelligence and information from Epaphroditus, a
Minister of the Gospel, that had loboured among these Colossians of their
receiving the faith, and of their love to the brethren. This was glad news to
the Apostle; and therefore he tells them, that he was not unmindfull or
backward to return thanks and praise to the Lord for so good a work begun in
them, and for the joy he had received by the work among them, and also to pray
for them, making mention of many particulars he sought of God on their behalf;
namely, That they may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding; closing up in thankfulness, in remembrance and
rehersall of the fountain and rise from whence all that grace and goodness
received, flowed and sprung, and that is the dear Son of God, in the 13. verse.
Having thus let himself into his own way; namely, the mentioning of the dear
Son of God; he takes the oppertunity from an apt connection, to go on according
to the main discourse of this Epistle, wherein the Apostle first sorts his
materials, and then he falls upon his business. The two main matters he deals
upon, are, first the foundation, and that is the Son of God, expressed in the
13. verse: Secondly, the structure raised upon this foundation, and that is
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

Here is the distribution of his matter. Now, by and by, having sorted his
materials, he falls to work; beginning first with the foundation, which he
polisheth, that he puts such a luster upon it, that it shines even like the
Sun; yea, more glorious then the Sun in beauty: He sets forth Christ the
foundation, in so many aimable considerations, as to ravish the world. And the
Apostle at the 15. and 16. verses, begins to show his faculty and expertnesse
in this great work, that Christ did entrust him withal; namely, to be a wooer
in the behalf of Christ, to win people to him, as in a former discourse upon
this place I have told you; and therein, I say, the Apostle does most
Rhetorically hold forth every thing that is of a winning and desirable nature
to draw forth the love of people unto Christ. If people look for beauty, and
that catch men, the Apostle tells us here, that Christ is an admirable piece of
beauty, there is none like to him, says the Church in the Canticles: He is the
chief of ten thousands; but, behold, the beauty the Apostle mentions here: He
is the Image of the invisible God. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the 1.
chapter, and the 3. verse, he speaks more fully to the business: He is the
express Image of his person, and the brightness of his glory. Here is a face
for you, if you be enamored with beauty, there is none like him. Yea, but some
they look for parentage, one of Noble blood, and of a great House. As they
would have beauty, so they would marry into an honorable Family. Well, the
Apostle will tell you here is a match for you with a witness: Here is beauty,
and a good race too. He is not only the express Image of God, but he is the
first born of God: The first begotten of every creature; nay, the dear Son of
God. In the 15. verse of this chapter, here is a stock for you of the highest
kindred in the world; he is, the heir of glory, the heir apparent, that if you
will match for honor, if you will match into a great House, here is beauty and
honor too. Yea, but you will vay, it may be, he may be in disgrace, it may be
he has no authority and power, and ability; we would have one that has
authority and power, and bears rule. Christ, he is called such a one too; the
whole sovereignty of the world is at his command and disposal: as you would
have it to be, so you have it, in the next verse. In verse. 16. All things were
made by him, says the Apostle, whether things in heaven, or things in earth,
visible, or invisible, principalities and powers, thrones or dominions, all
things were made by him, and for him; as much as to say, every thing is subject
unto him, every thing bows their knees to him: And in 2 Philip. he has a name
given to him above every name; that, at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, whether things in heaven, or things i^ earth, or things under the earth.
Tell me one that has greater power and authority then this i^ If you will
therefore match with advantage to the purpose, here is a match for you, says
the Apostle. I, but some will say, He may have honor enough himself, but it
may be he is a niggard, I may be kept hard enough, and poor enough; Is he
bountiful and free? Beloved, the Apostle tells us in Colos. 2.10. First, what
he has; he is not only honorable, but rich also: In him dwells the fulness
of the Godhead bodily, says he. What is that to me, some will say, he may
hoard it all up, I may have little enough of it. No, says the Apostle, we are
complete in him. Here is the fullness of the Godhead, and ye are complete in
him; he cannot abide to keep any thing to himself: In this he is a Householder
with a witness; he cannot eat his morsels alone, he must impart that he has.
The tender mother, if she have but a bit, the child must have half with her,
and participate thereof. And therefore, in the 1. of John, he is full of grace
and truth, says the Holy Ghost, and of his fulness we have received grace for
grace. What better Husband can you desire in the world, then to have his whole
purse at your command? You are not at stint and allowance, you may draw till
you are weary, there is no shutting up of the chest of his treasure; he is a
Fountain set open for you.

But to draw toward our purpose: There are two offices the Holy Ghost is
pleased to acquaint us withal, proper unto Christ as an encouragement to win
people unto him. The first is general, in respect of creation and providence
over the whole world; the second is peculiar and special, over the Church
alone, that is the office mentioned in the Text: He is the head of the body,
the Church the beginning.

In the words you may observe with me, a Proposition, and an Eposition, and
Interpretation; or an Allegorical Proposition, and the exposition of the
Allegory.

The Allegorical Proposition is, He is the head of the body.

The interpretation of it is, He is the beginning of the Church.

In the words, note whose office this is, that is here spoken of; it is he that
is the Head, even the Image of the invisible God, the dear Son of God.

Secondly, note the office it self, what that is. It is Headship; He is the
Head of the Church; He is the beginning.

Thirdly, note among whom this office is executed, and for whose use he does
execute this office, that is, the body, interpreted to be the Church, the
several members of Christ. I will not set down any other Proposition, but what
the Apostle has stated in the Text, using his own words, Christ is the head of
the body, the Church the beginning. A head, and so consequently a body, admits
of a threefold consideration: Sometimes it is taken naturally, and so
proportionably it has a body consisting of natural members. Sometimes a head
is taken politically, and so proportionably it has a body politic. But here
it is taken spiritually for a spiritual head, and a spiritual body: Christ is
the head, and the Church you see, is the body, so that this is here a mystical
body. And the Church is called a body, not that it has a compleatnesse without
a head; but in reference to the head, it is called a part of the whole. A body
and a head is but a complete body indeed. Sometimes the body goes for a part,
and sometimes for the whole. Here it is taken for a part only: But that we are
to insist upon is this.

First, to take into consideration, who this is that is the head.

Secondly, what this office of Headship does import unto us.

Thirdly, how this Head is furnished to the office that is proper for a head to
a body.

Fourthly, and then, as time will give leave, we will have a word or two of
application.

First, who this Head is; You will say, we need not ask the question, it is
confessed by all it is Christ. It is true, it is so; but yet there is a mystery
in it, and peradventure, the thoughts of many persons are something more
confused in the apprehension of Christ, as he is Head, then happily they might
be. And it may be there might be a more clear apprehension of Christ considered
as he is Head, then yet there is among us. I will therefore as clearly as
possibly I may, state unto you, under what confideration Christ is to be
considered, being head of his Church, or of his members. Note, for the making
way to this, that there are five very distinct things in Chrirst; I say, all
five distinct one from another, and all of them, as you shall hear in the
closure, concur together in Christ as head of the Church.

First, in Christ the^ is the one only divine nature and Godhead; there is no
God in the world, but the God that Christ is: This is worth your consideration,
for the minds of men are apt, frequenty to (...) so between God and Christ, as
if God were one, and Christ distinctly another (...) Gods when as the truth is,
there is no other God (...) the world, but what Christ himself (...) My Lord
and my God, said Thomas, speaking to christ. And in the 2. chap. or this (...)
to the Colossians, verse. 9. the Apostle says th^^ in (...) dwells the fulness of
the Godhead bodily: In the beginning was the Word, and the (...) was with God,
and the Word was God. In (...) 1. chapter of John: and the 1. verse. Christ is
God, there is but one God in all the world, and therefore you must know, that
you are never to separate in your thoughts God from Christ. Always as you look
upon Christ, so look upon God; or, as you look upon God, look upon God no
otherwise then as he is in Christ, as if there were another God, besides what
Christ is; for there is no such thing.

Secondly, besides the Godhead, there is the eternal, ineffable personality in
Christ, as he is God, so he is the Son. And in this, though we cannot fathom
the difference, yet certainly there is a personal difference between the
Fatherhood and the person of the Son: There is but one God, as I said before,
but the persons are three; the Father is one, the Son is another, and the Holy
Ghost is another: There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Now, the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost, are not all one personally, but the Son is the Son, and the
Father is the Father. But the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son is one,
that is the true meaning; there is a difference between the person of the
Father, and the person of the Son; but this matter is not to be pryed into by
humane wit: For this of all the mysteries in Scripture, is the pure object of
mere faith; there is no humane way to illustrate the difference between the
eternal Fatherhood and the eternal Sonship.

Thirdly, in Christ there is a distinct human nature, that is, as this man is
not that man, such a distinct individual human nature Christ has, having a
peculiar soul and body of his own; that which was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered upon the cross: distinct, I say, from our individual souls and
bodies.

Fourthly, in Christ there is to be considered an ineffable and
incomprehensible hypostaticall Union of the divine nature of the second person
in the Trinity, and humane nature in one person. There is difference between
the being of God, and man, considered severally, and the being of Christ as
Mediator. The Godhead of Christ is not the Mediator simply; the Manhood of
Christ is not the Mediator simply considered: But God and man in one person, as
we call it, is the Mediator.

Finally, Christ is to be considered not only personally, as he is God and man
being one individual person by himself; but Christ is to be considered
collectively, that is, he is not only Christ as he is one person of himself;
but he is Christ, as he himself in that one person is ^nited to the persons of
all the elect in the world. He and they make up but one collective body.

In brief, there is a kind of trin-union in Christ, The divine union which
makes the Father and the Son one. The personal union, which makes the divine
nature, and the human nature one. The mystical union which makes Christ the
Mediator, God and man, one with all the members of Christ jointly. You know,
that in respect of the last consideration, Christ, as he is collectively
considered, consists of his own person as head, and of all the elect as
members; so that in some sense Christ cannot be said to be separated, but has
his members knit unto him. A headless body, or a bodylesse head, are equally
both of them imperfect. If the Church be separated from Christ, or Christ
separated from the Church, he should in the last consideration be imperfect.
Now in this Text, the Apostle speaking of Christ, does understand him in the
last consideration I have spoken of; namely, as God the Son united to the
humane nature, or rather uniting the humane nature unto himself; as these two
natures in one person are united unto the Church or members of Christ; so
Christ is the head. It is true, sometimes you have expressions of Christ's own
speaking, by way of subjection: My Father is greater then I: And, I came not to
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me; which phrase of Christ,
being not rightly understood, does occasion in the thoughts of men, some
conceits, as if God were a distinct being from Christ; that Christ makes God
here greater then himself, whereas the truth is, there is, as I said before, no
God but what Christ is. Christ does never acknowledge that the Godhead of his
Father is greater then his own Godhead: For, the Father and the Son is but
one in the Godhead and divine nature; and therefore, when Christ in his ^peech
has reference unto God, he has but reference unto the divine nature that is
un^^ed unto his humanity, and the very nature of God is within himself; and
there is no other but what is within himself. Therefore there is no distinct
God in the world, but (...) God that is become man, and is now called Christ.
Therefore you are never to look upon Christ, but as he is the complete only
true God. What need all this discourse, you will say? I answer, You must have
Christ set forth in this consideration, or else you shall never be able to
reach that he is the head. Therefore the consideration of the second thing will
c^^er the usefulness of the first. What this Headship is the Text says: He is
the beginning, that is, the root and spring from whence things have their first
being. Now, mark, beloved, either the Apostle must speak false, when he says,
he is the beginning; or else you must consider Christ, as the only God. All the
world grants God to be the beginning of all things; therefore, if there be any
thing in the world that should be the beginning of being besides Christ, he
himself cannot be the beginning of all things; therefore for the maintenance of
this prerogative of Christ being the beginning and fountain, he is to be
considered always as the only God. Now, this word, beginning, does import unto
us, that Christ is first the beginning of being: and secondly, the beginning of
well being: He is the beginning of being in general; All things were made by
him, and without him there was nothing made that was made, John the 1. As ^ere
in this 1. of the Colos. All things were created by him, Whether visible or
invisible; principalities and powers, thrones or dominions.

The main thing the Apostle drives at is this: that Christ is the beginning of
the Church, that is, Christ is the beginning of them being members of himself.
Every member of the Church of Christ received his first being from him, and
only from him, and from none other. Consider the original beginning of them,
even in eternity it self, if it may be properly called a beginning, it has its
being from Christ himself. Mark the Apostle in the 1. chapter of the Epistle to
the Ephesians, 2. and 3. verses: Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ, according as he has chosen us in him, before the foundations of the
world were laid. This expression may seem to some, to import a difference
between God and Christ or something distinct one from the other, as if Christ
were the subject in whom persons are chosen, and God the Author, by whom
persons are chosen. But, beloved, properly there is no such thing as Christ
distinct from God, so as if he were not God. If God be in Christ, then it is
Christ himself, as he is God that does it. And therefore, if you will mark the
expression well, it may be, you shall see that it is Christ himself has chosen
us. I confess, the words may have a double reference, either to the Father, or
to Christ; and according to this second reference, Christ may be conceived both
the object, and the fountain too, in whom you are chosen; and the expression,
perhaps, will bear both: According as he has chosen us in him; that is,
according as he in him chose us. But howsoever, all comes to one effect, the
Father and the Son being one God.

Secondly, to come down to particulars: Christ is the beginning of a present
possessive being, as persons are members of him. He is the beginning of a
possessive being, or being in possession. Consider the first thing in the being
of a member, that is life; life, as it is spiritual, and so peculiar to a
member, has its first rise from Christ himself: mark the expression in the 2.
chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians; He has created us in Christ Jesus,
unto good works, whereto he has ordained us, that we should walk in them. You
are created of God in Christ Jesus to good works: or, God in Christ has done
it. The very self-same phrase and expression that the Apostle uses there to
the Ephesians, he uses again in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 5.
and verse 19. Namely, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself. The truth is, It pleased the divine nature to unite the humane nature
to it self, and so to manage the affairs of the Church in those two natures so
united; not as if God gave out some of himself to the humane nature, and
reserved some of it self to it self; but the whole divine nature gave up it
self, though only in the second Person: God was in Christ, as much as to say,
whole God, the divine nature assumed a humane nature, and so makes up a Christ.
And thus God is in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: You shall see in
the Apostles expression elsewhere, that the beginning of life in a member of
Christ flows from Christ: Your life is hid with Christ in God. It is such
another phrase as the two former: It is hid with Christ in God; that is, it is
hid in that God, who by being man, is become Christ: For that is all the
difference, between God and Christ; all the difference, I say, is between God
simply and absolutely considered in himself, and God considered as ineffably
united to the humane nature. God, I say, thus united, becomes Christ; and so in
such a union is reconciling the world unto himself, and takes the Church, who
is his body. The Apostle tells us further, Now I live, but he presently checks
himself; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Christ is the soul of the body, and
as the body without a soul is dead, so a person without Christ is dead.

I will not dispute that needless dispute of the Philosophers, whether the
soul be seated in the head principally, or in the heart, but this I am sure of,
the life and soul of the Church is in the head of the Church: I am the way, the
truth and the life; he is the life of the soul of man: as the body without the
soul is dead; even so, if there could be such a thing, as the body of the
Church without Christ, that body were but a dead thing. It has all animal
virtue from him alone: It has all life in all respects from him. Take life in
the first fruits, in its sense or motion, all spiritual sense, all spiritual
motion, all spiritual actions, and activenesse for action, receives being and
beginning only from Christ: He is given for a covenant to open the blind eyes.
All eyes are blind till Christ opens them; there is no seeing till the body
receive sight and seeing from the head. The head causes us also to sinell; as
well as to see, the sweet savor of the ointment of Christ, that makes the
Virgins love him: Because of the sweet savor of thy ointments, therefore do
the Virgins love thee. Now, this savor, the smell thereof, being as the smell
of a field that the Lord has blessed, to smell this, is the sole work of Christ
himself: So also the spiritual taste, to taste how good God is, to relish the
fatness, and marrow, and sweetness of the spiritual wine well refined upon
the lees, is all by the power of Christ, and has its being from Christ: So all
our feeling, to feel comfort, joy unspeakable, and glorious, all is from
Christ; Christ opens our eyes, he boars the ears, he causes us to smell.

You will say, all this is the work of the Spirit; why do you say it is the
work of Christ? Mark what John says in the 16. chapter, the words are these:
He, that is, the spirit shall glorify me: For he shall receive of mine, and he
shall show it unto you. The Spirit himself, as he deals with the members of
Christ, is the agent of Christ proceeding from Christ, communicating that that
is Christ's to those members. So that the Spirit is, as it were, the
conduitpipe, through whom the fullness of the fountain conveyes it self, and
runs forth to every member. The Spirit is as the veins and nerves in the
natural body. The blood, you know, has its fountain from the liver: but the
veins carry it into every part of the body: And as the natural eye cannot see,
except the nerves feed it with visive spirits; so neither can any eye behold
the secrets of the Lord, the hidden things of Christ, such as he thanks his
Father, he reveals unto babes, while he hides them from the wise of the
world, except the Lord Christ do feed the members with his own Spirit. It is
not the eye that does discern and see of it self, but the spirits that do
come from the head, cause sight by the eye: For there may be an eye, and no
sight; where a want of these spirits are. Look over all the Book of God, and
you shall find, that there is no action that comes from the Spirit, but Christ
is the head and spring of it. You shall find the strength and hearts of people
fail when he withdrawes himself. It is he that is the strength of them for
ever: Fear not, says the Text, be not dismayed; I will uphold thee, I will
strengthen thee. There must needs be miscarriage for want of power, except
Christ come with his strength and power to uphold. Therefore, when Paul exhorts
those to whom he writes, to work the works of the Lord, he gives them this
counsel: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: and again, says
he, Put on the whole armor of God. Now it is a vain thing to think of taking
up of arms, except there be strength to manage them. Saul thought David to be a
puny, when he was to sight with Goliath, and had no regard to him, although he
might have good armor on; he was too little a man; What Saul thought of
David, is true of all the whole armor of God, it is to no purpose, except men
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. And therefore, when Paul
was in a strait, he begged, and begged again, to have strength given, though
he had not an answer to his mind, yet God told him: My grace is sufficient for
thee; My strength is made perfect in weakness. All persons are weak, but as
they have strength in Christ. Yea, there is no strength but what is his, and is
sent by him. Let me tell you this, and I beseech you consider, they that have
Christ for their head, they have an infinite advantage above the closest
hypocrite in the world, although he go never so far: All he does is but from
a weak principle; Christ is not the principle of that he does: but he that
has Christ for his head, he has a spring of fullness. The Holy Ghost tells
us; He is full of Grace and Truth; and, in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily: and, It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should
dwell: So that you may plainly see, that the preaching of Christ as head, and
setting up of all the glory of Christ, is not the preaching of licentious
liberty to men. He that can win a person to be a true member of this head,
that is Christ, he brings that person into a fat soil; he transplants him
from a barren soil, from a rocky soil, into a rich soil; whereby he come to
abound in all manner of fruitfulness. And certainly, beloved, fruitfulness
will be more abundant, as the soul can apprehend it self by true faith to be
a part of this head: For, the head will communicate that the soul it self
cannot contain it self in its own bounds: The love of Christ constraines me
says Paul, he can do no otherwise; he that is driven must needs go: Christ
he drives, and makes himself a way into his members; he breaks his own way
into them, and so sets them on, and puts them forwards.

Then again, Christ being the beginning of all our being, he is the beginning
also of all prerogatives and privileges whatsoever the Church of Christ has;
they have no privilege but as it flows from the grant of Christ: As first of
all, Justification; even Justification it self comes from Christ.

It may be that you will object, that the Text says, that God justifies the
ungodly, and how then does Christ justify them?

I say still as I said before: That which God does, Christ does; God is still
in Christ; God does nothing, but Christ does all things. All the Father has,
he has given to the Son: The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son. The meaning, I take it, is this: God, as he is simply one
divine essence in himself, he does in this simple consideration of himself, not
manage any thing in this kind: but all that ever he manageth, he manageth in
his Son; and this Son, as he is become man. So that whosoever they are that are
justified, they are justified by the Son; and whosoever come to the knowledge
of Justification, they attain to the knowledge of Justification also by Christ:
We have not received the spirit of the world, but we have received the Spirit
that is of God; that we may know the things that are freely given us of God.
Now, this Spirit of God, is the Spirit of Christ: So then, the knowledge of the
things freely given us of God, is by the Spirit of Christ. Nothing can acquaint
the soul, and satisfy it of a portion and interest in Christ, and being a
member of Christ, but by the Spirit of God; that must resolve the case at last,
do what you can. Every thing is dumb and silent: but as the Spirit of God does
speak. The Word of God, and even the word of grace, is a dumb letter, but as
the Spirit of the Lord does speak in it, or with it; and so of all things in
the world. And therefore, beloved, know, you run into those two great evils
the Holy Ghost speaks of in Jeremiah; the forsaking the fountain of living
water, and, the digging to your selves cisterns that can hold no water; while
you forsake Christ the spring and fountain, and go to pump and fetch any thing
you take from any thing besides him: If you run to creatures, you make not
Christ the beginning.

You will say, you suppose Christ to be the beginning in all, and you believe
him so to be. But, I say, Is this a good supposition of Christ, when he is not
thought of, shall he be but supposed? and shall services be set up to take up
all the affections, and all the suits and pleadings of your hearts? How has
Christ all the priority? In the 18. verse of the 1. chapter to the Colossians,
he is said to be the head of the body of the Church: That he might have the
pre-eminence in all things. Why do people then run to other things, and
magnify, and extol, and exalt other things, while Christ shall not have a
good word? Nay, people are afraid to speak out of things that are Christ's,
for fear of giving liberty to people to sin, and charge people to take heed of
the setting forth of Christ and Grace by him, as a dangerous Doctrine: So
seldom daring to speak of the excellencies of Christ, and of the excellent
privileges and benefits that come by and from Christ; nor of the freeness of
those things that are conveyed to us, in, and through Christ. And why? Oh! this
will make men run out into all manner of licentiousness and profaneness,
without control; and so Christ shall be suppressed, for fear of giving
liberty, and in the mean while other things shall be set up above Christ: the
divine Rhetoric of Repentance, and Humiliation; the prevalency of tears to
wash away sin, and our conscionable walking will commend us to GOD at the last
day. Here must be a magnifying of man's righteousness, and when these things
come to be examined, they are but rhetorical expressions. Beloved, God grant
that our Rhetoric may advance him, that is to be advanced, and keep all
other things in their own places, that are to be kept low, that nothing may
have the preeminence of Christ, Christ being the head and the beginning of all
things; that the people of God may go with their buckets to the wells of
salvation, and draw waters of life from thence, and not run to muddy puddles.
The zeal of the Lord, I mean of the Lord Christ, who has so magnified the
riches of his grace to the Sons of men, should eat up your spirits, and raise
up your souls against every thing that does raise it self up, to exalt it
self above Christ. If Christ be not the beginning, but something else, let that
have the preeminence; but if Christ be the beginning let him have the
preeminence: as Eliah once said to the Idolatrous Israelites that had fortaken
the Lord, and had set up the works of their own hands instead of him; If Baal
be God, then worship him; but if God be God, then serve and worship him: So I
say, at this present unto you: If you will acknowledge Christ to be the
beginning, let it appear in the setting of him up above all other things in
your hearts and thoughts. Make him your sanctuary, make him your refuge, wait
upon him for all things. Why are your hearts so cast down? It may be
corruptions prevail within you; fear not, Is not there enough in the fountain
to refresh thee, and supply thee with strength against them? Does Satan seek to
overcome you by his temptations, and like a roaring Lion, seek to devour you?
he is able to tread down Satan under your feet. Beloved, will you starve in a
Cooks shop, as they say? Is there such plenty in Christ, and will you perish
for hunger? You will answer, it may be, you would close with Christ, you would
go to Christ for supply with all your hearts, but you dare not, you are afraid
Christ will reject you, if you come to him. Beloved, come to Christ, and Christ
will not cast you off. Is there any thing in the world you would have? would
you have joy and peace? come to him, and the God of peace will full you with all
peace and joy in believing. Would you have your iniquities subdued? come to
him, and sin shall not have dominion over you, says the Apostle: for, Ye are
not under the Law, but under Grace: For it is the grace of God that brings
salvation: salvation from sin, as well as salvation from wrath: And, this Grace
of God, says the Apostle, will teach you to deny all ungodliness, and worldly
^usts. There is no greater motive in the world to encourage man to venture upon
any thing that Christ puts him upon then this; That he has Christ to enable
and to lead him through it. In the mean time give me leave to ^ut one caution
to you: Christ, I say, being the head, and as the head being the beginning, the
supplier of all things pertaining to life and godliness; if there be any
person that either now, or at any other time make these most despera^^
conclusions from any thing that they have heard, as that they may continue in
sin, and that they may go on in iniquity, Christ has dyed for them, let them
sin as much as they can, they cannot out-sin the death of Christ. If there be
any person that do charge any such untruth upon any Minister, and will collect
such blasphemies from the Doctrine of the Gospel o^ Christ, let them know, that
God will either bring them to see the greatness of their folly, (...) to be
ashamed of it; or, for ought I know, the^ may have their deserved portion in
the lowe^ part of hell. I dare be bold to say, there is no^ people under
heaven, who are so prejudicial (...) the Gospel of Christ, as such stumbling
blocks are; nor unto trembling hearts that would fai^ close with the free grace
of God in Christ, a^ such persons that take liberty to sin, that grace may
abound, causing the Gospel to be evil spoken of, and detested, causing that
scandalou^ name to be raised upon the Gospel, that it is a doctrine of liberty.
Beloved, as he that has called you is holy; so you that are called, (...) ye
holy in all manner of conversation; and (...) he that has called you, will
make you holy (...) he is holy.

First, in a word, here is matter of exhortati^^; if Christ be the head and the
beginning of ^^l things, look up to the head, suck at the head, raw from the
he^ let nothing draw you ^om the head.

2ly. Here is matter of consolation to all the ^embers of Christ, as long as
the head has in self, the body shall never want. Such a head christ is, that
has al fulness in him, he can ne^^r be drawn dry; Christ is not as the springs
^^b speaks of, brooks that fail in summer, but ^is spring is of such an
excellent nature, that he ^akes an everlasting spring in the heart, where^to he
pours himself: so says he, He that drin^^th of the waters that I will give
him, shall never first again, but the waters shall be in him a well, ^ith
Christ, bubling up unto eternal life. Know ^ssuredly, and be consident of it,
God must cease (...) be God, before there can be a lack of supply (...) what is
useful for you. Christ is head, and as he (...) head, he is God as well as man.
God himself ^en must be drawn dry, before you shall want any thing that is good
for you. Therefore let Sa^^n and all the world set themselves against you, ^^u
shall never have cause to say, all the springs ^e dried up, now there is no
hope of any more ^pply; for certainly the Lord will maintain and ^^ntinue that
which he has undertaken: I am ^d and change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob
are consumed.

FINIS.

