The Country-mans Delight: Or, The Happy VVooing.
Being the Successful Love of JOHN the SERVING-MAN, In his Courting of JOAN the
DARY-MAID.
John's humble suit Joan does long time withstand,
Till his known Wealth her favor does command;
Then mustering all her Smiles, to him she bends,
And to the Bargain straight she condescends:
Now no Objection can retard her Love,
If not of him, she does his Wealth approve;
So Women for base Gold their Beauty sell,
To whom so e're bids most, that Cursed spell,
Fixed deep into their Souls, comands them still,
And guides the Reins of their tempesteous will.
To a New Playhouse Tune: Or, Dolly and Molly.





John. QUoth John to Joan will thou have me?
I prithee now will thou, i will Marry with thee
My Cow, my Cow, my House and Rents,
All my Lands and Tennements:
Say my Joan, say my Joan, what will thou do?
I cannot, I cannot come every every day to woo.
I Have Corn and Hay in a Barn hard by,
And three fat Piggs penned up in a Stye;
I have a Mare and she is Cole-black,
I ride on her Belly to save her Back,
Say my Joan, say my Joan, what will thou do?
I cannot, I cannot come every every day to woo.
I have three Mark tied up in a Ragg,
I keep them there instead of a Bagg;
I have a Cheese upon the Shelf,
I Will cannot eat it awe my self:
Say my Joan, say my Joan, what will thou do?
I cannot, I cannot come every every day to woo.

Joan. Quoth Joan to John you must not come,
For your Master and Mistress are both at home;
You are a Servant, and must obey,
Else they will be angry and turn you away:
Say my John, say my John, is this not true?
You must not, you must not come every every day to woo.





John. I love thee Joan with all my heart,
Come quickly consent, and we never will part;
My Shirt, my Shirt, and eke my Band,
All I have is at thy Command:
Believe me Joan, believe me Joan, I tell thee true,
I cannot nown's, I cannot come every every day to woo

Joan. In troth my John, I cannot consent,
To gain your Cow, your Shirt, and your Rent;
Yet smiling I think of your Love,
And wish often I worthy could prove:
With a Serving-man, with a Serving-man i will not do,
who cannot, who dare not come every every day to woo.

John. Nay my Joan, pray say not so,
E're i will loose thee, my Place i will forgo
Come Kiss my Joy, and I will be
A Servant unto none but thee:
My Master, my Master i will bid adieu,
I Will leave him, i will leave him, every every day to woo.

Joan. Oh John, by no means, not for me,
I would not your Master and you disagree;
For I shall never have you it is plain,
You offered your Band, but all in vain:
Cease you Clown, cease you Clown, it will not do,
though you come, though you come every every day to woo.

John. Then yet more my Joany I have,
Oh think not pray, thy Johnny a Slave;
I was Free born i will make it appear,
My Father left me five Marks a Year:
Believe me Joan, believe me Joan, I tell you true,
I will come, I will come every every day to woo.

Joan, Come, come, it is no time for delay,
Hark John, your Mistress calls you away;
We must not so sudden agree,
For what will the Maids think all of me:
Say my John, say my John, in this not true?
You cannot by the Mass, you cannot come every every day to woo.

John. Fear not my Joan, for by this Kiss,
They cannot think on it amiss;
Each on 'um would, and wished the like,
And conquered by Love, they would soon strike:
Say my Joan, say my Joan, is this not true?
I cannot, I cannot come every every day to woo.

Joan. Well John, you have Charmed me I see,
My Love thou have won, I yield it to thee,
Though with soft sighs it is express,
Yet Iohnny is lodged in my Breast:
Say my John, say my John, what must we do?
You must come, you must come every every day to woo.

John. Oh speak it again my dear Joan,
Can it be so quickly that thou art my own;
I Will Hug thee, i will Buss thee, now for this,
Thou art my Joy and all my Bliss:
Say my Joan, say my Joan, is this not true?
Now I i will come, now i will come every every day to woo.

Joan. Well, when is the time you Design,
That'th Parson in Weblock may, both of us join?

John. Uds-foot Joan, to morrow let us meet,
And then we will do all things Complete:
Say my Joan, say my Joan, does it please you?
then i will come, then i will come every every day to woo.


