COUNSEL FOR SUFFERERS, OR Helps under Sufferings from.

Acts 5:41. And they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.

Sapienti meliora sunt in votis, deteriora vero in expectatione: Plut: de
tranquil.

Gravius est vulnus quod non expectatur, and illa agrius tollerantur, quibus
homose non prius assue facit. Aug.

London printed, for JOSEPH HALL, Bookseller, and Book-binder, on Tine-Bridg
New Castle upon Tine, 1683.

To the Christian READER.
CHristian Reader, I nothing doubt; but the worthy Author will be in esteem
with, and get the approbation and testimony of all that either now are, or
hereafter may be trysted with a suffering lot for their owning of, and cleaving
to the truths of Jesus Christ, for his plain, free, and faithful endeavors in
the following treatise. It needs no testimony from man to an impartial Reader;
for it is stamped with such a divine image, and bearing such clear lineaments of
heaven-born truths, as testify it to be of God, and therefore oblidgeth us to
receive it, as into our houses, so into our hearts.

Further, I make bold to tell thee, Reader, who ever thou art; if thou haste
received a spiritual relish, thou shall taste much sweetness in this (it being
so suitable and seasonable) following discourse which clears up these six,
solid, sound and most necessary propositions.

First; That the condition of Gods people in this world is a suffering
condition. To suffer, etc.

Secondly, that shame is one great piece of, and ingredient in their
sufferings. To suffer shame, etc.

Thirdly, that the profession of Christ's name is the great ground of the
saints sufferings. To suffer shame for his name, etc.

Fourthly, It is a great dignation of God to call out his people to suffer for
his name. Worthy to suffer shame for his name, etc.

Fifthly, that an opportunity to suffer shame for the name of Christ, ought to
be esteemed and entertained not only willingly, but joyfully. Rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name, etc.

Sixthly. The consideration of Christ's name being in our sufferings, is
sufficient to quicken us to joyfullness in them. And they departed, etc.

In the handling of which, it may be truly said of the Author. (Alluding to
that Prove. 31: 29. many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all) if there be any thing wanting here which happily thou might have exspected
impute it to the want of the Authors hand and subscription how ever I would not
keep from thee what is here, though I could not give thee what is wanting.

It is storied of Democritus, that he put out his eyes that he might
contemplate the better; I do not counsel thee to do so, but if ye would wink
with one; the eye of carnal reason and slavish fear (captivate every thought
to the obedience of Christ,) thou might with that other of faith, take the
better aim at the mark to obtain the price of the high calling in Christ
Jesus.

Thus not willing longer to detain thee from the perusal of the Book it self,
I commend both thee and it to the blessing of God, and bids you fare well.

Acts Cap. 5. verse. 41. And they departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were Counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.


IT was the saying of Bishop Jewel, that famous and shining light of our
Church: That it becomes a Bishop, or Minister of the Ghospel to die preaching.
It was Austins wish of old. That he might die, either preaching or praying.
Accordingly we find the Apostles in this chapter preaching in the face of
death it is self; we find them breathing out Gods grace to man, while they are
breathing out their lives into the Arms of Gods grace. Commending of God to
the world, while they live in the world, yea when they were leaving of the
world; while the world persecute Christ, the Apostles preach him.

It was a time of great opposition and public persecution; as ye may read in
the History of this Book, yea of this very chapter; But the Apostles continued
in the work of the Ghospel: They went not a foot of the way of their Calling
and station, notwithstanding all the malice of their enemies, but continued the
same by many signs and miracles, for by the hands of the Apostles, Chap.
5.12.13.
were many signs and wonders wrought among the people; so as their persons
received honor, and a great accession was made unto the Church by their
Ministry. God will not own his people in haltion days, but in stormy and
tempestuous times. Paul that was once a great persecutor, after conversion,
turns a great preacher and professor; Grace where it comes, makes a great
change, and the Cross of Christ is the best Pulpit; to read a Lecture of Gods
grace to souls out off: But the High Priests and officers (always the severest
enemies of Christ and Religion) if they prove not of, and with the people, who
commonly follow their heads that go before them) if the Apostles cannot now
keep their mouths shut, they will endeavor to keep their persons close; wicked
men who cannot hinder the burning of holiness in wardly in the hearts of Gods
people, will (if possible) hinder the shinning of it openly in their lives.
They laid hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison. V. 18.
The worst (if any thing could be worse then another) as for them; But while
their mouths are showing forth Gods praise, He opens a Door for their
deliverance. But the Angel of the Lord by night, V. 19.
opened the prison doors and brought them forth. He makes his Angels
instruments of their deliverance; yea, and he does not only deliver them out
of prison, but immediately sets them to work again, which they did accept: and
fell to work again immediately; V. 21.
and when they heard that they entered into the Temple again early and taught,
they Echoed to the voice, they were journey-men at Gods call ready; no sooner
could he command, but they were ready to obey in whatsoever he would have them
to do. God ow'ns them and advises them, gives new orders to them. Man's
interdiction, cannot hinder Gods commission, nor invalidate his commands. Moses
goes in again and again to Pharaoh, notwithstanding of all his threatenings
against him; so do the Apostles here fall too and follow their work, what ever
was threatened against them; but no sooner had they got into the Temple, but the
high Priest and his train, was at their heels; called Council, and finding
them not in the prison but in the Temple: they said unto them, did not we
straightly command you, that ye should not teach in his name; and behold ye
have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, and intend to bring this Man's blood
upon us. A guilty conscience was within, and they could not endure the Doctrine
of the Ghospel. Peter there turns prolocutor, and he makes a noble and brave
answer unto them: saying, we ought to obey God raither then Man. The commands
of no inferior power, can supersede the commands of a superior power; and now
orders were issued out against the Apostles, to forbid their preaching; yet,
having an injunction upon them from Christ they go on; yea, Peter goes on and
preaches a Sermon before his enemies, and did not only preach what might serve
the turn, (was not mealy mouthed) but preached that, which touched them to the
quick, V. 29, 30. and 31.
tells them that that Jesus that was now exalted, whom they now preached, that
very Jesus they had crucified: so he goes on to the 31 verse. The God of our
Fathers raised one Jesus whom ye slew, and hanged on a Tree. And now they
begin to think, not of in prisoning, but of massacring them; as if the land
were not able to bear their persons, and what they had said was the highest
piece of wickedness in the world. They go about to kill their bodies, that
would (if posible) save their souls. And being cut to the heart: they now take
council together to slay them; but one of the council, being more wise then the
rest, gives more sober advice, which upon mature deliberation (though not out
of conscience but fear) they took; But yet they would give them some taste of
their kindness. They called the Apostles and beat them, V. 40.
and then let them go. And do but see the effects in the 41. and 42. verse. And
they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy, to suffer shame for his Name. And daily in the Temple, and in
every house, they ceased not to teach, and to preach Jesus Christ.

1. The words that I have read contain. 1. an account of Gods dignation toward
his people, and their disposition toward him. The saints condition (to suffer)
the name, or title of their sufferings, (shame.)

2. Secondly here is their disposition of spirit, not with sorrow, and hanging
down their heads like a bulrush, no they lift up their heads, and exalt their
horn in him. 2 Samuel 12.20.
It was a manlike act in David when the child was dead: while it was alive, he
fasted and wept: But when it was dead he arose from the earth, washed and
anointed himself, and changed his apparel and came into the house of the Lord,
and worshipped; so it was with the Apostles, notwithstanding all their evil
usages; yet, they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name.

Six propositions contain the sum of this Text. 6 Propositions.












our sufferings, is sufficient to quick en us up to joyfullness in them. And
they departed etc.

Rev. 12. v. last.
and went to make war with the remnant of her seed. The dragon is the Devil,
the woman the church. By his instruments he maks war with her, the seed of the
serpent, makes war with the seed of the woman, because they keep the
commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ: It was a right
speech of Austin, when those ten persecuting emperors were dead, and those ten
persecutions over, and the people began to comfort themselves, that persecution
would now cease, O but says he, the Devil is not dead, and so long as he has
instruments to stir up, persecution will be raised. So long as the wicked lust
to envy, the people of God must expect to suffer. 1. Reason of our suffering.
They that cannot sin, must expect to suffer, because we have sined, we suffer
justly from God, because we will not sin, we suffer unjustly from men. Never
a soul that ever set it is face toward heaven, but the world turned their backs
upon it: The Church of Christ, is as the Lylie among thorns, such as are
interested in the Love of God, must expect to feel the wrath and anger of men;
John. 16.33.
in the world (it was Christ's own prediction) ye shall have tribulation; in the
upper Region above is peace, but in this under the moon is nothing but trouble.
Daniel, Dan. 6.16.
a man greatly beloved of God, but as greatly persecuted by men. The Apostle
Paul, a person eminent in grace and in favor with God, yet notwithstanding, as
the raither extremely persecuted; he was in bonds for the word sake. 2 Timothy
2.9. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds. They that
receive much mercy from God, 2 Timothy 2.9.
and perform much duty to God; must expect to meet with little mercy from the
world. They shall put you out of the Synagogue, yea, out of the world too, kill
you and yet think they do God good service; this arises from the words
wickedness, they wound Christ through the Saints sides; ungodly men conceive
and contrive enmity against the people of God, and when it is conceive, it
brings forth reproach, and persecution of them. Lord, Isa. 26.11.
when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and be
ashamed for their envy at the people, yea, the fire of thine enemies shall
devour them. The whole world lies in wickedness, that is, the two seeds are
put in enmity, the seed of the serpent against the seed of the woman.

Secondly, from Gods will and pleasure, 2. Rea. of suffering.
God has willed sufferings to his people, as his Livery, its a Legacy to his
people, to you it is given on the behalf of Christ: not only to believe, but
also to suffer: not only to believe, but to blood also: They that are called
to grace, are called to sufferings. The time of grace at first is atyme of
love, the continuance of it, a time of affliction. For whom he did foreknow,
Romans 8.29.
he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his son; that is his
suffering Image, in order to our conformity to his glorious Image. God had one
Son without sin, but he has none without a scourge. It is the will of God we
should belike Christ; not only in the end, and form, but in the means. Sin
resembles a man to the Devil, but sufferings resembles a man to Christ. From
hence.



Psalm. 22.12.
the bulls of Bashan push at them, let not the Lambs push one at another. Do
they suffer from the world? That is no great matter, but to suffer from
familiar friends, is too much. If it had been mine enemy (says David) I could
have born it: Psalm. 55.12, 13. and 41.9. v.
but it was thou my familiar friend, who took sweet council together, etc. It
is said in a prophecy of Christ. Zech. 13.6. v. He was wounded in the house of
his friends; that augmented the grief.







Second proposition is this. That reproach and shame, is part of Gods peoples
sufferings here in the world.
with God, are commonly cast out with men. They lie here oft-tymes among the
pots, whom God intends for the fairest Cup-board of heavenly glory in the world
to come. They manifested open indignity to the Apostles, two several ways; by
words and by blows reproach before Magistrates, is a shame in the worlds
Calender. Those whom God do honor; one way or another the wicked will
dishonor: The wickeds spite is against god, but, Panther-like, if they cannot
reach the person, they will tear the picture; though the consciences of Gods
people compurgats them, yet the world maks no conscience of condemning. Psalm.
44.13.
Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that
are round about us. A reproach to men on every side hedged in, and compassed
about with reproaches, scandals, and slanders, Psalm. 79.4.
so Psalm. 79. v. 4. we are become a reproach to our neighbors, ascorn and a
derision to them that are round about us. You see the church of God,
wherever, at one time or other, were under reproaches. Isaac the Son of the
promise, was scoffed at, by Ishmael, Gal. 4.29.
this is called persecution. But as then he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the spirit; so it is now. Thus it was with
holy Job when he was made an out cast by his friends; Job. 16.8, 9.
that made of him no more then a Hypocrite: He teareth me in his wrath, who
hates me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy sharpneth his eyes
upon me. They gaped upon me with their mouth, they have smitten me upon the
cheek reproachfully, they have gathered themselves together againse me. And
will ye step a little farther and see David. In my adversity they rejoiced etc.
this was the measure this holy man of God met with in his time; and the Prophet
Isa: says, Isa. 8.18.
that the professers of his time were signs and wonders in Israel^ Zion is an
out cast, whom no man seeks after an out cast that no man seeks after. Jer.
30.17. Lam. 1.7, 21.
So Jerusalem what she came to be in her distresses. They have heard that I
sight, there is none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble,
they are glad that thou have done it: And this Is common with all the saints,
for such as are guilty of oppression, Lam. 2: 15, 16.
are guilty likewise of Columnies so chap. 2. is this the city of solemnities?
All that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the
daughter of Jerusalem, saying, is this the city that men call, the perfection
of beauty, the joy of the whole earth? All thine enemies have opened their
mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth; they say, we have swallowed
her up; certainly this is the day that we looked for; we have found, we have
seen it: Thus they please themselves, with scoffing at the poor Church and
people of God. Psalm. 69.20. Lam. 3.30.
Reproaches have broken my heart; says the Psalmist in the person of Christ:
so Lam: The church there says, she gave her cheeks to him that smot her, she
was filled full ith reproaches. Thus both the worship and worshippers of God,
have been made a reproach in the world. The word of the Lord in the prophecy
of Jer. 6.10. was a reproach unto that wicked generation; Jer. 6.10.
to whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear; behold, the word
of the Lord is unto them a reproach: they have no delight in it: Jer. 20. v. 18.
and so chap. 20.18. he speaks again of the reproaches he met withal, there he
says, he came forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, that his days
should be consumed with shame: The spirit of God tells the Prophet Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 33.30.
concerning the children of the people, not enemies only, but the children of
the people are taking against thee, by the wall's, and in the doors of the
houses, they snarld at the word of the Lord. Thus all the Prophets under the
old, and Christ and his Apostles under the New Testament, have been accounted
vilely off. Paull called a seditious fellow, Christ called the Carpenters Son,
no better title could they afford him: And they thought they had hit the bird
on the eye, when they said have any of the Rulers believed on him! Isa. 66. v.
5.
Esa. 66.5. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name sake
said, let the Lord be glorified. Therefore the Apotle exhorts. Peter. 2.12.
Having your conversation honest among the gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, 1 Pet. 2.12.
which thy shall behold, glorify God in the day of your visitation. The saints
had need do well, while they hear it. The work of God, as well as the servants
of God, has met with reproaches. Neh. 2.19. Nehem. 2.19.
But when Sanballat the Honorite, and Tobiah the servant the Ammonite, and
Geshem the Arabian heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and
said, what is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the King? there
was a charge for them. So chap. 4.2, 8. Neh 4.2, 8.
And he spoke before his brethren, and the Army of Samaria, and said, what do
these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they
make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the
rubbish, which are burnt? And v. 8. v. 8.
And conspired all of them together, to come and to feight against Jerusalem,
and to hinder it. In so much, as they even broke the good man's heart, and made
him cry out v. 4. Hear, O our God, for we are despised: and turn their
reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of
Captivity. The Apostles, when they were preaching the Ghospel; with greatest
earnestness and vehemency, nay, when as the holy Ghost, descended in such an
extraordinary manner upon them, they said, these men are filled with new wine,
therefore the Apostle says, they were defamed, and blasphemed, 1 Cor. 4.13.
we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all
things. This is the Sect, every where spoken against. Heb. 10.33. Acts 28.22.
You may read, concerning those admirable worthies, what a heap of reproaches
were thrown upon them. Partly whilst ye were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches and afflictions. And Heb. 11.36. Heb. 11.36.
And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings, yea, moreover, of
bonds and imprisonments. And indeed reproaches are cruel, the wounds of the
tongue, go deeper, then those of the hand; and in the primitive times, how
many calumnies were the precious servants of the most high God, laden with;
when they rose early in the morning to sing their morning Hymn, they charged
them with uncleanness, and incest: thus they called Athenasius the eldest Son
of the Devil, And Luther (the Papists say) was the cause of all the troubles,
that befell Germany. With vilifying names and expressions, have Gods eminent
and worthy Champions suffered. So for usage too, what whippings, scourgings,
imprisonning? thus it was with Christ; and thus it was with all his followers.
The design of the adversary, has been, partly the terror, and partly, the
shame of Christians. They were tortured, Heb. 11.35.
not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. This
was the portion (my beloved) of the eminent Saints, and people of God of old;
and the reason of this is plain.

out of malice will reproach that they do understand, but it is no wonder the
world reproach that they do not understand; our life is hid, with Christ in
God: Religion is a melancholy thing, says the men of the world, and
therefore: it is no wonder they despise it: as it was said of Christ: Jes. 53.3.
He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief: And so it is with all the people of God; men look upon their outsides,
and see that vil'd, but they see not their insides. Psalm. 45.13.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within.

whom the Emperor answered, they were the servants of God, at which he went
away, saying, if God kept his servants so poor, he would not be one of them.
This is the trick of Apostates, to reproach zealous Professors, to take of the
shame of their Apostasy, as Julian did. Jer. 6.28.
They are all grievious revolters, that walk with slanders, they are Brass and
Iron, they are all corrupters. Well, hence Gods people may learn.

2 Samuel 6.14 and 22.
Can you say as David, when he danced before the Lord, when scoff't at by
Michal. If this be to be vile, I will yet be more vile then thus, Consider
Christ, Christians, that endured the Crosz, despised the shame, and is now set
down, at the right hand of the Majesty on high, far above all principalities
and powers, you must deny your selves, your own lusts, pleasures, honors; if
ye will be Christ's Disciples you must be willing to be accounted base, vile by
every evil foot of pride, even by them, that in the flourish of Religion, ye
would not set with the dogs of your flock, as Job speaks.

2. Tim. 1.8.
to animate your selves against reproaches; be not thou ashamed of the
afflictions of the Ghospel. Nothing carry's with it a true ground of shame, but
sin; be not ye ashamed of your afflictions. Moses, chose the reproaches of
Christ, before the pleasures, and treasures of Egypt: we must go forth to
Christ, without the Camp, to mount Calvary, as well as mount Olivet; bearing
his reproach. And that you may be armed against reproaches.





1 Pet. 4.14.
consider, the spirit of glory rests upon you, not the spirit of grace only,
but of glory also, not for a little time, but to rest, yea, and that for ever.



1 Pet. 1.7.
your Trials will be found for praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearance of Jesus Christ: The wicked shall leave their names for a curse unto
my chosen: for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another
name. Isa. 65.15.
Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
Diadem, in the hand of the God. Isa. 62.3. The Lord has promised to wipe away
the rebuke of his people, and there shall be never a blott, to blurr their
faces. The day is shortly coming, in which wicked men shall answer, for all
their hard usages of, and speeches to the people of God. Dan. 12.^.3. Math.
2.34.
The wicked that are in the highest state, in the world, shall rise at the last
day to everlasting shame, and you to everlasting honor. Ye shall shine as the
Sun, in the Kingdom of your father. The shouldier is not ashamed of his marks,
and scarrs he receives in the wars, but looks upon them, as so many badges of
honor: so the reproaches you meet with, are but as so many badges of honor,
all the scarrs ye meet with in the way of holiness, are as so many marks of
honor put upon you, and if you confess Christ before men, he will confess you,
before his father, and before the holy Angels. And O Christians! here is a good
target against reproaches, do but maintain your innocence, and then you can
never be made miserable, by the Judgments of others.

Third proposition is this. That the name of Christ, is the cause, and great
occasion, of all the sufferings that befall the Children of God.
Math. 24.9.
All these things will they do unto you for my names sake. John 15.21.
There Is the ground of wicked men's malice against the saints; the profession of
Christ is the butt of persecution: for that is thee implied, some suffer the
loss of Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, houses and lands, for my names
sake, (says Christ.) It Is not for their sin, that Gods people suffer from the
world, but for their grace: could they conform to the world, could they drink
and be drunk, swear and blaspheme, live riotously and loosly, the world would
hug them in their Arms, and embrace them with their dearest affection. They
think it a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.3.
you run not with them to the same excess of riot: This expression (for his
name sake) may have a double reference.

2 Cor. 12.10.
Therefore I take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in infirmities, in
distresses for Christ's That is that which ingages a Christian in, and
encourages him under sufferings; and as sufferings for righteousness
distinguish a Saint from the wicked, so will respect to Christ's Name distiguish
a Saint from a Hypocrite; for although I should give all my goods to the poor
(a universal alms) and my body to be burned, yet if I had not charity, al
were nothing; therefore for thy sake (says the Church) we are killed all the
day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. But,

Tim. 2.1.
It is a great ground of comfort to the saints, that it is for Christ's, and
his Gospel's sake, that they suffer. Do not they blaspheme, James 2.7.
that worthy name, by the which ye are called? It was the name of Christ, that
worthy name, they dealt with them for. It was upon that account, they measured
out this measure unto them. The world cannot come up to the pitch of holiness
the Saints do, and they going beyond the common pace of Civility, Morality,
and Hypocrisy, the Dogs bark at them. Noah condemned the old world, by his
righteousness: the world praise and cannonize the dead saints, but cannot endure
to see them that are living, but hunt after their precious lives. If one child
in the Family have the Fathers indulgence, all the rest will hate him. So
Joseph's brethren hated him. Gen 49.27.
He that is the object of Gods love, (commonly) is the but of the worlds envy,
therefore the wicked take all the occasions they can, against the saints, and
watch for their haltings; they daily blaspheme the name of God, because of his
peoples failings. Isa. 52. v. 5, 6.
And the most of them are like Tyggers, that cannot endure a fragrant scent,
but will fall upon them that carry it, and kill them. And if it be so.







Romans 8.36. 1 Cor. 4.10.
here is comfort, when the soul can say, Lord it is for thy sake. The Apostle
triumphs in this. That they were fools for Christ's sake. O! blessed be God,
that ever we had a name to offer up for Christ, Bernard saying.
and sacrifice for Christ: As Bernard was wont to say, Lord make me a shield,
to fence of the injuries, that fall upon thy name. Paul complained of his
persecuting the Saints, it is a killing the Prince of life, the Lord of glory;
it is a great piece of Injustice. It is not our preaching, but your not
receiving the Gospel says Luther, that is the worst ingredient in suffering.

The fourth Proposition is this: It is a great Dignation of God toward his
people, to call them out, and count them worthy to suffer for Christ's sake.
Gal. 6.14.
next to beleiving; to declare Christ's sacrifice to others in the world. It is
an honor to do much, but greater honor to suffer much for Christ. God forbid
I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ. The Apostle well
understood what he did, and said too. I glory (says he) in nothing but the
Cross of Christ. To suffer for Christ, is an honor beyond that granted to the
Angels, for they have no body, Mr. Philpot would say of sufferings, no such
preferment on Earth, as for Gods Childen to be called out to suffer. I have
read of a Knight in Venice, that being carried to suffer with his other
brethren, they being bound, and he being a noble person, was carried, without
chains and fetters, why says he, may not I be bound likewise, and so commence,
Knight of the honorable order of the Garter?



Isa. 43.12.
says the Lord, that I am God: hereby the Saints obtain victory over their
accusers, by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.11.
and the word of their Testimony. Paull was Gods wittness, and God made him a
chosen vessel to bear his name.

Phil. 3.12.
By the spirit of life and holiness, implanted in beleivers, they have a
fellowship with Christ, and still (a nearer) by sufferings, which the Apostle
presses after, those afflictions, we bear for Christ, and the Gospel's sake,
make us expressly partakers of Christ. For we are made partakers of Christ, if
we hold fast the beginning of our confidence firm to the end. Heb 3.14.
Therefore John tells us in Rev. 1.9. that he was a brother and companion in
tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Christ: not in the merits,
Rev. 1. v. 9.
nor effects thereof as personal, but as it was mystical, in the efficacy
thereof: we bear about in our bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10.
Gal. 6.5.
that the life also of Christ may be made manifest in our mortal bodies. These
are scripture expressions for every man shall bear his own burden; to sin is a
great dishonor, but to suffer is not so. The Saints are more glorious in being
Martyrs, then in being victors.

1 Thef. 3.3.
That no man should be moved by these afflictions; for you your selves know,
that we are appointed thereunto. And through Gods free grace accepting us in
and through Jesus Christ; and we suffering, the head and body being united,
we are counted worthy of the Kingdom of God. Then

own account: for Christ to suffer by us, is a great dishonor, but to suffer
in us is honorable. They rejoiced that they were counted worthy, to be
unworthy; and graced to be disgraced. Hebr. 11.38.
They that suffer for Christ are such of whom the world is not worthy. God
esteems heaven a fitter place for them. Consider what an honorable thing it is
to suffer, it is more honorable to give then receive. In all the benedictions
of grace conferred upon us, we receive from God; in our sufferings we give to
God. In our services we do that which God of us has commanded; in our
sufferings we give glory to the cause of God to us commended.

Secondly, bless God for any opportunity he has given us to suffer. Giving
thanks to the Father who has made us meet, to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light: Col. 1.12.
it seems a hard lesson, but 't is to be learned, giving thanks to the Father,
who by afflictions, have made you meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light: for they were made fit, as by grace, so by afflictions.
It is a great question, whether we are most to bless God for making Heaven
fit for us, or us fit for Heaven by affliction.

The fifth Proposition is this: That an opportunity to suffer for Christ's name,
is to be esteemed a great privilege and mercy; 't is to be judged the highest
Felicity.


First, fromthe express command of God to his people, to suffer with
joyfullness; 't is the general Character given of the people of God, Phil. 3.3.
they are such as rejoice in Christ Jesus. We are of the Circumsion, that
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus. Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
And we rejoice in Christ Jesus, having received the attonment: And so it is
the duty and has been the practice of the Saints, to rejoice in him.
Sufferings for Christ have been always matter of great joy. James 1.2.
My brethren, count it all joy (says the Apostle) when ye fall into diverse
temptations. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven.
Math. 5.12.
Rejoice ye in that day, when men has you, and separate you from their
company, rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: Luke 6.22. and 23.
for great is your reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets. It is
the will of God, his people should rejoice always; rejoice ever more. 1 Thessalonians.
5.16. Especially upon the matters of affliction; that is the will of God toward
his people. The Cross should not only be taken up with patience, Coll. 1.11.
but born with joyfullness. Strengthened with all might, according to his
glorious power, unto all patience, and long suffering with joyfullness:
joyfullness is a help to patience and long suffering under the Cross. For
example, see how the Apostle rejoices under all his afflictions. I rejoice
that I help to fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, Col. 1.24.
for his bodies sake which is the Church. But rejoice in as much as you are
partakers of Christ's sufferings; 1 Pet. 4.13.
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad wih exceeding joy. In
whom beleiving (though under manifold temptations) we rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.
In a time of great affliction it was the great commendation of the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 6.
that they received the Gospel with great joy. The Church rejoiced when the
hand of Gods providence was out against her. Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the
fig tree should not blossom, neither should fruit be in the Vines: Hab. 3.17,
18.
the labor of the Olive should fail, and the fields shall yield no meat: yet
will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. And so do
the people of God, rejoice likewise under the stroke of man's violence; this
has been their practice, nay, not only to joy, but to glory in afflictions.
We glory in tribulation also. Romans 5.3. 2 Cor. 2.14.
Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place. A Saint is
bound to rejoice in the Lord in good days, and in evil days; but especially
in times of great opposition. Neh. 8.10. 2 Cor. 6.10.
The joy of the Lord is your strength. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. They
took joyfully the spoiling of their goods Hebr. 10.34. not only patiently, but
joyfully. Acts 16.25. Phil. 1.20.
Paul and Silas did not repine, but sung in the prison. Paul rejoiced that
Christ should be magnified in him whether by life or death. The Martyrs endured
exquisite torments with admirable patience: Divine joy abated outward anguish;
their souls were wrapped up in joy, as if they were in a separated state. Paul
counted it his honor to suffer reproach and afflictions. 1 Timothy 4.10.
For this cause we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the
living God. The Apostles were not found (in the Text) blaspheming, nor
repining, nor only submitting but blessing God, yea, joying in God: They were
not (men) altogether unsensible of injuries, yet, they that through infirmities
foresooke their Master, in the strength of his grace and spirit rejoiced to
suffer for him: remembering Christ told them, they were blessed that suffer. Now
there are sufficient grounds of the Saints thus rejoicing in all their
sufferings.

2 Cor. 1.5.
Not only weight for weight; but a preponderating weight of consolation they
enjoy: while the people of God drink deep draughts of the water of affliction,
they also draw water out of the wels of Consolation. Gods consolations ought
not to be small to his people. 2 Cor. 7.4, 6.
2 Cor. 7.4. compared with the v. 6. Great is my boldness of speech toward you,
great is my glorying of you, I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful
in all our tribulation, nevertheless, God that comfort those that are cast
down, comforted us by the coming of Titus; though troubled on every side:
whence arose this joy? why, God that comfort those that are cast down,
comforted us also. Though a storm of Hail fell upon their heads, yet the sun
shine of his favor shone upon their hearts. Psalm 94.19.
In the midst of my sad thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.
Although we meet with storms without, no matter, so we have but peace within.
In the world ye shall have tribulation (always tribulation) but in me ye shall
have peace, John. 16.33.
therefore be of good comfort.



Thirdly, there is ground of rejoicing in sufferings for Christ's name, in
respect of the presence of God, and Christ under afflictions communicated and
enjoyed. Fear not (says God) I am with thee, when thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee: Isa. 43.2.
and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou passest through
the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame, kindle upon thee.
God was with the three Children, when in the fiery-Furnace; with Daniel in the
Lions Den; with Joseph in the prison; Jeremiah in the Dungeon. The Lords
presence is with his, to the end of the would. The presence of God supports
under all burdens, and sweetens the bitterest cups of affliction; you have made
me more glad, with the light of thy countenance; then they with the increase of
their Corn, Wine, and Oil: There Is a spring in divine joy; if Gods people want
the Stars, they shall have the light of the Sun: and the enjoyment of God, can
make up for the want of the creature.

2 Cor. 1.10.
and does deliver: in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us: Christ's
deliverance, is an assurance to Gods people, of deliverance out of their
tribulations: for he that raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead; 1 Cor. 6.14.
by his own power, will also raise up us. And God has raised up the Lord'
Christ: and will also raise up us by his own power. And therefore ye may find
that God encouraged his people under all their persecutions; that when their
brethren cast them out for his name sake, he would take them up, and make their
enemies ashamed, when his hand should be known to his servants.

Heb. 12.2. Heb. 11.27.
Moses having a veiw of God, and of glory by the spectacles of faith, is said
to endure as seeing him that is invisible: for this cause we faint not, but
suffer reproach, because we judge that these light afflictions, which are but
for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. O
Soul! who ever thou art, that suffer for Christ's name though hell be
behind thee, Heaven is still before Hell; this was that, Heb. 10.34.
those primitive Christians comforted themselves with. Knowing with in
themselves (they had experience in their own hearts, assurance in their bosoms)
that in Heaven they had a better and more enduring substance. 40 Mart.
This comforted those forty Martyrs, when (before they were to suffer) they
were cast in to water in cold weather; now (say they) we shake for cold, but by
and by we shall be in Abraham's bosom: men may kill the Saints, but it is
impossible that they should ever hurt them: so that an opportunity to suffer
for Christ is to be esteemed as a meecy. By way of inference from hence.





Prove. 14.10.
the world wonders how the Saints go so courageously through sufferings. But
the Martyrs answer may serve to answer this; ye see the fuel that burns me,
but did ye feel the joy that I feel, ye would not wonder. The ways, of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord:
eternal life is sweet, the assured expectation whereof makes men thus to
suffer. There is a great deal of difference between Saints and sinners upon
this account.



2 Samuel 19:2, 4.
I may allude to that 2 Samuel 19:2, 4. where the King wept for his son, and the
victory that day was turned into mourning, and the King covered his face and
cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, Number. 14.2.
my son: wat an ugly sight was that of the Isralites digging their graves. And
all the Children of Israel murmured against Moses, and against Aaron: and
against the whole congregation, and said unto them, would, God that we had
died in the Land of Egypt, or would God we had died in this wilderness. It is
a great shame for Christians, and it is a great dishonor to Christ, for
Christians to be so dastardly spirited.



Isa. 10.18, 19.
And then the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a Child may
write them. When the hearts of the principal of God flock fail, they offer
discouragement to all the rest.



Secondly, 2ly for reproof.
this justly reproves those, that, instead of rejoyceing to suffer for Christ,
entertaines them with regrate, that come to affliction as a bear to the stake,
or a thief to the Gallous. Such as shrink, especially that dog it in Religion
when they should appear courageously, such sufferings are very unacceptable
unto God, when (we are compelled to that, in which we should be most free and
voluntary. Isa. 58.5.
Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is
it to bow down his head like a bull-rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable day unto the Lord? It
is a sad sign of a perverse and hypocritical heart, not to suffer joyfully
upon Christ's account. The Romans, if the beast that was to be made a sacrifice
would not go willingly, they would never offer that beast up in sacrifice; so
if we do not offer our selves willingly, soul and body, which is but our
reasonable sacrifice, we shall not be accounted holy, nor acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ. It was the excellency of former times, 4 Cautions anent
sufferings.
that they were careful to suffer for Christ, that so Christ might not suffer
by them. Always remember.

First, that it is far better to suffer for Christ, then to suffer by Christ.

1 Pet. 3.10.
if I had served you, as you serve me, at the battle of Actium, where had you
been? so may Christ say to us, where had you been, if I had served you upon the
Cross, as ye serve me? if I had deserted your cause, what had become of you? ye
had been lost to eternity.





Thirdly, by way of exhortation, 3 For Exhortation.
let me persuade all of you, to learn this Leslen (though hard, and will go
much against the hair, of holy joyfullness in sufferings; it is good for you to
be provided, and not to go naked into a storm and battle; hard times put me
upon calling you to it. Since Christ has suffered for us, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind: resolve to suffer with chearfullness: 't is your
privilege as well as duty: why will ye neglect one thing that is matter of
privilege unto you?

Motives 8.
Motives to press you hereunto.







love; yea, while he suffers wicked men to chastise and correct you, his
fatherly love is toward you: Gods people have had powerful experience, and
familiar acquaintance of and with God upon this account: God as a Father
chastises every Son whom he receives; nay, as the fire burns hottest, when
the wether is coldest, so Gods affections to his people is highest; when their
afflictions are greatest.

2 Cor. 4.16.
For this cause we faint not; (says the Apostle) for though our outward man
perish, our inward man is renewed day by day, as the Sea, what it loses in
one shiere, it gets in another: grace grows by an Antiperistasis, affliction is
sanctified and grace is exercised and proved thereby. We had fathers of our
flesh, that corrected us; and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather
be in subjection unto the father of spirits, and live? Heb. 12.9. and 10.
They corrected us for their pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness. The trial of your faith is for honor, praise and
glory: fiery trials make golden Christians, your suffering (like the sun)
scorcheth the Hypocrite, but ripens the sincere Christian. The North-winde of
affliction, blowing upon the garden of the saints graces, cause the spices
thereof to flow forth.

Math. 5.11, 12
Blessedness is the entail; Math. 5.11, 12. blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven. Luke 6.22, 23.
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the
son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, Luke 6.23.
and leap for joy: for behold your reward is great in heaven: for in the like
manner did their fathers unto the Prophets. Happy are they that endure.

Seventhly, James 5.11. Mot. 7.
all your sufferings serve to work you up to a further likeness to Christ and
the saints. So they dealt with them before you. Take, my brethren, the
Prophets, James 5.10.
who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering
affliction, and of patience.

Eighthly, Heb. 11.35.
they greaten and agravate your glory and happiness in the next world. They
would not accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.
They had a good resurrection, though they had not suffered, but hereby they had
a better one. O that all might prevail with you to this rejoyceing! if ye may
be counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name. Now your joy under
sufferings must be.

1. What kind of joy ye must leave.
First, spiritual, not carnal, in spiritual objects, in things spiritual; it
must be a pure and refined joy. Jesus rejoiced in spirit. Luke 10.21. The joy
of the Lord must be your strength: your joy must be pure and spiritual.

Hebr. 12.5.
we must glory, not sport it under afflictions and tribulations. We must not
dispond, nor yet make light of afflictions; if we make light of afflictions,
God will make them heavy, true joy should be a serious thing.

Luke 6.23.
putting the soul on to duty, engageing the soul under all afflictions to
manifest our joy by outward signs; a leaping of heart and body, it comes from,
and is an allusion to the danceing of the Galyard, or leaping of young cattle
that are wanton, or (as some carry it) to the joy that a Bridegroom takes in
his Bride, upon their marriage day.

Heb. 3.6.
Strengthened with all might to endure with patience, and long suffering with
joyfullness. Our joy must be such as the Apostles was here, they were constant;
that accompanied their joy. A saint indeed may have some mixtures of sadness;
but though heavyness endure for a night, joy comes in the morning. A beleivers
joy is not like that of a hypocrite that lasts but for a moment: but constant:
like the conflict of wind and fire, that increases it the more; so must
afflictions. That Apostle that failed before in his speeches and doctrine,
could now rejoice in his stripes; he that before trembled at the look of a
silly damsel, now could look upon the face of a great and learned Council. But
you will say, 10. Direct. and Helps.
what shall we do, to attain such a blessed frame of spirit? I will propound
you some directions to help you herein.

1 Pet. 4.12.
if ye would be joyful under your sufferings for Christ's sake, Enure your
selves to them; count not the fiery trial a strange thing we entertain
strangers with dissatisfaction, but friends with joy and delight: receive not
sufferings as strangers, but friends, and then ye will bid them welcome; we
are like Ephraim unaccustomed to the yoke, and that maks us to entertain
afflictions so unwillingly. A suit at first putting on, pinches but afterward
becomes easy; a Bird at first putting into the Cage is dampish, but afterward
being satisfied sings sweetly; Fox: vol. 2. page 277.
Mr. Bilney in prison diverse times proved the fire, by putting his finger near
to the candle; at the first touch of the candle his flesh resisting, and he
with drawing his finger, did after chide his flesh in these words; Quid unius
membri inustionem far non potes, and quo pacto cras totius corporis
conflagrationem tolerabis? What (said he) can thou not bear the burning of
one member, and how will thou endure to morrow the burning of the whole body? I
feel, and have known it long by philosophy, that fire is hot; yet I know some
(recorded in Gods word) even in the flame felt no heat; and I believe that
though my body will be wasted by it, my soul shall be purged thereby.



and yet the sweetness on the other hand. I have read of a picture, that had
the deformed shape of a Monster on the one side, and the face of a beautiful
virgin on the other: so are sufferings, black on one side and beautiful on the
other; when we judge of the Be by her sting we cannot bear with her, but
consider honey with it, and she is acceptable. Remember the joyfullness of
afflictions, as well as the grieviousness of them, and you will be taken off
all prejudices against it. Tribulation works patience, and patience experience,
and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; because the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost: God gives all out of love in
proportion, and in infinite wisdom, which he will show in due time. The
ransomed of the Lord shall come to Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon
their hands, though now they have sorrow in their hearts.

Rev. 2.2. comp. with 3.
if you would suffer joyfully for Christ, then labor for joy in doing work,
this will make way for joy in suffering Rev. 2.2, and 3. compared. I know thy
works and thy labor, and thy patience, and for my name sake have labored and
have not fainted; the soul that comes once to work and labor, will come to
patience, and will not faint: if ye would bear Christ's Cross joyfully, 1 Timothy
4.8. and 9.
labor to bear his yoke joyfully; for bodily exercise profits little, but
godlyness is profitable unto all things; having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. This is a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance. I count not my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish
my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have recived of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 20.24.
to testify the Gospel of the grace of God; what follows! but I am willing to
die at Jerusalem for the name of Jesus. Ps. 119.114.
Thou art my hiding place and my shield I hope in thy word. He made the word
the man of his Counsels; and so it was the man of his comforts.

Fifthly, labor to get a right esteem of sufferings, esteem them as a
privilege, an honor as well as a duty, that will make you suffer joyfully, ye
must not only look to your innocence, to take heed that you suffer not from
God, while you suffer for God: but turn your afflictions into a right stream
and channel, to us it is given (says the Apostle) not only to believe, but
also to suffer for his sake, he looked upon it as a Largess. Chrysostom. says of
Paul, that he boasts most of this, I Paul the prisoner of the Lord: he does not
boast of his high offices, knowledge of arts and sciences, great and glorious
Revelations, no, but the glories in his sufferings, as in his own narrative it
appears. 2 Cor. 11.23. ad finem capitis.
2 Cor. 11:23. in labors more abundant: in stripes above measure: in prisons
more frequent: in death often, etc.

Sixthly, take heed of consulting with flesh and blood; the flesh is a jade
that will kick at sufferings; when Peter grew carnal and fleshly, his voice was
no better then this, Master save thy self: which motion Christ rejected, with a
get thee behind me Satan. Look not at the making of your own Interest; but
advance the Interest of Christ and the Gospel; your endeavors to save your own
selves, will but make you stumble at the Cross of Christ.



Eighthly, Direct. 8. 1 Cor. 15.31. Heb. 13.13. 1 Cor. 7.30.
take heed of being overcome with love to the world. I protest by your
rejoyceing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. We must go
forth unto Christ without the Camp, bearing his reproach. If we would rejoice
in the world, it must be as if we rejoiced not, and if we buy, as if we
possessed not. Our rejoyceing should be in God, not in the world for the
fashion thereof passes away; in a day of prosperity we are too apt to be
filled with carnal joy; Gal. 6.14.
and often times we have the more heavenly joy in God in a day of Adversity. God
forbid I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, whereby the
world is crucified unto me, and I am crucified unto the world. A holy contempt
of the world, will best lead you to a holy joy in God.

Psalm. 16. ult.
that he foresaw the Lord always before his face, therefore did my heart
rejoice, and my tongue was glad, moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope. O
the blessed enjoyment of God reserved for the next world! the glorious vision
and fruition of God, that is to be enjoyed in heaven; the communion that is to
be enjoyed with the glorious Angels and Saints in Heaven, will sweeten all.
Rejoice that your names are written in Heaven. Luke 10.20.
Luke 10.20. in the Lambs book of life; if your names are written in blood or
in water in the worlds Calander, yet they are written in gold in the Lambs book
of life; with in a few days, you shall enter into your Masters joy. I reckon
not the sufferings of this present time worthy to be compared to the glory that
is to be revealed in us: Look upon sin and hell, and then sufferings and heaven
will appear the highest good. I read of one that spent his time in reading of
three leaves; the black leaf of his own sins; the red leaf of Christ's blood,
and the white leaf of Heaven and Eternity. Three leafes worth the reading of.
For this cause we faint not, while we look not at the things which are seen
and temporal; but at those things which are not seen, but eternal. Labor to
make a right comparison between the horror of hell, and the happiness of
Heaven: get a greater assurance of Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.3.
that ye may rejoice in the hope that is laid up for you in Heaven. This was
that, those scattered Sants blessed God for. Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ: which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrecton of Jesus Christ from the dead. To
an inheritance incorruptable and undefiled that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you. This made them break out into a triumphant doxology; this made
the Martyrs hearts leap for joy under their sufferings for Christ, even the
thoughts of Heaven and that blessed eternity to which they were going; holy
Ignatius triumphed going to suffer at Rome; yea, gloried and triumphed to think
that the Lord would come to reckon for blood.

Tenthtly, and lastly, labor to get your hearts discharged of carnal and
slavish fear, perfect love casts out fear; be not afraid to die, and you
will not be afraid to suffer. Ye may thresh the body of a poor man, but ye
cannot hurt the jewel of his soul. Threaten says the Emperor what ye will, I
fear nothing but sin; fear not them that can kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do; but I will forewarn you whom ye should fear: fear
him that when he has killed, has power to destroy both body and soul in hell
fire. Why shoul'st thou fear a mortal man, that has his breath in his
Nostrils, or his bigg words, or staring face? do men threaten imprisonment?
God threatens hell. Do they promise great rewards, if ye will but comply with
them? Ask them (as the Father did) whether they can give that to you they
would take from you.

The sixth Proposition is this. That the Consideration of Christ's name, that is
concerned in the sufferings of the Saints, is sufficient, to encourage them
under them.
2 Cor. 4.11.
For we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. Christ's blood
is the meritorious cause, and his spirit and grace the assisting cause, and
when sufferings come from his name sake as the procuring cause there is always
joy in them. Therefore when we suffer for bearing witness to the Truth, this
is suffering for Christ's name; when we thus hold forth the profession of
Christ's name, it tends to the glory of Christ. When we suffer out of Love to
Christ's honor to his person, love to his offices and administrations,
chooseing to suffer rather then to abate any duty, or neglect any communion,
when we suffer upon a Gospel account, as Christ suffered for the introduction,
so we for the confirmation, as he for the satisfaction, so we for the
edification of the Church, that is the valuable account of our sufferings:
Phil. 2.17.
this the Apostle triumphed in Phil. 2.17. there he tells them If I be offered
upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith, I joy and rejoice with you all.
There is great reason why this should encourage the hearts of Gods people under
all their sufferings, because it is but a just return to him of his sufferings
for us: it entails us to great honor with him; and he is able to recompense us
for them all. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
2 Thessalonians. 1.7. And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. To close all hence.

and submissively, justifying of God and condemning of our self, and humbling
our selves for the sin, that was the provoking cause of them: there is comfort
in those sufferings, that are for the trial and probation of grace, 't will be
found for honor and praise at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Luke 21.13.
But under sufferings for Christ's name much more; This will turn to you for a
testimony. If we suffer as evil doers, our sufferings are not thankworthie,
but if we suffer wrongfully happy are we.



Thirdly how precious ought Christ's name to be to the saints; if it will make
sufferings so sweet; what will it not make sweet? how precious must that name
needs be, that we are concerned to lay down our names and lives for, if called
for? O how sweet is the name of Christ? it will like a bunch of Camphire
sweeten all to us. Let us esteem of that blessed name, and count all loss and
dross, yea, and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of it. Cant. 1.3.
Cant. 1.3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments thy name is as an
ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. To such as believe
Christ's name is precious. He is admired of his saints, and of all them that
believe. Nothing shall separate me (says the Apostle) from the love of God;
which is in Christ Jesus. If we love that name, we shall not only be ready
to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, for the name of Jesus; rather choosing
the communion of Gods people, and the afflicted state thereof, then all the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season.

FINIS.

