blazon of the Protectorate
An ORDINANCE for Erecting COURTS BARON in SCOTLAND.
BE it Declared, Established, and Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector,
by and with the advice and consent of his Council, That in every place or
circuit of Land which really is, or has commonly been called, known or reputed
to be a Manor, within the Nation of Scotland, there shall be one Court, which
shall be in the Nature of a Court Baron, or Court of a Manor here in England,
to be holden every three weeks; which Court shall have power, order, and
jurisdiction of all Contracts, debts, promises, and Trespasses, whatsoever
arising within the said Manor, or precincts thereof; Provided that the Matter
in demand exceed not the value of forty shillings sterling, and that in any
such action of Trespass, the Freehold or Title of the Land be not drawn into
question; And it is further declared and Ordained, That every the said Court
Baron shall be held in manner following, That is to say, the style of the Court
shall be, The Court of A. B. held the ^ day of one thousand six hundred (...)
by K.D.C. Suitors of the said Court and the homage or Suitors to be named in the
entry, then after three O yes made, the Suitors, or their Clerk, or Steward
shall say, If any will be assoigned, or enter any plaint, let them come in and
they shall be heard, then the lury are to be impanelled and sworn, and then a
short charge is to be given concerning the several matters and things to be
done there, and after presentment and enquiry made, the Suitors shall proceed in
the several matters presented, and give order and Relief, as the Case shall
require and make execution by attachment upon the goods of the party within
that Manor.

And it is here by further declared and ordained, That the Suitors in every the
said Court Baron may from time to time, as there shall be occasion, make
bylaws for the public Weal, Rule and Government of the persons within such
Manor, and all and every such by-law shall be binding to every party within
the Manor; And the said Suitors shall have power and authority to amerce such
persons as infringe any of the said bylaws, and may give VVarrant to the
Bailiff of the Manor to did(...) (...) suc^ (...) amercement by attachment
upon the goods of the party offending. Provided that such bylaws ^e not
extended to bind the Inheritance of any person who is not party to the same and
agrees not thereunto.

Wednesday April, 12. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Leith, 1654.


