His Majesty's miraculous Preservation By the Oak, Maid, and Ship.
The Oak.
WHen Absalom rebelled against his King,
An Oak betrayed him to a suffering:
Boughs hanged him first; then Joabs Dart,
Thrice striking, wounded his perf^dious Heart.
When second CHARLES by Rebels lost the Field,
An Oak against Rebels was to him a Shield;
It opened wide, and in the Hollow where
Once lay its Heart, the King concealed there.
Men may suspend their Thoughts, Trees can define
Rebellion sinful, Royalty Divine.
The Maid.
THe Oak discharged his Trust: a Female found
(Men are but Trees inverted from the Ground)
Who next takes care: the weaker seems the Hand,
The Wonder more admiring does command:
The Sun was then in Virgo; Heavens Maid
Sent down a potent Influence and Aid:
They both agree: Acted by Starry might,
Lady Jane Lane conducts the King, in spite
Of Armed Bands, safe through the numerous force
Of Those, who King from Kingdom would divorce.
William was seen: As if sh' had Gyges Ring,
Invisible went Royal CHARLES the King.
In vain ye search, Blood-thirsty Men, to find
Veiled Majesty, her Virtue makes you blind;
Her Faith out-acts your Malice; and your Swords,
First drawn, are melted by her softest Words.
Silence in France of Orleans Jone the Fame,
Whilst England does record the worth of Lane.
The Ship.
POor Cottage of the Sea, we admire thee,
Not for thy State, or Pomp, or Pedigree;
No Neptune and no Triton stand in Gold
About thy Deck, no Statues grace thy hold;
Nor Mermaids with their Combs; Nor Stars that make
Sometimes the Sea be calm, sometimes to quake:
No Pontick Masts, whose towering Summets show
How high the Sun's above the Sea below.
Thy Oaky Ribs swell not the Forests Pride,
Nor can thou boast of the Ankers by thy side,
Nor Royal Sails: Ships framed by Art most wise,
Are thus ennobled of the vastest size.
Thy low Condition, various is from them;
Once thou secur'dst our King, the best of Men:
Thy Glory is, though mean, yet strong have stood
Against Rage of Tempests, and against Waves of Blood,
When Lions, Tigers, and those Beasts of prey,
Hunted his Life, and most would him betray.
Talk now no more of Theseus Ship, no more
Of that which brought Prince Lothbrook to our Shore:
Drown ye the Fame of former Ships, none yet
Strange to relate before so small, so great:
Worthy of Water, more renowned then Thames,
Though she like Tagus yielded Golden Sands.
If Springs of Helicon could make a Main,
Thou should ride there, and Muses by their Brain
Would make thee more then Mortal; their sweet Breath
Would fill thy Sails, and long preserve from Death.
Depths are above the Clouds, those Waters there
May suit thee well, worthy the Starry Sphere:
But if in place beneath the Moon thou rest,
Which, for admiring Visitors is best,
Gazed on by thousands; and when aged Time
Thy Body shall dissolve; and Limbs untwine,
May Seamen holy Relicts them account,
And with them still the Waves when high they mount:
Each piece an Amulet against Shipwracks harm
Will stand; against Winds and Rocks a Charm.
By John Couch, M. in A. sequestered from Horsmonden in Kent.

