The CASE of EDWARD WILLIAMS, Esquire Against a Bill caused to be brought to the
House of Peers by Mr. George Weld, a Member of the House of Commons, relating
to the Custody, Tuition, and Marriage of Sir Paul Pindar, Baronet, an Infant of
the Age of Thirteen Years and Ten Months.
SIR Peter Pindar, Baronet, had Issue Thomas Pindar, Esquire Charles Pindar, and
three Daughters, whereof one married Mr. George Weld without her Father's
consent.

Robert Win, Esquire seized of an Estate of Inheritance, had Issue three
Daughters, Ann, Mary, and Jane.

Thomas Pindar, Eldest Son of Sir Peter Pindar, married Ann, the Eldest
Daughter and sole Heir to the Inheritance of Robert Win, and by her had Issue
Paul Pindar, and one Daughter.

Thomas Pindar in 1687. dyed in the Lifetime of his Father.

In July 1689. Ann Pindar, the Widow of Thomas Pindar, by her Will named and
appointed Edward Williams, Esquire (married to her Sister Jane) Roger Mostyn, and
Ambrose Thelwal, Esquires Trustees of her Estate, and Guardians to her Son Sir
Paul Pindar (then an Infant about Nine Years old) for his Benefit, and
conmitted the Care of him to her said Brother Edward Williams in her Lifetime,
and left the Infant in his actual Custody at her Death in June 1690.

Mr. Edward Williams her Brother took care of, and provided for her Funeral,
Sir Paul Pindar the Infant continuing in his actual Custody with the consent of
the other Trustees and Guardians; and having Interred the Mother, he Peaceably
without any Force or Violence brought the Infant with him from the Funeral of
his Mother in the Presence, and with the Approbation of his Co-Trustees and
Guardians, to Place Ward, the late House of William Williams, Esquire in his way to
Mr. Edward Williams his House, and within two days brought the Infant to his
own House, where he has continued in good Health, and Educated agreeable to
his Mothers Appointment, and his own Quality.

In Michaelmas Term 1690. Mr. Weld exhibited a Bill into the Court of Chancery
against Mr. Edward Williams in the Name of Sir Paul Pindar the Infant, naming
himself his Prochein Am, untruly suggesting that Mr. Edward Williams had by
Violence seized the Infant, and detained him with an intent to dispose of him
in Marriage.

Mr. Edward Williams answered that Bill, denying the Force and Violence,
setting forth his Custody of the Infant and Trust under his said Mother's Will
and Appointment, showing also tha he was Guardian in Soccage to the Infant.

The Commissioners of the Great Seal in February 1690. Assuming the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Wards over the Estate and Person of this Infant,
Ordered, That Mr. Edward Williams should Receive the Rents of the Infant's
Maternal Estate, and Mr. Charles Pindar (the Infant's Uncle of the Father's
side) should Receive the Rents of the Infant's Paternal Estate.

Soon afterward upon the Death of Mr. Charles Pindar, the Commissioners
Appointed Mr. Weld Receiver of the Infant's Paternal Estate, and Mr. Thomas
Jones to be Receiver of the Infant's Maternal Estate; and other Orders were
made by the Commissioners in Relation to the Person and Education of the Infant.

Mr. Edward Williams Humbly conceiving that the Court of Chancery had no
Jurisdiction of the Person of the Infant, or Power over his Estate in this Case
to control the Mother's Will and Dsposition therein, and his Guardianship in
Soccage, did in pursuance of the Trust in him reposed and Guardianship, take
care of the Person of the Infant, and of his Education.

Mr. Weld having received the Profits of his Estate all this tine without
Account or Security for the Benefit of the Infant, or any Maintenance allowed
him, though there is a Bill filed for tht purpose in the Infant's Name, Mr. Weld
insisting upon his Privilege.

Now the Infant drawing near the Age of Fourteen, enabling him to choose a
Guardian, Mr. Weld fearing he may be compelled to Account for what he has
Received out of the Infant's Estate, has caused this Bill to be brought to the
House of Peers, Complaining that Mr. Edward Williams and Mr. William Williams
by Force and Violence seized and carried away the Infant, and that he has been
detained by them ever since, in order to Mary him to a Daughter of the said
Edward Williams.

All which Suggestions are notoriously untrue.

I. It cannot be pretended that Mr. William Williams was concerned, or
intermedled in any taking or detaining of the Infant, otherwise than that Mr.
Edward Williams and the Infant lay at his House a Night or two in their way
from Mrs. Pindar's Funeral to Mr. Edward Williams his House. Mr. William
Williams is a stranger to the Infant, and was so in June 1690. and has so
continued ever since without intermedling in any thing that concerns his
Person, Estate, Custody, or Marriage; he has no Power over the Infant, neither
has he seen him since he was at his House in June 1690. II. Mr. Edward
Williams had the actual Care and Custody of the Infant's Person in the
Lifetime of his Mother, and has continued so ever since, and does Humbly
insist upon it, that he is Entitled to the Custody of his Person, and
Management of his Estate with the other Co-Trustees, by the Appointment of his
Mother's Will. III. He is also Entitled to the Custody of the Infant as
Guardian in Soccage, having married the Infant's Mother's Sister. IV. The
Infant is very well pleased with his being under the Management of Mr. Edward
Williams, and has been very well Educated, and desires to continue under the
Care and Management of his Guardians appointed by his Mother's Will. V. There Is
no Ground for the Presumption of his being married to Mr. Edward Williams his
Daughter, it is rather to be suspected and feared, that the Person who married
his own Wife without her Father's Consent, and Sollicites this Bill, would
Marry this Infant to one of his Daughters, if he could get him into his Power,
having already made a Marriage for one of his Daughters to an Infant Baronet,
unequal in all respects, except the Infancy of the Persons.
Wherefore it is Humbly hoped this Bill will be rejected.


