My Bird is a Roundhead,
Being a very pleasant and true Relation of a man in Northamptonshire, that
kept a tame Owl in his house, whom he called Roundhead; and how one of his
neighbors had him before a Justice, for calling his Owl Roundhead.

To the tune of, let us to the wars again.


AS I to London took my way,
A pretty passage caused me to stay,
Which you shall know if you attend,
No honest man I will offend;
You that are wise in your conceits,
That with mere toys do trouble your pates,
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still.
In Northamtonshire a man did dwell,
That sports and pastimes loved well,
A May Pole be set up on hye,
To recreate all Comers by;
But one that was more nice then wise,
Was much offended and termed it a vice:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still.
Neithbour (quoth he) you are profane,
I wonder you will be so vain,
A May Pole here for to erect,
Me thinks such toys you should reject;
Young folk about it dance and play,
It leads their minds too much astray:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she a Roundhead still,
I Will have it down believe me friend,
Although that half my estate I spend,
It Is but a kind of an Idol vain,
Against it honest men complain;
And thus this understanding Clown,
Did still protest to have it down:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still.
Kind neighbor quoth the other man,
How long have you been a Puritan?
Zounds ^he May Pole here shall stand,
It shall not down at your command;
You I have it down, I pray Sir, why?
Come show me your authority?
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird he is a Roundhead still.
This man he had an Owl in his house,
That killed many a Rat and Mouse,
And cause he would do w^a^ he list,
He brought her otr upon his fist;
And to his neighbor showed her straight,
That still stood bawling at his gate:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still.
The second part,
to the same tune.




NEeighbour, what Bird is this (quoth he)
That here upon my fist you see?
It Is a Mag-howlet the other replied,
That on your fist does now abide;
No, it is a Roundhead on my fist,
I hope I may call my Bird what I list:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still.
The man began to fret and chafe,
Whilst he with his Owl did heartily laugh,
His laughing made him almost mad,
The one was merry the other sad:
My pretty Roundhead hurts none,
Among other Roundheads my Bird is one:
To whit to who, etc.
She meddles not with State affairs,
Or sets her neighbors by the ears,
No Cross nor May Pole makes her start,
Nor can she preach in Cup or Cart;
She seeks to pull no Organs down,
Nor on an Image casts a frown:
To whit to who, etc.
To be revenged the other sought,
He called him knave and all to naught,
Before a Justice he did him bring,
And told the Justice every thing;
Before the Justice they came I wis,
But all they could get of him was this,
To whit to who, come say what you will
My Bird she is Roundhead still.
Sirrah quoth the Justice hold your-tongue,
Good men methinkes you should not wrong,
Sir quoth the man, nor have I yet,
Though he thinks so for want of wit;
I have a Bird he says she is an Owl,
But I may call her Roundhead or fool:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird she is a Roundhead still,
The Justice knew not what to say,
But friendly bid him go his way,
Then home he went being dismissed
With his Roundhead upon his fist;
I wonder men so simple be,
They can be so displea'd with me:
To whit to who, etc.
There Is none my Roundhead vill despise,
But such as are known to be unwise,
Giggy-headed fools and dolts,
Sisters and unbridled Colts;
My Roundhead is a gallant Bird,
Good words to her I pray afford:
To whit to who, come say what you will,
My Bird it is a Roundhead still.
Humphery Crouch.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Richard Harper, at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield.
1642.


