MIRACVLA MVNDI. To the KING Upon the day of thanksgiving for his Majesty's
happy delivery from the late Plot, being Sabbath 9th of September, 1683.
PErmit, Great Sir, in this our double day
Of joy, we tell the World what wonders may,
And ought, your Subjects from all Plots deterr
For future times: Since (pardon Sir) you were
1 Foretold by Wonder, and with Wonder borne; 2
3 Escaped by Wonders, Wondrous forelorne, 4
5 Restored by Wonder, and with Wonder Crowned, 6
From Plots and Machines still with Wonder found
Preserved, and saved; that it for Wonder goes;
Heavens kindness, or the malice of your foes,
Which greater is: for if their working Pates
Plod Wonderfully deep, the Happier Fates
With fresher Wonders still The Anointed saves:
While Rebels gain but their untimely graves.
Since nothing then but Wonders now can teach
Some Loyalty, may these few Wonders preach
Them to their duty; while all good men sings
You, King of Wonders, Wonder unto Kings.
J. C. Scotus.
1 In that AEnigmatick Prophecy concerning the Posterity of K. Henry VII.
their succeeding to the Crown of England, Vir, Puer, Alecto, Virgo, Vulpes,
Leo, Nullus
but too Politickly made use of in the late troubles as a Stalking-horse for a
Republic, and more Hellishly cajoled by Oliver for a Welsh Noll, and which was
yet miraculously at once fulfilled and eleided by that Ditton upon his
Majesty's Birth-pieces, largessed at the Baptism; Hactenus Anglorum Nullus.

2 As appeared by the miraculous Star at his Birth not only seen over London by
thousands betwixt twelve and one in a bright day the 29 of May, but seriously
observed by his Father as he rode to St. Paul's to give thanks; and
questionless the aspect heightened the devotions of that pious King for such a
Son, and let us believe the blessings come accordingly.

3 From Worcester, 50 several Persons (whereof some Men some Women) being
privy to it, and yet no discovery made of him, notwithstanding of the proposed
rewards, assured threats, narrow searches, and securing of all the Ports, which
wrung from the Usurper himself (upon the Hearing he had got over Seas) this
Prophetic confession, That God had preserved him for some strange thing to
their Lands.

4 As is easily evinced from the many sad and dark passages of his 9 years
exile.

5 In a Restoration not to be parallelled in all its circumstances: ardently
wished for by the free Genius of three Nations, who alas had too deeply
ingadged themselves not to receive their Lawful Monarch but upon limited
conditions, brought home (without the barking of a Dog) by ane Army which was
unfortunatly but too Victorious against him. Yea such a Restoration was it,
that upon an account thereof to the Turk, it is reported the Grand Seigneour
uttered this expression: That if it were Lawful for him to change the Religion
of his Fathers, he would choose that of the King of Britans, whose God and
great Prophet had performed so miraculous things for him.

6 In the great and observable thunder and lightning at his Coronation, the
very Heavens as it seems (to witness him the anointed of the Lord in all
things) being willing to discharge their Artillery at so joyful and Sacred a
solemnity.

Obstupuere animis alii, sed Troius Heroes
Agnovit sonitum, and Divae promissa Parentis.
Edinburgh, Printed in the Year 1683.


