The CASE of Mary Duchess of Norfolk.
UPon the Marriage of the Duchess with the now Duke of Norfolk, in the year
1677, her Father the late Earl of Peterborough, paid as part of her Portion
10000 l, and Settled on that Marriage Lands of near 1000 l. per annum, the
Remainder of which on Failure of Issue was limited to the now Duke and his
Heirs for ever; and the Earl after his and his Lady's death secured to the Duke
the Furniture of Drayton worth 10000 l. more, and the Duke received also by
Agreement 1000 l. per annum for Twenty years out of the Earls Estate; besides
very rich Jewels, Plate, and other things of great value, which the Duchess
brought with her into the Duke's Family: And great Debts having been
contracted, for the support of the Duke's Honor and his Service while he
cohabited with the Duchess, she has since his Separation from her paid them
out of her own Estate.

That by the evil and malicious insinuations of the Dutchess's enemies, the
Duke was prevailed on, to carry her then a Protestant into France, and to put
her into a Monastery (where she could not be admitted without changing her
Religion) and left her there on great assurances of sending for her home in a
short time, and so parted with great expressions of Kindness.

That a considerable time after by the Dukes consent, she returned into
England, and lived retiredly at Drayton in Northamptonshire, and at the time of
the Revolution she again retired to France, where she continued till she heard
of her Father's Imprisonment in the Tower, and then came back to England and
lived privately till her Father obtained his Liberty, when she came home to him.

That the 8th of January 1691 the Duke was prevailed on by the instigation of
her Enemies, to exhibit a Bill in the House of Peers, to the same effect with
the Bill now depending, and diverse Witnesses were examined on both sides,
after which and a long solemn debate and due consideration had by their
Lordships of the Witnesses, and what was Sworn by them, the 17th of February,
they were pleased to reject the Bill without a second reading.

Notwithstanding which the Duke was again prevailed on the 22th December 1692
to exhibit a Second Bill in the House of Peers, to the same effect with his
First, which after several debates was the 2d of January following again
rejected.

Sometime after this, and for accomodating all differences between them,
Proposals were made to the Duchess, which after long agitation on 28th April
1694 were reduced into Writing, and executed by the Duke and Duchess: The
preamble of which Articles is in the words following. Whereas diverse
Controversies, Debates, Demands, and Suites of several natures have for some
time since been agitated, and continued between the said Duke and the said
Duchess his Wife, etc. unto all which it is at last held fitting (it being
conduceable to their respective quiets and ease) to have an end put, and the
like for the future prevented. It is therefore hereby and by the Parties to
these presents, declared and agreed in manner following; Whereby the Duchess
conveyed to the Duke's use the Manor of Castle Rising etc. And also the said
Duchess and her Trustees, Assigned their Interest in a Considerable Part of
the Manor of Sheffield in Yorkshire to the use of the said Duke. So that by
these Articles and that Deed Executed thereupon, the Duke had his then desired
Advantages.

That after the execution of these Articles, the Duchess sent for one Mr.
Negus the Dukes principal Gentleman, and expressed her self very sensibly of
the misfortunes of the Duke and her self, and desired Mr. Negus to tell the
Duke, that she would avoid all Company that should give him any offense, and
that she would not so much as pay a Visit, but where he liked; which Mr. Negus
lately testified before the Lords, and that he acquainted the Duke with it, as
also that she had several times told him, if she Dyed first, she would leave
the Duke her Estate.

That notwithstanding the said Agreements, whereby the Duke and Dutch^^^ agreed
to live Seperately, yet without his signifyng any Dissatisfaction to or with
the Duchess, and without any manner of Notice, or previous proceeding in the
common and ordinary Course of Justice, but by taking from her that Legal Trial
in the Ecclestastical Court, which by the Laws of this Realm she is entitled
unto, he did on the 16th. day of February last exhibit in the House of Peers
the Bill now depending for Dissolving the Dukes Marriage with the Duchess, and
for enabling him too Marry again. Upon which the proceedings were so very
quick, two Foreigners ( a French Footman and a Dutch Cook-maid) lately brought
from beyond Sea being forthwith examined against her, charging her with Facts
supposed to be committed many Years since, and long before the date of the said
Agreements, and on which the two former Bills were sounded, that it was
impossible for her to make her Defense as she might have done, if the
proceedings had been against her according to the known Laws of this Land.

The Duchess thought her self under a necessity of complying with all the
Orders of the House of Peers, and accordingly as well as she could, made her
Defense, though less than a weeks time was allowed her for doing it, and upon
Examining the Evidence of the Dukes Witnesses, many contradictions appeared,
some whereof follow, as does appear by the depositions taken in Writing, and
now remaining in the House of Peers.

For Hosieur the Footman Swears the Duchess was at the Cockpit, when and
before, he came to Live with Sr. John Jermaine and that he continued there
Fifteen days after, and that after the Duchess left the Cockpit she went to
Fox-hall.

Vannas the Cook-maid Swears Hosieur came to Sir. John when the Duchess was at
Fox-Hall.

Hossieur Swears that 8th. Feb. 92 he left Sir John's service, when the Trial
was between the Duke and Duchess in Parliament, and after Lived privately six
or eight weeks till he and Vannas could get for Holland, and arrived there in
Easter following.

And yet in an other place he Swore he desired leave to go, and afterward that
he also went for Holland as soon as the Wind was fair.

But Note all the Evidence was closed and ordered to be summed up, the 9th. of
February, so that he needed not afterward to have gone. And whereas he
insinuates that he and Vannas were Secreted and kept from being Witnesses.

Note it does no where appear, that either he or Vannas were ever thought on
for Witnesses.

Hossieur Swears he returned again to Sir John in Summer 92 being often sent to
by Sir John.

Whereas Bailey an other of the Dukes Witnesses swears, he did not return again
to Sir John in two years after he went away; Bailey the Witness being all that
time and three years before a Servant in the House.

Note also that this very Summer 92, to wit in Easter-Term, the Duke brought
his Action against Sir John, which was tried Michaelmass-Term 92, at which time
it had been more likely, if Sir John had believed he could have done him any
harm, he should have kept him in Holland, rather then have sent for him over,
especially considering that this fellow afterward Swears, Sir John Swore in a
rage this fellow would betray him.

Hosieur being asked who sent for Vannas over.

He answered that after he had promised the Duke and Lord Howard to speak the
truth of what he knew, they desired him if he met Vannas to desire her to come
over, and speak the truth of what she knew.

And being asked how long after he met Vannas. Answered about 12 months since.

And being asked when was the first time he spoke to her, about her coming over
to speak the truth. Answered, it is about a year since.

And being asked how long it was since they resolved to come over. Answered, 12
months.

Vannas being asked whether she was not sent for from Holland to be a Witness,

Answered, she knew nothing of it, till eight or nine weeks ago.

Vannas Swears she was sent away on account of the Trial.

Whereas Peacock, Hawkesworth and Knight, three Servants of the D^^ch^^^ Swore
the Duchess turned her away before the Trial, for keeping company with Dutch
Soldiers, and they do Swear a new Cook-maid there before the Trial.

Hossieur Swears he had a Key of the door going into the P^^^, and could come
in when he would,

And yet owns, he knew but two of the Servants, one whereof is long since dead;

And also the Dutchesses Servants, Swear they never heard any body had a Key,
and that if any Key had been, they must have known of it; they also prove the
Shutting up, Bolting and Chaining the door every night, and Opening it every
morning, and but one of the Servants remembers ever to have seen him at the
Door, and then he rung the Bell, but came only to see a Country woman of his,
and to carry Letters to Holland, and brought answer back to her, but was not
admitted beyond the passage.

Hossieur and Vannas Swear they saw the Duchess and Sir John in Bed together
at Mill-bank;

The Dutchesses woman Swore she has put the Duchess to Bed, and taken her up
every night and morning several years, and never saw him in the House. And two
others Swear they were constantly in waiting night and morning, and positively
deny any knowledge of any such thing, and say they never saw Hussieur there,
and that Vannas was never admitted up stairs, she was so dirty a creature; much
less to Dress or Undress the Duchess as she Pretended often to have done.

Vannas Swears she could not tell the places she has been at these six weeks
last past. Whereas

Mr. May, and two other of the Dukes servants, Swear she has been fourteen days
in the Dukes own house, with the full Liberty of the house.

Vannas being asked whether she ever told any body of the occasion of her going
away, she Swore yes, she told it to a great many in Holland, and not here.

Yet being afterward asked whether she ever discovered that she was sent out
of the way, she Swore directly no.

These are some of the many and plain Contradictions and Disproofs of these
Evidences; besides the great improbability in their own nature, in several
things Sworn.

But it is also to be noted, that Husieur left Sir John's service in a disgust,
and so it is proved by Bailey another of the Dukes Witnesses, and that what
Husieur Swore, could be nothing but Spite and Malice. Yea it is proved on the
Dutchesses part, that he Swore he would find a way to be revenged of him, and
that perhaps it might not be long first; and Mr. Strange, Mrs. Pitts and and
her two Maids, who could have deposed very materially for the Duchess refused
to appear, though often Summoned; being persons not in the Dutchesses Interest or
Power.

This Hosieur has been out of place ever since he left Sir John's service April
96. and is so still as he Swears. And so in consequence likely to be
necessitous.

Note also that Hosieur Swears Sir John gave him seven Guineas to pay the
charges of himself, Vannas and an other, which were ordered to be kept private,
till they could be Shipped off, and also for their passage into Holland, which
was in time from the 8 Feb. 92. till Easter.

Which does not look like a bribe for a secret of this nature, being hardly
sufficient to maintain three People, and pay their Lodgings for two Months.

Hussieur would be thought a mighty Confident, so as to have a Key to the
Dutchesses house, to come in, and go out, when he pleased; and yet as well
acquainted as he pretended to be with the house, and the Dutchesses
Bedchamber, he could not tell on what Floor it was, nor what Furniture it had;
nor whether Wainscotted or Hanged. And when he was asked, which way the Windows
of the Bedchamber looked, he triffled in that Question, and concluded he could
see the Water, but was afraid to go near the Window for fear of being
discovered, and yet had no scruple of coming into the house with his Key at any
time.

These things being observed it must be considered, that the Facts now in
effect charged against the Duchess, are suggested to be done many years since,
and were debated and considered before the Peers, before the rejecton of the
two first Bills, and long before the Agreement for putting an end to all
Controversies and Debates. Now it is very hard to put the Duchess to account
again, for those very Facts, considering that after eight or nine years, many
People are dead, others dispersed, and not in a little time to be found out,
and circumstances of times and places (which in the nature of all these Cases
is almost all that is left to discover a Falsity) forgot.

The Duchess is also under the unavoidable necessity of proving a Negative
against down right Swearing, and that without any matter Introductory, and also
by two mean Servants, the one turned out of her Place for keeping company with
Foot Soldiers, and the other leaving his Place in disgust, because he could
not have the Play Money.

Masters are already too much in the power of their Servants, and if they
charge their Masters with Adultery, Felony and even Treason, it is not easily
in the power of the Master to defend himself against down right Swearing;
Servants having those opportunities of the knowledge of times and places and
Company, which cannot be denied or avoided, and which others have not,
whereupon they may frame and build false Evidence, and many times are of ill
Principles and desperate Fortunes, and of tempers very Revengeful, so that
whoever turns away a Servant, he is in his power for his Estate, Honor and
even Life it self. And therefore for the safety and freedom of Families in
other Countries, they are not permitted to be Evidence against their Masters, in
any matter criminal whatsoever.

Note also the Duchess thinks, She as an English Subject has by Magna Carta
the same right to a Trial in the Legal and ordinary way of Justice, as the ^est
of the Kings Subjects, especially considering that there never yet was in
England one Precedent, of a Bill exhibited in Parliament to dissolve a Marriage
at the first instance, without any previous proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts; (which in these Cases is the Law of the Land) and not above Five or Six
Bills, in above 600 years ever passed to dissolve Marriages, or make Second
Marriages good, even after there had been a divorce in the Spiritual Courts,
and those Bills too in Cases generally where the Husbands were without any
recrimination.

No Impediment appears why the Duke should not have endeavored a Divorce at
Law, before he had attempted a Bill to dissolve the Marriage. For any
Application to the Legislature, for Trial of matters of Private right, is
improper, because there are proper Judicatures, that give that remedy the Law
allows.

To ask any thing of the Legislature, in private Causes between Party and
Party, beyond what the known Laws in force give, seems to be improper,
because,

1. It is to make a Law in one persons Case, which is not the Law in another.
2. It is to retrospect actions, and after the Fact to Augment or alter the
Penalty. Our Laws are certain, and known, that persons may conform their
actions to them. 3. The Courts and Forms of Law are equally the Subjects right
with the Law, and the application to the Legislature, takes away all that right
of Form and Charging, whereas a certainty in time to Answer, and exceptions to
Witnesses, and other Legal defenses of the Fact, cannot be denied the meanest
Subject.
The consequence that short and summary ways of proceedings, may have on the
Settlements of Estates and Families, may be very dangerous, and though the Duke
of Norfolk's Bill passed the House of Peers, yet a great number of the Peers
both Spiritual and Temporal entered their Protest against its Passing, and their
reasons for it.

It ought to be no prejudice to the Duchess, that the next Heir presumptive to
the Duke, does not as yet appear to be a Protestant, because when a Bill which
has lately passed both Houses is become a Law, it is not likely that Noble
Family will be without a Protestant at the head of it.

If any of the Witnesses formerly examined on the Bill in 1691, be now again
produced, it is humbly apprehended, that as the validity of their testimony
they then gave was totally overthrown, by a great number of Witnesses, so it
will be again though under the disadvantage of the great distance of time.

FINIS.

