THE Complete Bell-Man.

Being A Pattern for all sorts of People to tak^ notice of the most remarkable
Times and Days in the Year.

Very useful for to read and meditate upon at a Times, both in Sickness and
in Health.

Published for the help of all those that desire to (...) goldly in this life,
and eternally happy in the life to come

By H: Crouch.

depiction of a town-crier A Complete Bellman


Newly Printed for FRANCIS COALS, at the Half-Boul in the old Bailey.

A Table of all the Verses contained in this Book.
^ For Christ's Birthday. ^ For St. Stephens day. ^ For St. John the Evangalist
day. ^ For Innocents day ^ For the Circumcision of Christ 6 For New years day 7
For Twelfth day 8 For the Conversion of St. Paul. 9 For the Purificacion of
Mary. 10 For Vallentines day 11 For St. Mathias day. 12 For the Annunciacion of
Mary. 13 For good Friday. 14 For Easter day 15 For St. Marks day 16 For Phillip
and jacobs day, or May day 17 For Ascencion day 18 For Whitsunday 19 For
Barnaby bright 20 For St. John Baptist^ day 21 For St. Peter's day. 22 For St.
James day 23 For St. Bartholmews day. 24 For St Mathews day 25 For St Michaels
day 26 For St. Lukes day 27 For Simon and Judea day 28 For All Saints day 29
For Gunpouder-Treason day, or 5 of Nov. 30 For St. Andrews day. 31 For St.
Thomas day 32 For St. Barnabas day. 33 For the S^bboth day 34 The Belmans Care
35 Gods Protection 36 Man's Mortallity 37 Man's Resurrection 38 Against Fear of
Invasion 39 On the day of Doom.
THE Complete Bell-Man. Being A Pattern for all sorts of People to tak^ notice
of the most remarkable Times and Days in the Year.
For Christ's Birthday.
THis is the Day, the joyful Day indeed
Which God foretold, that the woman's Seed
When Adam by his wife was then misled,
By Satan's means, should break the Serpents head,
Christ came from Heaven upon the Earth to dwell
To die for us, and free our souls from Hell;
O blessed be his holy name therefore,
That gives a present Salve for every Sore.
For St: Stephens day.
SAint Stephen on this day was stoned to death,
By misbeleiving Jews he lost his breath,
For preaching Christ to them; which they withstood
Yet Stephen sealed his Faith even with his blood.
Lord strengthen us against the day of trial,
That we against our Faith make no denial.
3 For St: John's day, the Evangelist.
SAint John that holy Evangelist divine,
Whose Gospel over all the world does shine,
Converted Heathens, was Christ's bosom friend,
And preached pardon to us that offend,
^n leu of all, there is required but this
To love and fear the Lord of joy and blis.
4 For Innocents Day.
THis was a bloody, dark, and dismal day,
When Herod did so many Children slay,
^ntending then our Savior to have slain,
For fear lest he upon his Throne should reign,
Yet divine providence did guard him so
His time not come, that he escapt his fo;
Gods providence (you see) is for us all,
His true Elect shall stand, the rest shall fall.
5 For the Circumcision of Christ, or New Years day.
Our Savior Christ came to fulfill the Law,
As all the Prophets in old time foresaw,
And as the Evangelists themselves do say
He circumcised was on the Eight day.
Lord circumcise our hearts, and keep us still
In thy true fear obedient to thy will.
6 Another for the same day.
THis is the first day of the year,
Begin it then in Gods true fear,
And if the old year bad was spent,
Begin the new well, and repent,
Because we cannot tell how soon
Our Morning may be turned to Noon,
Our Noon be turned into Night,
Our Souls from Bodies take their flight.
7 For twelfth day.
GOd by a Star directed the wise men
(As the Evangelists declare by their pen,
To find out Christ the Savior of mankind:
They found and saw him; We by Faith him find:
They find by Faith who after him do thirst,
He found the lost sheep, so he found us first
8 For the Conversion of St: Paul.
THe admirable Conversion of St: Paul
Seems wonderful and strange unto us all:
But those that do unto the Lord belong
He Will bring them home, the wicked from among,
Gifts of the spirit, God to him had given
And now remains a blessed Saint in Heaven.
9 For the Purification of Mary or C^ndlemas day
THe Virgin Mary never did refuse
The Order and the Custom of the Jews
For when the time of Purifying came,
She willing was and yielded to the same;
Lord purify our corrupt hearts within,
And cleanse our souls from soule-destroying sin.
10 For Vallentines Day.
YOung Men provide you fine new Gloves,
To give your Vallentines and Loves.
Arise, Arise; get up I say,
For this is merry Vallentines day,
Go call up Mary, Ioane, and Joyce,
And be you constant in your choice,
11 For St Mathias Day.
BLessed Mathias, he was chose in place
Of Judas that did fall away from grace,
O it is a fearful thing to fall from God,
To ly for ever underneath his Rod,
To fall away and so receive our doom,
And have another taken in our room.
12 For the Salutacion of Mary, on March 25
HAil Mary, full of grace, the Angel said,
The God of Hosts is with thee, Holy Maid,
Blessed above all other women-kind,
Such favor from the Highest thou shall find,
The Holy Ghost shall over-shadow thee,
A Maid shall bear a Son, that Son shall be
The Savior of the world: praise yea the Lord
Who such a matchless mercy does afford.
13 For good Friday
THis is the Day that we good Friday call,
This is the Day Christ sufferd for us all,
This is the Day Gods wrath was satisfide,
This is the Day weak Man was iustifide,
This is the Day Christ's love to us was shown,
This is the Day the Devil was overthrown,
For which great love of his, let us thankful be,
That did from Satan's bondage set us free.
14 For Easter Day.
Our Christ is risen from the Dead,
And opened the gate of Life,
Man redeemed, the Devil fled,
Gods wrath appeasd, Christ ends the strife,
And for which unspeakable Love,
Let Us evermore true thankful prove.
15 For Saint Marks Day,
SAint Mark Gods holy Church instructed has
So worthily and heavenly in the Faith,
And made the path way of our souls so even,
We cannot lightly miss the way to heaven,
Unless we to our souls be so unkind
For to be blown away by every wind.
16 For Phillip and Jacobs day or May Day.
YOung Men and Mayds do now prepare
Abroad to go to take the Air,
To gather May and many a thing
That's brought forth by the pleasant Spring
Together then they merry be,
And wish May Day as long as three.
17 For Ascencion Day.
CHrist is ascended up to Heaven,
And rich gifts to men has given,
As we are members, he our head,
So we shall rise when we are dead,
And rest with him eternally
Where we shall live and never die.
18 For Whit-Sunday.
GOd sent on his Apostles his blessed spirit
Of his own goodness, not their own merit,
Even so Lord give us all thy spirit of grace
And from our sins give our poor souls release*
That they to us may never be a terror,
And keep us ever from the spirit of error.
19 For Barnaby bright.
THis day we call Barnaby bright
The longest day and shortest night,
The Summer now we count half spent,
Which young Folk spend in merryment,
In pretty Sports and harmless Play,
Wishing that Summer still would stay.
20 For St. John Baptists day.
AS on this day John Baptist lost his life,
When Herod married with his Brothers wife
For telling Herod that he was misled,
King Herod's Daughter soon daunc'd off his head;
It Is always so when Tyrants bear the sway;
For speaking Truth, good men are made away.
21 For St. Peter's Day
PEter his Lord and Master did deny,
But when his Lord on him did cast an ey,
He wept most bitterly, his tears did show
His troubled heart was full of grief and woe,
Lord cast thine ey of Mercy on us all,
And lend a hand when we begin to fall.
22 For St. James Day.
SAint James his heavenly Doctrine divine.
Among the Christians evermore will shine*
As God instructed him, so he does all
To fear his Name, and ever on him call,
His sweet Epistles manifest full well
His Love to us, to shun the paths of Hell.
23 For St. Bartholomews day.
SAint Bartholmew did beleiv, and likewise preach
And did the Faith of Christ to Gentiles teach,
Converting many Heathens to the truth,
A follower of the Gospel from his youth;
Let us by his example do the same,
And let Gods glory ever be our aim.
24 For St. Mathews day.
CHrist from ye receipt of Custom Matthew did call,
And he forsook both Friends, and wealth, and all:
O happy Matthew! could so rule thy heart,
To leave the world, and choose the better part,
O follow Matthew in a Course so even.
For why, his footsteps brings you all to Heaven
25 For Michael the Archangels day.
MIchael ye Archangel (who was Christ) no less
Brought Satan and his Angels to distress:
(...) thy heavenly Angels guard us still,
(...) Satan may not work us any ill,
P^otect thy Church, O heavenly Lord most high,
It may not suffer under Tyranny
26 For Saint Lukes day
LVke was a Physician, whom Christ did call,
Who left his Parents and the World, and all,
To follow Christ against the worlds control,
And he became a Physician for the Soul,
Lord grant the physic of his Doctrine may
Cure all our sinful Souls that walk astray.
27 For Simon and Iudes day.
SImon and Jude united both in love,
By the holy, heavenly Spirit of God above,
So all Gods Saints combine themselves in one
Christ Jesus our blessed Lord the Corner stone,
Lord grant thy Church may hold together so
That Scismaticks may never work our woe.
28 For all Saints day.
ALl Saints in Heaven agree and well accord,
The Church triumphant with our heavenly Lord
But the Church Millitant upon the Earth
Has ever been at Discord from its Birth
The Reason is (if humane Wit can tell)
That Heaven cannot well agree with Hell;
If it be so, it is Satan's Policy
For to disturb Gods Church with Heresy.
29 For the fifth of November, or Gunpouder Treason.
THat Damned Hellish Pouder-plot
Laid under ground so deep,
Because it should not be forgot,
That day we still do keep:
O let us all with one accord
Give praise unto our heavenly Lord
30 For St: Andrews Day
SAint Andrew suffered on the Cross,
And did not think his life a loss
To gain eternal life thereby,
Knowing that Christ on Cross did die
To save both him, and you, and me,
For which great love let us thankful thee
31 For Saint Thomas Day,
SAint Thomas for Christ's Death did greive*
That Christ was rose did not believe
Till he his Wounds did feel and see,
Thou art my Lord, my God, said he*
How blessed are they that him never saw
And yet believe, and him obey.
32 For St. Barnabas day.
THis do we call holy Saint Barnabas day,
Let all Men to our heavenly Father pray
To give unto us such like gifts of grace,
That we in heaven may have a dwelling place,
Let each man labor ever to do well,
And pull his neighbor from the gates of Hell.
33 For the Sabbath.
SIx days is given you for to labor in
So merciful and kind the Lord has been
Of seven days, himself does take but one,
O rob him not of that to leav him none:
Whoever will not on the Sabbath rest,
Shall never rest with him among the blessed.
34 The Bel-Mans Care
We walk abroad in Frost and Snow,
And many a weary step do go
To keep your houses from all harm,
While you ly in your Beds full warm;
Be careful of your Fire and Light:
And so God bless you Day and Night
35 Gods Protection
EXcept the Lord our City guard
In vain is all our watch and ward,
For Fire and Sword may you consume,
Then on our Care do not presume,
Both Night and Day Lord keep you all
By sudden death you may not fall
36 On man's Mortallity
O Serve the Lord with all your power
For here you have no certain hour:
Remember (man) when thou came here
How naked, poor, thou did appear;
And that whatever now thou have,
Thou must return so to thy Grave
37 On Man's Resurrection
THat Man must die we all do know,
A death to God for Sin we ow,
O happy man that makes his peace
Before his mortal life does cease;
For as the Tree (we know) does fall.
So rise again we know it shall
38 Against fear of Invasion
He that does truly trust in God,
Needs never fear nor Fire nor Sword,
His fear of God, and Conscience clear,
Remooveth all his Cause of fear:
Though Mountains into Seas were cast
His Faith is firm, his Fear is past
39 Upon the day of Doom
When Earth of Earth shall turn to Earth
That was but Earth even from its Birt^
Then Earth from Earth shall rise again
To endless joy (...) endless pain,
Let Earth then ^e and please his Maker
That Earth of Heaven may be pertaker.
FINIS.

