The Cuckold's Lamentation of a Bad WIFE.
He is tormented, and she Tanns his Hide,
He knows not how to live, nor where to abide;
Besides she makes him for to wear the Horn,
And he wishes that he never had been born:
To all young Batchelours now he does declare,
When they go a Wooing for to have a Care,
There Is is many Maids good, but some proves evil,
His Luck was bad, he met with a She-Devil.
To the Tune of The Country Farmer. Or, Why are my Eyes still flow -- ing.


O good Wife


out Rogue spend thy Money




YOung Batchelours all, come hear this new Song,
And take warning by me, lest you do your selves wrong
For I like a Fool must needs go to be Wed,
To bring a Slut, and a Whore, and a Scold to my Bed;
Biside she will fight with me every day,
She is such a devilish Queen, I do say:
A Man needs no more Sorrow to shorten his Life,
When he has such hard Fortune to have a bad Wife.
All day I lie working and taking of pains,
And she lies at the Alehouse and spends all the Gains;
And when I come home and give her a word,
She Will snap me up short and no comfort afford,
And then she will say, Sirrah where is all your Money?
You have bin with your Whores, and you have left never a penny;
And then she lets fly that I am weary of my Life,
Then God help that poor Man that has got such a Wife:
I complain of my Wedding, and of my bad Life,
What fortune I had in choosing a Wife;
If I had sought Hell there had not been such another
For fighting, and scolding, and swearing together,
That I am frighted sometimes clear out of my Wit,
For fear that my Bones they should be sore beat:
A Man needs no more sorrow to shorten his Life,
Then God help that poor Man that has got such a Wife.
On Saturday-night I staid late for my Wage,
And when I came home my Wife was in a great Rage,
She wellcom'd me home, but never called me Honey,
But bumbasted me soundly, and called for my Money;
She gave me a slap on the Chops, and put me in a fright,
That I promise you truly that my Nose is sore yet:
A man needs no more sorrow to shorten his Life.
When he has such hard Fortune to have a bad Wife.
She makes me a Cuckold when I am at work,
Her Cullies about her so closely do lurk,
I may curse the time that ever I was born,
That I must be forced now to wear the Horn;
No, the Horn is not all, but she bangs my Bones sore,
And when I am in Bed with her, she throws me on the floor
A Man needs no, etc.
I cannot sleep quietly, I now will be sworn,
I am so tormented with the pain of the Horn,
Therefore honest Batchelors have a great care
That you never, like me, draw your selves in a Snare;
For my Wife is so maukin when she sets on
That I am not able to tame her, let me do what I can:
A Man needs no, etc.
She minds naught but Idleness, this is the Truth,
And to find fault with her I am very loath,
One day I but speak, and she did begin,
She took up the Tongs and broke both my shins,
You Cuckoldy Rogue do you know what you say?
I will soften your Hide if you prate in that way:
Did you ever hear the like, she will shorten my Life,
God help that poor Man that has got such a Wife.
When any of her Customers comes to our House,
I must stand at the back, I dare not say Dun is the Mouse,
She will be so angry at me, I swear,
That I am ready to bepiss my Breeches for fear;
And if I do not carry my Cu^ then upright
Lamb-pye I must have to my Supper that night:
I am so tormented I am weary of my Life,
God help that poor Man that has got such a Wife.
And now to conclude, you have heard my Distress,
My Fortune was bad, all this I confess,
And Batchelors all take warning by me,
Some Women are dangerous Cattle you see;
For I am Hen-peckt to the sight of my Friends;
And have nothing but Blows to make me amends;
I am so tormented I am, weary of my Life,
God help that poor Man that has got such a Wife.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.


