The PROLOGVE and EPILOGVE to the New COMEDY, called, The English Friar, Or,
The Town Sparks.
LICENSED,

March 17. 1689. J. F.

The PROLOGVE.
HEaven to the Muses well may Coin deny;
Pleasures attend on 'em, no Gold can buy.
Our Poet even in Poetry is poor,
Yet he so charming finds his little Store,
All England seems to him, less rich than he;
For he is content, -- which England never will be.
All Sects and Parties lend him Stuff for Plays,
And his Delight, though not his Fortune, raise.
Goods borrowed thus, he does not long retain,
But on the Stage, brings Fools and Knaves again
To those that lent 'em, that they may have Use,
Profit and Pleasure of their own produce.
To Day, he does make bold, a Farce to show,
Priests made, and acted here, some Months ago.
They turned to Farce, the Court, the Church, the Laws;
It met a while, some Fortune and Applause.
Now sure the Wits, that did assist it then,
And strive to have it acted over again,
Will like it on the Stage; it is cheapest here.
Priests are good Actors, but they are cursed dear;
And will, if they return, have greater Pay;
With Reason! -- Oh! They lost a hopeful Play.
Truth is, if ever Priests return, they come
With all the Hunger, Rage, Revenge of Rome:
And therefore we had best no longer jar;
We shall agree too late, when in the Snare.
Nay, those who once served Priests, and still promote
France, Teague, and Jesuit, in their secret Vote:
And are so mad, they would give up Englands Glory,
Only to keep, the wretched Name of Tory;
Had better quit their Plots, and cheaply sit,
To see us act the Product of their Wit.
The EPILOGVE.
PRiests have the Keys of Heaven and Hell they boast;
No doubt to both, they let in many a Ghost:
But we, to Day, have Ranting Sparks displayed,
Can Damn themselves, without the Churches Aid;
Who count it Glorious to Drink, Whore and Swear,
And rather would be caught at Rapes, than Prayer.
But Hect'ring Heaven, they will not trust it far;
Therefore our Playhouse is their Seat of War.
And they encounter without Wit, or Fear,
Dangerous French Forces in Lewd Vizards here.
Our Hero's once in France great Fame did gain;
Our Masks give France Revenge, and spoil the strain.
The Masks, no doubt, are Pensioners of France;
It Is Treason now, French Interest to advance;
And French Commodities are all by Law
Doomed to be burnt: Then you, Bold Masks, withdraw,
Or else the Custom-House will seize you all,
And make our House to the Prize-Office fall.
To revive English Virtue, drive away
Folly and Vice, is aimed at by this Play.
To Friends of England this must well appear;
And such, no doubt, is every Creature here.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A True and Impartial Account of the most Material Passages in Ireland since
December. 1688. With a particular Relation of the late Forces of Londonderry.
Taken from the Notes of a Gentleman who was Eyewitness to most of the Actions
mentioned therein during his risiding there; and now, being in England,
published the same for the further Satisfaction of this Nation. To which is
added, A Description, and an Exact Map of Londonderry, as he took it upon the
place. Price 6 d. Licensed and Entered according to Order. Printed for John
Amery at the Peacock against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. Sold by
Randal Tailor at Stationers' Hall.

London, Printed for John Am ry; and published by Randal Tailor. 1690.


