The Case of John Goudet, and David Barrau, Partners, Merchants.
In relation to the Petition of the Lustring Company.
Presented to the Honorable House of Commons.
ABout the Months of May and June last, and before, the said Goudet and
Barrau's Letters were often intercepted and stopped here; many of them
importing Advice of several Bills of Exchange by them drawn on Places beyond
the Seas, and others containing Remittances to discharge the said Draughts;
Bills of Loading, and other matters of the greatest consequence to Merchants:
Which seemed to be contrived to the end that the said Goudet and Barrau's Bills
might for want of their said Advices and Remittances, return back protested, in
the time of their intended Confinement, and so occasion their breaking.

The said Goudet was on the 15th of the said Month of June taken up, and their
Books and Papers seized by Warrant from the Secretary of State, for suspicion
of Treason and Treasonable Practices: And on the 13th of November following,
the said Barrau, and few days before, Peter Longueville (who was formerly their
Partner) were also taken up by virtue of the like Warrants.

The said Longueville, Goudet, and Barrau, were obliged to give 6000 l.
Security each for their Appearance at the King's Bench the first day of the
following Terms: And the last day of last Michaelmas Term, nothing being
alleged against him the said Goudet, though the said Books and Papers had been
examined by the Lustring Company, and a Report made thereof, he was discharged
by the said Court: After which, having demanded the said Books and (...) of
Captain Henry Baker, who had them in his possession, and being de^^d the same,
the said Court, upon a Motion made by the said Goudet and Barrau the last day
of last Hilary Term, ordered the said Books and Papers to be forthwith restored
to them, and the said Longueville and Barrau, and their Bail, to be discharged.

This not only put them the said Goudet and Barrau to vast Charges, but for
want of their Books and Papers for Nine Months together, they are disabled to
proceed in their Business, and cannot avoid falling into a Confusion, if not
speedily relieved.

The Lustring Company notwithstanding, who for some private hatred and jealousy
of Trade, have been the promoters of all these proceedings, to prevent the
restoring the said Books and Papers, and finding no Evidence against them the
said Goudet and Barrau, of any Treasonable, or other evil Practices, as was by
them suggested, have now by their Petition presented to this Honorable House,
prayed that the said Books and Papers may be examined by Order of this House.

The said Goudet and Barrau utterly deny ever to have had any Share in, or
Knowledge of any Combination or Design against the setting up here the
Manufactory of Lustrings and Alamodes, but on the contrary they have encouraged
and promoted the same to the utmost of their power, by supplying with Raw Silk
fit for that work, a great many private Master Weavers, who employed many
Hundreds of poor People about it under them; and had brought it to a much
greater perfection than the said Lustring Company, when they obtained a Clause
in an Act of Parliament past the last Session, excluding all others from making
the said sorts of Goods. The said Raw Silk Imported by them the said Goudet and
Barrau, being the Returns of considerable Quantities of Cloth and other
Woollen Manufactories of this Kingdom; the Exportation whereof was and still is
their chief Trade and Business, as they are ready to prove by the Testimony of
the said Weavers and the Blackwell-Hall Factors.

The said Goudet and Barrau hope therefore, that this Honorable House will
please to Order that their said Books and Papers shall be forthwith Restored to
them, according to the said Order of the King's Bench.

The Case of John Gouder, and David Barrau, Merchants.

In relation to the Petition of the Lustring Company.

Presented to the Honorable House of Commons.


