Cupids Trappan: Or, Up the green Forest.
The Scorner Scorned, or Willow turned into Cornation.

Described in the ranting resolution of a forsaken Maid.

To a pleasant new Northern Tune, Now all in fashon.


ONce did I love an a bonny bonny Bird,
thinking that he had been my own;
But he loved another far better then I,
and he has taken his flight, and he is flown, brave boys
and he has taken his flight and he is flown.
Up the green Forest, and down the green Forest,
like one much destressed in mind,
I hoopt and I hoopt, and I flung up my Hood,
but my bonny Bird I could not find, brave boys
but my bonny Bird, etc.
But she that has gotten my bonny bonny Bird;
would the Devil had had her for me,
It was not a Crown, nor a Noble so round,
that should have bought my bonny Bird from me, brave boys.
that should have, etc.
He set me upon his dissembling knee
and looked me all in the face,
He gave unto me and a Judas Kiss,
but his heart was in another place, brave boys,
but his heart was, etc.
She that has gotten my bonny bonney Bird,
let her make as much often as she can;
For whether I have him, or I have him not,
I will quaff with him now and than, brave boys
I will quaff, etc.
He told me he loved me far better then all
the richest Temptations in the world,
Then Treasure or Money, he called me his Honey;
but now from his heart I am hurld, brave boys
but now, etc.
He could not endure to be out of my sight,
he loved me like Silver or Gold;
His blood was on fire with the flames of desire,
but I find his hot love was soon cold, brave boys
but I find, etc.
His tongue was so tip'd with Temptations that I
could have suffered him (without control)
To have done what he would and have humor'd his blood,
had the venture been body and soul, brave boys
had the venture been, etc.
And now he requites me with scorn and disdain,
some other has got him from me;
But let her take heed, at the last how she speed,
least a third do prove better then she brave boys
least a third, etc.
One Man for one Maid, the Creator has made,
he that has more, has more then his due;
Sure two is to many, he will never love any,
for twenty Maids will be too few, brave boys.
for twenty, etc.
Those Virgins that take him, I think are stark mad,
for he that proves false unto one
That loved him like life will be false to his wife
I have cause to be glad that he is gone, brave boys.
I have cause,
The Witchcraft of love, is enough to undo
the hearts of poor credulous Creatures,
My freedom to me, is far sweeter then he;
for Freedom is softer then Fetters, brave boys.
for Freedom is, etc.
If he had continued he might'a had all,
his Carriage and Wit was so brave;
Although he had like to have given me a fall,
yet the Jewel of Jewels I have, brave boys.
yet the Jewel of, etc.
Which still I will keep from such Gamsters as he,
by such I will never be betrayed;
My Portion shall be, my Virginity,
it is Dowry enough for a Maid, brave boys.
it is Dowry, etc.
I Will Swagger and Rant, and I Will nere think upon it,
but bring Willow Garlands in fashon;
Although for my part, my own merry heart
shall turn Willow into Cornation, brave boys
shall turn, etc.
I vow to be jolly, brisk, bonny and free,
and march under Chastities Banners;
I Will sing, and I Will dance, and my spirits advance
in spite of all Cupids Trappanners, brave boys
in spite of, etc.
When he comes disfigured, and crippl'd from War
I Will jeere him, and laugh him to scorn;
His wife too will scoff, when he comes lamely off
and give him a Nightcap of Horn, brave boys.
and give him, etc.
All you that are Virgins, and live at your wills
be wise and take warning by me;
Nere venture your hearts, to a tongue and good parts
if the man have no fidelity, brave boys
if the man, etc.
It is better to live in a Virgins degree,
then marry a false hearted Mate;
Their cunning shall nere, take me in their snare
the Devil shall catch them for Kate. brave boys
the Devil shall catch them for Kate.
FINIS.
London, Printed by E Crowch, for F. Goles, T. Vere, and J. Wright.

With Alowance.


