The CASE of John Prideaux Esquire Upon his PETITION against FRANCIS STRATFORD Esquire
the Sitting Member, for the Borough of Newport, in the County of Cornwall.
The Petitioner Complains of Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings of the Vianders
at the Election; and of an Undue Return manifestly Injurious to the Petitioner.
UPON the Day of the Election, the Electors (who are agreed to be those who
have Freehold in the Borough, tho they live out of the Borough, and Inhabitants
in the Borough paying Scott and Lot) met at the usual place; and the end of
their meeting being made known to them by the Vyanders, a great number of the
Electors demanded to be Polled for the Petitioner: but the Vyander adjourned
the Poll to a private House, where the doors were shut against all who who
offered to Vote for the Petitioner; nor were they admitted, but with some
disturbance, and after much delay.

When the Poll was taken, SEVENTY TWO Voted for the Petitioner, and only THIRTY
NINE for the Sitting Member; and the Petitioner and the Electors desiring Mr.
Morris (one of the Vyanders) to declare the Election; he answered, he would
delare it when he would, where he would, and for whom he would; and then
withdrew to his Nephew's House in another County; where, with the other
Vyanders only, and without any of the Electors privity or Signing the Indenture
(contrary to the constant practice) they made a Return for the Sitting Member;
neither did the Vyanders ever declare to the Borough whom they had Returned.

Thus Mr. Morris made good his Arbitrary Declaration; and William Isbell (the
other Vyander, a poor Man, and absolutely managed by Mr. Morris) being asked
how he dared to make that Return? said It was only a Money Matter, that Mr.
Morris would save him harmless, and had given him a Bond of 1000 l. to
Indemnifie him.

All this was proved by Mr. Horwell Clerk of the Peace for the County of
Cornwall; and can be attested by Mr. Carry, and Mr. Manaton, two of the Members
of this Honorable House.

Mr. Morris, to give some color to this foul practice, having denied the
Petitioner a Copy, and a Scrutiny of the Poll, when regularly and duly
demanded; about four days after the Election and Return, sent the Petitioner a
Paper containing the Names of the Petitioner's Electors, with Exceptions to all
but NINE of them, as if they were not qualified; and upon this Scheme the
Sitting Member defended himself, before the Honorable Committee of Elections.

But the Petitioner conceives he then fully justified all his Votes but
EIGHTEEN at the most, (and those were Inhabitants) which being deducted, his
Number will be FIFTY FOUR. And the Petitioner did then disqualifie FIFTEEN of
the Sitting Member's Votes, which reduced his Number to TWENTY FOUR; so there
remains a Majority on the Petitioner's side of THIRTY, as the Petitioner
Conceives, and hopes will appear to this Honorable House, by the Report from
the said Committee.

The Return therefore is evidently false, and the Petitioner thereby wronged;
and he hopes that he shall be adjuged to be duly Elected, notwithstanding the
Endeavors used to Incapacitate him upon the pretense of Bribery, or Treating.

The Bribery and Treating pretended, is attempted to be proved by one Hicks,
who says that Mr. Foster brought him Half a Crown from Colonel Specott, and
desired his Vote for the Petitioner: That a great Entertainment of Punch was
made at Mr. Horwell 's, when Mr. Prideaux was present, and Solicited for
Votes: That a Treat was at Mr. Foster's, but he does not say who was present at
it: That he drew Ale for about twenty Persons; and that Mr. Foster told him if
he would trust for 10 s. worth, Mr. Horwell would pay it.

One Rattenbury says, That Pepperell told him, that if he would not Vote for
the Petitioner, he should lose a pair of Gloves.

As to the Evidence of Rattenberry, that is only hearsay, and can no way
affect the Petitioner.

To the Evidence of Hicks, the Petitioner by his Witnesses has given this ('it is
hoped clear and convincing) Answer. By Glanville and Kittowe (both Men of good
Credit) That Hicks is now Servant to Mr. Morris, by whom he said he should get
more than by the Petitioner: That Hicks said he would say any thing rather than
Mr. Stratford should lose the Election, because Colonel Speccott had taken away
his Gun, and Mr. Horwell had Sued him since the Election. That he had declared
he never had any Order from the Petitioner to draw any Drink.

Nor is it pretended that the Petitioner ever promised to pay, or did pay for
any, or any other person by his direction.

By Mr. Horwell, and Mr. Bewes, Men of good Estates, and as fair Reputations;
it is proved, That Colonel Speccott, a Gentleman of known Worth and Honor, has
for fourteen Years past at Christmas time used to be Hospitable and Charitable
to the Inhabitants of this Borough, and his Neighboring Parishioners: That the
method of doing it this Christmas before the Election, was by the Advice of,
and according to a List given in by Mr. Kittowe, Mr. Stratford 's Friend, that
the Distribution was without distinction, as well to those who Voted for the
Sitting Member and Petioner, as those who had no Votes at all; and that it was
done without any Condition, or any Request made of Voting for the Petitioner.

Note, That the Inducement for such the Colonel's Charity and Entertainment at
Christmas times, was in return to their assisting him in his Harvests, and that
they had Money and Corn this Year, but were not Entertained at the Colonel's
House as usual, by reason of his extreme Illness.

By Mr. Horwell it is proved, That this Entertainment was no more than he used
ordinarily at such a Season to make; That it was not made on any design
relating to the Ensuing Election; That there was no talk of it by any but
Hicks, and that Mr. Prideaux his being there, was purely Casual.

And as to Mr. Foster's Treat, it is not offered to be proved that it had any
Relation to the Election; nor is it proved that Mr. Prideaux or any of the
Electors were there.

Now if it was the Vyanders Duty to return the person who had the Majority of
the Electors Voices, and they have no Authority to Judge of the Capacity of the
Candidates (as it is hoped they have not) then the Petitioner ought to have
been Returned; and if the Honor of so Worthy a Gentleman as Colonel Speccott
be rather to be presumed, than the Evidence of a mean interested Fellow
admitted to blast it; and if the Evidence of three or four Persons of good
Credit and Estates be rather to be believed, than the Evidence of so vile a
Fellow as Hicks;

Then it is Humbly Hoped the Honorable House of Commons will not adjudge the
Petitioner Incapacitated to be a Member, but will Resolve him to be duly
Elected.

John Prideaux the PETITIONER, Against Francis Stratford Esquire the Sitting Member.

The PETITIONER'S CASE.


