The Cruel LANDLORD: OR, The Fortunate Husbandman:
Containing a sweet and comfortable Cordial, after sharp and sower Sorrow, as
you shall find by this following Ditty.
To the Tune of, If Love's a sweet Passion, etc.
Lord bring my Soul out of Prison.

psalm. 142.




THere was a poor Man lived in Somersetshire,
Who by his loving-VVife had five Children dear;
And though every day he did work and take pains,
Yet so great was his charge and so little his gains,
That he scarce could get Bread for to feed them with all,
When they did to their Father for Nourishment call.
All kind of Provision was raised in a trice.
Being forced an compelled to give double the Price
For our Bread* corn, and likewi7s;e all manner of Food;
From which Con^^deration we well may conclude,
That it must be a sorrow and grief to the poor
Who receive for their Work not one Penny the more.
The Rich at a plentiful Table do feed,
While the Poor they are ready to Perish for need;
As by woeful Experience we well understand,
For there is many good Familes now in this Land,
That can hardly bear up, let them do what they can,
Ay, and such was the case of this honest poor Man.
His Wife she fell Sick, and did languishing lie,
At the end of full seventeen VVeeks she did dye;
In which time he could never pay the Landlard his Rent,
Who did threaten him daily, That he should be sent
To a Prison, where he should for ever remain,
For without Rent he never would release him again.
He cried, Be not so Cruel, Pray Landlord forbear,
You shall not lose one Penny, I Will work and take care
For to pay you next Harvest; yet this was in vain,
Having buried his Wife, and returning again;
He arrested this poor Man, and sent him to Iayl,
For he had not a friend that would stand for his Bayl.
The cries of the Infants did ring in his Ears,
And in sorrow they paid a sad tri^^^e of Teers;
Yet this cruel Oppressor no pity would show,
But to Prison the poor Man was ^orced to go;
While his poor little Infants did weep and bewail,
Their dear Mother was Dead, and their Father in Iayl,
There was a poor VVidow that lived in the Town,
Who did readily proffer to part with a Crown
Toward raising a Sum, the said Landlord to pay,
Her example was followed by others next day;
So they quickly released their poor Neighbor from thrall;
Having some what to feed his poor Children withal.
About five VVeeks after this Action was done,
He had an one loving Cousin, a dear Sister's Son,
Who did dye without Issue, and made him his Heir;
Horse and Man being sent for to find him out there.
For to take Possion of two Hundred a Year,
Which does lie in the middle of fair Dorset-shire.
Soon after he was in Possion of all,
He returned to the Town, for his friends he did call,
Who had hope him from Prison, requiting there love
But the poor honest Widow he honored above
All the rest of his good Benefactors and Friends,
For he took her to Wife for to make her amends,
Some blamed him for making that VVidow his Wife,
But he answered, saying, She saved my Life,
Had it not been for her, I in Goal might have died;
She Is deserying and worthy to be my sweet Bride;
I shall always remember her love and good will,
And while life does remain I will honor her still.
This cruel Oppressor which was so unkind,
He began to be vexed and mad in his mind,
He that had been his honest mean Tenant before,
Was at last the head Landlord of his and much more;
For the cruelty acted when as his Wife died,
He was fearful he would probe a Thorn in his side.
Whose Sorrow was evermore sharp and severe,
Yet he now has no less then two Hundred a Year;
Thus we see how good Providence still does take care,
Of the, Poor and the Needy, then who shall despair?
Let us trust in God's Mercies, though never so poor.
It is he that in love can replenish our Store.

