To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament,
Assembled.
The humble Petition of Abjohn Stokes, Esquire
Shows,
THAT your Petitioner, in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and the late
King James, being in the Commission of the Peace for Gloucestershire,
Wiltshire, and Somersetshire, did make a Discovery of about Six Hundred
Clippers, Coyners, and Utterers of False Money; and by the Encouragement of
both their said Majesty's, Four Years, did Prosecute and Convict great Numbers
of the said Criminals, at his own proper Cost and Charges: All which is well
known to most of the Gentlemen in those Parts, and particularly to the Members
of this Honorable House of Commons for the said respective Counties, who have
attested the same under their Hands

THAT your Petitioner, to the great Damage, and almost Ruin of himself and
Family, having expended above 3000 l. did at length meet with Obstructions in
the said Proceedings from the late Lord Chief Justice Jefferies, who being
prevailed with by indirect Means, used by the said Criminals, did oppose the
farther Prosecution against them.

THAT His said Majesty King Charles the Second, declared your Petitioner should
be refunded his Charges, and also gratified for his said Services, but died
soon after, before any Order was made. The said late King James did order 1000
l. to be paid your Petitioner, by Richard Kent, Esquire Receiver of his said
Majesty's Customs, in part of your Petitioner's Disbursements, and also a
Commission for a Regiment of Foot, provided he would use his Endeavors to
Abrogate the Test and Penal Laws; but because your Petitioner would not comply,
the said Commission was not sealed, nor the 1000 l. paid, so that your
Petitioner was forced to Mortgage the greatest part of his Estate, and since
Sell, for the Payment of Debts contracted in the Prosecution.

THAT your Petitioner, in Testimony of the Truth hereof, has to offer Nineteen
Informations, Four Lists of Offenders, prosecuted and convicted; a Copy of the
Deputation from the Wardens of the Mint; Mr. Macy's Receipt for a number of
Engines, Stamps, and Clippings; a Certificate from several Members of this
Honorable House; the Justices of the Peace, Gentlemen, and Substantial
Dealers; Mr. Collier's, Mr. Gough's, and Sir Charles Rawley's Certificate;
Colonel John Windham's Letter; the said Collier's, Keiling's, Elliot's, and
Allen's Affidavits of the Truth of this Petition, Sworn before Judge Turton,
Judge Rookby, and the Lord Chief Justice Holt; with your Petitioner's
Affidavit, that he never Received any Reimbursement or Satisfaction for his
aforesaid Service: All which Testimonials are ready to be laid before this
Honorable House, when they shall please to Order.

Your Petitioner most humbly Implores, That this Honorable House will
vouchsafe to take his great Sufferings into their Considerations, that some
Expedient may be found out (as in your great Wisdom shall be thought meet) by
which your Petitioner may be preserved from Ruin.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
CASE OF Abjohn Stokes, Esquire


