The CASE of EDWARD CLAVILL Esquire duly elected (although not returned) one of the
Burgesses to serve in this present Parliament for the Borough of Corfe-Castle
in the County of Dorset.
IN the Borough of Corfe-Castle, by ancient Custom, the Electors for Burgesses
of Parliament are all Inhabitants that pay Scot and Lot, and all that have any
Estate of Inheritance, or Freehold, or Leasehold, determinable upon Life or
Lives.

At the last Election there were four Candidates, viz. William Culliford,
Edward Clavill, Richard Founds, and John Banks Esquires; and there were given
Eighty five Votes for Mr. Culliford, Sixty three for Mr. Clavill, Fifty two for
Mr. Fownds, and Seventy (talia qualia) for Mr. Banks.

In this Borough are fourteen Tenements, which were granted by Leases for Lives
to so many several Tenants, and they according to Custom and Right voted at the
Election. Notwithstanding which, Mr. Dackcomb, who had granted these Leases,
did a little before the Election, convey the Reversion to fourteen several
other Persons, on purpose to vote for Mr. Banks, and were admitted by the
Mayor. When the Words of the Act Septimo and Octavo Gulielmi Tertii, for
further regulating Elections of Members to serve in Parliament, are as
follows. That all Conveyances of any Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, in any County, City, Borough, Town Corporate, Port, or Place, in
order to multiply Voices, or to split and divide the Interest in any Houses or
Lands amongst several Persons, to enable them to vote at Elections of Members
to serve in Parliament, are hereby declared void, and of none effect; [and that
no more than one single Voice shall be admitted for one and the same House or
Tenement.]

In this Borough likewise are some Lands given to the Poor of the Parish of
VVimbourn, which are under the Management of several Trustees, five of which
were admitted to vote for Mr. Banks.

Besides these nineteen Voters, diverse others, who had no Right in this
Election, were brought to vote for Mr. Banks, who having the Mayor in his
Interest, is returned instead of Mr. Clavill, who had the Majority of legal
Votes.


