The CASE of John Viscount Grandison, in Relation to the Bill now depending in
this Honorable House, for Settling the Estate of Katharine Fitzgerald
Villiers, his Mother, etc.
THE said Katharine being Married to Edward Fitzgerald Villiers, Esquire;, Eldest
Son of George late Viscount Grandison, Anno 1685. with the said Edward, by Fine
and Deed settled her own Estate in Ireland, to the use of the said Edward for
Life, with Remainder to her self for Life, Remainder to her Sons by him
successively in Tail Male, with a Power in the said Settlement for the said
Edward by his Last Will, or other Instrument in Writing, to direct Trustees
named in the said Settlement, to raise by the said Estate any Sum not exceeding
Twelve Thousand Pounds Sterling, for the better Provision for the said
Katharine, and Portions for his Younger Children; pursuant to which the said
Edward by his Last Will, Anno 1691. did Devise that the said Trustees should
raise Two Thousand Pounds apiece for his Younger Son and his Four Daughters,
who are still living, and Two Thousand Pounds for the said Katharine his Wife;
and soon after the said Edward Died, the said Katharine having neither Jointure
or Dower of any Estate of the said Edward's.

Hellen Countess Dowager of Clanricard, the Relict and Second Wife of the said
Katharine's Father, having for her Dower enjoyed a third part of the said
Katharine's Estate so settled as aforesaid, the said Katharine, for the Benefit
of the said now Viscount Grandison, and by the Advice and Concurrence of his
nearest Relations by his Father, for 4000 l. which she borrowed at 8 l. per
Cent. Interest, purchased the said Countess of Clanricard's Dower, intending
the surplusage of the Rents, above the Interest-Money, to be a present
Maintenance for the present Viscount Grandison, now Sixteen Years of Age, and
otherwise totally unprovided.

After which purchase made, the Fine, which was the Foundation of the said
Settlement made in 1685. was by Writ of Error Reversed; and thereon the said
Katharine, for making a Provision for the Lord Grandison, and other her
Children, is contented, and desirous that this Bill pass, which is no way for
her own advantage, but purely that all her Children may be provided for, as was
intended by the Settlement in 1685. and their Father's Will, and to prevent all
Quarrels hereafter among them concerning the same.

In this Bill there is a full General Saving of the Right of all Persons
whatsoever, other than the said Katharine and her Children, who alone are
concerned in this Act.

Notwithstanding which, John Bargiter, and others, Creditors of the said Edward
Fitzgerald Villiers, endeavor to hinder the passing this Bill, unless a
Clause may be added to it, for charging the Estate of the said Katharine with
their Debt due from him, to which that Estate is not subject, either in Law or
Equity. Nor had he any Power whatsoever to Charge the same, otherwise than for
his Wife and Younger Children, but not for the Payment of his Debts. And
although it is recited in the Security made by the said Edward, for the Debt
claimed by the said Bargiter, and others, that he had by a Settlement Dated the
(...) Day of February, 1685. Power to Charge that Estate for Payment of his
Debts, yet that mis-recital could not enlarge his Power; and it is plain by that
Security, that the Person that Lent the Money, relied on the said Edward's
Bond, and Interest of Ten Pounds per Cent. and not of Security of the Land;
having never seen the Deed of Settlement, which was his own fault; and
therefore if he was deceived, it was because he would be so, and would not look
whether in the Settlement there was any such Power.

The Petitioners were heard by their Council before the Committee, who were
fully satisfied there was no reason to put them in a better Condition than they
would be, if this Bill should not pass, and to Charge the Estate by Act of
Parliament with Debts that do not affect it either in Law or Equity.

In regard therefore such Right as the Petitioner had, is fully Saved to them
by the Saving in the Act, it is humbly hoped that the said Bill shall pass.

CASE OF John Viscount Grandison, in Relation to the Bill, now depending in
this Honorable House, for Settling the Estate of Katharine Fitzgerald
Villiers, his Mother* etc.


