Cupids Golden Dart, Or,
A dainty Sonnet here is to be sold,
The like whereof was never sung nor told:
Of a brave Girl that had a bag of Gold,
Which she delivered into her Sweet hearts hold.
And now they live together lovingly,
In joy, in peace, and true tranquillity:
At first they seemed to be at mortal strife,
But in Conclusion were made Man and Wife.
Tune is, Down in an Arbor devouted to Venus.




When Aurora in Azus was blushing,
A nymph of Venus attending the train,
Then Noble Mars with his Pike fell to pushing,
all was to stop, and turn her again.
That time bold Cupid with his Dart,
Pierced a young man unto the heart:
Which made him sigh, lament, and cry,
My love is gone, and I know not why.
My Love is beautiful, gallant and stately,
able to give a Man any content:
She that has sported with me very lately,
is parted from me, which makes me repent:
That ever such a spotted name,
Should come unto so fair a Dame:
This makes me sigh, etc.
I that have clipped her, and oftentimes kiss her,
and kindly dandled her on my knee,
Though sickle Fortune frow, now I have mist her
for I perceive she is angry with me.
Else should she not in rash despite,
Have robbed me of my hearts delight,
She never bade me once good-boy,
But went her way, etc.
I never gave my Love any occasion,
whereby to hold me so much in disdain,
Nor can she show me any good reason,
why she my company thus should refrain:
It Was only hardness of her heart,
Which caused her so to depart,
Her unkind dealing makes me cry, etc.
Had I been resolute, cross grained, or froward,
as many Batchelors are in their ways,
Had I been a Prodigal, proud, or untoward,
as many Impudents are now adays:
Or had I chosen another Mate,
Then had she had just cause to hate:
No such ill qualities ever had I,
Yet she is gone, I know not why.




SInce there is no remedy, farewell adieu love,
in vain it is any longer to stay,
Thou have been false, but i will seek out a true-love,
with all the post haste and speed that I may;
Because thou wast unkind to me,
I never again will look on thee:
The vow thou made thou did deny,
And went away, I know not why.
The Maids Loving Reply.

Prithee Love, Turtle-dove, once again mind me,
do not so bid me adieu:
Loyal and constant thou ever shall find me,
and am resolved to love no man but you:
Cheer up thy spirits, and be not sad,
I have that for thee, will make thee glad:
Do not refuse my courtesy,
I Will love thee dearly till I dye.
Of all other Youngmen I think thee most worthy,
though I was absent from thee for a space,
yet hold up thy head; there is good money bid for thee,
if you are willing my love to embrace,
Here Is for thee a Bag of Gold,
Lake it and keep it fast in hold:
So thou will wed me speedily,
Then shall I love thee till I dye.
If I were worth a whole Ship-load of money;
I would bestow that great substance on thee
And make thee master of it e're a penny,
if thou will cast thy affection on me:
And more than that, i will undertake,
All other creatures to forsake:
If thou the true-love knot will tie,
I Will love thee dearly till I dye.
I Will forsake father, and I Will forsake mother,
if thou wilt be pleased to make me thy bride,
I Will forsake Sister, and I Will forsake Brother,
and all the Kindred that I have beside,
The Proverb old allows it so,
That Love will creep, where't cannot go:
Let me enjoy thy company,
For I must love thee until I dye.
When she these loving words had spoken,
he stepped unto her and gave her a kiss,
Saying, Receive this same as a love-token,
and i will reward thee much better then this;
He took the Gold, and married the Maid,
The matter was not long delayed:
And now they live most lovingly,
Together in Felicity.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


