The CASE of Edward Lloyd Esquire concerning the Election of a Burgess for the
Borough of Montgomery in the County of Montgomery, to serve in the Parliament,
to be holden at Westminster the sixth day of March 1678.
BY the Statute 27 H. 8. 26. It is provided, That for that present Parliament,
and all other future Parliaments for this Realm; For every Borough being a
Shire Town within Wales (excepting the Shire Town for the County of Merionith)
one Burgess should be Chosen and Elected for Parliaments in the like manner,
form and order as Burgesses of Parliament be Elected and Chosen in other Shires
of this Realm; and the Burgess Fees to be Leavied and gathered as well of the
Shire Towns as they be Burgesses of, as of all other Ancient Buroughs within
the same Shires.

By the Statute of 35 H. 8. 11. It is Enacted, for as much as the Inhabitants
of all Cities and Buroughs in every the Twelve Shires within Wales, not
finding Burgesses for the Parliament themselves, must bear and pay the
Burgesses Wages within the same Shire Towns. That from the beginning of that
Parliament, the Burgesses of all and every the said Cities, Buroughs and
Towns, which be, or shall be Contributary to the payment of the Burgesses Wages
of the said Shire Towns, shall be lawfully admonished by Proclamation, or
otherwise by the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other head Officers of the said Towns,
or by one of them to come to give their Elections for the Electing of the said
Burgesses at such time and place lawful and reasonable, or shall be Assigned
for the same intent by the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and other head Officers of
the said Shire Towns, or by one of them: In such Elections the Burgesses shall
have like Voice and Authority to Elect, Name and Choose the Burgesses of every
the said Shire Towns, like and in such manner as the Burgesses of the said
Shire Towns, have, or use. And the Justices of the Peace of every the said
Shires, by the same Act have power to Allot and Tax every of the said Cities,
Buroughs and Towns for the Portions and Rates that every of the said Cities
and Buroughs shall bear and pay toward the said Burgesses; and the said Rates
so set in gross by the Justices of the Peace, shall be rated on the Inhabitants
of the said Cities and Buroughs, by four or six Discreet Substantial Burgesses
of every the said Cities and Buroughs to be Named by the Head Officers
thereof, and to Collect and pay over the same to the said Burgesses.

The said Town of Mountgomery, by the said Statute 27 H. 8. 26. is named and
appointed the Shire Town of the said County of Mountgomery, and the Buroughs
of Llanidloes, Pool and Llanvylling, are three Ancient Buroughs of the same
County; and the Burgesses thereof heretofore used to have their Voices at the
Elections of the Burgesses for the said Shire Town, with, and like as the
Burgesses of the same Shire Town of themselves, had and used: And for that
purpose convenient notice was usually sent from the Bailiffs of Mountgomery to
the said three other Buroughs, of the time and place, when and where such
Elections were to be made.

The Sheriff of the said County having on the 10th of February 1678. received
His Majesty's Writ for Summoning His Parliament to be held at Westminster on
the 6th. day of March following, and for Choosing a Knight for the said County,
and a Burgess for the said Borough, to serve in the same Parliament; Did
immediately the same day send away his Mandate to the Bailiffs of Mountgomery,
to do and execute what appertains to them in that behalf.

The Bailiffs of Mountgomery being wrought upon by some great persons in that
Neighborhood, on whom they had dependence, to surprise the said three other
Buroughs of Llanidloes, Pool and Llanvylling, by not giving them notice of the
said Election of a Burgess for the said Borough, and privately by some of the
Burgesses of their own Town to Elect one Matthew Price Esquire to be Burgess: And
having in prospect, that if the Burgesses of the said three other Buroughs
would appear, they would by Majority of Voices Elect another person, and not
the said Mr. Price: They the Bailiffs of Mountgomery in pursuance of that
unjust practice and design, did not send notice of the said Election to the
said other Buroughs, but only made Proclamation at the Town of Mountgomery on
the 17th of February, that the Election was to be made at 8. of the Clock the
next Morning; And by that means so surprised the Borough of Lanidloes, being
14 Miles distant, that none of their Burgesses, did, or could attend at the
said Election.

Yet some of the Burgesses of the said Buroughs of Pool and Lanvelling being
at a nearer distanee to Mountgomery, having casually some few hours intimation
of the said intended Election, appeared at the same Election, and with them
joined also some of the Burgesses of Mountgomery, which made up in the whole
219 Voices, all for the said Edward Lloyd Esquire to be Elected for the said
Borough, and so declared themselves, at the said Election and prayed the Poll.

The Bailiffs of Mountgomery perceiving, that if they admitted the Burgesses of
Pool and Llanvelling there present, to Poll, that then the Majority of Voices
would be for the said Mr. Lloyd, did only Poll the Burgesses of Mountgomery
upon a List of their own preparation, of whom only 82. Voted for the said Mr.
Price, being the Major part of the Mountgomery Burgesses then present: And
thereupon the Bailiffs closed the Poll, and declared and returned the said Mr.
Price to be Burgess, wholly rejecting the Votes of the said Burgesses of Pool
and Lanvelling then present, pretending for a reason for their so doing, that
none but the Burgesses of Mountgomery had right, or should be admitted to Vote
at the said Election, though the said Burgesses of Pool and Lanvylling insisted
upon, and earnestly pressed to have their Voices received for the said Mr.
Loyd, who had Voices there for him as they were upon a just account, and can be
made appear in the whole with those of Mountgomery Burgesses, who Voted for him
219. whereas there were but 82. Votes in the whole for the said Mr. Price.

Now in regard the said Election was made by surprise, whereby the Burgesses of
Lanidloes could not attend the same for want of notice, who intended if they
had been present, to Elect to the said Mr. Lloyd Burgess, and that
notwithstanding the said surprise, Mr. Lloyd had the Majority of Voices of
Burgesses present at the said Election for him, if the said Votes of the
Buroughs of Pool and Lanvylling had been received and not rejected as
aforesaid; and for that by the said undue means and practice of the said
Bailiffs of Mountgomery, the said three other Buroughs have not only lost the
benefit of their Voices in a free Election at this time, but the same may be
drawn in precedent against them in future Elections.

Notwithstanding by the very express words of the Statutes (being Ancient
Buroughs within the said County) they have an undoubted right to give their
Voices in all Elections and are liable and Contributary to the Wages of the
respective Members Elected, have always been so, and ever from the making of
the said Statutes without dispute or question had notice of, and did give their
Voices in all Elections.

They Humbly Petition.
That the said Mr. Price may not be received to Sit as a Member in Parliament,
being unduly Elected as aforesaid. That the said Mr. Loyd who had the Majority
of Voices, may be returned, and stand Elected Burgess for the said Borough. Or
that the said undue Election of Mr. Price may be void, and a new free Election
granted. Or such other Releif in the Premises as to the great Wisdom of the
Honorable House of Commons shall seem just and meet.


