To the Honorable Committee of PARLIAMENT appointed for Prisoners.
The most humble Petition of Sir David Cuningham Prisoner in the Upper-Bench,
and the rest of the Creditors of James Enyon Esquire, lately called Sir James
Enyon Baronet deceased.
Shows,
THat the said James Enyon in and about the year 1640. borrowed and became
indebted unto several Creditors, whose Names and Debts are hereunto annexed, in
the Sum of Eleven thousand and seven hundred pounds of clear principal
money, which with the interest thereof due and in arrears, is now in the whole
the Sum of Nineteen thousand pound and upwards; for the most part of all
which said debt your Petitioner Sir David Cuningham is bound for and with the
said James Enyon as his Surety, and is no wise able to pay the same; The said
James Enyon about the year 1642. made a Deed of Bargain and Sale of his Manor
of nether Itchington in the County of Warwick, unto four friends in trust, to
be by them sold for and toward the payment of his debts; which said deed is in
it self somewhat defective in opinion of Council, in which respect a Decree in
the High Court of Chancery was obtained about a year and a half ago, the better
to supply and strengthen the said Deed, nevertheless Purchasers are not well
satisfied therewith, the said James Enyon having left three daughters under
age, the eldest of them married.

In consideration whereof, your Honors Petitioners do humbly pray, that an Act
may be granted for making good the said Sale against the said Children, the
better to satisfy Purchasers. And in regard that the Sale of the said Manor
will not produce nor yield above Eight thousand pounds, the whole debt being
above Nineteen thousand pounds: They the said Sir David Cuningham and the rest
of the Creditors do most humbly pray, That an Act may be likewise granted for
the rest of the said Sir James Enyons entailed Lands (which is near about
twelve hundred pounds of yearly Rent) to be made subject and liable to the
payment of the rest of his said just debts, which is above Eleven thousand
pounds more: there being no heir-male, but only three daughters, who may have
fair and competent Portions besides of Two thousand five hundred pounds apeece
at least: and this the rather ought and may in all justice and equity be
granted; in respect that the said James Enyon to the same effect, did in this
last Parliament prefer a Petition and Bill in Parliament to cut off the
intail, he having no issue-male; And lastly, That the possession of the said
entailed Lands may be ordered and settled to your Petitioners, toward the
satisfaction and payment of their just Debts: To all which effect your
Petitioners did lately Petition the Committee appointed for hearing, relieving,
and representing to the State the grievances of the people, but nothing being
yet done, they are thus again constrained to become Petitioners to your
Honors, most humbly begging relief in the Premises,

And they as in all duty bound shall ever pray, etc. D. Cuningham.
A true Note of the said James Enyon his Debts, with the Interest in arrear,
and due the first day of June, 1653.

John Acton Esquire. -- 4200. Mr William Combs and his Assigns. -- 2800.
James Lock Esquire. -- 1700. Mr Richard Cox. -- 1000. Anne Moorhead Widow. --
1780. The Heirs of Robers Jessy. -- 1740. The Lady Pools Children. -- 1600.
William Palmer Esquire, lately called Sir William Palmer and Mr Buckbury. 1540
Thomas Benett Esquire, and others. -- 0900. The Lady Harvey. -- 0470. Henry
Hen Esquire, lately called Sir Henry Hen Knight and Baronet. -- 0460 Mrs
Andrews. -- 0480. Mr Hawtry. -- 0360.
Sum of the said Debts 19030.




