^ome buy a Mouse-Trap, Or, a new way to catch an old Rat:
Being a true relation of one Peter's Post of Roterdam, who temping an honest
woman to leudnesle, was by her and her husband catch in a Mouse Trap, by what
means the following Story shall relate.
To the tune of, Packingtons Pound.
Oh, my finngers.


The Rat is caught








THis Nation long time has bin plagued with old Rats,
And bin at great charges to keep them good Cats,
one great black Rat now as it does appear,
put a Fair Woman in bodily fear,
But he being in have,
Was taken at last,
(...) Woman was glad when the danger was past,
But certain you shall have no need of a Cat,
Come buy a new Mouse-Trap to catch an old Rat.
Good morrow fair Mistrisse, good morrow (quoth she)
I would we were better acquainted (quoth he)
You may if you please Sir, the Woman replied,
For why, my poor. Spirit is free from all pride;
He gave her a Shilling,
The woman seemed willing.
Then straight the old Rat, and the Mouse fell a billing,
But certain you shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Then unto the Tavern they went with all speed,
And there they were wondrous merry indeed;
The old Rat was hungery, and aimed at her fall,
The Woman was honest and crafty withal,
He called her his Honny,
And p^offer'd her Money,
What should an old Mungrell do with a young Conny?
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
He praised her Foot and he praised her Hand,
And feign he would have her now at his cammand,
She told him her Husband was gone out of Town,
And he should lie with her all Night for a Crown,
A Crown he did ^ive her,
Which well did relieve her,
And so the old Doatard was forced to believe her.
but certain you shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
I Will lay the Key under the Door Sir (quoth she)
And then about midnight you ^ay come to me,
Alas Mistrisse sweet Lips you do me great wrong,
For I am not able to tarry so long:
My Neighbors (quoth she)
Takes notice of me,
When they are a sleep, then the business must be,
but certain you shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Then by much persuasion at length they did part,
And she took her leave of her old new Sweetheart,
She went to her husband and straight did declare it,
Who laugh^d m^st heartily when he did hear it,
He highly commends her,
And thus much befriends her,
That he with assistance behold now attends her,
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Husband (quoth she) if by me you will be ruled,
By me this old Doatard again shall he fooled.
When he at night comes for to make me his whore,
He Will grope with his hand for the Key of the door,
A Mouse-Trap their set,
O do not forget,
And there you may catch him, and teach him more wit,
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat,
Come buy a new Mouse-Trap to catch an old Rat.
HE did then according as she him advised,
A better Project was never devised,
Peter's the Post then came posting with speed,
And there he was caught by the Fingers indeed,
His Fingers were toare,
Which made him to roar,
The old Rat was never so plagued before,
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat,
Come buy a new Mouse-Trap to catch an old Rat.
He called to the Woman to show him some pity,
And there he sung forth a most pitiful Ditty,
The Man he made answer, and called him sweet-hony,
Quoth he art thou come for to bring me more money,
Some money I Will give thee,
If thou will believe me,
And for my offenses now freely forgive me,
But certain you shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Five pounds he did give him, and fell on his knees,
He asked him forgivenes, which when the man sees,
He draws out his sword then and makes him believe,
he would cut off his head now, which made him to grieve,
But I did heard say,
This Rat run away,
And did through fear his Breeches b^wray,
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Peter's the Post-man next day did lament,
And all the sweet Sisters were much discontent,
He might have had any of them at command,
Without any trouble, the case so did stand:
These sweet Babes of Grace,
Told him to his face,
For hunting strange flesh, they would him displace,
but certain we shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
All you married men now, rejoice you and say
Our wives are all honest, and teach us a way,
If they so continue, to keep our heads clear
From horns, which a many do causelessly fear,
And you that make Traps,
'Twill be your good haps
To flourish, if women do escape private claps,
but certain you shall have no need of a Cat, etc.
Now all you good women that lead honest lives,
And would be accounted to be honest wives,
If you in the Street do meet such a Knave.
Tell him at home Sir a Mouse-Trap you have,
'Twill make them a shamed,
When they hear it named,
And you for your modesty ever be famed,
But certain we shall have no need of a Cat,
Come buy a new Mouse-Trap to catch an old Rat.
Humphery Crouch.

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond.


