The CASE of Sir JOHN EDWARDS, Knight, Appellant from a Decrcee made in the
High and Honorable Court of Chancery, in a Cause there Depending, wherein Mary
Howard, Widow, was Plaintiff, and the Appellant was Defendant: Humbly Offered
to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in Parliament Assembled.
HENRY HOWARD, Esquire being seized in Fee of the Honor of Cl^ne, the Manor of
Bucknill, and of other Manors and Lands in the County of Salop, the 19th day
of January 1669; after his Marriage with the Respondist, did settle part of the
Premises of the value of 500 l. per. ann. upon her for her Jointure; and the
7th day of December following, did make her a voluntary additional Settlement
of other Lands, worth (if in possession) 1500 l. per annum more. Henry Howard
afterward, viz. the 10th day of July 1671, sold to the Appellant for a full
and valuable Consideration, really paid the Reversion after three Lives of
three Tenements in Bucknill; which unknown to the Appellant, were in the
aforesaid voluntary and additional Settlement, and of two small Tenements in
the Forest of Clone, which were not in that voluntary additional Settlement.
All which said Premises, were an absolute purchase, without any power of
Redemption, either by Word or Writing. Which Premises so purchased by the
Appellant (to save charges, and to protect them by Collateral security from
encumbrances) were included in the same conveyance with other Lands about that
time contracted for by one Mr. Edward Powell, with the same Mr. Howard; but the
Contracts were several, and the Tenements purchased by the Appellant, were by
the said Powell immediately to be conveyed to the Appellant and his Heirs; and
a Draught for that purpose was then prepared, and agreed on, and afterward was
executed by the said Powell.

The said Mr. Powell voluntarily gave Mr. Howard a Note to admit him to
re-purchase the Premises by him the said Powell contracted for and purchased.
Mr. Howard, after he had supplied his occasions with the said Purchase-money,
preferred his Bill in Chancery against Powell, and the Appellant to have
Redemption from them both, of the Lands by them severally purchased, upon
pretense that the said Note given by Powell, did amount to an agreement, that
Mr. Howard might re-purchase the same, and Mr. Howard would therein have
included the Lands purchased by the Appellant. But it appearing that the
Appellants purchase was a distinct purchase from Powells, and so not to be
affected with Powell's Note, That Bill was dismissed, and then Mr. Howard
exhibited a new Bill against Powell alone to redeem the same; who submitting
thereto the 6th of July, 26 Car. 2 di, the same was decreed accordingly, but
without prejudice as to the Premises purchased by the Appellant.

In November 1675, Mr. Henry Howard dyed, and the Appellant having, as he was,
and is advised, an absolute and irredeemable Estate in the Premises, and
conceiving himself at peace and quiet, did in consideration of a Marriage and
Portion, received with his new Wife, absolutely settle the said Lands in
Bucknill (inter alia) upon Sir Edward Harley, Knight of the Bath, and Robert
Beale, Esquire in Trust for the Appellants Wife, for part of her Jointure, and
afterward to the Use of the Heirs Male of their two bodies, and charged with
Portions for younger Children; That the Respondist May Howard, Relict of the
aforesaid Henry Howard, deceased, claiming part of the Premises, as being
comprised in her said volantary additional Settlement, made as aforesaid,
brought her Bill in Chancery against the Appellant for a Re-conveyance of all
the whole Premises, and a Redemption thereof though absolutely bought and
purchased by him, and settled for a valuable consideration as aforesaid, on
pretense, that the Appellants having accepted of a conveyance from Powell; and
being privy to Powells giving the aforesaid Note, and not opposing the same,
ought to be affected thereby.

Whereas,

1st, The Appellants Purchase and Contract was distinct from that of Mr.
Powells; the Purchases were treated for severally, and severally paid for. 2ly,
Mr. Powell only agreed to admit Mr. Howard to re-purchase what he himself had
contracted for, and so the Appellants purchase not comprehended in that Note.
3ly, The Premises purchased by the Appellant, not being included in Powells
Note; therefore, though the Appellant was present when the Note was given, yet
had he no reason to oppose it, or to desire that to be excluded, which, in
truth, was never included therein. 4ly, The Note given by Mr. Powell, was
voluntary, and he has sworn expressly it was so; and that it was to extend only
to his own purchase, and not to the Appellants. 5ly, To make a Construction,
that the Appellants Lands should be redeemable, because Powell so agreed for
his own, is not only against the truth, but a construction contrary to all
common sense and understanding: For can any man think it probable, that the
Appellant would part with his money, and take only a security of a dry
Reversion, after three Lives in being, for the same? Out of what could he
expect to be paid his Interest? It would be worthy of enquiry, Whether ever any
man lent his money upon a dry Reverson, after three Lives, without something in
possession, that might answer his Interest, or some Collareral security for the
same? 6ly, The money paid by the Appellant, was the full value of the
Reversions, considering the Lives then in being. 7ly, The Appellant on
presumption, that this absolute purchase of his, was only a Mortgage, is
decreed to re-convey the same free from encumbrances, which is absolutely
impossible for him to do, he having for a valuable consideration settled the
same on his wife and Children, as aforesaid; so that it is out of his power to
perform the Decree, and consequently his Person decreed to perpetual
Imprisonment. 8ly, The Respondist is admitted to a Redemption of all the Five
Tenements aforesaid; whereas (were the Appellants title but a Mortgage, yet
has the title only to three of them) none of them being in her Jointure, and
there being but three of them in her additional voluntary Settlement, the
equity of Redemption of the other two (if redeemable at all) being in another
person, viz. Mr. Walcott, who purchased Clone, whereof those Tenements are a
part, who is neither Plaintiff nor Defendant, and to whose prosecution the
Appellant is equally liable. 9ly, The Respondist is relieved by the said
Decree, upon a voluntary conveyance against the Appellant, who is a Purchasor
for a full and valuable consideration, and upon account stated by the Master in
Chancery, according to the Respondists own values in proofs; the money now due
to the Appellant, is more then the Reversions are worth, if now to be sold,
although several of the Lives are dead since the purchase; so that the Decree
is purely obtained for vexation, and can be in no case for the Respondists
advantage, yet Decrees an impossibility to be performed; and if not performed,
the Appellants person is liable to perpetual Imprisonment, as aforesaid. 10ly,
That the Appellant having the conveyance of the Reversion in his own Name, his
Estates for three Lives are Merg'd; which is an evidence of an absolute
Purchase, not a Mortgage.
All which it most humbly submitted to the Wisdom and grave Consideration of
this Supreme Fountain of Justice, your Lordships in Parliament Assembled. And
the Appellant humbly prays Relief according to Justice, and that the Decree
aforesaid may stand reversed.


