A DIALOGUE Between DEATH AND Doctor ROBERT WYLD, Who Dyed lately of an
APOPLEXY.
D. NO Roaring Christmas shall Thou keep, now Rore
Bold Wit! W. Oh! oh! Hhohh! Well! I Will cry no more,
Alas, it is for Thee, not Me, to Rore.
A Deadly Blow! But where is thy Sting? There lies
The King of Terrors cowed out! In Sacrifice
(An Eucharist) Lord, take this Soul to Thee,
By Death Thou have slain Death, Redeemed Me.
Grave, take the Carcass, at the reckoning Day
With Interest the Principal repay.
Take Worms meat (they will scarce lick the punched Face,)
Bring't up in Glory, though sown in Disgrace,
In never-fading Beauty it shall rise,
And be transplanted int' yon Paradise.)
They Will Digg the Kernels out (the Eyes) Digg on!
One Breakfast makes the Head a Skeleton.
They Will tease the Hands, and Toes, and Paunch (their Fence)
Intolerable Pains, have numbed all Sense.
'Twas not Seer Sheldon, when he turned Me out,
Did Me perplex; no, it was Bishop Gout.
Death did me vex and terrify much less,
I Will now be gone out of his Diocese.
I con you Thanks. Bish. Gout proceeded on,
You granted me a Prohibition.
Adieu, my Lord. D. I Am but a Pursivant,
To the Court you to conduct, by Heaven sent.

W. I lived a Martyr all my Days, now I,
In flaming Spices, like a Phoenix, Die.
My Heart bleeds for the Church and State, I faint,
Take of my Cordial, Surviving Saint.
Proud Babel Reels, it Totters, it will Fall,
As sure as Lambeth stands against White Hall.
Come Seraphims, and bear this Soul above,
Impatient to see her Vines, her Love.
One Stroke, with all the Clusters, Lop'd the Vine,
One chopped off Love. Ha, ha! their Lot is Mine.
They were so quick at Work, their Master's Voice
Soon called them off; Into your Master's Joys.
More Blessed Sight I Will see, ('Twill satisfy)
The Glorious, Ever-blessed Trinity.
Whom I Adored and Loved sometimes, Him I
For ever will Love, Admire, and Glorify;
So, so, I Will spend a Blessed Eternity,
In everlasting Love, Delights and Joy.
Hal -- Le -- Lu -- Jah.

Alas! Poor Scholar, have thou felt the Stroke
Of matchless Death? Are all thine Heart Strings broke?
Who Will sing thine Iter Empyraeum? I
After thy Blood-suck send this Hue and Cry.
Great Wyld is slain! Slain! Let this Shreek fly round
Till Hills, and Dales, and Rocks, and Shores rebound,
Unto Pale Pyrene, and from thence go on
Over Parnassus unto Helicon.
Raise up the sluggish Sisters, Three times Three,
In Lamentations Drop one Elegy.
Streams Ever-flowing from each Muses Eye
May Spring a Fountain, now their Well is Dry.
Tagus and Ganges will astonished be,
And all the Antipodes as well as We.
Who slew the Muses Darling, of Mankind
The Choice Delights? Search out until you find.
Who was it killed the Divine? Who slew the Poet?

Echo. Eat! What Nimble Chaps, what Cormorant was he
Could eat up Wyld? Might not he poisoned be?
Who poisoned Wild? Wakeman with all his Main
Could not get Sacred Charles out of his Wain.
He pawned his Skill, though Justice might not spy,
A Plaster to the Fist affects the Eye.
'Twas Death (that Jesuit) so greedy grown
It chapt up Robert, and let George alone.
Rome's Emissary Leeches, so fine bred,
Will Not touch Posteriors, they chap at the Head.

AN EPITAPH.
HEre lies Poor Robin, most enriched one
With Nature's Dowre, Graces large Portion.
Nature brought Reason, Prudence, Eloquence,
And Magnanimity, Munificence,
Courage and Constancy, and Matchless Wit.
Grace Him adorned with Faith, and Hope, and Love,
That Saints below he might excel, above
With Patience, in none admired more;
Nature and Grace on him laid out their Store.
Rome's Plot to strangle Justicein Godfrey,
Hell's was; in Wild, to choke Divinity.
Here lies the Poet, here lies Poetry,
Here Is the Divine, here lies Divinity.
Ah Fools! an inexhausted Springdoth Lie,
Justice in Charles, in God, Theology.
London, Printed in the Year 1679.


