A Description of the late Rebellion in the WEST
A HEROIC POEM.
episodic depiction of Monmouth's rebellion

FROM Belgia's shore, with a pretended claim
On Junes eleventh in three small Vessels came,
(Though fatal to him in a fatal Time)
The Traitor MONMOUTH and surprised Lyme;
IN the West of England, whence of th fourteenth day,
He marched with all his Rebel Rout away
Part of which fell on Bridport and their sbed
The Blood of Loyalists, but were repaid,
With tripple Deaths, there Rebel Blood first stained,
The guiltless Ground there Loyalty first gained.
A lucky vantage, seven were killed outright,
Twenty three Prisoners, made the rest by Flight,
Scattering their Arms, to their main Strength retreat,
And the sad Tale of their Defeat relate.
No sooner news of this Rebellious Crew,
To our dread Monarch and his Senate flew,
On Fames swift Wings, but an Attaindure's laid
Against MONMOUTH and upon his Rebel Head
Five thousand pounds to bring him alive or dead.
When worthy Monaux on Junes nineteenth day
With twenty Horse the Rebels did dismay,
Killing them twelve, though in the valiant strife,
Death (still the Brave's worst Foe) surpised his Life:
But unrevenged he did not long remain
Brave Oglethorp's Commanded Troops distain
Canisham's Bridge with eighty Rebels slain
Whilst bold Trevanion Lyme's Recovery wrought,
With the Arms and Powder which the Rebels brought,
And noble Pembroke entered factious From,
Scattering the Rabble that were thither come;
Took the Ringleader and made him recant
The Traiterous Declaration he durst plant,
Up in the Marketplace and Traitor own,
MONMOUTH to be who had such mischief done.
Soon after thrice renowned Feversham
Near to the Town called Phillips-Norton came
Where leading on the Rebels flanked the Lane.
Yet Hero like undaunted Grafton made
A brave attempt and beat their Ambuscade,
Speaking in Thunder his unshaken sense
Of Loyalty and Justice to his Prince;
Whilst from the Hill the loud mouthed Cannons bent
Against the Foe, their Globes of Ruin sent:
Winged with swift Death, which made them soon remove,
Not longer daring such destruction prove:
But fearful of approaching Fate retire,
Before those Swords that spoke a Monarchs Ire.
And passing many Towns, at last they came,
To Wells so known for it Cathedrals fame:
Which impiously with Sacrilegious Hands,
Fit for all horrid Mischief these black Bands
Rifl'd and such base outrages commit,
As if they had been born the Sons of Spite:
Which done to Glassenbury strait they drew,
From thence to Bridgwater and there make show,
As if they meant to fortefy the Town,
But now the fatal time came swiftly on,
To which Rebellions Punishment was due
On Julys fifth, when the bright Sun withdrew
And over the World sad night her Mantle threw,
In Darkness suiting with their Deeds the Rout,
From all their Quarters silently drew out,
With an inglorious purpose to surprise
The Royal Army, but those wakeful eyes,
Under so great a Charge, no slumber brook,
But instantly the hot alarm took.
And now no more but Neptune's silver Hair,
Parting the threatening Fronts of cruel War;
The Leaden Thunderbolts on Lightnings Wing,
A swift Destruction to the Rebels bring.
Not able to withstand those juster Arms,
Their Horse affrighted, fly the fierce Alarms:
In much Disorder before every Charge,
And over the field disperse themselves at large:
Leaving the Foot, who faintly stood a while,
But broken by the Horse they soon Recoile.
MONMOUTH himself, GREY's fortune follow strait;
With thirty Horse betaking him to flight
Whilst one the plain the slaughtered Rabble lie
And stain the Grass with a Rebellious dye.
Those that escaped the field for safety sought,
By wretched flight but that small fafety wrought
Heaven had decreed to punish their bold guilt
And on their Heads, revenge the Blood they spilt:
Two thousand Lives they paid upon the place
And most that fled were taken in the Chase.
So July's happy sixth their ruin viewed,
Saw them entirely broken and subdued;
On some of them the Martial Law took place,
And made them know what 'twas the Nation Peace
In such wild lawless Tumults to molest
Whilst other Laws prepared to try the rest:
And now the happy Victory being known,
To Troops on diverse Posts their care was shown:
In seizing all suspicious Travelers,
When near Holt-Lodge some Troopers unawars
Seized on the late Lord GRAY with him his Guide
Who vainly sought a refuge where to hide.
On July's Eight MONMOUTH was likewise found
Hid in a Ditch enclosing Ferney Ground;
With him the Brandenburg on whom a Guard,
Was strongly placed which instantly prepared;
To bring them to Whitehall who there with GRAY,
Arrived secure on July's thirteenth day;
Thence to the Tower they in a Barge were rowed
Whilst on each shore stood the rejoicing Crowd
Clapping their Hands to see the Punishment
Fall upon those that others Ruins meant.
MONMOUTH upon Attaindure being doomed,
His Treasons meed no more on Life presumed:
But on the fifteenth day being brought upon
A Mourning Stage, and there his Crimes made known;
Expressing Sorrow for the wrong he did
To his dread Sovereign and the Blood he shed,
Submitted patiently and lost his Head:
Which in a Coffin with his body laid
A Hearse to their Interment them conveyed
So fell Rebellion and so fall it still,
So fare it with all those that dare Rebel.
FINIS.
This may be printed

September the 7th 1685. R.L.

Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-Corner.


