The DESPAIRING LOVER.
Whose Mind with Sorrow much was discontented,
Because of his true Love he was prevented.
To the Tune of, Aim not too high.


BReak heart and dye, I may no longer live,
To Enjoy this World nothing that I would give,
I live forlorn, all joys are from me fled,
I have lost my Love, alas, my heart is dead!
Each thing on earth continues with his Love,
The pretty Hidgeon and the Turtle dove;
And diverse others in this World I know,
But my Love will not seem to love me so.
I little thought what true I now do find,
I did not dream my Love would prove unkind;
But it is no news, for many proves untrue,
And so does mine, for she bids me adieu.
Seeing it is so, i will turn a Palmer poor,
And I will range abroad the World half over,
To see if I can find some dismal cave.
There will I dwell, there will I d^g my grave.
I will go travel to some new found Land,
To France to Spain and Turkey out of hand;
Where unto Strangers there I will complain,
How that my Love has me unkindly slain.
If I do land upon some new found shore,
Whereas no M^n did ever land before,
Then should I think myself in happy case,
For my delight is in a silent place.
There will I write my fill of my true Love;
Did I say true? what fancy did me move,
(...)her true that always was unkind,
(...)
(...)
(...)
But now her smiles are turned to frowns and fire,
To kill my heart with woe is her desire.
Bright Phoebus beams are darkened in the skies,
When as the storms of Boreas do arise;
But she does quickly shine after the rain,
But my coy Mistress will not love again.
I would I were now sin^ing in the Seas
In some frail vessel, if the Fates did please:
Where neither love nor comfort could be found,
But every hour expecting to be drowned.
My speeches all do but prolong my pain,
For I did never sail the Ocean main;
Nor will I suffer life in me to 'bide,
So long to wait the time of wind and tide.
Seeing it is so, to the wilderness i will hie,
Amongst wild beasts, where I intend to dye;
Where lions tigers, bears, and panthers mourn,
With dragons, elephants and unicorn.
Thus many wishes I have wished in vain,
And none of these can ease me of my pain:
This piercing poniard now shall end the strife,
And kill my heart that loathes this mortal life.
This being spoken, forth His Love did rush,
Beholding him with many a smile and blush,
O hold, quoth for, and hear what I do say,
Do not despair, nor work thy lives decay.
(...) fair I pray come lend an ear,
(...) appear:
(...) (...)bled (...)
(...)
A Constant and Kind MAID,
Who saved in Love a proper young Man's Life,
And after proved his dear and loving Wife.
To the same TUNE.




COntent th^self my Love, and do not dye,
Thy life I l^ve, thy death I do defy,
Live then in joy an^ seek to banish pain,
Take a good heart, and I will love again.
Each thing on earth does love his chosen Mate,
And thou con^emnest me, and said I hate:
M^n love by fancy, beasts they love by kind,
Then fancy me, and thou shall favor find.
For all the gold that Cresus ever did own,
I will not seem to leave my Love alone;
No, no, my Love, I will not prove untrue,
Nor will I change an old Friend for a new.
Thou shall not need to turn a Palmer poor,
For I for thee have gold and silver store;
Instead of finding out some secret place,
Thou shall have me within thy arms t'imbrace;
Thou shall not travel to another land,
For i'l^ be ready still at thy command:
Thou shall my Dear have no cause to complain,
For I with joy thy love will entertain.
If thou had landed on some fo^reign shore.
Whereas no Man did ever land before:
But seeing thou art here alive with me,
Thou shall not go hence dangers for to see:
What will thou wish of me my own true Love,
F^ar not my Dear, for I will constant prove:
I am thy own, and so thou shall me find,
To thee I will be loving true and kind.
As I w(...) (...)
(...)
I will not seek thy dearest blood to spi^l,
But I will yield unto thy wished will.
Sweet I have listened to thy moan and cries,
Weep thou no more, but wipe thy watery eyes:
The storms are past, the sun shines after rain.
And I do vow to love thee once again.
If thou were on the roaring Sea so wide,
Upon the Dolphins back then thou may ride:
Desiring Neptune's favor out of hand,
To be your Pilot to some other Land.
Sweet Love abroad much dangers do ensue,
The Seas and Wilderness bids thee adieu;
Never seek to write, nor think of wind and tide,
But live with me and I will be thy Bride.
O stay at home my Love and go not there,
Wild beasts in pieces will thy body tear:
When I behold them for to suck thy blood,
They shall have mine; my Love, to do thee good.
Lo thus to thee, my Love, I do make known,
Vowing hereafter I will be thy own:
O stay thy hand, my Love, and do not kill
Thy gentle heart, which I do love so well.
Then straight he took his Love into his arms,
That had preserved his body from such harms,
Welcome, quoth he, I love thee as my life
And quickly after he made her his Wife.
Thus have you heard my Song of we and joy.
Let Maids and young Men listen t^^t I pray*
(...)
(...)
(...)


