A DIALOGUE OR DISCOVRSE between a Parliament Man And a Roman Catholic,
Touching The present state of Recusants in ENGLAND.

And showing how from time to time they have always Maintained their Religion
by Treason and Conspiracies.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the year 1641.

A Dialogue or Discourse between a Parliament Man and a Roman Catholic.
Catholic. SIR, What are your Senators resolved to ruin all Catholics?


Prost. We shall proceed against you according to the Laws.


Cath. But the Laws sometimes may be suspended: for when the cause and motive
of the Law does universally cease, the Law it self may be anulled.


Prot. True: but not in our case; for the motives, which heretofore induced our
Parliaments to enact Statutes against Recufants, do still continue, neither
are they as yet universally ceased. Therefore the neglect of putting them in
execution is both offencive to God, and dangerous to our State.


Cath. Yet I cannot see, why the suspention of a rigorous hand, and a
charitable moderation of your illimited power over a small number of poor
Catholics can breed a scruple in your Conscience, on be offencive to
Almighty God, for although in your opinion the Religion of Catholics be false,
and consequently, that your zeal to the Truth do urge you to suffer no
miscreants among you: yet this zeal being only grounded upon the literal
text of the Scripture, interpreted by your selves, how can you think that the
explication of this sacred authority is so evident, as that he may justly be
punished, who will not adheare to your opinion. But however, may you not in
sure charity without offense to God suffer us to live amongst you, with
intention to bring us to the knowledge of you deem to be truth, and so with
intention to make us of your Religion: This you see is the practice of other
Nations, both Catholics and Protestants to admit and to lerate among them
such as profess a different belief from theirs: It is so you know in France,
Spain, Germany, Swevia, Polonia, Muscovia, Turkey, Persia, etc. will you only
be more scrupulous, then all the Christians of Europe, and more severe to your
own Country men, then Turks, and other Heathen Princes?


Prot Could I be persuaded that such a connivence at Recusants were not
hurtful to our present government, and that the Roman Catholic could be true
and loyal subjects to a Protestant King or Common wealth, I would never give
my voice to have them used with rigor and severtity, but you Papists are much
pemitious to our State. Therefore it is not your Religion, but Treason that we
punish.


Cath I confess this severity sprung not only from the motives of State, and
Policy, but was much exasperated by the rigorus proceedings of the Court of
Rome, and by the factious combinations, and seditious plots of some few busy
bout feux of the Roman faith. Yet I am confident, that our Religion does not
teach us any thing contrary to the fidelity we owe to our King and Country,
though Protestants, yea even though they persecute us.


Ptot. But I can tell you, that the vast ambition of the Court of Rome, their
continual practices and endeavors to conserve and augment their greatness,
and the Popes primacy, and pretended authority to create and depose Kings and,
Emperors were able to make us Jealous of you, but I will only speak of the
special power, which you generally give him over Heretical and Schismatic
States and Princes, as our State and King is in your opinion.


Cath. In this many wise and experienced Catholics do blame the ambition of
the Court of Rome as well as you. And as for the Popes power of creating Kings,
there is now no Prince will either expect or desire creation from him.


Prot. How ever you see, that our case is different from the case of Catholic
Princes, for you say, that the Pope can depose Kings for Heresy, or Schism:
(and this is a general tenent amongst you) or for joining in league, and
alliance with Protestant States, nay for notorious vices: and some of you add
even for insufficiency; and in all these cases the Pope himself must be judge.
And what Protestant Prince can be secure, supposing this doctrine be true, and
that the Popes party, either foreign, or domestical, be stronger, then such
a Princes? Do you not hold that the Pope can absolve the subjects of such a
King from their allegiance? and has he not done it here in England? Did not
his Nuncio in Spain solicit for many years together, to have an Armado sent
against this Kingdom. And was not this effected at the instance, and pursuit
of your English Jesuits, did not Cardinal Allen write, and print a seditious
letter by the Popes command, to stir up the Papists of England to rebellion?
Was not Queen Elizabeth excommunicated, and deposed by the Pope? Did not
Dolman write a Book by the Popes order, to disprove Queen Elizab. Title to the
crown, and to transfer it upon Portugal? These are your tenants, and your
practices must needs follow upon all occasions; which if sometimes they do not,
it is not for want of Principles to make them good in your conceit, but for
want of power to put them in execution: and therefore we conclude, that both
the Pope and you, do but expect a fit oppertunity to blow up both our King and
Parliament, and set up your Religion.


Cath. Those authors, which you seem most to point at, too too much favoring
the Popes authority in temporal affairs, have been deservedly condemned by
our Catholic Universities, and their books publicly burned by the order of
Catholic Magistrates. And for my part I shall not think him innocent, or a
worthy member of this Commonwealth, that will not acknowledge his faithful
loyalty, and constant allegiance to our King, and country, though Protestants;
independent of all foreign, or papal authority.


Prot. Why do you not then at the least take the Oath of allegiance? Though
perhaps for the oath of supremacy, there may be some more difficulty in it.


Cath. Sir, if you only intend to be secured of our allegiance we shall easily
agree, but to make us decide a question disputable in Schools by swearing an
universal negative, to what effect I pray? For although in my opinion the Pope
cannot depose any absolute Prince, though an Heretic, no not in any case of
his own power, or by any authority inherent in his person or dignity; nor do
I think, that any indifferent man will say, that the Pope can depose King
Charles, that now reigns, much less that he can absolve his Catholic
Subjects, from their allegiance due unto him. Wherefore as wise Statesmen you
ought not to make us swear to this, or that universal tenent in points
proble, matically disputed by Divines: but to secure your selves of our
particular allegiances and fidelity to our King, and Country, which you may
justly exact of us, and we as justly perform. And for the Oath of Supremacy
it is a mere folly to imagine, that any secular, or Laymen can be supreme of
the Church: None of your selves believe it, nor any Christian Religion, or sect
did ever before Henry 8. Profess such a tenent, and Master Calvin in his
relation, de Valentiniano, Theodosio, and Saint Ambrosio, strongly opposing
this fond assection calls them, who first gave this title to Henry 8. Homines
inconsiderati and concludes, erunt enim Blaspemi, cum vocarent ipsum, summum
Ecctesiae caput sub Christo.


Prot. I could wish all the papists of England were of your opinion in the
point of disposition, it would then perhaps be better for them: but the
contrary doctrine is more general amongst you, and thence do follow most
dangerous sequels, and sometimes most enormous effects: your Divines tell you,
that it is lawful for any Catholics Subject, to take arms against his Prince,
if he be either an Heretic, or an open persecutor of the Roman Church: nay,
that it is no sin to kill him either by private treachery, or public
assaults: and of this we have seen in our age diverse lamentable examples
practiced abroad, and some most execrable attempts here at home.


Cath. Truly Sir, your Divines, as Luther, Calvin, and others are more foreward
in this point, then any Catholic I know: and their practices have far
exceeded ours; except perhaps the Powder Treason: but that was Diabolical
beyond measure.


Prot. Well, you will never wash off the infamy of that powder plot; you know
what proofs were brought in against your Jesuits before the Lords
Commissioners at that time.


Cath. Sir, you know I am neither Priest, nor Jesuit: and I think there is
never a Catholic Gentleman in England, but does abhor and detest that
wicked conspiracy, as much as any Protestant of you all And sure King James
knew well, that this monster was hatched in the breast of some particular
Catholics; See his Proclamation November. 7. His words are these: We are by
good experience so well persuaded of the loyalty of diverse of our Subjects of
the Roman religion, that they do as much abhor this detestable conspiracy,
as we our selves.


Prot. But I could object more disloyalties, if the time would permit, then you
can answer too: and the root thereof spring from your seminary Priests, who by
their power, and authority have a maine sway over your consciences, and under
pretense of Religion can bend your passions to their own ends, and designs.


Cath. Sir, I confess some things may be objected in that kind worthy the
reflection of a good commonwealths man: but if you be pleased to use your
clemency toward your poor Catholic Subjects, and graciosly to conceive at
their subsistence: you shall find them ready to conspire with none, nor aim
at their own temporal good, but by the advancement of your commonwealth,
whereof if once you vouchsafe to admit them as worthy members, the Popes power
shall no way hinder their obedience to his Majesty and you.


Prot. I could wish your Priests would do so too, but I see not how we can
expect such loyalty at their hands, and therefore you see his Majesty has
proclaimed their banishment. And surely if we had suffered the Popes agent to
continue here, he would have had a care of his Masters interests without doubt.


Cath. Sir, how fit it may be to suffer an Agent from the Pope in a State
generally Protestant, intermixed with some Catholics, I will not dispute, but
for the banishing of our Priests, merely for exercising their function, it is in
vain; you may hang them at your pleasure, but as long as there remains a
Catholic in England there will be Priests, because we believe, that we have
an essential dependence, and necessity of Priests. And therefore Priests will
venture their lives for the salvation of our Souls: It Is, and ever has been
the spirit of our Church and Religion, when all comes to all, you will find
that a moderate hand over us, is more Christian, more human, and more
politic.


Prot. Sir, If you could find a way how we might be secured of the fidelity
of your Priests, and that their dependence of Rome, and affection to foreign
states, were not obnoctious and liable to our just suspicions, I could be
content Recusants lived amonst us, in a civil intelligence, and ordinary
friendship. But you see we are so zealous of them, that we have rather
permitted strangers and foreign Priests to reside in her Majesty's Chapel,
though with no little danger; for it is a wonder, that the more zealous sort of
our people have not made some tummults, and uproares, seeing the Chapel so
frequented, as it was: and you know we cannot be so secured of any strangers
fidelity to our Country, especially if they be Priests, and of a different
Religion, and daily frequent both Court and Town, being imbol^ned in that they
are not liable to our Laws; for besides their zeal to Religion, they are
naturally inclined to give notice of what they hear, and favor in what they
can, their own Countries interests.


Cath. Truly sir I doubt not but I can clearly show you, how you may be
secured of the loyally of some of our Englsh Priest, and how their dependence
of Rome may be of that nature, as shall give you no just occasion of
suspicion, and therefore might be admitted upon those terms and conditions,
as would banish all suspicion, and prevent all dangers. A^ for her Majesty's
Chapel, try the Articles of her marriage, agreed upon betwixe the two
States, ratified under the broad Seal of each Kingdom, and it would be
against the law of Nations, and unworthy the fidelity of a Christian Prince to
infringe, and violate such a public contract, alas Sir, consider that now
whilst you happily are sitting at the stern of the Commonwealth, and piously
endeavoring to reform the corruptions, and abuses of our Courts, and
government, as also respectively seeking to vindicate the ancient liberty of
our Country, shall we only your poor Catholic Subjects be excluded from
this general Iubilee; take then some moderate course to secure your selves of
our allegiance: and let us all conspire to make one Civil Body, that joined,
and united both in your domesticke interests, and in your foreign leagues and
wars we may (as your Catholic Allies do) engage our selves as willingly,
and as far as you, Did not King James say well; a too severe persecution
makes men desperate? Non coercet, sed provocat violentia. Clemency begets love,
love breeds loyalty.


Prot. If these your tenants were common to all Papists, I conceive you would
find us more indulgent. Therefore me thinks it were worthy your labor to
draw such a Proclamation of your fidelity, as you think Papists might lawfully
take, and as would perhaps content our Parliament.


Cath. Sir, I framed the last Winter p ivately to my self a short petition in
the behalf of Catholics, and have since added thereunto such a Protestation
as you speak of; here they are peruse them I pray, and if you think fit, make
your mederate friends pertakers of them, whom if they satisfy, I shall be
heartily glad, if nothing will serve but our total ruin, Gods will be done,
at least it will be a comfort to have given this testimony of our allegiance,
and fidelity; so that if we perish, it must needs be for our religion, since
the past crimes of some few, and the disputable opinions of others can never be
a legal warrant to condemn the innocent: the next time we meet, you will
tell me more, in the interim God be with you.


FINIS.

