The Devils Conquest,
or, a Wish obtained:
Showing how one lately of Barnsby-street, in Leg-Ally, in St. Olaves Parish,
Southwark, one that Carded Wool for Stockings, carried home some work to her
Mistress, living upon Horsly-Down, who asked her how much she owed her for; the
Maid answered eight pounds; her Mistress said 'twas but six whereupon the Maid
began to Swear and Curse, and wished the Devil fetch her, if there was not eight
pounds owing for; the Mistress loving quietness, paid her for eight pound: the
Maid, with two of her Companions, walking over Horsly-Down, she having a Child
in her arms, one came and throwed her down, and presently took her up again,
which caused her to say, Thou Rogue, do thou fling me down and take me up
again, and suddenly he vanished away, neither she, nor the two women with her,
could discern which way he went, which caused them to say, It was the Devil,
which for all this, nothing terrified the Maid, who went boldly home, and to
bed, and the two Women with her; at midnight she heard a voice, which called
her by her name very often; she answered, I come, I come; but the voice still
continuing, she swore she would come, and being got out of the Bed, fell down
upon her face, and was taken speechless, yet her body moving in most terrible
manner, manifesting her inward pangs; her Mistress was sent for, who freely
forgave her, and wished God might forgive her too, and then she departed, and
her body was found as black as pitch all over; and all this was for no more
than the value of eleven pence, which was done on the 6th. of this instant May,
1665. and was written for a warning to all, to avoid the like course.

The Tune is, Summer Time.


PI



ATtend good Christian people all
to what here I do mean to write,
You Muses nine, to you I call,
help me these verses to indite.
A story true I shall relate,
I wish it may a warning be,
That all may now avoid that fate,
and shun that cruel destiny.
Full sore and dreadful judgments we
have often heard and seen abroad,
The righteous God, he does decree,
as we have it upon Record.
Many a time we do provoke,
yet still his mercy does endure,
But at the last he will give a stroke,
which art of man can never cure.
Examples many we have had
in former and in latter years,
But sure you never heard one more sad
then this, therefore attend to hear.
In Barnsby-street of late there dwelt
one Margery Perry called by name,
With whom it seems the Devil dealt,
and played his subtle cunning game.
In carding wool she employed her self,
a lively hood for to obtain,
But Satan that old subtle Elf,
tells her it is not sufficient gain.




TO swear and curse she was inclined
a Vice too common in this Land,
In this the Devil with her was joined,
as you shall shortly understand.
She carried home some work one day
unto her Work-Mistrisses home,
Who asked how much she had to pay
for all the wool that she did comb.
Says she, you owe me for eight pounds
nay, says the Mistress, it is but sir,
But now she goes beyond her bounds,
to swear and curse she does not stick.
This caused some contest to arise
between them both, for a short space,
The Devils flame in her breast fries,
O woman! what made thee so base?
She wished the Devil fetch her strait,
if that she had not done eight pounds;
Ah woman! caught with such a bait,
that came not all to half a crown.
Her Mistress paid her, away she hies,
and with her Comrades walk ye streets,
she little thought how conscience cries
but now at last the Devil meets.
On Horsly-down she down was thrown
and presently caught up again,
Alas she is so hard hearted grown,
she cannot perceive her inward stain.
Those women with her were amazed,
because he vanished quite away
That took her up, although they gazed,
no more of him they saw that day.
Then home she hies with her consorts,
to bed she goes and thinks all well,
But vengeance will at length arise,
and death will come with passing bell.
Oh little did she think, but she
should rise again as she was wont,
Judgment must come by Gods decree,
he will not always bear the affront.
At midnight then she heard a voice,
which frequently called her by name,
Surely she could not then rejoice,
knowing her guilt deserved blame.
She answered straight, I come, I come,
and presently begins to swear,
The Devil he will not stay too long,
but takes her in her chamber there.
They took her up from off the boards,
whereon ye Devil her down did throw
She speechless was, no breath affords,
which made ye women's hearts to glow
Then for her Mistress they did send,
who came immediately to see
That, which almost her heart did rend,
a spectacle of misery.
Some that were present there did say,
forgive her though she did forswear,
I and God forgive her too I pray,
and so she died whilst she was there.
They stripped her naked being dead,
and found her body black as pitch,
The hellish fiend her prepared,
according to her cursed wish.
Oh that a warning this might be
to all, that these few lines do read,
Here plainly we may learn and see
and not such wicked paths to tread.
Wish for true riches and true grace,
and labor for it earnestly,
The Devil he will come apace,
wish not for him, such courses fly.
And now lets study to amend,
and free our selves from slavery,
That all our lives may have good end,
and full assurance when we dye.
So to conclude remember still,
Swearing and Cursing ends in woe,
If you let the Devil have his will,
he will prove the worst and greatest foe.
London Printed for S. Tyus, on London Bridge. With privilege. Finis.


