The CASE of Sir CHARLES PORTER Knight. WILLIAM ADDERLEY Esquire Touching their
Election for New Windsor.
SIR Christopher Wren, and Baptist May Esquire, were chosen by the Mayor and
Select Burgesses only, not exceeding Thirty.

Sir Charles Porter, and William Adderley Esquire, by the General Burgesses and
Inhabitants, paying Scot and Lot; who doubt not but to prove, that the Right of
Election is in the general Burgesses, and consequently, that they are duly
Chosen.

1. From Ancient Returns. 2. From Judgments in Parliament.
Precedents of Returns.
25. Hen. 6. Major and Communitas Burgensium Elegerunt, etc. In sujus
Testimonium Sigillum Commune Omnium and singulorum Burgensium, and Communitatis
praedict' est appensum. 27. Hen. 6. Return in the same Words. 29. Hen. 6.
Return in the same Words. 39. Hen. 6. Major Ballivi and tota Communitas
Elegerunt, etc. 17. Edw. 4. Return, Per Majorem ville five Burgi simul cum
Ballivis, Burgensib' and Communitate. 1. Mary. Return, Per Thomam Goade Majorem
ville five Burgi de nova Windsor in Com' Berks, simul cum Bugensib' and
Communitat' etc. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mary. Major and Ballivi and Burgenses simul
cum Communitate ex Communi assensu Elegerunt, etc. 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar.
Return, Per Majorem simul cum Burgensib', and Communitat'! 4. and 5. Ph. and
Mar. Return in the same Words. 1. Eliz. Major simul cum Ballivis Burgensib' and
Communitate Elegerunt, etc. 16. Car. 1. 17. Car. 1. Mayor, Bailiffs, Burgesses
and Inhabitants, have Chosen and Sealed with the Common Seal and the
Inhabitants.
Judgments in Parliament.
In the Years 1640 1679 1980


Resolved, That all the Inhabitants in general, and not the Special Burgesses
only, have the Right of Electing Members to serve in Parliament.

OBJ. 1.That some latter Returns are by the Mayors, Bailiffs and Burgesses, and
under the Common Seal.

Answer.That makes nothing against Us, every Inhabitant being a Burgess by the
Charter of Ed. 4th, and most Returns where there is a Mayor, being under the
Common Seal, though they Choose by the Inhabitants at large. Vid. Char. 6 Edw. 4.


OBJ. 2.That Two Judgments of Parliament, viz. in the Years 1660 and 1688, are
in favor of the Mayor and Select Burgesses.

AnswerTo the First of these Judgments we Answer, That the Resolution in the
Year 1660; was occasioned by one Starkey's mislaying the Records of those
Returns abovementioned, as appears by the Report of the Committee, 1679. Vid.
Report, 1679.


As to the Second, We conceive the Case in 1688. was grounded upon Necessity,
the Person that contested the Right then being Speaker of the House, and hope
neither of these Judgments shall be able to set aside an undoubted Right,
proved by so many Ancient Returns, and settled further by Three Resolutions,
against which there can be no Objection.

NOTE 1.They were not formed into a Select Number not exceeding Thirty, till
King James the First's Reign, which shows the Ancient Right of Election cannot
possibly be in them.

NOTE 2.That if the Select Burgesses should be admitted to have the sole Right,
then in Case their Corporation were Dissolved, either by Surrender or
Forfeiture of their Charter; the Town of Windsor could send no Burgesses to
Parliament, which would be against all Reason.


