A Description of a Great Sea-Storm, That happened to some Ships in the Gulf
of FLORIDA, in September last; Drawn up by one of the Company, and sent to his
Friend at London.
THE PREFACE.
THe blustering Winds are hushed into a Calm;
No Air stirs now, but what my Muse Embalmed,
Breaths forth to thee, dear Friend; Heaven smiles upon
My Paper, and the Sea turns Helicon;
The Mermaids Muses all, the Sea-Nymphs, bring
Aid to my Genius, whilst to thee I Sing
Of Storms, Gusts, Tempests, if compared to these,
Bermoodus Winds are but a Gentle Breez;
And to express them fully, I am feign
To raise in Verse a kind of Hurrycane.
THE STORM.
NOthing but Air and Water is in sight;
(I am no Poet here, since Truth I wright.)
When Eolus with his Iron whistle Rouzes
The blustering breathings from their Airy houses,
Which like to Libertines let loose, will know
No Law to guide them, but begin to blow
The Sea to swell her teaming Womb, brings forth
Wave after wave, and each of greater birth:
Waves grow to Surges, Surges Billows turn;
The Ocean is all Timpany, the Vrn
Of water is a brimmer; Neptune drinks
So full a Cup it over-runs the brinks.
To Amphetrites Health, the proud waves dash
At Heaven as though its Cloudy Face it would wash:
Or sure the lower Water now was bent
To mix with that above the Firmament;
Or the cold Element did go about
To put the Element of Fire out.
Our Ship now under water seems to sail
Like to a drowned Tossed in John Cook's Ale.
The Sea rould up in Mountains: O! it is such
Your Cottsall-Hill's a Wart, if it be so much,
Which fall again into such hollow Vales
I thought I Would crossed the Sea by Land ore Wales;
And then to add Confusion to the Seas,
The Sailors speak such Babel words as these:
Hale in maine Bowlin, Mizen tack aboard;
A Language, like a Storm, to be abhorred:
I know not which was loudest, their rude Tongues,
Or the Bigg Winds with her whole Cards of Lungs.
So hideous was the Noise, that one might well
Fancy himself to be with Souls in Hell;
But that the Torments differ, those Souls are
With Fire punished, we with Water here.
Our Helm that should our Swimming-Colledge sway,
We lash't it up, lest it should run away.
Have you a Hedge seen hung with Beggars Fleeces?
So hung our tattered Mainsaile down in pieces.
Our Tackling cracked as if it had been made
To string some Fiddle, not the Sea-mans Trade.
Whilst her own Knell the Sea-sick Vessel Rings,
In breaking of her Ropes, the Ships Heart-string
As to repent, but never to amend;
So we pumpt th'Ship, even to as little end;
For all the water we pumpt out with pain,
The Sea returns with scorn, and more again.
The Guns we carried to be our Defense,
Heaven thundered so, it almost scared them then^
And yet to Heaven for this give thanks we may,
But for it is Lightning we had had no Day.
The dropy Clouds drinking Salt Water sick,
Did spew it down upon our Heads so thick;
That twixt the lower and upper Seas that fell,
Our Ship a Vessel seemed, and we Mackrell.
Pickled in Brine, and in our Cabines lie
Soust up for Lasting Immortality.
The Fear of being drowned, made us wish
Our selves transpeciated into Fish.
Indeed this Fear did so possess each one,
All looked like Shotten-Herring, or Poor-John:
Nay of our Saving, there was so much doubt,
The Masters Faith begun to tack about;
And had he perish't in this doubtful Fit,
His Conscience sure (with his own Ship) had
For which way into Heaven could his Soul Steer,
Starboard or Larbord that still cries, No near?
But we were in great Danger, you will say,
If Seamen once begin to Kneel, and Pray;
What Holy Church never could, Rough Seas have
Made Seamen buckle to Devotion,
And force from them their Letany, whilst thus
They whimper out, Good Lord deliver us!
So pray I too, good Lord deliver thee,
Dear Friend, from being taught to Pray at (...)
Be wise, and keep the Shore then, since you m^
Go in by Land to your VIRGINIA.
Licensed, August the 5th. 1671. Roger L'Estrange.

(...) Arms in the Poultry, 1671.


