A Description OF THE Four Seasons or Quarters of the YEAR, AS SPRING, SUMMER,
AUTUMN and WINTER. Likewise of Beauty, the Bees and Ants, and also on
Prodigality.
personification of seasons spring

summer

autumn

winter

To: Walton excutlit


SPRING.
THE Pleiades their influence now give,
And all that seemed as dead afresh, do live.
The croaking Frogs, whom nipping Winter killed,
Like Birds, now chirp, and hop about the field;
The Nightingale, the Blackbird and the Thrush,
Now tune their lays on sprayes of every bush;
The wanton frisking Kids, and soft-fleec't Lambs,
Now jump, and play before their feeding Dams;
The tender tops of budding Grass they crop,
They joy in what they have, but more in hope.
This is that part, whose fruitful showers produces
All Plants and Flowers for all delights and uses;
The Pear, the Plum, and Apple Tree now flourish:
The Prim-Rose pale and Azure Violer,
Among the verduous Grass has Nature set;
But chief of all the pleasant fruitful May,
Wherein the Earth is clad in rich array:
All Flowers before the Sunbeams now discloses
Except the double Pinks, and matchless Roses.
Now swarms the busy buzzing Honey-Bee,
Whose praise deserves a page, from more then me.
The Meads with Cowslips, Honey-suckles dight,
One hangs his head, the other stands upright:
For fruit my Season yields the early cherry,
The early Pease and wholesome red Strawberry.
On Beauty.
WOuld foolish Females, with their Features,
Remember they are but mortal Creatures,
Of which rightly Man may say,
They Are but beauteous Clods of Clay;
Or refined, though pure dust,
From whence they came, and thither must.
And that as their great Grand-dame died before,
Even so mvst they, and then be seen no more.
And all their Gaudy Glory be forgot,
Whilst they must lie, consume, yea, stink and rot.
If these things they would to remembrance call,
Their Honey'd Pleasures would be mixed with Gall,
And all and every one their course would bend,
Within themselves, what is amiss to mend.
The Memory unto the soul is food.
That thinks, and says, and does the things that is good.
But Shows of Virtue, hiding of their Vice,
Bring simple Ga lant-s to the Fools Paradise:
For when the Heart thinks Lust abomination,
Sense nicknames it but Youthful Recreation.
Reason delights in Liberality,
Which Sense perverts to Prodigality.
And thus this little Kingdom, Man, does fade,
With hearing Traitors when they do persuade.
SUMMER.
SPring being past, then Summer must begin,
With melted Tawny face, and Garments thin.
Now go those frolic Swains, the Shepherd-Lad,
To wash their thick-cloath'd Flocks, with Pipes full glad.
In the cool streams they labor with delight,
Rubbing their dirty coats till they look white.
Whose fleeces, when purely spun, and deeply died,
With Robes thereof Kings have been dignifyde,
This part the Roses are distilled in Glasses,
Whose fragrant Scent all made-Perfume surpasses;
The Cherry, Goos-berry, is now in the prime,
And for all sorts of Pease this is the Time.
On goes the Mowers to their flashing Toil,
The Medows of their burdens to despoil;
The Forks and Rakes do follow them amain,
Which makes the Aged Fields look young again;
The laden Carts do bear away this Prize
To Barns and Stacks, where it for Fodder lies,
With Sickles eke, the painful Reapers go,
The ruffling Tress of Terra for to Mow;
And bundles up in sheaves the weighty Wheat,
Which after Manchets make for Kings to eat;
Now Is ripe the Pear, Pear-Plum and Apricock,
The Prince of Plums, whose stone is hard as Rock.
On the Ants.
I Walked, and did a little Molehill view,
Full peopled with a most industrious Crew
Of busy Ants, where each one labored more,
Then if he were to bring home Indian Ore;
Here wrought the Pioneers, there marched the Bands,
Here Colonies went forth to Plant new Lands:
These hasted out, and those supplies brought in,
As if they had some sudden siege foreseen:
Until there came an angry Spade, and cast
Country and People to a Pit at last.
And therefore as Solomon says, Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, consider her ways
and be wise, Prove. 16.6. For though they are not strong, yet they prepare their
meat in the Summer, Prove 30.25.

On the Bees.
AGAIN I viewed a Kingdom in an Hive,
Where every one did work, and so all thrive;
Some go, some come, some war, some watch and wa^d,
Some make the works, and some the works do Guard.
These frame their curious waxen Cells, and those
Do into them their Nectar-drops dispose:
Until the greedy Gardener brought his smoke,
And for the Work, did all the Workmen choke.
AUTUMN.
THE Vintage now is ripe, the Grapes are pressed,
Whose lively Liquor often is cursed and blessed;
The Raisins now in clusters dried be,
The Oringe, Lemon dangle on the Tree;
The Fig is ripe, the Pomegranate also,
And Apples now their yellow sides do show;
Of Medler, Quince, of Warden and of Peach,
The Season's now at hand of all and each;
The fruitful Trees, all withered now do stand,
Whose yellow sapless leaves by wind are fanned:
Which notes, when youth and strength have past their prime,
Decrepit Age must also have his time:
The sap does slily creep toward the Earth,
There rests until the Sun gives it a birth:
Almost at shortest is the shortened day,
The Northern pole beholds not one Ray!
Now Greenland, Groenland, Lapland, Finland, see
No Sun to lighten their obscurity.
This Month is Timber for all uses felled,
When cooled, the sap to the roots has low'st repelled:
Beef, Brawns and Pork are now in great'st request.
And solio'st meats our stomachs can digest:
This time warm clothes, full diet, and good fires,
Our pinching flesh, and appetite requires*
On Prodigality.
I Dread when I do see a Prodigal,
On whom a fair Estate of late did fall:
When as is spent his Credit and his Chink,
And he quite wasted, to a snuff does stink,
Who in the Spring or Summer of his Pride.
Was worshipped, honored, almost deifi'd:
And whilst the Golden Angels did attend him,
What swarms of Friends and Kindred did befriend him:
Persuading him, that give, and spend, and lend,
Were Virties which on Gentry do depend.
But though of late be seemed in wealth to swim,
Yet many b^se occasions do suck him.
The Prodigals Estate, like to a Flux.
The Mercer, Draper, and the Silk-man plucks.
The Tailor, Millener, Dogs, Drabs and Dice,
Trey-trip, or Passage, or the most at thrice:
At Irish, Tick-tack, Doublets, Draughts or Chess,
He flings his Money free with carelessness;
Kuff, Slam, Trump, Nod, Whisk, Hole, Saut, New Cut;
Unto the keeping of four Knaves he will put.
Bowls, Shove-groate, Tennis, no Game comes amiss,
His Purse a Nurse for any body is:
His vain Expenses daily suck and soak,
And be himself sucks only drink and smoke:
And thus the Prodigal, himself alone
Giv's suck to Thousands, and himself sucks none.
WINTER.
COLD, Moist, young Phlegmy Winter now does le
In swaddling Clothes, like newborn Infancy;
Bound up with Frosts, and Fur'd with Hails and Snows,
And like an Infant still he taller grows.
December is the first; And now the Sun
To the Southward Tropic her swift Race has run^.
This Month he is Housed in horned Capricorn,
From thence begins to length the shortened Morn:
Through Christendom with great Festivity,
Now Is held, a Guest, (but blessed) Nativity.
Old frozen January next comes in,
Chilling the blood, and shrinking up the skin.
In Aquarius now keeps the loved Sun,
And Northward his unwearied Race does run,
The day much longer then it was before,
The Cold not lessned, but augmented more.
Now Toes, and Ears, and Fingers often freeze,
And Travelers sometimes their Noses leeze.
Moist snowie February is my last,
I care not how the Wintertime does have;
In Pisces now the Golden Sun does shine,
And Northward still approaches to the line;
The Rivers now do open, and Snows do melt,
And some warm Glances from the Sun are felt,
Which is increased by the lengthned day,
Until by's heat he drives all Cold away.
Printed and sold by Rob. Walton at the Globe and Compasses; at the West End of
St. Paul's Church, turning down toward Ludgate, where you may be fitted with
All sorts of Maps and Copy-books, large or small, Colored or not, the Marrow
of Humane Learning, the Laurel of Metaphysick, an Artificial Description of
Logic, the Tree of Man's Life, His Majesty in Armor on Horsback, and
underneath the Manner of his Riding through London the day before his
Coronation, another of him in Parliament Robes, and underneath the Manner of
his going to his Coronation, the King and Queen, the Story of David and
Abigail, Orpheus Playing on his Music, and Beasts about him, the Manner of the
tortures used by the Heathen Emperors of Rome on the Christians, and a
Comparison of the like bloody cruelties used by the Pope and that Party since
they got up, a Description of the four Ages of Man, Childhood, Youth Middle-Age
and Old Age, a Description of the four Elements, Earth, Water, Fie and Air, A
Looking-glass for Youth, 1. The Devilentices Youth. 2. Wisdom gives good
Advice to Youth. 3. Time declares his Experience to Youth. 4. Death sounds an
Alarm to Youth. 5. Youth Reasons with Death. 6. The Soul speaks to the Devil.
7. All is Vanity. And 8. Of the Chief Good. The four Elements, each with
Borders about them, and Verses, all these in large sheets, and many others,
that here is not space to mention. And he is the oldest in London in that way,
and does truly say, as the Poet, That when each Man keeps to his own Trade,
Then all thing will be better made.



