THE PLAIN-MANS PATH-VVAY TO HEAVEN.

Wherein every man may clearly see whether he shall be saved or damned.

Set forth Dialogue-wise, for the better understanding of the simple, By Arthur
Dent, Preacher of the Word of God at South-Shoobery in Essex.

The six and twentieth Edition: Corrected and amended; With a Table of all the
principal matters, and three prayers, necessary to be used in private
families, hereunto added.

Zephaniah 3.5. Every morning the Lord brings his judgment to light, he
fails not: but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed.

LONDON, Printed by Ja. Young, for G. Lathum, in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Bishops-head. 1643.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Julius Caesar, Knight, one of the Masters of the
Request to the Kings Majesty, Judge of the high Court of Admiralty, and Master
of St. Katherins: A.D. wishes all good things in Christ Jesus.
HAving finished (Right Worshipful) and made ready for the Press this little
Dialogue, I bethought me (since the common manner of all that write any books in
this age is to dedicate the same to one or other of great place) to whom I
might dedicate th^se my poor labors. At last, I did resolve with my self, none
to be more fit then your Worship: both in regard of some affinity in the flesh,
as also because of those manifold good parts wherewith the Almighty has endued
you. Having therefore none other thing to present your Worship withal (in
token of a thankful heart for your courtesies showed toward me) behold, I
do here send unto you this third fruit of my labors published; most humbly
beseeching you to take it in good worth: not weighing the value of the thing
(which is of no value) but the simple and good mind and meaning of the giver.
This work does sharply reprove and evict the world of sin, and therefore is
like to find many deadly enemies, which with cruel hatred will most eagerly
pursue it unto death. Zoilus also and his fellows, I know, will bitterly carp
at it: therefore it slieth unto your Worship for protection, and humbly
desires to take sanctuary under your wings. Wherefore I humble entreat you to
take upon you the patronage and defense of it, that by your means it may be
delivered both from the calumnious obloquies of evil disposed persons, and
also from the worlds malignity, so as it may take no injury. And concerning
this little volume, the sum of the matter of it you shall find it in the
Epistle to the Reader. As concerning the manner, here is no great matter of
learning, wit, art, eloquence, or ingenious invention, (for I have herein
specially respected the ignorant and vulgar sort, whose edification I do
chiefly aim at:) yet somewhat there is which may concern the learned, and give
them some contentment. Whatsoever it be, I leave it with your Worship,
beseeching you to give it entertainment. And so I do most humbly take my
leave, commending both your self, your good wife, and your whole family to the
merciful protection of the everliving God.

From South-Shoobery in Essex, April 10. An. Dom. 1601. Your Wps to command in
the Lord, ARTHUR DENT.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, seeing my little Sermon of Repentance, some few years since
published, has been so well accepted of I have for thy further good published
this Dialogue, being the third fruit of my labor: wishing it the like
success, that God thereby may have the glory, and thou, who are the Reader,
comfort I have in one part of this Dialogue produced some of the ancient
Writers, and some of the wise Heathen also, to testify upon their oath in
their own language, and to bear witness of the ouglinesse of some vices, which
we in this age make light of: which I wish may not be offensive to any. In
other parts of this work I do in a manner relinquish them. But in this case I
have in my weak judgment thought them to be of some good use, to show forth
thus much, That if we do not in time repent, forsake our sins, and seek
after God, both the ancient Christian Fathers (whose eyes saw not that we see,
nor their ears heard what we hear) yea, the very Heathen also shall rise up in
judgment against us. Let none therefore stumble at it. But if any man do, let
him remember, I am in a Dialogue, not in a Sermon. I write to all of all sorts;
I speak not of some few of one sort. But that which is done herein is not much
more then that of the Apostle, ( As some of your own Poets have said, Acts
17.) which is warrantable. One thing, dear Christian, I pray thee, let me beg
of thee; to wit, that thou would not read two or three leaves of this book,
and so cast it from thee; but that thou would read it throughout, even to
the end. For I do assure thee, if there be any thing in it worth the reading,
it is bestowed in the latter part thereof, and most of all toward the
conclusion. Be not discouraged therefore at the harshnesse of the beginning: but
look for smoother matter in the midst, and most smooth in the perclose and wind
up of all. For this Dialogue has in it, not the nature of a Tragedy, which is
begun with joy, and ended with sorrow: but a Comedy, which is begun with
sorrow, and ended with joy. This book meddleth not at all with any
controversies in the Church, or any thing in the state Ecclesiastical, but
only enters into a controversy with Satan and sin. It is contrived into six
principal heads: First, it shows man's misery in nature, with the means of
recovery. Secondly, it sharply inveigheth against the iniquity of the time, and
common corruptions of the world. Thirdly, it shows the marks of the children
of God, and of the reprobates; together with the apparent signs of Salvation
and Damnation. Fourthly, it declares how hard a thing it is to enter into
life, and how few shall enter. Fifthly, it lays open the ignorance of the
world, with the objections of the same. Last of all, it publishes and
proclaims the sweet promises of the Gospel, with the abundant mercies of God
to all that repent believe, and truly turn unto him. The Author of all
blessing give a blessing unto it. The God of peace, which brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of
the everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in all good works, sanctify us
thorowout, amend all our imperfections, and keep us blameless until the day
of his most glorious appearing. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, A. D.

The Contents of this Dialogue.
FIrst, it shows man's misery by nature, with the means of recovery. Secondly,
it sharply inveigheth against the iniquity of the time, and common corruptions
of the world. Thirdly, it sh weth the marks of the children of God, and of the
reprobates, with the apparent signs of Salvation and Damnation. Fourthly, it
declares how hard a thing it is to enter into life, and how few shall enter.
Fifthly, it lays open the ignorance of the world, with the objections of the
same. Last of all, it publishes and proclaims the sweet promises of the
Gospel, with the abundant mercies of God to all that repent, believe, and truly
turn unto him.
THE PLAIN-MANS PATHWAY TO HEAVEN. Interlocutors.
Theologus, a Divine. Philagathus, an Honest man. Asunetus, an Ignorant man.
Antilegon, a Caviller.

Philagathus. WEll met good master Theologus.


Theol. What? mine old friend Philagathus! I am glad to see you in good health.


Phil. Are you walking, Sir, here all alone in this pleasant meadow?


Theol Yea, for I take some pleasure at this time of the year to walk abroad in
the fields for my recreation, both to take the fresh air, and to hear the sweet
singing of birds.


Phil. Indeed, Sir, it is very comfo^^^ble, especially now in this plea^^^^
month of May; and thanks be to God, hitherto we have had a very forward
spring, and as kindly a season as came this seven year.


Theol. God does abound toward us in mercies; Oh that we could abound toward
him in thanksgiving!


Phil. I pray you, Sir, what a clock hold you it?


Theol. I take it to be a little past one, for I came but even now from dinner.


Phil. But behold, yonder come two men toward us, what be they, I pray you?


Theol. They be a couple of neighbors of the next Parish; the one of them is
called Asunetus, who in very deed is a very ignorant man in Gods matters: and
the other is called Antilegon, a notable Atheist, and caviller against all
goodness.


Phil. If they be such, it were good for us to take some occasion to speak of
matters of religion: it may be we shall do them some good.


Theol. You have made a good motion: I like it well. If therefore you will
minister some matter, and move some questions, I will be ready to answer in the
best sort I can.


Phil. But stay, Si, lo here they come ^^on us.


Theol. Welcome good neighbors, welcome. How do you, Asunetus? and you,
Antilegon?


Asun. Well, God be thanked: and we are glad to see your Mastership in good
health.


Theol. What make both of you here at this time of the day? There is some
occasion, I am sure, draws you this way.


Asun. Indeed, Sir, we have some little business; for we came to talk with one
of your Parish about a Cow we should buy of him.


Theol. Has my neighbor a Cow to sell?


Antil. We are told he has a very good one to sell; but I am afraid at this
time of the year we shall find dear ware of her.


Theol. How dear? What do you think a very good Cow may be worth?


Antil. A good Cow indeed at th^^ time of the year is worth very near four
pound, which is a great price.


Theol. It is a very great price indeed.


Phil. I pray you, M. Theologus, leave off this talking of kin^, and worldly
matters, and let us enter into some speech of matters of religion, whereby we
may do good, and take good one of another.


Theol. You say well. But it may be these men's business requires haste, so as
they cannot stay.


Asun. No, Sit, we are in no great haste; we can stay two or three hours,
for the days are long: if we dispatch our business by night, it will serve
our turn well enough.


Theol. Then if it will please you to walk to yonder Oak tree, there is a
goodly arbor, and handsome seats, where we may all sit in the shadow, and
confer of heavenly matters.


Asun. With a good will, Sir.


Phil. Come then, let us go.


Asun. This is a goodly arbor indeed, and here be handsome seats.


Theol. Sit you all down, I pray you. Now, friend Philagathus, if you have any
questions to move of matters of Religion, we are all ready to hear you.


Phil. It may be these men are somewhat ignorant of the very principles of
Religion; and therefore I think it not amiss to begin there, and so to make
way for further matters.


Theol. I pray you do so then.


Phil. First then, I demand of you in what state all men are born by nature.


Theol. In the state of condemnation; as appears, Ephesians. 2.3. We are by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. And again, it is written:
Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me, Psalm.
51.5.


Phil. Is it every man's case? Are not Dukes and Nobles, Lords and Ladies, and
the great Potentates of the earth exempted from it?


Theol. No surely: it is the common case of all, both high and low, rich and
poor; as it is written: What is man, that he should be clean; and he that is
born of a woman, that he should be just?


Phil. From whence comes it that all men are born in so woeful a case?


Theol. From the fall of Adam, who thereby has not only wrapped himself, but
all his posterity in extreme and unspeakable misery, as the Apostle says: By
one man's disobedience many were made sinners. And, By the offense of one, the
fault came on all men to condemnation, Romans 5.1.


Phil. What reason is there that we all should thus be punished for another
man's offense?


Theol. Because we were then all in him, and are now all of him: that is, we
are so descended out of his loins, that of him we have not only received our
natural and corrupt bodies, but also by propagation have inherited his foul
corruptions, as it were by hereditary right.


Phil. But for as much as some have dreamed that Adam by his fall hurt himself
only, and not his posterity; and that we have his corruption derived unto us
by imitation, and not by propagation: therefore I pray you show this more
plainly.


Theol. Even as great personages by committing of treason, do not only hurt
themselves, but also stain their blood, and disgrace their posterity (for the
children of such Nobles are dis-inherited, whose blood is attainted, till they
be restored again by Act of Parliament:) Even so our blood being attainted by
Adams transgression, we can inherit nothing of right till we be restored by
Christ.


Phil. Does this hereditary infection and contagion overspread our whole
nature?


Theol. Yes truly, it is universal, extending it self throughout the whole
man, both soul and body, both reason, understanding, will, and affections:
Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 1.2. and 3.2.
for the Scriptures avouch, that we are dead in sins and trespasses.


Phil. How understand you that?


Theol. Not of the deadness of the body, or the natural faculties of the
soul, but of the spiritual faculties.


Phil. Did Adam then lose his nature, and destroy it by his fall? or is our
nature taken away by his fall?


Theol. Not so: our nature was corrupted thereby, but not destroyed: for still
there remains in our nature, reason, understanding, will, and affections, and
we are not as a block or a stock; but by Adams disobedience we are blemished,
maimed, and spoiled of all ability to understand aright, or to will and do
aright: as it is written; 2 Col. 5.3.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but
our sufficiency is of God. And again: (...). 2.3.
It is God which works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure. And as concerning the other point, Jam. 3.9.
St. James says, That all men are made after the similitude of God: meaning
thereby, that there remain some relics and parts of Gods image even in the
most wicked men: as reason, understanding, etc. so that our nature was not
wholly destroyed.


Phil. Then you think there be some sparks and remnants left in us still of
that excellent image of God, which was in our first creation.


Theol. I think so indeed: and it may plainly appear unto us in the wise
speeches and writings of heathen Poets and Philosophers: in all which we may,
as by certain ruins, perceive what was the excellent frame and building of
man's creation.


Phil. Can a man please God in any thing which he does, so long as he
continues in the state of nature?


Theol. No, not in any thing: for till we be in the state of grace, even our
best actions are sinful, as preaching, prayer, almsdeeds, etc. as it is
written: Who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? Job 14.4.
The Apostle also says: They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8.
that is, such as are still in their natural corruption. And our Lord Jesus
himself says, Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Matthew.
7.16. meaning thereby, that mere natural men can bring forth no fruits
acceptable to God.


Phil. This is a very harsh and hard saying: I pray you, for my further
instruction make it more plain.


Theol. Men in the state of nature may do those things which of themselves are
good, but they do utterly fail in the manner of doing them; they do them not
as they should be done: that is, in faith, love, zeal, conscience of obedience,
etc neither yet with any cheerfulness, delight, or feeling; but then as it
were forcing themselves to do the outward actions. Thus did Cain sacrifice,
the P^^risces pray, Ananias and Sapphira give alms, and the Jews offer up
their oblations and burnt-offerings.


Phil. Have men any true sight, or lively and sound feeling of this misery and
woeful estate, so long as they be merely natural?


Theol. No surely, but are altogether blinded and hardened in it, being nothing
desirous to come out of it, but do greatly please themselves in it, and can
hardly be persuaded that they are in any such woeful case: as appears plainly
in the example of that Ruler, who being commanded, or rather required of our
Savior Christ to keep the commandments, answered, All these have I kept from
my youth, Luke 18.21. And again, although the Church of Laodicca was wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked; yet she thought her self rich, increased
with goods, and wanting nothing. It follows then, that so long as men are in
the state of nat^^e, they have no true sight and feeling of their miseries.


Phil. Do you not think that all men, being merely natural, are under the
c^rse of the Law?


Theol. Yes certainly: and not only so, but also under the ver^ ^^^onny and
dominion of Satan, though they know it not, feel it not, see it not, or
perceive it not: for all that are not in Christ are under the curse of the Law,
and the power of darkness, and the Devil: as appears, Ephesians. 2.2. where the
Devil is called the Prince that rules in the air, even the Spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience. In another place he is called the god
of this world, 2 Cor. 4 4.
who blinds the eyes of all unbeleevers. And again, it is said, 2 Timothy 2.26.
that all men naturally are in his snare, being taken captive of him at his
will.


Phil. Few will be persuaded of that; they will say, They defy the devil, and
thank God they were never troubled with him.


Theol. Their hot words do nothing amend the matter: for the devil is no more
driven away with words, then with holy water: but he sits in the tongues and
mouths, nay, possesses the very hearts and intrals of thousands, which say,
They defy him, and are not troubled with him: as appears manifestly by their
particular actions, and the whole course of their life.


Phil. Me thinks, if the devil do so inwardly possess the hearts and
consciences of men, they should have some sight and feeling of it.


Theol. The working of the devil in men's souls (being an invisible spirit) is
with such unconceivable slight and crafty conveyance, that men in the state of
nature cannot possibly feel it, or perceive it: for how can a blind man see,
or a dead man feel?


Phil. Show this more plainly.


Theol. Even as a crafty Iuggler does so prestigiate and blind men's outward
senses by the delusions of Satan, that they think they see that which they see
not, and feel that which they feel not: even so the devil does so delude and
bewitch our inward senses, and the natural faculties of our souls, that we,
having a mist cast before our eyes, think we are that which we are not, see
that which we see not, and feel that which we feel not. For the deep cunning
of Satan lies in this, that he can give us our deaths wound, and we shall
never know who hurt us.


Phil. Few will believe this to be true.


Theol. True indeed: for few will believe the Scriptures: few will believe
this, because few feel it. Where it is not felt, it can hardly be believed.
Only the elect do feel it, and therefore only the elect do believe it. As
for all others, they are the very prentises and bondslaves of the devil.
which is a thousand times worse then to be a galley-slave.


Phil. How long do men continue in this woeful state of nature, being under
the curse of the Law, and the very slavery of Satan and sin?


Theol. Till they be regenerate and born again, and so brought into the state
of grace; as our Lord Jesus says: John 3 3.
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.


Phil. Do not many die, and depart this life, before they be born again, and
consequently, before they be brought into the state of grace?


Theol. Yes, no doubt, thousands: for many live forty or threescore years in
this world, and in the end die, and go out of this life, before they know
wherefore they came into it, as it is written: Ho^. 4.6.
My people perish for want of knowledge.


Phil. What may we think of such?


Theol. I quake to speak what I think: for surely I do not see how such can be
saved. I speak not now of infants and children, whereof some, no doubt, are
saved by virtue of the promise and covenant, through the election of grace.


Phil. It seems then that you think none can be saved, but those only which
are born again.


Theol. I think so indeed.


Phil. I pray you tell me what the same regeneration and new birth is, whereof
you speak.


Theol. It is a renewing and repairing of the corrupted and decayed estate of
our souls: as it is written, Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, Romans
12. And again: Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23.


Phil. Explain this more fully.


Theol. Even as the wild olive retains his old nature, till it be graffed
into the sweet olive, but afterward is partaker of a new nature; so we, till
we be graffed into Christ, retain our old nature, but afterward are turned
into a new creature: as it is written, If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.


Phil. I understand not what you say.


Theol. You must know this, that as there is a natural birth of the whole man;
so there is also a spiritual birth of the whole man.


Phil. How is that?


Theol. When as the natural faculties of the soul, as reason, understanding,
will, and affections, and the members of the body also are so sanctified,
purged, and rectified by grace, that we understand, will, and desire that which
is good.


Phil. Cannot a man will and desire that which is good before he be born
again?


Theol. No more then a dead man can desire the good things of this life. For
man's will is not tree to consent unto good, till it be enlarged by grace: and
an unregenerate man does sin necessarily, though not by constraint. For man's
will is free from constraint (for it sins of it self) but not from thraldom
unto sin.


Phil. You speak, as if a man could do no other thing but sin till the new work
be wrought in him.


Theol. That is mine opinion indeed. For a man and his flesh are all one, till
he be regenerate: they agree together like man and wife, they join together in
all evil, they live and die together: for when the flesh perishes, the man
perishes.


Phil. Is not this regeneration a changing, or rather destroying of humane
nature?


Theol. Nothing less: it is neither an abolishing, nor changing of the
substance of body or soul, or any of the faculties thereof, but only a
rectifying and repairing of them by removing the corruption.


Phil. Is then our natural corruption so purged and quite removed by the power
of grace, as that it remains not at all in us, but that we are wholly freed
of it?


Theol. Not so: For the relics and remnants of our old nature, which the
Scripture calls the old man, do hang about us, and dwell in us even until
our dying day; as it is plainly proved in the ten last verses of the seventh to
the Romans.


Phil. Then you affirm, that this new man, or new work of grace and
regeneration is unperfect in this life.


Theol. Yea: for the new creature, or new work of grace can never be fully
fashioned in this life, but is always in fashioning. And as our faith and
knowledge in this life are unperfect; so is our regeneration and sanctification.


Phil. You said before, that the regeneration or new birth is of the whole man:
which speech seems to imply, that the new woe k of grace is entire and
perfect.


Theol. You mistake the matter. For although the new birth is universal, and
of the whole man, yet it is not entire, perfect, pure, and without mixture or
corruption: for it is written, The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh. The Apostle also prays that the Thessalonians may
be sanctified throughout, in spirit, soul, and body.


Phil. This seems very obscure, I pray you make it more plain.


Theol. You must note this, that the new work and the old, flesh and spirit,
grace and corruption are so intermingledly joined together in all the faculties
of the soul and body, as that the one does ever fight against the other.


Phil. But tell me, I pray you, how you understand this intermingling of grace
and corruption in the soul. Do you mean, that grace is placed in one part of
the soul, and corruption in another, so as they be sundred in place?


Theol. No, that is not my meaning: but this, that they be joined and mingled
together (as I said) in and throughout the whole man. For the mind or
understanding part is not one part flesh, and another part spirit; but the
whole mind is flesh, and the whole mind is spirit, partly one, and partly
another. The same is to be said of will and affections.


Ph. I pray you, express it more plainly.


Theol. Even as the air in the dawning of the day is not wholly light, or
wholly dark, as at midnight, or at noonday; neither is it in one part light,
and in another part dark: but the whole air is partly light, and partly dark
thorowout: and as in a vessel of lukewarm water, the water it self is not
only hot, nor only cold but heat and cold are mixed together in every part of
the water; so is the flesh and the spirit mingled together in the soul of man.
And this is the cause why these two contrary qualities fight together.


Phil. Out of doubt this doctrine of regeneration is a very great mystery.


Theol. Yes certainly, it is a secret of secrets, which the wise of this world
cannot comprehend.


Phil. Some think that courtesy, kindness, good nurture, good nature, and
good education are regeneration; and that courteous and good natured men must
needs be saved.


Theol. They are generally deceived: for these things do not necessarily
accompany salvation, but are to be found in such as are altogether profane and
irreligious: yet we are to love such good outward qualities, and the men in
whom we find them.


Phil. What say you then to learning, wit, and policy? are not these things of
the essence of religion, and prove a regeneration?


Theol. No, no: for they be external gifts, which may be in the most wicked
men; as in Papists, heathen Poets, and Philosophers: yet we are greatly to
reverence learned and wise men, although the new and inward work be not as yet
wrought: for that is only of God, that is from above.


Phil. The common people do attribute much to learning and policy: for they
will say, Such a man is learned and wise, and knows the Scripture as well as
any of them, and yet he does not thus and thus.


Theol. It is one thing to know the history and letter of the Scriptures, and
another thing to believe and feel the power thereof in the heart, which is only
from the sanctifying spirit, which none of the wise of this world can have.


Phil. It is a common opinion, that if a man hold the truth in judgment, be no
Papist or Heretic, but leads an honest civil life, then he must of
necessity be saved.


Theol. That follows not: for many come so far, which yet notwithstanding
have not the inward touch.


Phil. That seems strange. For many will say, As long as they be neither
whore nor thief, nor spotted with such like gross sins, they trust in God
they shall be saved.


Theol. They err, not knowing the Scriptures. For many thousands are in great
danger of losing their souls for ever, which are free from such notorious and
horrible vices: nay, many which in the world are counted good honest men, good
true dealers, good neighbors, and good townsmen.


Asun. I pray you, Sir, give me leave a little. I have heard all your speech
hitherto, and I like reasonable well of it; but now I can forbear no longer, my
conscience urges me to speak: For me thinks you go too far, you goo beyond
your learning in this, that you condemn good neighbors, and good townsmen.
You say, many such men are in danger of losing their souls; but I will never
believe it while I live: For if such men be not saved, I cannot tell who shall.


Theol. But you must learn to know out of the Scriptures, that all outward
honesty and righteousness, without the true knowledge and inward feeling of
God, avails not to eternal life: As our Savior Christ says, Matthew. 12.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. It is also written, that
when Paul preached at (...), Acts 17.18.
many honest men and women did believe: that i^, such no were outwardly honest,
or honest to the word only: for they could not be truly and inwardly honest
before they did believe. Therefore you see that this outward honesty and
c^vility, without the inward regeneration of the spirit, ava^seth not to
eternal life: and then consequently, all your honest worldly men are in great
danger of losing their souls for ever.


Asun. What sound reason can you yield, why such honest men should be
condemned?


Theol. Because many such are utterly void of all true knowledge of God and his
word. Nay, which is more, many of them despise the word of God, and hate all
the zealous professors of it. They esteem Preachers but as pratlers, and
Sermons as good tales: they esteem a Preacher no more then a shoemaker: they
regard the Scriptures no more then their old shoes. What hope is there then, I
pray you, that such men should be saved? Does not the holy Ghost say, Ho^. 2.5.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?


Asun. You go too far; you judge too hardly of them.


Theol. Not a whit. For all experience shows, that they mind, dream, and dote
of nothing else day and night, but this world, this world, lands and leases,
grounds and livings, kine and sheep, and how to wax rich. All their thoughts,
words, and works are of these and such like things. And their actions do most
manifestly declare, that they are of the earth, and speak of the earth, and
there is nothing in them but earth, earth. As for Sermons, they care not how
few they hear: And for the scriptures, they regard them not, they read them
not, they esteem them not worth the while, there is nothing more irksome unto
them: they had rather pill strawes, or do any thing, then hear, read, or
confer of the Scriptures. And as the Prophet says: (...) 8.1.^.
The word of the Lord is as a reproach unto them, they have no delight in it.


Phil. I marvel much that such men should live so honestly to the worldward.


Theol. No marvel at all: for many bad men, whose hearts are worm-eaten
within, yet for some outward and carnal respects do abstain from the gross
act of sin: as some for credit, some for shame, some for fear of law, some for
fear of punishment; but none for love of God, for zeal of conscience, or of
obedience. For it is a sure thing, that the wicked may have that spirit which
does repress, but not that which does renew.


Phil. It seems then by your speeches, that some which are not regenerate do
in some things excel the children of God.


Theol. Most certain it is, that some of them in outward gifts, and the outward
carriage of themselves do go beyond some of the elect.


Phil. Show me, I pray you, in what gifts?


Theol. In learning, discretion, justice, temperance, prudence, patience,
liberality, assability, kindness, courtesy, good nature, etc.


Phil. Me thinks it should not be possible.


Theol. Yes truly: for some of Gods dear children, in whom no doubt the inward
work is truly and soundly wrought, yet are so troubled and encumbered with a
crabbed and crooked nature, and so clogged with some master sin, as some with
anger, some with pride, some with covetousness, some with lusts, some one way,
and some another; all which breaking out in them, do so blemish them and their
profession, that they cannot so shine forth unto men, as otherwise no doubt
they would; and this is their wound, their grief, and their heart-smart, and
that which costeth them many a tear, and many a prayer: and yet can they not
get the fu l victory over them, but still they are less in them as a prick in
the flesh to humble them.


Ph. Yet love should cover a multitude of such infirmities in Gods children.


Theol. It should do so indeed: but there is great want of love, even in the
best: and the worst sort espying these infirmities in the godly, run upon
them with open mouth, and take upon them to condemn them utterly, and to judge
their hearts, saying, They be hypocrites, dissemblers, and there is none worse
then they.


Phil. But do you not think, that there be some counterfeits even amongst the
greatest professors?


Theol. Yes, no doubt there be, and always have been some very hypocrites in
the Church; but we most take heed of judging and condemning all for some. For
it were very much to condemn Christ and his eleven disciples, because of one
Judas; or the whole Primitive Church for one Ananias and Sapphira.


Phil. But I hope you are of this mind, that some regenerate men, even in
outward gifts, and their outward carriage, are comparable with many others.


Theol. Questionless very many. For they being guided by Gods spirit, and
upheld by his grace, do walk very uprightly and unblamably toward men.


Phil. Yet there rests one scruple: for it seems very strange unto me, that
men of so discreet carriage as you speak of, and of so many good parts, should
not be saved. It is great pity such men should be damned.


Theol. It seems so unto us indeed, but God is only wise. And you must note,
that as there be some infirmities in Gods children, which he corrects with
temporal chastisements, and yet rewards their faith, love, and inward
service and obedience with eternal life; so there be some good things in the
wicked, and them that are without Christ, which God rewards with temporal
blessings, and yet punishes them eternally for their unbelief and hardness
of heart.


Phil. Now you have reasonably well satisfied me touching the doctrine of
regeneration, and the manifold errors and deceits that are in it, and of it. I
pray you let us now proceed: and first of all tell me by what means the new
birth is wrought.


Theol By the preaching of the word, as the outward means: 1 Pet. 1 2.3. John
1^.3. Acts 10.44. Ephesians. 4.3.
and the secret work of the spirit, as the inward means.


Phil. Many hear the word preached, and are nothing the better, but rather the
worse: what, I pray you, is the cause of that?


Theol. Men's own incredulity and hardness of heart: because God in his wrath
leaves them to themselves, and depriveth them of his spirit, without the which
all preaching is in vain. For except the spirit do follow the word into our
hearts, Act. 16.14.
we can find no joy, taste, nor comfort therein.


Phil. Cannot a man attain unto regeneration and the new birth without the word
and the spirit?


Theol. No verily. For they are the instruments and means whereby God does work
it.


Antil. Why may not a man have as good a faith to Godward that hears no
Sermons, as he that hears all the Sermons in the world?


Theol. Why may not he which eats no meat, be as fat and as well liking as
he that eats all the meat in the world? For is not the preaching of the word
the food of our souls?


Antil. I like not so much hearing of Sermons, and reading of the Scriptures,
except men could keep them better.


Theol. Faithful and honest hearers do therefore hear, that they may be more
able to observe and do. For a man cannot do the will of God before he know it,
and he cannot know it without hearing and reading.


Antil. I marvel what good men do get by gadding to Sermons, and poring so
much in the Scripture; or what are they better then others? There are none more
full of envy and malice then they: They will do their neighbor a shrewd turn
as soon as any body; and therefore in mine opinion, they be but a company of
hypocrites, and precise fools.


Theol. You judge uncharitably. Full little do you know what they feel, or
what good Gods people get by hearing of the word. For the work of the spirit in
the hearts of the elect is very secret and altogether hid from the world, John
^.8.
as it is written: The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whither it goes, or whence it comes; so is
every man that is born of the spirit. And again, The things of God knows no
man, but the spirit of God.


Amil. Tush, tush, what needs all this ado^? If a man say his Lords prayer, his
ten Commandments, and his Belief, and keep them, and say no body harm, not
do no body harm, and do as he would be done to, have a good faith to
Godward, and be a man of Gods belief, no doubt he shall be saved without all
this running to Sermons, and prattling of the Scripture.


Theol. Now you power it out indeed: you think you have spoken wise y. But,
alas! you have bewrayed your great ignorance. For you imagine a man may be
saved without the word, which is a gross error.


Antil. It is no matter; say you what you will, and all the Preachers in the
world besides, as long as I serve God, and say my prayers duly and truly,
morning and evening, and have a good faith in God, and put my whole trust in
him, and do my true intent, and have a good mind to Godward, and a good
meaning, although I am not learned, yet I hope it will serve the turn for my
souls health. For that God which made me must save me. It is not you that can
save me, for all your learning, and all your Scriptures.


Theol. You may very fitly be compared to a sick man, who having his brain
distempered with heat, raveth, and speaks idly, he cannot tell what. For the
holy Ghost says, P^o. 18.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. And again, Prove. 13.15.
He that destroys the word shall be destroyed. So long therefore as you
despise Gods word, and turn away your ear from hearing his Gospel preached, all
your prayers, your fantastical serving of God, your good meanings, and your
good intents are to no purpose; but most odious and loathsome in the sight of
God: as it is written, My soul hates your new moons, Esa. 1.14.
and your appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am weary to bear
them: When you stretch out your hands I will hide mine eye from you; and though
you make many prayers, I will not hear: For your hands are full of blood. And
again, the Lord says by the same Prophet; He that kills a bullock, Esa. 66.3.
is as if he sl^w a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs
neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that
remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol. Where you see the Lord tells
you his mind touching th^se matters; to wit, that all your prayers, services,
good meanings, etc. are abominable unto him, so long as you walk in ignorance,
profaneness, disobedience, and contempt of the Gospel. For he says in the
words immediately going before: To him will I look, even to him that is poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words.


Asun. I grant indeed, for them that are idle, and have little to do, it is not
amiss now and then to hear a Sermon, and read the Scriptures: but we have no
leisure, we must follow our business, we cannot live by the Scriptures; they
are not for plain folk, they are too high for us, we will not meddle with
them. They belong to Preachers and Ministers.


Theol J^^^ 10.
Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them eternal life. If
therefore you refuse to hear the voice of Christ, you are none of his sheep,
neither can you have eternal life. And in another place our Lord Jesus says,
John 8.47.
He that is of God, hears Gods word. Ye therefore hear it not, because ye are
not of God. Saint Paul writing to all sorts of men, both rich and poor, high
and low, men and women, Colos. 3.1
young and old, exhorts, that the word of Christ may dwell plenteously in
them all, in all wisdom. You see therefore that the Apostle would have all
sorts of people that have souls to save, to be well acquainted with the
Scriptures. Therefore you may as well say you will not meddle with God, with
Christ, nor with everlasting life, as to say, you will not meddle with the
Scriptures.


Asun. Well, I cannot read, and therefore I cannot tell what Christ, or what
Saint Paul may say; but this I am sure of, that God is a good man (worshipped
might he be) he is merciful, and that we must be saved by our good prayers,
and good serving of God.


Theol. You speak foolishly and ignorantly in all that you say, having no
ground for any thing you speak, but your own fancy, and your own conceit: and
yet you will believe your own fancy against all preachers, and against all that
can be spoken out of the word: But I pray you give me leave a little: If a man
dream that he shall be a King, and in the morning when he is awake, persuades
himself it shall be so, may he not be justly laughed at, as having no ground
for it? Even so may all they which believe their own dreams and fantasies
touching salvation. But it is true which Solomon says, Prove. 14.15.
A fool believes every thing: That copper is gold, and a counter an angel. And
assuredly great reason there is that he which will not believe God, should be
given over to believe the Devil, his dream, and his fancy.


Asun. I pray you instruct me better then.


Theol. You had need indeed to be better instructed: for the Devil has slily
deluded your soul, and cast a mist before your eyes, making you believe the
crow is white, and that your estate is good before God, whereas indeed it is
most woeful and miserable.


Asun. Nay, I defy the Devil with all my heart. But, I pray you, tell me how
it comes to pass that I am thus deceived.


Theol. This it is that deceives you and many others: that you measure your
selves by your selves and by others, which is a false met-wand. For you seem to
lie straight so long as you are measured by your selves and by others; but lay
the rule of Gods word unto you, and then you lie altogether crooked.


Asun. What other thing is there that deceives me?


Theol. Another thing that deceives you is your own heart: for you know not
your own heart, but are altogether deceived therein: Jer. 17.9.
For the heart is deceivable above all things. He is a wise man, and greatly
enlightened, that knows his own heart. But you are blind, and know not what
is within you; but dimly imagine you shall be saved, and hope you know not what
of eternal life. And because blindness makes you bold, you will seem to be
resolute in words, and say, It is pity he should live which does any whit
doubt of his salvation. And assuredly you speak as you think, and as you know.
For, for ought that you know to the contrary, it seems so: though indeed and
in truth it is not so: for you are deluded with a false light. And sometimes no
doubt you have pricks, gripes, terrors, and inward accusations of conscience,
for all your bold and resolute speeches.


As. Truly I never heard so much before.


Theol. That is because you shut your eyes, and stop your ears against God and
all goodness. Psalm. 58.47.
You are like the deaf Adder, which hears not the voice of the charmer,
though he be most expert in charming.


Asun. Well then, if it be so, I would be glad now to learn, if you would teach
me. And as you have showed me the means whereby the true birth is wrought, so
now show me the certain signs and tokens thereof, whereby all men may
certainly know that they are sanctified, regenerate, and shall be saved.


Theol. There be eight infallible notes and tokens of a regenerate mind, which
may well be termed the eight signs of salvation; and they are these: A love to
the children of God. Right infal^^ble signs of salvation
A delight in his word. Often and fervent prayer. Zeal of Gods glory. Denial
of our selves. Patient bearing of the Cross with profit and comfort.
Faithfulness in our calling. Honest, just, and conscionable dealing in all our
actions amongst men.



Phil. Now that you have showed us the evident signs of man's salvation, show
us also the signs of condemnation.


Theol. The contraries unto these are manifest signs of damnation.

R^gh^ s^gn^ of ^^nd^mna^^on.
No love to the children of God.

No delight in his word.

Seldom and cold prayers.

Coldness in Gods matters.

Trusting to our selves.

Impatience under the cross.

Unfaithfulness in our calling.

Dishonest and unconscionable dealing.


Phil. No doubt, if a man be infected with these, they be shrewd signs that a
man is extremely soul-sick, and in a very dangerous case. But are there none
yet more evident and apparent signs of condemnation then these?


Theol. Yes verily. There be nine very cle^r and manifest signs of a man's
condemnation.


Phil. I pray you, let me hear what they be.


Theol. Pride. Nine manifest signs of damnation.
Whoredom. Covetousness. Contempt of the Gospel. Swearing. Lying.
Drunkenness. Idleness. Oppression.



Phil. These be gross things indeed.


Theol. They may not unfitly be termed the nine Beclzebubs of the world; and he
that has these signs upon him is in a most woeful case.


Phil. What if a man be infected with some two or three of these?


Theol. Whosoever is infected with three of them, is in great danger of losing
his soul. For all these be deadly venom, and rank poison to the soul: and
either the three first, or the three last, or the middle three are enough to
poison the soul, and sting it to death. Nay, to say the truth, a man were as
good gripe a toad, and handle a snake, as meddle with any one of these.


Phil. Is every one of them so dangerous?


Theol. Questionless: For they be the very plague-sores of the soul. It any
man have a plague sore upon his body, we use to say, Gods tokens are upon him,
Lord have mercy on him: So we may ^ri^ly say, If any man, be thoroughly and
totally infected at the heart with any one of these, Gods tokens are upon his
soul, Lord have mercy upon him.


Phil. Many do not think these to be such dangerous matters as you make them,
and many there be which make light of them.


Theol. True indeed, for the most part of men are altogether shut up in
blindness and hardness of heart, having neither sight nor feeling of their
sins, and therefore make light of them, thinking there is no such danger.


Phil. It is most certain, that men are given to lessen and extenuate their
sins: or else to hide them, and dawb them over with many cunning shifts and
vain excuses. For men are ever ready to take covert, and will writhe and wreath
(like snakes) to hide their sins: yea, if it were possible, to make sin no sin,
to make virtue vice, and vice virtue. Therefore I pray you lay open unto me
out of the Scriptures the grievousnesse and ugliness of their sins.


Theol. The stinking filthiness of these sins is so great and horrible, that
no tongue or (...) of (...) is sufficientfully to (...) and lay open the same,
according to the proper nature and being thereof: yet notwithstanding, I will
do my endeavor to lay them open in some measure, that all men may the more
loath them.


Phil. I pray you then first of all begin with pride.


Theol. You say well: for that indeed may well stand in the forefront, since it
is a master-divell, and the master-pock of the soul.


Phil. Show me out of the Scriptures that pride is so grievous and loathsome.


Theol. Solomon says, Prove. 16.5.
Every one that is proud in heart is abomination to the Lord: which plainly
shows, that God does detest and abhor proud men. And is it not a fearful
thing, think you, to be abhorred of God? And in the same Chap. Ver. 18. he
says, Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall.
Wherein he shows, that pride is the for-runner of some deadly downfall,
either by disgracing or displacing. For it is an old and true Proverb, Pride
will have a fall. And oftentimes, when men are most lifted up, then are they
nearest, unto it: as the examples of Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod do
plainly declare. When the milt swells, the rest of the body pineth away; even
so when the heart is puffed up with pride, the whole man is in danger of
destruction. Moreover, the holy Ghost says, Prove. 15.24.
The Lord will destroy the house of the proud. Job 11.5.25. Job 28.26.
Job says of such kind of men, The spark of his fire shall not shine: fear
shall dwell in his house, and brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
And in another place he says, Job 23.13.
The fire which is not blown shall devour him. Me thinks therefore, if
there were any spark of grace in us, these terrible speeches of the holy Ghost
might serve to humble us, and pull down our pride: especially, since the
Scriptures do affirm, that God resists the proud, and sets himself ex
profess against them, and therefore woe unto them; for if God take against a
man, who can reclaim him? for he does whatsoever he will.


Phil. But tell me, I pray you, when you speak against pride, what pride is it
that you mean?


Theol. I mean all pride, both that which is inward in the heart, and that also
which breaks out in men's foreheads: I mean, that which apparently shows it
self in men's words and works.


Phil. Do you mean pride also of men's gifts?


Theol. Yes surely: for there is no pride worse or more dangerous then that.
Beware, says one, of spiritual pride: as to be proud of our learning, wit,
knowledge, reading, writings, sermons, prayers, godliness, policy, valor,
strength, riches, honor, birth, beauty, authority. For God has not given such
gifts unto men, to the end they should make sale-ware of them, and set them a
sun-shining to behold; seeking only themselves with their gifts, the vain
praise of the multitude, and applause of the people: so robbing God of his
honor, and proudly arrogating to themselves that which is due unto God, which
is the praise of his gifts: but he has given his gifts to another end, namely,
that we should use them to his glory and the good of others (either in Church
or Commonwealth) especially of those which do most concern us.


Phil. Yet we see commonly men of greatest gifts are most proud.


Theol. True indeed: for the finest cloth is soonest stained. And as worms
engender sooner in soft and tender wood, then in that which is more hard and
knotty; and as moths do breed sooner in fine wool then in course flocks: even
so pride and vain glory do sooner assault an excellent and rare man in all kind
of knowledge and virtue, then another of meaner gifts: and therefore pride is
said to spring out of the ashes of all virtues. For men will be proud, because
they are wise, learned, godly, patient, humble, etc. Pride therefore may very
fitly be compared to the crabstock spines, which grow out of the root of the
very best Apple Tree. Therefore to say the truth, this is one of the last
engines and weapons which the Devil uses for the overthrowing of Gods own
children, even to blow them up with pride, as it were with gunpowder. For, as
we see it come to pass in the siege of strong holds, when no battery or force
of shot will prevail, the last remedy and policy is to undermine it, and blow
it up with trains of gunpowder; so when Satan can no way prevail against
some excellent servants of God, his last device is to blow them up with pride,
as it were with gunpowder.


Phil. I see it is a special grace of God, for men of great gifts to be
humble minded: and he is an odd man of a thousand, which excelling in gifts,
excels in humility; and the more gifts he has, the more humbly he walks:
not contemning others, but esteeming them better than himself. For commonly
we are the worse for Gods gifts, because we have not the right use of them;
and again, because they engender so much proud flesh in us, that we had need
daily to be co^zied. Therefore God shows great favor and mercy to that man,
whom he humbles and takes down by any afflictions or infirmities whatsoever.
For otherwise, it is sure, proud flesh would altogether over-grow us.


Theol. 2 Cor. 12.
You have spoken the truth: for the Apostle himself confesses, that he was
tempted and troubled this way, and had like to have been puffed up out of
measure with the abundance of his revelations, but that God in great mercy sent
him a cooler and a rebater; to wit, a prick in the flesh (which he calls the
messenger of Satan) whereby the Lord cured him of his pride. And even so does
he cure many of us of our pride, by throwing us to Satan, leaving us to our
selves, and giving us over to commit some gross evil, even to fall down and
break our necks: and all, to the end he may humble us, tame us, and pull
down our pride, which he sees we are heart-sick of. It is good for us
therefore to be humble in the abundance of grace, that we be not proud of
that which we have, or that which we have done. For humility in sin is better
then pride in well-doing.


Phil. Herein surely appears the great wisdom and mercy of God: that he so
graciously brings go d out of evil, and turns our afflictions, infirmities,
falls and down-falls; to his glory and our good.


Theol. It is most true. For even as of the flesh of a Viper is made a
sovereign medicine to cure those which are stung of a Viper; and as Physicians
expel poison with poison: so God, according to his mavelous wisdom, does,
of the infirmities which remain in us after regeneration, cure other more
dangerous diseases; as pride, vainglory, and presumption. O blessed therefore
be his name for ever, which thus mercifully causes all things to work together
for the good of his own people; of whom these things are specially to be
understood.


Phil. Is there no cause why men of great gifts should glory in their gifts?


Theol. No surely none at all. For the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4.
Who separateth thee? And, what have thou that thou have not received? If thou
have received it, why boastest thou, as though thou had not received it?
Where the Apostle plainly shows, that no man is to be proud of his gifts;
because they are none of his own: he has but received them to use. We count
him worthy to be laughed at as a fool, who having borrowed brave apparel of
others (as a silk gown, a s^tten doublet, a chain of gold, velvet breaches,
etc.) should proudly jet it in the streets in them, as if they were his own:
even so are they worthy to be chronicled for fools, which are proud of good
gifts, which are none of their own. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy says, Jer.
25.3.
Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, not the strong
man in his strength, neither the rich man in his riches: but let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me. To this point
also well says the heathen Poet: T^eo^ti^us.
No man can escape the punishment of pride; therefore in greatest prosperity be
not puffed up.


Phil. Yet it is a world to see how proud, surly, haughty, stately, insolent,
and thrasonicall some be, because of their gifts: they think they touch the
clouds with their heads, and that the earth does not bear them: they take
themselves to be petty angels, or some wonderful wights: they contemn and
disdain all others which have not the like gifts: they do contemptuously
overlook them, as a lion should overlook a mouse, a King a beggar; or, as we
say in a proverb, as the Devil looked over Lincoln.


Theol. Oh proud dust! Oh haughty worms meat! If they would bring their hearts
before God, and their consciences thoughts, and affections to be judged by his
law, it would soon cool them, and take them down well enough; they should see
their wants and imperfections to be so great, that they indeed should have no
more cause to boast of their gifts, then the Blackmoor, has of his whiteness,
because his teeth are white. The holy Ghost ours all our combs, and plucketh
down all pride of flesh, when he says, Job 26.14. How ^mall a thing does man
understand of God?


Phil I pray you let us proceed to speak of the outward and gross pride of the
world: and first of all, tell me what you think of pride in apparel.


Theol I think it to be a vanity of all vanities, and a folly of all follies.
For to be proud of apparel, is as if a thief should be proud of his halter, a
beggar of his clouts, a child of his gay, or a fool of his babble.


Phil. Yet we see how proud many (specially women) be of such bables. For when
they have spent a great part of the day in tricking and trimming, pricking and
pinning, pranking and pouncing, girding and lacing, and braving up themselves
in most exquisite manner, then out they come into the streets with their
pedlers shop upon their back, and carry their crests very high, taking
themselves to be little angels, or at least somewhat more then other women.
Whereupon they do so exceedingly swell with pride, that it is to be feared
they will burst with it as they walk in the streets. And truly we may think,
the very stones in the street, and the beams in the houses do quake and wonder
at their monstrous, intolerable and excessive pride. For it seems that they
are altogether a lump of pride, a mass of pride, even altogether made of
pride, and nothing else but pride, pride.


Theol. You seem to be very hot in the matter.


Asun. Marry, Sir, I like him the better: for the world was never so full of
pride as it is now adays.


Theol. Alas, alas: indeed who can hold his peace at the pride of this age!
What a thing is it that flesh and blood, worms meat, dust and ashes, dirt and
dung, should so brave it out with their (...) clouts, and that in the sight of
^od, Angels, and men? For the time will come, when both they and all their gay
clouts shall be buried in a grave: Yea, as Job says, Job 12.13,14
The grave shall be their house, and they shall m^ke their bed in the dark. And
^h^n they shall say to corruption, Thou art my Father: and to the worm, Thou
are my Mother and my sister. What then shall it avail them thus to ^a^e
r^^fled it out in all their bravery, w^o as suddenly they shall (...)
struction? What did it prove the ri^h man to be sumptuously clothed, and fare
deliciously every day, when his body was buried in the dust, and his soul in
hell fire?


Asun. I pray you, Sir, what say you to these great ruffes, which are born up
with supporters and rebatoes, as it were with post and rail?


Theol. What should I say? but God be merciful unto us. For such things do
draw down the wrath and vengeance of God upon us all: and, as the Apostle
says, Gal. 5.6.
For such things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience. And truly, truly, we may well fear, that God will plague us for our
abominable pride.


Asun. What say you then to these doubled and r doubled ruffes, (which are now
in common use) strouting fardingales, long locks, fore-tufts, shag hair, and
all these new fashions which are devised and taken up every day?


Theol I say they are far from that plainness, simplicity, and modesty, which
has been in former ages: our forefathers knew no such things. It is recorded
of William Rufus, Graftous (...) ^4.
sometime King of this land, that when his Chamberlain on a time brought him a
new pair of hose, he demanded of him what they cost: who answered, three
shillings: Whereat the King, being somewhat moved, commanded him to prepare him
a pair of a mark. If Kings were then thought to exceed, that bestowed a mark
upon a pair of hose, what is it to be thought of many mean men in these our
days (yea such as have no living, and are scarce of any good calling) which
bestow as much upon a pair as the King did upon two, when he was thought most
of all to exceed? But alas, alas, we have passed all bounds of modesty and
measure; there is no he with us. Our Land is too heavy of this sin. For the
pride of all Nations, and the follies of all countries are upon us; how shall
we bear them? And as for these new fashions, the more new they be, the more
foolish, and as foolish they that use them. For with our new fashions we are
grown clean out of fashion. If we had as many fashions of our bodies as we have
of our attire, we should have as many fashions as fingers and toes. But vain
men and women do apparently show their vain minds, by following so greedily
such vain toys and fashions.


Asun. It was never a good world since starching and steeling, busks and
whale-bones, supporters and rebatoes, full moons and hobby-horses, painting and
dying, with selling of favor and complexion, came to be in use. For since
these came in, covetousness, oppression, and deceit have increased. For how
else should pride be maintained? and sure it is, within these thirty years
these things were not known, nor heard of. And what say you then to painting of
faces, laying open of naked breasts, dying of hair, wearing of periwigs, and
other hair coronets, and top-gallants? And what say you to our artificial
women, which will be better than God has made them? They like not his
handiwork, they will mend it, and have other complexions, other faces, other
hair, other bones, other breasts, and other bellies then God made them.


Theol. This I say, that you and I and all the Lords people have great and just
cause of mourning, weeping, and lamentation, because such abomination is
committed in Israel. David's eyes gushed out with rivers of tears, (...) 9
because men kept not Gods laws, and an horrible fear came upon him, because
men forsook the law of God. (...) 5 1.
J remie did sigh in secret, wishing that his head were full of water, and his
eyes a fountain of tears, because of the sins of the people. Nehemiah
mourned for the transgression of Gods people. N^hem. 1^.
Lots just soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites: and
s^^ll we mo^rne nothing at all for t^^se things? shall we be no whit grieved
for the pride of our land? shall we shed no tears for such horrible and
intolerable abominations? They are odious in the s^ght of God and men: the air
stinketh of them. It is Gods mavelous patience that the Dwell does not carry
them away quick, and rid the earth of them: or that fire and brimstone does not
come down from heaven and consume them.


Antil. You are too hot in these matters of attire: you make more of them then
there is cause.


Asun. I con him thank: Gods blessing on his heart, I shall love him the better
while I know him, because he is so earnest against such shameful and
detestable pride. Is it not a shame that women professing true religion, should
make themselves such pictures, puppets, and peacocks as they do? And yet I
hear few Preachers in the pulpit speak against it.


Antil. I marvel you should be so earnest in matters of apparel. You know
well enough that apparel is an indifferent thing: and that religion and the
kingdom of God does not consist in these things.


Theol. I know right well that apparel in its own nature is a thing
indifferent: but lewd, wanton, immodest, and offensive apparel is not
indifferent. For all such abuse takes away the indifferency of them, and
makes them sinful and evil, by c^rcumstance. For otherwise why should the
Lord threaten by his Prophet, that he would visit the Princes, and the Kings
children, and all such as were clothed with strange apparel, that is, the
fashions of other countries? Zephan. 1.8. Again, why should the Lord so plague
the proud dames, and mincing minions of Jerusalem, for their pride and vanity
in attire, if there were no evil i^ such kind of abuse? The Lord says thus in
the third of Esaias, against those brave and gallant dames, Because the daughters
of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched-out necks, and with wandering eyes,
walking and mincing as they go, and make a tinkling with their feet: therefore
shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Sion bald, and the Lord shall
discover their secret parts. In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament
of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tires, the sweet balls, and the
bracelets, and the bonnets, the tires of the head, and the slops, the
head-bands, and the tablets, the earings, the rings, and the mufflers, the
costly apparel, and the veiles, and the wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and
the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the lawns. And in stead of
sweet savor there shall be stink: and in stead of a girdle, a rent: and in
stead of dressing of the hair, baldness: and in stead of a stomacher, a
girding of sackcloth: and burning in stead of beauty. Then shall her gates
mourn and lament: and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.

Thus we see how terribly the Lord threatens the gallant dames of Jerusalem,
for their excessive and abominable pride. And this may well be a mirror for
the proud minious of our age: which assuredly may well fear the Lord will bring
some such judgment upon them, as he did upon the daughters of Jerusalem. For
their sin is as great in this kind, as was the daughters of Sion, and God is
the same God now that he was then to punish it.


Antil. Tush, never speak so much of these matters of apparel; for we must do
as others do, and follow the fashion, or else we shall not be esteemed.


Theol. If you follow them not, you shall be more esteemed of God, of his
Angels, Saints, and all good men. As for all others, if you esteem them more
then these, you show what you are.


Antil. Well, for all that, say you what you will, pride is in the heart, and
not in the apparel: For one may be proud of plain apparel, as well as of
costly. And some are as proud of their falling bands and little sets, as others
are of their great ruffes.


Theol. You speak foolishly, for how know you that? Can you judge men's hearts
and inward affections? Can you say, when men's and women's apparel is sober,
modest, and Christian like, that they have proud hearts, and are proud of that
attire? You go very far indeed, to judge the heart. You ought to judge
charitably of such as go soverly and modestly attired, even that their heart
is according to their attire. And for you, we may rather think your heart is
vain, light, and foolish, because your attire does strongly argue it: And, as
the Prophet says, The trial of your countenance testifies against you: you
declare your sins as Sodom, and hide them not, Esaias 3.9.


Phil. I pray you then set down some rules for apparel out of the Scriptures.


Theol. I may well set down what I will: but surely most men and women will do
what they list. For verily it may be thought, that many of this age have
forsworn God and his word, and all goodness. For they are come to this point,
let God say what he will, they will do what they list. For as the Prophet
says, They have made a covenant with hell, and with death, and are grown to an
agreement, Esaias 28.15. And I do verily think, if God himself should come
down from heaven in his own person, and dissuade men and women from this
vanity of apparel, yet would they still use it, as it were in despite of God,
and as it were to anger him the more. For they are so extraordinarily
enamoured, and so immoderately delighted with it, and do so continually, and
altogether dote on it, and are so wood-mad of it, that they will have it,
though men and Angels, and all the world say nay: nay, which is more, though
they should go to the Devil quick with it. And therefore it is but lost
labor to speak against it, preach against it, or write against it. It is but
even to plough the sea, or knock at a deaf man's door; for there is no hope of
any reformation. Only this we gain, that the world is reproved and convicted
of sin. And these things shall stand in a record against them, in the last day:
so that they may say, they had a fair warning, and that there was a Prophet
among them.


Phil. Yet for all this, I pray you set us down some directions and rules, out
of Gods holy Book, concerning attire. For albeit some be very bad, and
outrageous in these things, yet there be some others which are well disposed,
and will (no doubt) make some conscience to frame themselves according to the
rules of Gods word.


Theol. Well then, for their sakes which are well disposed, I will set down
some few directions. Saint Paul in 1 Timothy 2.9. wills, that women should array
themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, as becomes
women that profess the fear of God: and not with broydered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or castly apparel. The Apostle Saint Peter gives like rules also: 1
Pet. 3.3.
for he says, speaking of Christian matrons, and professors of holy religion,
That their apparel must not be outward, that is, not consist so much in
outward bravery; as broidered hair, gold put about, etc. as it must be inward,
that the hid man of the heart may be clothed with a meek and quiet spirit,
which is a thing before God much set by. For after this manner, says he, in
times past the holy women which trusted in God did attire themselves; as Sarah,
Rebeica, Rachel, and such like ancient and grave matrons.


Phil. Wherein does this inward clothing specially consist?


Theol. In four things, which are set down in the forenamed places, to wit,
shamefacednesse, modesty, a quiet spirit, and a meek spirit.


Phil. These be sine suits of apparel indeed: I would all women would put them
on, and never put them off, but wear them continually: for they are the better
for wearing, though all other apparel be the worse.


Theol. If women would deck themselves inwardly with these aforesaid virtues,
they would be unto them as ornaments of gold, and jewels of pearl. For the
woman that fears the Lord shall be praised. Prove. 30.1.



Phil. But now, I pray you, Sir, set down your judgment for outward attire.


Theol. This is all that I can say touching that point, That it must be as the
Apostle says, comely, decent, handsome, neat and seemly: not light, not
wanton, not lascivious, not immodest, not offensive.


Phil. But who shall judge what is comely, sober, handsome, modest? etc. For
every man and woman will say, their apparel is decent and cleanly, how
gallant, brave, and flanting soever they be.


Theol. Herein the examples of the most godly, wise, grave, and modest men and
women are to be followed: for who can better judge what is comely, sober and
modest, then they?


Phil. But we see some, even of the better sort, in this matter are a little
infected, run out, and go beyond their bounds.


Theol. The more is the pity. But alas, we see the sway of the time, and rage
of the stream is so violent, that it carries before it whatsoever is not
settled, and very deep rooted. And some godly and well disposed persons, whose
hearts are not with these things, but with God, are notwithstanding perforce
carried away with the violence of the wind and tide; whose case, though it
cannot well be defended or excused, yet it is much to be pitied and lamented.


Phil. Have you any further directions touching this point?


Theol. There is one thing yet more to be added: to wit, that attire be
according to men's places, callings and degrees. For that is not seemly for one,
that is seemly for another; that becomes not one man's place, that becomes
another: For that is not meet for poor men, which is meet for rich men: nor
that meet for mean men, which is meet for men of note and great place.


Phil. Then you think it is lawful for Kings, Princes, and great Personages,
to wear pearl, gold, silver, and velvet, etc.


Theol. Questionless it is lawful for such, in sober manner and measure, to
wear the most costly and precious things which the earth can afford: and that
to set out the magnificence, pomp, and glory of their places: and therefore
such things are in them most comely and decent.


Phil. But now-adayes few will keep within compass, few will know their
places: But the most part run beyond their bounds, and leap quite out of their
sockets.


Theol. True indeed: For nowadayes mean Gentlewemen, yea some Gentlewomen of
their own making, will ruifle it, and brave it out in their attire like
Countesses and Ladies of honor. Plain folk also in the country will flaunt it
like Courtiers, and like good Gentlemen and Gentlewomen: and they seem to say
in their hearts, Fie of this plainness, we will no more of it: we will not
take it as we have done. So that now the old proverb is verified: Every Jack
will be a Gentleman, and Joan is as good as my Lady. For now we cannot, by
their apparel, discern the maid from the mistress, nor the waiting
Gentlewoman from her Lady. And thus we see in this matter of apparel how all
is out of joint.


Phil. Is there any more to be said in this case? 14.



Theol. There is yet another thing to be respected in this matter of attire.


Phil. What is that?


Theol. That it be according to men's abilities. For it is lamentable to
consider how poor men and women, poor hired servants, milke-maides, and such
like, go quite beyond their ability. And more lamentable to see what wretched
and ill-favored shifts they make to compass these things: so sharp and so
eagerly are they set upon them.


Phil. Well Sir, now you have sufficiently rolled the stone, and at large
satisfied us touching the matter of pride; which is the first sign of
condemnation. Now proceed to the second, which is whoredom; and unfold unto us
out of the Scriptures the danger thereof.


Theol. Solomon, in his Proverbs, says: Pro. 32.14.
That the mouth of a strange woman [or an harlot] is as a deep pit: he that is
a detestation to the Lord, shall fall therein. Wherein he plainly shows, that
these whom God detesteth and is exceeding angry with, are given over to this
vice. And in another place he says, 13.17.
A whore is as a deep ditch, and as a narrow pit. Noting thereby, that if a man
be once fallen in with an harlot, he shall as hardly get out again, as a man
that is plunged into a very deep and narrow pit, where he can scant stir
himself. The same Solomon, in the book of Ecclesiastes, yields us the reason
hereof: namely, because she is as nets, snares and bands, wherein, if a man be
once taken, he is fast enough for getting out. Eccl. ^.28.
I find, says he, more bitter then death the woman whose heart is as nets,
and snares, and her hands as bands. He that is good before God shall be
delivered from her: but the sinner shall be taken by her. We do therefore
plainly see in what a labyrinth and dangerous case they be that are left of
God, and given over to whoredom and harlots: and therefore it is said, Prove.
6.5.
Desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her eyelids catch thee: for
by a whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread; and the adulteress
hunteth for life, which is precious. Pro. 5.3, 4.
Again he says, Albeit the lips of an harlot drop as an honeycomb, and the
roof of her mouth is softer then oil: yet her latter end is bitter as
wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged sword. All these prudent speeches of the
holy Ghost do most evidently show unto us what a fearful thing it is to
commit whoredom, and so to fall into the hands of whores and harlots.
Therefore Job says of the wicked, Job 36.14.
Their soul dies in youth, and their life among the whoremongers.


Phil. You have very well showed out of Gods book, the great danger of
whoredom and adultery. And it is greatly to be lamented, that men in this age
make so light of it as they do, and that it is so common a vice: nay, that some
(alas, with grief I speak it) do profess it, live by it, and prostitute
themselves wholly unto it.


Theol. Such men and women may justly fear the plaguing hand of God: for the
Lord says by his Prophet; Though I fed them to the full, Ier. 5.7.
yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in harlots
houses. They rose up in the morning like fed horses: for every man neighed
after his neighbors wife. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord?
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation?


Phil. Me thinks, if men were not altogether hardened in this sin, and even
past feeling, and past grace, this threatening and thundering of God himself
from heaven should terrify them.


Theol. A man would think so indeed: but now we may take up the old complaint
of the Proph^t, Ie^. 8.6.
I hearkened and heard, and lo, no man spoke aright: no man repented him of
his evil; saying, What have I done? Every one turns to their race, as the
horse rusheth into the battle.


Antil. Tush, whoredom is but a trick of youth; and we see all men have their
in perfections.


Theol. You speak profanely and wickedly: For shall we count that but a
trick of youth, 1 Cor. 1^.8.
for the which the Lord smote three and twenty thousand of his own people in
one day? Shall we count that but a trick of youth, for the which the Lord
threatened David his own servant, 2 Samuel 12.10
that the sword should never depart from his house? Shall we count that but a
trick of youth, for the which Hamor and Sechem, the father and the son, Genesis
34.25.
and many other, both men, women, and children, were cruelly murdered by Simeon
and Levi the sons of Jacob? Shall we count that but a trick of youth, for
the which the Lord slew Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 4.11.
the two sons of Eli the Priest, in the battle of the Philistines? Shall we
thus set all at six and seven, and make light of such horrible villainies? Does
not the severity of the punishment show the greatness of the sin? Does not
the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 10.11
These things came unto them for our examples, upon whom the ends of the world
are come? And yet you pass it over with a tush, and a trick of youth, as if
God were to be dallied with. No, no, be not deceived; God is not mocked. They
which will not be moved now in hearing, shall one day be crushed in pieces in
feeling. And they which now call whoredom a trick of youth, shall one day
howl and cry, yell and yelp for such tricks, with woe and alas that ever they
were born.


Antil. Oh Sir, you must bear with youth: youth you know is frail; and youth
will be youthful, when you have said all that you can.


Theol. Yea, but God does allow no more liberty unto youth then unto age: but
binds all upon pain of death, to the obedience of his commandments. Titus
2.6.
The Apostle says: Let young men be sober minded. David says, Wherewith shall
a young man cl anse his way? Psalm. 119.9.
In taking heed thereto according to thy word. The wise man says, Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth: Eccles. 12.1.
And further adds; that if they will needs follow their lusts, their
pleasures, and their own swinge, yet in the end he will bring them to
judgment, arraigne them, condemn them, and tame them in hell fire well enough.


Phil. Yet we see men are so violently carried after their lusts, and so
desperately bent, that they will have the present sweet and pleasure of sin,
come of it what will. Come sickness, come death, come hell, come damnation,
they are at a point; they will pay the highest price for their lust. They will
purchase their pl^asures with the loss of their souls. O woeful purchase! O
damnable pleasures!


Th^ol. Sweet meat will have sour sauce, and a dram of pleasure a pound of
sorrow. Such cursed c^itifes shall at last pay a dear shot for their
pleasures. Such desperate wretches shall one day know (to their everlasting
woe) what it is to provoke God, and to sin with so high an hand against him.
They shall well know, in spite of their hearts, that vengeance is prepared for
the wicked, and that there is a God that judges the earth. Heb. 1^.4.
Let all men therefore take heed in time; for whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge. And the Apostle says flatly, That whor^mong^rs and adulterers
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. Heb. 12.
Let therefore no fornicator, or unclean person be found among us, as was Esau:
but let us abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. 1 Pet.
1.2.
And let every one know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor,
and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God, 1
These. 4.5

Herein let us consider the wise speech of an ancient Father: Sin, Chrysostom.
in Matthew.
while it is in doing, ministers some pleasure, but when it is committed, the
short ple^sure thereof vanishes away, and long sorrow comes in stead of it.
Neither let us here reject the saying of a wise Heathen: Isocrat. ad Demon.
Shun pleasure for fear of smart. Sour things follow sweet, and joy heaviness.


Antil. Yet for all this you shall not make me believe, that whoredom is so
heinous a matter. You make more of it then it is.


Theol. True indeed: for you, and such as you are will believe nothing against
your lusts and fleshly delights: and that is the cause why you are deaf on
this care. I will therefore add a word or two more (out of the Oracles of God)
to that which has been spoken. Pro. 6.31. (...)
The wise King says, He that commits adultery with women, destroys his
own soul: and so is access^ry to his own death; which is no small matter.
For we use to say, if a man hang himself, drown himself, or any manner of
way make away himself, that he was cursed of God, that Gods hand was heavy
against him, that the Devil ought him a shame, and now he has paid it him.
And all the country rings of such a strange accident, when, and where it
falls out: and the Crowner of the country does sit upon it. How much more
may all the world wonder at this; that a man should destroy his own soul, and
wittingly and willingly cast away himself for ever? Now the holy Ghost says,
The adulterer does such an act, gives such a venture, and willingly murthereth
himself. Oh therefore woe unto him that ever he was borne! for sure it is,
that the great Crowner of heaven, that crowns whom he will crown, shall one
day sit upon it, and give judgment. Moreover, as the adulterer sins against
his soul, so also he sins against his body, after a special manner, 1
Cor 6.13.
as witnesses the Apostle. Also he sins against his goods and outward
estate, as the holy man Job testifies, saying, Job 5^.12.
Adultery is a fire that devoureth to destruction, and it will root out all
our increase. Furthermore, he sins against his name, Prove. 6.33.
For the Adulterer shall find a wound, and dishonor: and his reproach shall
never be put away.

Item, he sins against his wife, who is his companion, M^^^ 14, and 15.
and the wife of his covenant: And God says in the same place: Let none
trespass against the wife of his youth: keep your selves in your spirit, and
transgress not. Last of all, he sins against his children and posterity,
as the Lord said to David, Because thou have despised me, 2 S^^. 12 1^
and done this, therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house. Behold,
I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. Now therefore, to
conclude this point, we may see how many deadly wounds men make themselves by
committing of adultery. They wound themselves in their souls: they wound
themselves in their bodies: they wound themselves in their goods: they wound
themselves in their names: they wound themselves in their wives, and in their
children. What man, except he were stark mad, would thrust in himself in so
many places at once? The Adulterer, with his one sin of adultery, makes all
these deadly wounds in himself: and it is an hundred to one he will never get
them cured, but will die, and bleed to death of them. Lo, thus you see the
dangerous quality and condition of this sin. Shall we now therefore make light
of it? Shall we say, It is but a trick of youth? Shall we smooth over the
matter with sweet words, when the holy Ghost makes it so heinous and capital?
Shall we make nothing of that which draws down Gods wrath upon the soul,
body, goods, name, wife and children? That were an intolerable blindness, and
most extreme hardness of heart. An ancient Writer has long ago passed
sentence upon us, Basil in Epist.
who make so light of this sin: for (says he) Adultery is the very hook of
the Devil, whereby he draws us to destruction. And another godly Father
says, Gregor.
that adultery is like a furnace, whose mouth is gluttony, the flame pride, the
sparkles filthy words, the smoke an ill name, the ashes poverty, and the end
shame. And so we plainly see, that howsoever we regard not this sin, but
flatter our selves in it, yet those whose eyes the Lord has opened, have in
all ages condemned it as most flagitious and horrible: yea, the very Heathen
will rise up in judgment against us, who have spoken and written many things
against this filthy and beastly vice.


Phil. Now indeed you have sufficiently branded the vice of adultery, and laid
out the ugliness thereof, that all men may behold it stark naked, and abhor
it. If any man (notwithstanding all this) will venture upon it, he may be said
to be a most desperate monster. For what does he else, but (as it were) put
his finger into the Lions mouth, and (as it were) take the Bear by the tooth?
and they may well know what will follow, and what they may look for. Let all
men therefore in time take heed to themselves, and to their own souls, as they
will answer it at their uttermost peril at the dreadful day of judgment,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. But now one thing rests;
to wit, that you should show us the special roots and causes of adultery.


Theol. There be five special causes of it: The first is our natural
corruption: for the very spawne and seed of all sin is our corrupt nature:
and this, of all other, is a most inherent sin, as witnesses the Apostle
James, saying, James 1.15.
When lust has conc^ived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is
perfected brings forth death.

The second is gluttony, and fullness of bread: for when men have filled their
bellies, and crammed their paunches as full of good cheer, wine, and strong
drink, as their skins can hold; what are they meet for, or what mind they
else, but adultery and uncleanness? And therefore well says one, Great
nourishment and gross food is the shop of lust. The Heathen Poet could skill
to say, Sine Cerere and Baccho s^ige^ Venus, without meat and drink lust
waxes cold. And to this effect the wise King says, Prove 23 ^. and 35
that their eyes shall behold strange women, whose hearts are set upon wine and
belly cheer. And therefore he advises all men, not to look upon the wine
when it appears red, when it shows his color in the cup, or stirs very
kindly: and that for fear of this after-clap. An ancient writer says to the
same purpose: Gregori^s N^^^an^.
He that delicately pampereth his belly, and yet would overcome the spirit of
fornication, is like to him that will quench a flame of fire with oil.

Therefore to close up this point, sure it is, though men pray, hear, and read
much, and be otherwise well disposed: yet except they be abstemious in diet,
they will be much troubled with lust.

The third cause of adultery is Idleness: for when men are lazy, luskish, and
idle, having nothing to do, they lie wide open to adultery; and lust creeps
into them. Some Historiographers write, the Crab-fish is very desirous to eat
Oysters: but because she cannot perforce open them, she watches her time
when they open themselves unto the sun after the tide, and then she putreth in
her claw, and pulls out the Oyster: Even so Satan watches his opportunity
against us, that he may infect and breathe into us all filthy lusts, and
adulterous desires, when we lie open unto him by idleness. Wisely therefore
to this point says the Greek Poet: Hesiodus.
Much rest nourishes lust. And another Poet says: Quaeritur Aegystus quare
sit factus adulter:
In promptu causa est; d^sidiosus erat.


Slothful laziness is the cause of adultery: And therefore another says,
Eschew idleness, Our (...).
and cut the very sinews of lust.

The fourth cause of Adultery, is wanton apparel: which is a minstrellesse,
that pipes up a dance unto whoredom. But of this enough before.

The fifth and last cause of adultery, is the hope of impunity, or escaping of
punishment. For many being blinded and hardened by Satan, think they shall
never be called to any account for it: and because they can blear the eyes of
men, and carry this sin so closely under a cloud, that it shall never come to
light, they think all is safe, and that God sees them not. And therefore Job
says, Job 24.15.
The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, and says, No eye shall
see me. And in another place, Job 23.13.
How shall God know? Can he judge through the dark cloud? But verily, versly,
though the adulterer do never so closely and cunningly convey his sin under a
canopy, yet the time will come, when it shall be disclosed to his eternal
shame. For God will bring every work to judgment, Eccl. 12.24.
with every secret thought, whether it be good or evil. Psalm. 9^.
For he has set our most secret sins in the sight of his countenance. 1
Cor. 4.
And he will lighten the things that are hid in darkness, and make the
counsels of the heart manifest. For this cause Job says, Job 10.
When I sin thou watchest me, and wilt not purge me from my sin.


Phil. Now you have showed us the causes of adultery, I pray you show us the
remedies.


Theol. There be six remedies for adultery, which no doubt will greatly
prevail, if they b^ well practiced.


Phil. Which be they? Six remedies of adultery.



Theol. Labor. Abstinence. Temperance. Prayer. Restraint of our senses.
Shunning of women's company, and all occasions whatsoever.



Phil. Well Sir, now you have waded deep enough in the second sign of
damnation: I pray you let us proceed to the third, which is Covetousness. And
as you have laid naked the two former, so I pray you, strip this stark naked
also, that all men may see what an ugly monster it is, and therefore hate it
and abhor it.


Theol. I would willingly satisfy your mind: but in this point I shall never
do it sufficiently. For no heart can conceive, nor tongue sufficiently utter
the loathsomenesse of this vice. For covetousness is the foulest fiend, and
blackest Devil of all the rest. It is even great Beelzebub himself. Therefore
I shall never be able fully to describe it unto you: but I will do what I can
to sttip and whip it stark naked. And howsoever the men of this earth and blind
worldlings take it to be most sweet, beautiful, and amiable, and therefore
do embrace it, entertain it, and welcome it, as though there were some
happiness in it: yet, I hope, when I have showed them the face thereof in a
glass (even the true glass of Gods Word) they will be noe more in such love,
but quite o^t of conceit with it. I will therefore hold out this glass unto
them.

St. Paul to Timothy brandeth this st^ne in the forehead, and boareth it in the
ears, that all men may know it, and avoid it, 1 T^^. ^.1^
when he says, Covetousness is the root of all evil. Our Lord Jesus also
gives us a watchword to take heed of it, saying, Take heed and beware of
covetousness. (...) 12.15.
As if he should say, Touth it not, come not near it, it is the very breath
of the Devil, it is present death, and the very rats^bane of the soul. The
Apostle lays out the great danger of this sin, and does exceedingly grind
the face of it, ^^il. 5 19.
when he says, That the end of all such as mind earthly things is damnation.
Let all carnal worldlings, and muckish minded men lay this to heart, and
consider well of it, lest they say one day, Had I wist.


Phil. Good Sir, lay open unto us the true nature of covetousness, and what it
is, that we may more perfectly discern it.


Theol. Covetousness is an immoderate desire of having.


Phil. I hope you do not think frugality thriftinesse, and good husbandry to be
covetousness.


Theol. Nothing less: For they be things commanded; being done in the fear of
God, and with a good conscience.


Phil. Do you not think it lawful also for men to do their worldly
business, and to use faithfulness and diligence in their callings, that they
may p^ovide for themselves and their families?


Theol. Yes, no doubt. And the rather, if they do these things with calling
upon God for a blessing upon the works of their hands, and use preyer and
thanksgiving before and after their labor, taking heed all the day long of the
common corruptions of the world: as swearing, cursing, lying, dissembling,
deceiving, greedy getting, etc.


Phil. Wherein I pray you, does covetousness especially consist?


Theol. In the greedy desire of the mind. For we may lawfully do the works of
our calling, and play the good husbands and good huswives: but we must take
heed that distrustfullnesse, and inward greediness of the world do not catch
our hearts. For then we are set on fire, and utterly undone.


Phil. Since covetousness is especially of the heart, how may we know certainly
when the heart is infected?


Theol. There be four special signs of the hearts infection.


Phil. Which be they?


Theol. The first is an eager and sharp set desire of getting. Therefore the
holy Ghost says, P^o^. ^8.
He that hastes to be rich shall not be unpunished. P^o. 20.2.
And again, An heritage is hastily gotten at the beginning: but the end
thereof shall not be blessed. De^^st^^nes in Olinth. 2.
The heathen man also says, No man can be both justly and hastily rich.

The second is a pinching and niggardly keeping of our own: that is, when men
(being able to give) will hardly part with any thing, though it be to never so
holy and good use. And when at last, with much ado, for shame they give
something, it comes heavily from them (God wot) and scantly.

The third is the neglect of holy duties: that is, when men's minds are so
taken up with the love of earthly things, that they begin to slack and cool in
matters of Gods worship.

The fourth and last is a trusting in riches, and staying upon them, as though
our lives were maintained by them, or did consist only in them: which thing our
Lord Jesus flatly denies, saying, Though a man have abundance, Luke 12.15.
yet his life consists not in the things that he has.

These then are four evident signs and tokens whereby we may certainly
discern, that men's hearts and entralls are infected with covetousness.


Phil. You have very well satisfied us in this point. Now let us understand the
original causes of covetousness.


Theol. There be two special causes of covetousness: Two caus^s of
cove^ousness^.
The one is the ignorance and distrust of Gods providence.

The other is the want of tasting, and feeling of heavenly things. For till men
taste better things, they will make much of these: till they feel heaven, they
will love earth: till they be religious they will be covetous. Therefore the
cause is soon espied, why men are so sharp set upon these outward things, and
do so admire riches, worldly pomp pleasures and treasures: Because they know no
better, they never had taste nor feeling of those things which are eternal.


Phil. Now as you have showed us the causes of covetousness, so let us also
hear of the effects.


Theol. If I once enter into this, I shall be entangled, and wound up in a
maze, where I know not how to get out again. For the evil effects of this
vice are so many, and so great, that I know not almost where to begin, or
where to end. Notwithstanding, I will enter into it get out how I can.


Phil. If you do but give us some taste of them, it shall suffice.


Theol. Then will I briefly dispatch things in order. And first of all, I
reason from the words of the Apostle before alleged, That if covetousness,
and the love of money be the root of all evil, then it is the root of
idolatry, the root of murder, the root of theft, the root of lying, the root
of swearing, the root of symony, the root of bribery, the root of usurie,
the root of lawing, the root of all contentions in the Church, and the root
of all brabbling and brawling in the Commonwealth. Moreover, it spreads
far and near, it dwells in every house, in every town, in every ^ttie: it
pryeth into every corner, it creeps into every heart: it annoyeth our
Physicians, it infecteth our Divines, it choaketh our Lawyers, it wounds our
Farmers, it baneth our Gentlemen, it murthereth our Tradesmen, it bewitcheth
our Merchants, it stingeth our Mariners. O covetousnes, covetousness! It is
the poison of all things, the wound of Christianity, the bane of all goodness.
For covetousness marres all: it marreth all every where, in all places, in all
degrees, among all persons. It marreth marriages: for it coupleth young to old,
and old to young. It marreth hospitality, it marreth all good housekeeping, it
marreth almsdeeds, it marreth Religion, it marreth Professors, it marreth
Ministers, it marreth Magistrates, it marreth all things. And therefore, what
sin so grievous, what evil so odious, what vice so enormous as this? For this
cause it was prettily said of one, That all other vices are but factors to
covetousness, and serve for Porters to fetch and bring in her living. She
makes symony her drudge, bribery her drudge, usurie her drudge, deceit her
drudge, swearing her drudge, lying her drudge. O what a Devil incarnate is
this, that sets so many vices a work, and has so many factors and
underlings to serve her turn! Are they not in a pretty case, think you, that
are infected with this sin? Oh they are in a most miserable case. It had
been good they had never been borne. For being alive, they are dead: dead, I
mean, in their souls. For covetousnes is souls poison and souls bane.
Covetousness is the strongest poison to the soul that is. It is a confection
of all the Spiders, Toads, Snakes, Adders, Scorpions, Basilisks, and all other
the most venomous vermin of the whole world. If the devil can get us to take
down but one penny weight of it, it is enough, he desires no more, for
presently we fall down stark dead. Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ^.
They that will be rich (he means in all haste, by hook or by crook) fall
into temptations and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. For as covetousness is rank poison to
the soul: so the Apostle compares it to a deep gulf, wherein thousands are
drowned. And therefore he adds in the same place, But thou, O man of God,
fly these things. In which words he does most gravely advise all the Ministers
of the word of God to take heed of it. For as it is dangerous in all men: so is
it most dangerous and offensive in Preachers of the Gospel.


Phil. Indeed it must needs be granted, that covetousness is a very grievous
sin: yea, even a Monster with seven heads. Yet for all that, we see in this
our iron age, how many of all sorts are infected with it, and how few will give
any thing to any holy use. Most men now adays have nothing to spare for
Christ, nothing for his Gospel, nothing for his Church, nothing for the poor
children of God, and needy members of Christ. Christ is little beholden unto
them: for they will do nothing for him, no not so much as speak a good word
in his cause, or the cause of his poor saints. Every little thing with them is
too much for God and good men. For when they come to giving unto holy and
necessary uses, then they will stick at a penny, and grudge at a groat, and
every thing is too much: But to bestow upon themselves, nothing is too much.
Nothing is too much for lust, for pleasure, for back, belly, and building, for
cards and dice, for whores and harlots, for rioting and revelling, for tavernes
and brothel-houses. Hundreds and thousands are little enough, and too little
for their expenses this way. It is lamentable to consider, what masses of money
are spent and bestowed upon these things. But alas, alas, how heavy an account
are they to make in the day of the Lord, which so spend their lands, livings,
and revenues! I quake to think what shall become of them at last. It were well
for them, if they might be in no worse case then a Crocodile, or a Cur-dog.


Theol. It is most certain that you say: and we all have great cause to lament
it, and to take up the old complaint of the Prophet Jeremy, saying, From the
least of them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given unto
Covetousness: and from the Prophet even unto the Priests, they all deal
falsely. And another Prophet says, Mich. 3.22.
They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof
judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof prophecy for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not
tho Lord amongst us? No evil can come unto us But these holy Prophets, and men
of God do fully describe unto us the state of our time: wherein, though all be
corrupted, yet we bear our selves stoutly upon God, we presume of his favor,
because of our outward profession, and say in our hearts, No evil can come
unto us.


Asun. You say very true, Sir. The world was never so set upon covetousness,
and men were never so greedily given to the world, as now adays. And yet (in
truth) there is no cause why men should be so sharp-set upon this world. For
this world is but vanity: and all is but pels and trash. F^e on this muck.


Phil. Many such men as you are can skill to give good words, and say, Fie on
this world, all is but vanity: and yet for all that in your daily practice you
are never the less set upon the world, nor never the more seek after God. You
hear the word of God no whit the more, you read no whit the more, you pray
never the mo^e, which evidently shows, that all your fair speeches, and
protestations are naught else but hypocrisy and leasing. Your heart is not
with God, for all this. All is but words, there is no such feeling in the
heart. And therefore I may justly say to you, as God himself said to his
people, This people have said well all that they have said. Oh, D ut 5.28.
that there were an heart in them to fear me, and keep my commandments!


Theol. His words indeed are good, if his heart were according. For all things
considered, there is no cause why men should be so given to this world: for
they must leave it when they have done all that they can. As we say, To day a
man, to morrow none. And, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ^.
We brought nothing into this world: and it is certain, we shall carry
nothing out. We must all dye, we know not how soon: why therefore should men
set their hearts upon such uncertainties, and deceiveable things? for all
things in this world are more light then a feather, more brittle than glass,
more fleeting than a shadow, more vanishing than smoke, more unconstant than
the wind: Doubtless, says the Prophet David, man walks in a shadow, Psalm.
3^ 6.
and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who
shall gather them. I wonder therefore, that these moles and muckworms of this
earth should so mind these shadowish things, and so dote on them as they do.
If they were not altogether hardened and blinded by the Divel^, they would not
be so nearly knit to thee ^^od and the penny as they are; thinking, and always
imagining, that there is no happiness but in these things, which are but dung
and dross: and at last they will give us the slip, when we think our selves
most sure of them.

The wise King, who had the greatest experience of these things that ever man
had (for he enjoyed whatsoever this world could afford, upward and downward,
backward and forward) yet could he find nothing in them but vanity and
vexation of spirit. Moreover, he fl^t^y avoucheth, That all these things,
riches, wealth, honor, pleasures and treasures, will most notably deceive us
in the end, give us the sl^p, and be gone. For he compares riches and all the
glory of the world to an Eagle or Hawke, which a man holds upon his fist,
stroketh her, makes much of her, takes great delight and pleasure in her, and
says, he will not take ten pounds for her, yet all on the sudden she takes
her flight, and flies up into the air, and he never sees her more, nor she
him. The words of the holy Ghost are these, P^o^. 25.5.
Will thou cause thine eyes to fly after them (meaning riches)? Thou may:
but they will not be found. For they will make themselves wings like to the
Eagle, which slieth up to heaven. From thence we may learn, that though we
set our hearts neversomuch on any thing here below, yet at the last it shall
be taken from us, or we from it.

Therefore all worldly men do but weave the spiders web, and may fitly be
compared to the silly spider, who toyleth her self, and labors all the
week long to fluish up her web, that she may lodge her self in it as in her
own house and freehold. But, alas, at the weeks end, a maid, in a moment,
with one brush of a broom, dispossesseth her of her inheritance, which she had
purchased with great labor and much ado. Even so, when the men of this world
have with much care and travel purchased great lands and revenues, and
gathered all that they can: yet on the sudden death (with one stroke of his
^^refull dart) will make them give up the ghost: and then where are they? It
was prettily therefore said of a man in the light of nature, Seneca.
No man has ever lived so happily in this life, but in his life time many
things have befallen him, for the which he has wished rather to die than to
live. And assuredly, I think there was never any man lived any one day upon
the face of the earth, but some grief or other either did, or justly might
invade his mind ere night: either in the temptations of the World, the Flesh,
or the Devil; or in regard of soul, body, goods, or name: in regard of wife,
children, friends, or neighbors: in regard of dangers to Prince, Stay,
Church, or Commonwealth: in regard of casualties, and loss by water, by fire,
by sea, or by land. What a life therefore is this, that has not our good day
in it? Who would desire to dwell long in it? For it lies open every day to
manifold miseries, dangers, losses, casualties, reproaches, shame, infamy,
poverty, sickness, diseases, cholicks, ague^, toothache, headache, back-ache,
bone-ache, and a thousand calamities.


Phil. You have very well described unto us the vanity of this life, and that
no day is free from one sorrow or other, one grief or other: the which thing
our Lord Jesus ratifieth in the reason which he brings why men should not
distrustfully care for to morrow. For, says he, sufficient to the day is the
evil thereof: Or, as some read it, The day has enough with his own grief.
Wherein he does plainly show that every day has his sorrow, his evil, his
grief, and his thwart. But I pray you proceed further in this point.


Theol. This I say further: That when men have swinked and sweat, carked and
cared, mosled and turmosled, drudged and droiled, by night and by day, by sea
and by land, with much care and sorrow, much labor and grief, to rake
together the things of this life; yet at last all will away again, and we
must end where we began. For as Job said, Job. 1.
Naked we came into the world, and naked we must go out. For even as a
winde-mill beats it self, makes a great noise, whistleth and whisketh about
from day to day all the year long, yet at the years end stands still where
it begun, being not moved one foot backward or forward: so when men have
blustered and blown all that they can, and have even run themselves out of
breath, to scrape up the commodities of the earth, yet at last they must (spite
of their beards) end where they began; end with nothing as they began with
nothing: end with a winding sheet, as they began with swaddling clouts. For what
is become of the greatest Monarthes, Kings, Princes, Potentates, and
Magnificoes, that ever the World had? Where is Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes,
Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, Scipio and Hannibal? Where are the valiant Henry's,
and noble Edwards of England? Are they not all gone down to the house of
oblivion? Are they not all returned to their dust, and their thoughts perish?
Though they were as gods, yet have they dyed as men, and are fallen like others.

Who now cares for them? who talks of them? who fears them? who regards
them? do not beggars tread upon them? Yet while they lived, they were the lords
of the world; they were as terrible as lions, fearful to all men, full of
pomp and glory, dignity, and majesty. They ploughed up all things, they bare
all before them, and who but they? But now they have given up the ghost, Job
30.23.
and are (as Job says) gone down to the house appointed for all the living.
Their pomp is descended with them, and all their glory is buried in the ashes.
They are now covered under a clod, cast out into a vault, made companions to
toads, and the worms do eat them: and what is become of their souls, is most of
all to be feared.

Thus we see, how all flesh does but make a vain show for a while upon this
Theater of misery, fetches a compass about, and is presently gone. For, as
the Poet says, Serius aut citius sedem properamus ad unam: First or last we
must all to the grave.


As. You have made a very good speech, it does me good to hear it. I wonder,
all these things considered, that men should be so wholly given to this world
as they are. I think the Devil has bewitched them: for they shall carry
nothing with them when they die, but their good deeds and their ill.


Theol. The drudges and snudges of this world may very fitly be compared to a
Kings Sumpter-horse, which goes laden all the day long with as much gold and
treasure as he can bear, but at night his treasure is taken from him; he is
turned into a sorty dirty stable, and has nothing left him but his galled
back: Even so the rich Cormorants and Caterpillars of the earth, which here
have treasured and hoorded up great heaps of gold and silver (with the which
they travel laden through this world) shall in the end be stripped out of all,
let down into their grave, and have nothing left them but their galled
consciences, with the which they shall be tumbled down into the dungeon of
eternal darkness.


Phil. Wherein does the sting and strength of this world especially consist?


Theol. Even as the great strength of Samson lay in his hair, so the great
strength of the world lies in her two breasts; the one of pleasure, the other
of profit. For she, like a notable strumpet, by laying out of these her
breasts, does bewitch the sons of men, and allureth thousands to her lust. For
if she cannot win them with the one breast, yet she gains them with the
other: if not with pleasure, then with profit; if not with profit, then with
pleasure: He is an odd man of a thousand, that sucketh not of the one breast
or the other. But sure it is, which soever he sucketh he shall be poisoned.
For she gives none other milk but rank poison. The world therefore is like
to an alluring Jael, Judge. 4.^1.
which sits at her door to entice us to come in, and eat of the milk of
her pleasures: but when she has once got us in, she is ready (even while we
are eating) with her hammer and her nail, to pierce through our brains.


Phil. I see plainly, this world is a very strumpet, a strong bait, and a
snaring net, wherein thousands are taken. It is very bird-lime, which does so
belime our affections, that they cannot ascend upward. It is like the weights
of a clock, hanged upon our souls, which draw them down to the earth; it
naileth us fast down to the ground: it mortereth us into clay: it makes us
abominable unto God. For I remember God made a law, That whosoever goes with
his breast upon the ground, Levit. 11.
should be abominable unto us. How much more these carnal worldlings, which
are fast sodred to the earth!


Theol. The Apostle Saint James, seeing into the deep wickedness of this
world, and knowing right well how odious it makes us in the sight of God,
cries out against it, terming it adultery, and all worldings adulterers,
because they forsake Christ their true husband, and whorishly give their hearts
to this world. James 4.
O ye adulterers and adulteresses, says he, know ye not that the amity of
this world is the enmity of God? whosoever therefore will be made a friend to
this world, makes himself the enemy of God. And who dare stand forth and say,
I will be the enemy of God? who therefore dares be a worldling? for every
worldling is the enemy of God: what then will become of you, O ye wicked
worldlings?


Phil. It appears then plainly by the Scriptures, that the excessive love of
this world, and unsatiable desire of having, is a most dangerous thing: and men
do they know not what in seeking so greedily after it.


Theol. The Heathen man will ^ise up in judgment against us; for he says,
Sophocles.
Unsatiablenesse is the foulest evil among mortal men. But many of our
sea-gulfes and whirl-pools make no conscience of it. They think it is no sin,
they devour and swallow up all, and yet are never satisfied. They will have
all, and more then a l, and the Devil and all. The whole world cannot satisfy
their mind, but God must create new worlds to content them. These men are sick
of the golden dropsy: the more they have, the more they desire. The love of
money increases as money it self increases. But the Scripture says, He
that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver. Eccles. 5.9.
Oh therefore that we would strive earnestly to get out of this gulf of hell,
Apoc. 12.2.
and tread the Moon (that is, all worldly things) under our feet, as it is
spoken of the Church: and that we would set our affections on the things that
are above, and not on the things that are beneath: that we would fly an high
pitch, and soar al^ft as the Eagles, looking down at this world, and all
things in it, as at our feet, contemning it, and treading the very glory of it
under our feet, that it may never have more power over us!


Phil. O happy, and twice happy are they that can do so! and I beseech the
Almighty God to give us his holy Spirit, whereby we may be carried above this
world, into the mountains of spices. For, how happy a thing is it to have our
conversation in heaven! that is, to have an inward conversation with God, by
much prayer, reading, meditation, and heavenly affections. This indeed is to
climb up above the world, and to converse in the chambers of peace. O
therefore that we would seriously and thoroughly conceive and consider of this
world as it is! that we would well weigh the vanity of it, and the excellency
of that which is to com^; that so we might loath the one, and love the other;
despise the one, and embrace the other; love God more then ever we did, and
this world less! For what is this world but vanity of vanities?


Antil. You do exceedingly abase that which some make their god. You speak
contemptuously of that which most men have in greatest price and admiration.
You disgrace that which multitudes would grace. You make light of that which
numbers make greatest account of. Let us therefore hear your reasons. Show us
more fully what it is; describe it unto us.


Theol. The world is a sea of glass, a pageant of fond delights, a theater of
vanity, a labyrinth of error, a gulf of grief, a stye of filthiness, a vale
of misery, a spectacle of woe, a river of tears, a stage of deceit, a cage
full of Owls, a den of Scorpions, a wilderness of Wolves, a cabin of Bears,
a whirle-winde of passions, a fained Comedy, a delectable frenzy, where is
false delight, assured grief, certain sorrow, uncertain pleasure, lasting
woe, fickle wealth, long heaviness, short joy.


Phil. Now you have indeed described it to the full, and laid it out (as it
were) in orient colors. And a man would think he were bewitched, or stark mad,
which hereafter should set his mind on it. But yet I am desirous to hear a
little more of that which I asked you before: wherein the strength and poison
of the world does especially consist.


Theol. In this lies a great strength of the world, that it draws down the
stars of heaven, and makes them fall to the earth, as it is said of the
Dragons tail, Rev. 12.
which is ambition, covetousness, and the love of this world. For we may
wonder and lament, to see how the love of these things has wounded and
over-borne many excellent servants of God, both Preachers and Professors of
the Gospel: which thing does plainly argue the strength of it. For it is the
strongest, and the very last engine that Satan uses to impugn us withal,
when none other will prevail. For when no temptation could fasten upon Christ,
he brings forth this last weapon, which never fails, Matthew. 4.
All these things will I give thee; showing him the glory of the whole world.
So then, he (having experience of this, that it never fails) thought to have
overcome Christ himself with it. Here therefore lies the very sting and
strength of the world and the Devil. For whom has he not taken with, All
these things will I give thee? whom has he not wounded? whom has he not
deceived? whom has he not overthrown? With this he enticed Balaam: with
this he beguiled Achan: with this he overthrew Judas: with this he bewitched
Demas: with this in these our days he deceives many of excellent gifts. For
assuredly he is a Phoenix amongst men, which is not overcome with this. He is
a wonderment of the world that is not moved with money.


Phil. I am now fully satisfied for this matter. But one thing comes often
into my mind; to wit, that these miserable worldlings can have no sound comfort
in their pleasures and profits, because they have no comfort in God, nor peace
in their own consciences.


Theol. You say very true. It is impossible that men, loving this world, should
have any sound comfort in God. For no man can serve two masters, both God and
riches. Their case therefore is very dangerous and fearful, though they never
see it, nor feel it: as I will show you by a plain example. Put case one of
these great rich worldlings should be clothed in velvet and cloth of gold in
most stately manner, and also should be set at his table, furnished with all
the dainties of the world, should be attended and waited upon by many in most
lordly and po^pous manner, should sit in his goodly dining chamber, all
glittering like gold, should have his first, second, and third service served
in with minstrels and instruments of music in most royal sort, he sitting in
his chair like a King in his throne: yet for all this, if a dagger should be
held to his heart all this while, ready to stab him; what pleasure, what joy,
what comfort could he have in all the rest? Even so, whatsoever pomp and
pleasures wicked worldlings have here below, yet their guilty and hellish
conscience is as it were a dagger held always hard to their heart, so as they
can have no found comfort in any thing. Or let me give it you thus: Put case a
man has committed high treason, and were therefore apprehended, arraigned, and
condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; what then can comfort a man in
this case? can mirth, can music, can gold, can silver, can lands, can livings?
No, no, none of all these can help him, or give him any comfort: For the
continual thoughts of death do so gripe him at the heart, that none of all
these can do him any good, or any whit mitigate his grief. What then is the
thing that can comfort him in this case? Only a pardon sealed with the Kings
broad seal, and subscribed with his own hand. For as soon as he has got
this, his heavy heart reviveth, and lea^eth for joy. This then assuredly is
the very case of all profane Atheists and worldlings, who are not assured of
the King of heaven his pardon for their sin: and then, what joy can they have
either in their meat, drink, goods, cattle, wives, children, lands, revenues,
or any thing whatsoever? For the dreadful thoughts of hell do estsoones
cross them inwardly, and quite damp and dash all their mirth. Their own
consciences will not be stilled; but in most terrible manner rise up and give
evidence against them, telling them flatly, they shall be damned, how merry
and jocond soever they seem to be in this world, setting a good face on the
matter. For sure it is, that inwardly they have many a cold pull, and many
heart-gripes. And all their mirth and jollity is but a giggling from the teeth
outward: they can have no sound comfor^ within. And therefore the wi^e King
says, Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful: Prove. 14.12.
and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Job 27.20.
Likewise says the holy man Job, Terrors of conscience come upon the wicked
man like waters: in the night a whirlwind carries him away secretly. Eliphas
the Temanite avouched the same point, Job 15.20.
saying, The wicked man is continually as one that travelleth of child, a
sound of fear is in his ears, etc. Thus then we see, that howsoever many
carnal Atheists, and ungodly persons seem outwardly to float aloft in all
mirth and jollity, bearing it out (as we say) at the breast: yet inwardly are
they pinched with terrors, and most horrible convulsions of conscience.


Antil. You have spoken many things very sharply against covetousness: but in
my mind, so long as a man covets nothing but his own, he cannot be said to be
covetous.


Theol. Yes that he may. For not only is he covetous, which greedily desires
other men's goods; but even he also which over-niggardly and pinchingly holds
fast his own, and is such a miser, that he will part with nothing. We see
the world is full of such pinch-pennies, that will let nothing go, except it
be wrung from them perforce, as a key out of Hercules hand.

The gripple muck-rabers had as leeve part with their blood as their goods.
They will pinch their own backs and bellies, to get their god into their
chests. And when they have once got him there, will they easily part with him,
trow ye? No, no: a man will part with his god for no man's pleasure. He will
eat peasebread, and drink small drink, rather then he will diminish his god.
Therefore the Scripture says, Prove. 31.^.
Eat not the meat of him that has an evil eye: and desire not his dainty
dishes. For as he grudgeth his own soul, so will he say unto thee; Eat and
drink, when his heart is not with thee. Thou shall vomit thy morsels which thou
have eaten, and lose thy pleasant speeches. The old saying is, The covetous man
wants as well that which he has, as that which he has not; because he has
no use of that which he has. So then you see, there is a great strength of
covetousness in the niggardly keeping of our own.


Antil. Yet for all this, men must follow their worldy business, and lay up to
live. For it is an hard world, and goods are not easy to come by. Therefore
men must ply their business, or else they may go beg and starve.


Theol. I deny not, but that you may follow the works of your calling
diligently, so it be in the fear of God, and with a good conscience, as I told
you before: but this greediness and gripplenesse God does condemn, and also
this excessive love of money.


Antil. Believe me, I know no body that hates it: I cannot see but that all
men love gold and silver.


Theol. It is one thing to use these things: and another thing to love them,
and set our hearts upon thens. For the Scripture says, 1 John 2.
If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. Saint John also says, Love
not this world, nor the things that are in this world. He says not, Use not
this world; but, Love not this world: For use it we may: love it we may not.
1 Cor. 7.
Therefore the Apostle says, that, They which use this world should be as
though they used it not. Where he allows a sober and moderate use of the
things of this life in the fear of God. We must use this world for necessities
sake, as we use meat and drink, taking no more of this world then needs must,
for fear of surfeiting. The holy Ghost says, Heb. 13.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with things
present. Happy is that man therefore that is well content with his present
estate whatsoever, and carries himself moderately and comfortably therein.
For the Spirit says, Eccl. 2.24.
There is no profit to a man under the Sun, but that he eat and drink, and
delight his soul with the profit of his labors. I saw also this, that this is
the hand of God. In which words the prudent King says thus much in effect:
That this is all the good we can attain unto in this world, even to take a
sober and comfortable ^s^ of the things of this life, which God bestows upon
us. And further he avoucheth; Eccl. 18.19.
That thus to use them aright, and with sound comfort is a very rare gift of
God. For, as one says, Greg. N 1.
He is a wise man that is not grieved for the things which he has not; but
does rejoice in the things that he has, using them to Gods glory and his own
comfort. So then I conclude this point, and return to you an answer, thus: That
we may, in sober and godly manner, use gold, silver, and the things of this
life: but at no hand to overlove them, or give our hearts unto them.


Antil. Well: Yet for all this I cannot see, but that these Preachers and
Professors, these learned men and precise fellows, are even as eager of the
world, and as covetous as any other.


Theol. Now you show your venomous spirit against better men then your self.
And I have a fourfold answer for you. First, I answer, that although godly
men may be somewhat overtaken this way, and over-spirt a little, yet they break
not out so grossly as others. Secondly, if God leave them sometimes to be
overcome of the world, yet he, in his great wisdom and mercy, turns it to
their good. For thereby he first humbles them, and afterward raises them up
again. Romans 8.
And so all things work together for good to them that love God. Thirdly, I
answer, we must live by rules, and not by examples. For even the best of Gods
people have had their wants and weaknesses. Therefore we may not frame rules
to live by out of the infirmi ies of the most excellent servants of God. Wicked
therefore and impious is their allegation, who allege David's adultery, Lots
drunkenness, Peter's fall, Abraham's slips, Solomon's weakness, etc. for a
shelter and defense of themselves in the like sins. Lastly, I answer, that you
greatly wound your self in your own speech: so far off are you from mending
your market any whit thereby. For if Preachers and other godly men (after many
prayers, tears, and much means used, cannot escape scot-free, but sometimes
are wounded, and almost overthrown by the world and the Devil; what then
shall become of you, which use no means at all, nor any gain-striving, but
willingly give place to the Devil? If the Devil did over-master David, Lot,
Samson, Solomon, and other such excellent worthies; alas, what shall become of
mere worldlings and Atheists? If the most valiant men, and chief Captains in
a battle go down, what shall become of the faint-hearted soldiers? And as
S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous scarce be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?
So then I take you at the rebound, and return your own weapon upon your
self; That since godly men cannot escape through this world without blows,
what shall become of them that know not what godliness means?


Antil. Yet I say once again, that men must live, men must lay up for this
world: we cannot live by the Scriptures. And as for that which you call
covetousness, it is but good husbandry.


Theol. I thought we should have it at last. Now you have paid it home: you
are come to the old byas, and as a Hare to her old fourm, and he old covert.
For this is the very covert and thicket of the world, wherein they would hide
covetousness: but I will do what I can to hunt you out of it by the
Scriptures.

Prove. 11.14.
First, Solomon says, He that spares more then is right, shall surely come to
poverty. So then you see, that covetousness brings poverty. Thus therefore I
reason: That which brings poverty is no good husbandry: but covetousness and
too much sparing brings poverty; therefore it is no good husbandry. The same
Solomon says, He that is given to gain, troubles his own house. That is,
the covetous man is an occasion of many evils in his estate and family. From
Scripture I do thus reason: That which troubles a man's house is no good
husbandry: but covetousness troubles a man's house; therefore it is no good
husbandry. Last of all, the old Proverb says. Covetousness brings nothing
home: And therefore it is no good husbandry. For oftentimes we see, that men
for covetousness of more, lose that which otherwise they might have had. One
of the wise Heathen says, Hesiodus.
Evil gain is as bad as loss. But the covetous man does seek after wicked
gain, and therefore seeks loss; and consequently is no good husband.
Another says, Phocilides.
Unjust gain brings forth loss and misery. And therefore it is far enough
off from virtue and all good husbandry. Thus then, I hope, you are so hunted
both by God and men, that this covert cannot hide you. And therefore you must
out of it, and seek some other shelter: for this will not serve your turn.


Phil. Now I must needs say, you have fully stopped his mouth, and thoroughly
ferreted him out of his deep burrow. And it is most certain that you say, that
the wise Heathen has condemned covetousness and all unjust gains; which we
both practice and defend: and therefore shall they rise up in judgment against
us. But now let us leave this caviller, and proceed in our matters. There is
one thing yet remaining, wherein I desire to be satisfied.


Theol. What is that?


Phil. I would gladly know which be the special remedies against
covetousness.


Theol. There be two special remedies against covetousness: to wit,
contentation, and the meditation of Gods providence.


Phil. Let us hear somewhat of contentation out of the Scriptures.


Theol. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 7.9.
Having food and raiment, we must be therewith content. 1 Timothy 7.9.
For we brought nothing into this world: and it is certain we shall carry
nothing out. The Spirit also says, Heb. 12.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with your
present estate. Again, the Apostle says, Phil. 4.
He had learned in what estate soever he was, therewith to be content. Note
that he says, He had learned: for he had it not of himself. For
contentation is the singular gift of God: Prove. 13 25.
as it is written, The righteous eats to the contentation of his soul,
Cyril. in Joan. 12.
but the belly of the wicked shall want. An ancient Father says, We ought to
accustom our selves to live of a little, and to be content; that we may do
no wicked or filthy thing for lucres sake. Chrysostom. hom. 51.
Another says, He is not poor that has nothing, but he that desires much.
Neither is he rich that has much, but he that wants nothing: for
contentation never wants. There is no grief in lacking, but where there is
immoderate desire of having. If woe will live after nature, we shall never be
poor: if after our own appetite, we shall never be rich. Well therefore said
the Poet, Euripides.
Wax not rich unjustly, but justly: Be content with thine own things: abstain
from other m^ns. Thus then we see, that both God himself (the fountain of
all wisdom) and men also, both in the state of nature and grace, do all
jointly advise us to strive for contentation: and then we shall have a
sovereign remedy against Covetousness.


Phil. Let us hear somewhat of the second remedy against Covetousness.


Theol. An earnest thinking upon the providence of God is a present remedy
against the most foolish and pining carfulness of men for this life. For if
we would seriously weigh, and deeply consider the provident care that God has
had for his children in all ages, touching food and raiment, and how strangely
he has provided for them; it might suffice to correct this evil in us, and
minister unto us a notable preservative against Covetousness.

We read how wonderfully the Lord did provide for his Prophet Elijah, in the
time of the great dearth and drought that was in Israel. 1 King. 17.
Did not the Lord command the Ravens to feed him by the River Cherith? Did not
the Ravens bring him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the
evening, and he drank of the River?

What should I speak how miraculously God provided for Hagar and her infant,
Genesis 12.25.
when they were both cast out of Abraham's house, and brought to great
extremity; even both of them ready to give up the Ghost for want of food.

Did not God help at a pinch, as his manner has always been? Exodus 15.5.
Did he not send his Angel unto them, and both comfort them, and provide for
them? What should I speak how strangely God provided for his Church in the
wilderness? Did he not feed them with Manna from heaven, Exodus 17.6.
Psalm. 78.
and gave them water to drink out of the rock? Has not our heavenly Father
made many royal and large promises, that he will provide necessaries for his
children? Shall we not think that he will be as good as his word? Psalm. 34.1.
Does he not say, The lions lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek him
shall want nothing that is good? Psalm. 84.11.
Does he not say, Fear him all ye his Saints, for nothing is wanting to them
that fear him? Does he not say, No good thing shall be withheld from them
that walk uprightly? Does he not say, Matthew. 6.33.
Our heavenly Father knows that we have need of these things, and that all
these things shall be cast upon us, if we earnestly seek his kingdom? 1
Pet. 5.7.
Did he not bid us, Cast all our care upon him, for he cares for us? Luke 1^.
Does he not bid us, Take no thought what we shall eat, or what we shall
drink, or wherewith we shall be clothed? Meaning thereby, no distracting or
distrustful thoughts. Does he not say, Heb. 13.5.
He will not leave us, nor forsake us? Does he not say, The Lord is at hand,
Phil. 4.5.
in nothing be careful? Are not these large promises suffi^ient ^o stay up our
faith in Gods providence? shall we think God jesteth with us? shall we think
he means no such matter? shall we imagine he will not keep touch? Oh, it
were blasphemy once to think it. For God is true, and all men liars. He is
faithful that has promised. His word is more then the faith of a Prince; more
then ten thousand obligations. Why then do we not rest upon it? why go we
any further? why do we not take his word? why do we not depend wholly upon
him? why are we still covetous? why are we still distrustful? why do we
dissemble and deceive? Oh we of little faith! Our Lord Jesus knowing right
well the distrustfulnesse of our nature, and the deep root it has in us, is
not only content to make these great and royal promises unto us, which were
enough, but also strengthens and backeth us with many strong reasons, to
support our weakness in this behalf. He therefore brings us back to a due
consideration of things. Consider (says he) the Ravens: Luke 12.
consider the fowls of the heavens: for they neither sow not reap, nor carry
into barnes, and yet God feeds them; they want nothing. Consider the lillies,
how they grow; they neither labor, nor spinne; yet Solomon in all his royalty
was not clothed like one of these. Oh therefore that we would consider these
Considers! Oh that we would consider, that our life is more worth then meat,
and our bodies then raiment! Oh that we would consider, that with all our
carking and caring we can do no good at all, no not so much as add one cubite
to our stature! Truly, truly, if we would deeply ponder these reasons of our
Savior, and apply them to our selves, they might serve for a bulwark and sure
defense against covetousness. If men would consider, how that great King of
heaven (who has his way in the whirlwind, Nahum 1.3.
and the clouds are the dust of his feet) cares for the little Wren and silly
Sparrow, how he looks to them, how he tendreth them, how he provideth for
them every day both breakfast, dinner, and supper: it might serve to correct
our distrustfulnesse. For who ever saw these, or any other foul starve for
hunger? so good a Father, and so good a Nurse have they. And are not we much
better then they? Has not God more care of us, then of them? Yes verily, a
thousand times. For he loves them but for our sakes: how much more then does
he love our selves? Therefore I say again, and again, If we would consider
these things, and lay them to heart, they would nip covetousness on the head,
and drive it quite out of our hearts. Let us consider therefore, that God
provided for man before man was: then how much more will he provide for man
now that he is? Is he our Father, and will he not provide for us? Is he our
King, and will he not regard us? Is he our shepherd, and will he not look to
us? Has he provided heaven for us, and will he not give us earth? Has he
given us his Son Christ, and shall he not with him give us all things? Does
he provide for his enemies, and will he not provide for his friends? Does he
provide for whoremongers, and will he neglect his chosen? Does he send his
rain, and cause the sun to shine upon the unjust, and shall he not upon the
just? Does he provide for them which are not of the family, and will he not
provide for his own family? Will a man feed his hogs, and not care for his
servants? Or will he care for his servants, and not regard his own children?
Oh, then let us consider these reasons: let us remember, that our heavenly
Father has as great care for the preservation of his creatures, as once he
had for their creation. Let us therefore remember, that he which gives the
day, will provide for us the things of the day. Let us remember, that God
always gives for sustentation, though not for satiety. Let us remember, P^^v.
10.28.
that God will not famish the souls of the righteous. Let us remember how God
never fails his. For who ever trusted in the Lord, and was confounded?


Phil. What then is the cause that many do want these outward things?


Theol. The cause is in themselves, because they want faith. For if we had
faith, we could want nothing; For faith fears no famine, as says an ancient
Father. Hieron ad Heliodorum. Cypr. in oratione Dominica.
Another says, Forasmuch as all things are Gods, he that has God can want
nothing, if himself be not wanting unto God. Therefore to have God, is to
have all things: for if we have him our friend, we have enough, we need go no
further. For he will make men our friends: yea, he will make Angels and all
creatures to be serviceable unto us, he will give them special charge to
look to us, to guard us, and to do continual homage unto us. Therefore let
us make God our friend, and then have we done all at once, that may concern
our good both for this life and a better. But if he stand not our friend, if
we have not him on our side, if he back us not, then all other things
whatsoever can do us no good: All is not worth a button: For, August.
Quid prodest si omnia habes, cum tamen qui omnia dedit non habeas? What is a
man the better, though he have all things, and be without him which is the
author of all things.


Phil. Herein you speak very truly, no doubt. For we see many have great plenty
of outward things: but because they have not God, they can have no true comfort
in them, or blessing with them.


Theol. True indeed: For, Matthew. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, (says our Lord Jesus) but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. And again he^ says, L^ke 12.
Though a man have abundance, yet his life consists not in the things that
he has. For without Gods blessing there can be no sound comfort in any
thing. We see by daily expe^ience, how the Lord curses the wicked though they
have abundance. For some having abundance, yet are visited with continual
sicknesses. Some having abundance, pine away with consumptions. Others having
abundance, dye of surfeiting. Others are snatched away by untimely death, in
the midst of all their jollity. Others are visited with great loss both by sea
and by land. Others are vexed with cursed wives, and disobedient children. Some
again commit murders and treasons, and so lose all at once. Others are wasted
and consumed by the secret curse of God, no man knows how. Some having great
riches, are given over to the murderer, some to the thief, some to the
poysoner. Therefore the wise King says, There is an evil sickness under the
sun: riches reserved to the owners thereof for their evil, Eccl. 5.12.

Zophar also the Naamathite says, When the wicked shall have sufficient and
enough, Job 20.23.
he shall be brought into straits: The hand of every troublesome man shall be
upon him. When he shall fill his belly, God will send upon him his fierce
wrath; which he shall rain upon him in stead of his meat.

Thus then it is clear, that man's life and good estate depends not upon the
abundance of outward things, but only upon the blessing and providence of God.
Prove. 10.12.
For, his blessing only makes rich, and it does bring no sorrow with it.
Psalm. 37.16.
For, better is a little to the just, then great abundance to many of the
wicked. Prove. 25.26.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble
therewith. Better is a little with righteousness, Prove. 16.8.
then great revenues without equity.

Thus then I conclude this point: Man lives not by bread, but by a blessing on
bread: not by outward means, but by a blessing upon means. For how can bread,
being a dead thing, and having no life in it self, give life to others?


Phil. I do not well understand the meaning of these words, By every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.


Theol. Thereby is meant the decree, ordinance, and providence of God, which
upholdeth all things, even the whole order of nature.

For the Scripture says, He spoke, Psalm. 33.9.
and it was done: he commanded, and they were created. In which words we
plainly see, that God does but speak, and it is done; he does command, and
all creatures are preserved. For God does all things (...) a word. He created
all with his word: he preserves all with his word: he speaks, and it is
done. His words are words of power and authority. Whatsoever he says,
whatsoever he calls for, it must be done presently, without any delay: there
is no withstanding of him. He calls for famine, and behold famine. He
calls for plenty, and behold plenty. He calls for pestilence, and behold
pestilence. He calls for the sword, and behold the sword. All Angels, all
men, all beasts, all fishes, all fowls, all creatures whatsoever must obey him,
and be at his beck. He is the greatest commander his word commands heaven and
earth, and the sea. All creatures must be obedient to his will, and subject to
his ordinance.

This is the cause why all things, both in heaven, earth, and the sea, do keep
their immutable and unvariable courses, times and seasons, even because he
has charged them so to do. And they must of necessity always, at all times,
and for ever obey; for the creatures must obey the Creator. This ^ct of
Parliament was made the first week of the world, and never since was or can be
repealed.


Phil. But to call you back again to the point we had in hand: Resolve me, I
pray you, of this; whether many of the dear children of God do not, in this
life, sometimes want outward things, and are brought into great distress.


Theol. 1 King. 17.
Yes certainly. For Elijah did want, 2 C^r. ^.8. 2 Cor. 11.25
and was in distress. Paul did want, and was in many distresses. The holy
Christians mentioned in the Hebrews did want, Heb. 1^.3^.
and were in mavelous distresses. Many of Gods dear ones have in all ages
wanted, and at this day also do want, and are greatly distressed. But this is
a most infallible truth, that howsoever Gods children may want, and be low
brought, yet they are never utterly forsaken, but are helped even in greatest
extre^i^ie: yea, when all things are desperate, and brought even to the last
cast.

To this point most notably speaks the Apostle, saying, 1 Cor 4.8.
We are affl cted on every side, but yet we despair not: we are persecuted,
but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not. The Prophet Jeremie also
says, L^^. 3.
The Lord will not forsake for ever: but though he send affliction, yet will
he have compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies: For he does
not punish willingly, or from his heart, nor afflict the children of men. The
kingly Prophet says, Psalm. 94.4.
Surely the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance. The Lord himself says, For a moment in mine anger I hid my face
from thee: I^a. ^5.8.
but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee. So then we may
fully assure our selves, and even write of it (as a most undoubted and sealed
truth) that Gods children shall never be utterly forsaken in their troubles.


Phil. Since the care and providence of God is so great for his children, as you
have largely declared: what then, I pray you, is the cause why God suffers
his to be brought into so many troubles and necessities?


Theol. Their profit and benefit is the cause, and not their hurt. For he
loves them, when he smites them. He favors them, when he seems to be
most against them. He aims at their good, when he seems to be most angry
with them. He wounds them, that he may heal them. He presses them, that
he may ease them. He makes them cry, that afterward they may laugh. He
always means well unto them, he never means hurt. He is most constant in
his love toward them. If he bring them into necessities, it is but for the
trial of their faith, love, patience, and diligence in prayer.

If he cast them into the fire, it is not to consume them; but to purge and
refine them. If he bring them into great dangers, it is but to make them call
upon him more earnestly for help and deliverance.

He presses us, that we might cry: we cry, that we may be heard: we are
heard, that we might be delivered. So that here is no hurt done: we are worse
scared than hurt.

Even as a mother, when her child is way-ward, threateneth to throw it to the
Wolf, or scareth it with some poker, or bul-begger, to make it cling more unto
her, and be quiet: So the Lord oftentimes shows us the terrible faces of
troubles and dangers, to make us cleave and cling faster unto him, and also to
teach us to esteem better of his gifts when we enjoy them, and to be more
thankful for them; as health, wealth, peace, liberty, safety, etc. So then
still we see, here is nothing meant on Gods part but good: as it is written,
Romans 5.
All things work together for good to them that love God. For, Heb. 12 10.
Heb. 12.14.
even the afflictions of Gods children are so sanctified unto them by the
Spirit, 1 These. 1.6.
that thereby they are made partakers of the holiness of God. Gal. 6.14. Phil
3.10.
Thereby they enjoy the quiet fruit of righteousness. Thereby they attain
unto a greater measure of joy in the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 11.32
Thereby the world is crucified to them, and they to the world. Romans 5.3, 4.
Thereby they are made conformable to the death of Christ. Thereby they are
kept from the condemnation of the world. Thereby they learn experience,
patience, hope, etc. So that all things considered, Gods children are no losers
by their afflictions, but gainers. It is better for them to have them, than to
be without them: they are very good for them. For when Gods children are
chastised, it is as it should be. For to them the cross is mercy, and loss is
gain. Afflictions are their schooling, and their adversity their best
University.

It is good for me (says the holy man of God) that I have been afflicted,
Psalm. 118.
that I might learn thy statutes. By his afflictions therefore he learned
much, and became a good scholar in Gods book, and well seen in his statutes
and laws. He grew to great wisdom and judgment by his chastisements. All
things turned about in Gods merciful providence, to his everlasting comfort.
For I say again and again, That all things tend to the good of Gods chosen
people. And therefore that estate which God will have his children to be in, is
always best for them: because he who can best discern what is best, sees it
to be best for them: whether it be sickness or health, poverty or plenty,
prison or liberty, prosperity or adversity. For sometimes sickness is better
for us then health, and poverty then plenty. Are therefore the children of God
sick? It is best for them. Are they poor? It is best for them. Are they in any
trouble? It is best for them: because their good Father will turn it to the
best. He will oftentimes cut us short of our lusts and desires, because he
sees we will bane our selves with them. He in fatherly care will take the
knife from us, because he sees we will hurt our selves with it. He will
keep us short of health and wealth, because he knows we will be the worse
for them. He will not give us too much ease and prosperity in this world: for
he knows it will poison us. He will not allow us continual rest, like
standing ponds: for then he knows we will gather scum and filth. He
deals fatherly and mercifully with us in all things; even then seeking our
greatest good, when we think he does us most harm.

And to speak all in a word: he brings us into troubles and straits to this
end especially, that he may hear of us. For he right well knows our nature,
he is well acquainted with our disposition; he knows we will not come at
him, but when we stand in need of him: we care not for him, so long as all
goes well with us. But if we come into distress, or want any thing that we
feign would have, then he is sure to hear of us: as he says by the Prophet;
Hos. 3.15.
In their affliction they will seek me early.

And another Prophet says, Lord, Isa. 26.26.
in trouble have they visited thee: They poured out a prayer when thy
chastisement was upon them. So then now, I hope, you do plainly see the cause,
why the Lord brings his children into so many troubles and necessities.


Phil. I do see it indeed, and am very well satisfied in it. But yet let me
ask you one thing further: Are Gods children always sure to be delivered out
of their troubles?


Theol. Yes verily: and (out of doubt) so far forth as God sees good for
them. For it is written, Great are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.19.
but the Lord delivers him out of them all. Saint Peter says, ^ P^^^ 1 9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. As if he should
say, He is well beaten to it, and well seen and experienced in it, so as he
can do it easily, and without any trouble at all. It is said of Joseph, being
in prison, That when his appointed time was come, Phil. 105.1^. (...).
and the counsel of the Lord had tried him, the King sent and loosed him, the
Ruler of the people delivered him. And again the Scripture says, Psalm. 34.
The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear
him, and delivers them. And in another place, the Lord himself says,
concerning the righteous man, Psalm. 91.17.
Because he has loved me, therefore I will deliver him. I will exalt him,
because he has known my name. He shall call upon me in trouble, and I will
hear him. I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and glorify him.
Job 5.
So also says Eliphas the Temanite, He shall deliver thee in six troubles,
and in the seventh the evil shall not touch thee. Come, my people, says the
Lord, Isa. 25.22.
enter thou into my Chambers, and shut the doors after thee: hide thy self
for a very little while, until the indignation pass over. And the Prophet
says, Obad. 27.^^
Upon Mount Sion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy: and the house of
Jacob shall possess their hereditarie possessions. Almost innumerable places
of the Scriptures might be alleged to this purpose; but these may suffice.
Therefore let us know for a certainty, that so sure as trouble and affliction
are to the children of God; so sure also is deliverance out of the same. As we
may write of the one, and make reckoning of it, as sure as the coat on our
back; so may we also in Gods good time, write of the other, and make full
account of it, as sure as the Lord is true. Abraham was in trouble, but
delivered. Job in trouble, but delivered. David in great trouble, but
delivered. The three children in the furnace, but delivered. Daniel in the
Lions den, but delivered. Jonas in the Whales belly, but delivered. Paul in
innumerable troubles, but yet delivered out of all.


Phil. All this being true that you say, it follows, that Gods children are
chastised only for their good, and evermore sure of deliverance in his
appointed time. Which thing being so, me thinks there is no cause at all why
they should be over-heavie, or too much cast down in their afflictions.


Theol. Assuredly there is no cause at all, but rather cause why they should
rejoice, clap their hands, and sing, Care away. For can a father forsake his
children? a King his subjects? a master his servant? or a shepherd his sheep?
Does not Jehovah say, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee? Heb. 13.
Does not our heavenly Father know we have need of these things? Has not God
given us his word, that we shall not want outward things? Has he not said,
they shall be cast upon us? Why then should we be dismayed? Why should we
hang down our heads? Why do we not pluck up good hearts, and be of good
cheer? God is our dear Father: he is our best friend: he is our daily
Benefactor: or: he keeps us at his own cost and charges: he grudgeth us
nothing: he thinks nothing too much for us: he loves us most deadly: he is
most charie and tender over us: he cannot endure the wind should blow upon
us. he will have us want nothing that is good for us. If we will out gold, we
shall have it. He has given us his faithful promise, that as long as we
live, we shall never want Let us therefore rejoice and be merry. For heaven is
ours, earth is ours, God is ours, Christ is ours, All is ours: As the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 3.21.
All is yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The world clap their
hands, and crow long before it be day, saying. All is theirs: but the children
of God may say, and say truly, All is ours. For they have a true title, and
proper interest, through Christ, in all the creatures. Many are their
privileges, great are their prerogatives. They are free of heaven, and free of
earth. They are the only free Denizens of the world: Christ has purchased
them their freedom: Christ has made them free, and therefore they are free
indeed. They are free from sin, free from hell, free from damnation. They are
at peace with God, Men, and Angels. They are at peace with themselves. They are
at peace with all creatures. They are young Princes, Angels fellows, descended
of the highest house, of the blood royal of Heaven, States of Paradise, and
heirs apparent to the immortal Crown. Therefore God has commanded his
Angels to guard them, being such young Princes as they are: yea, he has given
a very strait charge to all his creatures to look to them, to see to them,
that they want nothing, that they take no hurt: so jealous, so chary, so tender
is he of them. Genesis 3.2. Jonah 2. 1 King. 17. Jos. 10.
The Angels must comfort Jacob. The Whale must rescue Jonas. The Raven must
feed Elias. The Sun and Moon must stay for Joshua. Exodus 14.
The Sea must divide it self, that Moses and his people may pass through. The
fire must not burn the three Children. The Lions may not devour Daniel. Dan.
3. and 6.
All the creatures must change their nature, rather then Gods children should
not be helped and delivered. Oh therefore how great is the happiness of Gods
chosen! Who can express it? who can utter it? They know not their own
happiness: it is hid from them. Afflictions do cloud it: troubles do
over-shadow it: crosses do dim it: and there is an interposition of the earth
betwixt their sight and it. But this is most certain and sure, that the best
is behind with the children of God: all the sweet is to come. Their happiness
does not appear in this world. 1 John ^.2^
Their life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ shall appear, then shall
they also appear with him in glory. It does not yet appear what they shall
be, but when he comes, they shall be made like unto him. Col. 3.3, 4.
Their names are already taken, and entered into the book of life: and one day
they shall be crowned. One day it shall be said unto them, Come ye blessed,
etc. One day they shall enjoy his presence, where is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and at whose right hand there is pleasure for evermore. Therefore let all Gods
secret ones rejoice, sing, and be merry. For howsoever in this world they be
contemned, trodden under the foot, made no-bodies, and walk as shadows; being
counted as the very rags of the earth, and the objects of the world: yet the
time will come, when their happiness and felicity shall be such as never
entered into the heart of man: it is endless, unspeakable, and unconceivable.


Phil. I do now plainly see, that there is no cause why Gods people should be
too heavy and dumpish in their afflictions. I see, that though they be not
free from all afflictions, yet are they free from all hurtful afflictions. For
no rod, no cross, no chastisement is hurtful unto them, but all, in the
conclusion, comes to a blessed issue.


Theol. You have uttered a great and a most certain truth. For there is no
affection or trial, which God imposes upon his children, but if they endure
it quietly, trust in his mercy firmly, and tarry his good pleasure obediently,
it has a blessed and a comfortable end. Therefore the people of God may well
be merry in the midst of their sorrows. They may with patience and comfort
submit themselves to their Fathers corrections, taking them patiently, and even
kissing his holy rod, and saying in themselves, Since my Father will have it so,
I am content; seeing it is his mind, I am willing withal. As old Eli said, It
is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what he will. And as David, in like submission, said in a certain
case, Behold, here am I: let him do to me as it seems good in his own
eyes. 2 Samuel 15.16
And again he says, I was dumb, Psalm. 29.
and opened not my mouth: because thou Lord have done it. Behold here then the
patience of Gods Saints, and their humble submission unto his most holy will.
They know all shall end well, and that makes them glad to think of it. I
conclude then, that the children of God are happy, in what state soever they
are: happy in trouble, Deuteronomy. 28.
happy out of trouble; happy in poverty, happy in plenty; blessed in
sickness, blessed in health; blessed at home likewise, and abroad; and every
way blessed. But on the contrary, the wicked are cursed, in what state soever
they are: cursed in sickness, cursed in health; cursed in plenty, cursed in
poverty; cursed in prosperity, cursed in adversity; cursed in honor, cursed in
dishonor. For all things work together for their destruction. Nothing does
them any good. They are not any thing the better, either for Gods mercies or
judgments. All weathers are alike unto them. They are always the same, in
prosperity and adversity: they are no changelings. And, as we say, A good year
does not mend them, nor an ill year pair them.


Phil. You have long insisted upon this point. Now proceed to the fourth sign
of a man's damnation, which is the contempt of the Gospel: and lay open both the
greatness of the sin, and the danger of it.


Theol. This sin is of another nature then the former. It is a sin against
the first Table. It touches the person of God himself. For to contemn the
Gospel, it is to contemn God himself, whose Gospel it is. If to contemn the
Ministers of the Gospel, he to condemn God and Christ (as our Lord Jesus
avoucheth) how much more then, Luke 10.10
to contemn the Gospel it self? Therefore it is dangerous meddling with this
sin. It is to meddle with edged tools, to meddle with Princes matters, to
touch the Ark, to come near the holy Mountain, which all were things full of
great peril and danger. Yea, it is to spill the Sacrament. It is Noli me
tangere. It is to rail at a King. It is to spet God in the face. It is high
treason against the King of glory. Therefore this sin, of all other, can
never be endured, and may at no hand be borne withal. For can a mortal King
endure the contempt of his laws? Can he put up the contempt of his own person?
Can he abide any to spet at his Scepter, or to throw a stone at it? No surely,
he will not. Therefore the holy Ghost says, He that despises Moses laws,
dies without mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment
suppose ye shall he be worthy, Heb. 20.28.
which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the
Testament as an unholy thing (wherewith he was sanctified, Heb. 2.5.
) and does despite the Spirit of Grace? And again, If they were punished which
obeyed not the word spoken by Angels; how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? Heb. 1^.
If they escaped not, which refused him that spoke on earth, how shall we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven? Therefore our
Savior Christ says, That it shall be easier for Sodom in the day of judgment,
Luke 10.12
than for the contemners of the Gospel.

Moreover he says, The Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment against
all froward despisers of his word. Mat. 12.
For she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of
Solomon: and behold a greater than Solomon is here. For Christ is greater than
Solomon; his doctrine and wisdom far more excellent. And therefore their
sin is the greater which contemn it. They shall never be able to answer it.
For the Spirit says, Prove. 13.13.
He that despises the word shall be destroyed. S. Peter also tells us, 1
Pet. 3.9.
that the old world, and men of the first age, are now in hellfire, because
they both despised, and were disobedient to the doctrine of Christ; 1 Pet. 5.10.
which (though not personally, yet in his divine Spirit) he spoke by Noah. So
then we see clearly, God will never take it at our hands, that his glorious
Gospel should be so universally and openly contemned as it is.


Phil. You have spoken most truly, and also showed it out of the Scriptures,
that the contempt of the Gospel is a most heinous sin: yet for all that, it
is most lamentable to consider, how little men esteem it, and how light they
make of it. Many regard it no more then an egge-shell, they think it not worth
a galley halfe-penny: they will not go to the door to hear it; they take it
to be a breath from us, and a sound to them, and so the matter is ended. They
esteem it but as a noise, or empty sound in the air; or as a voice a far
off, which a man understands not: they never felt the power of it in their
hearts. Therefore they prefer their sheep, their farms, their oxen, their
profits, their pleasures, yea every thing before it; they know it not to be
any such precious jewel, as it is. Although our Lord Jesus himself compare it
to a hid treasure, and a most precious pearl, yet these filthy swine of the
world tread it under feet: for they know not the price of it. Though Solomon
the wise, Prove. 3.
says, All the merchandise of gold and silver, pearl and precious stones, are
not to be compared to it: yet these beasts, these dogs and hogs of the world,
contemn it: They esteem a cow more then Christ's most glorious Gospel. They
are like Esops cock, which made more account of a barley corn, then all the
precious stones in the world: they are like little children, that esteem their
rattle more then a bag of gold; they are like the Gadarens, which esteemed
their hogs more then Christ and his Gospel: they make nothing of it: they
think it not worth the while. Many of them sit idle in the streets, even upon
the Sabbaths: while the Gospel is preached in their Churches, many are at cards
and tables in the Alehouses. Many on the Sabbath sleep upon their beds all the
Sermon while in the afternoon. Many will hear a Sermon in the forenoon, and
they take that to be as much as God can require at their hands, and that he is
somewhat beholden to them for it; but as for the afternoon, they will hear
none: then they will to bowls or tables. These men serve God in the forenoon,
and the devil in the afternoon. Some run after whores and harlots on the
Sabbath, some run to dancing and bear-baitings, some sit upon their stalls,
some sit in their shops, some by the fire side, some sit idle in the streets,
some go to the stole-ball, and others look on. O miserable wretches! O cursed
caitiffes! O monstrous hell hounds, which so grossly and openly contemn the
Gospel of Christ! What will become of them in the end? Assuredly their
damnation sleeps not. A thousand deaths wait for them: they lie open on all
sides to the wrath of God. And we may wonder at his mavelous patience, that
he does not throw down balls of wildefire from heaven, to consume and burn
up both them, their shops and houses, and even make them spectacles of his
vengeance, for so notorious contempt of such sacred, holy, and high things.


Theol. You have spoken very truly, zealously, and religiously; and I do
greatly commend you for it. And I must needs affirm the same things, for they
cannot be denied. And for mine own part, I think the Gospel was never so
openly contemned in any age (of a people living under the profession of it, and
under a godly and Christian Prince) as it is in this age. For howsoever some
make a show of religion, yet they have denied the power thereof. They turn the
grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4.
as St. Jude says. They make the Gospel a cloak for their sins. They receive
it, and embrace it, as it will best stand with their profits and pleasures,
their lusts and likings, their credits and policies, and not a jot further.
They will practice it at their leisure. Tit. 1.16.
These men profess they know God: but by their works they deny him, and are
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. This age is full of
such carnal Protestants.


Phil. This age indeed abounds with many hollow-hearted hypocrites,
dissemblers, and time-servers; which howsoever they make a face and bear a
countenance as though they loved the Gospel, yet their heart is not with it.
Their heart is with Atheism, their heart is with Popery; they have a Pope in
their belly: they be Church-papists. Howsoever now and then they come to the
Church, and hear a Sermon, and show a good countenance to the Preacher; yet
their heart goes after covetousness. The Lord complains of this by the
Prophet, saying; Ezekiel. 33.32.
This people will sit before thee, and hear thy words: but they will not do
them. For with their mouths they make jests: and their heart goes after
covetousness. God complains of this also by the Prophet Jeremie, saying;
Will you steal, murder, Jer. 7.9.
and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and stand before me in this house
whereupon my name is called, and say, We are delivered, though we have done
all these abominations? Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon my
name is called? Where we see how the Lord does chide his people, and sharply
reprove them for abusing of his temple, worship and sacrifices, making them a
cloak for their sins: and making his house a den of thieves, which should
be an assembly of Saints. Now all this is a lively description of our time,
wherein many use the exercises of the word, prayer, and sacraments, not to kill
and mortify sin, but to nourish and shelter their sins. For they blindly
imagine, that if they come to the Church and pray, and hear the Sermon, they
are discharged of their sins, though they leave them not. They imagine they
have given God his full due; and that therefore they may be the more bold to
sin afterward. These kind of hypocrites are like rogues, which use medicines
not to cure sores, but to make sores. These are like the Papists, which think
if they hear Mass in the morning, they may do what the list all the day
after.


Theol. I see now you have very well profited in the knowledge of God and true
Religion. You have spoken soundly, and like a man of knowledge in Gods matters.
For the common sort of people think indeed, that all Religion consists in
the outward service of God, though their hearts be far from him. To whom God
may justly say, Mat. 15.8.
This people draws near me with their lips, but their hearts are far from
me. Of whom also God may justly take up all his just complaints of his people
Israel and Judah, which are so frequent in all the Prophets: to wit, That he
did abhor their sacrifices, loath their oblations, Isa. 66.3.
detest their incense, despise their new moons, disdain their rains, lambs,
and goats; accounting them all but as man's blood, dogs blood, swines blood; and
all because their hands were full of blood; because they executed not justice
and judgment in the gate; because they were not obedient to his will; because
their hearts were not with him; because they used, or rather abused, all these
things as shelters for their sins.


Phil. The great contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel in this age does
strongly argue the contempt of the Gospel it self. For a man cannot love the
Gospel, and hate the faithful Ministers thereof. But we see by lamentable
experience, that the most grave, godly, and learned Ministers are had in
derision of very base and vile persons. And, as Job says, They whose fathers I
have refused to set with the dogs of my flocks, they were the children of
fools, and the children of villains, which were more vile then the earth. For
now every rascal dares scoff and scorn at the most grave and ancient Fathers
and Pastors of the Church, dares flout them as they walk in the streets, and
as they ride by the highways. And though the holy Ghost gives them glorious
and lofty titles (as the Stewards of Gods own house, disposers of his secrets,
Tit. 1.7. 1 Cor. 4.1. Mat. 16.19. 2 Cor. 5.20. Rev. 3.7.24. 2. Cor. 8.2.
disbursers of his treasure, keepers of the broad seal, keepers of the keys of
heaven, Gods Secretaries, Gods Ambassadors, Angels; yea, the very glory of
Christ: and all this, to express the excellency of their calling) yet these
vile varlets, and venomous vermin of the earth, dare call them proud Prelates,
pild Parsons, pelting Priests. O monstrous and intolerable impiety! Now it is
come to pass that this most sacred function (which is glorious in the sight of
God and his Angels, and in it self most honorable) is had in greatest
contempt of all callings. For now the earth is full of rank Atheists, and
mock-Gods, which scoff at the Gospel, and bleat out their tongues at all
religion. These kind of fellows never dissemble for the matter, they make no
show at all, they are no hypocrites, they hide not their sins, but declare them
openly like Sodom. They care not if they never come to the Church; they are too
full of it They live like brute beasts. They think the Scriptures are but
fables. They rail at the Ministers and Preachers; they make flat opposition
against them, and are notorious mockers and past-graces.


Theol. Of such the Apostle Saint Peter foretold, that in the last days should
come mockers, and such as would live after their own lusts, etc. Of such a
godly Writer says, Verbum Dei secure contemnitur, promissiones inanes esse
creduntur, minae pro fabulis habentur. That is, The word of God is carelessly
contemned; his promises are counted vain, and his threatenings fables. Of such
the Poet says, Heu! vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Aut velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Alas! men live as they should never die,
Or as though speech of hell were a stark lie.


Now is also the time, wherein the world swarmeth with Papists and Atheists:
and most men live as if there were no God. For now Religion is hated, true
godliness despised, zeal abhorred, sincerity scoffed at, uprightness
loathed, Preachers contemned, Professors disdained, and almost all good men had
in derision. For now we may justly complain with the Prophet, Isa. 39.1^.
Judgment is turned backward, and justice stands a far off. Truth is falen
in the streets, and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth fails, and he that
refraineth from evil, makes himself a prey. The Prophet Micah bewaileth the
times, saying, Mic. 7 2.
The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none righteous among
men. They all lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his neighbor with a
net. The Prophet Jeremy complains of the same evil in his time; namely, that
the people were come to be past shame in s^nning; (...). ^8.12.
Were they ashamed (says he) when they had committed abomination? Nay, they
were not ashamed, neither could they have any shame. This is a lively picture,
and a very counterpane of our time: for now we have put on a brow of brass:
we are become i^pudent in sin. We cannot blush, we cannot be ashamed. We
are almost past shame and past grace. O Lord, what will this geer grow to in
the end!


Phil. We may justly fear some great judgment of God to be near unto us:
yea, even to hang over our heads. For the Lord will never leave the contempt of
his Gospel and his Ministry unpunished.


Theol. You have spoken a truth, And we have heard before how the old world
was plagued for it. And we read how grievously the Jews were afflicted by the
Romans for this sin: as our Lord Jesus did plainly foretell. We read also,
that after the Lord had preached the Gospel himself, and spread it abroad by
his Apostles, conquering the world thereby (which things was signified by the
white horse, Re^. 6.^.
his rider, his bow, and his crown) end yet shortly after, saw that the same
began to be contemned in the world, and made light of; then he did in most
fearful manner plague the earth with wars, bloudsheddings, tumults, dearth,
famine, and pestilence: which are all signified by the red horse, the black
horse, and the pale horse, which did appear at the opening of the second,
third, and fourth seal. So likewise undoubtedly, God will severely punish all
injuries, wrongs, and contempts done to his faithful Ambassadors; as appears
Revel. 11.5. where it is set down, That, If any would hurt the two witnesses
with their two olives, and two candlesticks, (whereby is signified the
faithful Preachers of the Gospel, with all their spiritual treasures and
heavenly light) fire should proceed out of their mouths, and devour their
adversaries; that is, The fire of Gods wrath should consume all that had
oppressed them, either by mocks, flouts, railing, slanders, imprisonment, or
any other kind of indignity. Of this we have a plain example or two in the
Scripture. First, we read how fire came down from heaven, and consumed the
contemptuous Captain and his fifty, 2 Kin. 1.10.
at the threatening and calling for of Eliah. Secondly, how two Bears came out
of the Forest, 2 Kin. 2.23.
and tare in pieces two and forty yonkers which mocked Elisha, the Prophet of
God, calling him bald-head, bald-head. So then by these examples it is
manifest, that howsoever the Lord may wink at these things for a time, and
make as though he saw them not, yet the time will come, when he will rain
fire and brimstone upon all the scoffers of his faithful ministers, and
contemners of his Gospel. All this is plainly declared in the first chapter of
the Proverbs of Solomon: where is showed how the wisdom of God, even Jesus
Christ the highest wisdom, does cry aloud all abroad in the world, and
manifest himself in the open streets; but yet is contemned of wicked
worldlings, and scoffing fools. Therefore says Christ, Prove. 1.24.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, but none
would regard: ye have hated knowledge, and despised all my counsel; therefore
I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes upon you,
like a sudden desolation; and your destruction like a whirl-winde. Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me Here then we see his terrible wrath and vengeance, threatened
from heaven, against all profane contemners of Christ and his everlasting
Gospel, or any of the faithful ^^^^^shers and proclaimers thereto ^^^^hold
therefore, ye despisers, and wonder: consider well what will become of you in
the end. Do not think that the most just God will always put it up at your
hands, that ye should so manifestly contemn both his word and the most
zealous Preachers and Professors thereof. No, no: assure your selves, he will
be even with you at last. He will smite you both fideling and overthwart: he
will dog you, and pursue you with his judgments: and never leave following
the chase with you, till he has destroyed you, and consumed you from off the
face of the earth. For remember, I pray you, what he says in Deuteronomie;
Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42.
If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold of judgment, I will
execute vengeance on mine enemies, and I will reward them that hate me: I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall eat the flesh of mine
adversaries.


Phil. Truly, Sir, we may justly fear, that for our great contempt of the
Gospel, and general coldness, both in the profession and practice thereof,
God will take it from us, and give it to a people that will bring forth the
fruit thereof.


Theol. We may well fear indeed, lest for our sins, especially our loathing
of the heavenly Manna, the Lord remove our candlestick, take away our silver
trumpets, let us no more hear the sweet bells of Aaron, cause all vision to
fail, and our Sabbaths to cease, and bring upon us that most grievous and sore
famine of not hearing the word of the Lord, Amos 8.
spoken of by Amos the Prophet. Then shall our Halcion days and golden years,
be turned into weeping, mourning, and lamentation. God for his infinite mercy
sake turn it away from us.


Phil. Amen, Amen: and let us all pray earnestly night and day, that those
fearful judgments may, according to Gods infinite mercy, be held back, which
our sins do continually cry for: and that his most glorious Gospel may be
continued to us and our posterity, even yet with greater success.


Asun. No doubt it is a very great sin to despise the word of God: and I think
there is none so bad that will do it. For we ought to love Gods word: God
forbid else. He that loves not Gods word, it is pity he lives.


Theol. These are but words of course: It is an easy matter to speak good
words: and very many will say as you say. But both you and they in your
practice, do plainly show that you make no reckoning of it: you esteem it no
more than a dish-clout. I think, if the matter were well tried, you have scant
a Bible in your house. But though you have one, it is manifest that you seldom
read therein, with any care or conscien^e, and as seldom hear the word
preached. How else could you be so ignorant as you are?


Asun. I grant that I and some others are somewhat negligent in the hearing and
reading of the word of God; but you cannot say therefore we do contemn it.


Theol. Yes verily, your continual negligence and carelessness does argue a
plain contempt. Sure it is, you have no appetite nor stomach to the holy word
of God. You had rather do any thing, than either read or meditate in it: it is
irksome unto you: you read not two chapters in a week. All holy exercises of
religion are most bitter and tedious unto you: they are as vinegar to your
teeth, and smoke to your eyes. The immoderate love of this world, and of
vanity, has took away your appetite from all heavenly things. And whereas you
shift it off with negligence, as though that would excuse you; the Apostle hits
you home, when he says, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
Reb. ^.3.
Mark, that he says, If we neglect.


Antil. Belike you think men have nothing else to do; but to read the
Scriptures, and hear Sermons.


Theol. I do not say so: I do not say you should do nothing else. For God does
allow you, with a good conscience, and in his fear, to follow the works of
your calling, as has been said before. But this I condemn in you and many
others, that you will give no time to private prayers, reading and meditation
in Gods word, neither morning nor evening; neither before your business, nor
after. And although you have often vacant time enough, yet you will rather
bestow it in vanity: and idle prattling, and gossipping, than in any good
exercise of Religion. Which does plainly show, that you neither delight in
holy things, neither is there any true fear of God before your eyes.


Antil. I tell you plainly, we must tend our business, we may go beg else; we
cannot live by the Scriptures. If we follow Sermons, we shall never thrive.
What? do you think every man is bound to read the Scriptures? Have we not our
five wits? Do we not know what we have to do? you would make fools of us
belike. But we are neither drunk nor mad.


Theol. That every man (of what condition soever) is bound in conscience to
hear and read the word of God, has been showed, and proved in the beginning
of our conference: but as for your five wits, they will not serve your turn in
these matters, though you had fifteen wits. For all the wit, reason, and
understanding of natural men, in Gods matters is but blindness and mere
foolishness. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.15. Romans 8.7.
That the wisdom of the most wise in this world is not only foolishness
with God, but indeed very enmity against God. And again he says, 1 Cor. 2 14.
That the natural man (with all his five wits) understands not the things of
the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned. Most prudently to
this point speaks Elihu, saying, Job 32.2.
There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding.


Antil. I understand not these Scriptures which you do allege: they do not
sink into my head.


Theol. I think so indeed: for the holy Ghost says, Prove. 24.7.
Wisdom is too high for a fool.


Antil. What? do you call me fool? I am no more fool then your self.


Theol. I call you not fool: but I tell you what the Scripture says; which
calls all men (though otherwise never so wise, politic and learned) very
fools, till they be truly enlightened and inwardly sanctified by the Spirit of
God: as appears, Tit. 3.3. where the Apostle affirms that both Titus and
himself, before they received the illuminating Spirit of Gods grace, were very
fools, without wit, and without all sense in Gods matters.


Phil. I pray you good Mr. Theologus, let him alone; for he will never have
done cavilling. I see he is a notable caviller. Let us therefore proceed to
speak of the fifth sign of condemnation, which is swearing.


Theol. It may well indeed be called a sign of condemnation. For I think it
more than a sign; it is indeed an evident demonstration of a Reprobate. For I
never knew any man truly fearing God in his heart, that was an usual and a
common swearer.


Phil. I am flat of your mind for that. For it cannot be, that the true fear
of God and ordinary swearing should dwell together in one man; since swearing is
a thing forbidden by flat statute: And God adds a sore threat to his Law,
That he will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; but will
most sharply and severely punish that man.


Theol. You say true. And God says moreover, that if we do not fear and
dread his glorious and fearful Name JEHOVAH, Deuteronomy. 18.53
he will make our plagues wonderful. He says also by his Prophet M^lachy, M^
35.
that he will be as a swift witness against swearers. The Prophet Zachary
says, Zach. 5.24.
that the flying book of Gods curse and vengeance shall enter into the house
of the swearer, and he shall be cut off.

Therefore let all swearers take heed and look to themselves in time: for we
see there is a rod in piss laid up in stor for them.


Phil. These threatenings being s^ great and grievous, and that from the God of
heaven himself, a man would think should cause men's hearts to quake and
tremble, and make them afraid to nap out such oaths as they do, if they were
not altogether hardened, past feeling, and past grace.


Theol. True indeed. But yet we see by lamentable experience, how men are
given over both to swear and forswear. For at this day there is: no sin
more common amongst us than swearing: for many there be which cannot speak ten
words, but one shall be an oath. And numbers have got such a wicked custom of
swearing, that they can by no means leave it, no more than a Black-moore can
change his skin, or a Leopard his spots: For it is, made natural unto them
through custom, and they have got the habit of it. I do verily think, if it
were high treason to swear, yet some could not leave swearing. And sure I am
(as light as we make of it) that it is high treason against the Crown of
heaven: yea, it is a sin immediately against God, even against his own
person: and therefore he has forbidden it in the first Table of his law.


Phil. Questionless this vice of swearing is, of all other sins, most rife
in this Land. For you shall have little boys and children in the streets
rappe out oaths in most fearful manner. It would make a man's heart quake to
hear them. We may think, they have sucked them out of there mothers breasts:
but sure we are, they have learned them from the evil example of their
parents. And now adays we cannot almost talk with a man, but (in ordinary
speech) he will belch out one oath or another.


Theol. I will tell you a strange thing, and with great grief I speak it; I do
verily think there are sworn in this Land an hundred thousand oaths every day
in the year.


Phil. No doubt, Sir, you are within compass. For now almost so many men so
many oaths; excepting some few in comparison, Nay, I know diverse, of mine own
experience, which if they may be kept in talk, will swear every day in the
year an hundred oaths for their parts.


Theol. O what a lamentable thing is it; we may well take up the old complaint
of the Prophet Jeremy, who says, Jer. 23.20.
that in his time The land did mourn, because of oaths. And we may well
wonder, that the Land sinketh not because of oaths. For if God were not a God
of infinite patience, how could he endure his most sacred and glorious Name to
be so many thousand times blasphemed in one day, and that by such miserable
wretches as we be!


Phil. We may indeed admire and wonder at the patience and long-suffering of
God, that he spares us so long, and gives us so large a time of repentance.
But sure it is, that the Prophet says, That howsoever the Lord is slow to
anger, yet he is great in power, Nah. 1.3.
and will not surely clear the wicked. Though he may wink at their monstrous
oaths for a time; yet he forgets them never a whit, but scoreth them up,
and registreth them in his book of accounts: so as they stand in record against
them. And when the great day of reckoning shall come, he will fet them all in
order before them, and lay them to their charge.

Let not the wicked swearers and blasphemers therefore think that they shall
always escape scot-free, because God lets them alone a while, and deferreth
their punishment. For the longer God deferreth, the more terrible will his
strokes be when they come. The longer an arrow is held in the bow, the
stronger will be the shot when it comes forth. Though God have leaden feet,
and comes slowly to execute wrath, yet has he an iron hand, and will strike
deadly when he comes. Though God gives the wicked security for a time (says
Job) yet his eyes are fixed upon all their ways. Job 24.23.
And in another place he says, Job 21.30.
The wicked are reserved unto the day of destruction, and they shall be
brought forth unto the day of wrath. So then, the holy man Job plainly
affirms, that the state and condition of all the rich and wealthy worldlings,
is as the condition of an Ox, that is fatted up against the day of slaughter.
Job 21.13.
For he says, They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly go down to
hell. But now I pray you nominate the oaths which are so rife and common
amongst us.


Theol. There be six oaths which are (of all other) most rife and common in
every man's month; and they be these: By my faith. Six common oaths.
By my troth. By our Lady. By S. Mary. By God. As God shall judge me:


For you cannot lightly talk with a man, but he will flash out some one of
these in his ordinary speech.


Asun. Do you count it so great a matter for a man to swear by his faith, or
his troth.


Theol. Yes indeed do I. For our faith and our troth are the most precious
Jewels we have. Shall we then lay them to gage for every word we speak? it
shows we are of small credit; nay, very bankrupts. For who but a bankrupt
will lay the best Jewel in his house to pledge for every small trifle?


Asun. I know a man that will never swear but by Cock, or Py, or Mouse-foot. I
hope you will not say these be oaths. For he is as honest a man as ever brake
bread. You shall not hear an oath come out of his mouth.


Theol. I do not think he is so honest a man as you make him. For it is no
small sin to swear by creatures. The Lord says by the Prophet Jeremy, They
have forsaken me, Jer. 5.7.
and sworn by them that are no gods. So then to swear by creatures, is to
forsake God: and I trow you will not say, he is an honest man which forsakes
God.


Asun. I do not believe, that to swear by small things is a forsaking of God.


Theol. You, and such as you are, will believe no more of the Word of God, than
will stand with your fantasy. But, whatsoever you believe, or believe not, the
Word of God stands sure: and no jot of it shall ever be proved false. But
this I will say unto you, because you think it so small a matter to swear by
Creatures; That the more vile and base the thing is which you swear by, the
greater is the oath: because you ascribe that unto a base creature, which is
only proper to God: namely, to know our hearts, and be a discerner of secret
things. For whatsoever a man swears by, he calls it as a witness unto his
conscience, that he speaks the truth, and lies not: which thing only
belongs unto God. And therefore in swearing by creatures, we do rob God of
his honor. Therefore to swear by the cross of the money, or by bread, or by
mouse foot, or the fire, which they call Gods Angel, or any such like, is a
robbing of God of his honor, and an ascribing of that to the creature, which
is proper only to the Creator.


Asun. What say you then to them that swear by the Mass, and by the Rood?


Theol. Their sin is as great as the other: For it is an heinous thing to
swear by Idols; as St. Mary our Lady, by the Mass, by the Rood, etc. The
Prophet Amos says, Amos ^8.4.
They that swear by the sin of Samaria; and that say, Thy God, O Dan,
lives: even they shall fall, and never rise up again. To swear by the sin
of Samaria, is to swear by Idols: for Samaria was full of Idols.

Moreover the Lord threatens by the Prophet Zephanie, Zeph. 1.5.
That he will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and by Malcham, or by their
King. For the Idolaters called their Idol Molech their King.


Asun. Seeing you condemn both swearing by creatures, and swearing by Idols;
what then must we swear by? You would have us swear by nothing belike.


Theol. In our ordinary communication we must not swear at all, either by one
thing or another: but (as our Lord teaches us) our communication must be Yea,
yea; Nay, nay: For whatsoever is more than these, Mat. 5.37.
comes of evil. And S. James says, James 5.22.
Before all things, my brethren, swear not: neither by heaven, nor by earth,
nor by any other oath: but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay, lest you fall
into condemnation.


Antil. It seems you are an Anabaptist. You condemn all swearing, you will
have no swearing at all.


Theol. Not so: for though I condemn swearing by creatures, swearing by Idols
and vain swearing: yet I do allow of swearing before a Magistrate, and
privately also, in matters of weight and importance, for the further bolting
out of the truth.

This is warranted from Gods own mouth, where he says, Thou shall swear, The
Lord lives in truth, Jer. 2.
in judgment, and in righteousness. And in these cases only the name of God
is to be sworn by, as it is written, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, Deu^^
^.20
and thou shall serve him, and shall cleave unto him, and shall swear by his
Name.


Asun. May we not swear by God in our common talk?


Theol. At no hand. For that is to take the name of God in vain, which you
know is forbidden.

And one of the wise heathen could say thus, When an oath is laid upon thee,
Isocr. ad Them.
undertake it for two causes: either to deliver thy self from some grievous
crime and accusation, or else to preserve thy friends from danger. So then that
Heathen man in common talk will not allow any oath, much less to swear by
God. Phocilid.
Another says, Avoid an oath, though thou swear truly. So then we see vain
swearing condemned, even by Heathens.


Asun. Yea, but for all that, we must swear; men will not believe us else.


Theol. Neither yet will they believe you any whit the more for your swearing.
For it does manifestly appear, that thousands make no conscience at all of it.
They make no more conscience of it than of cracking of nuts: and therefore what
wise man will believe them, though they swear never so much? But if you would
make conscience always to speak the truth from your heart, without any oaths
at all, you shall be better believed of all honest and wise men, than otherwise
with a thousand oaths.


Antil. It is the custom to swear.


Theol. But a wicked and divellish custom.


Antil. I hope, Sir, we may swear, as long as we swear truly, and swear by
nothing but that which is good.


Theol. It has been answered before, that in vain matters you may not swear
at all.


Antil. As long as we do no worse than that, I hope God will hold us excused.


Theol. God will not hold you excused, when you break his commandments, and
continue so doing.


Antil. What say you then to them that swear wounds and blood, and such like,
in a bravery, thinking that it sets out their speech very well?


Theol. Hell gapeth for them: and they shall know one day what it is to
blaspheme God.


Antil. What may we think of such as swear by Gods life, Gods soul, Gods
body, Gods heart?


Theol. That their case is most woeful and dangerous; and I quake at the naming
of them. They are most horrible, monstrous, and outrageous blasphemies: enough
to make the stones in the street to crack, and the clouds to fall upon our
heads. And we may think that all the Devils in hell are in a readiness, to
carry such blasphemous villains headlong into that lake, which burns with
fire and brimstone for ever.


Antil. Do you find in Scripture, that God will so severely punish swearers?


Theol. Yes verily. For besides that which has been spoken before, we have
diverse other examples: First of Senacherib, the King of Ashur, who for his
outrageous blasphemies against the God of Heaven, was in most fearful and
tragical manner slain by his own sons, Adramalech and Sharezor, and that in
the temple, when he was worshipping his Idol-god Nisroch. And yet behold a
more fearful example of Gods wrath against blasphemers. 2 Kin. 19.37.


We read, that an hundred thousand of the Aramites were slain by the
Israelites in one day for blaspheming God, 1 King. 20.29. and seven and twenty
thousand being left, and flying into the city of Aphek for refuge, were all
slain by the fall of an huge great wall. What shall I here speak how the
seven sons of Saul the King of Israel were hanged up before the Lord in mount
Gibeah, for the breach of the oath made to the Gibeonites long before? 1 S^^.
^1.
In these examples we may plainly see, that the just God, even in this life,
sometimes will be revenged of blasphemers and oathbreakers. And therefore the
very heathen in all ages have been very careful for the performing of oaths:
as Pharaoh King of Egypt willed Joseph to go up into the land of Canaan to bury
his father according to his oath made to his father.


Phil. Me thinks these so terrible and fearful examples of Gods vengeance
against swearers and blasphemers, should strike some terror into the hearts of
our blasphemers.


Theol. One should think so indeed, if any thing could do it. But, alas, they
are so hardened in it, and in all other sin, that nothing can move them:
except peradventure there were a law made, that every swearer and blasphemer
should hold his hand a quarter of an hour in boiling lead. This or some such
like severe law might peradventure curb them a little, and make them bite in
their oaths. But otherwise they will never fear any thing, till they are in
hell fire, when it will be too late to repent.


Phil. What may be the cause of this so often and great swearing? for surely it
is no inherent and inbred sin in our nature, as some of the other sins be.


Theol. No verily. But these three I judge to be the causes of it: Custom.
Want of admonition. Want of punishment.



Phil. What then are the remedies of it?


Theol. The remedies are these: Disuse. Prayer. Friendly admonition. Some
sharp Law.



Phil. Well Sir, now we have heard enough of swearing: I pray you proceed to
the next sign of condemnation, which is lying.


Theol. Swearing and lying be of very near kindred. For he that is a common
swearer, is for the most part a common liar also: For he that makes no
conscience of swearing, will make no conscience of lying. And as the Lord
hates the one, so also he hates the other: And as he punishes the one, so
will he punish the other. Therefore Solomon says, Prove. 12.23.
Lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord. Rev. 21.25.
St. John says, Without shall be dogs, enchanters, whore-mongers,
murderers, and whosoever loves or makes lies. Rev. ^1.8.
Again the same holy man of God says, The liars shall have their part and
portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.


Phil. These Scriptures which you allege do manifestly declare that God
abhors liars, and has reserved great torments for them. Therefore the
Princely Prophet David says, that he would banish all liars from his house.
Psalm. 101.7.
He that tells lies (says he) shall not remain in my sight. Prove. 6.16, 17.
A lying tongue is one of the six things which God does hate, and his soul
abhor. Yet for all this, we see by lamentable experience, how many have even
taught their tongues to lie (as the Prophet says) and there is no truth in
their lips. Jer. 9.
This vice is almost as common as swearing. For it is hard to find a man that
will speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth from his
heart, in simplicity and plainness, at all times, in all places, and amongst
all persons, without all glozing or dissembling, either for fear gain,
flattery, men-pleasing, hiding of faults, or any sinister respect whatsoever.
Where, I say, is th^s man to be found? I would feign see him, I would feign
look upon such a man: it would do my heart good to behold him: I would
rejoice to set mine eyes upon such a man.


Theol. Such a man as you speak of, is hardly to be found among the sons of
men. They be b^ack Swans in the earth, they be white Crows, they be rare
birds. For there be very few that will speak the truth from their heart: yet
some such I hope there be. But for the most part, and amongst the greater sort,
lying, dissembling, and fraud, do bear all the sway. There is no truth, no
honesty, no conscience, no simplicity, no plain dealing amongst men in these
most corrupt times. Faith and truth are parted clean away. And as the Kingly
Prophet says, Psalm. 1^.
The faithful are failed from among the children of men. They speak
deceitfully every one with his neighbor; flattering with their lips, and
speaking with a double heart. Men now adays study the art of lying,
flattering, fawning, glozing and dissembling: they have a heart and a heart.
They have honey in their mouth, and gall in their heart. Their tongues are as
soft as butter and oil: but their hearts are full of bitterness, poison and
worme-wood. They are full of outward courtesy and civility, full of
Court-holy-water, when there is no truth nor plainness in their inward
affection. They will speak you fair, when they would cut your throat. They
will show you a good countenance, when they would eat your heart with Garlic.
In outward show they will carry themselves plausibly, when their hearts are
full of venom and malice. This viperous brood do but watch their times and
opportunities, till they can get a man upon the hip; and then they will sting
him, and work their malice upon him. These fawning curs will not bark till
they bite; they will lurk and lie close, till they spy their vantage, and then
they will show themselves in their kind: then they will hoist a man, and turn
him over the perk, if they can. These men are like the waters, which are most
deep when they are most calm: like a dangerous rock hid under a calm sea; or
as the Heathens say, like the Sirens song, which is the Sailers wrack: like the
Fowlers whistle, which is the birds death: like the (...) bait, which is the
fishes bane: (...) the Harpies, which have Virgins faces, and Vultures talons:
or like Hyena, which speaks like a friend, and devoureth like a foe: or, as
the Scripture says, like Joab, the Captain of the host, 2 Samuel ^0.10
which spoke kindly to Amasa another Captain, and kissed him, when presently
he stab^d him; or like unto the Herodians and Pharisees servants, which came
to our Lord Jesus with many fawning insinuations, calling him good Master, and
telling him that he was the plain truth, that he taught the way of God
truly, he regarded no man's person, and many good morrowes, and all this geere,
when as in very deed their purpose was to entangle him in his words, and to
entrap him, that they might catch advantage against him, and so cut his throat,
and give him pap with a hatchet. This is it which the wise m^n says, Pro. 29.5.
A man that stattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his feet. And again,
Pro. 26.23.
As silver, dross over-laid upon an earthen pot; so are fawning lips, and an
evil heart. And in another place he says, Pro 26.25.
He that bears hatred will counterfeit with his lips: but he lays up
deceit in his heart: When he shall show his voice favorably, trust him not.
For there are seven abominations in his ho^^* He will cover hatred by deceit:
(...) malice shall be discovered in the congregation. In another place he
pronounces a curse upon all these hallow-hearted hypocrites, and meal-mouthed
flatterers. For, Pro 27.4.
says he, Unto him that blesses his friend with a loud voice, betimes in the
morning, rising up early, a curse shall be imputed.


Phil. You have very w^ll described the conditions of the men of this age,
which have faces, countenances, and tongues, but no hearts; which prof^sse
lying and dissembling; which say, He cannot live that cannot dissemble; which
have fair faces, and false hearts; which have forgotten, that pl^ine honesty
is deep policy.


Theol. The holy Ghost often in the Proverbs of Solomon calls all
unregenerate men fools: or, as it is in the Hebrew, men without hearts:
Because they have no heart to God, no heart to his word, no heart to his
children, no heart to godliness, no heart to any thing that good is. They are
without an honest heart, an upright heart, a plain heart. They are all in
words, nothing in deeds. They promise mounraines, and perform molehils. They
will speak well of Religion, and practice nothing. They will give fair words to
their friends, and do just nothing for them.


Phil. The world is full of these masked counterfeits: and lying and
dissembling did never more abound.


Theol. It is too true, that lying and dissembling are most rise, and
overcommon vices amongst all sorts of men: but especially it does overflow and
superabound in shopkeepers and servants. For both these make a trade and
occupation of it: they can do no other but lie, It cleaves unto them as the
nail to the door.


Phil. I do certainly know some shopkeepers, which (to utter their bad wares,
and to blind the eyes of the simple) do trade in lying all the day long: from
Sun to Sun, from the opening of the shop and windows, to the shutting of the
same. And what is their life (if customers come in apace) but swearing, lying,
dissembling, and deceiving? They will lie as fast as a dog will trot, as we
say. It is wonder that their shops and all their wares do not fire over their
heads, for their so common, so lewd, and so abominable lying: and that against
their own knowledge, against their conscience, against God, against their
neighbor, against heaven and earth, men and Angels.


Theol. True it is, we may marvel at the long-suffering of God in this behalf.
But this is to be noted, that God does not immediately punish all notorious
sinners in this life, but reserveth thousands to the judgment of the great day.
In this life he only culleth out some few, whom he smites for the example of
others, that they might fear and tremble, and learn by other men's harms to
beware.

Therefore, even in this life, we see before our eyes, some liars, some
drunkards, some whore-mongers, some swearers, some misers of the world, some
ruffians and cutthroats, stricken down by the revenging hand of God: But
whereas God smites one of these in this life, he lets an hundred escape.
For if he should punish all offenders in this life, to what purpose should the
judgment to come serve? If he should punish none, then we should think there
were no God, or that he were shut up idle in heaven, and would do neither good
nor evil, nor once meddle in the matters of the earth; as some Epicures have
dreamed. Therefore to avoid both these extremities, God in his heavenly
wisdom has thought good to meet with some, even in this world.


Phil. I am of this mind, that the goods which men get by swearing, lying, and
deceit, will never prosper.


Theol. You are not therein deceived. For God will blow upon all such kind of
evil gotten goods, and they shall be put in a bottomless purse, as the
Prophet says. The holy Ghost in the book of the Proverbs has many excellent
sayings to this effect, as chap. 13.11. Hag. 1.6.
The riches of vanity shall be diminished; but he which labors with the
hand, shall increase them. And again, Prove. 10.
He that deals deceitfully, shall become poor: but the hand of the diligent
makes rich. In another place he says, Pro. 14.^7.
The deceitful man rosteth not that which he has caught in hunting. That is,
he shall not long enjoy or taste the prey, which he has gotten by fraud. For
either one trouble or other will come upon him, that he shall not be able to
possess, or take delight in the spoil. Therefore it is said, The bread of
deceit is sweet to a man: but after, his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
That is, in the end the crafty person shall meet with many troubles. For
either his conscience will upbraid him and check him, or vengeance will plague
him for his deceit. The fears, cares, and sorrows which he shall have, shall
be as it were so many sharp stones, to set his teeth on edge, and to vex him.
Wherefore in stead of meat, he shall feed on gravel: and in stead of wheat,
on pebble stones. Small pleasure is takes in the end in goods ill gotten, or
livings unlawfully come by. For the holy Ghost has passed sentence upon them,
that they shall never prosper.


Phil. It sometimes falls out, that they prosper for a time: but, as we say,
The third heir shall never enjoy them. For God will curse them in our
posterity: and our childrens children shall feel the smart of our sins.
Therefore the holy man Job says; Job 27.14.
The offspring of the wicked shall not be satisfied wi^^ bread: for out of
doubt God will bl^sse that only which is got with a good conscience, in the
works of our calling, and it shall remain blessed unto us, and our posterity.
Therefore the Spirit says, Pro. 2.7.
The just man that walks in his uprigh^n^sse is blessed, and bl^ssed shall h
s children be after him. But God will ^ot bless, but curse that which is, or
with an evil conscience: as swearing, lying, dissembling, deceiving, etc.


Theol. Some ancient Writers have spoken very prudently to this point. For one
says, J^r^^.
Injusta lu^ra breves habent voluptates, long^s autem dolores. That is, August.
Unjust gain has long sorrow, and short joy. Another says, Eligas damnum
potius quam turpe lucrum: illud enim semel tantum te dolor afficet, hoc vero
semper. That is, Choose loss rather than filthy lucre: for the one will grieve
thee but once, the other for ^ver. A third says, Bernard.
Melius est honest pauperem esse, quam turpiter divitem Hoc enim
commiserationem, illud vero reprehensionem adsert. It is better to be honestly
poor, than wickedly rich. For the one moves pity, the other reproof. E^rip.
P^enis.
One of the wise Heathen also says, We may not wax rich unjustly, but live of
just things, which he calls holy things.


Phil. Have we not examples in the Scriptures of such as have been punished
for lying?


Theol. Yes: for we read how the Gibeonites for their lying and dissembling
were made drudges and slaves to the Israelites; Josh. 9.23. 2 King. 5.
Gehezi also, the servant of Elisha the Prophet, for his lying and
covetousness together, was smitten with a most grievous leprosy. Acts 5.5.
Annanias and Sapphira his wife, for their lying and dissembling, were stricken
down stark dead by the immediate hand of God at the rebuke of Peter.

Zophar, one of Jobs friends, speaking of these kind of men, Job ^0.16, 24.
says, They shall suck the gall of Aspes, and the V^pers tongue shall slay
them. They shall sly from the iron weapons, and a bow of steel shall strike
them through.

Now then by all these examples we may plainly see, how greatly God abhors
lying and dissembling.


Phil. O therefore that we could follow the counsel of the Apostle, who says,
Lie not one to another: Col. 3.9.
since you have put off the old man, with his works. And again, Ephesians. 4.25.
Cast away lying, and speak very one the truth to his neighbor. The manner of
speech which the Apostle uses is very forcible, implying thus much: That we
should in a kind of disdain or detestation cast it away, and throw it from
us, as a filthy stinking and berayed clout, hanging about a man's neck, which
he does suddenly snatch away, and hurl into the fire; as being ashamed that
ever it should be seen or known. Would to God therefore that we were come to
such a detestation and loathing of lying, that we would even spattle at it, and
cry, Fie upon it, and all that use it! O that we could hate it as the Devil,
which is the father of it; and as hell fire, which is the reward of it! O that
we were come but so far as the Heathen man, who says, Homer. Iliad. ^.
I hate him as the gates of hell who has one thing in his tongue, and another
in his heart.


Antil. Yet for all this, we find in the Scriptures, that even some of the
godly have been taken tardy in lying, and yet have not sinned in so doing, as
Abraham, Jacob, Rahab, the Midwives of Egypt: and therefore why may not we do
so too?


Theol. I told you before, that you may not make the infirmities of Gods
people, rules for you to live by. And further I answer, that all these did
offend in their lying. Some of them indeed, I grant, are commended for their
love to the Church and charitable affections to Gods people, but none of them
simply for lying: which is a thing condemned even of the Heathen. For says one
of them, Lying does corrupt the life of man: ^.
and every wise and godly man does hate lying.


Antil. But may we not lie now and then for advantage?


Theol. No verily, neither is there any good vantage to be got that way. For
when you have made up your accounts, all charges deducted, and all expenses
defrayed, your clear gains will be very small. For by your wilful and
customary lying you gain inward grief, and lose true joy: you gain short
pleasure, and lose perpetual glory, you gain hell, and lose heaven, you make
the Devil your friend, and God your enemy. Now then reckon your gain.


Phil. I pray you let us grow toward a conclusion of this point: and show us
briefly the chief causes of lying.


Theol. The chief causes of lying are these: Custom. Fear. Covetousness. The
Devil.



Phil. What be the remedies?


Theol. The remedies be these: Disuse. Godly boldness. Contentation. Earnest
prayer.



Phil. You have spoken enough of this vice to cause all such to abhor it, and
forsake it, as have any drop of grace, or spark of Gods fear in them: but as
for them that are filthy, let them be more filthy. Now I pray you speak your
judgment of the seventh sign of condemnation: which is drunkenness.


Theol. It is so brutish and beastly a sin, that a man would think it should
not need to be spoken against: but that all reasonable men should even abhor
it, and quake to think of it. For it is a most swinish thing: it makes of a
man a beast: it takes away the heart of man from all goodness, as witnesses
the Prophet Hosea, chapt. 4.11. saying, Whoredom, wine and new wine take away
the heart. For what heart, what stomach, what appetite can whoremongers and
drunkards have to any thing that is good? either to hear, or read the word of
God, or to pray, or to meditate in the same? Alas, they are far from it, far
from God, and far from all grace and goodness. Joel. 1.^.
Therefore the Prophet Joel says, Awake ye drunkards: weep and howl ye
drinkers of wine. Yea, the mighty God of heaven does pronounce a woe against
them, saying, (...) 5.11.
Woe unto them that rise up ea^ly to follow drunkenness: and to them that
continue until night, till the wine do inflame them. Our Lord Jesus gives us
a cabeat to take heed of it: Luke 21.24.
Take heed, says he, that your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the ears of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares. Thus you hear how both Christ himself, and sundry of the Prophets
do thunder down from heaven against this gross beastliness, which now
abounds and reigns amongst the sons of men.


Phil. True indeed. But yet almost nothing will make men leave it, for it is a
most rise and over-common vice. We see many that think themselves some bodies
(and, as we say, no small fools) which yet will be overtaken with it, and
thereby lose their credit and reputation with all wise men: yea, do prove
themselves to be but swine, and brute beasts, as the holy Ghost avoucheth,
saying, Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging. Prove. ^0.1.
Whosoever is deceived therein, is not wise.


Theol. The wise King in the same book does most notably and fully describe
unto us the inconveniences and mischiefs which do accompany drunkenness, and
follow drunkards at the heels. Prove. 25.29.
To whom (he says) is woe? to whom is alas? to whom is strife? to whom is
babbling? to whom are wounds without cause? to whom is the redness of the
eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the wine: to them that go and seek out
mixed wine. Prove. 23.21.
In the same chapter he says, Be not of the number of them which are bibbers
of wine, or of them which glut themselves with flesh: for the drinker and the
feaster shall become poor: and the fleeper shall be clothed with rags.
Moreover, he says, Prove. 23.33.
Their eyes shall behold strange women; and that they shall be like him that
lies in the midst of the Sea, and sleeps in the top of the mast. In all
these speeches the holy Ghost does, in most lively manner, describe unto us the
properties of drunkards; even their staggering, their reeling, their snorting,
their senseless sensuality. Behold then what be the cursed fruits and events of
drunkenness: Even these which follow; woe, alas, grief, misery, beggary,
poverty, shame, lusts, strife, babbling, brawling, fightings, quarrelling,
surfeiting, sickness, diseases, swinish sleeping, security, and sensuality. So
then I conclude, that drunkenness is a vice more beseeming an hog, than any
reasonable man. And as one says, It is the Metropolitan City of all the
province of vices.

Well therefore says the Heathen Writer, When the wine is in, D^most. Olinth.
a man is as a running coach without a coachman.


Phil. Let us hear what executions have been done upon drunkards in former
ages, that now men may learn to take heed by their examples.


Theol. 1 Samuel 13.29
Ammon, one of David's ungracious children, being drunk, was slain by his
brother Absalom. 1 K^n. 20.20
Benhadad, King of Syria, being drunk, was discomfited by Ahab King of Israel.
Elah, 1 Kin. 16.10
King of Israel, being drunk, was slain by Zimri his servant, and captain of
his Chariots: who also succeeded him in the Kingdom. Lot, being drunk, Genesis
19.37.
committed incest with his own daughters; and therefore was punished in his
posterity. Thus we see what executions have been done, even upon Kings, for
this kind of sin. Therefore let men learn once at last to shun v^ce, and
embrace virtue, and, as the Apostle says, to make an end of their salvation i^
fear and trembling. For all our shifts and starting-holes will serve (...) to
no purpose in the end: but when we have asked hither and thither never so much,
yet at the last we must be fain to be shut up in Gods wrath.


Antil. What, I pray you, do you make it so great a matter if a man be a little
o^ertaken with drink now and then? There is no man but he has his faults: and
the best of ^s all may be amended. If neighbors meet together now and then at
the Alehouse, and play a game at Maw for a pot of Ale, meaning no hurt: I take
it to be good fellowship, and a good means to increase love amongst
neighbors; and not so heinous a thing as you make it.


Theol. I see you would feign make fair weather of it, and smooth over the
matter with sweet words; as though there were no such great evil in it. But
howsoever you mince it, and blanch it over, yet the Apostle says statly, 1
Cor. 6.
That Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. I think this one
sentence is enough to amaze and strike through the hearts of all drunkards in
the world: for it is as much in effect, as if the Apostle had said, All
drunkards are notorious reprobates and hell hounds; branded of Satan, and
devoted to perpetual destruction and damnation.

But you say you mean no hurt. I answer, whatsoever you mean, your actions
are naught, and your fellowship as bad. For what good meaning can you have, or
what good fellowship call you it, for poor laboring men, artificers, and such
like to sit idle all the day long in Tavernes, and Alehouses, mis-spending
their time, and their money in gaming, rioting, swearing, staring, swilling,
bezzelling, bibbing, brawling and brabling? There is no true fellowship in it:
it is mere impiety, if we may call it impiety; for poor men do live idly,
dissolutely, neglecting their callings, while their poor wives and children
fit crying at home for bread, being ready to starve, to beg, or to steal. I
pray you speak your conscience, what good fellowship is there in this?


Antil. Yet for all that, there be some which abstain from Alehouses, and yet
are as bad as any other. For they will back-bite and slander their neighbors:
they will do them a shrewd turn, as soon as any other: they are envious,
they censure us, and disdain our company: yet we think our selves as good as
they, for all their shows of holiness.


Theol. You speak more than you know, or can justify, against some better
than your self. But if it were so, you should not justify one sin by another,
a lesser by a greater: which is to no purpose.


Antil. Will you then condemn all good fellowship?


Theol. No, no: I do greatly allow godly and Christian fellowship; and
acknowledge it to be one of the chiefest comforts we have in the world. I know
we are commanded to love brotherly fellowship. 1 Pet. 2.11.
But as for your pot-companionship, I hate it, and abhor it. For it is
written, Prove. 28.19
He that follows the idle, shall be filled with poverty. And again, Prove.
2^.7.
He that keeps company with banqueters, shameth his father. And in another
place, Prove. 28.17.
He that loves pastime, shall be a poor man: and he that loves wine and
oil, shall not be rich.


Phil. Good Mr. Theologus, talk no more with him: but let us draw near to the
winding up of this matter; and tell us, in a word, which be the chief causes
of drunkenness.


Theol. The causes are these: Causes of Drunkenness.
Ill company. Alehouses. Idleness. A wicked humor.



Phil. Which be the true remedies?


Theol. The remedies are these: Remedies for Drunkenness.
Avoiding of evil company. Shunning of Alehouses. Laboring in your callings.
A good course of life.



Phil. Well Sir, you have waded far enough in this point: Let us now come to
the eighth sign of condemnation, which is idleness.


Theol. Concerning idleness, this I say briefly: that it is the mother of all
vice, and the stepdame of all virtue: yea, it is the very bel-dame of all
enormities. It is the mother of whoredom, the mother of pride, the mother of
theft, the mother of drunkenness, the mother of ignorance, the mother of
error, the mother of poverty, the mother of flandering and backbiting, prattling
and gossiping, brawling, scolding, quarrelling: and what not? Idleness was one
of the principal sins of Sodom, as the Prophet Ezekiel testifies, saying,
Pride, fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16 19
and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters. Solomon is very
plentiful in this matter: Pro. 13.4.
For, says he, The sluggard lusts, and has naught. And again, The
sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, Pro. 26.1^.
then seven men that can give a sensible reason: That is, he takes himself
the wisest of many, because he spares his body, when others take pains: Pro.
24.3^.
he says, Yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little foulding the
hands: and his povetty comes like a traveller; that is, unawares: and his
necessity, like an armed man; that is, Eccles. 4.5.
strongly. Then he fouldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.
Pro. 26.15.
For, He hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieveth him to put it to his
mouth again.

In another place the holy Ghost says, The sloathfull man will not plough
because of Winter: therefore he shall beg in Summer, and have nothing. Again,
Pro. 9.18.
The sloathfull man is brother to him that is a great waster.

Moreover, it is said, Pro. 26.14.
that the sluggard turns himself upon his bed, as the door does upon the
hinges. That is, he keeps his bed, as if he were fastened to it.

And because the Spirit will abound in this point, it is further written of the
sloathfull man, that he says, An huge Lion is in the way: Pro. 26.13.
I shall be slain in the streets: That is, when any good matter is in hand (as
preaching, praying, reading, giving to the poor, etc. (then he draws back,
he shrinketh into the shell, he finds one let or other, one excuse or other.
Then profit and pleasure, business and idleness, matters at home, and matters
abroad, company, and a thousand occasions will lie in his way, as so many
Lions, to let and hinder him. So then we see how lively and plentifully the
holy Scriptures do paint out the lazy lubbers of this world, and sons of
idleness: which are as hardly drawn to any good thing as a Bear to the
stake. As for the duties of Religion, they go as lively and as cheerfully about
them, as a thief goes up the ladder to be executed for his theft.


Phil. I do plainly see, that this sin of idleness is a very gross evil,
and the root of many vices: yet for all that, there be a great number which
think they were borne to live idly; as many young Gentlemen, and such like:
which imagine they came into the world for no other purpose, but to hunt and
hawke, card and dice, riot and revell; and so spend their days in pleasure and
vanity. Again, there be many lazy lozels, and luskish youths, both in towns
and villages, which do nothing all the day long but walk in the streets, sit
upon the stalles, and frequent Taverns and Alehouses. Many rich citizens,
especially women, do ordinarily lie in bed till nine of the clock, and then
forsooth rise, and make themselves ready to go to dinner. And after they have
well dined, they spend the rest of the day, and a good part of the night also,
in playing, prattling, babbling, cackling, prating and gossiping; fie on this
idle life. Many profane serving-men also do falsely suppose, that they were
borne only to game, riot, swear, whore, ruflle it and roist it out, and to
spend their time in mere idleness. But, of all these well said the Heathen
Philosopher, Illos pariter indignantur and dii and homines, Aristot.
quisquis otiosus: Both God and men do hate the idle person.


Theol. It is a lamentable thing to see so many men and women live so idly,
and so unprofitably as they do. For alas, there be too many which follow no
honest calling, live to no use; no body is the better for them. They do no
good, neither to the Church or commonwealth. They are like Drone-Bees: they
are improfitable burdens of the earth. God has no use of them; the Church no
good, the Commonwealth no benefit; their neighbors no profit; the poor no
relief. They imagine they came into the world to do nothing but eat, drink,
and sleep, and rise up to play. They think they would spend their time in
diceing and dancing, in whordome and bravery, in gluttony and belly-cheere, in
masting themselves like Hoggs of Epicurus Heard, in pampering their panches,
and cramming their bellies: in fatting themselves like Boares in a Frank, till
they be well brawned; Job 15.27. and 21.12.
and (as Job says) till their bones run full of marrow, their faces strout
with fatness, and they have collops in their flank. Oh, what a beastly life
is this! Fie upon it, fle upon it. It is more meet for Epicures than
Christians; for swine than for men; for Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus, and such
like belly-gods, than for the professors of the Gospel. But of all such Job
says enough, Job 11.
They spend their days in pleasure, and suddenly go down to bell.


Phil But may it not be allowed unto Lords and Ladies, Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, and other great ones, to live idly, since they have wherewith to
maintain it?


Theol. God does allow none to live idly: but all, great and small, are to be
employed one way or other: either for the benefit of the Church, or
Commonwealth; or for the good government of their own households; or for the
good of towns and parishes, and those amongst whom they do converse; or for
the succor and relief of the poor; or for the furtherance of the Gospel, and
the maintenance of the ministry; or for one good use or other. To these ends,
our wits, our learning, our reading, our skill, our policy, our wealth, our
health, our wisdom, and authority, are to be referred: knowing this, that one
day we shall come to give an account of our Bailywick, and to be reckoned
withal for the employments of our Talents. Job 5.7.
For this cause Job says, that Man is borne to travel, as the sparks fly
upward. And God has laid this upon Adam and all his posterity, Genesis 3.
In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread. Some do set down four
causes why every man should labor diligently in his calling.

First, to bear the yoke laid upon all mankind by the Lord.

Secondly, to get the necessaries of this life.

Thirdly, to live to the profit of humane society.

Lastly, to avoid evil thoughts and actions.

St. Paul finds great fault with some in the Church of Thessalonica, because
they walked inordinately, that is, idly, and out of a lawful calling; and
therefore concluded, That such as would not labor, should not eat. So then,
we do plainly see, that God allows idleness in none. For, when we are idle
(as has been showed before) we lie open to the Devil and his temptations,
and he gets within us, and prevails against us. While David tarried idly at
home in the beginning of the year, when Kings used to go forth to the battle,
he was soon overtaken with those two soul sins of adultery and
manslaughter. So long as Samson warred with the Philistines, he could never be
taken or overcome: but after he gave himself to idleness and pleasure, he
not only committed fornication with the Strumpet Dalilah, but also was taken
of his enemies, and his eyes miserably pulled out. These examples do show what
a dangerous sin wickesse is. Therefore the holy Ghost sends us to schools to
the little Creature, the Ant, to learn of her both to avoid idleness, and
also to use wisdom and providence in our actions. Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Pismire, O sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise: For she, having
no guide, task-master, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. And in good sooth it is wonderful to
observe, what infinite pains, and unwearied labor, this silly creature takes
in Summer, that she may be well provided for against Winter. Let us therefore
learn wisdom from her example: and let us set before our eyes the
looking-glass of all Creatures. Let us consider how the birds fly, the fishes
swim, the worms creep, the heavens turn, the elements move, the sea ebbeth
and flows uncessantly: yea the earth it self, which is the most heavy and
unweildy creature of all other, yet never cease his working, brings forth
his burden in Summer, and laboring inwardly all the Winter, in concocting, and
digesting his nourishment for the next spring. Thus we see how all creatures
are diligently and painfully exercised in their kinds. And therefore it is a
great shame for us to live idly carelessly, and dissolutely. Let us therefore
learn once (at last) to fly sloth, and every one to live faithfully,
diligently, and industriously in our several callings. So shall we both keep
Satan at the staves end, and also much sin out of our souls, which otherwise
idleness will force in upon us.


Phil. I must needs confess that idleness is a gross vice, in whomsoever it
is found. But specially, in my judgment, it is most odious in Magistrates and
Ministers.


Theol. That is so in truth. For they ought to be the guides, governors,
shepherds, and watchmen over the people of God. And therefore for them to
neglect their duties and charges, is a most horrible thing, since it concerns
the hurt of many. Therefore well said the Heathen Poet, Hom. l. ^.
A Magistrate or Minister may not be lazy or slothful, to whom the nursing of
the people is given in charge, and of whom many things are to be cared for.

What a lamentable thing therefore is it, when Magistrates are profane,
irreligious, popish, vicious, and negligent in the duties of their calling? And
how much more lamentable is it, when Ministers neglect their studies, slack
preaching and prayer, and give up themselves, some to covetousness, some to
pride, some to husbandry, some to other worldly affairs, and some to spend
their time idly in Tavernes, Alehouses, gaming, rioting, and lewd company?
Would to God therefore that both these kinds of public persons would cast off
idleness and sloth, and with diligence, faithfulness, care and conscience,
perform the duties of their places. For it is an excellent thing for any to be
a good man in his place: As a good Magistrate that rules well, that governs
wisely, which favors good men, and good causes, and defends them: which
also sets himself against bad men and bad causes, and punishes them
sharply and severely: which moreover maintains virtue, even of a very love
he bears unto it in his heart: and punishes vice, of a very zeal and
hatred against it: and not for his credit only, or to please some, or because
he must needs do it, and can do no less, or for any such sinister respect:
but even of a love to God, a care of his glory, a conscience of duty, and a
fervent zeal against sin. So likewise, it is a notable thing for a Minister to
be a good man in his place: to be studious in the Law of God, diligent and
painful in preaching; and that out of a love of God, a zeal of his glory,
deep pity and compassion toward the souls of the people, seeking by all means
possible to win them unto God; carrying himself in all his actions amongst
them wisely, religiously, unblameably, and inoffensively. So again, it is a
worthy thing to be a good rich man, which does much good with his riches, which
keeps a good house, relieveth the poor, ministers to the necessities of the
Saints, and gives cheerfully and with discretion, where need is. So also, it
is a commendable thing to be a good neighbor, a good Townsman, by whom a man
may live quietly, peaceably, joyfully, and comfortably.

And lastly, to be a good poor man: that is, humble, lowly, dutiful,
painful, ready to help, and ready to please. Oh, I say, this is a most
excellent and glorious thing, when every man keeps his standing, his range,
and his rank; when all men, with care and conscience, perform the duties of
their places: when the husband does the duty of an husband; and the wife of a
wife: when the father does the duty of a father; and the child of a child:
when the master does the duty of a master; and the servant of a servant: when
every man sets God before his eyes, in doing those things which especially
belong unto him. For herein consists the honor of God, the glory of the
Prince, the crown of the Church, the fortress of the Commonwealth, the
safety of Cities the strength of Kingdoms, and the very preservation of all
things.


Asun. You have said well in some things: but yet I do not see, but that rich
men and women may live idly, since they have enough wherewithal to maintain
it. For may not a man do with his own what he list?


Theol. No verily. For you may not take your own knife, and cut your own
throat with it: neither may you take your own axe, and kill your own child
with it. Therefore that reason is naught. Albeit therefore wealthy men and
women have great plenty of all things, so as they need not labor, yet let them
be profitably employed some way or other: let them exercise themselves in one
good thing or other. If they can find nothing to do, let them give themselves
much to private prayers, and reading of the Scriptures, that they may be able
to instruct and exhort others. Or else let Ladies and Gentlewomen do as that
good woman Dorcas did, that is, buy cloth, cut it out, work it, sew it, make
shirts, smocks, coats and garments, and give them to the poor, when they have
so done. For it is said of Dorcas, that she was a woman full of good works,
Act. 9.36.39.
and almsdeeds which she did. She was a merciful and tenderhearted woman,
she was the poor man's friend, she clothed the poor and naked, she knew it was
a sacrifice acceptable to God. Oh that the wealthy women of our Land would
follow the example of Dorcas! But (alas) these days bring forth few Dorcases.


Phil. As you have showed us the causes of the former evils: so now, I pray
you, show the causes of this also.


Theol. The causes of idleness are, Evil examples. Causes of idleness.
Bad education. Living out of calling.



Phil. Show us also the remedies.


Theol. The remedies are, Good education. Remedies against idleness.
Labor in youth. Good examples. Diligence in a lawful calling.



Phil. Now then let us come to the last sign of damnation, which is
oppression. And I beseech you, good Sir, speak your mind of it out of the
Scriptures.


Theol. It is so infinite a matter, that I know not where to begin, or where to
make an end of it. It is a bottomless sink of most grievous enormities. I
shall enter into a Labyrinth, where I shall not know how to get out again. But
since you are desirous to hear something of it, this I say; That it is a most
cruel monster, a bloody vice, a most ugly and hideous fiend of hell. The
Scriptures in very many places do ^ry our upon it, arraigning it, adjudging
it, and condemning it down to hell. They do also thunder and lighten upon all
those which are stained and corrupted with this vice, calling them by such
names, and giving them such titles, as are taken from the effects of this
sin, and most fit for oppressors: as namely, Isa. 3.15. Amos 8.6. Micah 3.2.
that They g^ind the faces of the poor; that They pluck off their skins from
them, and their flesh from their bones: that, They eat them up as they eat
bread. These are they which strive to devour all (like savage beasts) and to
get the whole earth into their hands, Psalm. 14.4.
either by hook or by crook, by right or by wrong; by oppression, fraud and
violence. These Caterpillars and Cormorants of the earth, are like unto the
Whale fish, that swalloweth up quick other little fishes. They are like a Lion
that devoureth other beasts. They are like the Falcon, which seizes, plumeth,
and preyeth upon other fowls. These greedy Wolves devour all, and swallow up
the poor of the Land. Therefore the Prophets of God do thunder out many great
woes against them.

First, the Prophet Esaias says, chapt. 5.8. Woe unto them that join horse to
house, and field to field, till there be no place for the poor to dwell in,
that they may be placed by themselves in the midst of the earth.

Secondly, the Prophet Jeremy says, Jer. 12.13.
Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
without equity.

Thirdly, the Prophet Micah says, Mich. 2.2.
Woe unto them that covet fields, and take them by violence; and so oppress a
man and his house, even a man and his heritage.

Fourthly, Hab. 2.12.
the Prophet Habakkuk cries out, saying, Woe unto him that builds a Town
with blood, and erecteth a City by iniquity. Sa nt James also most terribly
threatens these kind of men, saying, Go to now, ye rich men, James 5.1, 2
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your gold and
silver is cankered: and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire.

Lastly, S. Paul says flatly, 1 Cor. 8.10.
that Extortioners shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Thus we s^e, how many
fearful woes and threats are denounced from heaven against the pestilent
cutthroats of the earth.


Phil. And all little enough. For they are steeped in their sin, and the
stain of it is soked into them, as it will hardly ever be washed out. True it
is that you said, that these cruel oppressing bloud-suckers are the most
pernicious and pestilent vermin that creep upon the face of the earth; and yet
I think there were never more of them then in these days. For now the wicked
world is full of such as do sundry ways bite, pinch, and nip the poor, as we
see by every days lamentable experience. But you can speak more of it then I:
therefore, I pray you, lay open the sundry kinds of oppression used in these
days.


Theo. The sundry kinds of oppressions
There is oppression by usury. Oppression by bribery. Oppression by racking of
Rents. Oppression by taking excessive fines. Oppression in bargaining.
Oppression in letting of le^ses. Oppression in letting of houses. Oppression in
letting of grounds. Oppression in binding poor men to unreasonable covenants.
Oppression in thrusting poor men out of their houses. Oppression in hiring
poor men's houses over their heads. Oppression in taking of fees. Oppression by
Lawyers. Oppression by Church Officers. Oppression by engrossers. Oppression by
fore-stallers. Oppression of the Church. Oppression of the Ministry.
Oppression of the poor. Oppression of widows. Oppression of Orphans.


And thus we see how all swarms with Oppressions; and nothing but Oppressions,
Oppressions.


Phil. In truth, this is a most cruel and oppressing age wherein we live;
yea, a very Iron age. It seems that the great ones mind nothing else; they are
altogether set upon oppression: they dote and dream of it: they find sweet in
it, and therefore they are mad of it: As Solomon says, Oppression makes a
wise man mad. It seems therefore, that this vice is of such mavelous force,
that it can bereave men of their wits, and make them stark mad of getting
goods by hook or by crook, they care not how, not from whom, so they have it.
Yet no doubt the most wise God has enacted many good laws for the suppressing
of this evil, and threatens the execution of them in his own person: and
especially his Law does provide for the safety of the poor, the fatherless,
the widow and the stranger. But you, Master Theologus, can repeat the Statutes
better then I, because you are a professed Divine: therefore, I pray you, let
us hear them from you.


Theol. In the 22. chapter of Exodus, God made this Law following, You shall
not trouble any widow or fatherless child: If thou vex or trouble such, and so
he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his c^ie. Then shall my wrath be
kindled, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widow^s,
Deuteronomy. 12.
and your children fatherless. Again he says, Thou shall not oppress an
hired servant that is needy and poor: but thou shall give him his hire for his
day; neither shall the Sun go down upon it (for he is poor, and therewith
sustaineth his life) l^st he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin
unto thee. Exodus 22.
Moreover, the Lord says, Thou shall do no injury to a stranger: for ye were
strangers in the and of Egypt. Mal. 3.
And God himself threatens, that he will be a swift wi nesse against those
which keep back the hirelings wages, and vex the widow and the fathe less. 1
These. 4.6.
The Apostle says, Let no man opp^esse or defraud his brother in any matter.
For the Lord is an avenger of all such things. Eccl. 5.6.
Solomon also says, It in a country thou see the oppression of the poo^e,
and the defrauding of justice and judgment; be not astonished at the matter: for
he that is higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher then they.
All these holy Statutes and Laws, enacted and provided against oppressors, do
plainly show what care the Lord has for his poor, distressed, no desolate
people.


Phil. But these oppressing hell hounds are such as care for nothing. No law of
the Almighty can bridle them: nothing can fear them: nothing can restrain
them: they have made a covenant with hell and death. They are frozen in their
dregs, they are past feeling. And, as Job says, Job 24.14.
These are they that abhor the light: they know not the ways thereof,
neither continue in the paths thereof. Their hearts are as hard as the Adamant.
Nothing can move them, nothing can work upon them. There is great crying out
every where of the stone in the reins, which ind^ed is a great torment to the
body: bu^ th re is no complaining of the stone in the heart, I mean, a stony
heart, which is the sorest disease that possibly can fall into the soul of a
man: and yet in th^se times it grows very rife. For men's hearts are as hard
as brass, and as the nether Millstone, as the Scripture speaks. For many,
especially of these unmercifull and oppressing tyrants, s y in their hearts,
God will do neither good nor ev^ll. Zeph. 1.23.
Therefore they put the evil day far from them, and approach to the seat of
iniquity. They are at ^ase in Sion: they lie upon beds of I vorie, and stretch
themselves on their beds, and eat the Lambs of the flock, and the calves out
of the stall. They sing to the sound of the Viol: Amo^ 6.3, 9.
they invent instruments of music, like David: they drink wine in bowls, and
no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph, that is, the troubles of Gods
people. The Prophet Esaias also complains of these kind of men, Isa. 5.12.
saying, They regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the work of
his hands. And another Prophet says, Psalm. 10.11.
They say in their hearts, God has forgot, he hides away his face and will
never see. They are so proud, that they seek not for God. They think always
there is no God: his Judgments are far out of their sight, their ways always
prosper, and therefore they say in their hearts, Tush, we shall never be
moved, nor come in danger.


Theol. You have spoken very well touching the steelinesse and hardness of
these men's hearts, who are so unmercifull to their poor neighbors that almost
none can live by them They do so disturb and disquiet all things, that poor
men can dwell in no rest by them. Therefore truly says the wise King, A mighty
man molesteth all, and both hireth the fool and hires those that pass by: but
the poor man speaks with prayers, That is, by the way of entreaty and
supplications. For the poor are afraid ^im: they quake when they see them, as
the beasts quake at the roaring of a Lion. Many poor Farmers, poor
Husbandmen, poor Herds, poor Laborers, poor Widows and Hirelings, doe^
quake and tremble when these greedy Wolves come abroad. And (as Job says) The
poor of the earth hide themselves together. For ( alas! Job. 24.4.
in their hearts they cannot abide the sight of them) they had as leeve meet
the Devil as meet them, for fear of one displeasure or another. For either
they fear that they will warn them out of their houses, or parley about more
Rent, and straiter covenants, or beg away their best kine, or borrow their
horses, or command their carts, or require a weeks work of them, and never pay
them for it, or a twelve-months pasture for a couple of Geldings, or that
they will make one quarrel or another unto them, one mischief or another. So
that these poor souls cannot tell what to do, or which way to turn them,
for fear of these cruel Termagants. They are even weary of their lives. For
they have no remedy for these things, but even to bear it off with head and
shoulders. Therefore they often wish they were out of the world, and that they
were buried quick. They say, it any will knock them on the head, they will
forgive him. O most piteous case! O lamentable hearing! These poor silly
creatures are feign to drudge and moile all the year long, in Winter and
Summer, in frost and snow, in heat and cold, to provide their Rents, that they
may be able to pay their cruel Landlord at h s day. For else how shall they
be able to loo^e him in the face? Yet their Rent is so racked, that all they
can do is little enough to pay it: and when that is paid (alas) the poor man,
and his wife and children have little left to take to, or to maintain
themselves withal: they are feign to gnaw of a crust, to fare hardly, and go
t^inly clad. Sometimes they have victuals, and sometimes none. The poor
children cry for bread. Poor widows also, and poor fatherless children are
found weeping and mourning in their hous^s, and in their streets. So that now
we may, with Solomon, Eccl. 4.1.
Turn and consider all the oppressions that are wrought under the Sun. We
may behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort them. For the
mighty ones do wrong the weaker, even as the stronger beasts do push and
harm the feebler. These giving oppressors do pinch the poor even to the
quick. They pluck away from the fatherless and widows that little which they
have. If there be but a cow, or a few sheep left, they will have them. If there
be a little commodity of house or land; oh what devices they have to win i^ in,
and to wring it away! Those tyrants will go as nigh as the bed they lie upon.
They know well enough, the poor men are not able to wage law with them: and
therefore they may do what wrong they will, and show what cruelty they list.
Hence come the tears of the oppressed: hen^e c^mmeth the weeping and wailing
of the poor. But alas, poor souls! they may well weep to ease their hearts a
little; but there is none to comfort them: remedy they can have none. But yet,
assuredly, the everlasting God does look upon them, and will be revenged. For
the cries of the poor, the fatherless, and the widows, have entered into the
cares of the Lord of Hosts, who is an avenger of all such things; yea, a strong
revenger, as Solomon says, Pro 23.14.
Enter not into the field of the fatherless: for their revenger is strong: he
himself will plead their cause against thee. And again he says, Rob not the
poor, Pro. 22.6.
because he is poor: neither tread down the affl^cted in the gate: for the
Lord pleads their cause, and will spoil their soul that spoil them. We see
then, that the most just God will ^e revenged of these unmerciful tyrants. He
will not always put up these wrongs and injuries done to the poor.

In the eighth Chapter of the Prophet Amos, he swears by the excellency of
Jacob, that he will never forget any of their works. And again he says by his
Prophet Jeremy, Shall I not be avenged on such a nation as this?

Surely he will set his face against them to root them out of the earth. For
indeed they are not, worthy to crawle upon the face of the earth, or to draw
breath among the sons of men. It is written in the book of Psalms, that God
will set these fellows opposite against him, as a But to shoot at: Psalm. 21.12.
that he will put them apart, and the strings of his bow shall he make ready
against their faces. Be astonished at this, O ye heavens, and tremble, O thou
earth. Hear this, O ye cruel Landlords, unmercifull oppressors, and
bloud-suckers of the earth. You may well be called bloud-suckers: for you suck
the blood of many poor men, women, and children: you eat it, you drink it, you
have it served in at your sumptuous tables every day, Job. 24.5.
you swallow it up, and live by it. And, as Job says, The wilderness gives
you and your children food: that is, you live by robbing and murdering. But
woe, woe unto you that ever you were borne. For the blood of the oppressed,
which ye have eaten and drunken, shall one day cry for speedy vengeance against
you; as the blood of Abel cried against Cain. Their blood shall witness
against you in the day of judgment: and the tears of many poor starved
children, orphans and widows, shall cry out against you. 1 Kin. 21.
Was the Lord revenged of Ahab for his cruel and unjust dealing with poor
Naboth, and shall he not be revenged of you? Did the Dogs lap the blood of
Ahab, and shall you escape? No, no: you shall not escape. The Lord will be a
swift witness against you, as he says in Malachie. Mal. 3.
Was the Lord angry with the rich of the people for oppressing the poor (so as
the cry of the people, and of their wives, Neh. 5.
against their oppressors, was heard of the Almighty) and do you think you
shall escape scot-free? Does not the like cause bring forth the like effect?
the like sin, the like punishment? Know therefore for certainty, that the Lord
has costers full of vengeance against you, and one day he will unlocke them,
and bring them forth into the sight of all men.

Know also that the timber of your houses, and the stones of your walls, which
you have built by oppression and blood, shall cry against you in the day of the
Lords wrath, as the Prophet Habakkuk tells you. Hab. 2.
The stone (says he) shall cry out of the wall: and the b^ame out of the
timber shall answer it. Where the Prophet tells you, that the walls of your
houses built in blood, shall cry out loud and shrill, and play the Choristers
in that behalf, so as they shall answer one another on either side. The one
side sings, Behold blood; the other, Beho^d murder. The one side Behold
deceit; the other, Behold cruelty. The one, Behold pilling and polling; the
other, Behold covetousness. The one, Behold robbery; the other, Behold
perjury. And thus you see how the stones and timber of your houses shall
descant upon you. And howsoever you put on your br^zen brows, and harden your
hearts against these threatenings of the most terrible God and Lord of Hosts;
yet one day you shall (spice of your hearts, will ye, nill ye) be brought
forth^nes judgment: you shall once come to your reckoning: you shall at last
be apprehended, convented, and arraigned at the bar of Gods Tribunal seat,
before the great Judge of all the world. Then sentence shall pass against you,
even that most dreadful sentence, Go ye cursed into hell fire, Mat. 25.
there to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels for ever. O then, woe,
woe unto you: Mat. 16.
For what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own
soul? says our Lord Jesus. Surely, even as much, as it one should win a
farthing, and lose an hundred thousand pound. For if he shall be cast into hell
fire, which has not given of his own goods righteously gotten, as our Savior
avoucheth; where then shall he be cast, that has stolen other men's goods? And
if he shall be damned that has not clothed the naked: what shall become of
him that has made naked them that were clothed? Oh, therefore repent in time,
O ye cruel oppressors: seek the Lord while he may be found: call upon him
while he is near: lay aside your savage cruelty: visit the fatherless and
widow in their distress: dea^e your bread to the hungry: help them to their
right which suffer wrong: deal mercifully with your Tenants: Rack not your
rents any more: pinch not the poor souls for whom Christ di d: pity them, I
say, but pinch them not: deal kindly and friendly with them: remember your
great ac^o^n^s: consider the shortness of your days, and the vanity of your
life: rent your hearts, and not your clothes. Turn unto the Lord with all your
heart, with weeping, fasting, and mourning: prevent Gods wrath with a sacrifice
of tears: pacify his anger with the calves of your lips, and with a contrite
spirit: be grieved for that which is past, and amend that which is to come:
stand it out no more at the swords point against God: for it will not boot you
to strive; he is too strong for you. Your only wisdom is to come-in. Come-in
therefore, come-in, ye rebellious generation: submit your selves to the great
King: humble your selves under his mighty hand: cast down your swords and
targets: yield unto our God. So shall you escape the vengeance to come: so
shall God accept you, have mercy upon you, receive you to favor, grant you a
general pardon for all your rebellions, and admit you into the number of his
faithful and loyal subjects.


Phil. I conceive by diverse speeches which you have alleged, that goods got by
oppression and cruelty, will never prosper long. For oppressors coin their
money upon their neighbors skins. How then can it be blessed?


Theol. You have spoken a truth, For, as it has been showed before, that those
goods which are got by swearing and lying, are cursed; so all these that are
got by oppression and violence, are more cursed. Therefore the Lord says by
his Prophet Jeremy, As the Partridge gathers the young which she has not
brought forth; Jer. 17.11.
so he that gathers riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of
his days; and at his end shall be a fool, and his name shall be written in
the earth.


Phil. Would to God our Magistrates and Governors would take speedy order for
the remedying of these things, and for the redressing of such grievous
enormities as are among us; or that they themselves would step in, and deliver
the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor.


Theol. Job was an excellent man for such matters. For, it is said of him, Job
29.27.
that He brake the jaws of the unrighteous man, and plucked the prey out of
his teeth. Where we see how Job was a means to deliver the innocent, and to
pull the Lamb out of the Lions claws. Moreover, Job 29.25.
it is written of him in the same Chapter, that the blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon him, and that he caused the widows heart to
rejoice; that he was the eye to the blind, the feet to the lame, and the father
to the poor: and when he knew not the cause, he sought it out diligently. O
what a notable man was this! O that we had many Jobs in these days! Wise
Solomon does most gravely advise us all to follow Jobs example in this behalf.
Pro. ^4.12.
Deliver (says he) them that are oppressed and drawn to death: for should
thou withdraw thy self from them which go down to the slaughter? Would to
God this counsel were well weighed and practiced amongst us.


Phil. I marvel much with what face these cruel oppressors can come before
God in his holy Temple to pray, and offer up their sacrifices unto him. For we
see, many of them, though they have such foul hands, and foul hearts, as we
have heard; yet for all that, will most impudently presume to come to the
Church and pray: or at least, when they are laid in their beds at nights, and
half: sleep, then will they mumble over their prayers, or be pattering some
Paternosters.


Theol. Alas, alas, poor souls! all that they do in matters of Gods worship,
is but hypocrisy and dissimulation. For in truth they are not for God, they
love him but from the teeth outward: their mouths are with him, but their heart
goes after covetousness, and their hands are full of blood. And therefore God
does both abhor them and their prayers. For, says he, Isa. 1.15.
Though they stretch out their hands, yet will I hide mine eyes from them: and
though they make many prayers, yet will I not hear them. For their hands are
full of blood.

Moreover the holy Ghost says, Pro. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer is
abominable. Psalm. 66.18.
David says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear my
prayer. Our Lord Jesus also affirms, Joh. 9.31.
that God hears not sinners, that is, stubborn and careless sinners. So then
we may clearly s^e (by all these testimonies of holy Writ) what ^ccount God
makes of the prayers of oppressors, and all other profane and ungodly men:
namely, that he does hate them, and abhor them as loathsome and odious in his
sight.


Phil. Now in conclusion, show us the causes of oppression.


Theol. The causes are these: Causes of oppres^ion.
Cruelty. Covetousness. Hard heartedness. An evil conscience. The Devil.



Phil. Let us hear also the remedies.


Theol. The remedies be these: Remedies of oppression.
Pity. Contentation. Tender affections. A good conscience. Much prayer.



Phil. Now, Sir, you have at large uttered your mind concerning these gross
corruptions of the world, and have plainly and evidently proved them to be the
deadly poison of the soul: so also, I pray you, satisfy us in this, whether
they be not hurtful also to the body, goods, and name.


Theol. I have dwelt the longer in these common vices of the world, because
almost all sorts of men are stained with one or other of them: and therefore
they can never be enough spoken against. For the whole world lies in them, 1
John 5.
as Saint John testifies. If men therefore could be recovered of these
diseases, no doubt there would be a ready passage made for the abundance of
grace; and we should have a most flourishing Church and Commonwealth: but as
long as these do lie in the way, there is small hope of greater mercies and
blessings to be poured upon us; or that ever we shall come to have an inward
conversation with God. For these vices blind our eyes, burden our hearts, Jer.
5.^5.
and (as the Prophet Jeremy says) hinder good things from us. But touching
your petition; I must needs grant, that as these vices are the very bane of the
soul, and most certain signs of condemnation; so are they very dangerous to
the body, goods and name: yea and to the whole land, both Church and
Commonwealth.


Phil. Show us out of the Scriptures what danger they bring to the body.


Theol. The Lord our God says, that if we will not obey him, nor keep his
commandments (but break his covenant) he will appoint over us hasty plagues,
consumptions, Levi. 26.16.
and the burning ague, to consume the eyes and to make the heart heavy. So
also he says, that if we will not obey his voice, to observe all his
commandments and ordinances, that then he will make the pestilence cleave
unto us, Levit. 28.21.
until he have consumed us: that he will smite us with the Fever, with the
botch of Egypt, with the Emrods, with the Scab, and with the Itch; that also
he will smite us with madness, and with blindness, and with astonishment of
heart. So then you see what great evils the Lord threatens to inflict upon our
bodies in this life, for these and such like sins. But on the contrary, the
holy Ghost says, Pro. 5 7.
Fear God, and depart from evil: so health shall be to thy navell, and
moisture to thy bones.


Phil. What evil do these forenamed sins bring upon us in our goods and
outward estate?


Theol. They cause God to curse us in all that we set hand unto, as
plentifully appears in the forenamed chapter: where the Lord says thus, If
thou will not obey the commandments of the Lord thy God, Deu^. 38.
cursed shall thou be in the town, cursed also in the field: cursed shall be
thy basket and thy store: cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit
of thy land, and the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed
shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed also when thou go out. The
Lord shall send upon thee cursing, trouble and shame, in all that thou set
thy hand unto. Deuteronomy. 27.
And further he says, That he will break the staff of their bread; that ten
women shall bake their bread in one oven, and they shall deliver their bread
again by weight, and they shall eat and not be satisfied. You do therefore
apparently see, that these sins will draw down Gods wrath upon us, and all that
we have.


Phil. What hurt do these sins to our good name?


Theol. They bring reproach, shame, and infamy upon us, and cause us to be
abhorred and contemned of all good men. They do utterly blot out our good name.
For as virtue makes men honorable and reverend: so vice makes men vile and
contemptible. This is set down, where the Lord threatens Israel, 2 Kin. 197.
that for their sins and disobedience he will make them a proverb and common
talk, yea, a reproach and astonishment among all people. Ezekiel. 5.5.
In sundry other places of the Prophets he threatens, for their sins, to make
them a reproach, a shame, an hissing, and nodding of the head to all Nations.


Phil. I do verily thus think, that as sin generally does stain every man's
good name, which all are chary and tender of: so especially it does blot those
which are in high places, and of special note for learning, wisdom and
godliness.


Theol. You have spoken most truly, and agreeable to the Scriptures. For the
Scripture says, E cles. 10.1.
As a dead Fly causes the Apothecaries ointment to stink: so does a little
folly, him that is in estimation for wisdom and for honor. Where Solomon
shows, that if a Fly get into the Apothecaries box of ointment, and die, and
putrify in it, she marreth it though it be never so precious: even so, if a
little sin ge^ into the heart, and break out in the forehead of a man of great
sin for some singular gifts, it will blurre him, though he be never so
excellent.


Phil. Show me this, I pray you, more plainly.


Theol. We observe this, in oll experience, that if a Nobleman be a good man,
and have many excellent parts in him of courtesy, patience, humility, and love
of Religion; yet if he be covetous, the common people will have their eye
altogether upon that: and they will say, Such a Nobleman is a very good man
but for one thing: he is exceeding covetous, oppresses poor men, and deals
hardly with his Tenants, keeps no house, does little good in the Country
where he dwells. And this is it that marreth all.

Moreover, let a Judge, a Justice, or a Magistrate, be endued with excellent
gifts of prudence, policy, temperance, liberality, and knowledge in the low:
yet if they be given to anger, or taking of bribes, oh how it will disgrace
them amongst the people! for they will say, He is a worthy man indeed, but
there is one thing in him that marreth all: he is an exceeding angry and
furious man, he is as angry as a waspe, he will be in a pelting chase for
every trifle: he will fret and fume, if you do but blow upon him. And besides
this, he is a very corrupt man: he is a great taker of bribes: he loves well
to be bribed: he will do any thing for bribes.

Furthermore, if any Preacher be a man of great gifts, the common people will
say of him: Oh, he is a worthy man indeed, an excellent Scholar, a profound
Divine, a singular man in a Pulpit: but yet for all that, he has a shrewd
touch which marreth all; he is an exceeding proud man: he is as proud as
Lucifer. He has very great gifts indeed, but I warrant you he knows it well
enough: For he carries his crest very high, and looks very sternly and
disdainfully upon all other men. He is unmeasurably puffed up with overweening,
and thinks that he touches the clouds with his head. Thus therefore w^ ^re,
how the dead Flies mar all, and how some one sin does disgrace a man that
otherwise does excel.


Phil. What is the cause why some one sin does so blot and smut the most
excellent men?


Theol. The reason hereof is, because such men are as a candle set upon a
candles^icke, or rather upon a scaffold or mountain, for all men to behold and
look upon. And sure it is, they have a thousand eyes upon them every day; and
that not only gazing upon them, but also prying very narrowly unto them, to
spy out the least mote, that they may make a mountain of it. For, as in a
clean white paper, one little spot is soon espied; but in a piece of brown
paper, twenty great blurs scant discerned: even so in Noblemen, Judges,
Magistrates, Justices, Preachers and Professors, the least spot or speck is
soon seen into; but among the baser sort, and most gross livers, almost
nothing is espied or regarded.


Phil. Since the eyes of all men are bent and fixed upon such men as are of some
note, therefore they had need very heedfully to look to their steps, that they
may take away all advantage from them that seek it.


Theol. Yes verily. And furthermore, they had need to pray with David always,
Psalm. 119.13.
Direct my steps, O Lord, in thy word; and let no iniquity have dominion over
me. Psalm. 41.12.
And again, Order my goings, that my footsteps slip not: uphold me in my
integrity. For if such men be never so little given to swearing, to lying, to
drink, or to women, it is espied by and by: and therewithal their credit is
cracked, their fame over-cast, their glory ecclipsed, and the date of their
good name presently expired.


Phil. Now as you have showed what great hurt these sins do bring upon our
souls, bodies, goods and name: so also, I pray you, show what danger they
bring upon the whole Land.


Theol. Questionless, they pull down the wrath of God upon us all, and give
him just cause to break all in pieces, and utterly to subvert and overthrow the
good estate both of Church and Commonwealth; yea, to make a final consumption
and desolation of all. For they be the very firebrarnds of Gods wrath, and, as
it were, touch-wood to kindle his anger and indignation upon us. For the
Apostle says, Col. ^ 6.
For such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.


Phil. Declare unto us out of the Scriptures, how the Lord in former times has
punished whole nations and Kingdoms for these and such like sins.


Theol. In the fourth of Hosea, Hos. 4.1.
the Lord tells his people, that he has a controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Land: (and the reason is added) because there was no truth, nor mercy,
nor knowledge of God in the Land. By swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and
whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land
mourn: and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off.

Here then we see what it is that will incense God against us, and cause us
all to mourn. So likewise the Lord threatens by his Prophet Amos, that for
the cruelty and oppression of the poor, he would plague the whole Land. Amos
3.8.
Shall not the Land tremble for this (says the Lord) and every one mourn that
dwells therein?

Again, the Lord says by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 7.19, 1.
Do they provoke me to anger, and not themselves, to the confusion of their
own faces? Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, mine an^^r and my wrath
shall be poured upon this place, upon man and beast, upon the trees of the
field, and upon the fruit of the ground: and it shall burn, and not be
quenched.

Jer. 2^.5.
Again, the Lord says; If ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self
(says the Lord) that this house shall be waste, and I will prepare destroyers
against thee, every one with his weapons, and they shall cut down thy chief
Cedar-trees, and cast them into the fire.

Likewise the Lord threatens by his Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 5.7.
saying: Because you have not walked in my Statutes, nor kept my Judgments:
therefore behold, I, even I, come against thee, and will execute judgment in
the midst of thee, even in the sight of the Nations: and I will do in thee
that I never did before, neither will I do any more the like, because of all
thine abominations. For in the midst of thee, the fathers shall eat their sons,
and the sons shall eat their fathers. Again, by the same Prophet the Lord
says, Ezekiel. 7.23, 27.
The Land is full of the Judgment of blood, and the City full of cruelty.
Wherefore I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall possess
their houses. I will also make the pomp of the mighty to cease, and the holy
places shall be defiled. When destruction comes, they shall seek peace, and
not have it. Calamity shall come upon calamity, and rumor upon rumor. Then
shall they seek a vision of the Prophet: but the Law shall perish from the
Priest, and counsel from the Ancient. The King shall mourn, and the Prince
shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people in the Land shall
be troubled. I will do unto them according unto their ways, and according unto
their judgment I will judge them: and they shall know, that I am the Lord.
Last of all, the Lord says by his Prophet Jeremy, Hear, O earth: Behold, Jer.
4.19.
I will cause a plague to come upon this people, even the fruit of their own
imaginations, because they have not taken heed to my words and to my Law, but
cast it off.

Almost innumerable places to this purpose are to be found in the writings of
the Prophets: but the^ may suffice to prove the maine point; to wit, that the
just God does punish whole nations and kingdoms for the sins and rebellions
thereof.


Phil. Since all these sins (for the which the Lord did execute such universal
punishments upon his own people) do abound and overflow in the Land, may we
not justly fear some great plague to fall upon us? And the rather, because our
transgressions do increase daily, and grow to a full height and ripeness; so
as it seems, the harvest of Gods vengeance draws near, and approaches?


Theol. We may indeed justly fear and tremble. For if God spared not the
Angels that sinned, how shall he spare us? If he spared not his own people,
what can we look for? If he spared not the natural branches, how shall he
spare us that are wild by nature? Are we better then they? Can we look to be
spared, when they are punished? Are not our sins as many, and as great as
theirs? Does not the same cause bring forth the same effect? Is the Arm of the
Lord shortened? Or is not God the same just God to punish sin now, that he was
then? Yes, yes assuredly. And therefore we have great cause to mourn and
lament, to quake and tremble, because there is a naked sword of vengeance
hanging over our heads. Thus did Jeremy, Jer. 4.19. Amos 5.6. Hab. 3.16.
thus did Amos, thus did Habakkuk, when they plainly saw the imminent wrath of
God approaching upon the people of Israel and Judah.


Phil. I think we may the rather doubt and fear, because the punishment of
these forenamed vices is neglected by the Magistrate. For commonly when they
that bear the sword of Justice, do not draw it out to punish notorious
offenders and malefactors, the Lord himself will take the matter into his own
hands, and be revenged in his own person: which is most dreadful and
dangerous. For, H^b. 10.3^.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


Theol. You have spoken a truth: For if those which are Gods Deputies and
Vicegerents in the earth, do their duties faithfully in punishing vice, and
maintaining virtue; in smiting the wicked, and favoring the godly: then
assuredly evil shall be taken out of Israel, Gods wrath prevented, and his
judgments intercepted: as it is written, Psalm. 109.32.
Phineas stood up and executed judgment, and the plague was stayed. But if
they (for fear, favor, affection, gain, flattery, bribery, or any other
sinister respect) will be too sparing and remiss in punishing of gross
offenders, and be rather ready to smite the righteous; then do they
exceedingly provoke Gods wrath against the Land, and against themselves.


Phil. One thing I do greatly lament: that there be either none at all, or very
slender censures, either by the Civil, or Ecclesiastical authority, for
diverse of these forenamed vices: as pride, covetousness, oppression, lying,
idleness, swearing, etc.


Theol. It is a thing to be lamented indeed. For where do we see a proud man
punished, a covetous man punished, an oppressor punished, a swearer punished, a
liar punished, an idle person punished? Now, because they know they cannot, or
shall not be punished, therefore they are altogether hardened, and imboldened
in their sins, as the Wise man says: Because sentence against an evil work
is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully
set in them to do evil.


Phil. One thing I do much muse at, wherein also I desire to be further
satisfied, viz. what is the cause, that under so godly a Prince, so many good
laws, and so much good preaching and teaching, there should notwithstanding be
such an excess and overflowing of sin in all estates?


Theol. The causes hereof are diverse and manifold. But I will nominate four
especial ones in my judgment: The first is, man's natural corruption; which
is so strong, as almost nothing can bridle it. The second is, ill presidents,
and external provocations to evil. The third is, the want of teaching in many
congregations in the Land: by reason whereof, many know not sin to be sin. The
last reason is, the corruption and negligence of some such as are in authority.


Phil. Does nor this inundation and overflowing of sin, with the impunity of
the same, prognosticate great wrath against us?


Theol. Yes undoubtedly, as it has in part been showed before. And there be
diverse other presages of wrath, though not of the same kind: which are these;
Unthankfulness for the Gospel. Nine predictions, or sore-signes of wrath.
The abuse of our long peace. Our secret Idolatries. Our general security. Our
ripeness in all sin. Our abuse of Gods mercy. Our abuse of his long patience.
The coldness of Professors. Our not profiting by former judgments: as
pestilence, famine, death, and the shaking of the sword.



Phil. This last I take to be a special token of approaching vengeance: that
we have not profited by former warnings.


Theol. True indeed. For it is an ordinary thing with GOD, when men will not
profit by mild corrections, and common punishments, then to lay greater upon
them. And when a former trouble does us no good, we are to fear a final
consuming trouble. For so we read in the Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 3.12.
that at the first God was to Ephraim as a moth, and to Judah as rottenness:
but afterward, when as they profited not by it, he was to Ephraim as a Lion,
and to Judah as a Lions whelp. So the Lord says in another place, that if they
will not come in, and yield obedience at the first call of his wrath, then he
will punish them seven times more: Lev. 26.18.
but if they continue in their stubbornness, then he threatens to bring
seven times more plagues upon them, Ver. 21.
according to their sins. If by all these they would not be reformed, but walk
stubbornly against him, then he threatens, Ver. 24.
yet seven times more for their sins: Ver. 28.
and the fourth time, yet seven times more. The proof hereof we have in the
book of the Judges: where we read how the people of Israel for their sins
were in subjection to the King of Aram Naharaim eight years: afterward, Judge.
3.8.
because they profited nothing by it, but returned to their old sins;
therefore they served Eglon King of Moab eighteen years. Judge. 3.
After that again, for their new sins and provocations, the Lord gave them
up into the hands of Midian seven years. After all this, Judge. 6.1.
for the renewing of their sins, the Lord sold them into the hands of the
Philistims and the Ammonites, Judge. 10.7.
which did grievously vex and oppress them for the space of eighteen years.
Last of all we read, that when neither famine, Psalm. 103.3.
nor pestilence could cause them to return unto him, then he delivered them up
to the sword of their enemies, and held them in bondage and captivity
threescore and ten years. After all this, when they were delivered out of
captivity, and returned home safely to their own Nation, and enjoyed some good
time of peace and rest, yet at last they fell to the renewing of their sins:
and therefore the Lord plagued them most grievously, by the divided Greek
Empire, even Magog and Egypt, Ezekiel. 3^.
Seleuciae and Lagidae, and that by the space almost of three hundred years.
And this is it that the Prophet Hosea did foretell, Hos. 3.4.
that the children of Israel should remain many days without a King, and
without a Prince, without an Offering, and without an Image, without an Ephod,
and without a Teraphim.


Phil. You have very largely laid open this last token of vengeance: to wit,
that God at the first does but beat us upon the coat, but if we continue in
sin, he will whip us on the bare skin: and if men will not yield at the first
gentle strokes, then he will strike harder and harder, till he have broken
our stout stomachs, and made out great hearts come down. Therefore it is good
yielding at the first: for we shall get nothing by our sturdinesse against
him. We do but cause him to double his strokes, and strike us both side-long
and over-thwart: for he cannot endure that we should gruntle against him with
stubborn sullenness. But now to the point. Since there are so many presages
and fore-signes of Gods wrath, I pray you show what it is that stays the
execution and very downfall of the same.


Theol. The prayers and tears of the faithful are the special means that
stay the hand of God from striking of us. For the prayers of the righteous are
of great force with him: even able to do all things. S. James says, James
5.11.
that the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent: and
brings the example of Elias to prove it. For, says he, Though Elias was a
man subject to the like passions that we be, yet was he able by his prayers
both to open and shut the heavens. Genesis 18.
Abraham likewise prevailed so far with God by his prayers for Sodom, that
if there had been but ten just men found in it, it had been spared. The
Almighty God says by his Prophet, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me,
Jer. 15.1.
yet mine affection could not be toward this people. Which does plainly show,
that Moses and Samu^l might have done much with him, had he not been so fully
bent against his people for their sins as he was. So likewise he says in the
Prophecy of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 14.14.
Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were amongst them, they should
deliver but their own souls by their righteousness. Which also shows, that
if there had been any possible entreating of him for the Land, these three men
might have done it: but now he was resolutely determined to the contrary. In
respect therefore that the zealous Preachers, and true Professors of the Gospel
do so much prevail with God by their prayers, they are said to be the defense
and strength of Kingdoms and Countries, of Churches and Commonwealths: as it
is said of Eliah, 2 Kin. 2.12.
that he was the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, 1 Kin. 6.17.
Elisha also was environed with a mountain full of horses, and chariots of
fire. And sure it is, that Eliah and Elisha are not only the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, but also by their prayers they do cause God himself to be
a wall of fire round about it: as the Lord says by his Prophet; (...) 22 30.
I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the Land; that I might not destroy it: but I found none.
Which shows, that if there had been but some few to have stood in the breach,
he would have spared the whole Land. This also appears more plainly in the
Prophecy of Jeremy, Jer. 5.
where the Lord says thus: Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem; behold
and enquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be
any that executes Judgment, and seeks the truth: and I will spare it. Oh
then mark and consider, what a man may do: yea, what one man may do: what an
Abraham may do: what a Moses may do: what an Eliah may do: what a Daniel,
what a Samuel, what a Job, what a Noah may do! Some one man (by reason of his
high favor with the Eternal) is able sometimes to do more for a Land by his
prayers and tears, then many prudent men by their counsel, or valiant men by
their swords. Yea, it does evidently appear (in the sacred Volumne of the holy
Ghost) that some one poor Preacher, being full of the Spirit and Power of
Eliah, does more in his Study (either for offense, or defense: either for the
turning away of wrath, or the procuring of mercy) then a camp royal, even
forty thousand strong: yea (as the Spirit speaks) Though they all have their
swords girded to their thighs, Cant. 3.7.
and be of the most valiant men in Israel. And this is clearly proved in one
verse of the book of Psalms, where the Prophet, having reckoned up the sins
of the people, adds, Psalm. 106.23.
Therefore the Lord minded to destroy them, had not Moses (his chosen) stood in
the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. See
therefore what one man may do with God. Some one man does so bind the hands of
God, that when he would strike, he has no power to do it: as it is said of
Lot, Genesis 29.30.
I can do nothing till thou be come out. See how the Lord says, he can do
nothing, because he will do nothing: He does wittingly and willingly suffer
his hands to be manacled and bound behind him, for some fewes sake, which he
does make more account of then all the world besides; so precious and dear are
they in his sight. Likewise it is written, that the Lord was exceedingly
incensed against the Israelites for their Idolatrous Calfe which they made in
Horch: yet he could do nothing, because Moses would not let him. And
therefore he falls to entreating of Moses, that Moses would let him alone,
and entreat no more for them. Oh (says the Lord to Moses) let me alone, Exodus
32.1^.
that my wrath may wax hot against this people, and that I may consume them.
Thus we see, that except Lo^ go out of the City, and Moses let him alone, he
can do nothing. O the profoundnesse and altitude of Gods mercy toward mankind!
O the height and depth, length and breadth of his love toward some! O that the
most glorious and invisible God should so greatly respect the sons of men! For
what is man, that he should be mindful of him; or the son of man, that he
should regard him? Let us therefore that are the Lords Remembrancers, give him
no rest, nor let him alone, until we have some security and good assurance
from him, that he will turn away from us the wrath which we most justly have
deserved; that he will spare us, and be merciful unto us. Yea, as the Prophet
says, Isa. 62.7.
Let us never leave him, nor give him over, till he repair and s^t up
Jerusalem the praise of the world: lest for default hereof, that be charged
upon us, which was charged upon the head of some of the Prophets in Israel,
that they were like the foxes in the waste places, that they had not risen up
in the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel. Ez^k. 13.4, 5
For now adays (alas) we have many hedge-breakers, few hedge-makers; many
openers of gaps, few stoppers; many makers of breaches, to let in the floods of
Gods wrath upon us, but very few, that by true repentance go about to make up
the breach, and to let down the sluices, that the gushing streams of Gods
vengeance may be slopt and stayed.


Phil. I do now plainly see, that there be some in high favor with God, and,
as we say, greatly in his books: ^^th his love is so great unto them, that for
their sake he spares thousands.


Theol. It is written in the Proverbs of Solomon, that the righteous in a land
are the establishment of the Kings throne; and the wicked the overthrowing of
the same. The words are these: Pro. 25.4.
Take away the dross from the silver, and there will proceed a vessel for the
finer. Take away the wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness. Likewise in another place the wiseman affirms that the
righteous are the strength and bulwarks of Cittes, Towns, and Corporations:
but the wicked are the weakening and undoing of all. Pro. 27.8.
Scornful men (says he) set a City on fire, but the wise turn away wrath. To
this purpose most excellent is that saying of Eliphas in Job, Job 21.30.
The innocent shall deliver the Island, and it shall be preserved by the
pureness of their hands. 2 Chro. 11.14, 16, 17.
We read in the book of the Chronicles, that when the Levites and the Priests
were cast out by Jeroboam, they came to Jerusalem, and all such as set their
hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel came with them. And then afterward it is
said, they strengthened the Kingdom of Juda, and made Rehoboam the son of
Solomon mighty. By all these testimonies it is evident, that Princes,
Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, and Villages, are fortified by the righteous therein:
and for their sakes also great plagues are kept back. Which thing one of the
Heathen did well see into; as appears by his words, which are these; When God
means well to a City, and will do it good, then he raises up good men: but
when he means to punish a City or a Country, and do ill unto it, then he
takes away the good men from it.


Phil. It is very manifest, by all that you have alleged, that the wicked fare
the better, every day in the year, for the righteous that dwell amongst them.


Theol. All experience does teach it, and the Scriptures do plentifully avouch
it. Ge^. 30.2^
For did not churlish Laban fare the better for Jacob his kinsman? Does he not
acknowledge that the Lord had blessed him for his sake? Did not Potiphar fare
the better for godly Joseph? Genesis 39.5.
Does not the Scripture say, that the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for
Joseph his sake? and thee the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his
hand? 2 Samuel 6.1.
Did not Obed-Edom fare the better for the Arc? Act. 27.24.
Did not the seventy and six souls that were in the ship with Paul speed all
the better for his sake? Did not the Angel of God tell him in the night, that
God had given unto him all that sailed with him? for otherwise a thousand to
one they had been all drowned. Therefore the children of God may very fitly
be compared to a great piece of cork, which though it be cast into the sea
having many nails fastened in it, yet it bears them all up from sinking,
which otherwise would sink of themselves. What shall we say then, or what shall
we conclude, but that the ungodly are more beholden to the righteous than they
are aware of.


Phil. I do think if it were not for Gods children, it would go hard with the
wicked. For if they were sorted and shoaled out from amongst them, and placed
by themselves, what could they look for but wrath upon wrath, and plague upon
plague, till the Lord had made a final consumption, and swept them like dung
from the face of the ca^^^?


Theol. Sure it is, all creatures would frown upon them. The Sun would
unwillingly shine upon them, or the Moon give them any light. The stars
would not be seen of them, and the Planets would hide themselves. The beasts
would devour them. The fowls would pick out their eyes. The fishes would make
war against them, and all creatures in heaven and earth would rise up in
arms against them. Yea, the Lord himself from heaven would rain down fire
and brimstone upon them.


Phil. Yet for all this, it is a wonder to consider how deadly the wicked hate
the righteous, and almost in every thing oppose themselves against them and
that in most vivulent and spiteful manner. They ruile and slander, seoffe and
scorn, mock and mow at them, as though they were not worthy to live upon the
earth. They esteem every pelting rascal, and prefer every vile varlet
before them. And though they have their lives and liberty, their breath and
safety, and all that they have else by them, yet for all that they could be
content to eat their heart with garlic: so great, so fiery, so burning and
hissing hot is their fury and malice against them.


Theol. They may very fitly be compared to a Moth that fretteth in pieces the
same cloth wherein she is bred: or to a certain worm or canker, that
corrodeth and eats through the heart of the tree that nourishes her: or unto
a man that stands upon a bough in the top of a tree where there is no more,
and yet with an axe choppeth to off, and therewithal falls down with it, and
breaks his neck. Even so the fools of this world do what they can to chop
asunder the bough that upholds them, but they may know easily what will follow.


Phil. I see plainly they be much their own foes, and stand in their own
light, and indeed know not what they do. For the benefit which they receive by
such is exceeding great; and therefore by their maligning of them, they do but
hold the stirrup to their own destruction.


Theol. Now to apply these things to our (selves, and to return to the first
question of this argument: may we not marvel that our Nation is so long
spared, considering that the sins thereof are so horrible and outrageous as
they be?


Phil. We may justly marvel at the wonderful patience of God: and we may
well think that there be some in the land which stand in the breach, being in
no small favor with his Highness, since they do much prevail.


Theol. The merciful preservation of our most gracious King, who is the breath
of our nostrils, the long continuance of our peace, and of the Gospel, the
keeping back of the sword out of the land, which our sins pull upon us, the
frustrating of many plots and subtle devices which have been often invented
against our State, yea, and the life of his Majesty's most royal person, make
me to think that there be some strong pleaders with God for the public good
of us all.


Phil. You may well think so indeed: for by our sins we have forfeited (and
daily do forfeit into Gods hands both our King, our Country, our Peace, our
Gospel, our lives, our goods, our lands, our livings, our wives, our children,
and all that we have: but only the righteous (which are so near about the
King, and in so high favor) do step in, and earnestly entreat for us, that
the forfeitures may be released, and that we may have lease (in parley) of them
all again, or at least a grant of further time. But, I pray you Sir, are not
we to attribute something concerning our good estate to the policy of the
Land, the Laws established, and the wisdom and counsel of our prudent
Governors?


Theol. Yes assuredly, very much, as the ordinary and outward means which God
uses for our safety. For though the Apostle Paul had a grant from God for the
safety of his own life, and all that were with him in the ship, yet he said,
Acts 28.31.
Except the Mariners abide in the ship, we cannot be safe. Showing thereby,
that unto faith and prayers the best and wisest means must be joined. We are
therefore upon our knees every day to give thanks unto God for such good
means of our safety as he has given us.


Phil. Well then, as the prayers of the righteous have been hitherto great
means both for the hindering and turning away of wrath, and the continuance of
favor; so show, I pray you, what is the best course to be taken, and what in
sound wisdom is to be done, both to prevent future dangers, and to continue
Gods favors and mercies still upon us.


Theol. The best and surest course that I can consider or conceive of, is, to
repent heartily for sins past, and to reform our lives in time to come, to
seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near, to
forsake our own ways, and our own imaginations, and to turn unto him with
all our hearts, with weeping, with fasting, and with mourning, as the Prophet
Joel, chap. ^. advises. For our God is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. All the Prophets do
counsel us to follow this course, and do plainly teach, that if we all (from
the highest to the lowest) do meet the Lord with unfeigned repentance, and
offer him the sacrifice of a contrite spirit, undoubtedly he will be pacified
toward us, and be merciful to our transgressions. This is most plainly set
down in the seventh Chapter of Jeremy, where the Lord says thus to his
people, ^er. 7.
If you amend and redress your ways, and your works: If you execute
judgment betwixt a man and his neighbor, and oppress not the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, and shed no innocent blood in this place, neither
walk after other gods, to your destruction; then will I let you dwell in this
place, even in the Land which I gave unto your fathers for ever and ever. So
likewise he says by the same Prophet, Jer. 22.5.
Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the oppressed from the
hand of the oppressor, and vex not the fatherless, the widow, or the
strangers: do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in this place. For if you
do this thing, then shall the King, sitting upon the Throne of David, enter in
by the gates of this house, and ride upon chariots, and upon horses, both he
and his servants, and his people. And again, Jer. 3.22.
O ye disobedient children, return, and I will heal your rebellion. The Lord
also says by his Prophet Esaias, If ye consent and obey, Esaias 1.19.
ye shall eat the good things of the Land: but if ye refuse, and be
rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword. For the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Hos. ^.1.
The Prophet Hosea says, Come, let us return to the Lord for he has spoiled,
and, he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind us up. And
again, O Israel, Hos. 13.^^.
return unto the Lord (for thou have fallen by thine iniquity) and I will
heal thy rebellion and will love thee freely: for (...) i^ ^^^^ed away from
thee. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the Lilly, and fasten
his root as the trees of Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

The Prophet Micah tells us what is good for us, and what is our best course,
and what the Lord requires at our hands; namely, these four things, Micah 6.8.
To do justly, to love mercy, to humble our selves, and to walk with our God.
The Prophet Amos gives the same counsel, saying, Seek the Lord, Amo^ 5.38.
and ye shall live. Seek good, and not evil. Hate the evil, and love the
good, and establish judgment in the gate. It may be that the Lord of Hosts
will be merciful unto the remnant of Joseph. And the Lord himself says, Jer.
16.8.
If this Nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness,
I will repent of the plague I thought to bring upon them. Thus we do plainly
see what advice and counsel the Prophets and holy men of God do give unto us.
The sum of all is this, that if we do truly repent, and turn unto him with
all our hearts (studying to obey him, and walk in his ways) then he will
grant us any favor that we will require at his hands. For even as a
wooll-pack, or other soft matter, beats back, and dampeth the force of all
shot; so penitent, melting, and soft hearts do beat back the shot of Gods
wrath, and turn away his vengeance from us. Moreover, we may observe, in all
experience, that when Potentates are offended, or any great man has conceived
a displeasure against some poor man, then he must run and ride, send
presents, use his friends, break his sleep, and never be quiet until he have
pacified him: Even so must we deal with our God, seeing he has taken a
displeasure against us. O therefore that we would speedily use all possible
means to pacify his wrath! Oh that we would with one heart and voice, every
one of us (from the highest to the lowest) humble our selves before our God,
forsake our former evil ways, be grieved for that we have done, and purpose
never to do the like again! Oh that it might go to the hearts of us, that
we have so often and so grievously offended so loving a God, and so merciful
a Father! Oh that we would awake once at last, and rowse up our drowsy
hearts, and ransacke our sleepie consciences, crying out against our sins,
that our sins might never cry out against us! Oh that we would judge our
selves, accuse our selves, indite our selves, and condemn our selves! so
should we never be adjudged, accused, endited, or condemned of the Lord. Oh
that all hearts might sob, all souls might sigh, all loins might be smitten
with sorrow, all faces gather blackness, and every man smite himself on the
thigh, saying, What have I done? Oh that both Magistracy, Ministry, and
Commonalty, would purpose and vow, and even take a bond of themselves, that
from henceforth, and from this day forward, they would set their hearts to
seek the Lord, and wholly give up themselves to his obedience! Oh that all
men, women, and children would fear God, and keep his Commandments; would
eschew evil, and do good; would study to please God in all things, and to be
fruitful in all good works, making conscience to perform the duties of their
general callings, and duties of their special callings; duties of the first
Table, and duties of the second Table: that so God might be sincerely
worshipped, his Name truly reverenced, his Sabbaths religiously observed: and
that every man would deal kindly, mercifully, justly, and uprightly with his
neighbor, that there might be no complaining, no crying in our streets! Oh, I
say again and again, that if all of us, of what estate, degree, or condition
soever, would walk in the paths of our God, then doubtless we should live
and see good days, all future dangers should be prevented, our peace
prolonged, our state established, our King preserved, and the Gospel continued.
Then should we still enjoy our lives, our goods, our lands, our livings, our
wives, our children, our houses and tenements, our orchard^ and gardens: yea,
as the Prophet says, we shall eat the good things of the Land, spend our
days in much comfort, peace, and tranquillity, and leave great blessings unto
our children and posterity, from age to age, from generation to generation.


Phil. You have fully answered my question, and well satisfied me therein out
of the Scriptures: yet, I pray you, give me leave to add one thing to that
which you have at large set down. The Lord says by the Prophet Amos, Amos
4.6, 7
that for their sins and rebellions he had given them cleanness of teeth,
that is, dearth and scarcity: and yet they did not turn unto him. Also he
withheld the rain from them, and punished them with drought, and yet they did
not turn unto him. Moreover, he smote their Corn, their great Gardens, their
Orchards, Vineyards, Fig Trees and Olive Trees, with blasting and mildew, and
the Palmer-worme did devour them: and yet they did not return unto him. Last
of all he smote them with pestilence, and with the sword, and overthrow them,
as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and they were as a firebrand plucked out
of the burning: yet for all this they did not turn unto him. Ye have not
turned unto me, says the Lord. But now to come to the point. Out of this I
gather, that if we multiply our transgressions, God will multiply his plagues
upon us: but on the contrary, if we would unfainedly turn unto the Lord our
God with all our hearts, all plauges should be stayed, all dangers prevented,
and no evil should fall upon us. For because they would not turn, therefore
he smote them. If therefore they had turned, he would not have smote them. But
now, I pray you, briefly conclude this point, and declare in few words what it
is that does most materially concern our peace and public good.


Theol. These few then briefly I take to be the things which belong to our
peace.

Ten things concerning our peace.
Let Solomon execute. Joab and Shimei.

Let Achab and Eliah stay the Priests and Prophets of Baal.

Let Aaron and Eleazer minister before the Lord faithfully.

Let Jonas be cast out of the ship.

Let Moses stood fast in the gap, and not let down his hand.

Let Josuah succeed him.

Let Cornelius fear God with all his household.

Let Tabitha be full of good works and almesdeeds.

Let Deborah judge long in Israel, prosper, and be victorious.

Let us pray that the light of Israel may not be quenched.

And this I take to be the sum of all that belongs to our peace.


Phil. The sum of all our conference hitherto, as I remember, may be reduced
unto these few heads: First, man's natural corruption has been laid open.
Secondly, the horrible fruits thereof. Thirdly, their evil effects and
workings both against our souls and bodies, goods, name, and the whole Land.
Lastly, the remedies of all. Now therefore I would grow to some conclusion of
that which you touched by the way, and made some mention of; namely, the signs
of salvation and damnation: and declare unto us plainly whether the state of a
man's soul before God may not by certain signs and tokens be certainly
discerned in this life.


Theol. Besides those which before have been mentioned, we may odd these
nine following.

Nine signs of a sound soul.
Reverence of Gods Name. Keeping of his Sabbaths. Truth. Sobriety. Industry.
Compassion. Humility. Chastity. Contentation.



Phil. These indeed, I grant, are very good signs, but yet all of them are not
certain: for some of them may be in the reprobates.


Theol. What say you then to Saint Peter's signs, set down in the first
chapter of his second Epistle? which are these eight: Saint Peter's eight signs
of salvation 2 Pet. 1.8.
Faith. Virtue. Knowledge. Temperance. Patience. Godliness. Brotherly
kindness. Love.


Saint Peter says, If these be in us and abound, they will make us neither
idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Which is as much as if
he had said, They will make us sound and sincore Professors of the Gospel.


Phil. All these, I grant, are exceeding good signs and evidences of a man's
salvation: but yet some of them may deceive, and a hole may be picked in some
of these Evidences, I would therefore hear of some such demonstrative and
infallible Evidences as no Lawyer can find fault with. For I hold that good
Divines can as perfectly judge of the assurances and evidences of man's
salvation, as the best Lawyer can judge of the assurances and evidences,
whereby men hold their lands and livings.


Theol. You have spoken truly in that. And would to God all the Lords people
would bring forth the Evidences of their salvation, that we might discern of
them.


Phil. Set down then which be the most certain and infallible Evidences of a
man's salvation: against which no exception can be taken.


Theol. I judge these to be most sound and infallible.

Assured faith in the promises. Seven infallible signs of salvation Act.
16.31. Pro. 1.20. Job. 1.41. Romans 8.14. Job. 4.^. 1 These. 4.5. Romans 5.1. Col.
1.^3. Mat. 24.13.


Sincerity of heart.

The Spirit of adoption.

Sound Regeneration and Sanctification.

Inward peace.

Groundednesse in the truth.

Continuance to the end.


Phil. Now you come near the quick indeed. For in my judgment, none of these
can be found truly in any reprobate. Therefore I think no Divine can take
exception against any of these.


Theol. No, I assure you: no more then a Lawyer can find fault with the Tenure
of men's lands and fee-simples, when as both the title is good, and strong by
law; and the evidences thereof are sealed, subscribed, delivered, conveyed, and
sufficient witness upon the same, and all other signs and ceremonies (in the
delivering, and taking possession thereof) according to strict law observed.
For if a man have these forenamed evidences of his salvation, sure it is, his
title and interest to heaven is good, by the Law of Moses and the Prophets, I
mean the word of God. God himself subscribeth to them: Jesus Christ
delivers them as his own deed: the holy Ghost seals unto them: yea, the
three great witnesses, which bear record in the earth (that is, water, blood,
and the spirit) do all witness the same.


Phil. Now you have very fully satisfied me touching this point. And one thing
more I do gather out of all your speech, to wit, that you do think a man may
be assured of his salvation even in this life.


Theol. I do think so indeed. For he that knows not in this life that he
shall be saved, shall never be saved after this life. For St. John says, 1
John 3.2.
Now we are made the sons of God.


Phil. But because many doubt of this, and the Papists do altogether deny it,
therefore, I pray you, confirm it unto us out of the Scriptures.


Theol. The Apostle says; 1 Cor. 5.2.
We know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have
a building given us of God; that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal
in the heavens. Mark, that he says, both he, and the rest of Gods people,
did certainly know that Heaven was provided for them. Romans 8.15, 16.
For the spirit of adoption bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God. And again, the same Apostle says, from henceforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness: ^ Tim. 4.8.
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me
only, but to all them that love his appearing. Here we see, that he knew
there was a crown prepared for him, and for the Elect. And the same Spirit
which did assure it unto Paul, does assure it also to all the children of God.
For they have all the same Spirit, though not in the same measure. Saint John
says also, Herein we are sure we know him, 1 John 2.3.
if we keep his commandments. In which words St. John tells us th^^ much,
th^^ if we do unfainedly endeavor to obey God, there is in us the true
knowledge and fear of God: and consequently we are sure we shall be saved.
Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.10.
Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Wherefore should
the Apostle exhort us to make our election sure, if none could be sure of it?
In the second of the Ephesians, the Apostle says flatly, that in Christ Jesus
we do already sit together in heavenly places. His meaning is not, that we
are there already in possession; but we are as sure of it, as if we were
there already. The reasons hereof are these: Christ our head is in possession:
Therefore he will draw all his members unto him, as he himself says.

John 12.22. John 24.13.
Secondly, we are as sure of the thing which we hope for, as of that which we
have: but we are sure of that which we have, which is the (...) of grace:
therefore we are sure (...) we look for, which is the crown of glory. Many
other places of the holy Scriptures might be alleged to this purpose: but, I
suppose, these may suffice.


Phil. As you have showed this by the Scriptures: so also show it more planly
by evident reason out of the same.


Theol. How can a man in truth call God his Father (when he says, Our Father
which art in heaven) and yet doubt whether he is his Father, or no? For if GOD
indeed be our Father, and we his children, how can we perish? how can we be
damned? Will a Father condemn his own children? shall the children of GOD be
condemned? No, no: Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Again, Romans 8.33,
^4
Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies,
who can condemn? It is therefore most certain and sure, that all such as do
in truth call God their Father, and have God for their Father, shall be saved.
Again, how can a man say, in truth and feeling, that he believes the
forgiveness of sins, and yet doubt whether he shall be saved? For if he be
fully persuaded that his sins be forgiven, what lets why he should not be
saved? Moreover, as certainly as we know we are called, justified and
sanctified; so certainly we know we shall be glorified. But we know the one
certainly, and therefore the other.


Asun. I will never believe, that any man can certainly know, in this world,
whether he shall be saved or damned; but all men must hope well, and be of a
good belief.


Theol. Nay, we must go further then hope-well: We may not venture our
salvation upon uncertain hopes. As if a man should hope it would be a fair
day to morrow; but he cannot certainly tell. No, no: we must in this case,
being of such infinite importance as it is, grow to some certainty and full
resolution. We see worldly men will be loath to hold their lands and leases
uncertainely, having nothing to show for them. They will not stand to the
courtesy of their landlords, nor rest upon their good wills. They will not stay
upon uncertain hopes. No, they are wiser then so. For the children of this
world are wiser in their generation then the children of light. Luke 16.
They will be sure to have something to show They will have it under seal.
They will not slay upon the words and promises of the most honest men, and best
landlords. They cannot be quiet till they have it in white and black, with
sound counsel upon their Title, and every way made as sure unto them, as any
Law of the land can make it.

Are then the children of this world so wise in these inferior things, and
shall not we be as wise in matters of ten thousand times more importance? Are
they so wise for earth, and shall not we be as wise for heaven? Are they so
wise for their bodies, and shall not we be as wise for our souls? Shall we
hold the state of our immortal inheritance by hope-well, and have no writings,
or evidences, no seal, no witnesses, nor any thing to show for it? Alas! this
is a weak Tenure, a broken Title, a simple hold indeed.


Asun. Yet for all that a man cannot be certain.


Theol. Yes: Saint John tells us we may be certain. For he says, Hereby we
know we dwell in him, 1 John 4.13.
and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. He says not, we hope,
but we know certainly. For he that has the Spirit of God, knows certainly he
has it; and he that has faith, knows that he has faith; and he that shall
be saved, knows he shall be saved. For God does not work so darkly in men's
hearts by his Spirit, but that they may easily know whether it be of him or no,
if they would make a due trial. Again, the same Apostle says, 1 John 5.^6.
He that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself: That is,
he has certain testimonies in his own conscience, that he shall be saved.
For we must fetch the warrant of our salvation from within our selves; even
from the work of GOD within us. For look how much a man feels in himself
the increase of knowledge, obedience, and godliness, so much the more sure he
is that he shall be saved. A man's own conscience is of great force this way,
and will not lie, or deceive. For so says the wise man, Pro. 27.19.
As water shows face to face; so does the heart, man unto man: That is, the
mind and conscience of every man tells him justly, (though not perfectly)
what he is. For the conscience will not lie; but accuse or excuse a man, being
in stead of a thousand witnesses.

1 Cor 2.11.
The Apostle says, No man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man that
is in him. And again the Scripture says, Pro. 2^.29.
Man's soul is as it were the candle of the Lord, whereby he searches all the
bowels of the belly. So then, it is a clear case, that a man must have
recourse to the work of Gods grace within him, even in his own soul: and
thereby he shall be certainly resolved one way or other. For even as Rebecca
knew certainly, by the striving and stirring of the twins in her womb, that
she was conceived and quick of child; so Gods children know certainly, by the
motions and stirring of the holy Ghost within them, that they have conceived
Christ, and shall undoubtedly be saved.


Phil. I pray you let us come to the groundwork of this certainty of
salvation, and speak somewhat of that.


Theol. The groundwork of our salvation is laid in Gods eternal election;
and, in respect thereof, it stands fast and unmovable; as it is written, 2 Timothy 2.16. 1 These. 5.24.
The foundation of God stands fast. And again, He is faithful that has
promised: 2 Timothy 2.13.
Though we cannot believe, yet he abides faithful. So then, as we know it
certainly in our selves, by the consequence of election: so it stands most
firm in respect of God, and his eternal and immutable decree. And a thousand
infirmities (nay, all the sins of the world, nor all the Devils in hell)
cannot overthrow Gods election. For our Lord Jesus says, John 6.34.
All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me. And again, John 6.39.
This is the Fathers will that has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again at the last day. And
in another place our Savior Christ says, John 10.17.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto
them eternal life: and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater then all: and none
is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. We ought therefore to be as sure
of our salvation, as of any other thing which God has promised, or which we
are bound to believe. For to doubt thereof, in respect of Gods truth, is
blasphemous against the immutability of his truth.


Phil. But are there not some doubts, at some times, even in the very elect,
and in those which are grown to the greatest persuasion?


Theol. Yes verily. For he that never doubted, never believed. For whosoever
believes in truth, feels sometimes doubtings and waverings. Even as the
sound body feels many grudgings of diseases, which if he had not health he
could not feel; so the sound soul feels some doubtings, which if it were
not sound it could not so easily feel. For we feel not corruption by
corruption, but we fool corruption by grace. And the more grace we have, the
more quick we are in the feeling of corruption. Some men of tender skins and
quick feeling will easily feel the lightest feather, in softest manner, laid
upon the ball of their heads; which others, of more slow feeling and hard flesh
cannot so easily discern. So then it is certain, that although the children
of God feel some doubtings at some times, yet the same do no whit impeach the
certainty of their salvation; but rather argue a perfect soundness and health
of their souls. For when such little grudgings are felt in the soul, the
children of God oppose against them the certainty of Gods truth and promises,
and so do easily overcome them. For the Lords people need no more to fear them
then he that rides through the streets upon a lusty Gelding, with his sword by
his side, needs to fear the barking and bawling of a few little curs and
whappets.


Phil. Show yet more plainly how or in what respect the child of God may both
have doubtings, and yet be fully assured.


Theol. Even as a man set on the top of the highest steeple in the world, and
so fast bound unto it that he cannot fall though he would, yet when he
looks downward he fears, because man's nature is not acquainted nor
accustomed to mount so high in the air, and to behold the earth so far
beneath: but when he looks upward, and perceives himself fast bound, and
out of all danger, then he casts away all care: Even so, when we look
downward to our selves, we have doubts and fears; but when we look upward to
Christ, and the truth of his promises, we feel our selves cock-sure, and cease
to doubt any more.


Phil. Declare unto us what is the original of these doubts and fears, and
from whence they spring in the children of God.


Theol. They spring from the imperfection of our regeneration, and from that
strife which is in the very mind of the elect, between faith and infidelity.
For these two do mightily fight together in the most regenerate, and strive to
over-master and over-shadow one another. By reason whereof sometimes it comes
to pass, through the prevailing of unbelief, that the most excellent servants
of God may fall into fits and pangs of despair, as Job and David in their
temptations did. And even in these days also some of Gods children at some
times are shrewdly hindled this way, and brought very low, even unto deaths
door: but yet the Lord in great mercy does recover them both from total and
final despair. Only they are humbled and tried by these sharp fits for a
time, and that for their great good. For as we use to say, that an ague in a
young man is a sign of health; so these burning fits of temptations in the
elect, for the most part, are signs of Gods grace and favor. For if they were
not of God, the Devil would never be so busy with them.


Phil. Is it not mere presumption, and an overmuch trusting to our selves, to
be persuaded of our salvation?


Theol. Nothing less. For the ground of this persuasion is not laid in our
selves, or any thing within us, or without us; but only in the righteousness
of Christ, and the merciful promises of God. For is it any presumption for us
to believe that which God has promised, Christ has purchased, and the holy
Ghost has sealed? No verily, it is not any presumption, but a thing which we
all stand bound unto, as we will answer it at the dreadful day of judgment.
As for our selves, we do freely confess, that in Gods sight we are but lumps
of sin, and masses of misery, and cannot of our selves move hand or foot to
the furtherance of our salvation. But being justified by faith, we are at peace
with God, and fully persuaded of his love and favor toward us in Christ.


Phil. Cannot the reprobates and ungodly be assured of their salvation?


Theol. No. For the Prophet says, There is no peace to the wicked. Esaias 57.22.
Then I reason thus: They which have not the inward peace cannot be assured:
But the wicked have not the inward peace; Therefore they cannot be assured.
Steadfast faith in the promises does assure: But the wicked have not steadfast
faith in the promises: Therefore they cannot be assured. The Spirit of adoption
does assure: But the wicked have not the Spirit of adoption; Therefore they
cannot be assured.

To conclude: When a man feels in himself an evil conscience, blindness,
profaneness, and disobedience, he shall, in despite of his heart, sing this
doleful song; I know not whether I shall be saved or damned.


Phil. Is not the doctrine of the assurance of salvation a most comfortable
doctrine?


Theol. Yes doubtless. For except a man be persuaded of the favor of God, and
the forgiveness of sins, and consequently of his salvation, what comfort can
he have in any thing? Besides this, the persuasion of Gods love toward us is
the root of all our love and cheerful obedience toward him: For therefore we
love him and obey him, because we know he has loved us first, and written our
names in the Book of life. But on the contrary, that general doctrine of the
Papists, which would have men always doubt and fear in a servile sort, is
most hellish and uncomfortable. For so long as a man ho^ds that, what
encouragement can he have to serve God? what love to his Majesty? what hope in
the promises? what comfort in trouble? what patience in adversity?


Antil. Touching this point I am flat of your mind. For I think verily a man
ought to be persuaded of his salvation: and for mine own part I make no
question of it. I hope to be saved as well as the best of them all. I am out of
fear for that. For I have such a steadfast faith in God, that if there should
be but two in the world saved, I hope I should be one of them.


Theol. You are very confident indeed. You are persuaded before you know. I
would your ground were as good as your vain confidence. But who is so bold as
blind Bayard? your hope is but fancy, and as a sick men's dream. You hope you
cannot tell what. You have no ground for what you say. For what hope can you
have to be saved, when you walk in no path of salvation? What hope can a man
have to come to London speedily, that travelleth nothing that way, but quite
contrary? What hope can a man have to reap a good crop of corn, that uses no
means, neither ploweth, sows, nor harroweth? What hope can a man have to be
fat and well liking of his body, that seldom or never eats any meat? What
hope can a man have to escape drowning, which leapeth into the Sea? Even so
what hope can you have to be saved, when you walk nothing that way, when you
use no means, when you do all things that are contrary to the some? For
(alas) there is nothing in you of thou things which the Scriptures do affirm
must be in all those that shall be saved. There be none of the forenamed signs
and tokens in you. You are ignorant, profane, and careless. God is not
worshipped under your roof. There is no true fear of God in your self, nor
in your household. You seldom hear the Word preached. You content your self
with an ignorant Minister. You have no prayers in your family, no reading, no
singing of Psalms, no infirmitions, exhortations, admonitions, or any other
Christian exercises. You make no conscience of the observation of the Sabbath.
You use not the name of God with any reverence. You break out sometimes into
horrible oaths and cursings. You make an ordinary matter of swearing by your
faith and your troth. Your wife is irreligious, your children dissolute and
ungratious, your servants profane and careless. You are an example in your
own house of all Atheism and consciencelesse behavior. You are a great
gamester, a riotour, a spend thrift, a drinker, a common ale-house-hunter, a
whore-hunter; and, to conclude, given to all vice and naughtiness. Now then, I
pray you, tell me, or rather let your conscience tell me, what hope can you
have to be saved, so long as you walk and continue in this course. Does not St.
John say, 1 John 2.6.
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we are liers?
1 John 3.4.
Does not the same Apostle avouch, that such as say they know God, and keep
not his commandments, are liars?

Again, does he not say, He that commits sin, is of the Devil? And, 1
John ^.18.
Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God? Does not our Lord Jesus
flatly tell the Jews (which bragged that Abraham was their father) that they
were of their father the Devil, because they did his works? Does not the
Apostle Paul say, Romans 6.^^
His servants we are to whom we obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Does not the Scripture say, John ^.7.
He that does righteousness is righteous? Does not our Lord Jesus affirm^,
that Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 7.21.
but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Therefore I
conclude, that forasmuch as your whole course is carnal, careless, and
dissolute, you can have no warrantable hope to be saved.


Phil. I do verily think that this man's case (which now you have laid open) is
the case of thousands.


Theol. Yea doubtless, of thousand thousands, the more is the pity.


Asun. Soft and fair, Sir, you are very round indeed. Soft fire makes sweet
malt. I hope you know we must be saved by mercy, and not by merit. If I could
do all my self, wherefore serves Christ? I hope that which I cannot do he
will do for me. And I hope to be saved by Jesus Christ as well as the best of
you all.


Theol. Oh, now I see which way the game goes. You would feign make Christ a
cloak for your sins. You will sin that grace may abound. You will sin
frankly, and set all upon Christ's score. Truly there be many thousands of your
mind, which hearing of Gods abundant mercy in Christ, are thereby made more
bold to sin. But they shall know one day, to their cost, what it is to abuse
the mercy of God. Romans 2.4.
The Apostle says, The mercy and loving kindness of God should lead us to
repentance. But we see it leads many to further hardness of heart. The Prophet
says, Psalm. 13.4.
With him is mercy, that he may be feared. But many thereby are made more
secure and careless. But to come nearer to the mark: You say, you hope to be
saved by Jesus Christ. I answer, If those things be found in you which the
Scripture avoucheth to be in all that shall be saved by him, then you may have
good confidence, and assured hope, otherwise not. Now the Scriptures do thus
determine it, and set it down, that if a man be in Christ, and look to be saved
by him, he must be endued with these qualities following: First, he must be a
new creature. 1 Cor. 5.27. Nine things required of all that shall be saved by
Christ.
Secondly, he must live, not after the lusts of men, but after the will of
God, 1 Pet. 4.2. Thirdly, he must be zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
Fourthly, he must die to sin, and live to righteousness, Romans 6.14. Fifthly,
he must be holy and unblameable, Col. 1.23. Sixthly, he must so walk as
Christ has walked, 1 John 2.6. Seventhly, he must crucify the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Eighthly, he must walk, not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. Last of all, he must serve God in
righteousness and true holiness all the days of his life, Luke 1.75.


Lo then what things are required of all that shall be saved by Christ. Now
therefore if these things be in you in some measure of truth, then your hope is
current, sound, and good; otherwise it is nothing worth. For in vain do men
say, they hope to be saved by Christ, when as they walk dissolutely. The
reason hereof is, because the members must be suitable to the head; but Christ
our head is holy, therefore we his members must be holy also: as it is
written, 1 Pet. 2.15.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Otherwise, if we will join profane and ungodly
members to our holy head Christ, then we make Christ a monster. As if a man
should join unto the head of a Lion, the neck of a Bear, the body of a
Wolf, and the legs of a For, were it not a monstrous thing? would it not make
a monstrous creature? Even such a thing they go about, which would have
swearers, drunkards, whoremongers, and such like, to be the members of Christ,
and to have life and salvation by him. But since you do so much presume on
Christ, I pray you let me ask you a question.


Antil. What is that?


Theol. How do you know that Christ used for you particularly, and by name?


Antil. Christ dyed for all men, and therefore for me.


Theol. But all men shall not be saved by Christ. How therefore do you know
that you are one of them that have special interest in Christ, and shall be
saved by his death?


Antil. This I know, we are all sinners, and cannot be saved by any other than
by Christ.


Theol. Answer directly to my question. How do you know in your self, and for
your self, that you are one of the elect, and one of those for whom Christ
died?


Antil. I know it by my good faith in God, because I put my whole trust in him,
and in none other.


Theol. But how know you that you have faith? or how shall a man know his faith?


Antil. I know it by this, that I have always had as good a meaning, and as
good a faith to Godward, as any man of my calling, and that is not
book-learned. I have always feared God with all my heart, and served him with
my prayers.


Theol. Tush, now you go about the bush, and hover in the air: answer me to
the point. How do you know certainly and (...) that Christ dyed for you
particularly and by name?


Antil. You would make a man mad. You put me out of my faith: you drive me
from Christ. But if you go about to drive me from Christ, I will never believe
you. For I know we must be saved only by him.


Theol. I go not about to drive you from Christ, but to drive you to Christ.
For how can I drive you from Christ, seeing you never came near him? How can I
drive you out of Christ, seeing you were never in him? But this is it that
deceives you and many others, that you think you believe in Christ, because
you say you believe in Christ: as though faith consisted in words; or as though
a man had says, because he says so. If every one that faith he has faith,
therefore has faith; and every one that says he believes in Christ, does
therefore believe; then who will not have faith? who will not believe? But in
very deed, your faith, and the faith of many others, is nothing else but mere
imagination. But all this while you have not answered my question touching your
particular knowledge of Christ.


Antil. I can answer you no otherwise then I have answered you. And I think I
have answered you sufficiently.


Theol. No, no: you faulter in your speech: your answer is not worth a button:
you speak you wot not what: you are altogether befogged and benighted in this
question. But if there were in your heart the true knowledge and lively feeling
of God, then I am sure you would have yielded another and a better answer: then
you would have spoken something from the sense and feeling of your own heart,
and from the work of Gods grace within you. But because you can yield no found
reason that Christ died for you particularly and by name, therefore I suspect
you are none of them which have proper interest in him, and in whom his death
takes effect indeed.


Phil. I think this question would gravel a great number: and few there be
that can answer it aright.


Theol. It is most certain, I know it by lamentable experience, that not one
of a hundred can soundly and sufficiently answer this question; none indeed,
but only those in whom the new work is wrought, and do ty the inward work of
the Spirit feel Christ to be theirs. I have talked with some, which are both
witty, sensible, and learned, who notwithstanding, when they have been brought
to this very point and issue, have stuck sore at it, and staggered very much.
And howsoever they might by wit and learning shuffle it over, and in a
blundering sort speak reason, yet had they no feeling of that which they said,
and therefore no assurance: and consequently as good never a whit, as never the
better. It is the sanctifying Spirit, that gives feeling in this point: and
therefore without the feeling of the operation of the same spirit, it can never
be soundly answered. Thus then, I do close up this whole matter: As the
Vine-branch cannot live and bring forth fruit, except it abide in the Vine: no
more can we, except we abide in Christ, and be truly graffed in him by a
lively faith: None can have any benefit by him, but they only which dwell in
him: None can live by Christ, but they which are changed into Christ: None are
partakers of his body, but they which are in his body: None can be saved by
Christ crucified, but they which are crucified with Christ: None can live with
him being dead, but those which die with him being alive. Therefore let us root
downward in mortification, that we may shoot upward in sanctification: let us
die to sin, that we may live to righteousness: let us die while we are
alive, that we may live when we are dead.


Asun. If none can be saved by Christ, but only these which are so qualified
as you speak of, then Lord have mercy upon us: then the way to heaven is very
strait indeed, and few at all shall be saved. For there be few such in the
world.


Theol. You are no whit therein deceived. For when all comes to all, it is most
certain, that few shall be saved: which thing I will show unto you both by
Scripture, reasons, and examples.


Asun First then let us hear it proved by the Scriptures.


Theol. Our Lord Jesus says, Mat. 7.10.
Enter in at the strait gate. For it is the wide gate, and broad way that leads
to destruction; and many there be which go in thereat: because the gate is
strait, and the way narrow, that leads unto life, and few there be that find
it. Again he says, Many are called, Mat. 20.16.
but few chosen. In another place we read of a certain man which came to our
Savior Christ, and asked him of purpose, whether few should be saved: To whom
our Savior answered thus: Luke 13.14.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. For many (I say unto you) will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. In which answer, albeit our Savior does not
answer directly to his question, either negatively or affirmatively; yet does
he plainly insinuate by his speeches, that few shall be saved. For first he
bids us strive earnestly: noting thereby, that it is a matter of great grief
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Secondly, he affirms that the
gate is very strait; noting, that none can enter in without vehement crowding,
and almost breaking their shoulder-bones. Lastly, he says, that many which
seek to enter in, shall not be able; noting thereby, that even of them that
seek, many shall step short, because they seek him not aright. Esaias also
says, Except the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, Esaias 1.9.
we had been as Sodom; and had been like to Gomorrah. The Apostle also
alleges out of the Prophet, Romans 9 28. Esaias 10.22
that the Lord will make a short account in the earth, and gather it into a
short sum with righteousn^sse. These Scriptures, I think, are sufficient to
prove that few shall be saved.


Asun. Now let us hear your reasons.


Theol. If we come to reason, we may rather wonder that any should be saved,
than that few shall be saved. For we have all the lets and hindrances that
may be, both within us, and without us. We have (as they say, the Sun, Moon,
and seven Stars against us. We have all the Devils in hell against us, with
all the^^ horns, heads, marvelous strength, infinite wiles, cunning devices,
deep sleights, and methodicall temptations. Here runs a ^ort stream against
us. Then have we this present evil world against us, with her innumerable
baits, snares, nets, gins, and grins, to catch us, fetter us, and entangle us.
Here we have profits and pleasures, riches and honor, wealth and preferment,
ambition and covetousness. Here comes in a Campe-royall of spiritual and
invisible enemies. Lastly, we have out flesh, that is, our corrupted nature
against us: we have our selves against our selves. For we our selves are as
great enemies to our salvation, as either the World, or the Devil. For our
understanding, reason, will and affections are altogether against us. Our
natural wisdom is an enemy unto us. Our concupiscences and lusts do minister
strength to Satan's temptations. They are all in league with Satan against us.
They take part with him in every thing against us and our salvation. They fight
all under his standard, and receive their pay of him. This then goes hard on
our side, that the Devil has an inward part against, (...) and we c^^t^
always within (...) greatest en^^y, which is ever ready, day and night, to
betray us into the hands of Satan; yea, to unbolte the door, and let him in to
cut our throats. Here then we see on huge army of dreadful enemies, and a
very legion of Devils, lying in ambush against our souls. Are not we
therefore poor wretches in a most pitiful case, which are thus betrayed and
besieged on every side! All things then considered, may we not justly marvel
that any shall be sav^d? For who sees not, who knows not, that thousand
thousands are carried headlong to destruction, either with the temptations of
the World, the Flesh, or the Devil? But yet further, I will show by another
very manifest and apparent reason, that the number of Gods Elect upon the face
of the earth, are very few in comparison; which may thus be considered: First,
let there be taken from amongst us all treacherous papists, atheists, and
heretics. Secondly, let there be sho^led out all vicious and notorious
evill-livers; as, Swearers. Drunkards, Whore mongers, Worldlings, Deceivers,
Coseners, Proud men, Rioters, Gamesters, and all the profane multitude.
Thirdly, let there be refused and sorted out all Hypocrites, carnal
Protestants, vain Professors, Back-sliders, Deceivers, and cold Christians. Let
all these, I say, be separated, and then tell me how many sound, sincere,
faithful, and zealous Worshippers of God will be found amongst us. I suppose
we should not need the Art of Arithmetic to number them. For I think there
would be very few in every Village, Town, and City: I doubt they would walk
very thinly in the streets, so as a man might easily tell them as they go. Our
Lord Jesus asks a question in the Gospel of S. Luke, saying, Luke 18.^.
Do you think when the Son of man comes that he shall find faith on the earth?
To which we may answer, Surely very little.


Phil. Now, according to your promise, show this thing also by examples.


Theol. In the first age of the world all flesh had so corrupted their ways,
that God could no longer bear them, but even vowed their destruction by the
overflowing of waters. When the Flood came, how few were found faithful?
Eight persons only were saved by the Arc. How few righteous were found in
Sodom, and the Cities adjoining? But one poor Lot and his family. How few
believers were found in Jericho? But one Rahab. How few of the old Israelites
entered into the Land of Promise? Heb. 3.19.
But two, Caleb and Joshua: the rest could not enter in, because of their
unbelief. The true and visible Church was small during the government of the
Judges, as appears plentifully in that Book. In Eliahs time the Church was
so small, that it did not appear. 1 Kin. 17.
In the reign of the Kings of Israel and Judah, the sincere worshippers were
very few, as appears by all the Prophets. During the Captivity, the Church
was as the Moon under a cloud, she was driven into the wilderness, where she
hid her self. During the persecutions of the Greek Empire by Gog, Magog, and
Egypt, they were fewest of all. In Christ's time what a silly company did he
begin withal? How were all things corrupted by the Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees? In the beginning of the Apostles preaching there were but few
believers. After the first six hundred years, what an Eclipse was in the
Church, during the height of Antichrists reign? How few true worshippers of
God were in the world for the space almost of seven hundred years? Since the
Gospel was broached and spread abroad, how few do believe? And, as the Prophet
says, Lord, who has believed our report? Esaias 53.1.
Thus then you see it is apparent (both by Scripture, reason, and examples of
all ages) that the number of the Elect is very small, and when all comes to all
few shall be saved.


Phil. I pray you tell us how few, and to what scantling they may be reduced;
whether one of an hundred, or one of a thousand shall be saved.


Theol. No man knows that; neither can I give you any direct and certain
answer unto it. But I say, that in comparison of the Reprobate, there shall but
a few be saved. For all that profess the Gospel are not the true Church before
God. There be many in the Church, which are not of the Church.


Phil. How do you prove that?


Theol. Out of the ninth to the Romans, where the Apostle says, Romans 9.6.
All are not Israel that are of Israel. And again, Esaias cries concerning
Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the
sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.27.


Phil. How do you balance it in the visible Church, or in what comparison do
you take it? let us hear some estimate of it, Some think one of an hundred,
some, but one of a thousand shall be saved.


Theol. Indeed I have heard some learned and godly Divines give such
conjectures: but for that matter I can say nothing to it. Romans 9.27.
But only let us observe the comparison of the holy Ghost betwixt a remnant
and the sand of the Sea, and it will give some light into the matter.


Phil. Does not the knowledge of this doctrine discourage men from seeking
after God?


Theol. Nothing less. But rather it ought to awake and stir up in us a
greater care of our salvation, Phil. 2.12.
that we may be in the number of Christ's little flock, which make an end of
their salvation in fear and trembling.


Phil. Some make light of all these matters. Others say, As for the life to
come, that is the least matter of an hundred to be cared for. As for that
matter, they will leave it to God, even as pleases him: they will not meddle
with it. For they say, God that made them must save them. They hope they shall
do as well as others, and make as good shift as their neighbors.


Theol. It is lamentable that men should be so careless, and make so light of
that which (of all other things) is most weighty and important. For what shall
it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he lose his soul?
as the Author of all wisdom testifies, Mar. 16.26.


Asun. I pray you, Sir, under correction, give me leave to speak my mind in
this point. I am an ignorant man, pardon me if I speak amiss: for a fools
bolt is soon shot.


Theol. Say on.


Asun. I do verily think that God is stronger then the Devil. Therefore I
cannot believe that he will suffer the Devil to have more then himself. He
will not take it at his hands. He loves mankind better then so.


Theol. You do carnally imagine that God will wrestle and strive with the
Devil about the ^^^ter. ^s for Gods power, it does never cross his will: for
God can do nothing against his will and decree, because he will not.


Asun. Yea, but the Scripture says, God will have all men saved.


Theol. That is not meant of every particular man, but of all sorts some; some
Jews, some Gentiles, some rich, some poor, some high, some low, etc.


Asun. Christ died for all: therefore all shall be saved.


Theol. Christ died for all in sufficiency of his death, but not in efficacy
unto life. For only the Elect shall be saved by his drath: as it is written,
This is my blood in the New Testament, which is given for you; Luke 22.26.
meaning his Disciples and chosen children. And again, Christ being
consecrated, is made the Author of salvation to all that obey him.


Asun. God in merciful, and therefore I hope he will save the greatest part
for his mercy sake.


Theol. The greatest part shall perish: but all that shall be saved, shall be
saved by his mercy: as it is written, He will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, Romans 9.
and whom he will he hardneth. And again, It is not in him that wills, or
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Therefore though God be
infinite in mercy, and Christ infinite in merit, yet none shall have mercy but
only the vessels of mercy.


Antil. Can you tell who shall be saved, and who shall be damned? Do you know
Gods secrets? When were you in heaven? When spoke you with God? I am of the
mind that all men shall be saved. For Gods mercy is above all his work. Say
you what you will, and what you can, God did not make us to condemn us.


Theol. You are very peremptory indeed: you are more bold then wise: for Christ
says, Few shall be saved: you say, All shall be saved. Whether then shall we
believe, Christ or you?


Antil. If there should come two souls, one from heaven, and another from
hell, and bring us certain news how the case stood then I would believe it
indeed.


Theol. Put case two souls of the dead should come, the one from heaven, the
other from hell, I can tell you aforehand certainly what they would say, and
what news they would bring.


Antil. What, I pray?


Theol. They would say, there be few in heaven, and many in hell: heaven is
empty, and hell is full.


Antil. How know you that? how know you they would say so?


Theol. I am sure, if they speak the truth, they must needs say so.


Antil. Must they needs? Why, I pray you, must they needs?


Theol. Because the Word of God says so. Because Moses and the Prophets say
so. If you will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will you believe
though one, though two, though an hundred should rise from the dead.


Antil. Yes but I would.


Theol. I pray you let me ask you a question: Whether do you think that God
and his Word, or the souls of dead men, are more to be credited?


Antil. If I were sure that God said so, then I would believe it.


Theol. If his Word say so, does not he say so? Is not he and his Word all one?


Antil. Yet for all that, if I might hear God himself speak it, it would
move me much.


Theol. You show your self to be a notable Infidel. You will not believe Gods
word without signs, and miracles, and wonders from the dead.


Antil. You speak as though you knew certainly that Hell is full: you do but
speak at random: you cannot tell: you were never there to see. But for mine
own part, I believe there is no Hell at all, but only the bell of a man's
conscience.


Theol. Now you show your self in kind what you are. You say you believe no
Hell at all. And, I think, if you were well examined, you believe no Heaven at
all, neither God nor Devil.


Antil. Yes, I believe there is a Heaven, because I see it with mine eyes.


Theol. You will believe no more belike then you see: Job. 20.28.
but, Blessed is he that believes, and sees not. You are one of the rankest
Atheists that ever I talked withal.


Antil. You ought not to judge: you know not men's hearts.


Theol. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. You
have sufficiently bewrayed your heart by your words: For the tongue is the key
of the mind. As for judging, I judge you only by your fruits: which is
lawful. For we may justly say, It is a bad tree which brings forth bad
fruit: and he that does wickedly, is a wicked man. But it is you, and such as
you are, that will take upon you to judge men's hearts. For though a man's
outward actions be religious and honest, yet you will condemn him. And if a
man give himself to the Word and Prayer, reform his family, and abstain from
the gross sins of the world, you will by and by say, He is an Hypocrite. And
thus you take upon you to judge men's hearts, as though you knew with what
affection these things are done.


Antil. I confess I am a sinner: and so are all other for ought I know. There
is no man but he may be amended. I pray God send us all of his grace, that we
may please him, and get to Heaven at last.


Theol. Now you would shuffle up all together, as though you were as good as
the best, and as though there were no difference of sinners? but you must
learn to know that there is a great difference of sinners. For there is the
penitent and the impenitent sinner; the careful and the careless sinner; the
sinner whose sins are not imputed, and the sinner whose sins are imputed; the
sinner that shall be saved, and the sinner that shall be damned. For it is one
thing to sin of frailty, another thing to live in it, dwell in it, and trade in
it, and (as the holy Ghost speaks) to suck it in, as the fish sucketh water,
Esaias 5.18.
and to draw it unto us with cart-ropes and cords of vanity.

To conclude therefore; there is as great difference betwixt a sinner and a
sinner, as betwixt light and darkness. For though Gods children be sinners in
respect of the remnants of sin within them, yet the Scriptures call them just
and righteous, because they are justified by Christ, and sanctified by his
grace and holy Spirit. And for this cause it is that S. John says, He that is
borne of God sins not, 1 John 4.6.


Antil. What, I pray you, did you never sin?


Theol. Yes, and what then? what are you the better?


Antil. You Preachers cannot agree amongst your selves: one says one thing,
and another says another thing, so that you bring the ignorant people into a
mammering, and they know not on which hand to take.


Theol. The Preachers, God be thanked, agree very well together in all the main
grounds of Religion, and principal points of salvation. But if they dissent in
some other matters, you are to try the spirits, whether they be of God or no.
You must try all things, and keep that which is good.


Antil. How can plain and simple men try the spirits and doctrines of the
Preachers?


Theol. Yes. For the Apostle says, The spiritual man discerns all things. 1
Cor. 2.15.
And S. John says to the holy Christians, 1 John 2.26.
You have received an ointment from that holy One, and know all things; that
is, all things necessary to salvation. Those therefore which have the Spirit of
God, can judge and discern of doctrines, whether they be of God, or no.


Antil. I am not book-learned, and therefore I cannot judge of such matters. As
for hearing of Sermons, I have no leisure to go to them, I have somewhat else
to do. Let them that are bookish, and hear so many Sermons, judge of such
matters. For I will not meddle with them, they belong not unto me.


Theol. Yet for all that you ought to read the Scriptures, and hear the Word
of God preached, that you may be able to discern betwixt truth and falsehood in
matters of Religion.


Antil. Belike you think none can be saved without preaching, and that all men
stand bound to frequent Sermons: but I am not of your mind in that.


Theol. Our Lord Jesus says, My sheep hear my voice. John 10.2.
And again he says, ^^hn 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods Word. Ye therefore hear it not, because ye
are not of God. You see therefore how Christ Jesus makes it a special note of
Gods children to hear his Word preached.


Antil. But I think we may serve God well enough without a Preacher. For
Preachers are but men, and what can they do? A Preacher is a good man so long
as he is in the Pulpit: but if he be out of the Pulpit, he is but as another
man.


Theol. You speak contemptuously of Gods messengers, and of Gods sacred
ordinance. But the Apostle does fully answer your objection, saying, Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and hearing by the Word of God: and how can they hear without a Preacher? In
which words the Apostle tells you flatly, that you ca^ ^^ver have faith, nor
serve God aright without Preaching.


Antil. When you have preached all that you can, you can make the Word of God
no better then it is: and some put in and put out what they list. The
Scriptures are but men's inventions, and they made the Scriptures.


Theol. We preach not to make the Word better, but to make you better. As for
putting in and putting out, it is a mere untruth. And whereas you say, The
Scriptures were made by men, it is blasphemy once to think it, and you are
worthy to receive your answer at Tiburne.


Antil. Now I see you are hot. I perceive for all your godliness you will be
angry.


Theol. I take it to be no sin to be angry against sin. For your sin is very
great, and who can bear it?


Antil. All this while you speak much for preaching, but you say nothing for
prayer. I think there is as much need of prayer as preaching. For I find in the
Scriptures, Pray continually; but I find not, Preach continually.


Theol. No man denies but that Prayer is most needful always to be joined
unto Preaching and all other holy exercises: for it is the handmaid to all.
But yet we prefer Preaching above it, because Preaching is both the director
and whet-stone of Prayer; yea, it steereth us aright in all spiritual actions
and services whatsoever: without the which we can keep no certain course, but
are ever ready to err on this hand or that. Now whereas you say you find, Pray
continually, but not, Preach continually, you might (if you were not wilfully
blind) find also, Preach continually. For the Apostle says to Timothy, 2 Timothy
3.1.
Be instant, preach the Word in season and out of season; that is, always, as
time and occasion shall serve.


Antil. You extol preaching, but you say nothing for reading. I believe you
condemn reading.


Theol. Does he that highly commends gold condemn silver? I do ingenuously
confess, that both public and private reading of the Scriptures is very
necessary and profitable, and would to God it were more used then it is: for it
is of singular use both to increase knowledge and judgment, and also to make
us more sir to hear the Word preached. For such men as are altogether ignorant
of the History of the Bible, can hear the Word with small comfort.


Phil. It seems that this man neither regards the one not the other: because,
for ought that I can see, he cares not greatly if the Scriptures were burnt.


Antil. Oh sirrah, you speak very malapertly: you may speak when you are
bidden. Who made you a Judge? You are one of his Disciples, and that makes you
to speak of his side.


Phil. No, Sir, I hope I am Christ's Disciple, and no man's. But assuredly I
cannot hold my peace at your vile cavilling, and most blasphemous speeches.


Antil. I cry you mercy, Sir, you seem to be one of these Scripture-men: you
are of the Spirit: you are so full of it that it runs out at your nostrils.


Phil. You do plainly show your self to be a scoffing Ismaelite.


Antil. And you do plainly show your self to be one of the folk of God which
know their seats in heaven.


Phil. I pray God be merciful unto you, and give you a better heart: For I see
you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.


Antil. You think there is none good but such as your self, and such as can
please your humor. You will forsooth, be all pure. But by God there be a
company of pure knaves of you.


Theol. Now you do manifestly show of what spirit you are. For you both swear
and rail with one breath.


Antil. God forgive me. Why did he anger me then? There be a company of such
controllers as he in the world, that no body can be quiet for them.


Theol. I perceive a little thing will anger you, since you will be angry with
him for speaking the truth.


Antil. What has he to do with me? He is more busy then needs. Why does he
say I am in a bad case? I will not come to him to learn my duty. If I have
faults, he shall not answer for them. I shall answer for mine own faults, and
every Fat shall stand on his own bottom. Let him meddle with that he has to
do withal.


Theol. You are too impatient: you take matters at the worst. We ought
friendly, and in love, to admonish one another: for we must have a care one of
another salvation. I dare say for him, that he speaks both out of love and
compassion toward you.


Antil. I care not for such love. Let him keep it to himself. What does he
think of me? does he suppose that I have not a soul to save as well as he,
or that I have no care of my salvation? I would he should know that I have as
great care of my salvation as he, though I make not such outward shows. For
all is not gold that glisters. I have as good a meaning as he, though I cannot
utter it.


Theol. These words might well be spared: I hope you will be pacified, and
amend your life, and draw near to God hereafter.


Antil. Truly, Sir, you may think of me what you please; but I assure you, I
have more care that way then all the world wonders at: I thank God for it, I
say my prayers every night when I am in my bed: And if good prayers will do us
no good, God help us. I have always served God duly and truly, and had him in
my mind. I do as I would be done to. I keep my Church, and tend my prayers
while I am there: and I hope I am not so bad as this fellow would make me. I
am sure, if I be bad, I am not the worst in the world, there be as bad as I. If
I go to hell I shall have fellows, and make as good shift as others.


Theol. You think you have spoken wisely, but I like not your answer. For your
words smell strongly both of ignorance, pride, and unbelief. For first, you
justify your self in your faithless and ignorant worship of God. And
secondly, you justify your self by comparison with others, because others are
as had as you, and you are not the worst in the world.


Antil. Now I know you speak of ill will: for you never had a good opinion of
me.


Theol. I would I could have as good an opinion of you as I do desire, and
that I might see that wrought in you which might draw my love and liking
toward you. And as for ill will, the Lord knows I bear you none. I desire
your conversion and salvation with my whole heart, and I would think my self
happy if I might save your soul with the loss of my right arm.


Antil. I hope I may repent. For the Scripture says, At what time s ever a
sinner does repent, God will have mercy on him. Therefore if I may have space
and grace, and time to repent before death, and ask God forgiveness, and say
my prayers, and cry God mercy, I hope I shall do well enough.


Theol. You speak as though repentance were in your power, and at your
commandment, and that you can put it into your own heart when you list: and
that makes you and many others presume of it three hours before death. But you
must know that repentance is the rare gift of God, and it is given but to a
few. For God will know him well that he bestows repentance upon, since it is
proper only to the Elect. It is no worldly matter. It is not attained without
many and frequent prayers, and much hearing, reading, and meditating in the
word of God. It is not so easy a matter to come by as the world judges. It is
not found but of of them that seek it diligently, and beg it earnestly. It is
no ordinary three hours matter. Cry God mercy a little for fashion will not do
it. Cursory saying of a few prayers a little before death avails not. For
though true repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true.
Here^n delays are dangerous: for the longer wit defer it, the worse is our
case. The farther a nail is driven in with a hammer, the harder it is to get
out again. The longer a disease is let run, the harder it is to cure. The
deeper a tree is rooted, the harder it is to pluck up again. The longer we
defer the time of our repentance, the harder it will be to repent And
therefore it is dangerous driving it off to the last cast. For an ancient
Father says, Augustine.
We read but of one that repented at the last, that no man should presume;
and yet of one, that none might despair.

Well then, to conclude this point: I would have you to know that the present
time is always the time of repentance. For time past cannot be recovered, and
time to come is uncertain.


Antil. Sir, in mine opinion you have ^ttered some very dangerous things, and
such as were enough to drive a man to despair.


Theol. What be they I pray you?


Antil. There be diverse things. But one thing does most of all stick in my
stomach, and that is the small number that shall be saved, as you say. But I
can hardly be persuaded that God made so many thousands to cast them away when
he had done. Do you think that God has made us to condemn us? Will you
make him to be the Author of condemnation?


Theol. Nothing less. For God is not the cause of (...) condemnation, but
themselves. For every man's destruction comes of himself: as it is written,
Ho^^ ^3.^
O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self. As for God, he does (in great
mercy) use all possible means to save souls, as he ^ith by the Prophet, What
could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done unto it? Esaias 5.4.
But to come near to your question: I deny that God has created the most part
of men only and solely unto pardition, as the proper end which he did (...) in
(...) them: but he has created all things for the praise of his glory: as it
is written, He has created all things for himself, Prove. 1^.4.
and the wicked also for the evil day. Then it follows, that the cause and
end why the wicked were created, neither was, nor is the only destruction of
his creature, but his own praise and glory, that that only might appear and
shine forth in all his works. Yet certain it is that God for just causes
(albeit unknown and hid to us) has rejected a great part of men. The causes,
I say, of reprobation are hid in the eternal counsel of God, and known to
his godly wisdom only. They are secret, and hid from us, reserved in his
eternal wisdom to be revealed at the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus.
Psalm. 36. Romans 11.
His judgments (says the Scripture) are as a great deep, and his ways past
finding out. It is as possible for us to comprehend the Ocean in a little dish,
as to comprehend the reason of Gods counsel in this behalf.


Antil. What reason, justice, or equity is there that sentence of death should
be passed upon men before they be borne, and before they have done good or
evil?


Theol. I told you before, that we can never comprehend the reason of Gods
proceeding in this behalf: yet we must know that his will is the rule of
righteousness, and must be unto us in stead of a thousand reasons. For
whatsoever God wills, in as much as he wills it, it is to be holden just.
We cannot conceive the reason of many natural things, and things subject to
sense, as the motion of the celestial bodies, their unconceiveable swiftness,
their matter and substance, their magnitude, altitude, and la^itude. We cannot
thoroughly find out the causes of the thunder, lightness, winds, earthquakes,
ebbings and flowings of the sea, and many other things under the Sun: how then
can we possibly ascend up into the privy Chamber and Councell-house of God,
to sift and search (...) the bottom of Gods secrets, which no wit or reach of
man can any w^^ attain unto? Let us therefore learn in Gods fear to
reverence that which we cannot in this life comprehend.

This one thing I must say unto you, that whatsoever God dec^^eth, yet does he
execute no man till he has ten thousand times deserved it. For betwixt the
decree and the execution thereof, comes sin in us, and most just causes of
condemnation.


Antil. If God have decreed men's destruction, what can they do withal? who can
resist his will? why then is he angry with us? For all things must needs come
to pass according to his decree and determination.


Theol. First, I answer you with the Apostle: Romans 9.22.
O man, who art thou that pleadest against God? Shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power of
the clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor? Moreover, I answer, that Gods decree does not enforce the will of
man, which works and moves of it self. It has in it self the beginning of
evil m^t^on and sins willingly. Therefore, though the decree of God
imposes a necessity upon all secondary causes (so as they must needs be framed
and disposed according to the same) yet no co^ction or constraint; for they are
all carried with their voluntary motion. Even as we see the plumbe of a clock,
being the first mover, does cause all the other wheels to move, but not to
move this way or that way: for in that they move, some one way, and some
another, it is of themselves; I mean, of their own frame: so Gods decree does
move all secondary causes, but takes not away their own proper motion. For God
is the Author of every action, but not of any evil in any action. As the
soul of man is the original cause of all motion in man, as the Philosophers
dispute, but yet not of lame and impotent motion, for that is from another
cause, to wit, some defect in the body: so, I say, Gods decree is the root and
first cause of motion, but not of defective motion, that is from our selves.
Likewise, that a bell sounds, the cause is in him that ringeth it: but that
it jarreth, the cause is in it self. Again, that an instrument sounds, is
in him that plaieth upon it; but that it jarreth, is in it self; that is, in
its own want of tuning. So then, to shut up this point: all instruments and
middle causes are so moved of God being the first Mover, that he always does
will holily and justly in his moving. But the instruments moved are carried in
contrary motions, according to their own nature and frame: If they be good,
they are carried to that which is good: but if they be evil, they are carried
unto evil. So that according to the double beginning of motion and will, there
is a double and diverse work and effect.


Antil. But from whence comes it that man of himself, that is, of his own free
motion, does will that which is evil?


Theol. From the fall of Adam, whereby his will was corrupted.


Antil. What was the cause of Adams fall?


Theol. The Devil, and the depravation of his own will.


Antil. How could his will incline unto evil, it being made good, and he
being made good?


Theol. He and his will were made good, yet mutably good. For to be immutably
good is proper only to God. And Adam did so stand, that he might fall; as the
event declared.


Antil. Was not the decree of God the cause of Adams fall?


Theol. No: but the voluntary inclination of his will unto evil. For Adams
will was neither forced nor by any violence of Gods purpose compelled to
consent: but he of a free will and ready mind left God, and joined with the
Devil.

Thus then I do determine, That Adam sinned necessarily, if you respect the
decree or event: but if you respect the first mover and inherent cause, which
was his own will, then he sinned voluntarily and contingently. For the decree
of God did not take away his will, or the contingency thereof, but only order
and dispose it. Therefore (as a learned Writer says) Volens peccavit, and
proprio m^tu; B^^^
He sinned willingly, and of his own motion.

And therefore no evil is to be attributed unto God, or his decree.


Antil. How then do you conceive and consider of the purpose of God in all
these things?


Theol. Thus: That God decreed with himself, ^no actu, at once,

That there should be a world.

That Adam should be treated perfect.

That he should fall of himself.

That all should fall with him.

That he would save some of the lost race.

That he would do it of mercy through his Son.

That he would condemn others for sin.


Antil. How do you prove the decree of reprobation; to wit, that God has
determined the destruction of thousands before the world was?


Theol. The Scripture calls the Reprobates, Romans 9.22.
The vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction: The Scripture says, 2 These. 5.
God has not appointed us unto wrath: Therefore it follows, that some are
appointed unto wrath. The Scripture says of the Reprobates, that they were
even ordained to stumble at the Word. 1 Pet. 2.8.
The Scripture says, They were of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4.


Antil. (...). 18.
But how answer you this? God will^ not the death of a sinner: therefore he
has predestined none to destruction.


Theol. God wills not the death of a sinner simply and absolutely, as it is the
destruction of his creature; but as it is a means to declare his justice, and
to set forth his glory.


Antil. God did foresee and foreknow, that the wicked would perish through
their own sin: but yet he did not predestinate them unto it.


Theol. Gods prescience and foreknowledge cannot be separated from his decree.
For whatsoever God has foreseen and fore-known in his eternal counsel, he
has determined the same shall come to pass. For as it appertains to his
wisdom to foreknow and foresee all things: so does it appertain to his power
to moderate and rule all things according to his will.


Antil. What do you call prescience in God?


Theol. Prescience in God is that whereby all things abide present before his
eyes: so that to his eternal knowledge, nothing is past, nothing to come; but
all things are always present: and are they so present, that they are not as
conceived imaginations, forms and motions; but all things are always so
present before God, that he does behold them (...) their (...) and perfection.


Antil. How can God justly determine of men's destruction, before they have
sinned?


Theol. This objection has been answered in part before: For I told you, that
God condemns none but for sin, either original only, or else both original
and actual. For howsoever he does in himself, before all time, determine the
reprobation of many, yet he proceeds to no excecution, till there be found in
us both just desert^ and apparent cause. Therefore they deal unsoundly and
foolishly, which confound the decree of reprobation with damnation, it self;
since sin is the cause of the one, and only the will of God of the other.


Phil. Well, Sir, since we are so far proceeded in this question, by the
occasion of this man's objections and cavile, I pray you now, as you have spoken
much of reprobation, and the causes thereof; so let us hear somewhat of
election, and the causes thereof: and show us out of the Scriptures, that God
has before all worlds chosen some to eternal life.


Theol. Touching the decree of election, there are almost none that make any
doubt thereof: therefore small proof shall serve for this point. Only I will
construct it by one or two testimonies out of holy Scripture. First, the
Apostle says, Blessed be God, Ephesians. 1.3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in
him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without
blame before him in love. You see the words are very plain and pregnant for
this purpose. Another confirmation is taken out of the eight chapter to the
Romans, in these words: Those whom he knew before, did he also predestinate to
be like to be like to the image of his own Son, that he might be the
firstborn of many brethren.


Phil. Which be the causes of election?


Theol. The causes of election are to be found only in God himself. For his
eternal election depends neither upon man, neither yet upon any thing that
is in man, but is purposed in himself, and established in Christ, in whom we
are elected. This is fully proved in these words, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
Who has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ in himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of his glory,
wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his beloved. Where we see the
Apostle tells us, that his free grace, and the good pleasure of his will, are
the first motives or moving causes of our election.


Phil. But the Papists fetch the first motive of election out of man's merits,
and foreseen works. For, say they, God did foresee who would repent,
believe, and do well: and therefore he made choice of them.


Theol. But they are greatly deceived: For I say again and again, that there
is nothing in us which did ever move God to set his love upon us, and to choose
us unto life: but he ever found the original cause in himself; as it is
written, Romans 9.
He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth. And again: It is neither in him that wills, nor in him that
runs: but in God that shows mercy. Deuteronomy. 7.7.
The Lord himself also testifies, that he did choose his people not for any
respect in them, but only because he loved them, and bare a special favor
unto them. (...) then it is a certain truth, that Gods eternal predestination
excludes all merits of man, and all power of his will, thereby to attain unto
eternal life: and that his free mercy, and undeserved favor, is both the
beginning, the midst, and the end of our salvation: that is to say, All is of
him, and nothing of our selves.


Phil. Whether then does faith depend upon election, or election upon faith?
That is, whether did God choose us, because we do believe? or whether do we
believe, because we are chosen?


Theol. Out of all doubt, both faith and all fruits of faith do depend upon
election. For therefore we believe, because we are elected; and not therefore
elected, because we believe: As it is written, Act. 13.41.
So many as were ordained to everlasting life, believed.


Antil. If men be predestinate before they be borne, to what purpose serve all
precepts, admonitions, laws? etc. It sorceth not how we live. For neither our
godly or ungodly life can alter the purpose of God.


Theol. This is a very wicked and carnal objection, and shows a vile and
dissolute mind in them that use it. But I would wish such men to consider the
end of election; which is, that we should lead a godly (...): As it is plainly
set down in the first chapter to the Ephesians, ver. 3. where the Apostle
says, God has chosen us before the foundation of the world. But to what end?
that we should live as we list? No, no, says he; But that we should be
holy and, unblameable before him. Again he says, Romans 9.16.
We are predestinate to be made like the image of his Son, that is, to be
holy and righteous. For most certain it is, that we can judge nothing of
predestination, but by the consequents: that is, by our calling, justification,
and sanctification. For when once we feel the work of grace within us, (that
is, that we are washed by the new birth, and renewed by the holy Ghost, finding
in our selves an unfeigned hatred of sin, and love of righteousness) then
are we sure, and out of all doubt, that we are predestined to life. And it is
even as much is if God had personally appeared unto us, and whispered us in the
ear, and told us that our names are taken, and written in the Book of life.
For whom he has predestinate, them he has called: Romans 8.30.
and whom he has called, them he has justified: and whom he has justified,
them he has glorified. Now therefore, till we feel these marks of election
wrought in us, we can be at no certainty in this point; neither are we to take
any notice of it, or meddle in it: but we must strive, according to that power
and faculty we have, to live honestly, and civilly, waiting when God will have
mercy on us, and give us the true touch. As for them that are careless and
dissolute, letting all at six and seven, there is small hope that they are
elected, or ever shall be called.


Antil. I think the preaching and publishing of this doctrine of
predestination has done much hurt: and it had been good it had never been
known to the people, but utterly concealed. For some it drives to despair,
and others it makes more secure and careless.


Theol. You are in a great error: for this doctrine is part of Gods revealed
Truth, which he would have known to his people. And in good sooth, it is of
very great and comfortable use to the Children of God, against all the assaults
of the Devil, and temptations of desperation whatsoever. For when a man has
once in truth felt, by the effects, that God has chosen him to life, then
though the Devil lie sore at him, and the conscience of sin and his own
frailties do vehemently assault him; yet he knows certainly, that the
eternal purpose and counsel of God is immutable, and that because his
salvation is not grounded upon himself, or his own strength, but upon the
unchangeable decree of GOD, which is a foundation immovable, and always
standing sure and firm: therefore do the Devil and sin what they can, yet he
shall be upheld in righteousness and truth, and even (as it were) borne up in
the arms of God even to the end. For whom God loves, to the end he loves
them. Moreover, when once the Lords people perceive (by their sanctification
and new birth) both that the Lord has rejected and reprobated so many thousand
thousands, and made choice of them to be heirs of his most glorious Kingdom,
being in themselves of the same mould and making that others are, and that he
has done all this of his free grace and undeserved mercy toward them: oh how
does it ravish their hearts with the love of him! Again, how frankly and
cheerfully do they serve him! how willingly and faithfully do they obey him!
Yea, how are they wholly rapt, and inflamed with the desire of him! For it is
the persuasion and feeling of Gods love toward us, that draws up our love to
him again; as St. John says, 1. John 4. We love him, because he has love us
first.

Moreover, it is said of Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.
that she loved much, because much was forgiven. For after she felt her many
and great sins freely pardoned, her affections were kindled with the love and
obedience of Christ. So likewise the Church in the Canticles, Cant. ^.5.
after she had been in the banqueting house of all spiritual grace, and
felt the banner of Christ's love displayed upon her, forthwith she was rape
therewith, and cried out (as it were in a swoun) that she was sick of love.
So again, Cant. 5.5.
when Christ put in his hand by the hole of the door (that is, touched the
very inward parts of her heart by his spirit) then her heart yearned, and her
bowels were affectioned toward him. This is it which St. Paul prays for upon
his knees, Ephesians. 18, 19
that it may be granted to the Ephesians, that they may be able to comprehend
with all the Saints, what is the breadth and length, height and depth of Gods
love toward us, and to know the love of Christ (which passes knowledge) and
to be filled with all fullness of God. Thus then you see the great and
comfortable use of this doctrine of election, both in that it ministers
strength and comfort against all temptations, as also because it constrains
us to love God, and of very love to fear him, and obey him.


Phil. Well, Sir, I think now you have spent time enough in answering the
objections and cavils of Antilegon. In all which I do observe one thing; that
there is no end of cavilling and objecting against the truth: and that a man
may object more in an hour, then a learned man can well answer in a day.


Theol. You say truth. And the reason hereof is, because men have sin in them
out of measure, and the Spirit of God but in measure. Therefore they can by the
one object and conceive more against the truth, then by the other they shall be
able to answer and say for it.


Phil. It appears indeed, that errors be infinite, and objections
innumerable, and that there is no end of men's cavilling against Gods sacred
truth. It is good for us therefore to be thoroughly settled in the truth, that we
be not entangled or snared with any cavils or sophistications whatsoever. And I
do verily think (notwithstanding all his objections, and exceptions) that he
does in his conscience desire, with Balaam, to dye the death of the righteous,
and to be as one of them whom he seems to despise.


Theol. I am so persuaded too. For this is the triumph that virtue has over
vice, that where she is most hated, there she is often desired and wished for.
And this is the great punishment that God brings upon the wicked; Virtutem ut
videant, intabescantque relicta, as says the Poet; That they shall see virtue,
and pine away, having no power to follow it.


Phil. But now let us return to the point we were in hand with, before we
fell into these objections and cavils: which was concerning the small number of
them which shall be saved: and as you have showed us many reasons thereof, so
proceed to speak yet more unto that point.


Theol. As I have showed you of sundry lets, both within us, and without us,
which do keep us back from God, and hold us fast in our sins; so now, unto
all that has been said before, I will add nine great hindrances unto
eternal life, which may not unfitly be termed nine bars out of Heaven, and
nine gates into Hell.


Phil. Which be they?


Theol. They be these: Infidelity. Nine gates into Hell.
Presumption of Gods mercy. Examples of the multitude. Long custom of sin.
Long escaping of punishment. Hope of long life. Conceitednesse. Ill company.
Evil examples of Ministers.



Phil. These indeed be strong bars out of heaven, and wide gates into hell. I
pray you therefore prove them of the Scriptures, and lay them forth somewhat
more largely.


Theol. The first, which is Infidelity, is proved out of the fourth chapter to
the Hebrews, verse 2. where it is written, Unto us was the Gospel preached, as
unto them: but the word which they heard, profited them not, because it was not
mixed with faith in those that heard it. And again, Heb. ^.1^.
They could not enter in, because of unbelief. Here we s^e, that unbelief did
bar out the old people from entering into the Land of Promise, which was a
figure of Gods eternal Kingdom. And sure it is, that the same unbelief does
bar out thousands of us. For many will believe nothing but their own
fantasies. They will not believe the Word of God: especially when it is
contrary to their lusts and likings, profits and pleasures. Though things be
manifestly proved to their faces, and both the Chapter and the Verse showed
them, yet will they not believe; or though they say they believe, yet will they
never go about the practice of any thing, but reply against God in all their
actions. And, for the most part, when God says one thing, they will say
another: when God says ye, they will say nay, and so give God the lie. Some
again will say, If all be true that the Preachers say, then God help us. Thus
you see how infidelity does bar men out of Heaven, and cast them into Hell.


Phil. Let us hear of the second gate, which is, Presumption of Gods mercy.


Theol. This is set down in the 29. Chapter of Deuteronomie, where the Lord
says thus, When a man hears the words of this curse, and yet flattereth
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according
to the stubbornness of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst
(that is, one sin to anot^er) the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but
the wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
every curse that is written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord
shall put out his name from under Heaven.

Here we see how the mighty God does thunder down upon such as goeon in their
sins, presuming of his mercy, and saying in their hearts, If I may have but a
Lord have mercy upon me three hours before death, I care not. But it is just
with God, when these three hours come, to shut them up in blindness, and
hardness of heart, as a just plagne for their presumption. Therefore the
Prophet David, seeing the grievousnesse of this sin, prays to be delivered
from it: Psalm. 19.
Keep me, O Lord (says he) from presumptuous sins, let them not reign over
me. Let all men therefore take hood of presumptuous sins. For though God be
full of mercy, yet will he show no mercy to them that presume of his mercy.
But they shall once know, to their cost, that justice goes from him as well as
mercy.


Phil. Let us come to the third gate, which is, the Example of the multitude.


Theol. This is proved in the 23. of Exodus, verse 22. where the Lord says
flatly, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. In another place the
Lord says, Levit. 18.3.
After the doing of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and
after the manner of the Land of Canaan, whither I will bring you, shall ye not
do, neither walk in their ordinances.

Against this Law did the children of Israel offend, when they said in the
stubbornness of their heart to the Prophet Jeremie, The word that thou have
spoken unto us in the name of the Lord we will not hear, but we will do
whatsoever goes out of our mouth, and we will do as we have done, both we and
our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and the
streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 44.16.

Note here how they do altogether refuse the Word of the Lord, and how they
follow the example of the multitude. We see in these our days by lamentable
experience how thousands are violently carried down the stream, and for
defense of it some will say, Do as the most men do, and the fewest will speak
ill of you: Which is a very wicked speech. For if we will follow the course of
the most, we shall have the reward of the most, which is eternal perdition.

Let us therefore take heed of bending with the sway: for the sway of the world
does weigh down all things that can be spoken out of the Word of God, and
opens a very wide passage into hell.


Phil. Proceed to the fourth gate into hell, which is, the Long custom of
sin.


Theol. This is noted by the Prophet Jeremy to be a very dangerous thing. For
he says, Jer. 13.23.
Can the Black moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye
also do good, which are accustomed to do evil. Noting thereby, that it is as
hard a matter to leave an old custom of sin; as to wash a Black-moore white,
or to change the spots of a Leopard; which because they are natural is most
impossible. So when men through custom have made swearing, lying, adultery,
and drunkenness (as it were) natural unto them, oh how hard it is to leave
them! For custom makes another nature, and takes away all sense and feeling
of sin.


Phil. Let us hear of the fifth gate, which is, the Long escaping of
punishment.


Theol. This is avouched by the Wise man in these words, Eccl^s. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the children of men are set in them to do evil. Where he
shows, that one cause why men are so hardened in their sins, is, because
God winketh at them, and lets them alone, not punishing them immediately
after they have sinned. For if God should forthwith strike down one, and rain
fire and brimstone upon another, and cause the earth to swallow up a third,
then men would fear indeed. But it has been showed before, that God takes
not that course, but though he meet with some in this life, yet he lets
thousands escape; and that makes them more bold, thinking they shall never come
to their answer: even as an old thief, which has a long time escaped both
prison and gallows, thinks he shall always so escape, and therefore goes
boldly on in his thefts. But let men take heed: For, as the Proverb says,
Though the Pitcher goes long to the Well, yet at last it comes broken home.
So though men escape long, yet they shall not escape always: for there will
come a day of reckoning, a day that will pay it home for all. Thus you see how
impunity leads numbers to destruction: that is, when men are let alone, and
neither smitten by the hand of God, nor punished by the Law of the Magistrate.


Phil. Let us come to the sixth gate, which is the Hope of long life.


Theol. This is affirmed by our Lord Jesus concerning that rich worldling, who,
when he felt the world come in upon him with full stream, said he would pull
d^wne his barnes, and build greater, and say to his soul, Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years: Luke 12.19.
live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But our Savior calls him
fool for flattering himself in security and promising unto himself long
life. Moreover, he plainly told him that the same night he should make a
hellish and miserable end. Note, I pray you, how Jesus Christ, the fountain of
all wisdom, c^lleth this man a fool, and yields a reason thereof; to wit,
because he gathered riches to himself, and was not rich in God: he had great
care of this life, and none at all for that which is to come. So then it
follows that all such are right fools indeed, and may be chronicled for
fools (how wise soever they be taken and reputed in the world) which have much
care for their bodies, and none for their souls; great care for this life, and
little for that which is to come. well, let all such profane worldlings as
dream and dote of long life (and therefore defer the day of their repentance
and conversion unto God) take heed by this man's example, that they reckon not
without their host, and he suddenly snatched away in the midst of all their
pleasures and jollitie ^^s Job says, Job 22.13.
Some die in their full strength, being in all ease and prosperity: Their
breasts run full of milk, and their bones run full of marrow. We see
therefore how dangerous a thing it is for men to flatter and ^ooth up
themselves with hope of long life.


Phil. Proceed to the seventh gate, which is, Conceitednesse.


Theol. This is indeed a very broad gate into hell. For the Scripture says,
Prove. 16.12.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than
of such a one. And again, The fool is wiser in his own eyes, Prove. 26.^6.
then seven men that can give a sensible reason. The holy Ghost we see
affirms, that such as are puffed up with an overwe^ning of their own gifts,
are farthest of all other from the Kingdom of Heaven. For they despise the
wisdom of God to their own destruction. They hold scorn to be taught: they
will say they know as much as all the Preachers can tell them. For what can all
the Preachers say more then this? We are all sinners, we must be saved by
Christ, we must do as we would be done to. There is no more, but do well,
and have well, etc. Alas poor souls, they look ^loft, they are desperately
hoven up with conceitednesse, not knowing that they are poor, Rev. 3.17.
naked, blind, and miserable.

These men trust altogether to their own wit, learning, policy, riches, and
great reputation in the world. And because all men crouch to them, and clap
their hands at them, therefore they swell like Turki^^-Cocks, set up their
feathers and draw their wings upon the ground with a kind of snuff and
disdain of all men, as if they were the only wights of the world. Moreover
when men do praise them for their natural gifts, soothe them, and applaud
them, then it is a wonder to see how they streake themselves, as though they
would forthwith take their flight, and mount unto the clouds. But let all
insolent and conceived men hearken unto the woe that is pronounced against them
by the eternal King of glory, saying, Woe unto them that are wise in their
own eyes, Esaias 5.21.
and prudent in their own sight. Again, let them hearken to the counsel of
God, which says, Trust unto the Lord with all thine heart, Pro. 3.5.
but lean not unto thine own wisdom. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but
fear God, and depart from evil. These silly conceited fools think that
because they have the cast of this life, and can cunningly compass the things
of this world and go through stitch with them, therefore they can compass
heaven also by their fine wits, and deep devices: but alas, poor wretches,
they are greatly and grossly deceived. For the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God, and he cotcheth the wise in their own craftiness. 1
Cor. ^.19.
And again the Lord says, 1 Cor. 1.19.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding
of the prudent. Let not these men therefore stand too much in their own light,
let them not trust to their own policies: for they are all but as an ice of
one nights freezing, which will deceive them that trust unto it. Let them
therefore become fools in themselves, that God may make them wi^^. Let them
deny themselves, that God may acknowledge them. Let them be humbled in
themselves, that God may exalt them. For assuredly, there is no use, after this
life, of the most exquisite wisdom of flesh, it ends all when we end.
Eccles. 2.16.
For how dies the wise man? ^^ven as dies the fool, says the holy Ghost.
And where all worldly wisdom ends, there all heavenly wisdom begins.
Thus therefore we see what a wide gate into hell Conceitednesse is, and how
many enter in thereat:


Phil. Now let us understand of the eighth gate into hell, which is, Ill
Company.


Theol. The Spirit of God foreseeing the great danger of this, and knowing how
ready we are to be carried away with ill company, does give us most earnest
warning to take heed of it as a most dangerous thing. Prove. 4.14.
Enter not (says he) in the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of
evil men. Avoid it, go not by it, turn from it, and pass by. The reason
hereof is yielded in another place, where it is said, Prove. 13.20.
A companion of fools shall be made worse. Let men therefore take heed of ill
company, for many thereby have been brought to the gallows, and have
confessed upon the ladder, that ill company has brought them unto it, and
therefore have admonished all by their example to take heed and beware of lewd
company. Moreover the Scripture says, He that follows vain companions
shall be filled with poverty. Prove. 18.19.
And again in the same chapter, He that keeps company with banquetters
shameth his father. Let us therefore say with David, Psa. 119.63.
I am a companion of all them that fear God, and keep his commandments. And
on the contrary let us say with him, Psalm. 2.6.
I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with the
d^ssemblers. I hate the assembly of the evil, and have not accompanied with
the wicked. Let us therefore by David's example shun the company of the wicked:
for as a man is, so is his company. It is the surest note to discern a man by.
For as all unlike things are unsociable, so all like things are sociable.
Herein let us beware we deceive not our selves with vain words, and an
opinion of our own strength, as if we were as strong as Christ, and could not
be drawn away with any company. No, no, we are more apt to be drawn than to
draw; to be drawn to evil by others, then to draw others to good: therefore
God says by his Prophet, Jer. 15.16.
Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. Undoubtedly he is
an odd man that is not made worse with ill company. For can a man touch pitch,
and not be defiled therewith? Can a man carry coals in his bosom, and not be
burnt? Daily and lamentable experience shows, that many of them which think
themselves strong, are this way most grievously smutted. Let a man think
therefore he never abandoneth evil, till he abandon ill company. For no good
is concluded in this Parliament. For ill company is the suburbs of hell.
Furthermore, it is to be observed, that some, upon admonitions and some inward
compunctions of their own conscience, do leave their sins until they have
new provocations, and until they come amongst their old copesmates and
sin-companions, and then are they carried back again to their old byas, and
return to their folly, as a dog returns to his vomit. For we see some, which
otherwise are of good natures and dispositions, most pitifully and violently
carried away with ill company. Pro. 26.11.
For even as green wood of it self is unapt to burn, yet being laid on the
fire with a great deal of sear wood, it burns as fast as the rest: So many
toward youths, which of themselves are not so prone unto evil as others, yet
with this violent stream and blustering tempest of ill company are carried
away.


Phil. Let us come to the last gate, which is, the Evil examples of Ministers.


Theol. It grieveth me, and I am almost ashamed to speak of this point: for is
it not a woeful and lamentable thing, that any such should be found amongst the
sons of Levi? Is it not a curse, that the Ministers of Christ should be of a
scandalous conversation? For if the eye be dark, how great is the darkness?
If they be examples of all evil to the flock, which should be patterns,
lights, and examples of all goodness, must it not needs strengthen the hands
of the wicked, so as they cannot return from their wickedness? But this is an
old disease and evil sickness, which has always been in the Church. The
Prophet Jeremy does most grievously complain of it in his time, Jer. 23.24.
and says, That from the Prophets of Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into
all the Land. For both the Prophet and the Priest do wickedly. I have seen
(says he) in the Prophets of Jerusalem filthiness. They commit adultery, and
walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can
return from his wickedness: they are all unto me as Sodom, and the
inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah. And in the ninth verse of the same Chapter he
shows, that it was no pleasure or joy unto him so publicly to reprove them,
but that he did it with exceeding grief, as being forced thereunto, both in
regard of Gods glory, and the good of the Church. His words are these, Mine
heart breaks within me, because of the Prophets, and all my bones shake.
Moreover, in the same Chapter is set down how the Lord would feed them with
wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall, and sundry other ways plague
them for their flatteries, seducements, corrupt doctrine, and evil example of
life.


Phil. Most certain it is that the evil example of Ministers, and especially
of Preachers, is very dangerous and offensive: for thereby thousands are
hardened in their sins. For men will say, Such a Minister, and such a
Preacher does thus and thus, and therefore why may not we do so too? They are
learned, and know the Word of God, therefore if it were evil, I hope they
would not do it: for they should be lights unto us, and give us good examples.
Therefore since they do such things, we cannot tell what to think, or what to
say to the matter: they bring such simple folk as we are into a mammering.


Theol. Oh that I could with the Prophet Jeremy quake and shake to think of
these matters! Oh that I could mourn as a Dove in penning of it! Oh that I had
in the wilderness a cottage, and could with Job be a brother to the Dragons,
and a companion to the Ostriches, whilst I have any thoughts of these things!
Oh that I could weep and mourn without sin, before I yield you an answer! For
weep indeed I may, but answer I cannot. Alas (with much grief I speak it) all
is too true that you say, and herein the people have a vantage against us, if I
may call it a vantage. But let this be my answer: If the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. Mat. 13.14.
Blind guides and blind people shall perish together. If because we are wicked,
they will be more wicked, then both they and we shall burn in hell fire
together. Then let them reckon their gains, and see what they have got. They
have small cause to triumph over us: for thereby their market is never a whit
amended. Let them take this for answer. And let us that are the Ministers of
Christ, and Preachers of the Gospel, look narrowly to our selves, and make
straight steps to our feet: for if we tread never so little awry, we may see
how many eyes are upon us. Let us therefore with David pray continually, Order
my goings, O Lord, that my footsteps slip not: for when my foot slipped they
rejoiced against me. And as for the people, let them follow the examples of
those which walk unblameably (as God be thanked some such there be) and let
them fly the examples of such as are offensive. So shall God have more glory,
and they more peace in their own hearts. Thus have we heard what a wide gate
is opened into Hell by the evil example of Ministers, and especially of
Preachers.


Phil. Well, since there be so many bars out of Heaven, and so many gates into
Hell, it is a very hard matter to break through all these bars, and to enter
into life; and as hard a matter to miss all these gates, and to escape Hell.
He quits him well that can do it.


Theol. True indeed. And as hard a thing as that is, so hard a thing is it for
flesh and blood to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And yet most men make
light of it, and think it is the easiest matter of an hundred.


Asun. As hard as it is, yet I hope by the grace of God I shall be one of them
that shall enter in. For so long as I do as I would be done to, and say no
body no harm, nor do no body no harm, God will have mercy on my soul. And I
doubt not but my good deeds shall weigh against my evil deeds, and that I shall
make even with God at my later end. For, I thank God for it, I have always
lived in h^s fear, and served him with a true intent: Therefore I know that so
long as I keep his commandments, and live as my neighbors do, and as a
Christian man ought to do, he will not damn my soul.


Theol. Can you then keep Gods Commandments?


Asun. As near as God will give me grace.


Theol. Nay, but I ask you whether you keep them or no?


Asun. I do assay to keep them as near as I can. I do my true intent. Though
I keep them not all, yet I am sure I keep some of them.


Theol. Because you say you keep some of them, I pray you let me be so bold
with you as to examine you in the particulars. You know the first Commandment
is this: Thou shall have none other Gods in my sight. How say you, do you keep
this?


Asun. I am out of all fear of it. For I never worshipped any God but one. I
am fully persuaded there is but one God.


Theol. What say you to the second Commandment? Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image, etc.


Asun. I never worshipped any images in my life, I defy them, I know they
cannot help me, for they be but stocks and stones.


Theol. What say you to the third Commandment? which is this, Thou shall not
take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.


Asun. Nay certainly, I was never counted a swearer in my life, but I have
served God always of a child, and have had a good faith in him ever since I
could remember; I would be sorry else.


Theol. What say you then to the fourth Commandment? Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath day, etc.


Asun. Nay, for that matter I keep my Church as well as any man in the parish
where I dwell, and mind my prayers as well when I am there. I thank God for it
(though I say it my self) I have been always well given, and have loved Gods
word with all my heart; and it does me good to hear the Epistles and Gospels
read every Sunday by our Vicar.


Theol. Tell me, what say you to the fifth Commandment? which is; Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, etc. Do you keep this?


Asun. I have always loved and obeyed my father and mother from my heart. I
hope there is no body can accuse me for that: and I am sure, if I keep any
commandment, it is this. For when I was a boy, every body said that I was well
given, and a toward child. Therefore if I should not keep this Commandment, it
would be a great grief to me, and go as near my heart, as any thing that
came to me this seven years.


Theol. What say you to the sixth Commandment: Thou shall not kill?


Asun. It were strange if I should not keep that.


Theol. What say you to the seventh: Thou shall not commit adultery?


Asun. I thank God for it, I was never given to women. God has always kept
me from that; and, I hope, will so still.


Theol. What say you to the eighth: Thou sh^^t not steal?


Asun. I am neither whore-master nor thief.


Theol. What say you to the ninth: Thou shall not bear false witness? etc.


Asun. I defy all false witness bearing from my heart.


Theol. What say you to the last: Thou shall not covet?


Asun. I thank God for it, I never coveted any man's goods but mine own.


Theol. Now I perceive, you are a wonderful man: you can keep all the
Commandments. You are like the blind Ruler, which said unto Christ, All these
things have I kept from my youth. Mat. 19.20.
I perceive now indeed, that it is no marvel though you make so light of
Preaching: for you have no need of it. You are whole, you need not the
Physician: you feel no misery, and therefore you care not for mercy. For where
misery is not felt, there mercy is not regarded: but I see you need no Savior.


Asun. You ^^y not well in that, I need a Savior: and i^ is my Lord Jesus that
must save me; (...) he made me.


Theol. What need you a Savior, since you are no sinner?


Asun. Yes, believe me, I am a sinner. We are all sinners: there is no man but
he sins.


Theol. How can you be a sinner, since you keep all the Commandments?


Asun. Yes, I am a sinner for all that.


Theol. Can you both be a sinner, and be without sin too? for he that
keeps the Commandments, is without sin: which thing you say you do. But I
see how the case stands; that a great number of such ignorant and sottish men
as you are, will in general say you are sinners, because your conscience
tells you so; but when it comes to particulars, you know not how you sin,
nor wherein. I pray you therefore, let me lead you through the Commandments
again, and deal with you in particulars, that I may bring you to the sight of
your sins. How say you therefore, do you upon your knees, every morning and
evening, give God thanks for his particular mercies, and manifold favors
toward you? And do you call much upon him privately, and much also with your
family? Answer me plainly and simply.


Asun. I cannot say so.


Theol. Then you have broken the first Commandment, which charge us to give
God his due worship; whereof prayer and thanksgiving are a part. So then here,
at the very entrance, you are found guilty. Further, I demand of you, whether
you never had any by-thoughts in your prayers, and your heart has not been
upon other matters, even then while you were in prayer?


Asun. I cannot deny that: For it is a very hard matter to pray without
by-thoughts.


Theol. Then (by your own confession) you have broken the second Commandment,
which does command the right manner of Gods worship: that is, that as we must
worship God, so we must do it in faith, love, zeal, and pure affections. So
that here you are guilty also; because when you pray, your mind is of other
matters, and you do it not in sincerity and truth. Further, I demand of you,
whether you did never swear by your faith, or troth, or by our Lady St. Mary,
and such other oaths?


Asun. Yes by S. Mary have I: I must needs confess it.


Theol. We need no further witness, your very answer proves it; for your
answer is an oath: therefore, here also are you guilty, because you swear by
idols. Further, I demand of you, whether you did never travel to Faires on the
Sabbath day, or make bargains on that day, or take journies, or talk of
worldly matters, neglecting holy duties.


Asun. Yes, God forgive me, I have.


Theol. Then are you guilty of the breach of the fourth Commandment, which
charge us, on pain of death, to spend the Sabbath day in holy and religious
duties, both publicly and privately. Further, I demand whether you instruct
your wife, children, and servants in the true knowledge of God, and pray with
them or no?


Asun. I am sure you would have me speak the truth. I must needs confess, I
do not, neither am I able to do it.


Theol. Then are you guilty of the breach of the fifth Commandment, which
commands all duties of superiors toward their inferiors, and of inferiors
toward their superiors, whereof prayers and instructions are a part.
Moreover, I demand whether you were ever angry or no?


Asun. Yes, an hundred times in my days: and I think there is no body but
will be angry at one time or other, especially when they have cause.


Theol. Then you have broken the sixth Commandment, which charge us to avoid
wrath, anger, malice, desire of revenge, and all such like forerunners unto
murder. Furthermore, I ask you, whether you did never look upon a woman with a
lust in your heart?


Asun. Yes, for I think there is no man free from thoughts that way. I had
thought thoughts had been free.


Theol. No: thoughts are not free before God; for God knows our thoughts, and
will punish us, arraign us, and condemn us for thoughts. Men know not
thoughts; and therefore can make not Laws against thoughts: but because God is
privy to all our most secret thoughts, therefore he has made Laws against
them, and will condemn them. Therefore I conclude, that if you have nourished
adulterous thoughts in your heart, you are guilty of the breach of the seventh
commandment, which forbids all secret thoughts and provocations whatsoever
to adultery. But further, I demand, whether you did never pilfer, purloine, and
steal some small things from your neighbor: as pasture, poultry, conies,
apples, and such like?


Asun. I cannot clear my self in these things: for I had thought they had
been no sin.


Theol. Then have you broken the eight Commandment, and stand guilty of
eternal death. For God in this Commandment charge us to have as great care
of our neighbors goods, as of our own: and not to injure him any manner of
way, (...) thought, word, or deed. Therefore all deceit, pilfring, oppressing,
and all unjust dealing with our neighbors goods, is here condemned. Moreover,
let me ask you, whether you did never lie or dissemble?


Asun. Yes assuredly.


Theol. Then have you broken the ninth Commandment: wherein God charge us,
both in witness bearing, and all other matters, to speak the plain truth
from our heart: without lying, or dissembling.

Last of all, I demand, whether you did never in your heart desire something
that was not your own: as your neighbors house or ground, kine or sheep,
etc. therein bewraying the coffeehouse of your heart.


Asun. I am as guilty in this as in any thing: For God forgive me, I have often
desired and lusted after this and that, which was none of mine own, and so
have bewrayed my coffeehouse.


Theol. Then I perceive (by your own confession) that you are guilty of the
breach of all the Commandments.


Asun. I must needs confess it: for I see now more into that matter then ever
I did. I never heard so much before in my life, nor was ever asked any such
questions, as you ask me. I had thought many of those things, which you asked
me, had been no sins at all.


Theol. I could have convicted you in a thousand other particulars, wherein you
do daily and hourly break the Law of God. But my purpose was only to give
you a taste of some particular transgressions, and therewithal some little
light by the way into the meaning of the Law: that thereby you might be brought
to some better sight of your self, and might a little perceive in what case
you stand before God; and by that little conceive a great deal more.


Asun. Well: now I do plainly see, that I have been deceived, and am not in so
good estate before God, as I thought I had been. Moreover, I see that thousands
are out of the way, which think they are in a good case before God: whereas
indeed they are in blindness, and in their sins. But Lord have mercy upon
us. I do now plainly see, that I am far from keeping the Commandments: and
I think no man does keep them.


Theol. You may swear it, I warrant you. For neither Saint Paul, David, or the
Virgin Mary could ever keep any one of the Commandments. I am glad you begin
to see into the Law of God, and to have some taste that way. For as a man's
knowledge and in-sight is into the Law, so is hi^ knowledge and in-sight into
himself. He that has a deep in-sight into the Law of GOD, has also a deep
in-sight into himself. He that has no in-sight into the Law, can have no
in-sight into himself. For the Law is that glass, wherein we do behold the
face of our souls before GOD. The Apostle says, By the Law comes the
knowledge of sin. Therefore those which are altogether ignorant of the Law,
and never behold themselves in this glass, do commit an hundred sins a day,
which they know not of; and therefore are not grieved for them. For how can a
man be grieved for that which he knows not? But now further, I pray you to
give me leave to ask you some more questions of the principle^ of Religion, to
the end, that you, knowing and feeling your ignorance, may be humbled
therewith, bewail i^ in time, and seek after the true knowledge of God. But
yet, by the way, I will ask Antil^gon a question or two; because I desire to
understand what knowledge he has in the grounds of Religion. Tell me
therefore, Antilegon, what was the reason why Christ was conceived by the holy
Ghost.


Antil. I could answer you, but I will not. What authority have you to examine
me? Show your commission. When I see your warrant, I will answer you: in the
mean time, you have nothing to do to examine me. Meddle with that you have
to do withal.


Theol. I perceive you are not only ignorant, but wilful and obstinate, and
refuse all instructions. Therefore I will leave you to God, and to your galled
conscience. But I pray you, Asunetus, answer this question. What think you,
what was the reason that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost?


Asun. Bel^eve me, Sir, that is an hard question. You may ask a wise man that
question: For I cannot answer it.


Theol. What say you then to this? Who was Christ's mother?


Asun. Marry, Sir, that was our blessed Lady.


Theol. What was Pontius Pilate?


Asun. I am somewhat ignorant, I am not book-learned: but if you will have my
simple opinion, I think it was the Devil. For none but the Devil would put
our sweet Savior to death.


Theol. What is the holy Catholic Church which you do believe?


Asun. The communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins.


Theol. What do you pray for, when you say, Thy Kingdom come?


Asun. I do pray that God would send us all of his grace, that we may serve
him, and do as we ought to do, and keep us in a good mind to Godward, and
to have him much in our mind. For some (God bless us) have nothing but the
Devil in their mind: they do nothing a Gods name.


Theol. What is the Sacrament?


Asun. The Lords Supper.


Theol. How many Sacraments be there?


Asun. Two.


Theol. Which (...) they?


Asun. Bread an (...).


Theol. What is the principal end of your coming to receive the Sacrament?


Asun. To receive my Maker.


Theol. What is the principal use of a Sacrament?


Asun. The body and blood of Christ.


Theol. What profit and comfort have you by a Sacrament?


Asun. In token that Christ died for us.


Theol. I can but pity you for your ignorance: for it is exceeding gross and
palpable. Your answers are to no purpose, and bewray a wonderful blindness
and senselessness in matters of Religion. I am sorry that now I have not time
and leisure to let you see your folly and extreme ignorance; as also to lay
open unto you the sense and meaning of the Articles of the Faith, the Lords
prayer, and the Sacraments, and all other the grounds of Christian Religion.


Asun. What course would you wish me to take, that I may come out of ignorance,
and attain unto the true knowledge of God?


Theol. Surely I would wish you to be diligent in hearing of Sermons, and
reading the Scriptures, with prayer and humility. Also that you would peruse
Catechismes, and other good books, and especially Virels grounds of Religion,
and the works, of the two worthy servants of God, Master Giffard, and Master
Perkins; and other men's, that have done great service to the Church, and for
whom thousands are bound to give God thanks. If you take this course, you
shall by Gods grace, within a short time, grow to some good measure of
knowledge in all the main grounds of Christian Religion.


Phil. I had not thought any man had been so ignorant as I now perceive this
man is.


Theol. Yes verily, there be thousands in his case. And I do know by
experience, that many will use the very same answers, or at least very little
differing.


Phil. I warrant you, if you had questioned with him of kine or sheep,
purchasing of land, taking of leases, or any other matters under the Sun, you
should have found him very ripe and ready in his answers.


Theol. I am so persuaded too: For let a man talk with worldly men of worldly
matters, and their answer is never to seek. They will talk very freshly with
you of such matters, if it be all the day long. For they have a deep in-sight
into earthly things, and do wholly delight to talk of them, being never weary.
For it is their joy, their meat, and their drink But come once to talk with
them of Gods matters (as of faith, repentance, regeneration, etc.) you shall
find them the veriest dullards and dunces in the world. For when speech is had
of these things, they are so b^fogged that they cannot tell where they are, nor
what they say.


Phil. In my judgment, such men's case is very pitiful and dangerous: and so
is this man's case also, if God do not very speedily pull him out of it.


Theol. Questionless. For God says, (...)
My people perish for want of knowledge. Our Lord Jesus says, that ignorance
is the cause of all errors. Mat. ^2 15.
Ye err, says he, not knowing the Scriptures. The Apostle says, that
ignorance does alienate us from the life of God: Ep^^^ 4 ^8.
For, says he, the Gentiles were darkened in their cogitation, being strangers
from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. So then it is
clear that ignorance is not the Mother of devotion, as the Papists do avouch;
but it is the Mother of error, death, and destruction, as the Scripture
affirms. Our Lord foreseeing the great danger of ignorance (how thereby
thousands are carried headlong into hell) does admonish all men to search the
Scriptures, which do testify of him, that so they might get out of the most
dangerous gulf of ignorance, wherein multitudes are implunged. Therefore the
Noble men of Berea are commended by the holy Ghost, (...) 17.11.
because they received the Word with all readiness, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Oh therefore that men would
earnestly seek after the knowledge of God in time, and (as the Prophet says)
seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near.
Esaias 55.6.


Phil. I do see that all ignorance in matters of faith is dangerous, but I
think wilful ignorance is of all other most dangerous.


Theol. Wilful ignorance (no doubt) is a plain prognostication and
demonstrative argument of eternal death for it is a most horrible and fearful
thing for men to refuse instruction, despise counsel, harden their hearts,
stop their ears, and close up their eyes against God. This is the very upshot
of our decay.


Phil. I pray you, what call you hardness of heart?


Theol. An hard heart is that which is neither moved with Gods mercies, nor
scared with his judgments; neither fears the Law, nor regards the Gospel;
neither is helped by threatenings, nor softened by chastenings; whis is
unthankful for Gods benefits, and disobedient to his counsels; made cruel by
his rods, and dissolute by his favors; unshamefac't to filthiness, and
fearlesse to perils; uncourteous to men, and wretchlesse to God; forgetful of
things past, negligent in things present, and improvident in things to come.


Phil. Lay forth yet more plainly the state of ignorant and hard-hearted men,
and show how lamentable it is.


Theol. If a man be outwardly blind, we do pity him, and say, There goes a
poor blind man; but if he be both blind and deaf, do we not more pity him,
and say, Oh in how miserable a case is that man! but if he be both blind,
deaf, and dumb, do we not most of all pity him, and say, Oh that man is in a
most woeful taking, and in a most pitiful plight!

How much more then are they to be pitied, which, as concerning their souls,
are both blind, deaf, and dumb: For the diseases of the soul are far more
dangerous and more to be pitied then those of the body.

Would it not pity a man's heart to see a poor sheep in a Lions mouth, whilst
he teareth him, rendeth him, and pulls out his guts? Even such is the case of
ignorant men in the claws of the Devil. For the Devil has them under him,
rides them at his pleasure, and teareth their souls in pieces.

Oh that we had eyes to see these things, hearts to feel them, and affections
to be thoroughly moved with them, even unto mourning and tears!


Phil. Few do think that ignorant men are in so woeful a case as you speak
of; for they think ignorance will excuse them. And some will say, they are
glad they have so little knowledge. For if they should have much knowledge of
their Masters will, and do it not, they should be beaten with many stripes; but
now, being ignorant, they think all is safe.


Theol. God willed his people to offer sacrifice for their sins of ignorance,
therefore ignorance is a sin, and excuses no man. And as for the state of
their souls before God, it is most miserable, if we could see into their
souls as w:e see their bodies. For assuredly there be multitudes which ruffle
it out in velvets and silks, and most brave and glittering outsides, but
inwardly are full of filthiness and sin: they have fine delicate bodies, but
most ugly, black, and filthy souls: if a man could see into their souls as
he does into their bodies, he would stop his nose at the stink of them. For
they smell rank of sin in the nostrils of God, his Angels, and all good men.


Phil. Then I p rceive by your speech that the case of all ignorant and profane
men is fearful in the sight of God, and that all good men are to pity them,
and to pray for them.


Theol. If two blind and deaf men should walk in a ^^^ten path that leads to a
great deep pond, wherein they are like to be drowned if they go forwards, and
two men far off should whoope unto them, and will them not to go forward
lest they be drowned, yet they neither seeing any man, nor hearing any man, go
forward, and are drowned: were not this a lamentable spectacle to behold? Even
so is it with all the ignorant, blind, and deaf souls of the world, for they
cast no perils, but walk on boldly to destruction. And though the Preachers of
the Gospel whoop never so loud unto them, or give them never so many warnings
and caveats to take heed, yet they, being inwardly blind, see nothing, and
spiritually deaf, hear nothing, and therefore go on forward in their sins and
ignorance, till they suddenly fall into hell pit.

Put case also two great Armies should pitch a field, and fight a main battle
upon a plain, and that some man should stand upon the top of a mountain hard
by, and behold all, and should see with his own eyes how thousands, and ten
thousands went to wrack, and fell down on every side as thick as hail, the
whole plain swimming in blood: and should also hear the groaning of soldiers
wounded, and the doleful sighs and groanings of many Captains and Colonels
giving up the ghost: were not this a most woeful spectacle? Even so, when we
do clearly see Satan wound and murder thousand thousand souls, is it not a
far more tragical and lamentable sight? and ought it not even to kill our
hearts to behold it? but (alas) men have no eyes to see into these things. And
yet certain it is, that Satan does continually, and in most fearful manner
massacre innumerable souls. Thus have I showed you the woeful estate of
profane and ignorant men.


Phil. If it be so, you that be Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, and have
taken upon you the cure and charge of souls, have need to look about you, and
do what in you lies to save souls; and, as good shepherds, in great pity
and compassion, to labor to pull them out of the paws of this roaring Lion,
which goes about continually, seeking whom he may devour.


Theol. It stands us upon indeed very seriously and carefully to look to it,
as we will answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment. For it is no small
matter that we have taken in hand, which is, to care for the flock which
Christ has bought with his blood. Would to God therefore that we would leave
striving about other matters, and strive together all about this, who can pull
most out of the Kingdom of Satan, sin, and ignorance; who can win most
souls; and who can perform best service to the Church. This were a good
strife indeed; and would to God that we might once at last with joined forces
go about it, and with one heart and hand join together to build up Gods
house. If through our own follies the work has been hindered, or any breach
made, let us in wisdom and love labor to make it up again: if there have
been any declining and coldness, let us now at last revive, let us stir up
our selves, that we may stir up others: let us be zealous and fervent in
spirit, that we may through Gods grace put life into others, and rouse up this
dead, declining, and cold age wherein we live. So shall God be glorified, his
Church edified, his Saints comforted, his people saved, his throne erected, and
the kingdom of the Devil overthrown.


Phil. What think you were the best course to effect this which you speak of?


Theol. This is a thing that must be exceedingly labored in of us which are
the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel. And here is required diligence, and
(as we say) double diligence: for the people are every where very ignorant.
Some are stones, altogether incapable of instructions: others are froward and
wilful: some will receive the doctrine, but not the practice: some again are
altogether set upon peevishness and cavilling. So that a man were better take
upon him the charge of keeping Wolves and Bears, then the charge of souls.
For it is the hardest thing in the world to reform men's disorders, and to
bring them into order; to pull men's souls out of the Kingdom of Satan, and to
bring them to God. It is, as we say, an endless piece of work, and infinite
toil, a labor of all labors: I quake to think of it. For men are so
obstinate and irrefragable, that they will be brought into no order: they will
come under no yoke. They will not be ruled by God, nor bridled by his Word.
They will follow their own swinge. They will run after their own lusts and
pleasures. They will rage and storm if you go about to curb them, and
restrain them of their wills, likings, and liberties. They will have their
wills, likings and liberties. They will have their wills, and follow their old
fashions, say what you will, and do what you can.

Is it not, think you, a busy piece of work to smooth and square such
Timber-logs, so full of knots and knobs? Is it not a tedious and irksome thing
to think upon? And would it not kill a man's heart to go about it? For how
hard a thing is it to bring such into frame, as are so far out of frame?


Phil. Well, Sir, you can but do your endeavor, and commit the success to
God. You can but plant and water: let God give the increase. You are Ministers
of the Letter; but not of the Spirit. You baptize with water; but not with the
holy Ghost. If you therefore preach diligently, exhort, admonish and reprove
publicly and privately, studying by all good example of life, and seeking with
all good zeal, care and conscience, to do the uttermost that in you lies, to
reduce them from their evil ways: I take it, you are discharged, though they
remain stubborn and incorrigible. For you know what the Lord says by his
Prophet, Ezech. 3^.9.
If you do admonish them, and give them warning, then you shall be discharged,
and their blood shall be required at their own hands.


Theol. You have spoken the truth. And therefore, since some must needs take
upon them this so great a charge, it will be our best course, to labor much
with them in Catechizing, and private instructions, and that in most familiar
and plain manner. For much good has been done, and is done, this way. The
ignorant sort must be much labored upon this way: and so no doubt, much good
may be done. Prove. 14.23.
For in all labor there is profit. Herein we (that are the Ministers of
Christ) must be content to be abased, and to teach the poor ignorant people in
most plain manner; asking them many easy questions, and often questioning
with them in most plain and loving manner, till we have brought them to some
taste and smacke of the principles of Christian Religion. We must not be
ashamed to use repetitions and tautologies, an to tell them one thing twenty
times over and over again, here a line and there a line, here a little and
there a little, precept upon precept: as the Prophet speaks. Esaias 18.10.
I know right well, nothing goes more against the stomach of a Scholar, and him
that is learned indeed, than to do thus. It is as irksome and tedious as to
teach A B C. Some can at no hand endure it. But truly, truly, I find now,
after a long experience that if we will do any good to these simple and
ignorant souls, we must enter into this course: and we may not be ashamed of
it. For it will be our crown and our glory to win souls, howsoever we be
abased. Let us therefore be well content to stoop down, that Christ may be
exalted: let us be abased, that God may be honored: let us do all things in
great love to Christ, who has said, If thou love me, John 21.15.
feed, feed, feed my flock. Let us therefore testify our love to him by
feeding his flock. Let us do all things in great love and deep compassion
toward the poor souls that go astray: as it is said, that our Lord Jesus
was moved to pity, and his bowels did yerne to see the people as sheep without
a shepherd. Let it likewise move us thoroughly, and make our hearts to bleed, to
see so many poor sheep of Christ wandering and straying in the mountains and
wilderness of this world, caught in every bramble, and hanged in every bush,
ready to be devoured of the Wolf. Thus have I showed you what course (in my
judgment) is best to be taken for the delivering of poor ignorant souls out
of the captivity of Satan and sin.


Phil. Now as you have declared what course is best to be followed on your part
which are Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, so, I pray you, show what is
best to be done of us which are the people of God.


Theol. The best counsel that I can give you, if it were for my life, is, to
be much exercised in the Word of God, both in hearing, reading, and meditation
thereof, and also to purchase unto your self the sincere Ministry of the
Gospel, and to make conscience to live under it; esteeming your self happy if
you have it, though you want other things; and unhappy if you have it not,
though you have all other things. For it is a peerlesse pearl, an incomparable
jewel. For the purchasing whereof we are advised by our Lord Jesus to sell
all that we have, Mat. 13.44.
rather then to go without it. Again, our Savior Christ gives the same
counsel to the Church of Laodicea, in these words, Apoc. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may be rich;
and white rai^ent, that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness
do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see.
Where you see the Word of God is compared to most precious gold, whereby we
are made spiritually rich; and to glittering attire, wherewith our naked souls
are clothed, and to an eye salve, wherewith our spiritual blindness is cured.
We are advertised also by Jesus Christ, whose counsel is ever the best, to buy
these things, whatsoever they cost us. The same counsel also gives wise
Solomon, saying, Buy the truth, Prove. 2^.13.
but sell it not. So then you see the counsel which herein I give you is not
of mine own, but the counsel of Jesus himself, and Solomon the wise: and who
can, or who dare except against their counsel?


Asun. Is your meaning that men must of necessity frequent preaching of the
word? will not bare reading serve the turn?


Theol. I told you before that reading is good, profitable, and necessary: but
yet it is not sufficient. We must not content our selves with that only, but
we must go further, and get unto our selves the sound preaching of the
Gospel, as the chiefest and most principal means which God has ordained and
sanctified for the saving of men. As Saint Paul says, when as the world (by
wisdom) knew not God, 1 Cor 1.21.
in the wisdom of God it pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe. The meaning of it is, that when as men, neither by
natural wisdom nor the contemplation of the creatures, could sufficiently
attain to the true knowledge of God; the Lord according to his heavenly and
infinite wisdom thought of another course, which is, to save men by
preaching: which the world counts foolishness. And by the way note, that the
preaching of the Word is not a thing of humane invention, but it is Gods own
device, and came first from him, and is the next and nearest way to save men's
souls.

Wise Solomon also in the Book of the Proverbs tells us, that the preaching
of Gods Word (which he calls Vision, using the word of the Prophets, which
called their Sermons Visions) is not a thing that may be spared, or that we
may be at our choice whether we have it or no: but he makes it to be of
absolute necessity unto eternal life. For he says, Where Vision fails, the
people are left naked. So indeed it is in the Original^: Pro. 29.18.
but the old Translation gives us the sense thus, Wh re the Word of God is not
preached, there the people p rish. Thus you see that Solomon strikes it dead,
telling us, that all they which are without Preaching of the Word, are in
exceeding great danger of losing their souls. Oh that men could be persuaded
of this! Saint Paul also says, Romans 10.14.
that faith comes by hearing the word preached: for he says, How can they
hear without a Preacher? If faith comes by hearing the Word preached, then I
reason thus: No Preaching, no faith: no faith, no Christ: no Christ, no
eternal life: for eternal life is only in him. Let us then put them together
thus: Take away the Word, take away faith: take away faith, take away Christ:
take away Christ, and take away eternal life. So then it follows: Take away
the Word, and take away eternal life.

Or we may read them backward thus: If we will have heaven, we must have
Christ: If we will have Christ, we must have faith: If we will have faith,
we must have the Word preached. Then it follows thus: If we will have
heaven, we must have the word preached. Then I conclude, that preaching
generally, and for the most part, is of absolute necessity unto eternal life,
as meet is of absolute necessity for the preservation of our bodies, as grass
and fodder are of absolute necessity for the up^^^^^^ of the life of beasts,
and wat^^ of ^^solute necessity for the life of fishes. Then this being so, men
are with great care and conscience to hear the Gospel preached, to frequent
Sermons, to resort much to Gods house and habitation, Psalm. ^^.4.
where his honor dwells: with David to say, One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that will I require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life, to behold the be^utie of the Lord, and to visit his holy
Temple. With godly Mary to say, Luke 14.41.
One thing is necessary, and so choose the better part. With the poor Cripple
at Bethesda, John 5.7.
to wait for the moving of the waters by the Angel, that his impotency may be
cured: I mean, that we should tie our se ves to the first moving of the
spiritual waters of life by the Preachers of the Gospel, that our spiritual
impotency may be helped and relieved. For the ministry of the Gospel is that
golden pipe whereby and where-through all the goodness of GOD, all the
sweetness of Christ, and all heavenly graces whatsoever, are derived unto us.
Which thing was shadowed in the Law by the Pomegranates in the skirts of Aarons
garments, E^^^ 33.
and the golden Bells between them round about, that is, a golden Bell and a
(...) granate, a golden Bell and (...) granate. The golden Bells (...) g^nifle
the preaching of the Gospel, and the Pomegranates, the sweet savor of Christ's
death: Noting thereby, that the sweet savor of Christ's death, and all the
benefit of his passion, should be spread abroad by the preaching of the Gospel.
Thus you see, that if ever men purpose to be saved, they must make more account
of the preaching of the Gospel then they have done, and not think (as most men
do) that they may be without it, and yet do well enough: and some had as
leeve be without it as have it; for it does but disquiet them, and trouble
their consciences: but woe be unto such.


Phil. Yet we see where the Word is soundly preached, there be many bad
people: and the reasons thereof, in mine opinion, are two: The one, that GOD
takes his holy Spirit from many in heating the Word, so that their hearing is
made unfruitful: The other, that the Devil has an hundred devices to hinder
the effectual working of the Word, so as it shall do no good at all, nor take
any effect in multitudes of men. But you, Master Theologus, can better lay open
this matter then I, I pray you therefore speak something of it.


Theol. The sleights of Satan in this behalf are more, and more sly, then I
or any man else can possibly discover. For who is able to des^rie, or in
sufficient manner to lay open the deep subtilties, and most secret and sinful
suggestions of the Devil in the hearts of man? He is so cunning a
crafts-master this way, that none can perfectly trace him. His workings in the
hearts of men are with such close and hidden deceits, and most methodicall and
crafty convey^nces, that none can sufficiently find them out. But yet
notwithstanding, I will bewray unto you so much as I know, or can conceive of
his dealings with them that hear the Word, that he may steal it out of their
hearts, and make it fruitless and unprofitable. First of all he bestirreth
him, and labors hard to keep men fast asleep in their sins, that they may
have no care at all of their own salvation, and therefore disswadeth them from
hearing or reading the Word at all, lest they should be awaked. If this will
not prevail, but that they must needs hear, then h^s craft is to make their
hearing unprofitable, by sleepiness, dullness, by-thoughts, conceitednesse,
and a thousand such like. If this will not serve the turn, but that the Word
does g^t within them, and work upon them (so as thereby they grow to some
knowledge and understanding of the truth) then he practices another way, which
is, to make them rest themselves upon their bare knowledge, and so become
altogether consciencelesse. If this will not suffice, but that men fall to
doing, and leave some sins, especially the gross sins of the world, and do
some good, then he persuades them to trust to those doings without Christ, and
to think themselves well enough, because they do some good, and leave some
evil. If this be not enough, but that men attain unto the true justifying
faith, which apprehends Christ, and rests upon his merits, then he
devises how to blemish the beauty of their faith, and weaken their comfort
through many frailties and wants; yea, gross down-falls and ran^e evils; so as
they shall be but spotted and leprous Christians. If this weapon will not
work, but that Christians do join all good virtues with their faith, and
abundantly shine forth in all the fruits of righteousness, then he casts
about another way, which is, to daunt and damp them with discouragements, as
poverty, necessity, sickness, reproaches, contempt, persecutions, etc. If none
of all these will do the deed, but that men constantly believe in Christ, and
patiently and joyfully endure all afflictions, then his last refuge is, to blow
them up with gunpowder; that is, to puff them up with a pride of their gifts,
graces, and strength, and so to give them an utter overthrow, whilst they do
not walk humbly, and give God the praise of his gifts.

Thus have you a little taste of Satan's cunning, in making the Word
unfruitful amongst us.


As^n. I pray you, good Sir (seeing I an ignorant and unlearned) give me some
particular directions out of the Word of God, for the good guiding and ordering
of my particular actions, in such sort as that I may glorify God in the earth,
and after this life be glorified of him for ever.


Theol. It were an infinite thing to enter into all particulars: but briefly
do this; First, seek God earnestly in his Word, pray much, in all things give
thanks: eschew evil, and do good: fear God and keep his commandments:
reform your self and your household: love virtue and virtuous men: keep
company with the godly, and avoid the society of the wicked. Live soberly,
justly, and holily in this present evil world. Speak always gracinication.
Recompense no man evil for evil, but recompense evil, with good. Be
courteous and pitiful toward all men. Take heed of swearing, cursing, and
banning. Beware of anger, wrath, and bitterness. Praise your friend openly,
reprove him secretly. Speak no evil of them that are absent, nor of the dead.
Speak evil of no man: speak always the best, or at least not the worst.
Reverence Gods Name, and keep his Sabbaths. Avoid all the signs of
condemnation, and labor after all the signs of salvation. Above all things
take heed of sin, for that is the very out-throat of the soul, and of all
goodness. Tremble therefore, and sin not: for if you sin, mark what follows:
Six great dangers in sin.
God sees. His Angels bear witness. The Conscience pricketh. Death
threatens. The Devil accuses. Hell devoureth.


You see then that sin is no scarcrow or jesting matter. Every sin that a
man commits is as a thorn thrust deep into the soul, which will not be got
out again, but with many a sigh, and many a sorrowful Oh, oh. Every sin is
(...) Iron, ^er. 17.1.
and the point of a Diamond, upon the conscience, and shall in the last day
(when the Book shall be opened) accuse us, and give in evidence against us.
Note this.
If a man commit sin with pleasure, the pleasure posseth away, but the
conscience and sting of the (...) abides, and tormenteth deadly: but if a man
do well, though with labor and painfulnesse, the pain passes away, yet the
conscience of well-doing remains with much comfort. But the best end of sin
is always repentance, if not in this life, then with we and was when it is do
late. Therefore take heed in time; take heed, I say, of sin: for Six most
hurtful effects of sin.
Sin hardens the heart, Heb. 3.13. Sin gnawes the conscience, 1 Samuel 25. Sin
fights against the soul, 1 Pet. 1.11. Sin brings forth death, James 1.15.
Sin makes ashamed, Romans 6.21. Sin procures plagues of body and soul, Deuteronomy.
28.


Behold therefore the evil effects of sin. For this cause Zophar the
Na^mathite speaks very wisely to Job, saying, Job 11.
When thou shall life thy face out of thy sin, thou shall be strong, and shall
not fear: thou shall forget all sorrow, thou shall remember it as the waters
that are past. Where Zophar pleinely shows, that the avoiding of sin is our
strength, and the committing of it, our wo^^^ing: according to that of Solomon,
Pro^. 2^.1^
The way of the Lord is the strength of the upright man. Therefore w^^^e in the
way of God, and take heed of the ways of sin: for God punishes every sin
his way, some one way, and some another; and no sin can escape unpunished. For
because God is just, therefore he must needs punish sin in all men, though in
diverse manners; as the wicked in their own persons, the godly in Christ.
Beware of it therefore, and flatter not your self in your sins. Remember how
every disobedience and every transgression has had a just recompense of
reward. N^^^ how God in all ages has p^^^hed the breakers of his ^^w. ^^od.
32.10.
God has in all ages matched the cause with the effect, that is, sin with the
punishment of sin. The Israelites, for breaking the first Commandment, in
making other gods, were often smitten by the hand of God. ^^v. 10.2.
Nadab and Abibu, the sons of Aaron, for the breach of the second Commandment,
in offering strange fire upon Gods Altar, were consumed with fire. Numb. 15.
He that blasphemed, and transgressed the third Commandment, was stoned to
death. Number. 15.52.
He that brake the fourth Commandment, in gathering sticks on the Sabbath,
was likewise stoned. Absalom transgressing the fifth, was hanged in his own
hair. 2 Samuel 18. G^^. 4.15.
Cain transgressing the sixth, in slaying his brother Abel, was branded with the
mark of Gods wrath. Genesis 34.26.
Sichem the son of Hamor, transgressing the seventh, in defiling Dinah the
daughter of Jacob, was slain by Simeon and Levi the sons of Jacob. Jos. 7.25.
Achan sinning against the eighth Commandment, in stealing the wedge of gold,
and the Babylonish garment, was stoned to death Ananias and Sapphira sinning
against the ninth, in lying and dissembling, Act ^5.6.
were suddenly smitten with death Ahab transgressing the tenth Commandment, 1
(...). 21.24
in coveting and coffeehouse, was devoured of dogs. Or if you will have
original sin therein only forbidden, then infants are therefore punished
with death, Romans 5.14.

Thus we see there is no dallying with God; but if we sin, we are as sure to
be jerkt for it as the coat is on our back. Therefore let us not deceive our
selves, nor make light of sin: for sin is no scar-bug, and we shall one day
find it so. And howsoever we make light of some sins, yet in very deed all
sin is odious in the sight of God: yea, all sin is heinous and capital in this
respect, that it is against a person of infinite being, it is against God
himself, it is against the highest Majesty. For the greatness of the person
offended does inhaunse and increase the greatness of the sin.

As for example: If a man rail at a Justice of Peace, he shall be stocked: if
he cast at one of his Majesty's privy Council, he shall be imprisoned: but if
he rail at his own Majesty, he shall be hanged. So then you see how a sin
is increased by the dignity of the person offended. Now then, since all mortal
Princes are but dust in the sight of God (and he is a person of infinite and
incomparable Majesty) how heinous and how slagitious a thing is it, in any
wise, or after any sort, to sin against his most royal and sacred person? Well
then, to grow to some conclusion, this I do advise you, as to shun all vice,
so to embrace all virtue; as to put off the old man, so to put on the new man.
Remember often and always what shall become of you after this life, where you
shall be forty years hence in Hell, or Heaven. Look well to that in time; and
therefore to live, that you may live always. Consider often is your serious
cogitation, Nine profita^le consideratiions.
What you have been. What you are. What you shall be. What God has done for
you. What he does. What he will do. Gods judgments past. Gods judgments
present. Gods judgments to come.


Awake at last, and take care for your salvation. S^^^s no longer in sin,
lest yes perish eternally. For verily there is a reward for the righteous
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. Psalm. 58.1^.
And this is the best counsel I can give you.


Asun. Your counsel is very good. I pray God give me grace to follow it, and
so to live, that I may please God, and go to heaven in the end.


Theol. You must take heed you speak not these words of course, and for
fashion sake, having no settled purpose in your heart to follow those
directions. For there be numbers that can skill to give good words, but they
will do nothing. They think they highly please God with their good words, and
that God will take them for payment, as though God regarded words. They would
feign go to heaven, but they will take no pains, they will leave no sins,
they will not forget their lusts and pleasures. They would have the reward of
Gods children, This is most (...) case.
but they will not do the works of Gods children. They would have the sweet,
but they will none of the sour. They would have the Crowns, but they will
sight never a stroke. They would feign come to Canaan, but they are loath to
travel that long and dangerous way which leads unto it. Therefore those men
being the sons of idleness will step short (in the end) of that they look
for. Prove. 1^.4.
For the Spirit says, The sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught. We must
therefore leave bare words, and come to deeds. For our Lord Jesus says, Mat.
7.^1.
Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven:
but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven: Where we see
Christ (in plain terms) excludes out of his kingdom all those whose Religion
consists only in good words and smooth speeches; but make no conscience to
practice the Commandments of God.

David, having made some good preparation for the building of the Temple, and
perceiving his son Solomon to have stuff and provision enough to perfect and
finish it, does most wisely encourage him to the wor^, in these words: 1 C^^.
12.16
Up and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee. Oh that men would follow
this counsel of David, that they would up, and be doing, and not fit still and
do nothing; that they would leave words and countenances, and set upon the
practice of Gods Law, and study with all care and conscience to be obedient to
his will. Then assuredly God would be with them, and bless them, and much good
would come of it. For the Scripture says, Prove. 14.32.
In all labor there is profit or increase: but the talk of the lips only
brings want.


Phil. Most men's minds are so wholly drowned in the love of this world, that
they have no heart to obey God, nor any delight in his commandments.


Theol. The greatest part of men are like to the Gadarens, which esteemed their
Swine more than Christ. As we see in these our days, how many make more
account of their kine and sheep, than of the most glorious Gospel of Christ.
They highly esteem dung, and contemn pearl. They are careful for trifles,
and regard not the things of greatest moment; and therefore may very fitly be
compared to a man, who having his wife and children very sick, does utterly
neglect them, and is altogether careful for the curing of his hogs ears.


Phil. We are somewhat digressed from the matter we had in hand. I pray you
therefore, if you have any more matter of good counsel to give to Asunctus,
that you would presently deliver it.


Theol. I have little more to say, save only I would advise him often to
remember, and much to muse on these things: The evil he has committed. Nine
things much to be thought of.
The good he has omitted. The time he has misspent. The shortness of this
life. The vanity of this world. The excellency of the world to come. Death,
then the which nothing is more terrible The day of judgment, then the which
nothing is more fearful. Hell fire, then the which nothing is more intolerable.



Phil. This is short and sweet indeed. You have touched some of these points
before, in this our conference. But I am very desirous to hear somewhat more
of the two last, which yet have not been spoken of.


Theol. Since you are desirous, I will briefly deliver unto you that which I
have received from the Lord. First, concerning the day of judgment. I find in
the volume of Gods book, that it shall be very terrible and breadfull For the
Son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven, Mat. 24.3^
with power and great glory. St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.10.
The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a noise, the elements shall melt with heat, and
the earth, with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. The Apostle
tells us, that at Christ's coming the whole world shall be of a light ^^re; and
that all castles, towers, goodly buildings, gold, silver, velvets, silks, and
all the glittering hue, glory, and beauty of this world, shall be consumed to
powder and ashes. 2 Pet. 3 7.
For he says plainly, The heavens and the earth, which are now, are reserved
to fire against the day of Judgment, and of the destruction of ungodly men.
Moreover, he strongly proves, that as the world was once destroyed by water;
so the second time, in the end thereof, it shall be destroyed with fire. The
Apostle S. Paul witnesses the same things, for he says, 2 These. ^.1.
Christ shall come from Heaven, with all his mighty Ang^^s in naming fire. And
in another place he notes the terror of his coming to Judgment, saying, 1
These. 4.10.
He shall come with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet
of God. We see by experience, that the coming of mortal Princes to any place
is with great pomp and glory. They have great trains and troops behind them
and before them. They are accompanied with many Nobles: goodly Lords, and
gallant Ladies do attend upon them. The Swordbearer, Trumpetters, and
Harbengers go before: many slaunting and stately Personages follow after. Now
then, if the coming of mortal Princes be so pompous and glorious: how much
more glorious shall the coming of the Son of man be, in whose sight all
mortal Princes are but dust? The Scriptures do affirm, that his second
coming unto judgment shall be with such resplendent and unspeakable glory,
that even the most excellent creatures shall blush at it. For the Sun shall
^e darkened: (...) 24.29
the Moon shall not give her light: and the Stars shall fall from heaven.
Meaning thereby, that the most glorious and bright-shining Creatures shall be
clouded and obscured by the unconceiveable brightness of Christ's coming.

Moreover, the (...) Christ's coming is noted unto us in this, that immediately
before it, the very Sea shall quake and tremble, and in his kind cry out. For
it is said, that the Sea shall roar (and make a noise in most doleful and
lugubrious manner) and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, Luke 21.25.
and for looking after those things which shall come on the world: for the
powers of heaven shall be shaken. O what shall become of swearers, drunkards,
whoremongers, and such like in that day! They shall seek to creep into an
angerhole to hide their heads. They shall then cry, Woe and alas that ever they
were borne. They shall wish that they had never been borne, or that their
mothers had borne them toads. And, as it is in the Apocalypse, They shall say to
the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day
of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

We see therefore, that the coming of Christ shall not be base and
contemptible, as in his first visitation: but it shall be most terrible,
princely, and glorious. And, as the Scriptures do affirm, that his coming
shall be with great terror and dread: so also they do show, that it shall be
very sudden and unlooked for. 2 P^t. 3.10.
For the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night: 1 These. 5.1. Luke
21.35.
as the travel that comes upon a woman. As a s^are it shall come on all them
that dwell on the face of the earth. That is, it shall suddenly catch and
entangle all men, wheresoever they be in the world. As the earthquake, which
was near thirty years agone, did suddenly take the world tardy, they not
thinking of any such matter: So shall the coming of the Son of man to
judgment, take the world tardy and unprepared: for few there be that think of
any such matter. Since therefore the second appearing of Christ shall be with
such suddenness, let us fear and tremble: for all sudden things are to be
feared.


Phil. Well, Sir, as you have showed us the terror and suddenness of Christ's
coming, so show us the purpose and end of his coming.


Theol. The principal end of his coming shall be to keep a general audit, to
call all men to an account, to have a reckoning of every man's particular
actions, and to reward them according to their de^ds: as it is written, Mat.
26.27.
The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and
then shall he give to every man according to his deeds. Again, the Apostle
says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that which he has
done, whether it be good or evil.

Here we do plainly see, that the end of Christ's coming shall be to judge
every man according to his works; that is, as his works shall declare him,
and testify of him, and of his faith. 2 These. 1.9.
In another place the Apostle says, that the end of his coming shall be to
render vengeance unto them which know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Woe then unto two
sorts of men, the ignorant, and the disobedient: for the Apostle says flatly,
they both shall be damned. Me thinks both the ignorant and disobedient, and
all other profane men, should tremble to think of this, that Christ shall come
to render vengeance unto them. If we did certainly know that a foreign enemy
should invade our Nation, overrun it, and make a conquest of it, that he
should shed our blood, destroy us, and make a massacre amongst us; yea, that
we should see our wives, our children, our kindred and dear friends slain
before our faces, so as their blood should stream in the streets, what a
wonderful fear and terror would it strike into us? we would quake to think
of it. Shall we not then be much more afraid of the damnation of our souls?
shall we not quake to think that Christ shall come to take vengeance? If the
Lion roar, all the beasts of the field tremble: and shall not we be afraid
of the roaring of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? But alas, we are so
hardhearted, and so rockt asleep in the cradle of security, that nothing can
move us, nothing can awake us.


Phil. Now as you have showed us the terror a^^ end of Christ's coming: so also
declare the manner of it.


Theol. The manner of it is this: that the whole world shall be cited to
appear personally at the general Assizes, before the great Judge. No man
shall be admitted to appear by his Attorney: but all must appear personally.
None shall be suffered to p^^ in sureties: but all must come in their own
persons, without bail or mainprise; as it is written, We must all appear,
high and low, rich and poor, king and beggar, one and another: as it is
plainly set down in the twenty Chapter of the Revelation, where the Spirit
says, I saw the dead both great and small stand before God: and the sea gave
up the dead which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead which
were in them. So then it is clear, that all without exception, shall make
their appearance at the great and dreadful Assizes. O what a great day will
that be, when as the whole world shall appear together at once! If a King
marry his son, and bid other Kings, Emperors, D^kes, and Nobles to the
marriage, with all their pomp and tr^ine, we use to say, O what a marriage,
what a meeting, what ado, what a great day will there be? but when the
universal world shall be assembled together, not only all Monarkes, Kings and
Princes, but all other, that ever have been from the beginning of the world,
all that are, and shall be, what a day will that be? No marvel therefore,
though the Scriptures call it the day of God, and the great day of the Lord.
Now then when all flesh is come together, to make their personal appearance,
then shall the Son of God ascend unto his tribunal seat, with great majesty
and glory. For a fiery stream shall issue and come forth before him: thousand
thousand Angels shall accompany him, and minister unto him: and ten thousand
thousand shall stand before him: he judgment shall be set, and the ^o^k s
opened. All the Saints also and true worshippers of God shall attend him, and
accompany him unto his judgment seat. And not only so, but they shall sit
upon the Bench and Throne with him: as it is written, 1 Corinthians. 6.2. The
Saints shall judge the world: they shall judge the Angels: that is, the Devils,
the Angels of darkness. Our Lord Jesus himself did avouch the same thing,
when he said to his Disciples, and in them to all true Christians, Mat. 19 28.
Verily I say unto you, that when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of
his Majesty, ye which followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. That is, the Saints of God
shall bear witness that the judgment of Christ, and sentence of condemnation
which he passes against all, unbeleevers, is according to justice and
equity. Thus then we see how Christ shall be accompanied to his Throne, and
with what glory and majesty he shall ascend unto it. Experience teaches, that
when mortal Judges hold their Sessions and general Assizes, they are brought
unto the Bench and Iudgement-seat with pomp and terror. For the Sheriff of
the Shire, and Halberd-men, with many Justices of Peace, and trains of others,
do accompany them unto the Bench. Then with how much more glory and majesty
shall the Son of God be brought unto his royal Throne? Thus then Christ being
set upon his Judgment seat, all the ^^^dly shall be convented before him, and
he shall stand over them (...) a naked sword in his hand; The Devil (...)
stand by them on the one (...), and ^^^ir own conscie^^^ (...) the gaping
gulf of Hell underneath them, ready to devour them. Then shall the books be
opened, not any books of paper and parchment, but the books of men's
consciences: For every man's sins are written and recorded in his conscience, as
it were in a Register book. Then will God bring every work to judgment, with
every secret thought, and set them in order before all the Reprobates. 1 Cor. 4
5.
Then will God lighten the things that are hid in darkness: and make the
counsels of the heart manifest. Then shall all the ungodly be arraigned,
convicted, and hold up their hands at the Bar of Christ's Tribunal Seat, and
shall cry guilty. Then shall that most dreadful sentence of death and
condemnation be pronounced against them by the most righteous Judge, Man. ^5.4^.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Oh doleful sentence! Oh heavy hearing! Whose heart does not tremble
at these things? Whose hair does not stand up on their head? For then shall
thousands, which in this world have flourished as the Cedars of Libanus, be
cast down for evermore, and shall drink (as a just recompense for their
iniquity) of the bitter cup of Gods eternal wrath and indignation in the
kingdom of darkness, and in the fearful presence of Satan, and all the cursed
enemies of Gods grace.


Phil. Well, now as you have declared unto us the terror, the suddenness, the
end, and the manner of Christ's coming to judgment, so lastly, show us the
right use of all these things.


Theol. Saint Peter tells and teaches us the right use of all: for says he,
Seeing all these things must he dissolved, 1 Pet. 3 11.
what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? As
if he should say: Since the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Elements
shall melt with heat, and the Earth, with the works that are therein, shall be
burnt up: since also the coming of Christ shall be with great terror, to a
fearful end, and in a fearful manner; O how ought we to excel in goodness?
So then Saint Peter tells us, that the true use of all is this: that hereby
we be brought nearer unto God, then to be more obedient to his will, and to
walk in all his commandments, making conscience of all our ways, and
studying to please GOD in all things, and to be fruitful in all good works,
living soberly, justly and holily in this present evil world, and showing
forth the virtues of him which has called us out of darkness to this
mavelous light: that so we may be prepared against the day of his appearing,
that it may not take us tardy. For our life ought to be a continual meditation
of death: we should always live as if we should dye, or that our bed should
be our grave: we must live continually as if Christ should come to judgment
presently: as it is reported of a godly man in the Primitive Church, that
whether he ate or drank, or whatsoever he did, he thought always he heard
the Trumpet of the Lord, with these words: Arise, ye dead, and come unto
Judgment. Put case it were certainly known, that Christ would come to
Judgment the next Mid-summer day; O wh^t an alteration would it make in the
world! how would men change their minds and affections? who would care for
this world? who would set his heart upon riches? who would regard brave
apparel? who durst deceive or oppress? who durst be drunk? who durst swear,
lie, and commit adultery? Nay, would not all men give up themselves to the
obedience of God? would not all serve him diligently? would not all men and
women flock to Sermons? would they not give themselves to prayer and reading?
would they not repent them of their sins? would they not cry for mercy and
forgiveness? See then what the knowledge of a certain day approaching would
effect. And ought we not to do all these things with as great care and zeal,
seeing the day is uncertain? For who knows whether Christ will come this
month or the next, this year or the next? Mat. 14 44.
He himself says, Be ready, watch, for in the hour that ye think not of,
will the Son of man come. We think he will not come this year, nor next
year, nor this hundred years. It may be therefore that he will come suddenly
upon us, we know not how soon: For in an hour that we little think of will
he come. Therefore our Savior says in the thirteenth Chapter of Mark, Verse
33. Take heed, watch and pray: for you know not when the time is. And in the
Gospel of Saint Luke he says, Luk ^.^^.
Take heed that your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and the cares of this life; and so that day come upon you unawares. For as a
snare shall it come upon all them that dwell upon the face of the earth. We
hear therefore how many watch-words and caveats our Savior gives us, when
he says, Be in a readiness, awake, take heed, watch and pray, and look
about you, lest that day come suddenly upon you, and take you napping. It
stands us all therefore upon to be at an hours warning, upon pain of death,
and as we will answer it at our uttermost peril.


Phil. Proceed to speak of the torments of Hell.


Theol. Concerning the torments of Hell I do note three things, which I will
briefly speak of, and they be these: The extremity, perpetuity, and
remedilesness thereof. First, touching the extremity thereof: it stands
specially in these three things: First, that it is a separation from all joy
and comfort of the presence of God. Secondly, that it is an eternal fellowship
with the Devil and his Angels. Thirdly, it is a feeling of the horrible wrath
of God, which shall seize upon body and soul, and shall feed on them (as fire
does upon pitch and brimstone) for ever. The Scriptures do note the extremity
of it, in calling it, Apoc. 11.^.
A lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever: in saying, Job. ^^.^1.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: in affirming, Mark 1 44.
that their worm dies not (meaning the worm that gnaweth their conscience,
or the torment of conscience) and the fire never goes out: in terming it,
Tophet, which is deep and large, and the burning thereof is fire and much wood:
and that the breath of the Lord, as a river of brimstone, does kindle it. All
these things be terrible to our senses: and yet can they not fully express the
thing as it is indeed. For no heart can conceive, or tongue express the
greatness and extremity of the torments of Hell. As the joys of Heaven never
entered into the heart of man: no more did the torments of Hell. All the
torments and troubles that fall upon men in this life, are but the sparkles of
the furnace of Gods total wrath. All fires are but as it were pictures of
fire, in comparison of Hell fire. For, as one writes, Hell fire is so
extremely hot, that it will burn up a man seven mile before he come at it.
Yet the Reprobates, being always in it, shall never be consumed of it. As the
Salamander is always in the fire, and never consumes; so the wicked shall be
always in the fire of Hell, and never consume. For Hell is a death always
living, and an end always beginning. It is a grievous thing to a man that is
very sick, to lie long upon a feather bed: how much more upon a hot gridi^on?
but how most of all to burn always in Hell fire, and never be consumed?
Another extremity of it consists in this, that the torments of Hell are
universal: that is, in every member at once; head, eyes, tongue, teeth,
throat, stomach, back, belly, heart, sides, etc. All punishments of this life
are particular: For some are pained in their head, some in their back, some in
their stomach, etc. yet some particular pains are such as a man would not
suffer to gain all the world. But for a man to be tormented in all parts at
once, what sight more lamentable? who could but take pity of a dog in the
street in that case? Thus then we see, that the extremity of Hell torments is
greater then can be conceived or uttered. For who can utter that which is
incomprehensible? We can go no further in comprehending that which is
incomprehensible, then to know it to be incomprehensible.


Phil. As you have showed us the extremity of Hell torments, so now proceed to
the perpetuity.


Theol. The Scriptures do set forth the perpetuity of Hell torments, in
saying, they are for ever. The wicked shall be cast into the Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone for ever. The fire never goes out. When as many
hundred thousand years are expired as there be stones by the Sea side, yet
still there be so many more to come. For that which has no end, can never come
to an end. If all the Arithmeticians in the world were set a work to do
nothing but number all the days of their life, even the greatest numbers that
they could possibly set down, and should in the end add all their numbers
together, yet could they never come any thing near to that length of time
wherein the wicked shall be tormented. If the whole circumference of the
Heavens were written about with figures of Arithmeticke, from the East to the
West, and from the West to the East again; yet could it not contain that
infinite time, and innumerable years, wherein all unbeleevers shall suffer
eternal torture. For in things infinite, time has no place. For time is the
measure of those things which are subject to measure. Therefore because hell
torments are infinite, they cannot be measured by any time: neither can that
which is infinite be diminished. For if you substract from that which is
infinite ten thousand thousand millions of millions, yet it is thereby nothing
diminished or made less. Put case a man should once in an hundred thousand
years take a spoonful of water out of the great Ocean Sea, how long would it
be ere he had so emptied it? Yet shall a man sooner empty the Sea, by taking
out a spoonful once in an hundred thousand years, then the damned soul shall
have any ease. Therefore a certain Writer says, If a damned soul might be
tormented in Hell but a thousand years, and then have ease, there were some
comfort in it: (for then there would be hope it would come to an end) but,
says he, this word Ever kills the heart. O consider this ye that forget
God. O ye carnal worldlings, think on this in time. For if you will not now
be moved in hearing, you shall then be crushed in pieces in feeling. What
avails it to live in all possible pleasures, and carnal delights here for
some sixty years, and then to suffer this eternal torment? what shall it
profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul? They be more then mad,
which will hazard their soul for a little profit, and a few stinking
pleasures. But this is the manner of men: they will have the present sweet
(come of it what will) though they pay never so dear for it: though they go
to the highest price: though they lose their souls for it. Oh the unspeakable
blindness and madness of the men of this world! The Devil has put out their
eyes, and therefore leads them whither he lists. For who cannot lead a blind
man whither he lists? 1 Samuel 11.2.
Nahash the Ammonite would make no covenant with the Israelites, but upon
condition that he might put out all their right eyes. So the Devil does
covenant with all the wicked, to put out both their eyes, that he may lead them
directly into Hell.


Phil. Now, Sir, a word or two more of the remedilesnesse of Hell fire.


Theol. The Scriptures do affirm, that as the torments of Hell are extreme, so
they are without all hope of remedy: Psalm. 4^.8.
as it is written, A man can by no means redeem his brother: he cannot give
his ransom unto God: so precious is the redemption of the soul, and the
continuance for ever. To this purpose Abraham said to the rich man, Luke 16.16.
being in Hell torments, Betwixt you and us there is a great gulf set, so that
they which would go from hence to you cannot, neither can they come from
thence to us. Our Lord Jesus also says, (...). 19.
What shall a man give for the recompense of his soul? Where our Savior does
plainly affirm, that there is no ransom or recompense, though never so great,
to be given for a damned soul. For the soul being in Hell, can never be
released, it is past remedy, no means whatsoever can do any good: no gold, no
silver, no friends, no riches, no power, no policy, no flattery, no bribery, no
reach, no fetch or device whatsoever, can prevail one jot: for a man being
once in Hell has no remedy, he is in close prison, he is shut up under the
hatches for ever, there is no getting out again, he must suffer perpetual
imprisonment. He cannot bring a writ of false imprisonment, because he is laid
in by the most righteous and just Judge, who cannot possibly do any wrong; but
he must lie by it. For being there once, he is there for ever. If all the
Angels of Heaven should entreat for a damned soul; if Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob should make great suit; if all the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs should
be continual solicitors to Christ for release; if the father should make
request for his son, or the mother for the daughter, yet can none of these be
heard, they must all have the repuise. For the sentence of Christ cannot be
reversed, his decree is unrepealeable. The due consideration of these things
may make all hearts to quake, and all knees to tremble. In the troubles and
afflictions of this life, though a man come in never so great danger, yet he
may wind out again by one means or another, by money, or friendship, or
rewards, or such like means: but in Hellfire, this is it that gripes, and
makes the heart despair, that there is no remedy at all to be used. If we
should ask of a damned soul, or an afflicted conscience, what they would give
for the ease and redemption of their souls; they would answer, the whole
world: howsoever secure worldlings and wicked Atheists (which see nothing, or
feel nothing) make nothing of it.

Here, by the way, let us consider the greatness of the loss of a man's soul;
which we shall the better perceive and see into, if we can aright value and
prize the soul. If therefore it be demanded, what is the price of the soul,
or what is it worth? Our Lord Jesus answers, that it is more worth then all
the world. For, says he, Mat. 1^.
What shall it profit a man ^o win all the world, and lose his soul? Therefore
the soul of the poorest beggar is more worth then all the world. Then I reason
thus: If the soul be more worth then all the world, then the loss of it is
greater then the loss of the whole world. For indeed it is a loss of all
losses, an unrecoverable loss. If a man should have his house burnt over his
head, and all that he has consumed in one night, it were a great loss. If a
Merchant-venturer should lose twenty thousand pounds in one venture, in one
ship, or (as they say) in one bottom, it were a very great loss. If a King
should lose his Crown and Kingdom, it were an exceeding great loss: But the
loss of the soul is a thousand times more then all these, it is a matter of
infinite importance. If a Tenant be cast out of the favor of his Landlord, it
is a matter of grief. If a Noblemans Secretary be cast out of favor with his
Lord, so that he takes a pritch against him, it is a matter of great sorrow.
If a Nobleman himself be discountenanced, and cast out of all favor with his
Prince, that was in great favor, it is a corsie, a heart-smart, and a matter
of exceeding grievance. But to be eternally separated from God, to be shut out
of his favor, and to be cast away from his presence, and the presence of his
Angels, is a matter of infinite more dolor and torment. Mark then and behold
what a thing it is for a man to lose his soul. Oh therefore that men would be
wise in Gods fear, that they would look out in time, and make provision for
their souls. Now then, to close up this whole point: the sum of all that
has been said is this, That the torments of Hell are endless, easelesse, and
remediless.


Asun. The laying open of these doctrines of Hell fire, and the judgment to
come, makes me quake and tremble: I am much thereby perplexed, I feel great
terror in my conscience, I am afraid I shall be damned.


Antil. Damned, man! What speak you of damning? I am ashamed to hear you say
so. For it is well known that you are an honest man, a quiet liver, a good
neighbor, and as good a townes-man as any in the Parish where you dwell, and
you have been always so reputed and taken. If you should be damned, I know not
who shall be saved?


Asun. I regard not your flatteries. I believe God, I believe his Word, I
believe those things which Master Theologus has alleged out of the holy
Scriptures, pointing me both to the Chapter and the Verse: and whether it be
more meet that I should believe the Scriptures, or your soothings, judge you.
No, no: now I do clearly see, by the glass of Gods Law, that my state is
wretched and miserable. For I have lived in sin and ignorance all the days
of my life, being utterly void of all Religion and true knowledge of God. I am
not the man indeed that you and others take me for. For though outwardly I
have lived honestly to the world-ward, yet inwardly I have not lived
religiously to Godward.


Antil. Tush, tush: now I see you are in a melancholy humor. If you will go
home with me, I can give you a speedy remedy, for I have many pleasant and
merry books, which if you should hear them read, would soon remedy you of
this melancholy passion. I have the Court of Venus, The Palace of Pleasure,
Bevis of South-hampton, Ellen of Rummin, The merry jest of the Friar and the
Boy, The pleasant Story of Clem of the Clough, Adam Bell, and William of
Cloudesly, The odd tale of William, Richard, and Humfrey, The pretty conceit
of John Splinters last Will and Testament, which all are excellent and singular
books against heart-qualmes, and to remove such dumpishnesse as I see you are
now fallen into.


Asun. Your vain and frivolous books of tales, jests, and lies, would more
increase my grief, and strike the print of sorrow deeper into my heart.


Antil. Nay, if you be of that mind, I have done with you.


Phil. I pray you, if a man may be so bold with you, how came you by all these
good books? I should have said, so much trash and rubbish.


Antil. What mattereth it to you? What have you to do to enquire? But I pray
you, Sir, what do you mean to call them trash and rubbish?


Phil. Because they be no better. They be goodly geere, trim stuff; They are
good to kindle a fire, or to scour a hot oven withal. And shall I tell you my
opinion of them? I do thus think, That they were devised by the Devil, seen
and allowed by the Pope, printed in Hell, bound up by Hobgoblin, and first
published and dispersed in Rome, Italy, and Spain, and all to this end, that
thereby men might be kept from the reading of the Scriptures. For even as a
Lapwing with her busy cry draws men away from her nest, so the Popish
generation, by these fabulous devices, draw men from the Scriptures.


Antil. Ah Sir, I see now a fools bolt is soon shot. You are more precise then
wise. The Vicar of Saint Fools shall be your ghostly father. What tell you me
of your opinion? I would you should well know, I neither regard you nor your
opinion. There be wiser men then you, who both read, allow, and take pleasure
in these books.


Theol. Let him alone, good Philagathus, for you see what he is; there is no
end of his crossing and cavilling. But he that is ignorant, let him be
ignorant; and he that is filthy, let him be more filthy. Let us now turn our
speech to Asunetus, for I see he is heavie-hearted, and troubled in his mind.
How do you, Asunetus? how do you feel your self? Me thinks you are very
sad.


Asun. I am the better for you, Sir, I thank God: I never knew what sin
meant till this day. It has pleased God now to give me some sight and feeling
thereof. I am greatly distressed in my conscience to think what I have been.
The remembrance of my former sins do strike an horror into me. When I
consider how ignorantly and profanely, and how far off from GOD I have lived
all my life, it stings and gripes me to the heart. I do now see that which I
never saw, and feel that which I never felt. I do plainly see, that if I had
died in that state wherein I have lived all my life, I should certainly have
been condemned, and should have perished for ever in my sin and ignorance.


Theol. I am very glad that God has opened your eyes, and given you the sight
and feeling of your misery: which indeed is the very first step to eternal
life. It is a great favor and special mercy of God toward you, that he has
so touched your heart: you can never be thankful enough for it. It is more
then if you had a million of gold given you. It is the only rare privilege of
Gods elect to have the eyes of their souls opened, that they may see into
heavenly and spiritual things. As for the world, it is just with God to leave
them in their blindness.


Asun. I do feel the burden of my sins: I am greatly grieved for them. I
am weary of them. I am sorry that ever I sinned against God, or that I should
be such a wretch, as to incur his displeasure, and provoke his Majesty
against me. But I pray you, good Master Theologus, such you are a spiritual
Physician, and I am sick of sin, that you would minister unto me, out of Gods
Word, some spiritual physic and comfort.


Theol. Truly, I must needs think, that the promises of mercy, and
forgiveness of sin made in the Gospel, do belong unto you, and that Jesus
Christ is yours: that you are truly interessed in him, and have a proper right
unto him. For he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
You do now feel your self to be a sinner: you are grieved for your sins: you
are weary of them: therefore Jesus Christ is for you: all the benefits of his
passion belong to you. Mat. 9.12.
Again he says, The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick.
But you do acknowledge your self to be sick of sin: therefore Jesus Christ
will be your Physician: he will swaddle you: he will lap you: he will bind up
all your sores: he will heal all your wounds: he will anoint them with the
oil of his mercy: he will smile upon you, and show you a joyful countenance:
he will say unto you, Your sins are forgiven.

In him you shall have rest and peace to your soul. Through him you shall have
ease and comfort. For he takes pity of all such as mourn for their sins,
as you do. He bids you, and all that are in your case, to come unto him,
Mat. 11.28.
and he will help you. Come unto me (says he) all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you. You are one of them that are bidden to come:
for you are weary of your sins: you feel the burden of them: Christ is
altogether for such as you are. He regards not the world, that is, the
profane and unregenerate men. He bids not them come: he prays not for them.
Joh. 18.^.
I pray not for the world (says he.) They have no part nor interest in him.
They have nothing to do with him, or with his merits and righteousness. He
is only for the penitent sinner, and such as mourn for their sins. He is a
Pillow of Down to all aching heads, and aching consciences. Be of good comfort
therefore, fear nothing: for assuredly Christ and all his righteousness is
yours. He will clothe you with it. He will never impute your sins unto you, or
lay any of them to your charge: though they be never so many, or so great, he
will forget them, and forgive them; as he says by the Prophet Esaias, ^^ay 1.1^.
Though your sins were as cr^mson, they shall be made as white as snow: though
they were red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. And again he says by the
same Prophet, ^^ay 4.2^
I have put away thy transgressions as thick as clouds, and thy sins as a
mist. By another Prophet he says, Micah 7.19.
He will lay aside our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of
the sea. Again he says by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 43.25.
I, even I, am he that put away thine iniquities, for my own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. And yet more sweetly he speaks to us by the Prophet
Jeremy, Jer. 3 12.
saying, Turn again unto me, and I will not let my wrath fall upon you. For
I am merciful, and will not always keep mine anger. And again by the Prophet
Hosea he says, Hos. 11.6.
I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim: for I am GOD, and not man. Be of good cheer therefore, comfort your
self with these promises: you have cause to rejoice, seeing GOD has wrought
in you a dislike and a grief for your sins, which is a certain token that
your sins shall never hurt you: for sins past cannot hurt us, if sins
present do not like us. You are grown to an hatred and dislike of your sins,
you mourn under the burden of them, therefore you are blessed. For blessed
are they that mourn. Why therefore should you be so heavy and sad? Remember
what Saint John says, If any man sin, 1 John 1.
we have an Advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the reconciliation
for our sins. Saint Paul says, Romans 3.13.
that Jesus Christ is set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood. Again the holy Ghost says, Heb. ^.1^.
He is perfectly able to save all those that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for us. The Apostle says, He is made of GOD
for us, 1 Cor 1.3^.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Mark that he
says, All is for us, all his for his Church, for every member of his Church,
and therefore for you. Christ is made of God righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption for you: Christ is your Mediator, and your high Priest, and has
offered up the everlasting sacrifice, even for you, that he might pay your
ransom, and redeem you from all iniquity. Heb. 9.1^.
By his own blood has he entered once into the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for you. Christ is not entered into the holy places which
are made with hands, which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary, but is entered
into the very Heaven, Heb. 9.
to appear now in the sight of God for you. The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
He has made him to be sin for you, that knew no sin, that you might be
made the righteousness of GOD in him. Gal 3.13.
Christ was made a curse for you, that he might redeem you from the curse of
the Law. Oh therefore how happy art thou that have such a Mediator and high
Priest! Rest therefore wholly upon him, and upon that perfect, eternal, and
propitiatory Sacrifice which he has once offered. Apply Christ, apply his
merits, apply the promises to your self, and to your own conscience, so shall
they do you good, and bring great comfort to your soul. For put case you had
a most excellent and sovereign salve, which would cure any wound, if it were
laid to; yet if you should lock it up in your chest, and never apply it to
your wound, what good could it do you? Even so the righteousness and merits
of Christ are a spiritual salve, which will cure any wound of the soul: but
if we do not apply them to our souls by faith, they can do us no good. You
must therefore apply Christ, and all the promises of the Gospel, to your self
by faith, and stand fully persuaded, that whatsoever he has done upon the
Cross, he has done for you particularly. For what is justifying faith, but a
full persuasion of Gods particular love to us in Christ? The general and
confused knowledge of Christ and his Gospel availes not to eternal life.
Labor therefore to have the true use of all these great and precious promises,
and stick fast to Christ: for through him only we have remission of sins,
and eternal life. Acts 10.45.
To him all the Prophets give witness (says Saint Peter) that through his
Name all that believe shall receive remission of their sins. Where the Apostle
tells us, that if a great Jury of Prophets were pannelled to testify of the
way and means to eternal life, they would all, with one consent, bring in a
verdict, that remission of sins and eternal life are only in Christ. Let us
hear the Foreman speak, and one or two of the rest: for in the mouth of two
or three witnesses shall every word stand. The Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 54.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
This great Prophet we see plainly affirms, that Christ suffered for our sins,
and by his suffering we are saved. The Prophet Jeremy testifies the same thing,
Jer. 23 5.
saying, Behold, the day is come (says the Lord) that I will raise to David a
righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely: and this is the name whereby they shall call him,
The Lord our righteousness. This Prophet jumps with the other. For he says,
that Christ is the righteous branch, and that he is our righteousness: which
is all one, as if he had said, our sins are pardoned only through him, and
through him we are made righteous. Moreover he affirms, that Juda and Israel,
that is, the Church, shall be saved by him. The Prophet Zachary, that I may
speak it with reverence, tells the same tale word for word. He avoucheth the
same thing with the other two Prophets: for he says, In that day a fountain
shall be opened to the house of David, Zach. 13.1.
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. The
meaning of the Prophet is, that in the days of Christ's Kingdom, the fountain
of Gods mercy in Christ, should be opened and let-out to wash away the sins
and uncleanness of the Church. So then we see, that these three great
witnesses do all agree in this, that through Christ only we are washed from
our sins, and through him only we are made righteous. Seeing then that
eternal life is only in the Son, therefore he that has the Son, has
life. Be of good courage therefore, O Asunetus: for no doubt you have the
Son, and therefore eternal life. Fear not your sins, for they cannot hurt
you: for as all the righteousness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
most righteous men that ever lived on the face of the earth, if it were yours,
could do you no good without Christ: so all the sin in the world can do you
no hurt, being in Christ; Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Pluck up a
good heart therefore: be no more heavy and sad: for if you be found in Christ,
clothed with his perfect righteousness (being made yours through faith) what
can the Devil say to you? what can the Law do? They may well hiss at you,
but they cannot sting you: they may grin at you, but they cannot hurt you. For
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies,
Romans ^.33.
who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, or rather which is risen
again; who also sits at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.
Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord therefore; again, I say, Rejoice: for greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the world: Our Lord Jesus is stronger then all.
None can pluck you out of his hands: he is a strong Mediator: he has
conquered all our spiritual enemies: he has overcome hell, death, and
damnation: he has led captivity captive: Col. 1.15.
he has spoiled principalities and powers, and has made an open show of
them, and triumphed over them on his cross. He has most triumphantly said, O
death, Hos. 13.14.
I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy destruction. O death, where is thy
sting? 1 Cor. 15.55
O hell, where is thy victory? Seeing then you have such a Mediator and high
Priest, as has conquered the hellish army, and subdued all infernal power,
what need you to doubt? what need you to fear any more? Moreover, you are to
understand, and to be persuaded, that Gods mercy is exceeding great toward
penitent sinners, and all such as mourn for their transgressions: according as
he says, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, he will put them all out of his remembrance. The Prophet
David does most lively and fully describe unto us, the merciful nature of God,
in the 103. Psalm, where he says, The Lord is full of compassion, and mercy,
slow to anger, and of great kindness: he will not always chide, neither
keeps his anger for ever: he has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as high as the heaven is above the
earth, so great is his mercy toward those that fear him. As far as is the
East from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us. As a Father
has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear
him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust.
The History of the lost son does most notably set forth the wonderful mercy
of God toward penitent sinners. There is showed how the Lord does embrace,
tender, Luke 1^.20.
and made much of such poor sinners, as have broken and contrite hearts for
their sins: for it is said, that when the Father saw his repenting Son a
great way off, he had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him, and clothed him with the best robe, put it on him, put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet, and caused the fat calfe to be killed for
him. Even so the everlasting Father does rejoice at the conversion of any of
his lost sons. Yea, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God for one
sinner that converteth. Moreover, the Lord most lively expresses his merciful
nature and disposition in this, That he is very loath we should perish, and
willingly cast away our selves. Therefore often in the holy Scriptures he
mournes for us, bewailes our wretchedness, and takes up many pitiful
complaints and lamentations for us, Psalm. ^1.13.
saying, O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways. Psa. 48.18.
And again, O that thou had hearkened unto my commandments: then had thy
prosperity been as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waters of the sea.
Again, he mourningly complains by his Prophet Hosea, saying, O Ephraim, what
shall I do to thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? And in another place,
Isa. 5.
What could I do more to my Vineyard that I have not done? Mark here how
compassionately the Almighty God does yerne over us, and even as it were blood
upon our wounds. The Apostle also notes the rich mercy and mavelous love of
GOD to mankind, in this, that he does beseech us, and pray us by the Ministers
of the Gospel, that we would be reconciled unto him. The words are these, Now
then are we Ambassadors for Christ; as though God did beseech you through us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, that you be reconciled unto God. Is it not a
strange thing, that the omnipotent God should fall to entreating of us poor
wretches? It is all one, as if a King should entreat a beggar, whom he may
will and command. But the abundant mercy of God toward mankind does most of
all consist in this, That he has given his only Son for us, when we were
his enemies: as it is written, God so loved the world, that he has given his
only begotten Son, John ^.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Again, Gods sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us: much more then being now justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath through him. Romans 5.1.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. In all this
then we may clearly behold the infinite mercy of God toward us poor
sinners. For is it not a great matter, that the Son of God should take our
nature upon him, should be so abased as he was, and should humble himself to
death, Phil. 2.^.
even to the death of the cross? For as the shadow of the Dial went back ten
degrees, that Ezechias might receive length of days and much happiness; so
Christ, the Son of righteousness, has gone back many degrees, that we
might have eternal life. His humiliation therefore is our exaltation, his
sufferings our joy, his death our life. For we have no other remedy or refuge
but only his merits and righteousness. He is our City of refuge, whither we must
fly, and where we must take sanctuary. Jer. 9.
He is the balm of Gilead, whereby our souls are cured. He is that poole of
Bethesda, John ^.2.
where every man may be cured of what disease soever he has. 2 Kin. 5.
He is the river of Jordan, where Naaman may wash away all his leprosy. He is
that Pelican, who by pecking a hole in his own breast, does restore his young
to life again by his blood. Yet one thing we must note by the way, which has
been partly touched before, That all the mercies of God, and merits of Christ,
are to be restrained only to the Elect, only to the true members of the Church;
as plainly appears in Psalm. 103. where the mercies of God, which are there
largely described, are restrained only to them that fear him, keep his
Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them. And touching Christ it
is said, that he is a Prince and a Savior unto Israel, and that he shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Again it is written, Psalm. 130.
that Christ being consecrate, was made the Author of eternal salvation to
them that obey him. Heb. 5.6.
None do or can obey him but only the Elect, therefore he is the Author of
salvation only to the Elect. And consequently, the profane world, whatsoever
they say, whatsoever they brag and boast, have no true title, or interest in
him. This thing was figured in the Law, in this, that the Mercy-seat, which was
a type of Gods mercy in Christ; and the Arc, which was a figure of the Church,
were, by the express commandment of GOD, fitted each to other, Exodus 25.10.
both in length and breadth. For as the Arc was two cubits and a half long,
and a cubit and a half broad; just so was the Mercy-seat. Noting thereby, that
the mercy of God in Christ should only be fitted to his Church, and belong
only to the Church; so as not one without the Church should be saved. For he
that has not the Church for his Mother, cannot have God for his Father.
Lastly, we are to observe, that as God is infinite in mercy, and of great
compassion toward penitent sinners: so also is he most constant in the course
of his mercies toward his children. And therefore one of the Psalms carries
this foot, Psalm. 156.
His mercy endures for ever, his mercy endures for ever, his mercy
endures for ever. Noting thereby both the constancy and eternity of Gods
mercy. To the same purpose it is thus written, Lam. 3.2^.
It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, it is because his
compassions fail not. Let us know therefore that God, as touching his mercy to
his children, is of a most constant and unchangeable nature. As he says, I am
the Lord, I change not. For if GOD were of a changeable nature, as we are, and
subject to passions, then were we in a most miserable case, then must he
needs smite us down, and take vengeance of us every day, and every hour in
the day, because we provoke him every day, and every hour in the day. But the
God of Heaven is not as a man, that he should be subject to passions and
affections: he is of a most constant and immutable nature. For though we
provoke him every day with new sins, yet is he so far off from taking
revenge, that the next day he rewards us with new mercies, and breaks
through all our unkindnesse to show kindness unto us; and through all our
naughtiness to do us good. All our infirmities cannot make him breaks off
with us, or cease to love us. He is content to take us with all faults, and to
love us dearly, though we have great faults. He regards not our
infirmities: though we be oftentimes wayward and elvish, yet for all that he
loves us nevertheless. Even as a loving Mother, though her young suckling cry
all the night, and be exceeding trease and wayward, so as she cannot rest on
hour in the night; yea, though she endure much lothsomenesse and trouble with
it, yet in the morning when she rises she loves it never the less, but
dandleth it, plays with it, smileth and laugheth upon it: so the God of all
mercies, whose love toward us far passes the love of mothers, though we
grieve him with our infirmities continually, yet loves us nevertheless, and
is content to put up all, to forget and forgive all; for he is a most constant
lover. Where he once sets and settles his love, he loves most constantly,
nothing can alter him, nothing can remove him. Even as a Father, when his
little child catches a fall, breaks his shinnes, and hurts his face, is
so far from being offended or displeased with him therefore, that he does
pity him and bemoane him, seeking remedies for his hurt: so our merciful
Father is so far off from being angry and displeased with us for some slips
and falls, that he does the more pity us, and lament our case. Even as a
loving, and wise husband, although his wife have many infirmities, yet being
assured she loves him dearly, and that her heart is with him, he is well
content to wink at all her faults, to hide them, to bear with them; yea, and
to make nothing of them; loving her no whit the less for them: so our dear
husband and Spouse, Christ Jesus, because he knows we love him, and that
he has our hearts, is content to bear with all our infirmities, and to make
light of them. For this cause it is that he says to his Spouse in the
Canticles, though she was black and full of infirmities, Behold thou art all
fair, C^nt. 4 1, 7.
my Love: Behold, thou art fair: thou art all fair, my Love: there is no spot
in thee. Mark, that he calls his Church fair, all fair, and without spot;
not because she was so in her self, but because she was made so in him: and
assuredly the eternal God, beholding her in his Son, does so esteem and
account of her. For, as he that beholds any thing through a red glass, does
take it to be red, as is the color of the glass: so God the Father, beholding
us in his Son, does take us to be of the same nature and quality that he is;
that is, perfectly righteous. For this cause it is that he loves us, and
sets his heart upon us, and will not be removeed from us. For his love to
his children is always one and the same, although we have always the like
sight and feeling of it; as the Moon is always the same in substance and
quantity, though sometimes it seems unto us to be wasted into a very small
scantling. Let us know then, to our great comfort, that the love of God toward
us, in his dear Son, is constant, and always alike: and that he will not
discountenance us, or shake us off for some infirmities, no nor yet for many
infirmities: for the merciful God does accept of his children, because their
general care is good, and the universal tenor of their life tends unto
righteousness howsoever they may greatly fail in many particular actions. Two
or three fits of an ague do not prove a diseased body; nor two or three good
days a found body: then so some few infirmities do not argue a wicked man; nor
two or three good actions, a good man: but we must have an eye to the certain
(...) settled course of a man's life. Even a^^ men are truly said to walk in a
way, when they go in it, although sometimes they trip and stumble: so Gods
children do walk in the way of righteousness, although sometimes they stumble
and step out of it, or sometimes be violently haled out of it by thieves. For
Satan and the violence of our lusts do often hale us out of the way: but we
must get into it again as soon as we are escaped. Now then, to conclude and
draw to an end: Since God is so infinitely merciful, and constant in his mercy:
since such great and precious promises are made to us in Christ: since the Lord
does not regard our infirmities when our hearts are with him: therefore, O
Asunetus, be of good cheer, let nothing trouble you; fear not the assaults of
the Devil, regard not his temptations: for assuredly your sins are forgiven.
Christ is yours: heaven is yours: and all the promises of life and salvation
belong unto you. So as you need not doubt; you cannot miscarry: your name is
written in the Book of life.


Asun. I am greatly comforted and cheered up with your words. Your preaching of
the Gospel, and laying open of Gods abundant mercy in Christ, and of the
promises, do exceedingly revive me, and even as it were put new life into me:
they are as Sack and Sugar unto my soul, and sweeter then the honey and the
honey-combe: they are as Physic to my sick soul, and as ointment to my
spiritual wounds. I do now begin to see what misery is in man, and what mercy
is in God. And I know by woeful experience, that where misery is not felt,
there mercy is not regarded: but now it has pleased God to give me some
feeling of mine own wretchedness and misery, and yet with good comfort in his
mercy. For I thank God for it, I begin now to grow to some persuasion, that
the promises do belong unto me, my sins are forgiven, and that I am one of them
that shall be saved.


Theol. I do greatly rejoice, that God has, according to his rich mercy,
wrought this good work in you. I do, from the bottom of my heart, give him
the praise and glory of it. Happy are you that ever you were borne, in whom
the Lord has wrought so gracious a work. It is his high favor and special
mercy toward you: for it is the only privilege and prerogative royal of
Gods own children, truly to repent and de^^eve. I beseech God therefore to
increase your faith, and to fill you full of joy and peace in beleeveing, that
you may abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost.


Antil. The Sun draws low: Asunetus, it is time for you and me to be going.


Phil. Indeed the night will approach by and by, and therefore we must of
necessity break off.


Theol. Since it is so, we will here surcease, and go no further.


Asun. Sir, I will now take my leave of you: I can never be thankful enough
for all the good instructions and comforts which I have heard from you this
day: I hope I shall remember some of them whilst I live. I do therefore praise
God for you, and for your counsel, and for this day, which I hope shall be the
first day of my repentance and true conversion unto God.


Theol. The Lord for his infinite mercies sake grant it. And I most humbly
beseech the Almighty God to establish you with his free spirit, that you may
proceed and go forward in a Christian course unto the end.


Phil. I pray you, good M. Theologus, pardon my boldness, for you see I have
been very bold to propound many questions unto you, wherein you have fully
satisfied me, to the great joy and comfort of my soul. I do therefore praise
God for you, and I hope I shall never forget some things you have uttered. But
I will now commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build us further.


Theol. Farewell good Philagathus. The Lord bless you and keep you in all
your ways: and the God of heaven preserve us all, and continue us in his fear
unto the end.


All glory be given to God.
A Table containing all the principal matters handled in this Book, and
directing to the Page where they are set down.
Man's natural corruption. page 5 Man's misery in nature. page 6 Man's nature
corrupted, but not destroyed, by Adams fall. ibid. Some sparks of Gods image
still remain after the fall. page 7 Man in the state of nature cannot do any
thing that pleases God. page 8 Man naturally neither sees nor feels his
misery. ibid. Man in nature is under the tyranny of Satan, and curse of the
Law. page 10 Man grown to years, living and dying in the state of nature,
perishes for ever. page 12 Man continues cursed till he be borne again.
ibid. None can be saved but only the Regenerate. ibid. Regeneration, what.
page 13 The quality of Regeneration. page 14 Remnants of sin after
Regeneration. ibid. Regeneration unperfect in this life. page 15 Means of
Regeneration. page 24 Eight infallible signs of salvation. page 30 Eight
signs of damnation. page 31 Nine manifest tokens of damnation. ib. Pride
described. page 33 Pride of gifts condemned. page 35 Pride in apparel
condemned. page 42 Rules of the Word for apparel. page 52, 53, 54 Whoredom,
and the dangers thereof. page 58 Excuses of whoredom. page 59 The fearful
effects of whoredom. page 60 The punishment of whoredom. page 61, 62 The
causes of whoredom. page 65, 66 Remedies against whoredom. page 69
Covetousness, what. page 70 Covetousness, wherein it does consist. ibid.
Four notes to discern the inward covetousness of the heart by. page 72 The
evil effects of covetousness. page 74 The vanity of this world, and all
worldly things. page 77 Excuses of covetousness. page 94 Remedies against
covetousness. page 101, 102 Gods providence for his children in the things of
this life. page 103 For the things of this life, Gods blessing is all in all.
page 119 Outward means alone do not uphold us. page 120 Gods children
sometimes are brought to great distress. page 123 Gods children always sure
to be delivered out of trouble. page 128 The great privileges of Gods
children. page 129 Contempt of the Gospel a grievous sin. page 135, 136
Contempt of the Gospel punished. page 137 Contempt of the Gospel the sin of
this Age. page 138 Contempt of the Gospel a sure sign of wrath to the Land.
page 147 Swearing, and the punishment thereof. page 154 Excuses for swearing.
page 163 Causes of swearing. page 166 Remedies against swearing. page 167
Lying, flattering and dissembling. ibid. Punishments for lying. page 175, 176
Excuses for lying. page 177 Causes of lying. page 178, 179 Remedies against
lying. ibid. Drunkenness, and the evil effects thereof. page 110, 181 Excuses
of drunkenness. page 184 Causes of drunkenness. page 185 Remedies of
drunkenness. ibid. Idleness, and the woeful effects thereof. page 190 Causes
of idleness. page 197 Remedies against idleness. ibid. Oppression, a most
horrible sin. page 198 Many woes denounced against oppressors. page 199 Sundry
kinds of oppression. page 200, 201 Causes of oppression. page 215 Remedies of
oppression. ibid. Sin hurts men in their bodies, goods, and name. page 216
Sin brings great danger to the whole Land. page 224 Nine predictions of wrath
to the Land. page 229 The prayers and tears of the faithful keep back the
wrath of God from the Land. page 322, 323 Prayers of the Elect of great force.
ibid. The wicked fare the better for Gods children. page 242 The best course to
prevent Gods judgments, and to keep back his wrath from our Land. page 244
Ten special things concerning the continuance of our peace. page 250, 251 Nine
signs of a sound soul. page 252 Saint Peter's eight marks of salvation. ibid.
Seven infallible tokens of salvation. page 253 Assurance of salvation in this
life proved. page 254, 255 Objections against the assurance of salvation,
answered. page 259 The groundwork of our salvation. page 261 Some doubts may
stand with the assurance of faith. page 262 It is no presumption to be
persuaded of our salvation. page 265 The wicked cannot be assured of their
salvation. page 266 The security of salvation which the wicked brag of, is
vain. page 267, 268 Nine things required of all that shall be saved by Christ.
page 271, 272 Many say they hope to be saved by Christ, but few can give a
reason why Christ died for them particularly, and by name. page 273 Few shall
be saved, proved by Scriptures, reasons, and examples. page 277, 278 But few,
even in the visible Church, shall be saved. page 284 Objections against the
small number of the Elect answered. page 285 Objections of Atheists and
unbeleevers answered. page 286 Reading of the Scriptures much commended. page
294 Deferring of repenting dangerous. page 299 God no Author of man's
condemnation, but himself. page 300 Objections against Predestination
answered. page 301, 302 Gods decree no cause of Adams fall. page 305 The decree
of reprobation proved. page 306 Prescience in God, what. page 307 The decree of
election proved. page 308 The first motive of election is in God himself. page
309 Foreseen faith and foreseen works no motives of salvation. ibid. Faith
depends upon election, not election upon faith. page 311 A reason yielded why
there is no end of cavilling and objecting against the truth. page 315 Nine
bars out of heaven. page 316 Nine gates into hell. ibid. The ignorance of the
world. page 32^ The answers of ignorant men to the grounds of religion. page
334 The means to get out of ignorance. page 346, 347 Ignorance a most
dangerous thing. page 348 The charge of Ministers exceeding weighty, and most
carefully to be looked unto. page 353 What is the best course for Ministers to
take to bring the people out of ignorance. page 357 What is the best course for
the people to take, that they may be brought out of the bondage of sin, and
captivity of Satan. page 358, 359 Preaching a matter of absolute necessity
unto eternal life. page 363 Without preaching the people are in great danger
of losing their souls. page 364 Satan's cunning in frustrating the hearing of
the Word, and making all preaching utterly unprofitable. page 365 The Preachers
counsel to the ignorant man. page 367 Six great dangers of sin. page 368 Six
most fearful events of sin. page 369 God in all ages has severely punished
the transgressors of his Law. page 370, 371 Every sin, though never so little
in our eyes, is heinous and capital, because it is against a person of
infinite Majesty. page 371 Nine profitable considerations. page 372 If men
would leave words, and fall to doing, great good would come of it. page 374
Nine things much to be thought upon. page 376 The description of Christ's
coming to judgment. page 376, 377 The terror, the suddenness, the end, the
manner, and the use of Christ's second coming described. page 378, 379 The
torments of hell, with the extremity, perpetuity, and remedilesnesse thereof,
described. page 389 The ignorant man upon the hearing of the day of judgment
and hell fire laid open, is pricked in his conscience, bewailes his former
life, repents earnestly for his sin and ignorance, and desires spiritual
physic and comfort of the Preacher. page 398 The Preacher ministers unto him
much spiritual comfort, and does in ample manner lay open unto him all the
sweet promises of the Gospel, and the infinite mercy of God, in Christ, to all
true penitent and brokenhearted sinners. page 402, 403 The ignorant man being
afflicted in his conscience, is exceedingly comforted with the hearing of Gods
abundant mercy preached unto him, and thereupon gathers great inward peace,
converts unto God with all his heart, and exceedingly blesses God for the
Preachers counsel. page 422
FINIS.
A Morning Prayer to be used in private Families.
O Lord our God, and heavenly Father, we thy unworthy children do here come
into thy most holy and heavenly presence, to give thee praise and glory for all
thy great mercies and manifold blessings toward us, especially for that thou
have preserved us this night past from all the dangers and fears thereof, have
given us quiet rest to our bodies, and brought us now safely to the beginning
of this day, and do now afresh renew all thy mercies upon us, as the Eagle
renews her bill; giving us all things abundantly to enjoy, as food, raiment,
health, peace, liberty, and freedom from many miseries, diseases, casualties,
and calamities which we are subject to in this life every minute of an hour:
and not only so, but also for vouchsafing unto us many good things, not only
for necessity, but even for delight also. But above all (dear Father) we
praise thy name for the blessings of a better life, especially for thy most
holy Word and Sacraments, and all the good we enjoy thereby; for the
continuance of the Gospel amongst us, for the death of thy Son, and all that
happiness which we have thereby; also because thou have chosen us to life
before we were, and that of thy mere goodness and undeserved favor toward
us; and have called us in thine appointed time, justified us by thy grace, and
sanctified us by thy Spirit, and adopted us to be thine own children, and
heirs apparent to the great Crown. O Lord, open our eyes every day more and
more, to see and consider of thy great and mavelous love to us in all these
things; that by the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be drawn yet
nearer unto thee, even more to love thee, fear thee, and obey thee: that as
thou art enlarged toward us in mercy, so we may be enlarged toward thee in
thanksgiving: and as thou do abound toward us in goodness, so we may abound
toward thee in obedience and love. And since (dear Father) thou art never
weary of doing us good, notwithstanding all our unworthiness and naughtiness,
therefore let the consideration of thy great mercy and fatherly kindness
toward us, even as it were force our hearts, and compel us to come into thy
most glorious presence, with new songs of thanksgiving in our mouths. We pray
thee (O most merciful God) to forgive all our unthankfulness, unkindnesse,
profaneness, and great abusing of all thy mercies, and especially our abuse
and contempt of thy Gospel, together with all other the sins of our life,
which we confess are innumerable, and more then can be reckoned up, both in
omission of good things, and commission of evil. We most humbly entreat thee
to set them all over to the reckoning which thy Son Christ has made up for
them upon his Cross, and never to lay any of them to our charge, but freely
forget all, and forgive all. Nail down all our sins and iniquities to the
Cross of Christ, bury them in his death, bathe them in his blood, hide them in
his wounds, let them never rise up in judgment against us. Set us free of the
miseries that are upon us for sin, and keep back the judgments to come, both
of soul, body, goods, and good name. Be reconciled unto us in thy dear Son
concerning all matters past, not once remembering or repeating unto us our old
and abominable iniquities, but accept us as righteous in him, imputing his
righteousness to us, and our sins to him. Let his righteousness satisfy thy
justice for all our unrighteousness, his obedience for our disobedience, his
perfection for our imperfection. Moreover, we humbly beseech thy good Majesty
to give us the true sight and feeling of our manifold sins, that we may not be
blinded in them through delight, or hardened in them through custom, as the
reprobates are: but that we may be even weary of them, and much grieved for
them, laboring and striving by all possible means to get out of them. Good
Father, touch our hearts with true repentance for all sin. Let not us take
any delight or pleasure in any sin, but howsoever we fall through frailty (as
we fall often) let us never fall finally, let us never lie down in sin, nor
continue in sin: but let us get up on our feet again, and turn to thee with
all our hearts, and seek thee whilst thou may be found, and whilst thou
do offer grace and mercy unto us. O Lord, increase in us that true and lively
faith, whereby we may lay sure hold on thy Son Christ, and rest upon his
merits altogether. Give us faith assuredly to believe all thy great and
precious promises made in the Gospel, and strengthen us from above to walk and
abound in all the true and sound fruits of faith. Let us walk, not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. Let us feel the power of thy Sons death killing
sin in our mortal bodies, and the power of his resurrection raising us up to
newness of life. Let us grow daily in the sanctification of the Spirit, and
the mortification of the flesh. Let us live holily, justly, and soberly in this
present evil world, showing forth the virtues of thee in all our particular
actions, that we may adorn our most holy profession, and shine as lights in
the midst of a crooked and froward generation amongst whom we live, being
gainful to all by our lives and conversation, and offensive to none. To this
end we pray thee fill us with thy Spirit, and all spiritual graces, as love,
wisdom, patience, contentment, meekness, humility, temperance, chastity,
kindness, and affability, and stir us up to use prayer and watchfulness,
reading and meditation in thy Law, and all other good means whereby we may
grow and abound in all heavenly virtues. Bless us in the use of the means
from day to day, make us such as thou would have us to be, and such as we
desire to be: work in us both will and deed, purpose and power: For thou, O
Lord, art all in all, thou will have mercy upon whom thou will have mercy,
and whom thou will thou hardenest. Have mercy upon us therefore (dear Father)
and never leave us to our selves, nor to our own wills, lusts, and desires,
but assist us with thy good Spirit, that we may continue to the end in a
righteous course; that so at length we may be received into glory, and be
partakers of that immortal Crown which thou have laid up for all that love
thee, and truly call upon thee.

Further, we entreat thee, O heavenly Father, to give us all things necessary
for this life: as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, and such freedom from
those manifold miseries which we lie open unto every day, as thou see meet.
Bless unto us all the means which thou have put into our hands for the
sustenance of this frail life. Bless our flock and store, corn and cattle,
trades and occupations, and all works of our hands: for thy blessing only
makes rich, and it brings no sorrows with it. Give us therefore such a
competencie and sufficiency of these outward blessings, as thou in thy
heavenly wisdom see most needful for us. Moreover, we humbly beseech thee
(most loving Father) in great mercy look down from Heaven upon thy whole
Church, and every member of it. Be favorable unto Sion, and build up the walls
of Jerusalem. Behold with the eye of pity, the great ruins and desolation of
thy Church. Heal up the wounds, and make up the breaches thereof in all
Nations. Regard it as thine own flock, tender it as thine own family, dress
it as thine own Vineyard, love it as thine own Spouse. Think thoughts of
peace to it, and always look upon it in deep compassion. Bless it with thy
grace, guide it with thy Spirit, and defend it still with thy mighty power:
scatter the devices, consound the counsels, and overthrow the forces of all
that fight against it. Specially we entreat thee, dear Father, to set thy
self against that Antichrist of Rome, that man of perdition, which sets
himself against thee, and against all thy people. In thine appointed time we
pray thee give him a deadly downfall: Beat down all his power and authority
daily more and more; give free passage to thy Gospel in all Kingdoms, that
Babylon may fall, and never rise up again. The more the favorites and
adherents of Rome labor to uphold their Idolatrous Kingdom, the more let it
fall down, even as Dagon before the presence of thine Arc. Pour down the
Vials of the fullness of thy wrath upon the Kingdoms of the Beast; and let
their riches, wealth, credit and authority dry up every day more and more, as
the river Euphrates. Let it pity thee, O Father, to see thine own Spouse sit
as a deformed and forlorn woman here below, weeping and mourning with her
hair about her neck, having lost all her beauty and comeliness: Cheer her
up (dear Father) glad her with the joy of thy countenance, and so deck her,
and trim her up, that thou may delight in her as a Bridegroom in his Bride.
Specially we entreat thee have mercy upon thy Church in this Land: intend
good unto us, and not evil: Give us not over into the hands of our cruel
enemies, as our sins have deserved. Scatter we pray thee, O Lord, the
devices, and break the plots of all such as have plotted the overthrow and
utter subversion of this Church and Commonwealth. Bless this Church more and
more with the continuance of true Religion amongst us: for thy great Names
sake, and infinite mercies sake, deal graciously and favorably with us and
our posterity. Turn from us that vengeance which is due unto us for our
sins. For thou see how iniquity prevails, and the wicked go away with
the goal. Atheism over-spreadeth every where, and Popery seems to get a
head again. Now therefore (dear Father) we most humbly beseech thee to take
order speedily for the remedying and repressing of these manifold disorders and
grievous enormities that are amongst us. Be entreated of thy poor children to
be good to this English Nation. Hear the cries of thine Elect: hear the
mourning of them that mourn in Sion. Let the cries of thy children cry down
all the cries of the sins of the Land, and be reconciled unto us in the
multitude of thy compassions; that so thou may still continue a most
merciful protector of this thine English Vineyard. We pray thee (good
Father) show special mercy to our most Noble and gracious King Charles, thine
anointed Servant, bless him and keep him in all his ways, bless his
government unto us. Let thine Angels encamp about him, and let thy holy hand be
always over him keep him from treasons, and deliver him from the treacheries
of his enemies: give him to see what belongs to his peace, and give (...) a
heart earnestly bent to set upon the practice of the same: give him all graces
necessary for his place, and necessary for his salvation: continue his
government peaceable and prosperous amongst us: and as thou have made him the
breath of our nostrils, and a gracious instrument for the saving of many
thousand souls, so let his own soul be saved in the day of thy Son Christ.
Bless his Majesty's most honorable privy Counselors, and give such good
success unto all their counsels and policies in matters of State, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Bless all the
Nobility, work in them a care to glorify thy Name in their places; make them
faithful to thee, and faithful to the Land. Direct with thy good Spirit all
such as bear the sword of Justice, that they may draw it out to punish the
wicked, and to defend the godly, and that they may with all good care and
conscience discharge the duties of their places. Increase the number of
faithful and zealous Ministers in this Church. Send thy Gospel to those places
where it is not, and bless it where it is. Remember them in thy mercy, O Lord,
that are under any cross or affliction whatsoever: be comfortable unto them,
heal up their wounds, bind up their sores, put all their tears into (...)
bottle, and make their bed in all their sorrows, and put such a good end to
all their troubles, that they may redound to thy glory, and the furtherance of
their own salvation. In the mean time give them patience and constancy to
bear whatsoever it shall please thy merciful hand to lay upon them. Last of
all, in a word, we pray the^ bless the Magistracy, Ministry, and Commonalty.
Bless all the people, do good to all that are true and upright in their
hearts. And so (dear Father) we do commit and command our selves, our souls
and bodies into thy hands, for this day and the rest of our life, praying thee
to take care and charge of us. Keep us from all evil, watch over us for our
good, let thine Angels encamp about us, let thy holy hand be over us, and keep
us in all our ways, that we may live to thy praise and glory here on earth,
keeping faith and a good conscience in all our actions; that after this life
we may be crowned of thee for ever in thy Kingdom. Grant these things (good
Father) to us here present, and to all thine absent, praying thee in special
favor to remember an our friends and kinsfolks in the flesh, all our good
neighbors and well-willers, and all those for whom we are bound to pray, by
nature, by deserts, or any duty whatsoever, for Jesus Christ's sake our only
Mediator: to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be given all praise and
glory, both now and for evermore, Amen.

An Evening Prayer to be used in private Families.
O Eternal God, and our most loving and dear Father, we thy unworthy
children do here fall down at the foot of thy great Majesty, acknowledging from
our hearts that we are altogether unworthy to come near thee, or to look
toward thee, because thou art a God of infinite glory, and we are most vile
and abominable sinners, such as were conceived and borne in sin and corruption,
and such as have inherited our Fathers corruptions, and also have actually
transgressed all thy holy Statutes and Laws, both in thoughts, words, and
deeds, before we knew thee and since, secretly and openly, with our selves and
with others, our particular sins are more then can be numbered; for who knows
how often he offends? but this we must needs confess against our selves,
that our hearts are full of pride, covetousness, and the love of this world,
full of wrath, anger, and impatience, full of lying, dissembling, and
deceiving, full of vanity, hardness, and profaneness, full of infidelity,
distrust, and self-love, full of lust, uncleanness, and all abominable
desires: yea, our hearts are the very sinkes of sin, and dunghils of all
filthiness. And besides all this, we do omit the good things we should do:
for there are in us great wants of faith, of love, of zeal, of patience, of
contentment, and of every good grace; so as thou have just cause to proceed to
sentence of judgment against us, as most damnable transgressors of all thy
holy commandments, yea, such as are sunk in our rebellions, and have many
times and often committed high treason against thy Majesty; and therefore thou
may justly cast us all down into Hell fire, there to be tormented with
Satan and his Angels for ever. And we have nothing to except against thy
Majesty for so doing, since therein thou should deal with us but according to
equity, and our just deserts. Wherefore, dear Father, we do appeal from thy
justice to thy mercy, most humbly entreating thee to have mercy upon us, and
freely to forgive us all our sins past whatsoever, both new and old, secret
and open, known and unknown, and that for Jesus Christ's sake our only
Mediator. And we pray thee touch our hearts with true grief, and unfeigned
repentance for them* that they may be a matter of continual sorrow and
heart-smart unto us, so as nothing may grieve us more then this, that we have
offended thee, being our special friend and Father: Give us therefore (dear
Father) every day more and more sight and feeling of our sins, with true
humiliation under the same. Give us also that true and lively faith, whereby we
may lay sure hold on thy Son Christ, and all his merits, applying the same to
our own souls; so as we may stand fully persuaded, that whatsoever he has
done upon the Cross, he has done for us particularly as well as for others.
Give us faith (good Father) constantly to believe all the sweet promises of the
Gospel, touching remission of sin, and eternal life, made in thy Son Christ.
O Lord increase our faith, that we may altogether rest upon thy promises,
which are all Yea and Amen. Yea, that we may settle our selves, and all that
we have wholly upon them; both our souls, bodies, goods, names, wives,
children, and our whole estate: knowing that all things depend upon thy
promises, power, and providence, and that thy Word does support and bear up
the whole order of nature. Moreover, we entreat thee, O Lord, to strengthen us
from above, to walk in every good way, and to bring forth the fruits of true
faith in all our particular actions, studying to please thee in all things, and
to be fruitful in good works, that we may show forth unto all men by our
good conversation whose children we are: and that we may adorn and beautify
our most holy profession, by walking in a Christian course, and in all the
sound fruits and practice of godliness and true religion. To this end we pray
thee sanctify our hearts by thy Spirit yet more and more: sanctify our souls
and bodies, and all our corrupt natural faculties, as reason, understanding,
will, and affections, so as they may be fitted for thy worship and service,
taking a delight and pleasure therein. Stir us up to use prayer,
watchfulness, reading, meditation in thy Law, and all other good means,
whereby we may profit in grace and goodness from day to day. Bless us in the
use of the means, that we may daily dye to sin, and live to righteousness:
draw us yet nearer unto thee, help us against our manifold wants. Amend our
great imperfections, renew us inwardly more and more, repair the ruins of our
hearts, aid us against the remnants of sin. Enlarge our hearts to run the way
of thy Commandments, direct all our steps in thy Word, let none iniquity have
dominion over us. Assist us against our special infirmities and master-sins,
that we may get the victory over them all, to thy glory, and the great peace
and comfort of our own consciences. Strengthen us, good Father, by thy grace
and holy Spirit, against the common corruptions of the world, as pride,
whoredom, covetousness, contempt of thy Gospel, swearing, lying, dissembling,
and deceiving. O dear Father, let us not be overcome of these filthy vices,
nor any other sinful pleasures and fond delights, wherewith thousands are
carried headlong to destruction. Arm our souls against all the temptations
of this world, the flesh, and the Devil, that we may overcome them all
through thy help, and keep on the right way to life; that we may live in thy
fear, and dye in thy favor; that our last days may be our best days, and
that we may end in great peace of conscience. Furthermore, dear Father, we
entreat thee not only for our selves, but for all our good brethren, thy dear
children, scattered over the face of the whole earth, most humbly beseeching
thee to bless all them, to cheer them up, and glad them with the joy of thy
countenance, both now and always. Guide them all in thy fear, and keep them
from evil, that they may praise thy Name. In these dangerous days, and
declining times, we pray thee, O Lord, raise up nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers unto thy Church. Raise up also faithful Pastors, that thy cause may
be carried forward, Truth may prevail, Religion may prosper, thy Name only
may be set up in the earth, thy Sons Kingdom advanced, and thy will
accomplished. Set thy self against all adversary power, especially that of
Rome, Antichrist, Idolatry, and Atheism; curse and cross all their counsels,
frustrate their devices, scatter their forces, overthrow their armies. When
they are most wise, let them be most foolish: when they are most strong, let
them be most weak. Let them know that there is no wisdom nor counsel, power
nor policy, against thee the Lord of hosts. Let them know that Israel has a
God, and that thou which art called Jehovah art the only Ruler over all the
world. Arise therefore, O most mighty God, and maintain thine own cause
against all thine enemies, smite through all their loins, and bow down their
backs: yea, let them all be confounded and turned backward that bear ill will
unto Sion. Let the patient abiding of the righteous be joy, and let the wicked
be disappointed of their hope. But of all favor we entreat thee, O Lord, to
show special mercy to thy Church in this Land wherein we live. Continue thy
Gospel amongst us yet with greater success, purge thy House daily more and
more, take away all things that offend. Let this Nation still be a place where
thy Name may be called upon, and an harbor for thy Saints. Show mercy to our
posterity, dear Father, and have care of them, that thy Gospel may be left
unto them as a most holy inheritance. Defend us against foreign invasion,
keep out Idolatry and Popery from amongst us. Turn from us those plagues which
our sins cry for. For the sins of this Land are exceeding great, horrible, and
outrageous, and give thee just cause to make us spectacles of thy vengeance to
all Nations, that by how much the more thou have lifted us up in great mercy
and long peace, by so much the more thou should press us down in great
wrath and long war. Therefore, dear Father, woe most humbly entreat thee,
for thy great Names sake, and for thy infinite mercies sake, that thou would
be reconciled to this Land, and discharge it of all the horrible sins thereof.
Drown them, O Lord, in thy infinite mercy through Christ, as it were in a
bottomless gulf, that they may never rise up in judgment against us. For
although our sins be exceeding many and fearful, yet thy mercy is far
greater. For thou art infinite in mercy, but we cannot be infinite in sinning.
Give us not over into the hands of the Idolaters, lest they should blaspheme
thy Name, and say, Where is their God in whom they trusted? But rather, dear
Father, take us into thine own hands, and correct us according to thy wisdom:
for with thee is mercy and deep compassion. Moreover, we most heartily
beseech thy good Majesty to bless our most gracious Sovereign King Charles,
Queen Mary, Prince Charles, and the rest of the Royal Progeny. We beseech
thee also to bless his Majesty's most honorable privy Counselors, counsel
them from above, let them take advice of thee in all things, that they may both
consult and resolve of such courses as may be most for thy glory, the good of
the Church, and peace of this our Commonwealth. Bless the Nobility, and all
the Magistrates of the Land, giving them all grace to execute judgment and
justice, and to maintain truth and equity. Bless all the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, increase the number of them, increase thy gifts in them, and so
bless all their labors in their several places and congregations, that they
all may be instruments of thy hand to enlarge thy Sons Kingdom, and to win
many unto thee. Comfort the comfortless with all needful comforts. Forget
none of thine that are in trouble, but as their afflictions are, so let the
joys and comforts of thy Spirit be unto them, and so sanctify unto all thine
their afflictions and troubles, that they may tend to thy glory, and their own
good. Give us thankful hearts for all thy mercies both spiritual and
corporal, for thou art very merciful unto us in the things of this life, and
infinitely more merciful in the things of a better life. Let us deeply ponder
and weigh all thy particular favors toward us, that by the due consideration
thereof our hearts may be gained yet nearer unto thee, and that therefore we
may both love and obey thee, because thou art so kind and loving unto us: that
even thy love toward us may draw our love toward thee, and that because mercy
is with thee thou may be feared. Grant these things, good Father, and all
other needful graces for our souls or bodies, or any of thine throughout the
whole world, for Jesus Christ's sake: in whose Name we further call upon thee
as he has taught us in his Gospel, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer to be used at any time, by one alone privately.
O Lord my God and heavenly Father, I thy most unworthy child do here in thy
sight freely confess that I am a most sinful creature, and damnable
transgressour of all thy holy Laws and Commandments: that as I was born and
bred in sin, and stained in the womb, so have I continually brought forth the
corrupt and ugly fruits of that infection and contagion, wherein I was first
conceived, both in thoughts, words, and works: If I should go about to reckon
up my particular offenses, I knew not where to begin, or where to make an end.
For they are more then the hairs of my head; yea, far more then I can possibly
feel or know. For who knows the height and depth of his corruption? Who
knows how often he offends? Thou only, O Lord, know my sins, who know
my heart; nothing is hid from thee: thou know what I have been, and what I
am: yea, my conscience does accuse me of many and grievous evils, and I do
daily feel by woeful experience how frail I am, how prone to evil, and how
untoward unto all goodness. My mind is full of vanity, my heart full of
profaneness, mine affections full of deadness, dullness, drowsinesse in
matters of thy worship and service: Yea, my whole soul is full of spiritual
blindness, hardness, unprofitablenesse, coldness, and security. And in very
deed, I am altogether a lump of sin, and a mass of all misery, and therefore I
have forfeited thy favor, incurred thy high displeasure, and have given thee
just cause to frown upon me, to give me over, and leave me to mine own corrupt
will and affections. But (O my dear Father) I have learned from thy mouth that
thou art a God full of mercy, slow to wrath, of great compassion and kindness
toward all such as groan under the burden of their sins. Therefore extend
thy great mercy toward me poor sinner, and give me a general pardon for all
mine offenses whatsoever: seal it in the blood of thy Son, and seal it to my
conscience by thy Spirit, assuring me more and more of thy love and favor
toward me, and that thou art a reconciled Father unto me. Grant that I may all
time to come love thee much, because much is given, and of very love fear
thee, and obey thee. O Lord, increase my faith, that I may steadfastly believe
all the promises of the Gospel made in thy Son Christ, and rest upon them
altogether. Enable me to bring forth the sound fruits of faith and repentance
in all my particular actions. Fill my soul full of joy and peace in believing.
Fill me full of inward comfort and spiritual strength against all temptations:
give me yet a greater feeling of thy love and manifold mercies toward me; work
in my soul a love of thy Majesty, a zeal of thy glory, and hatred of evil,
and a desire of all good things. Give me victory over those sins which thou
know are strongest in me. Act me once at last make a conquest of the world
and the flesh. Mortify in me whatsoever is carnal: sanctify me throughout
by thy Spirit: knit my heart to thee for ever, that I may fear thy Name: renew
in me the Image of thy Son Christ daily more and more. Give me a delight in
the reading and meditation of thy Word. Let me rejoice in the public Ministry
thereof. Let me love and reverence all the faithful Ministers of thy Gospel.
Sanctify their doctrines to my conscience, seal them in my soul, write them
in my heart; give me a soft and melting heart, that I may tremble at thy words,
and be always much affected with godly Sermons. Let not my sins hold back thy
mercies from me, nor mine unworthiness stop the passage of thy grace. Open
mine eyes to see the great wonders of thy Law. Reveal thy secrets unto me: be
open-hearted toward me thy unworthy servant. Hide nothing from me that may
make for thy glory, and the good of my soul. Bless all means unto me which
thou usest for my good. Bless all holy instructions unto my soul. Bless me
at all times, both in hearing and reading thy Word. Give me the right use of
all thy merci^ and corrections, that I may be the better for them. Let me
abound in love to thy children. Let my heart be very nearly knit unto them,
that where thou love most, there I may love most also. Let me watch and pray,
that I enter not into temptation: give me patience and contentment in all
things. Let me love thee more and more, and the worldlesse and less. So draw
my mind upward, that I may despise all transitory things. Let me be so rapt
and ravished with the sight and feeling of Heavenly things, that I may make a
base reckoning of all earthly things. Let me use this world as though I used it
not. Let me use it but for necessity, as meat and drink. Let me not be carried
away with the vain pleasures and fond delights thereof. Good Father, work the
good work in me, and never leave me nor forsake me till thou have brought
me to true happiness. Oh dear Father, make me faithful in my calling, that
I may serve thee in it, and be always careful to do what good I may in any
thing. Bless me in my outward estate. Bless my soul, body, goods, and name.
Bless all that belong unto me. Bless my goings out and comings in. Let thy
countenance be lifted up upon me now and always, cheer me up with the joys
and comforts of thy Spirit: make me thankful for all thy mercies. For I must
needs confess that thou art very kind to me in all things. For in thee I
live, move, and have my being; of thee I have my welfare and good being; thou
art a daily friend and special good benefactour unto me. I live at thy cost
and charges, I hold all of thee in chief, and I find that thou art never weary
of doing me good: thy goodness toward me is unchangeable. Oh, I can never be
thankful enough unto thee for all thy mercies both spiritual and corporal.
But in such measure as I am able I praise thy Name for all, beseeching thee to
accept of my thanksgiving in thy Son Christ; and to give me a profitable use of
all thy favors, that thereby my heart may be fully drawn unto thee: give me,
O Father, to be of such a good nature and disposition, that I may be won by
gentlenes^ and fair means, as much as if thou gave me many lashes. Pardon
all mine unthankfulness, unkindnesse, and great abusing of thy mercies, and
give me grace to use them more to thy glory in all time to come. Strengthen me,
dear Father, thus to continue praising and glorifying thy Name here upon
earth, that after this life I may be crowned of thee for ever in thy Kingdom.
Grant these petitions, most merciful God, not only to me, but to all thy
dear children throughout the whole world, for Jesus Christ's sake: in whose
name I do further call upon thee, saying as he has taught me; O our Father,
which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.

