THE CASE Of Several Thousands Concerned and employed in and about the
Importation and Working of IRON WIRE.
BY the Statute of 3 Edw. 4 Cap. 4. Amongst diverse other things, the
Importation and Vending of foreign White Iron Thread, commonly called
White-Wire, is prohibited under the Forfeiture thereof. And by the Statute 1
Rich. 3. Cap. 12. the Importation of all Iron-Wire by Aliens, is prohibited
under the like Penalty.

There are, and always have been several sorts of foreign Iron-Wire, known by
several distinct Names, which are not Card-Wire, nor called White-Wire; which
in all times ever since the Statute of 3 Edw. 4. have been imported by
Denizens, and paid the Duties required by Law, and was never looked upon to be
prohibited by the said Statute, as Card-Wire and sorts finer were.

The several sorts of Iron-Wire, which were larger than Card-Wire, being always
imported without Restraint, a further Duty therefore was laid upon the same, as
appears by the Book of Rates, 12 Car. 2. and the old Duty of 5 s. per c.
weight, was advanced to 7 s. 6 d.

The Parliament taking notice, that notwithstanding the said Statute, 3 Edw. 4.
great Quantities of Card-Wire was imported to the prejudice of the Woolen
Manufacture, did by an Act, made the 14th Car. 2. Cap. 19. restrain the
importation of any foreign Wool, Cards, or foreign Card-Wire, or Wire for
making Cards.

Nevertheless, the Importation of all other foreign Wire by Denizens, was
allowed and practiced, as appears by the Custom-House-Books, till about Twelve
years since, one Conen a Dutchman (but naturalized) importing some sort of
Iron-Wire larger than Card-Wire, under the supposition that it was imported by
an Alien, it was seized after the Duty paid; and under Color of a Verdict:
upon the said Seizure, no foreign Wire has been suffered to be imported, to
the great impoverishment and almost ruin, of many Families; the then
Prosecutor pretending to furnish the Traders concerned therein with sufficient
Iron-Wire of his own Manufacture, which he has in no sort performed: Therefore
the Traders and Dealers in Iron-Wire, do humbly offer the Reasons following,
for the Importation of all Wire, except Card-Wire, or Wire of a lesser size.

1. Because many necessary Trades and Manufactures cannot be carried on, or
supported without the Foreign Wire; the English Wire being of a soft, hollow
nature, and apt to cleave, is not so serviceable as the Foreign Wire; the
Traders who are chiefly concerned herein, being Tin-Plate-workers,
Wire-drawers, Hetchel-makers, for dressing Hemp and Flax, Skreen makers for
Corn, Braziers, Wire-workers, Hook and Eye-makers, Ship-Lanthorn-makers,
Box-makers, Tobacco-Pipe-makers, and many others. 2. Because they have not, nor
indeed cannot be in any measure supplied with English Wire sufficient for the
several Artificers concerned therein. 3. Because, as the English Wire is not so
good, nor fit for many Uses, so it is far dearer; the Foreign Wire called Fine,
being to be afforded at 4 s. notwithstanding it pays a fourth penny Custom; when
for the English is exacted 6 s. 8 d. for the like Size and Quantity. Besides,
those Persons in whose hands the sole making of all English Wire remains,
taking the advantage of the great necessities the poor Handicrafts are in at
this time, for want of Wire, have within these few days advanced their English,
Wire 5 l. per Cent. 4. Because if this Prohibition be continued, their
Majesty's will greatly lose in their Customs; the Duty upon Foreign Wire,
having formerly yielded about 5000 l.per annum Custom, when the Duty was but at
7 s. 6 d. per Cent. weight.
I. But it may be Objected, How has this Nation been supplied since the late
Verdict? Resp. 1. Very great quantities were clandestinely imported; much of
which was seized and condemned in the Exchequer, and sold publicly, as may
appear by the Custom-House-Officers. 2. Great quantities were imported under
the Denomination of Steel-Wire, and paid the Duty as such; but these private
Practices being suppressed, it is now fully evident that the Iron-Wire made in
England, is not sufficient to supply the Markets.
II. It may be Objected, That a large Imposition will encourage clandestine
Importations. Resp. The height of the Price of the English Iron Wire, above the
Foreign Wire, and that being under a Prohibition, and not a sufficient Quantity
of the English Wire being made, will doubtless more encourage, and almost
necessitate Clandestine Importations.
III. It may be Objected, That if this sort of Wire be permitted to be
imported, it will ruin very many Families, who are solely employed in the
making of Wire here in England. Resp. 1. There are but about an hundred Persons
in England that are employed therein, who nevertheless cannot want Work, though
this Permission be granted. 2. Whereas there are now employed not above 100 Men
in manufacturing the rough English Wire (it being made by Water Engines) there
are at least an hundred times the Number employed in drawing Card-Wire by hand,
and other necessary Uses of Iron-Wire, who will equally be employed by the
foreign rough Iron-Wire, as by the English.
IV. It may be Objected, That it will extremely lower the Price of our English
Wire, to the great disencouragement of the Dealers therein. Resp. If a Duty of
15 s. per cent. or more be imposed upon it(as generally all dealers in Wire
would be very well contented with, rather than be without it) it will keep up
the Price of English Wire, and thereby gratify the Dealers therein: As also be
a great Accommodation to all the Manufactors and Traders in that Comodity.
Besides that it will advance their Majesty's Customs at least 10 or 12000 l.
per Annum.

Wherefore it is most humbly hoped, that this Honorable House will be pleased
to explain the said Statute of the 3 d of Edw. 4. according to the constant
Usage, whereby the Workers in Iron-Wire may be capable to follow their several
Callings.


