The Case of R. Gee, Esquire
Humbly recommended to the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament.
IN the last Session of Parliament, there was exhibited a Petition to the House
of Commons, by the Hackney Coachmen against R. Gee, and other Commissioners for
the Regulating of Coaches, complaining against the said R. Gee for several
Misdeameanors by him committed, contrary to the Directions of a late Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Licencing and Regulating Hackney Coaches and
Stage Coaches, etc. charging the said R. Gee, one of the Commissioners, as
follows.

1. For refusing Licenses to persons qualified by the Act. 2. For granting
Licenses to persons not qualified by the Act. 3. For licensing above 700. 4.
For exacting more Money than the Law allows.
The matter was taken into Consideration, but so intricated, with a Confusion
and Contradiction of Witnesses, false Suggestions in the Evidence, and other
Irregularities in the manner and order of the Proceeding, that R. Gee addressed
himself, by Petition, to the Honorable House of Commons for Redress,
complaining of hard measure (to fall under a Sentence that looks like a
Conviction of Perjury, without so much as one Witness upon Oath) and only
desiring to be heard upon the matter in Question, the said Petition was
tendered to the House, but other business intervening, it fell to the ground.

By this disappointment the Petitioner finds himself, now in a manner forced
upon a Second Application to the same Authority, and upon the same Account, not
doubting of such Encouragement from the Wisdom and Equity of the House, as
shall be found agreeable to Honor and Justice at least if these following
Articles, which the said R Gee takes upon himself to make good, may be admitted
in proof of his inocency. As under favor for instance.

1. There is a dead man produced for a Witness. 2. A Witness said to be
summoned and appear, that was neither summoned, nor did appear. 3. A Charge
exhibited impossible to be true. 4. Witnesses heard ex part. 5. A Copy of the
Defendants Charge promised them, and then forced to an Answer without it.
These are some few Exceptions, of many, to save time and trouble; and R. Gee
humbly submits himself upon the whole to this Impartial Equity, either to be
repaired in his reputation, if he make good his charge, or to suffer if he does
not.


