A Description of the PAINTING of the THEATER IN OXFORD.
IN imitation of the Ancient Theaters of the Greeks and Romans, which were too
large to be covered with Lead or Tyle, this is supposed to be open: and as they
stretched a Cordage from Pilaster to Pilaster, upon which they strained a
covering of Cloth, to protect the People from the injuries of the weather; so
here is a Cord-moulding gilded, that reaches cross and cross the House both in
length and breadth, which supporteth a great Reddish Drapery, supposed to have
covered the Roof, but now furled up by the Genii round about the House, toward
the Walls, which discovers the open Air, and makes way for the descent of
the Arts and Sciences, that are congregated together in a Circle of Clouds; to
whose Assembly Truth descends, as being solicited and implored by the most of
them. For joy of this Festival the other Genii sport about the Clouds, with
their Festoons of Flowers and Laurels; and prepare their Garlands of Laurels
and Roses, viz. Honor and Pleasure, for the great Lovers and Students of those
Arts. And that the Assembly may be perfectly happy, their great Enemies and
Disturbers, Envy, Rapine, and Brutality, are (...) Genii of their opposite
Virtues, viz. Prudence, (...)titude, and Eloquence, driven from the Society,
an^ tumbled down headlong from the Clouds.

The report of the Assembly of the one, and the Expulsion of the other, is
proclaimed through the open and serene Air by some other of the Genii, who
blowing their Antic Trumpets, divide themselves into the several Quarters of
the World.

This in Gross.
But more particularly, the Circle of Figures consists of Theology, with her
Book of seven Seals, imploring the assistance of Truth for the unfolding of it.
On her left hand is the Mosaical Law Veiled, with the Tables of Stone, to which
she points with her Iron Rod. On her right side is the Gospel, with the Cross
in one hand, and a Chalice in the other. In the same Division, over the
Mosaical Law, is History holding up her Pen as dedicating it to Truth, and an
attending Genius with several Fragments of Old Writing, from which she collects
her History into her Book. On the other side of the Gospel is Divine Poefie,
with her Harp of David's fashion.

On the other side of the Circle, opposite to Theology, in three Squares, are
the Mathematical Sciences, (depending on Demonstration, as the other on Faith:)
In the first of which is Astronomy with the Celestial Globe, Geography with the
Terrestrial, together with three attending Genii.

In the next is Arithmetic with a Paper of Figures; Optic with her
Perspective Glass; Geometry with a pair of Compass in her left, and a Table
with Lines drawn in it in her right hand.

In another Square, on the West side of the Circle, is Law, with her Ruling
Scepter, accompanied with Records, Patents, and Evidences, on the one side, and
on the other with Rhetoric, by which is an attending Genius, with the Scales
of Justice, and a Figure with a Palm-Branch, (the Emblem of Reward for virtuous
Actions) and the Roman Fasces, the Marks of Power and Punishment. Printing,
with a Case of Letters in one hand, and a Form ready set in the other, and by
her several Sheets hanging as a drying.

On that side the Circle, opposite to Law, is Physic, with the Knotty Staff of
Aesculapius, with a Serpent winding about it: The Herbalist, imploring the
assistance of Truth for the right understanding of the Nature of her Plants:
Chemistry, with a Bolt-head in her hands: Chyrurgery, as preparing her self to
finish the Dissecting of an Head, which has the Brain already opened, and is
held before her by one of the Genii. In the Triangle on the right hand of the
Gospel is Logic in a posture of Arguing. In the Triangle on the left hand of
the Mosaical Law is Music, with her Antic Lyre and Paper of Musick-notes on
her knee, with a Genius by her (a little within the next Circle) playing on a
Flute, being the Emblem of the most ancient Music. Dramatick Poetry with a
Vizor, representing Comedy, a bloody Dagger for Tragedy, the Reed Pipe for
Pastoral.

In the midst of these Squares and Triangles (as descending from above) is the
Figure of Truth sitting on a Cloud; in one hand she holds a Palmbranch, (the
Emblem of Victory) in the other the Sun, whose Brightness enlightens all the
Circle of Figures, and is so bright, that it sometimes hides the face of her
self to us that are below.

Over the Entrance of the Front of the Theater are Three Figures tumbling down;
first Envy with her Snaky hairs, Squint eyes, Haggs breasts, Pale venomous
Complexion, Strong, but ugly Limbs, and Riveling skin, frighted from above by
the sight of Pallas her Shield with the Gorgon's head in it, against which she
would oppose the biggest of her Snakes, but her fall is so precipitous that she
has no command of her Arms.

Then Rapine with her fiery Eyes, grinning Teeth, sharp Twangs, her Hands
imbrued in blood, holding a bloody Dagger in one hand, in the other a burning
Flambeau; with which Instruments she would seize on, or destroy, not only
Learning, but her Habitations, but is prevented and overcome by an Herculian
Genius, or Power.

Next that, brutish scoffing Ignorance, that endeavors to vilify and
contemn what she understands not, represented by a Satyr, which is charmed by
a Mercurial Genius with his Caduceus.

OXFORD: Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Domini
1674.


