Unto his Grace, his Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament. The Petition of Sir John Dalmahoy of that Ilk.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT the Commissioners of Supply, of the Shire of Edinburgh, having Appointed
Hen^e Legate their Collector, to furnish the Forces with Hay, Corn and Straw, at
the Rates appointed by the Act of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and
ingadged that he should be no Loser, b^ Buying at the current price. Tho the
same should exceed the Rates appointed be the Privy Council. B^ Virtue whereof
be began to furnish at Candlemass 1691. And the current rates being far above
the prices appointed by the Privy Council, He did represent the same in April
thereafter to the Commissioners of Supply, who desired him to continue to
furnish the Forces as formerlie. And renewed their engagement that he should be
no loser thereby, upon the Faith whereof he continued to serve as formerlie.

By this and other Los^s sustained through the Public. Harie Legate turned
Bankrupt, And Your peiitioner as his Cautioner was distressed for Cess, and
other Ariers due by him, and upon ultimate diligence was necessitat to pay Ten
Thousand pounds Scots of his Debt; And I having applied to the said
Commissioners for reimbursing of Harie Legate of the Damages he had sustained
by the furnishing the Forces in manner foresaid. And they having appointed a
Committee to consider his Accounts, And to Report. After full consideration
thereof and probation taken anent the difference of the current Rates, and
these appointed by the Privy Council; Upon Report they found that the said
Harie Legate was no less Loser during his Service as Commissar, then in the sum
of one Thousand seven Hundred pounds Scots but scrupled to lay on the same upon
the Shire, unless the Authority of Parliament be inte^poned thereto, And
seeing the foresaid sum is but a small part of the loss I have sustained, and
a true and real Debt upon the Shyre, and the only Fond of my Relief.

Its therefore Humbly Begged, Your Grace; and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament, will be pleased to take the Premises and my Great Loss to Your
Consideration, And to Authorize the said Commissioners of Supply, to lay on
the foresaid sum of one Thousand seven hundredth pounds upon the Respective
Heritors, conform to the Valuation, And to Allow Your Petitioner such Diligence
for Inbringing thereof, as is Granted for Supply, and other Public Burdens.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.


