A DIALOGUE BETWEEN ANTHONY Earl of Shaftsbury, AND Captain THOMAS WALCOTT,
Upon their Meeting in PLUTO's Kingdom.
Walcott. Cursed be those Eyes that sees him where he stands,
That has Disturbed the best of Kings, of People, and of Lands.
Had Nature gave him but his Sons proportion
Of Wit, and Mind, as little as his Station,
I had been Happy, and never doomed to see
The dolesome Shades of Nights Eternity,
But freed from Plots and Treasons, lived to see
Dame Nature my Imprisoned Soul to Free.

Shaftsbury. What Is Walcott come, why then I plainly see,
Nor Hell, nor Holland, ever can be free
From my accursed Crew: Fools, did you think
Rebellion kept too long, would never Stink?
Believe't it is true, when Treasons in the thought,
It must to Action presently be brought;
It Is dangerous, when the case on Tip-Toe stands,
To make delay, Treason's not safe in many hands.

Walcott. Ah! Sir, but think of the groans of Orphans, and the Tears
Of Widows, and how this to Heaven appears.
Think what sad Doom it brought on me and others
And in what Infamy our Race it Smothers.
No Age can Parrallel a Crime so foul,
Unless the Antecedent, wherein your Soul
Was no small Agent, for no Plot could be
Against the King, or Kingdom, Tony Free:
As if Dame Nature you for naught designed
But mischief, and our First Parents Mind
To you She gave, who scarce a day could Live,
But must Rebel against Heavens Prerogative.

Shaftsbury. Relenting Fool! does pity moove Thee here,
Where pity cannot be had, shake off thy Fear,
And take a Mind worthy thy Name again,
Swear that, nor Gods, nor Kings, nor Men,
Should escape thy Fury, if thou could but be
In Holland once again with Shaftsbury.
Then thou shall Merit Pluto's just Reward,
The first Commissioned Captain of his Guard.

Walcott. Rewards with Soldiers seldom fail tomoove,
But such Rewards, I cannot well approve.
And if a Captain must, I Would rather Head
A Thousand Red-Coats in Hide-Park, then Lead
Myriads of black Locusts in Elysium,
Which from the Wilderness of Sins have come.
These need a Ferguson which knows all Tongues,
All Sins and Wickednesses, to guide your Throngs:
I to these but a petty Captain am,
And with me every Soldier cut the Sham:
Therefore on them let Honor be conferred,
That from your Lordship it have best deserved.

Shaftsbury. If I again from Pluto's Kingdom come,
I Will turn the Scales, I Will make Geneva, Rome,
I Will Cant no more, but Hallalujahs Sing,
And to my Consult, all the Jesuits bring:
I Will Converse Men, who dare like Russel Dye,
First to Contrive, and then maintain a Lie
With their last Breath: These are the Men,
That dare be Wicked, and defend their Sin.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by William Downing, 1683.


