To the Right Honorable, the LORD CHANCELLOR, the humble Petition of
COVENT GARDEN.
Shows,
THat having for many years past lived under great Oppressions, by the pretense
of raising great sums of money for the paying of a Minister, and the People
being divided in Opinion, commonly called Religion, where the Godly have
always persecuted the Loyal, Upon the coming of His Sacred Majesty (who seemed
rather to be descended from above, then returned from the Low Countries) they
were in great hope to be relieved; yet so it is, that the same Persons that did
formerly torment them, being continued still in Authority, they are still
troubled by vexatious Suits at the Common Law, by which means they are much
hindered from following their lawful Callings.

Wherefore we do humbly desire, that one Dr. Babre, who has been a chief
Instrument in troubling the Parish ever since he came into it, and has often
threatened that we should have no QUIET as long as he continued in Commission of
PEACE, may be removed out for these following Reasons.

1. He was a Physician to Cromwell in Scotland against the King.

2. He was employed by Cromwell for the taking away the Life of Pantaleon Sa,
and had been hanged himself if he had not got Cromwell's Pardon, to whom he was
a Pentionary Spy.

3. He indicted a very goodly Captain of the Parliament for treasonable words
against Cromwell, and endangered his Life without giving him any Physic.

4. He was indicted himself by the Parish for Forgery, the Indictment found,
and his Ears like to have been lost.

5. He is a general Solicitor practicing to set Man and Wife together by the
Ears, as in Mris. Juyes Case it was plainly seen, when her Council told him,
that if he had studied the Law he would have been an excellent Physician,
because studying Physic he was become so excellent a Lawyer.

6. Being Physician to his Sacred Majesty, if he were an honest man, he would
study his Profession, and leave his Lawsuits, and broking in other men's
affairs.

7. It Is a great discouragement to the Bench of Justices, that when they should
send a Vagabond to be whipped, His Majesty should send His Physician to cure
them.

8. He is a Knight of the P. a common Affidavit. Man. etc.

9. He is a Physician at the Court, a Doctor at the College, a Committee-man,
a Militia-man, John Babre, and Jack of all Trades, Spy to all sides, a Plague
to all his Neighbors, and a Pestilence to the whole Town; and therefore we
come unto your Honor in the words of Robert Wisdom:

Help Lord, for good and godly men
Malicious are as Devils;
You Our good Angel, only can
Seal up these pious Evils.

And as in duty bound, we shall pray, etc. Bedford Berry, St. An. Shandois,
Piazza King, Henrietta Bedford, James Russel, Charles York, Bridges Bowstreet,
Amen Manto, Todos Autros.

Jun. 1661

