A DISCOURSE BETWIXT ALEXANDER The Great, And DINDIMUS King of the Brachmans,
Which has been Printed in Greek and Latin, and also into high Dutch, in Anno
1642. And made into English by T Raicroft in London, 1668.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1688.

A DISCOURSE Alexander the Great, and Dindimus King of the Brachmans, which has
been Printed in Greek and L^^^^e, and also into high Dutch, in Anno 1642. And
made into English by T. Raicroft in London, 1668.
AND because some through ignorance in History have presumed to affirm that
none of the Heathens so (called) knew or practis^d such things, for the
conviction of them, and a general service to the truth, we shall here allege
some remarkable examples to evince the truth of what is affirmed in those
particulars: which made Aristotle in his Ethics lib. 10. chap. 4. 7. say, they
that did these things did them, not as men, but as having some thing divine, or
of God in them.

Not then to quote at large the Noble Testimony given by Palladius, Ambrosius
and others, concerning Dindimus King of the Brachmans, as they are at large
published in Latin and Greek and printed in London by T. Raicroft 1668.
entitled Palladius de Gen^ibus Indiae and Bragmanibus. S. Ambrosius de moribus
Brachmanorum, and Anonymus de Brachmanibus. As also another in the high Dutch
language, entitled, History von them grossen Konig Alexander, etc. Yetzo auffs
new aus der alten Teutschen sprache in druck gebracht. Printed Anno 1642.

All which do relate the excellent and Christian Evangelical lessons given by
the said Dindimns to Alexander, who sent Ambassadors to him to require him to
come to him, promising him great rewards if he did, and loss of his head if he
did not, and this in the Name of Alexander the King of all men and Son of the
great God jupiter. But Dindimus smiling at this Vapor, and not m^ving his h^nd
from the leaves he lay upon, answered, God the great King never begot injury,
but light, peace, life, the wa^^r body and soul^s, which he also receives when
they have finished their course, nor was he ever the author of lust. This i^ my
Lord. and only God, who as he hates murder so he wageth not war, etc. And a
little further he says. The things that I seek I easily atiain to, those
things which I regard nor I am not to be driven to. If therefore Alexander take
my head he shall not destory my soul which will return to the Lord, while the
body which was taken out of the earth shall thereunto return. For I being made
a Spirit, shall ascend unto my God, who included us in the flesh, and placed us
upon this earth t^ try whether we being gone forth from him, would live unto
him, as he has commanded: who deman^s an account of those that depart; for he
is a judge of all injuries: and the sighs o^ those that are inj^riously
treated, become the pains of those that injure them. Let Alexander then
threaten those that love silver and gold, and fear death; neither of which has
place among the Brachmans, who do neither fear the one nor love the other. Go
therefore, and tell Alexander, Dindimus wants him nor, and it he wants
Dindimus, let him come to him. Which being reported to Alexander, he was the
more desir us to see that single old man that could conquer him after he had
conquired so many Nations. And so coming to him said, I come to hear a word of
wisdom from thee whom I hear do converse with God. To whom Dindimus
replied, Very willingly would I administer to thee the words of the wisdom of
God, had thou but place in thy mind to receive the gift of God administered.
But thy mind being filled with various lusts, insatiable avarice, and a
devilish desire to rule, which fights against me, and my design of drawing
thee off from destroying Nations and shedding hum^ne blood is in all things
contrary to the wisdom by which I and the Brachmans are led, who worship God,
love men, contemn gold, despise death, and slight pleasures: whereas Alexander
and his, fear death, love gold, covet pleasure, hate men, and despise God.
adding how can I speak unto thee the words of the wisdom of God, whose
cogitations are so filled with pomp, ostentation and inordinate lust that a
whole world is not able to satiate thee? however he refused not to give him
that counsel, which Alexander was (as he confussed) convinced in his heart was
good, but could not follow, Viz. to cease warring against men without, and
engage himself in another warfare, against the enemies within himself, his
lusts, his affections, his desires, she desired to be rich indeed and to be a
true victor: asuring him that all his power, all his hosts, all his strength,
all his Riches, all his Pomp, would at last not avail him any thing; But
(says he) if thou will hearken to my words, thou shall possess of my goods,
who have God to my friend, and whole inspiration I enjoy within me. Thus thou
shall overcome lust the mother of penory, which never obtains what it seeks.
Thus thou shall, with us, honor thy self, by becoming such as God had created
thee. Adding though thou slay me for telling thee these profitable things, If
are not. For (says he) I shall return to my God which created all things, who
knows my cause, and before whom nothing is hid^en.

I know not (says he) whether thou shall be so happy as to find thy self
p^rswaded by my words, but I assure thee, it thouse not, when thou art departed
hence I shall see thee punished for thy actions, and hear thee lament with deep
and sharp sighs, the misery thou have put many to, etc. Viz. when thou shall
have no other companion then them mory of the evils thou have heap^d up upon
thy self. For (says he) I know the pains justly inflicted by God upon unjust
men. Then thou shall say unto me, Dindimus, how good a counselor were thou to
me? etc

Those things Alexander heard (as it is said of Herod concerning John the
Baptist) not only without wrath, but with a placed countenance, and replied. O
Dindimus thou true teacher of the Brachmans! I have found thee the most
excellent amongst men, by reason of the Spirit that is in thee; I know all that
thou have spoken is true; God has brought thee forth and sent thee into this
place: in which thou art happy and rich, wanting nothing, all thy life long
quiet, enjoying much rest.

But what shall I do who cohabit with continual slaughters? etc. who if I would
live in the desert, my Lievtenants would not suffer me, and though they would
being in this state. it is not lawful for me to quit them, for how shall I
defend my self before God, who has assigned me this Lot.

But thou reverend old man and servant of God, for these words of wisdom
wherewith thou have helped, and rejoiced me, dehorting me from war, receive
thou my presents and despise me not: I am affected with k^ndness, honoring
wisdom, and so commanded his servants to bring forth gold and several sorts of
array, bread and oil. Which Dindmus beholding lauged, saing to Alexander
Persuade (if thou can, the birds about the woods to receive thy gold, and
sing the better for it: but if thou can not p^rswade them, nor shall thou
ever persuade me, to be worse then they. I therefore receive no anprefitable
present, which I can neither eat nor drink, nor do I serve soul-hurtful riches,
etc. Here Is nothing in this desert to be bought with gold, For God gives me all
things freely, etc. selling nothing for gold, but freely bestowing all good
things, and even the mind on those that freely accept it, etc. But the oil be
took; and walking about the wood gathered some sticks, and kindling a fire, he
said, The Brachmans have all things, being sed by providence, and into the fire
he powered the ovle, till it was all consumed and sang a hymn unto God. Oh God
immortal, I give thee in all things thanks. For thou rulest in all things,
giving all things abundantly unto thy creatures for their food. Thou creating
this world do preserve it, expecting the souls which thou have sent into it,
that thou may, as God, justify those that have laid a pious life, and condemn
those that have not obeyed thy laws. For all righteous judgment is with thee
and life eternal prepared by thee. Who with eternal goodness show mercy unto
all.

He that shall read Hermes Trismegistus, his Divine Pimander, translated out of
Arabic by the famous Dr. Everard, printed in English 1657. and especially his
book, or secret sermon in the mount, of Regeneration, and the profession of
silence, if he underst and what he reads, shall without all hesitation say, the
things there uttered transcend the reach of natural wisdom and proceed from a
more profound source. As also his Doctrine in his 12. Book called Crater or
Monas, where he does not darkly preach the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the
Spirit which he (in his dialect) calls the mind.

A certain Indian Monk or secluse, an ancient man living in a chapel in toe
Island Calempluy which certain Portugals having robbed of no small treasure,
they were by this old man sharply reproved and advised, if they escape the just
judgment of God, and find mercy and pardon of their sins, that their souls
might not perish eternally, to restore the spoil they had taken away, to pray
with tears for forgiveness, and as freely to give alms as they would bestow
any thing upon themselves. Which they promised to do, but fearing least their
prey might be taken from them, they asked him whether there were no arms upon
the Island: the old man replied no, adding that all that would go to heaven,
stood more in need of patience to bear injuries, then arms to revenge
themselves. See Ridderus his shamed Cbristian.

Lucupang Emperor of China, taught that it was the part of a great mind, to
forgive injuries, and that the greatness of the mind never shines clearer then
where opportunities of revenge are neglected. Demonax taught that we ought not
to be wrath with offenders, but endeavor to become their amenders: to sin,
says he, is humane, but to amend the faults of others is the part of God, or
of men most near unto him.

Claudianus taught, that we ought to be ready to forgive offenders, of our own
accord, and more ready to lay aside anger then to stir it up, and not refuse
reconciliation with any that seek it.

King (...) the Emperor of China said, there is nothing that increases virtue,
more then the slighting of all sustained injuries.

Nothing inferior to this was that action of Lycurgus that famous Spartan
Legislator, who, for making wholesome laws to reduce his people to good manners
was hated stoned, and, among many other insolences sustained, had one of his
eyes smot out, with a cudgel, by a certain young man called Alexander, for
which he being apprehended, and condemned to dye, Licurgus redeemed him, took
him as a friend into his own house and there taught him to live well, so that
its said be became a good man. If this be not to overcome evil with good; what
is?

That famous Athenian General Pericles having been upon a time, all the day
long reviled by a certain man, who followed him even to his house at night
railing at him, was by this noble man so meekly born that he not only reviled
him not again but commanded his servant, with his lantern to light him home.

Phocion that noble Athenian being unjustly condemned to dye, by the drinking
(after manner of that country) a cup of p^yson, being asked what he would
leave in charge to his son, answered, Nothing but this, that he should never so
remember this cup, as to avenge his death.

Aristides an Athenian noble and righteous man, being banished out of Athens,
and in order thereunto, by the Magistrates led out of town, a certain
ill-natured person, ran after him, and spit in his face. Whereupon the meek man
only d^sired the Magistrates to teach that man for the future to be more
mannerly. And after he was, through envy thus unjustly banished, seeing his
country in peril, secretly helped it against King X^rxes, being the chief
occasion of that victory.

Solon being by one abused who spit in his face, nothing moved thereat, said,
If a fisher man, to catch a small fish, bear the sea water, why should not I to
catch a man bear th^s.

Just so Aristippus, when having reproved Dionysius, who for it spat in his
face; said, If a fisher man be not afraid of being wet to catch a small fish,
why should I to catch a whole salmon fear a little sprinkleing?

The same Aristippus being railed at held his tongue, and went his way; the
Reviler following him, said. What! Do thou runn away? Aristippus replied,
Thou have power to speak evil, and I to forbear hearing (or heeding) it.

FINIS.

