The Distressed Damsels;
OR, A ^^lefull Ditty of a sorrowful Assembly of young Maidens that were met
together near Thames Street, to bewail the Loss of their Loves which were
lately pressed away to Sea.

To the Tune of an Orange.
Licensed according to Order.





My sweet Sister Sue, ah! what ^ shado? I
I fain would be married but know notl to who;
^or why, I protest, the young Men are Pressed,
and my Sweetheart Robin is gone with the rest
For a Seaman.
Then Susan replied there is many beside,
That Fortune this Summer will surely divide;
Each sudden surprise will cause Lasses cries,
While Tears they do trickle like Rain from the Skies,
For our Sweethearts,
There Is Bess at the Bell you know her full well,
A sorrowful story to me she did tell,
That Thomas her Dear, was Pressed she did hear,
And then the poor Creature did tremble for fear
He should leave her.




In Thames Street of late, young pretty-fac,d Kate
Had lost her dear sweeting, the Bricklayer her Mate;
He was pressed away but yet the next day
They freed him, then Kate she did lovingly say.
My sweet Johnny.
In the open Street her John she did meet,
And gave him a thousand soft Kisses so sweet,
With stroaking his Chin, she welcomed him in,
For Joy she was fit to leap out of her Skin,
For her Johnny.
There Is Doll at the Swan, her true Love is gone,
Poor Heart she with sorrow does sigh and take on;
Yet all is in vain, he is gone to the Main,
She fears that he never will return home again,
To embrace her.
There Is Bridget and Joan it is very well known,
Of Fourteen young Sweethearts they have not left one
But all Pressed on Board for to stand by the Sword,
And this does much Sorrow and Trouble afford,
At the Parting.
If Pressing goes on, there wont be a Man
To please a young Lass, let her do what she can,
For they will be scarce here in a short space,
Then we shall be all in a sorrowful case,
To be Married.
Two Twelvemonths ago, sweet Sister you (...)
The Batchelors then we could bring to our (...)
Nay, at our Command, they stood Cap in (...)
But now they grow scarcy all over the Land,
We must prize them.
Young Nancy and Ned last week they were (...)
And within an hour of going to Bed,
Just in all their Pride he was Pressed from he(...)
Before he had dallied one Night with his B(...)
Want it Pity?
To leave his delight, and Beauty so bright,
Before he had ever enjoyed her one Night;
But what shall we say? he was Pressed away,
Now you that have Husbands adore them I(...)
They are Jewels.
Last year I declare, young Maids was cho^^^
But now they grow wonderful plenty I sw^^^
All over the Town they walk up and down,
I reckon you may have a Score for a Crown
By Midsummer.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. (...) I. Back.


