A DISCOVERY After some search of the SINS OF THE MINISTERS, Because of which
(as we conceive) the Lord is angry, and has almost made his Ministers and
Ordinances vile and contemptible.

BY THE BRETHREN OF THE PRESBYTERY Of KILMARNOCK.

Printed Anno Dom. 1651.

A DISCOVERY After some search of the Sins of the MINISTERS,
Because of which (as we conceive) the Lord is angry, and has almost made his
Ministers and Ordinances vile and contemptible.
I. SECTION.
I. IN relation to our calling to the Ministry; Entering to the Ministry
without the knowledge of Gods sending. 2. Not seeking Con^^^nations and seals
of our mission in the Consciences of the People, or in our own further grouth
and fitting for the Mnistery.

II. SECTION.
II. In relation to Preaching. 1. Going out with little preparation, trusting to
gifts and parts, and growing lazy in preparing to speak to edification. 2.
Where pains is taken for preparation, trusting to it, whereby God is provoked
to blast good matter well ordered and worded.

III. Neglect of Prayer. 1. In study and preparation, the ^atter we bring
forth, is not seriously recommended to God, (...) be quickened to his People. 2.
In our Prayers for assistance, being more set upon assistance to the Messenger,
nor to the Message which we carry, not careing what become of the Word, if we
be with some measure of assistance and liberty carried on in the duty. 3.
Neglect of Prayer for the fruit and blessing of the Word which we have
preached, that it may receive the early and latter rain. 4. Neglect of
applications to God for the knowledge of his mind in debateable matters.

IV. Not meaning and aiming every word we speak to edification, but bringing
forth many things in the Name of the Lord, which are not aimed at profit.

V. Speaking rashly and by guess in the Name of the Lord things that are
plausible; and in many things not bringing from the Lord, that which we speak;
a sin pointed at by the Lord, in his disappointing that which so many spoke
confidently of the success^ of our Army, against those that have invaded us.

VI. Too much frequent and unnecessary speaking of public transactions in
Sermons, neglecting to set forth the excellency of Christ, the new Covenant,
etc.

VII. Preaching against public sins, neither in such a way, nor for such an
end as we ought, for the gaining of souls, and drawing Men out of their sin,
but rather because it is of our concernment, to say something, and have a
by-blow or wipe at them, reproving the evils of the time to please men.

VIII. Want of bowels in preaching toward them who are in hazard to perish.

IX. We preach not as before God, but as to men, as does appear, by the
different pains of our preparation, to speak to our ordinary Hearers, and to
others to whom we would approve our selves.

X. Too much eying our own credit and applause, and being tickled with it when
we get it, or unsatisfied when it is wanting.

XI. Neglect of endeavors to have our hearts affected with the power, either
in preparation, or delivering of the Word which we preach at ordinary and
extraordinary occasions; but for most part preach, as if we our selves were not
concerned in the Message which we carry to the People.

III. SECTION.
In relation to the Judicatories of the Church, and their Constitutions. 1.
Idolizing the Authority of Assemblies, so that no difference from their
conclusions have been accounted tolerable, because of which, God has spotted
our Assemblies.

II. Not making Conscience of keeping and waiting the meetings of
Church-Judicatories, but wearying of the expense and attendance, because of
which, diverse things therein treated of, have been miscarried.

III. Hasty concluding of Acts, and pressing obedience thereunto, without
convincing grounds, held forth from the Scriptures, for satisfying the
Consciences of the Lords People.

IV. Neglect of making application to God, for the knowledge of his mind, in
debatable things, before they pas into conclusions

V. Wearying to hear men fully, who present doubts, and to weigh all the
arguments that can be presen^ed for the negative, before the affirmative be
taken into consideration.

VI. Impatience to wait for clear and deliberate bringing of matters to a
conclusion, with passionate hasting to carry things by a plurality.

VII. Binding the People of GOD, with strait and binding Acts, in things
unnecessary.

VIII. Blind following of leading men in Judicatories, without perswation of
the matter, and oftentimes with a hint and doubting of Conscience smoothered.

IX. Want of Faithfulness and tenderness, both in bringing in, and holding in
persons, in the ministry, not trying the reality of the Work of God, in those
that enter into the Ministry.

IV. SECTION
In relation, to the exercise of Discipline, and drawing forth the Censures of
the Church. 1. Partiallity in the administration of Censures, with respect of
persons, not using the like faithfulness and zeal toward the high and low.

II. Not making use of the Ordinances of Discipline, for the gaining of Souls,
but turning it in a mere civil punishment, and in the administration thereof,
becoming either luke warm, or without a spirit of meekness.

III. Mocking of repentance, by teaching formality therein to offenders,
hardening them in their sins, by accepting bare forms without evidences of
repentance, and loosning when we were persuaded, that Christ did not loose,
turning the profession of repentance into a State Engine, to step to employment
and preferment.

IV. Want of tenderness in testifying of the conversation and repentance of
Ministers and people, giving testimonialls to gratify men, or to shift our
selves and Congregations of infectious persons.

V. Want of exact carfulness and faithfulness in debarring from the Lords
Table, the ignorant and scandalous.

VI. Unequal dealing with the poor and rich, in admitting to, or suspending
and debarring from the Lords Table.

VII. Want of Bowels and Compassion to the parties on whom Discipline is
exercised, and imperious kind of boasting of them.

V. SECTION.
In relation to our way of performing Ministerial duties. 1. Laisines in going
about duties, not improving our time and Talents, to do all the good we might
amongst the people of GOD.

II. Want of delight in going about the duties of our calling, doing them not
for Christ's sake and love to the flock, looking on them as burdens.

III. Satisfying our selves with public reproving of public sins, and
neglecting the gaining-way of private dealing with the Consciences of sinners.

IV. A groff carnal way of handling the matters of Christ.

V. Carrying on some O^dinances, and neglecting others equally warranted, and
almost being diligent in no duty bu^ Preaching.

VI. Not studying to be acquainted with the condition o^ the people, that we
may apply our selves to the variety o^ their estates.

VII. Turning all duties and Religion into forwardness i^ ^^e Cause of GOD, and
under cullor of that, neglecting duties and the power and life of Godliness.

VIII. Neglect of pains to fit us more for our calling, after we have acquired
a habit of preaching, as if we need not to grow in fitness for all the duties
of our calling.

IX. Partiality in visiting the sick; if they be poor, we go once, and when
sent for, if rich; and of better rank, more frequently, and unsent for: And in
examination, passing by great folks often.

X. Performing the duties of Preaching and public Prayer, as parts of trial,
and not as worship done to GOD.

VI. SECTION.
In relation to our walk and conversation Personal faults. 1. Earthly
mindedness, careing immoderatly for the things of this life, and following too
eagerly the bettering of stipends. 2 Want of hospitality and charity, to the
members of Christ. 3. Want of sobriety in all things suitable to the Times. 4.
Slighting of the beating of the Lords word, hearing the word from others, only
to censure and try their gifts, and not as Christians, that should hear and
make use of it. 6. Envying the gifts and graces of God in others, or
discouragement in our Duties, because of our short upcomming to others, in whom
Gifts, and Graces shine; undervaluing and slighting the sincerity of Grace in
others; because they be inferior to our selves in Gifts. 7. Pride showing it
self in not stouping, and condescending to the Infirm; but disdaining Christ's
work in them; because of some Infirmities that we ^an observe in them. 8. Not
enduring admonition or reproof from Mynisters, or such of the people of God,
as observe something in us that are contrary to tenderness, and give Offense.
9. Loss of tenderness and diligence after we are Ministers, unto which some
had before attained. 10. Being very little in secret Prayer, and converse with
God; and excusing ^his within our selves; with being much taken up with other
Duties. 11. Neglect of accurat studying of the Scriptures. 12. Vain Imitation
of other men. 13. Neglect of frequent reflecting upon our own state, and walk
with God.

VII. SECTION.
In our walk in our Families, not being paterns to the flock in holiness and
diligence, but rather ill examples of lightness in our conversation, and
slighting of duties. 1. By superficial performing of Worship by starts, and
not setting apart time for the deliberate going about it. 2. Reading of the
Scriptures rashly and inconsiderately, and not as men that should be acquainted
with the mind of GOD in all his Word. 3. Neglect of the instruction and
edification of our Families; so that none (more then our own) are worse looked
too. 4. Little or no time set apart in our Families to mourn for the
guiltiness of the Land, and the backsliding of the time. 5. Deep hypocrisy in
pressing upon others, to do that in their Families, which is utterly slighted
by our selves.

VIII. SECTION.
In our walk among the people of our charge. 1. Unfruitfulness, not studdying
to converse with the people of GOD for their edification. 2. Carnal familiarity
with wicked and natural people, out of the duties of our calling, whereby they
are hardened in sin, by finding the Minister like themselves, however he speak
to them in Public. 3. A straingenesse, and upkeeping of our selves from such
as (...) whereby they are made to keep back a profitable freedom with us. 4.
Neglect of spiritual fellowship with the people of GOD, and not putting them
to pray with us. 5. Unwillingness to entertain spiritual purpose and
discourse; yea many a time slighting and shufling it out, when its cast in by
others. 6. Speaking our own words on the Sabbath Day, and countenancing the
same in others. 7. Not daring to reprove sin, and appear zealous and tender
before the wicked.

IX. SECTION.
In our walk in the company of Ministers, very unprofitable, and oftentimes
hurtful one to another, and being an offense to the Lords people. 1. Neglect
of prayer, and every thing that may edify. 2. Shifting of prayer and other
duties when we are called to it. 3. Ordinary driving away our time in carnal
rejoicing and lightness, sporting and jesting one with an other, and censuring,
etc. 4. Want of freedom and love to reprove and admonish one another in serious
tenderness; and if any freedom be used, it is in a jest, and an upcast, which
draws on alienation, when things observed in another does stick with us, and
are kept up or told in such a way. 5. Ordinarily we converse together as
Ministers, but not as Christians; speaking only of things pertaining to our
Calling, and of nothing pertaining to our Souls, and their condition. 6.
Turning all Christian duties into Ministerial duties: We speak of them as
things that are with out us, and as if they did not concern our selves; In a
word, We are not good Ministers, because we are not good Christians: This is
the root of all the corruptions of our calling.

FINIS.

