A Dismal Account of the burning of our Solemn LEAGUE And National COVENANT
(...) GOD) and one another. At Linlithgow May 29. 1662. Being the Birth Day of
Charles 2d
^Ivine Service being ended, the S^reets were so filled with Bonefires on every
side, so that it was not without Hazard to go along them, The Magistrates about
4 a Clock Afternoon, went to the Earl of Linlithgows Lodging, inviting his
Lordship to honor ^^m with his Presence at the Solemnity of the Day, so he
came with the Magistrates, ac^^^panied with many Gentlemen to the Marketplace,
where a Table was covered with ^^^fections, Then the Curat met them, and prayed
and sang a Psalm, then eating some of the ^^^fections, they threw the rest
among the People, the Fountain Well all that time run^^^^ French and Spanish,
Wine of diverse Colors, and continued running 3 or 4 ^^^rs. The Earl, the
Magistrates and Gentlemen did drink the K. and Q. their good Healths (...) all
Royal Healths, not forgetting His Majesty's Commissioner his Health, My Lord
Middl^, and breaking several Baskets full of Glasses.

^t the Market Place was erected an Arch standing upon 4 Pillars, on the one
side thereof (...) placed a Statue in Form of an old Hag-Mare, having the
Covenant in her Hands, with (...) Superscription, A glorious Reformation. On
the other s de was placed in Form of a Whig^^uir, having the Remonstrance in
his Hand, with this Superscription, No Association with ^^lignants. Within the
Arch on the Right Hand was drawn a Committee of Estates with (...)
Superscription, An Act for delivering up the King. Upon the left Hand was
drawn, The ^^mmission of the Kirk, with this Superscription, A Commission of
the Kirk, and Commit (...) of Estates, and Act of theWest-kirk of Edinburgh,
and upon the Top of the Arch stood the ^^^il as an Angel of Light, with this
Superscription, Stand to the Cause, and on the Top of (...) Arch hang a Tablet
with this, From Covenanters with their uplifted Hands,
From Remonstraters with their associat Bands,
From such Committees as govern this Nation,
From Kirk Commissions, and from their Profession
Good Lord deliver us.


ON the Pillars of the Arch, beneath the Covenants was drawn Kirk stools, Rocks
and Reels, upon the Pillar beneath the Remonstrance was drawn, Brechems Cogs,
and Spoons. and on the back of the Arch was drawn, the Picture of Rebellion in
a Religious habit, with ^urned up Eyes, and with a Fanatic Gesture. And in
the Right Hand holding Lex Rex, that infamous Book, maintaning Defensive Arms,
And in their Left Hand, holding that pitiful Pamphlet, the causes of GODS
Wrath. And about their Wast laying all the Acts of Parliament, comittie of
Estates, And Acts of General Assemblies, and Commission of the Kirk, with the
Protestations, and Declarations, during these 22 Years Rebellion, and above
with this Superscription, Rebellion is as the Sin of Witch craft. Then at the
Drinking of the Kings health, Fire was put to the Frame, which gave many fine
Reports, and soon burnt all to Ashes, which being Consumed, there appeared
suddenly a Tablet, supported with two Angels carrying this Suppersciption.
Great Britains Monarch on this Day was born,
And to his Kingdom happily Restored;
His Queen's arrived, the matter now is known.
Let us Rejoice, this day is from the Lord.
Flee hence all Traitors that did mar our Peace,
Flee hence all Schismatics who our Church did rent
Flee hence Covenanting Remonstrating race
Let us Rejoice, that GOD this day has sent,


Then the Magistrates accompanied the Noble Earl to his Palace, where the same
Earl had a Magnificent Bon-fire. Then the Earl and Magistrates, and all the
Rest did drink the K, and Q and all Royal Healths. Then the Magistrates made
the procession throw the Burgh, and saluted every Man of account and so they
spent the day Rejoicing in their labor. They burnt and buried them
In Contempt and disdain.
And we in holding of them down,
Do say thereto. Amen.
The Curats Rejoice, the Assemblies sat down
Of Tested members and drunken Dragcun.
They have for their head and for Moderator,
Meldrum that once Episcopal Frater.
You may boldly advance, why do you pause,
You need not fear Covenant nor the good cause.
Those things are Buried, that trouble did breed,
They Will take you for brethren, the King for their head.
E're they lose stepends, or be called prescise
Their not the old Zelots these men are more wise
And shall you break Gods Covenant,
And think to prosper still. Ezekiel. 17.5.16.
No no GODS word who cannot reverse (and is 19
Tit. 12 Says he will requite this ill.
Poor Scotland thy great Glory was,
Thy Cover anting times
Tho afterwerd by Backsliding;
They were accounted Crimes.
Go to go to Deboording Land,
Go to thy first Husband.
Go sigh, go mourn for all the steps,
Of thy trespass grand.
Trace back thy footsteps where it was,
That thou thy Husband left.
Look back Poor Church with watery Eyes,
And see how you are bereft.
With Groans, O mind thy broken Bonds,
And Cords assunder Cut.
Go fast go Pray and on thy self,
Maids Garments do not put.
But wi h the widow; desolat,
Take up thy mournful song.
With Jephthahs Daughters mourning maids,
Wander the Hills among.



