OLD Mr. DODS SAYINGS.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, in the Year, Anno Dom. 1680

OLD Mr. DODS SAYINGS.
1. NOthing can hurt us but Sin, and that shall not hurt us, if we can repent
of it. And nothing can do us good but the Love and Favor of God in Christ, and
that we shall have, if we seek it.

2. No man is in a sad condition, but he that has a hard heart, and cannot
pray.

3. So much Sin, so much Sorrow; so much Holiness, so much Happiness.

4. Make thy Sin thy greatest Sorrow; ^o shall thy Sorrow never hurt thee. Make
Jesus Christ thy greatest Joy, so shall thou ^ever want Joy.

5. A man that has the spirit of prayer, ^ath more then if he had all the
world.

6. Two things to be commended to a Married Couple, Cares and strifes. For the
^^rst, Let your Cares be, which shall please God most; for your strifes, let
them be, which shall love one another best: So will ^our Cares and Strifes be
to purpose; so will all needless Cares and strifes vanish

7. If you be in a married estate, know and believe it, Though you might have
had a ^etter, or richer Wife or Husband, yet sure enough you could never have
had a fitter, because it was so appointed by God in Heaven, before it could be
accomplished here o^ Earth; and therefore, though mutual love (...) not
performed to thee, yet do thou thy part (...) obedience to God, and thou shall
be sure (...) have comfort in the end, though God exerci^^ thee with
chastisements for a time.

8. There can no afflictions or miseries b^ fall us, but by Gods appointment,
and cann^^ hurt us, but must needs do us good, if we (...) Gods Children. But
first, Be sure you (...) not sin with them, for that only makes the^ bitter.
Secondly, Look not at the rod, but (...) him that smites; for that causes
fretti^^ and fainting both.

9. If thou desire to be assured thy sins (...) forgiven thee, labor to
forgive injuries a^^ offenses done unto thee, according to the in. Mat. 6.14,
15. Four things consider this end: 1. Christ's example, who forga^^ and prayed
for his enemies. 2. Christ's command, When ye pray, forgive, if ye have ought
again any man. 3. Christ's promise, If ye forgi^^ ye shall be forgiven. 4.
Christ's threatening, (...) ye forgive not, ye shall not be forgiven.

10. In all miseries and distresses, it is (...) wisdom to go to that friend
that is most ne^ most willing, and most able to help; such friend is God.

11. He would often say, He had no reas^^ to complain of his crosses, being
they w^^ but the bitter fruit of his sins.

12. Where sin lies heavy, crosses lie lig^^ and contrary, where crosses lie
heavy sins lie light.

13. Either prayer will make a man give over sinning, or sin will make a man
give over praying.

14. Four things we may learn from Children: 1. They take no unnecessary care:
2. They sleep without malice: 3. They are content with their condition. 4. They
are humble; the child of a King will play with the child of a beggar.

15. There is no affliction so small, but we should sink under it, if God
upheld not; and there is no sin so great but we commit it, if God restrain not.

16. If we be raised on, or reviled, or injuriously dealt withal by friend or
foe, we should be more troubled for the sin against God, then for the offense
done to our selves.

17. A godly man is like a sheep every place is the better for him where he
comes: A wicked man is like a goat, every place is the worse for him; he leaves
a stinking favor behind him.

18. Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions, and are far better for a
Christian, then all the silver and gold in the world, being that the trial of
our Faith is much more precious then of gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1.6.

19. Directions for the Lord day, Make the Sabbath the Market* day for thy
soul: Lose not one hour, but be either praying, conferring, or meditating;
think not t^^ own thoughts; let every day have its dutie^ turn the Sermon
heard, into matter of pra^er: Instruction into petition, reproof in^
confestion, consolation into thanksgiving Think much of the Sermon heard, and
make something of it all the week long.

20. Directions for every day: First, For morning. Every morning presuppose, 1.
I must die: 2. I may die or night: 3. whithe^ will my soul go, to heaven or to
hell? Secondly, For night. Every night ask at thy soul these Questions: 1. Have
I twice this day humbled my self before God in private? 2 How did I pray? In
faith and love: 3 what have my thoughts been this day? 4. what have I been in
my place and calling? 5. what have I been in company? Did I speak of good
things? or did I hear, and with Mary, lay up? 6. If God, with the morning,
renewed mercies, was I thankful? 7. If the day afforded me matter of sorrow,
did I fret? or did I lie in the dust before God? 8. when you have thus done,
where have you been failing, confess it with sorrow; the lesse-work you will
have to do when death comes. Thus every night reckon right with thy God. This
has been my daily course, and shall be my practice till I die.

21. What we win by prayer, we shall wear with comfort.

22. There is a twofold assurance: 1. A A Sun. shine: 2. A Moon shine
assurance. The first is that full assurance, in Heb. 10.22. The Moon. shine is
that of the Word, To the which we do well that we take heab, I These. 1.5. 2
Pet. 1, 18. The first is given but to few, and that but seldom; and that either
upon some great duty to be performed, or some new condition of life to be
entered in to, or upon some great suffering to be undergone, of which one says,
The hours it comes, is but seldom, and the stay of it short. The second is that
we must trust to, A relying upon the sure Word of God, by the faith of
adherence, when we want the other, the spirit of full assurance.

23. For the comfort of Gods people, he observed out of the 129. Psalm. that
though the wicked were the plowers of the righteous, and would plow deep, make
long furrows, and even plow their hearts out, if they could, yet the righteous
Lord that sits in heaven laughs at them, and cuts their Cords, and then they
can plow no more.

24. In case of persecutions and other sufferings, Gods people should seriously
consider these four things: 1. God wills them, and sends them: Now Gods will is
a perfect ^ule of righteousness; and what God does, ^s so well done, that it
could not be better ^one: 2. There is need of them, or else we should not have
them. 3. Their number, ^easure and continuance is determined by God; they are
but for a moment, and, last for few days, Rev. 2.10. not too heavy, (...)
many, or too long, as the devil would h^ them; not too few too short, or too
light, our corrupt natures would have them (...) Their end is a weight of
glory, and the Cr^^^ that attends them, everlasting, 2 Cor. 4.^

25. Three things make a man count h^self happy here below: 1. To have a
g^enate: 2. To have it in a good place: 3. (...) good neighbors. Now these
three, they (...) die in the Lord eminently enjoy. 1. T^ heavenly inheritance
great; Eye has not I^ nor ear heard the like, 1 Cor. 2.9. 2. It is (...) good
place, 2 Cor. Heaven, which is a h^ made for them, and made by God. and
the^fore must needs be good: 3. By good nei^bours, God, Christ, the Spirt,
Angels (...) Saints. Adam had a good inheritance, an^ a good place, but he had
an evil nighbou^ the devil that troubled him, and marred (...) but there is no
evil neighbors in heaven.

26. The passions of Gods people do^ hinder the success of their prayers. Elias
(...) a man subject to like passions as we are, (...) he prayed, and was heard,
James 5.17.

27. Three things concur to the making of the sin against the holy Ghost: 1.
Light in the mind: 2. Malice in the heart: 3. (...) insensibleness of the sin.
He that fears he (...) committed it, has not committed it.

28. The reason why many are not wron^ upon, that live under powerful means of
grace, ^hen many that live at a great distance, and ^ome seldom under a
powerful Preacher, are ^rought upon by it; he used to give by this ^^militude:
As in a Market Town the Towns people matter not so much for Market ^ares, as
they that live in the Countries ^hey come to buy, and must, and will have that
they want, what ever they pay for it; whereas they that live in the Town, think
^hey may buy at any time, and so neglect buy^ng at present; and at last,
oftentimes they ^re disappointed.

29. To persuade us not to return railing ^or railing, he would say, That if a
dog bark^d at a sheep, a sheep will not bark at a dog.

30. Four arguments against immoderate ^ares for earthly things, that we might
not ^ishonour or deny God, he observed out of Mat. 6.1. It is needless: 2. It
is brutish: ^. It is bootlesse: 4. It is heathenish. 1 Need ^lesse. What need
we care, and God too? verse. ^0.31.32. Our heavenly Father knows we have need ^f
these things, and he bids us be careful for nothing, but cast our cares on him
who cares for ^5. 2. It is brutish, nay more then brutish; v. ^0. Consider the
Fowls of the air, and ravens that he ^eeds, they toil not. 3. It is bootlesse,
and to no purpose, v. 27. Which of you by taking though can ^ad one cubit unto
his stature, or penny to his estate. ^. It is heathenish: After all these
things, the Gen^iles seek, v. 32

31. Many in the world take their Sa^^ship upon trust, and trade in the duties
of Religion, with the credit they have gained from others opinions; they
believe themselves (...) be Christians, because others hope them to (...) such,
and so Zealously trade in duties that (...) outmost, to keep up their credit,
but no^ look for a stock or solid grace within; an^ this undoes many.

32. As we read of daily bread, so of a a^^^ross, Luke 9.23. which we are bid
to take, (...) to make. We need not make crosses for ^selves, as we are too
prone to do; but (...) God make them for us: Crosses being (...) in heaven,
best fit the Sain^s backs; and (...) must not lay them down till they and we
(...) down together.

33. It was a notable saying of a human; (...) hell, and (...) heaven, yet I
(...) love and fear my God.

34. It is not crying out upon the devil, (...) declaming against ^^m prayer or
discou^^ but fighting with the devil, and mortifyi^ our lusts, that God chiefly
looks upon.

35. The ^^^^ty professor disappoin^ (...) at ^^ce 1. The world, who seeing
the (...) sin but finds none: 2. (...) self wh^ think^ to reach heaven, but
fa^^ (...) of it.

36. The only way for a distressed soul the (...) on former comforts, by reason
of future backslidings, and so questions (...) this former evidences is To
renew his repentance, as if he had never believed,

37. Some are apt to think, if they are in such a family, under such a
minister, out of such temptations, the devil would not meddle with them as he
does: But such should know, that so long as his old friend is alive within, he
will be knocking at the door without.

38. The s^ed were sown so deep in the nature of the devil, and the Saint, that
they will never be rooted out till the devil cease to be a devil, and sin to be
sin, and the Saint to be a Saint.

39. The sinner is the devil's Miller, always grinding, and the devil is
always filling the Hopper, that the Mill may not stand still.

40. There be some sins that an ignorant person cannot commit; but there are
far more that an ignorant person cannot but commit.

41. There be five ^yes by which the God of heaven has bound himself to be the
Saints Life guard against the powers of darkness: 1. His relation to them as a
Father: 2. His love to them, in respect as they being the Birth of his
everlasting counsel, are partakers of his own Likeness: 3. The price of His
Sons Blood, and His Covenant with them: 4. Their dependence upon Him, and
expectation from him in all their straits. Now the expectations of the poor
shall not perish, Psalm. 9.18. 5. Christ's present employment in heaven is to see
all things carried fairly between God and them.

42. Brown bread with the Gospel, is good fare.

FINIS.

